A SERMON Preached before the KING, UPON THE Twenty seventh of February,
1669/70.

BY JOHN Lord Bishop of CHESTER.

Published By His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell, for SA: GELLIBRAND, at the Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1670.

A SERMON Preached before the KING UPON The Twenty seventh of February, 1670:
ECCLES. 12. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and
keep his Commandments: for this is the Whole of man.
THis Book is one of Solomon's Philosophical Discourses, containing such
principal Observations about Human Affairs, as are apt to offer themselves to
the thoughts of every serious considerate man, especially concerning those
things which may more immediately either promote or hinder our Happiness.

This Text is the Conclusion which he inferrs upon the whole matter, that which
is the most natural result of all such Debates and Enquiries:

In the former part he had taken into consideration those several states of
life, to which men usually apply themselves for Happiness; namely, Learning and
Wisdom, Mirth and Pleasures, Power and Greatness, Riches and Possessions: Each
of which he does by great variety of Arguments prove to be vanity and vexation,
and altogether insufficient to the End for which they are designed.

Then he takes notice of the several Accidents of life, whether they concern
our Endeavors, or our Persons.

1. For our Endeavors. The most likely Means are not always effectual for the
attaining of their End. The utmost that Human Councils and Prudence can provide
for, is to take care, when they are to contend in a Race, that they be swifter
than those who run against them; or when they are to fight a Battle, that they
be stronger than those whom they are to encounter. Chap. 9. 11, 12.
And yet the race is not always to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong,
neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor
favor to men of skill; but time and chance happens to them all. (i.e.) There
is a secret Providence which does overruled all those worldly events in such a
manner, as is not accountable to Human Reason. Even amongst Secular Businesses,
which we are apt to think most within our reach and compass, there is nothing
so much under the power of the wisest Counsels and Endeavors, but that the
Providence of God may interpose for the disappointing of it, and render it
ineffectual.

And then for those Accidents to which our Persons are liable, He observes
these three things:

1. Our obnoxiousness of Pain and Sickness, which he styles by the names of
Wrath and Sorrow; Chapter 5. 17
under which, when a man lies languishing, none of his Worldly Enjoyments will
signify any thing to him; nor will they be able to afford him any such ease or
help, but that he may be thereby cut off in the midst of his days, and then all
his thoughts perish, or else waste away a great part of his life with much
anguish and weariness; and may sometimes, perhaps, be driven to that extremity
by noisome and painful Diseases, as to choose strangling and death, rather than
life.

2. If it be supposed, that by the strength and cheerfulness of a man's natural
temper, he should escape these, and live many years, Chapter 11. 8
and rejoice in them all; yet he must remember the days of darkness, which
shall be many. (i.e.) Those who devote themselves to continual Mirth and
Pleasure, cannot yet avoid the thought of their future estates, what shall
become of them hereafter, when they are to depart out of this World; but that
the remembrance of this will be often thrusting into their Minds when ever they
are retired and serious. And this being to them a dark obscure condition,
concerning their well-being in which, they can have no reasonable hopes, must
needs therefore be a great damp and allay to all their other Enjoyments.

3. But in the third place: Suppose a man should be able to avoid sickness, and
to put the trouble of these thoughts likewise far from him; yet there is
somewhat else which he cannot possibly decline, Old Age will unavoidably steal
upon him, with all the infirmities of it; C. 12. 3.
when the grinders shall be few, and appetite cease; when those who look out of
the windows, shall be darkened, and the keepers of the house shall tremble: when
a man shall become a burden to himself, and to his Friends; when those of his
nearest relation, whom he has most obliged by kindness, shall think it time
for him to depart unto his long home, C. 12. 5.
to creep off the Stage, and make room for succeeding Generations; and then,
after a little Funeral-pomp of the Mourners going about the streets, a man
shall be buried out of the way, and forgotten: For there is no remembrance of
the wise, C. 2. 16.
more than of the fool; seeing that which now is, in the days to come shall be
forgotten. Every Generation producing somewhat which seems new and strange, to
take up men's talk and wonder, and to drown the memory of former Persons and
Actions. And I appeal to any rational man, Whether these are not some of the
most material reflections that occurr about Human Affairs.

Now from all these premises put together, he inferrs this Conclusion in the
Text, That to fear God, and keep his Commandments, is the Whole of man. (i.e.)
To be serious in the matter of Religion, and careful about our future states,
is that which every considerate man, after all his other disquisitions and
experiments, will find to be his greatest interest, that which does most of all
deserve his care and study.

There are these Two parts in the words:

1. A Description of Religion, which in the former Clause is said to consist in
fearing God, and keeping his Commandments. An awful apprehension of the Divine
Nature, and an obedient submission to His Will.

2. A Commendation of Religion, in the latter Clause, This is the Whole of man.

It is the second of these only, which I purpose to treat of at this time.

In the handling of which, the first thing to be enquired into, is, What is the
true import and meaning of this phrase in the Original: (...) for the right
understanding of which, it will be proper to consider the several ways of
expressing it in other Translations.

The Septuagint and the Vulgar do render it verbatim, This is All, or Every
man. The word Duty, which is supplied by our English, being not in the
Original, or in other Translations. This ought to be the way and course of all
mankind, so the Targum. This is the course to which every man is designed, so
the Syriack. This will be most profitable and advantageous to men, so the
Arabic. Hoc est totum hominis, This is the whole of man; so some of our later
Interpreters, most proper to the scope of the place, it being an usual Enallage
in the Hebrew, Totius universalis, pro toto integrante, All for Whole.

So that according to these various Interpretations of the words, they may
contain in them a threefold reference: To the Essence, the Happiness, the
Business of man.

According to which, the sense of them must be, That Religion, or the fearing
of God, and keeping his Commandments, is a matter of so great consequence to
Human Nature, that

1. The Essence or Being of man, may be said to consist in it.

2. The Happiness or well-being of man, does depend upon it.

3. The great Business or Duty of man, is to be conversant about it, and to
labor after it.

These particulars I shall endeavor to make out by such clear Principles of
Reason, attested to by several of the wisest Heathen Writers, as may be enough
to satisfy any serious man who is able to understand the reason and
consequence of things, and will but attend and consider.

1. I begin with the first: Religion is of so great importance, that the
Essence of man may be said to consist in it. Mankind may be considered under a
twofold notion:

1. More Separately, and by it self, according to that Principle whereby it is
constituted in such a rank of Creatures.

2. More Complexly, as joined in Society, for which Man seems to be naturally
designed, and without which he could not well subsist. Now Religion will appear
to be Essential to him in both these respects.

1. As considered Separately, according to those Principles by which he is
framed. That which does constitute any thing in its Being, and distinguish it
from all other things, This is that which we call the Form or Essence of a
thing. And this, for the Human Nature, does consist in those very things which
are the chief Principles and Foundations of Religion; namely, the Apprehensions
of a Deity, and an Expectation of a future state after this life: Which no
other Creature, below Man, does partake of; and which are common to all
Mankind, notwithstanding the utmost endeavors that can be used for the
suppressing of them.

As for what is commonly alleged in the behalf of Reason, it may be observed,
that in the Actions of many Bruit Creatures, there are discernable some kind of
footsteps, some imperfect strictures and degrees of Ratiocination; such a
natural Sagacity as bears a near resemblance to Reason. From whence it may
follow, that it is not Reason in the general, which is the Form of Human
Nature; But Reason as it is determined to Actions of Religion, of which we do
not find the least signs or degrees in Bruits. Man being the only Creature in
this visible World, that is formed with a Capacity of worshipping and enjoying
his Maker. Nor is this any new Opinion, but such as several of the Ancient
Writers, Philosophers, Orators, Poets, have attested to, who make this Notion
of a Deity, and Adoration of Him, to be the true difference betwixt Man and
Beast.

Plutarch asserts it to be a very improper thing to own such for Men, who do
not acknowledge and adore the Deity. And in another place, he affirms Irreligion
to be a kind of Stupor, whereby Men are deprived of their Senses.

So Tully: De Legi. L 1.
Ex tot generibus, nullum est animal, etc. Amongst all the living Creatures
that are in the World, there is none but Man that has any notion of a Deity;
and amongst Mankind, there is no Nation so wild and barbarous, but pretends to
some Religion.

And in another place, Quis hunc bominem dixerit? etc. Why should such a one be
accounted a Man, who, by what he sees in the World, is not convinced of a
Deity, and a Providence, and of that adoration he owes to it? Of the same sense
is that of the Satyrist, who speaking of Religion, says this of it: -- Separat
haec nos Iuvenal. Sect. 15.

Agrege Brutorum, atque ideo venerabile soli
Sortiti ingenium divinorumque capaces.


It Is this (says he) that does distinguish us from Brute Creatures, That we
have Souls capable of Divine Impressions.

So that, by what has been said, it should appear, that the Definition of Man
may be rendered as well by the Difference of Religiosum, as Rationale. As for
that Inconvenience which some may object, That Atheistical and Profane persons
will be hereby excluded: Why so they are by the other Difference likewise; such
persons having no just pretense to Reason, who renounce Religion: and it were
well, if they might not only be reckoned amongst Beasts (as they are by the
Psalmist, where he styles them Brutish), but driven out amongst them likewise,
and banished from all Human Society, as being public Pests, and Mischiefs of
Mankind, such as would debase the Nobility of our Natures, to the condition of
Brute Creatures, and therefore are fit only to live amongst them. Which brings
me to the

2d Consideration of Man as a Sociable Creature. Religion is essential to him
in this respect also, as being the surest Bond to tie men up to those
respective duties toward one another, without which Government and Society
could not subsist.

There is a remarkable passage in Plutarch to this purpose, where he styles
Religion, the Cement of all Communities, and the chief Basis of all Legislative
Power. And in another place he says, Against Colotes.
That it is much more easy to build a City in the open air, without any ground
to found it upon, than to establish a Government without Religion. A City
(says he) may make some shift to subsist without Walls, Schools, Theaters,
Houses; nay, without Money, but not without Religon.

If it were not for this notion of a Deity, and those natural impressions which
we have concerning Justice and Probity, so necessary for the conservation of
Human Society; instead of those well-ordered Governments and Cities which are
now in the World, Mankind must have lived either wild and solitary in Caves and
Dens, like Savage Beasts; or else in Troops of Robbers, subsisting upon the
spoil and rapine of such as were weaker than themselves.

Pietate sublata, Not. Deo* L. 1.
fides etiam, and Societas humani generis, and una excellentissima virtus
Iustitia tollitur, says Tully. Take but away the awe of Religion, and all that
Fidelity and Justice, so necessary for the keeping up of Human Society, must
perish with it.

It Is this fear of a Deity, and the sense of our obligation to Him, that is the
only effectual means to restrain Men within the bounds of Duty. And were this
wholly extinguished, there would follow such wild Disorders and Extravagancies
amongst men, as would not leave so much as the face or least shadow of Virtue
or Honesty in the World: There being no kind of Vice which men would not
abandon themselves unto, considering the impetuousness of their own natural
appetites, and the power of external temptations, were this restraint from
Religion once removed or abolished.

The two chief Opposites to Religion, are Profaneness and Superstition. Both
which, are prejudicial to Civil Government: The one by destroying Conscience,
the strongest obligation to Political Duties: The other by perverting and
abusing it; introducing in the stead of it, a new Primium Mobile, which
ravisheth the Spheres of Government, and puts them into a preternatural course,
Ld Bacon Essays.
as a Noble Author has elegantly expressed it.

The two grand Relations that concern Society, are Government and Subjection.
And Irreligion does indispose men for both these.

1. For Government. Without Religion, Magistrates will lose that Courage and
Confidence belonging to their stations, which they cannot so well exert in
punishing the offenses of others, when they are guilty of the same or the like
themselves. Those that sit on the Throne of Judgment, should be able to scatter
away evil with their eyes, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 20. 8. By their very
presence and look, to strike an awe upon offenders. Which will not be so easily
done, if they should lie under the same guilt themselves. Sine Bonitate nulla
Majestas, says Seneca: The very nature of Majesty does denote Goodness as well
as Power. And without this, Governors may easily lose that Reverence which is
due to them from others; and consequently that Authority which they ought to
have over them. When they cease to be Gods in respect of their Goodness, they
may diminish in their Power. And though they should be able to keep men under
as to their Bodies and Estates, yet will they decline as to that awful love and
reverence whereby they should sway over the Hearts and Affections of men.

The Philosopher in the fifth Book of his Politics, Cap. 11.
does lay it down as a rule for Magistrates, That they must be careful to give
public testimonies of their being religious and devout; for which he gives
this double reason: Because the people will be less subject to entertain any
jealousy or suspicion of suffering injury from such whom they believe to be
religious. And withal, they will be less subject to attempt the Doing of
injury against such; as knowing, that good Magistrates are after a more
especial manner under the Divine Favor and Protection, having God to fight
with them, and for them.

2. The want of Religion will indispose men for the condition of Subjects, and
render them loose and unstable in those duties of obedience and submission
required to that state. How can it be expected from that man who dares affront
and despise God Himself, that he should have any hearty reverence for His
Deputies and Vicegerents? Those who are destitute of Religion and Conscience,
as they are not to be trusted in any ordinary private duty toward those with
whom they converse, much less can they be useful in any such extraordinary
Action, whereby the public welfare is to be promoted. Where there are no seeds
of Piety and Virtue, there can be nothing of Honor or Magnanimity.

He that is subject only upon the account of Wrath, and the power of the Sword
which is over him, will be no longer so, when he has an opportunity of
escaping or resisting that Power. Nor is there any possible way to secure men
in their quiet subjection and obedience, but by their being obliged for
Conscience sake. And therefore such kind of persons, as by their open
profaneness and contempt of Religion, do endeavor to destroy Conscience from
amongst men, may justly be esteemed as the worst kind of Seditious Persons, and
most pernicious to Civil Government.

Whatever Disputes have been raised concerning the lawfulness of punishing men
for their dissenting Consciences in matters of Religion; yet never any man
questioned the lawfulness of punishing men for their profaneness and contempt of
all Religion. Such men as renounce Conscience, cannot pretend that they suffer
for it. And certainly this Vice does upon many accounts deserve the greatest
severity of Laws, as being in its own nature destructive of the very Principles
of Government, and the Peace of all Human Societies: Besides the Mischiefs
consequent upon it from Divine Vengeance.

So that upon all these accounts, there is just reason to infer the truth of
this Proposition, That Religion is totum hominis in this first sense, as it
referrs to the Essence of Man considered either Separately, or as a Member of
Society.

2. It Is so likewise with respect to the Happiness and well-being of Man. That
is properly said to be the chief End or Happiness of a thing, which does raise
its nature to the utmost perfection, of which it is capable according to its
rank and kind. So the chief good belonging to a Vegetable or Plant, is to grow
up to a state of maturity, to continue to its natural period, and to propagate
its Kind, which is the utmost perfection that kind of Being is capable of. And
whereas Sensitive Creatures, besides those things which are common to them with
Plants, have likewise such faculties, whereby they are able to apprehend
external objects, and to receive pain or pleasure from them: Therefore the
Happiness proper to them, must consist in the Perfection of these Faculties,
namely, in sensible pleasures, the enjoying of such things as may be grateful
to their senses. But now Mankind, (if we will allow it to be a distinct rank of
Creatures superior to Brutes) being endowed with such Faculties, whereby it is
made capable of Apprehending a Deity, and of expecting a future state after
this life; It will hence follow, That the proper happiness of man must consist
in the perfecting of this Faculty; namely, in such a state as may reconcile him
to the Divine Favor, and afford him the best assurance of a blessed
Immortality hereafter. Which nothing else but Religion can so much as pretend
to. And that this is most agreeable to Natural Light, may appear, from the
Testimonies of several of the wisest Heathens, Pythagoras, Plato, Epictetus,
etc. who assert a Man's Happiness, or chief End, to consist in a likeness or
resemblance to the Divine Nature, In following of God, Endeavoring to imitate
Him whom we worship; which are but several descriptions of Religion.

It Is true indeed, the nature of Man, by reason of those other Capacities,
common to him with Plants and Brutes, may stand in need of several other
things, to render his condition pleasant and comfortable in this World, as
Health, Riches, Reputation, Safety, etc. Now herein is the great advantage of
Religion, that besides the principal work which it does for us, in securing our
future Estates in the other World; It is likewise the most effectual means to
promote our happiness in this World; and that not only Morally, upon account of
that Reward which Virtuous Actions do entitle a man unto from a just and a wise
Providence: But Naturally also, by reason of that Physical efficacy, which the
Duties of Religion have in procuring for us each of those things, wherein our
Temporal Happiness does consist; in promoting the welfare not only of
particular persons, but of public Communities, of Mankind in general, and of
the whole Universe. Insomuch, that if we could suppose our selves in a capacity
of capitulating with God, concerning the Terms upon which we would submit to
this Government, and to choose the Laws we would be bound to observe, It were
not possible for us, to make any Proposals, which upon all accounts should be
more advantageous to our own Interests, than those very Conditions, to which we
are obliged by the rules of Religion and Virtue. And herein does the
reasonableness of Religion, and the Beauty, and Wisdom of Providence most
eminently appear toward Mankind, in governing us by such Laws as do most
apparently tend to the perfecting of our Natures, and in making that only to be
our Duty, which is our Interest.

3. Religion is Totum hominis, with respect to the chief Business and Duty of
Man, that which he ought to be most intent upon, and conversant about, as to
his Employment in this World. That General calling to which every man of what
rank or quality soever is to be engaged. Men are distributed under other
particular callings, according as their Education, Abilities, Friends, and
several Opportunities, do dispose of them. But the obligation of Religion,
being of universal concernment, does extend to all and every particular, there
being none exempted from it. Hoc est omnis homo, Every man is concerned in it.
And it is Totum hominis likewise; It Is his calling, the chief business about
which he is to be employed.

I do not say, that a man's thoughts are always to be taken up about the
immediate Acts of Religion, any more than a Traveller is always to have his
mind actually fixed upon the thought of his journey's end. This would be
inconsistent with the infirmity of our natures, and the necessity of our
conditions in this World. But yet, as he that is upon a journey, does so order
all his Particular Motions, as may be most conducible to his General End; so
should men habitually, though they cannot actually, in every affair have
respect to their chief End, so as to observe all the duties of Religion, and
never to allow themselves in any thing against the rules of it. And he that
has this care continually upon his mind, (though he be but a Secular person)
may properly be said to make Religion his Business.

The Wise man, in the beginning of this Book, had proposed it as his grand
Query to be discussed, Chapter 2. 3.
to find out what was that good for the sons of men, which they should do under
the Heavens, all the days of their lives. (i.e.) What was the chief employment
or business, which they should apply themselves to in this World. And here in
the Text he asserts it to be the business of Religion, Fearing God, and keeping
his Commandments: Suitable to that Precept of Moses, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now, O
Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in his ways, and to serve the Lord thy God, and keep his
Commandments: And the Practice of St. Paul, who made this his daily exercise,
to keep his Conscience void of offense, both toward God, and toward men.

To the Reasonableness of this, several of the wisest Heathens have attested.
That Is a remarkable passage in Aristotle to this purpose, Moral. 1. ad Eudem in
fine.
where he states that to be the most desirable proportion of all Worldly
Felicities and Enjoyments, which is most consistent with men's devoting
themselves to the business of Religion: And that to be either too much or too
little of Wealth, or Honor, or Power, etc. whereby men are hindered in their
meditating upon God, or their worshipping of him.

So Epictetus, Dissert. 1. 6.
discoursing concerning the work and business he was designed to, has this
passage: If I had been made a Nightingale or a Swan, I should have employed the
time of my life in such a way as is suitable to the conditions of those
Creatures: But being made a Man, capable of serving and worshipping that God
from whom I had my Being, it is but reason that I should apply my self to this,
as being my proper work and business: (...). And therefore hereunto will I
devote my self, as being the chief Employment to which I am designed.

So Antoninus: Lib. 8. Sect. 19.
Every thing (says he) is designed for some kind of work. Beasts and Plants,
the Sun and Stars, (...), And what do you conceive your business to be?
Sensual pleasures? Bethink your self a little better, whether this be suitable
to the nobility of your nature, and those excellent faculties with which you
are endowed?

Men usually apply themselves to that as their chief business, which may quit
cost and be worth their labor, by which their Interest is most promoted. And
there is nothing can be more reasonable, than for that to be the chief business
of a man's life, which is the chief end of his Being. Which is the third thing
I proposed to speak to.

I crave leave to mention two Inferences very briefly by way of Application,
and I have done.

If this be so, that Religion is of so great Importance, that it may be styled
the Whole of man, with reference to all those things that are of greatest
moment, The Essence, the Happiness, the Business of Man:

1. What Monsters of Folly, and Madness, and Contradiction, must those men be,
who do upon this account put a greater value upon themselves, as being more
learned, and wise, and better than others, because they can contemn and despise
Religion? Certainly, by all the Laws of God and Men, such Miscreants ought to
be rendered most vile and contemptible themselves. Their Discourses ought not
to be listened unto without nauseousness and detestation. Their Persons should
be used as the Lepers were under the Law, whose company every one was obliged
to avoid, as being unclean infectious persons. And perhaps this might be one
good way, if not of Curing themselves, yet of hindering their Mischiefs upon
others, when they should find themselves abhorred and abandoned by all sober
men.

2. How dear should the Concernments of Religion be to every one of us. How
serious should we be in the Profession and Practice of it ourselves. How
zealous in promoting the Honor and the Power of it amongst others. The things
of this World are full of uncertainty, and of short continuance. When a few
days are past, we must all of us go to the place whence we shall not return.
And when we come to dye, nothing then will be of any advantage to us, but
Religion, The testimony of our Consciences, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, we have had our Conversation in this world. Upon which we may
confidently expect, that there is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord the Righteouus Judge, will give unto us at the day of his
Appearance; when He shall come to bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

FINIS.

