CHARACTERS OF A SINCERE HEART, And the COMFORTS thereof. Collected out of the.
WORD OF GOD,

By HEN-WILKINSON, D. D. Late Principal of Magdalen Hall in the University of
OXFORD.

1 Samuel 16. 7. Man looks on the outward appearance, but Lord looks on the
heart.

Psalm. 51. 6. Behold thou desire truth in the inward parts^ and in the hidden
part thou shall make me to know wisdom.

OXFORD, Printed by L. LICHFIELD, Printer (...)e University, for RIC. DAVIS,
Anno Domini, 1674.

To the much Honored and virtuous Lady HESTER HONYWOOD of Marks-Hall in the
County of of Essex: Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God our Father, and Jesus
Christ our Lord.
Honored Madame,
DEDICATIONS of Books to Persons of great rank and Quality, are of great
antiquity, for St. Luke Dedicates Luke 1. 3. Act. 1. 1.
two Treatises To the most excellent Theophilus. And now a days it is usual to
dedicate Books to such Personages, who are (probably) ready to approve them by
their Patronage and practice.

As to my own concernment, I the rather prefix your name to this little
Treatise, not only to acknowledge with all thankfulness, the many great
Favors, which I have received from you, but especiall^ I am encouraged to
present those things to your view whereof you have had so large experience as
you can give Testimony to the truth of them, both as to your judgment and
affections.

I therefore am your remembrancer of those things, whereof (as I doubt not) you
have experimental knowledge, and my design is to comfort you with those
comforts, wherewith I my self have been comforted: It Is the charge which the
Angel gives unto the Church of Thyatira -- But that which you have already,
hold Rev. 2. 25.
fast: And the Apostle's charge is suitable unto that, -- Let us hold fast Heb.
10. 23.
the profession of our faith without wavering, (for he is faithful that
promised.) Likewise for self examination, and trial of our evidences for
heaven, we are frequently commanded, -- More particularly St. Paul charge the
Corinthians, and us as well as them. -- Examine your 2 Cor. 13. 5.
selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you? except
ye be Reprobates. So likewise the Church (after she had undergone great
afflictions and sufferings) makes this serious deliberate resolution -- Let us
search and try Lam. 3. 40.
our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

You being (Madam) an old Disciple, and an experienced Christian, cannot but
know, that it is a duty of great concernment, and in an especial manner
incumbent upon all faithful Ministers to endeavor in their Preaching to
distinguish the precious from the vile: for so says the Lord to the Prophet
Jeremiah. If thou Ier. 15. 19.
take forth the pretiou^ from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth: let them
return unto thee but return thou not to them.

Our blessed Lord and Savior, the best Example and the exactest Pattern for
our imitation* in that incomparable Sermon which he Preached in the Mount,
makes mention of seven Beatitudes, each of them being a rare discriminati^g
character, whereby good and bad, blessed and cursed, are distinguished one from
another: For if the poor in spirit be blessed, then the rich and proud in
spirit are cursed; and if the pure in heart be blessed, then the impu^e in
heart must be cursed, etc. Because of Contrarieties there are contrary
consequences. And Christ himself is the best Interpreter of himself, for when
he pronounced blessings upon such as Luke 6. 20. 21. 22.
were poor, and hungered, and wept, v. 24, 25, 26.
he pronounced woes against such as were rich and full, and of whom all men
speak well.

Likewise our Savior shows the absolute and indispensible necessity of
Regeneration and being born from above, as may appear by Christ's answer to
Nichodemus. -- Jesus answered, and said unto him, Verily, verily Ioh. 3. 3.
I say unto thee, except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God.
And Regeneration is a Characteristick note of distinction between the old and
new birth. Farther, Christ puts a vast difference between a good and a bad
tree: For (says he) A good tree cannot Matt. 7. 18, 19, 20.
bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
Every tree that brings not good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire,
wherefore by their fruits you shall know them: And Christ makes Love one to
another, a mark Ioh. 13. 35.
af his Disciples.

And after Christ's Example, his Apostles lay down marks and signs to
distinguish the good from the bad. For instance, How frequently, does St. John
press the grace of love, and lays it down as an infallible sign of one that is
translated from death to life -- We know that we have passed 1 Ioh. 3. 14.
from death to life, because we love the Brethren: He that loves not his
Brother abides in death. Saint Peter expressly manifests what we should avoid
-- Wherefore laying 1 P^t. 2. 1, 2, 3.
aside all malice and guile, and hypocusies, and envies, and all evil
speakings, etc and he injoynes what we should reduce unto practice, As new born
babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. And it
follows by way of Character, representing such who are new born babes in these
words. If so be that ye have tasted that the Lord 2 Cor. 5. 17.
is gracious. Saint Paul gives an evident sign of such who are in Christ by the
new Creature wrought in them. Thefore if any man be in Christ he is a new
Creature: old things are past away, behold all things are become new. And, to
mention only one more scripture to this purpose, The Apostle discovers a great
difference between the old man and the new, and Ephesians. 4. 21. 22, 23, 24.
thus Presses our duty upon us: If so be that ye have been taught by him as
the truth is in Jesus, That ye put of concerning the former conversation, the
old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts: And be renewed in
the spirit of your mind: and that ye put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness, and true holiness.

Now having such abundant warrant from the example of Christ and his Apostles,
I question not in the least, but that in the exercise of our Ministry we
obliged according to the Rule of the word of Gods to lay down Characters of a
Regenerate estate, and to distinguish sincere and real Professors, from such
who are only Nominal and Hypocritical. Many there are who name the name of
Christ, but depart not from iniquity: But it is the express command of the word:
And let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Many
there are that content themselves, with the Angel of the Church of Sardis, to
have only a bare name to live; But he is reproved by Christ, Rev. 3 1, 2. And
unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis write, these things says he (...). 3.
1. 2.
that has the seven spirits of God, and the seven Stars, I know thy works,
that thou have a name, that live and art dead. Be watchful and strengthen the
things that are ready to dye: (...) I have not found thy works perfect before
God. Many there are who rest satisfied with a bare form, and deny the power of
godliness: But the Apostles command is -- Having a form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.
5.
but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

The Sincerity of the Heart is that which God requires. Behold thou desires
truth in the inward parts: Psalm. 51. 6. Josh. 34. 14. Ioh. 4. 24.
God must be feared and served in sincerity and in truth: God is a spirit, and
his worship must be a spiritual worship: So says our Savior, God is a spirit
and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit, and in truth. The fruits
of the spirit are reck^n^d up by the Apostle to be in all goodness,
righteousness and truth. Goodness may Ephesians. 5. 9.
be reckoned to the duties of the first Table, and righteousness to the duties
of the second Table, but Truth (i e.) Sincerity, refers to both Tables
respectively. Sincerity is the ground of rejoicing, For (says the Apostle) Our
rejoicing is this, the Testimony Cor. 1. 12.
of our Conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation, and more
abundantly to you ward. And the same Apostle prays for the Philippians, That
Phil. 1. 10.
ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere, and without
offense till the day of Christ. And although he is sensible of his own, and of
his Brethrens insufficiency for the great work of the Ministry, as may appear
by that Question which he propounds: And who is sufficient for these things? 2
Cor. 2. 16.
Yet he makes this profession of his own, and his brethrens sincerity. For
(says he) we are not as many v. 17.
which corrupt the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God in the fight
of God, speak we in Christ.

To draw to a close of this Epistle: It is the sincerity of the Heart, which
both to Ministers and people is a great ground of consolation. The grand design
which I only drive at in this small Treatise, is to stir up my self and others,
that every one in good earnest may Chatechise his own heart, and propound this
great needful Question. Is my heart sincere with God? For answer to this
question, I have by way of Character, according to the Rule of the word of God,
endeavored to declare in several particulars, wherein the sincerity of the
heart consists.

This Treatise I preached as to the substantials thereof, (which sinc^ I have
unlarged) in the public Congre^ation at Cosfield in Essex. T^ you (much
Honored Madam) I offer ^his Mite, or Testimony of my graceful acknowledgment
of these many signal favors, which both my self and my nearest Relations have
recieved from you, both in our sickness, and health, God has made you a worthy
instrument to do good to many, and I hope you will fare the better for their
prayers. That Bread which you have cast upon the waters, you shall find after
many days. May the Lord lengthen out your days, for the glory of God, and for
your own good, and the good of many others: And may you be one of those of whom
the Psalmist makes mention; Those that be planted in Psalm. 92. 13.
the house of the Lord shall flourish in the Courts of God; They shall still
bring forth fruit in old age; They shall be fat and flourishing. I commend your
self, and all your Relations, to the Gracious Providence of God, beseeching him
to guide you by his counsel till he bring you to glory. I remain

Sible Henningham in Essex, Jan. 1. 1674. Madame Your Servant for Christ sake,
HEN. WILKINSON.

CHARACTERS OF A SINCERE HEART.
CHAP. I. Of Spiritual Poverty.
THE first Character of a Sincere Charact. 1. Spiritual Poverty.
Heart, is, Spiritual Poverty: And Spiritual Poverty consists in emptying of
the Heart to the utmost, of all and every thing, whatever is Self; as
self-love, self-righteousness, self-opinion, self-sufficiency, selfreasonings
and disputings with flesh and blood, and self-confidence, and selfconceit, and
all manner of self ends, selfaims, and self-designs, So that when a Christian
is wholly emptied of himself, and he has learned that great and excellent
Gospel-Lesson of Self-denial, and he comprehends himself, as he is in himself
only, nothing, and less then no* thing, and is vile in his own eyes, and h^
magnifies the riches of Gods mercy, and ascribes all honor and glory to God
such a one is Sincere, and upright hearted toward God. Jacob whom the Holy
Ghost styles a plain man, (i. e.) as Taatum dicit suisse simplicem; (...)
quidem pro integro and sincero at plurimu^ accipitur, Calv. Jacob viz. integer,
simplex: Graeci (...) alienus ab omni fraud dolo, and callidatate, Mercer. in
Lo^.
some Genesis 25. 27.
interpret, a sincere and single hearted man, was a man of an humble spirit,
witness his confession, I am not worthy o^ the least of all thy mercies, and of
all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant, Genesis 32. 10. David was
poo^ in spirit, and endowed with that excellen^ grace of Humility: For he was
so vil^ in his own eyes, as he accounted himself a worm and no man, Psalm. 22.
6. and when the Lord sent Nathan the Prophet to tell what great things God had,
and would do, for him, as to take him from 2 Samuel 7. 8. and that he had cut off
all his the Sheep Coat to be ruler over Israel, enemies, and made him a great
name, ver. 9. and that he would fix the children of Israel, that they may dwell
in ^ place of their own, and ^^ve no more, and that the Lord would make David
an house; how David received these messages from the Prophet, is apparent by
the humility and thankfulness, whereof he gave a large testimony, 2 Samuel 7. 18.
19. Then went King David in, and sat before the Lord, and he said, who am I, O
Lord God? and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And this
was yet a small thing in thy sight O Lord God; but thou have spoken also of thy
servants house, for a great while to come, and is this the manner of man, O
Lord God? Agur was a wise man, and the more wise, because the more humble, and
the more esteemed of by God, by how much the more vile he was in his own
opinion. His Qui s^i vilis est Deo charus est. Born. Prove. 30. 2.
acknowledging himself to be more brutish then any man, and not to have the
understanding of a man, plainly declares the lowliness and poverty of his
spirit. S. Paul, who was the chiefest of the Apostles, and more eminent in
gifts, and graces, then any of them, yet he had so cheap and mean thoughts, and
valuation of himself, as to confess that he was chief 1 Timothy 1. 15.
of sinners.

himself to be poor, and indigent, and therefore he goes to Christ to enrich
him. He apprehends himself blind, and ignorant, or knowing nothing as he ought
to know, and therefore he begs eye salve and a spirit of illumination from
Jesus Christ. He is sensible of his nakedness, and therefore he goes to Christ
for clothing, knowing that the immaculate robes of Christ's righteousness can
alone cloth and cover his nakedness. For this is that soul-saving Counsel,
which Christ gives to the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, -- I counsel
thee to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that thou may Rev. 3. 18. Suadendi
no imperandi verbo utitur Dominus, quo illorum retundat insani em qui nisi
violenter trahantur non arbitrantur se a Domino admonitos, tractos vel vocalos.
Bulling. 1 Pet. 1. 7.
be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, that the shame of
thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eie-salve that thou
may see. By Gold we are to understand true grace, especially true faith,
which is much more precious then Gold, and this faith is not an ordinary faith,
but it is a tried faith, for its said tried in the fire, (i. e.) such a faith
that is genuine, and of the right stamp, that can endure the trial of the
sword, and the trial of afflictions though they be fiery. Further, by white
raiment we are to understand, the unspotted and innocent robes of Christ's
righteousness. And by eye salve, we are to understand the illumination of the
spirit, even that wisdom that comes from above. All these we are counseled to
buy of Jesus Christ: * yet here is no gap opened to let in Popish merit:
Christus est (...) ille qui merces salutis caelitus venales nobis promittit, et
offert in Evangelio, no^ pretio, vel meritis parandas, sed ^precibus and fide
gratis Deo accipiendas. Hoc monopolium est Christi, extra quod nulla est salus,
Pareus.
Here is not the least allowance given to that rotten Doctrine of Merits: For
all graces which we have, and all gifts which we have, are gratuitously given
us by God, and to him alone we must ascribe the praise and glory of all.
Whoever then has received this great and excellent grace of Spiritual Poverty,
the free gift of God (which is by our Savior mentioned the first, and leads
the van to the rest of all the Beatitudes) he is obliged more and more daily to
search his heart thoroughly, and so to find out, and be sensible of, his own
lost, forlorn, and utterly undone condition as in himself, and so likewise to
apprehend his absolute necessity of making sure of his interest in Christ; who
was for this very purpose sent into the world, to seek and to save that which
was lost: For Mat. 18. 11.
he professes, Matthew 15. 24. I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel. He then, who is so poor in spirit, and vile, and despicable, and
altogether less then nothing in his own eyes, O! what have does he make unto
Christ. As poor men flock apace to the Lord Almoner, to receive Alms, so all
spiritually poor Christians make have unto Christ, who only can enrich them
with never fading ^iches. They therefore apply themselves unto Christ, and
apply his merits unto themselves. They are thoroughly apprehensive of their
absolute necessity of getting a saving interest in Christ, and that without
him, they are utterly undone, wherefore with all expedition they run to Christ,
and ^hey lay hold on him by faith (for he is their life) and they will not let
go their hold.

who labors and is heavy laden, and therefore he goes to Christ for rest: For
so runs the Invitation, and promise, both made by Christ, Mat. 11. 29. Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy (...), A^imo delassati dicuntar qui
sub peccatorum gravi sensu animo faitscu^t. Beza.

Refocillatio, quam promittit in gratuit a peccatorum remis^ione seta est quae
nos tranquillat, Calvin.


laden, and I will give you rest. But some are conscious to themselves of so
much unworthinese, as they are afraid to come, least if they do come, they be
utterly rejected: But O! Christian, labor to be sensible of thy unworthiness,
and mourn for the same, and then, notwithstanding thy unworthiness, be not
discouraged; O! do not slacken thy pace, but make have to go to Jesus Christ,
for he has made a gracious promise, -- And him that comes Ioh. 6. 36.
to me I will no wise cast out, Joh 6. 37. Although you are poor and indigent,
blind, miserable and naked, and can claim no merit from any thing, no not the
best things, which you can do, yet you must not exclude your selves, and so
refuse that great salvation offered to you in the Gospel. The expostulation is
pathetical, Heb. 23. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? If
you are thirsty, and vehemently desire Tam pauperes quam divites fo^s graciae
De^ recipit, ac largiter polat, Musc. in Loc.
Christ, you have many special invitations: One is ^saiah 55. 1. Ha every one
that thirsts, come unto the witers, and let not want and penury set a bar
against your coming, for it follows, And he that has no money, come ye, buy
and eat, yea come buy Wine, and Milk without money, and without price. Another
Invitation is made by Christ amongst a great confluence of people. -- In the
last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood, and cried saying, if any
man thirst let him come unto me and drink. Joh. 7. 37. A Third Invitation is
Rev. 22. 17. And the Spirit, and the Bride say, come, and let him, that is
athirst come, and whosoever will let him take of the water of life. Now least
any may affix a false gloss, and a corrupt sense upon those Invitations, as if
they laid down a ground for Liberum facio cuilibet veniendi: neminem ex --
cludo, prorsus omnes venire subeo. Omnes venite and accipite aquas. Domino ^t
gloria. Bulling.
Free Will: I answer, That all those Invitations abundantly manifest the Free
grace of God and ascribe nothing to man's Free will (which if we trust to it,
will prove an Egyptian reed to deceive us.) We read Ezrah. 1. 5. Then rose the
chief of the Fathers of Judah, and Benjamin, and the Priests and the Levites,
with all them, whose spirit God had raised to go up, to build the house of the
Lord in Jerusalem. Before we can come to Christ and accept of the Gospel
Invitation, God raises up our hearts: For says our Savior. Joh. 6. 44. No
man can come to me except the Father, which has sent m^ draw him. But when he
draws us w^ can run (as the spouse professes) Can. 1. 4. Draw me, we will run
after the. Before we can run the ways of Gods Commandments, he inlargeth our
hearts. So says the Psalmist. Psalm. 119. 32. I will run the way of thy
Commandments: When thou shall enlarge my heart.

Sect. 4. He that is poor in spirit is weak, sick, and in a distressed
condition, as to his own apprehension, and therefore of necessity (all delays
being laid aside) he must repair to Christ, and beg strength, health, Comforts,
even all from him, as the only skillful Physician who alone can Work an
effectual cure. And Christ is the only Physician, and his blood is the only
Medicine; and both the Physician, and his Medicine are of infinite dignity,
price, value. For no Physician, nor no Medicine can work that cure, which
Christ works, Psalm. 103. 3. For he pardons all iniquities, and heals all
diseases. Christ prepares and prescribes the Medicine: our Duty is to apply it
to our wounds: For the most Sovereign Medicine cures not in preparation, but in
Application. Wherefore we must imitate the Apostle, by making a particular
Application of of Christ and all his merits unto our own souls. For (says he)
Gal. 2. 20. I am crucisied with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life with I now live in the Flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and g^ve himself for me. After Thomas
had a demonstrative Conviction of Christ's personal appearance after his
resurrection, he made use of a Pronoun Possessive to his comfort, saying, Joh.
20. 28. My Lord, and my God. Whoever he be, that is so poor in spirit as to be
nothing and less then nothing in his own account and value Christ above all,
and (as the Apostle phraseth (...).

Est Christus (sese scilicet uniens re^atis eosque regenerans) omnia, scilicet
ad salutem necessaria: Omnibus, ni mirum fidelibus sanctificatis and Christo
copulatis, Est illis omnia meritorie. Daven. in Loc.

(...). Macar. Hom. 16.


it) Col. 3. 11. All in All, he (questionless) is in the state of blessedness;
for (says our Savior, Matthew. 5. 3.) Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Observe how low the Foundation is laid, even
in Poverty of spirit: But Christ setts a high Roof and glorious superstructure
upon so low a Foundation, even the Kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. II. Concerning the highest priceing and valueing of Jesus Christ.
A Second Character of a sincere Heart Character 2. The highest priseing and
valuing of Jesus Christ.
is to set the highest Price, Value and Estimation upon Jesus Christ. Unto you
therefore which believe he is prelious (...).
O! how high an Estimation did the Lovesick Spouse discover concerning Jesus
Christ: For (said she) Cant. 5. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest
Jesus Christus totus suavis est, totus salubris est, totus delect ib^lis, totus
denique secuadn^ sponsae Vocem desiderabilis. Beza.
among ten thousand. Christ is white by his innocence, purity, and immaculate
righteousness, but he is ruddy by reason of his bloody sufferings, and the
effusion of his precious blood. To which the Prophet Isaiah alludes in a lofty
piece of Retorick Esa. 63. 1, 2, 3. Who is this that comes from Edom? with
died Garments from Bozrah? This is to be understood of Christ, as may appear
Loquitur Ecclesia and Christum ipsum alloquitur. Quare vestes tuae rubidae
sunt? Piscator, in Loc.
more evidently by what follows, viz: This that is glorious in his apparel,
traveling in the greatness of his strength, I that speak in righteousness,
mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in apparel and thy garments like him,
that treads the wine fat? This scripture represents the meritorious
sufferings of Christ, in pouring out his most precious blood out of his veins.
His body was pierced with a Spear, and forthwith came thereout Joh. 19. 34.
Rev. 19 13 Amictus cruentus indicat victorem reducem ab hostium strage Parae.
Tinctum non piorum sanguine, ut Roma sed impiorum Grot.
blood and water. St. John in the Revelation gives us a farther Evidence -- And
he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood and his name is called the word of
God. Oh! what an inestimable value should we have of Christ, who bought us, and
paid for the purchase the greatest price that ever was paid, even the price of
his innocent, meritorious, and most precious blood. The Apostle observes the
Doctrine, and injoyns us to make particular application thereof -- For (says
Haec correctio estquod admonet corpus non minus quam animam subjectum esse Deo.
Calv. Ezekiel. 34. 29. Hag. 2. 7.
he) 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your
body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. Christ is called by the Prophet
Ezekiel a Plant of renown. Christ is called by the Prophet Haggai The Desire of
all Nations, and by Malachy The Angel of the Covenant, and by Zachary the
Branch of Mal. 3. 1. Zech. 3. 8. Dan. 9. 26.
Righteousness, and by Daniel The Messiah. Add farther, by way of Singularity
and excellency and incomparable Benefit, Christ is called our Advocate and 1 John 2. 1.
Propitiation, our Redeemer and only Mediator. Job. 19. 25. Christ has trodd
the wine press alone. 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is Isa. 63. 3.
none other given under heaven, whereby we must be saved, but by the name of
Jesus. Act. 4. 11. 12. Christ therefore as he is of infinite value and dignity
in himself, so we ought to have the highest estimation of him, and to prefer
him both in judgment and affections, before all the Kingdoms of the world, and
the glory of them. Christ is compared to a Fountain, which is beyond compare
with any Zech. 13. 1.
other, for it is a Fountain opened to the House of David and to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness. Christ is likewise
compared to a Stone, and to such a one as excels others in admirable
Properties. Isai. 28. 16. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold I lay in
Zion for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious corner Stone, a sure
Foundation: He that believes, shall not make have. Farther Christ is compared
to the Pearl of great Price. Matthew. 13. 45. 46. Again the Kingdom of heaven
is like unto a Merchant man seeking goodly Matt. 13. 45, 46.
Pearls, who when he had found one Pear^ of great price, he went, and sold all
that h^ had and bought it. Whatever we estee^ highly of, must go for Christ,
the Pearl o^ Price: If we possess Christ in our hearts b^ faith, we are
enriched with that possession, which is infinitely more worth the^ all the
possessions of the Universe. Much value is set upon the Eastern, and Western
treasures of the Indies, and great pains is taken to get them: Impiger extremos
currit Mercator ad Indos. Ye^ they are not worth the nameing, in comparison of
the Riches of Christ. The knowledge of Christ is the most enriching knowledge,
for Col 2. 3. In him are hi^ O Thesauris omnibus opulentior notitia Christi.
all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge Whosoever has a saving Interest i^
Christ, is richer then the greatest Emperor, who is ignorant of him.

2 Cor. 5. 14. (...), constringit, cohibet (i. e.) totos possidet ac regit, ut
ejus afflatu quasi correpti agamus omnia. Beza.
Jesus Christ. The apprehension of the exceeding great love of Christ to u^
should constrain us to love him with a reciprocal love. Love is the Loadstone
o^ love, and love will never be paid, nor b^ contented and satisfied, but with
its own coin; I mean love, answering love. And the greatest love which we can
express to Jesus Christ, is only the reflection of those Beams, which he first
darted upon us. Whatever love we manifest toward God is only the Return of
that love, which he first shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is
given unto us. Romans 5. 5. 1 John 4. 19.
We (says the Apostle) love him, because he first loved us. Where Christ is
highly prised, that soul is inflamed with ardent love to him. Neither is this
an ordinary and common, but an extraordinary, and special love. This love is in
the highest degree above the apprehension of Philosophers. They tell us, That
there is Calor ad octo, and this is in gradu intenso, and non in gradu remisso.
Something that expression represents, but we will set forth the vehemence of Love
in the Scripture Phrase: Love, Psalm. 120. 4. is hotter then the coals of
Juniper; and to such an extensive heat, so that Cant. 8. 7. many waters cannot
quench love, neither can the floods drown it. But as for all those who love not
the Lord Jesus, they are cursed in this world, and in the world to come: For
(says the Apostle 1 Cor. Read Pynk in Loc.
16. 22, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathama
Maranatha. An Anathama alone is a dreadful Curse, but that is not all, there is
a Maranath^ Maran-Domiaus, Athan-venit Maranatha extrema and ultima species
excommunicationis quae Ebraeis Samatha dicitur. Drus.
added to the Anathema; and this Maranatha is reserved until the second coming
of Christ to judgment, and oh! how dreadful must their condition be at that
great and terrible day, who love not the Lord Jesus Christ! Against them Christ
will pronounce that dreadful sentence of condemnation, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

CHAP III. A heart in love with holiness, evidenced in a holy life and
conversation, is a Character of a sincere Heart.
A Third Character of Sincerity, is a Character Third. A heart in love with
holiness.
Heart in love with holiness: Believer loves holiness for it self, because it
is the image of God. And (as Bucer used to say) where there is Aliquid Christi
(i. e.) any impression of the image of Christ, there we ought to place our
love. Wherefore the Apostle gives a strict Ephesians. 4. 23. 24. (...).
Command -- Be renewed in the spirit of your mind. And that ye put on the new
man, which after the image of God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. Where this image of God is, (which consists in righteousness and true
holiness) Sanctitas veritatis est vera sincera minime fucata Drus. Tali
innocentia and sanctitate qu^ sint in esse non in videri Grot.
it is stamped upon the heart, and is visible in the life, and there is such a
transcendent beauty, purity, and excellency, and amiableness in all the ways
of holiness, as the least glimpse of them are abundantly sufficient to delight,
rejoice and ravish the soul of every true believer. What plato said of Moral
virtue, much more may be said of Theological virtue (i. e.) Si Virtus and
humanis ocutis possit cer^i admirabile (sui) desiderium excitaret-Plato.
Soul-saving grace, and holiness, that if it could be discerned by Corporal
eyes, it would raise the heart to a wonderful desire thereof. Oh! how did
David love the Law of God! He professed that Gods Law was his Delight, and that
Psalm. 119. 77. he loved the commandments above Gold, yea above fine gold. Psalm.
119. 127. Thy Testimonies (says he) I have taken Psalm. 119. 111.
(...)n Heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart. O! What
sweet ness did David suck out of the Judgments of the Lord! for (says he) The
Psalm. 19. 9. 10.
Judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether: More to be desired
ar^ they then Gold yea then much fine Gold sweeter also then honey, and the
hone^ comb. There is a great reward in the very work of holiness: For it
follows i^ the next words -- Moreover by them, i^ thy Servant warned: and in
keeping o^ them, there is Utilitas non mediocris, sedingens sequitur, etiamsi
illi respectum retributionis alicujus non habeant sed simplici ac sincer^ cord
in via mandatorum Dei current, unum hoc spectantes, ut Domino Deo suo
gratificentur Musc.
great reward Now to love God for himself and the Law of God for it felf and
holiness for holiness sake because it is the image of God and resembles him,
this is a good sign indeed that the heart is sincere with God. But to profess
religion for self and sinister ends, hopeing to make a good Market to
themselves by ingratiating themselves with some Professors for advantage sake,
this is a very bad Sign, and comes far short of a heart right with God. Qui
Deum ideo colit ut aliud magis quam ipsum assequatur, non Deum colit sed illud
colit quod concupiseit. August.
So the Sichemites Embraced circumcision upon a Politic design, to compass to
themselves all the Estate of the Israelites Genesis 34. 25. Si vere hoc dicunt,
tyran^ide baud dubie, and per vim cum illis agere specie foederis statueru^t,
quod vellent vi eorum bonae accipere. Ita cum dolose cum illis agerent just
sunt pu^iti^ alioqui praeter stuprum illataus. Merc.
Shall not their Cattle, and their substance, and every beast of theirs be
ours, only le^ us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us. But that
Politic, and selfended proposal did not prosper with the Sichemites, for we
read immediately after of their utter destruction: No more will any men thrive
in the close of all, who seek their own ends and design only self-Interests.
The People followed Christ for the loaves, and many like the Persians worship
the rising Sun, and seek only their own private ends, and some have two faces
under one hood, and some imitate Water men rowing upon the Thames, who look one
way and row another. The Apostles Censure is verified of multitudes -- For all
seek their Phil. 221.
own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's: But such men's hearts are not
upright with God.

cheerful obedience to him. Not only a form but the power of godliness must
exert and evidence it self in a Sanctified conversation. The Apostle cautions
us against such, who content themselves with a bare outside-form of godlyness,
2. Tim. 3. 5.
and deny the power thereof -- Having a form of godliness, but deny the power
thereof: from such turn away. There must not be only (...), a formal
profession: But there must be (...) (...)
a transforming, Rom 12. 2. We must be transsormed by the renewing of our
minds. Questionless, where the heart is sincere toward God, there profession
and practice concur in a sweet harmony, and where the profession is in
since^^ty, a holy life gives abundant Testimony thereunto: For we must adorn
the Doctrine of God (as the Apostle Tit. 2. 10.
speaks) and then we adorn the Doctrine of God when we evidence the sincerity
of our profession by the holiness of our lives and conversations: For wherever
holiness is in sincerity, and in truth, it is very diffusive, and discovers it
self in its vast extent, and latitude. It consists not only in verbal
professions, but in real actions, nor is confined to one or to two acts, nor to
a few particulars, but it is in the Habit, and extends it self to all manner
of Conversation (as the Apostle 1 Per. 1. 15. (...) Heb. 12. 14, (...) Per
sequutione premite, Sum studio enitimiai.
exhorts) But as he that has called you, is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of Conversation. We must with all diligence pursue holiness (for so the
Original imports) It is used of Hunters and Hounds, who follow the game, and
take great pains in the pursuit thereof. Peace and Holiness are conjoined by
the Apostle -- Follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord. Holy persons, and they only shall be made partakers of the
blessed Vision: And they are thus distinguished from hypocrites by our Savior
-- Blessed are Matthew. 5. 8.
the pure in heart, for they shall see God. They are said to be pure in
opposition to Deum jam vide^t lumine gloriae, quae es^ summa hominis Beatitudo.
Spanhem.
all manner of impurity, and profaneness, and pure in heart in opposition to
all manner of hypocrisy. Whoever then has hope to be made like unto God in
happiness, in the highest Heaven, must be first made like unto God in holiness
here on Earth. For holiness and happiness differr not substantially, but
gradually: For Holiness is happiness inchoate in this World, and happiness is
holiness perfected and consummated in the World to come. Let us take a narrow
View View of the Words of the Apostle -- Behold now are we the Sons of God, and
it 1 John 3. 2.
does not yet appear, what we shall be; But Non sanctitate tantum, sed
aeternitate and beatitudine, ac sic multo magis filii ejas quam nunc. Grot.
we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him
as he is. Now for the right Interpretation of those words, we must interpose
this Caution by way of Distinction -- There is sicut similitudinis to be
understood, non sicut proportionis. In variety of places in Holy Scripture, we
are commanded Lev. 11. 44. Lev. 19. 2. Lev. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 16.
to be holy, as God is holy; yet we must know and acknowledge, that it is
altogether impossible for us poor finite Creatures to attain to that equality
of holiness, which is in God: However it is our obliged duty to endeavor
according to our utmost ability, after a similitude and conformity to God.
Similitudes are in the Predicament of Quality, and according to Quality, we are
said to be like, or unlike. But similitudes are not in the Predicament of
Quantity: for it is altogether impossible for any Creature to be equal and hold
any proportions of holiness, with the Infinite, and Everlasting Creator. But
what is the Grand Duty incumbent on all those, who hope to be partakers of the
blessed Vision. The Apostle makes mention -- 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
And every one that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is
pure: Both outward and inward purity; holiness of Heart, as well as Holiness of
life are essentially requisite to a good Christian. Both Hands and Hearts (as
St. James commands) must be cleansed, and I am. 4. 8.
purifyed -- V^clean persons can have no commerce with God: If you would have a
holy life you must get a clean heart v D. Manton in Lo. 2 Cor. 7. 1. (...). In
divino. Cultu nihi mutilu^ sed omnia absoluta esse decet. Calv.
Cleanse your hands ye Sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double minded. Not
only outward impurity of the Body, but inward impurity of the Heart, not only
practical uncleanness, but speculative uncleanness should be utterly abhorred,
and abandoned altogether: For so runs the Charge of the Apostle -- Having
therefore these promises, (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
This then is an undoubted Conclusion consonant to the Rule of the word. That
where holiness is cordially embraced, loved, desired, and delighted in, and
rightly priced in the Judgment, and preferrd as the true Wisdom, before Rubies
and all manner of precious Stones, and where holiness is practiced in the life
and Conversation, questionless that heart is upright and sincere toward God,
notwithstanding many personal Infirmities (which we grieve for and dislike of)
while we are in this Vale of misery.

CHAP. IIII. Of ingenuous Sorrow for Sin.
A Fourth Character of Sincerity is Ingenous Charact. 4. Ingenous sorrow for
our Sias.
sorrow for all Sin. This Epithete Ingenuous, I therefore name, because I would
lay down hereby a discriminating note between that sorrow; which is for the
Sin, and that which is only for the punishment.

it displeases the only Holy Lord God, and is odious and abominable in his
sight. The Eye of every upright man affects his Heart, and melts him into Tears
of Godly sorrow, and works an inward compunction, and a heart breaking sorrow.
And this is that sorrow, which is of the right stamp, a genuine and ingenuous
kind of sorrow. And where ever this ingenuous sorrow is, it may be fully
evidenced by seven Apostolical characters mentioned by the Apostle: For, Behold
(says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 7. 11.
this self same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it
wrought in you? yea, what clearing of your selves? yea, what indignation? yea,
what fear? yea, what vehement desire? yea, what zeal? yea, what revenge?

Cain, Pharaoh, Ahab, and Judas, (who only mourned and roared for the smart of
punishment) and the mournings of David, Paul, Peter, and Mary Magdalen, who
mourned for their sins; and therefore grieved, because they displeased so good
and gracious a Lord God. For instance, Pharaoh often cried out, that the
plagues inflicted on him and on his people might be taken away; but what
plagues did he mean? I answer; he meant only the plagues of Frogs, Locusts,
Caterpillars, etc. Pharaoh had a plague incumbent on him worse than all those,
and that was the plague of a hard heart; of this plague he makes not any
mention at all. A hard heart was his great sin, and it was inflicted upon him
as a very great judgment: But David cries out against Psalm. 51. 4.
himself for his sins, and makes a particular acknowledgment: Against thee,
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. And he prays, Hide
thy face Verse 9.
from my sins, and blot out all my transgressions. Ahab was a mere stranger to
the Grace of Humility, and unacquainted with it altogether; yet it is said of
him, that he humbled himself: and for his outward humiliation the judgment
threatened was adjourned. See thou how Ahab 1 Kings 21. 29.
humbles himself before me? Because he humbles himself before me, I
Poenitentia ductus sed quae non permansit. Aliquid tamen de commerita poena ob
hoc detractum est. Grot. Exemplum bonitatis Dei: quatenus Achab quantumvis
hypocritice poe^itentiam agenti poenas meritas differt. Hinc colligi pot est
Deum, multo magis beneficum fore erga cos qui veram and seriam poenitentiam
egerint. Piscat.
will not bring the evil in his days; but in his sons days will I bring the
evil upon his house. Yet of Ahab it may be more properly said, that he was
rather humbled than humble; for the fear and horror apprehended of those
dreadful judgments which were to be poured down against himself, and Jezebel
his Wife, and his Posterity, extorted from him an outward humiliation, which
consisted in putting on Sackcloth, in fasting and going softly, and looking
with a sorrowful and dejected countenance, yet all this while he had not one
dram of true godly sorrow, and of true humility. How sad must be the condition
of many loose Professors now a-dayes, who come short of such as Ahab was? and
how dreadful must their condition be who come short of those who come short of
Heaven? But St. Paul was a man of another spirit, he was not only humbled, but
humble, and had the gift and grace of true humility; and he was a true
Penitent, a sincere Convert, and a godly Mourner for sin; and he was so low and
debased in his own eyes, as to account himself the chief of 1 Timothy 1. 15.
sinners. We read of Ahab's forwardness in offering himself a Voluntier and
Slave to sin, so that this foul Brand of Infamy is stamped upon him. But there
was none 1 Kings 21. 25.
like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord, whom Jezebel his Wife stirred up. Ahab was active, and put himself
forward to work all manner of mischief; he precipitated himself, without fear
or wit, into any desperate Adventure. He stuck at nothing, but ran on in a wild
and mad career, following all sorts of wickedness with a full bent, propension
and vergency of his soul, and with delight and complacency, driving a Trade for
Sin, and for the Devil. We read of such who were almost starved for hunger,
that they flew upon the spoil. And likewise 1 Samuel 14. 32.
the Apostle stigmatizeth the vilest of sinners after this manner; Who being
past feeling, have given themselves over Ephesians. 4. 19.
unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness. Of this brand
was Ahab. But on the contrary, St. Paul discovers a better spirit, as appears
by his protestation; I delight in the Law of God after Romans 7. 22.
the inward man. He was passive, and with great grief and remorse of heart Tom.
7. 14.
complains, that he was sold under sin. He discovered great renitency,
reluctance and antipathies against every sin; For (says he) that which I do, I
allow not; for what I would do, that do I not; but Romans 7. 15.
what I hate, that do I. O how did this holy Apostle fight and struggle, and
exercise continual Combats and Conflicts, fighting against Sin and Satan! And
thereupon he breaks forth into a doleful complaint; But I see another Law in
Verse 23.
my members, warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity
to the Law of sin which is in my members. And it is observable, that all this
while, and amidst all those sad complaints, Paul was a regenerate man; and a
pregnant demonstration we have of our assertion, because he delighted in the
Law of God, For (says he) I delight in the Law of God Verse 22. Totus homo
mento and ratione regitur: ab ca itaque Apostolo homo totus appellatur, Bucer.
after the inward man. And to delight in the Law of God in the inward man,
cannot be appropriated to any, but to such only who are in the state of
Regeneracy. And that the words of the Apostle are not by a figure, called
(...), it is evident that he speaks in his own, and not in another person,
because he says, I my self. And that the Apostle Romans 7. 25.
gives no allowance to himself (...). Idem ego vel ipse ego, quod a Paulo
emphatice dictum est ad designandum seipsum ne quis eum sub aliena persona
hactenus fuisse locutum suspicaretur. Estius in Loc. Accipiamus hoc in sua
ipsius persona protulisse Apostolum. Zegerus. Hac exceptione fatetur se it a
esse Deo addictum, ut reptans in terra mu^tis sordibus inquinetur. Calr.
in any sin is clear, because he professes, For the good that I would, I do
not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. And the Apostle was
apprehensive of his own impotency and insufficiency, to extricate himself out
of those straits and difficulties wherein he was involved, and therefore he
cries out for a deliverer, as appears in that pathetical exclamation: O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of Sin? By the Body
o^ Sin, he understands all sorts of Sin, both Original and Actual, both the
Roor and Fruit; the corrupt Fountain, and the corrupt Streams. And none but God
ca^ deliver and set him free from them. H^ alone can deliver him, who delivers
u^ from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10.



Poe lit eat te quod tot and tantis flagitiis involutus in luto faecis and
miseriae diutius jacuisti, poenite^tiam agens corpus tuum conteras and
furibunde carnis asello iacentivorum semina subtrahens, etc. Bern. p. 331.
But as for all those who are true and unfeigned Mourners in Zion, they are
deeply affected with godly sorrow for sin; and therefore they grieve and mourn,
because they have been so hardhearted as to kick a tender Father upon his
Bowels; and have been so unthankful, as to sin against riches of mercy and
loving kindness: Hence comes their Heart-piercing, Heartbreaking, and
Soul-melting Sorrows, because they have been such undutiful Children, as to re^
bell against a gracious and merciful God, the Father of all mercies, and the God
of all consolations. No massy great Mountain, no not the burden of Aetna (as
the Proverb is) no weight imaginable, or expressible, can be so heavy, as is
the burden of sin to a Child of God. And no manner of sorrow can be so bitter
to a godly man, as is the sense of Sin, and sorrow for it. Nothing in the World
can be so grievous, vexing, torturing, and every way afflictive to a good
Christian, as Sin is: for Sin to him is like a Dagger sticking in his Heart,
and continually tormenting and putting him to pain. Hereupon we read of David
watering his Couch with his Tears; For Psalm. 6. 6, 7.
(says he) I am weary with my groaning; I make my Bed to swim, I water my
Couch with my Tears: Mine eye is consumed because of grief. Further he
expresses an addition to his mourning, because his Psalm. 42. 3.
tears was his meat day and night. To eat the bread of affliction, and to drink
the water of affliction is a sad calamity, but to feed on tears must needs be
much sadder; but this is not all, for the Psalmist confesses further; There is
no Psalm. 38. 3.
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my
bones, because of my sin. Diseases, aches, pains, and broken bones are very
grievous Omnium est utilissimum dolorem corporis ex morbo vel ulcere loco
peccati habere, and peceati etiam vocabulo appellare: ita vel hoc pacto ad
detestationem peccatorum, and horrorem induceremur. Musc. in Loc.
but sin is, or should be, more grievou^ to us than all. David was of a
sanguin^ complexion (and such naturally are more cheerful.) David was a great
and potent King, and an excellent Musician^ yet the sense of his sins caused
great sorrows to him, and made him go^ mourning all the day long. If then the^
through sense of sin, and the guilt thereof be set home upon the Conscience,
there will be weeping and mourning: The eye will affect the heart, and cause
inward compunction, and godly sorrow. Thus we read of Ephraim smiting upon his
thigh. Of Ephraim's Conversion and Repentance (which is the Fruit of
Conversion) the Prophet Jeremy makes mention: I have surely heard Ephraim Jer.
31. 18, 19.
bemoaning himself thus; Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a
Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou
art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after that
I was instructed, I smote upon my thing. I was ashamed, yea even confounded;
because I did bear the reproach of my youth. We shall likewise find the Prophet
Ezekiel ^zek. 21. 6.
sighing to the breaking of his loins. And Job 42. 6.
Job abhorring himself, and repenting in dust and ashes. Many mourn for worldly
losses, and shed many a tear for any loss which befalls them in their temporal
estate; but few there are which mourn for sin, which produces the greatest
loss, even the loss of God's favor. Many have cause to repent for their worldly
mournings, and to mourn for their mournings. See the vast difference between
worldly and godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 10. For godly sorrow works repentance to
salvation, not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world works death. If
we could mourn for sin much more, and for the world less, we should lead more
comfortable lives for the future, than ever we have formerly done.

CHAP. V. Of Sorrowing and Mourning for others Sins.
Charact. 5. Mourning for others Sins. 1.
is Sorrowing and Mourning for others Sins. A true godly Mourner, (whose heart
is upright with God) does not confine and terminate his sorrow within the
narrow compass of his own ^rest, and not let it extend any further, but he
lays to heart, and unfeignedly mourns for the sins of others. Though (as it is
commonly said) Charity begins at home, yet it must not end there; there must be
a plus ultra for our Charity; it must be diffusive, and extended to others. And
this is a great sign of love, when we are assected with, and affected for the
sins o^ others, as well as for our own. Every good man is not only grieved for
his own sins, but for the sins of others. Of this excellent temper was David,
the man after God's own heart; who from his heart professed, Rivers of tears
run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119. 136. But many
there are whose motions Qui spiritu Dei aguntur hi sentiunt tales dolorum
stimulos, ut Loath cum videret sceleru^ omnium colluviem regnare Sodomae, etc.
Mollcrus.
are excentrick to that good man; for they are so far strangers to mourning for
other men's sins, as they make their sins a matter of sport, mirth and mockery:
However, they would be loath to be branded for fools, yet they cannot escape
Solomon's censure, Prove. 14. 9. Fools make a mock at sin. When men make sin a
matter of pleasure and jesting, and make that a matter of laughter, which
should be a cause of mourning, they show themselves to be notorious fools. Many
there are who deservedly may be ranked amongst the chiefest and worst sort of
fools, who when they see men drunk, or hear them swear or curse, or talk
lasciviously, and belch out such words as (even the Heathen could say) corrupt
good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33. then (...). Menander.
those men are transported with laughter and merriment, and they talk with
delight and complacency, pleasing themselves with the remembrance of others
sins. These have Solomon's brand for fools; and their folly will appear to
their shame, when they shall mourn for their laughter, and weep for their
wicked pleasure and jollities. When some wrote Books in a jesting and deriding
manner, concerning several faults of great men, after Mr. Greenham, a Reverend
and Learned Divine, had read those Books, he was much offended at them, saying,
That sins ought to be made V. Greenhams works.
odious, and not only made ridiculous. Whatever sins we either discern in our
selves, or in any other, we ought to mourn for them, and not to make a sport of
them. A good Christian, who is acquainted with the pangs of the New Birth, and
is sensible of that great filthiness and abomination that is in every sin, and
that every sin grieveth and vexes God, and is odious and abominable in his
sight, such a man (I say) wherever he finds sin, he hates it, and mourns for
it; and therefore he is not an idle Spectator, or overcurious Inquisitor, but
a real Mourner for other men's sins. And whilst he mourns for others sins, he
reflects upon himself as a person made of the same mould, and one of the same
passions, and having the same corrupt nature. That excellent Father St. Bernard
makes mention of an old man, who when he had heard that one of his Brethren had
committed a scandalous sin, he wept bitterly, saying, He sinned to day, Vid.
Bern. in Fest. St. Martini.
I may sin to morrow. We are all by nature children of wrath, as others, Ephesians.
2. 3. Nature makes no difference between us and the vilest of men: Who art thou
then that boastest of a good nature, and a sweet disposition? though these
things are very commendable amongst men, and much to be desired, yet there is
much more required; for the best nature, without sanctifying grace, is no
better than poison in a golden Cup. Has then God endowed thee with a greater
measure of grace than thy Brother? remember that it is thy duty to acknowledge
with all thankfulness, that what grace thou have, is the free gift of God. And
what have thou which thou have not received? now if thou did receive it, why
do thou glory as if thou had not 1 Cor. 4. 7.
received it? Not the goodness of thy nature, but the free grace of God makes
thee to differ from thy Brother. O therefore with all thankfulness acknowledge
God's restraining grace, and sanctifying grace, whereby thou kept from running
with others into the same excess of riot. All sorts of grace come from God; as
antecedent, concomitant, and subsequent; and a Christian has need of them all,
that so he may begin any good work, proceed, and persevere therein. If the Lord
should leave thee to thy self, and let thee be filled with thy own ways, and
give thee up to thy own hearts lusts, thou will quickly destroy thy self, by
breaking out into such horrid sins, as the vilest of men give themselves to
commit with delight and complacency. It was a good Prayer in an ancient Letany,
Lord, deliver me from my self. That rare Father St. Bernard prayed, Lord,
deliver me from the evil man, (i. e.) my E^ipe me a malo homine, a me i^so.
Bern. de i^ter. Dom^.
self. Thus he counted himself the evil man, and thus he discovered singular
humility.

dust and ashes, frail creatures, our Fathers being Amorites, and our Mothers
Hittites; notwithstanding we are preserved from the commission of many sins
which others ordinarily commit, we have great cause of thankfulness, but not
the least cause of being proud. If through riches of mercy we have hopes of a
saving interest in Christ, (we not knowing the secret Decree of God) for ought
we know others may be fellow members of Christ's Body, and fellow Citizens of
the new Jerusalem; we ought therefore to sympathize with them, and be alike
affected with variety of Dispensations toward them, as the Apostle commands,
Romans 12. 15 Rejoice with them that do rejoice, weep with them that weep. For
any one to say as Cain, Am I my Brothers keeper? What am I concerned in
another matters? let every one look to himself: such speeches as ^^^elare
scriptum est a Platone ^on a nobis solum nati sumus, sed ortus nostri partem
patria, partem pareates ve^dicant, partem amici. Cic. off. lib. 1.
these are so far below a Christian spirit, as they come short of a moral
Heathen: For one of the best of Heathen Orators cites Plato, (and commends his
saying) We are not only born for our selves, but our Country, our Parents; our
Friends challenge a part of us. And Sympathies and Antipathies are critical
Dispensations, and discriminate Friends from Enemies. If then our Brethren be
in adversity, then we should mourn with them; if they be in prosperity, we
should rejoice with them. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 3. 11. that God has made
every thing beautiful in his time, also he has set the world in their heart.
And that shows the beauty of Providence; for God has abundantly discovered his
beautiful ordering of all the affairs of the World, representing his infinite
Wisdom and gracious Providence. Now seasons of Providence are to be observed,
and we ought to act accordingly; as the same Wise man exhorts, Eccles. 7. 14.
In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity consider: God
also has set the one over against the other, to the end that man should find
nothing after him. And as we ought to take notice of Providence in general, so
we should take notice of the particular conditions of others, as considering
that all things come by a Providence, either permitting or approving. No sin is
approved of, but altogether abhorred by Almighty God; yet God permits that
which he approves not of. For the greatest of sins which the Jews committed, in
embrewing their hands in the blood of Christ, came to pass by Divine permissive
Providence; (as St. Peter spoke Acts 2. 23.) Him being delivered by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledg of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands
have crucified and slain. That which was an Act of the highest Malice in the
Jews, was an Act of great Providence in God.

Wherefore though we cannot (though if we could we ought) prevent and hinder
the commission of sins in others, yet (be they never so bad) we ought heartily
to mourn for them. So did Lot mourn for the abomination of the Sodomites;
though they were ripe for vengeance, by reason of their exceeding great
wickedness, (as if they had attained unto the highest degree of sinning) yet
Lot grieved and mourned for them, who no way grieved nor mourned for
themselves. Of Lot's mourning for those wicked Sodomites, St. Peter sets an
especial remark, 2 Pet. 2. 7. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy
conversation of the wicked. The word imports more then an ordinary sorrow and
vexation (...), Significas opprimi, fatigari, gra^^ter assligi. Gerh. in Loc.
for their wickedness, for it signifies to be oppressed, wearied, and
grievously afflicted. And it is further added; For that righteous man dwelling
among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day
with their unlawful deeds, 2 Pet. 2. 8. And here is another word expressing a
greater grief or vexation; the word is (...). The word implies a sifting and
searching; so in Aristophanes, and others note upon the word: So that many have
been questioned by such searching and torturing to force confession. 2. The
word signifies to Vid. Rev. 14. 10. (...).
vex, rack and torment; and it expresses the torments of Hell. Lot was as it
were upon the rack, and for the time imagined himself to be so tormented in his
Soul, as if he was in Hell, by seeing and hearing those abominations of the
Sodomites. And as Lot, so the Prophet Jeremy was a true Mourner for the sins of
others; he wept abundantly for the dreadful judgments inflicted on the
Israelites: his Rhetoric is raised to a high pitch. My bowels, my bowels; I am
pained at my very heart; my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my peace;
because thou have heard, O my Soul, the sound of the Trumpet, the alarm of War,
Jer. 4. 19. And he strains himself to a higher piece of Rhetoric, Jer. 9. 1. O
that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep
day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people. But he not only weeps
for the judgments, but in an especial manner for their sins, Jer. 13. 17. But
if ye will not hear it, my Soul shall weep in secret places for your pride. By
what has been mentioned, let us utterly detest the careless, heedless temper of
Cain, Gallio, etc. and let us look upon our selves concerned, not only to mourn
for, and bewail our own sins, but mourn for, and bewail the sins of others also.

CHAP. VI. Showing, that all sincere-hearted Christians labor to approve their
Hearts toward God.
Charact. 6. A sincere heart approves it self.
. Christian, is to approve himself to God, and to put himself in the integrity
of his heart upon the test, trial and examination of God himself, who only
knows the heart, and alone can search it thoroughly. Thus David durst not stand
upon his own searching, but casts himself altogether upon God's search and
trial: Judge me, (says he) O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity; I have
trusted also in the Lord, therefore I shall not slide. Examine me, O Lord, and
prove me; try my reins and my heart, Psalm. 26. 1, 2. Likewise in another Psalm
David puts himself upon a farther test and trial, Psalm 139. 23, 24. Search me,
O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts. And see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Job makes his appeals and
applications unto God alone. Behold, (says he) my witness is in Heaven, and my
record is on high, Job 16. 19. Hence he discovered a resolution truly heroical.
I will not remove my integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast, and will
not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live, Job 2^. 5, 6.
Variety of the foulest slanders are cast upon the people of God, (as Histories
mention) even such lies and calumnies were invented, as bad as the Father of
lies could invent. Nero, when Rome was burnt, imputed the burning of it to the
Christians; and the Romish Gunpowder Traitors (had their Treason took effect)
were resolved to have laid the whole Treason upon such whom they maliciously
stigmatized with the nickname of Puritans. It Is an old Policy (though there is
not one dram of honesty in it) of Machiavel; To accuse Auducter criminare
aliquid haerebit.
boldly, and cast dirt enough, hoping that some may stick on. Yet
notwithstanding, all those whose hearts are sincere and upright toward God, do
raise to themselves a ground of strong consolation, from the testimony of a
good conscience; that notwithstanding humane infirmities, the whole frame,
vergency, and resolution of their hearts is, to walk in the fear of God all the
day long. The Apostle speaks in his own name, and in the names of all
uprighthearted Christians, 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
World, and more abundantly to you-wards. Wherefore then we must make it our
grand study and business to approve our hearts to God, and always to walk as
in the presence of God, as having the fear of God before our eyes; if so,
amidst troubles, trials, and sufferings, we may take abundant comfort in the
integrity of our hearts and consciences.

quite exempted from them whilst we are in this World, yet if we groan under
the burden of them, and mourn for them, and pray and strive against them;
there may be sincerity in the heart, notwithstanding human infirmities incident
to our lives. We read in that Parable, Matthew. 25. 5. that all the Virgins
slept, even the five wise Virgins as well as the five foolish Virgins: While
the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept. That sleeping implies
infirmity. Both wise and foolish went forth to meet the Bridegroom, verse 1.
Both of them took their Lamps, verse 3. But the wise took oil in their Vessels,
with their Lamps; i. e. they had grace in their hearts. Both wise and foolish
had the Lamps of an enlightened judgment, and of an Per oleum unde lampades
aluntur ne exting ua^tur poterit exponi cordis justitia, sinceritas and
vigilantia, quae est in vera solida, and perseveranti fide Christi, and
charitate non ficta. Nam sine tali cord, quid aliud est quicquid foris
ostenditur, quam lampas quaedam adsque oleo. Musc. in Loc.
outward profession; but the wise had made provision for supplies, and
augmentation of all the graces of the spirit of God. Those five wise Virgins,
notwithstanding they slept as well as the foolish, yet they were admitted to
the Marriage, when the foolish lost the season, and a door of hope was for ever
shut against them. For we read Matthew. 25. 10. And while they went to buy, the
Bridegroom came, and they that were ready went in with him to the Marriage, and
the door was shut. The Spouse likewise had her infirmities, and she was
sensible of them, so she professes, Cant. 5. 2. I sleep, but my heart waketh.
She confessed (as some have observed) That security had oppressed her in a great
Vid. English Annotat.
measure; but yet the inward bent and motion of her heart was active and
vigilant. Let us, Oh! let us secure this Fort-Royal of a good conscience; this
is a better defense than a wall of Brass. Bulwarks and Forts have Hic murus
abeneus esto Nil conscire sibi nulla pallescere ^ulpa.
been took by stratagems, or by storming; great Castles built upon Rocks may be
undermind, and the strongest Military Garrison may be forced to yield, lest
they be starved: but a good Conscience cannot be starved, for it is a continual
feast. Ahashuerosh made a magnificent Feast unto the common People seven days,
but unto his Princes and Nobles, an hundred and fourscore days, Esther 1. 4,
5. But he that daily keeps a good Conscience, he keeps a Feast every day. And
notwithstanding many assaults and batteries, a good Conscience will be a shield
of defense, and as a Bulwark impregnable, to secure us from the malice and
mischief of unreasonable and malicious Adversaries. However men may be enraged
against us, and accuse us falsely, and condemn us unjustly, yet if a good
Conscience acquit us, we have more to make for us, than all accusations and
condemnations of the worst of Enemies can make against us. Wherefore we should
make it our continual endeavor to walk with that wisdom and circumspection, as
we may put to silence ungodly men, who watch for our haltings, and would gladly
make us an offender for a word. And a good Conscience, and a good Conversation,
will make our Enemies to be ashamed. Having a Christiant testatum mundo
facerent, se procul ab omni impietate, veraeque pietatis corruptela ab esse,
quo nomine imperitis suspecti erant. Calv.
good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they
may be ashamed that fasly accuse your good conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3.
16. Here is the great labor, and the great work, so to endeavor to order our
hearts and our lives, that we may amidst all our troubles and calamities,
either imminent or incumbent on us, appeal to God, the searcher of all hearts,
whose curious eyes are more then ten thousand times ten thousand, even
infinitely more bright than the Sun in his brightness; before whom all things
are transparent; to whom day and night are all one; the darkest night hides
not from God: For (says the Apostle, Heb. 4. 13.) neither (...). Tradunt
Grammatici (...) dici quae a collo suspensa excoriantur, and per dorsi spinam,
tandem resupinata fiaduntur ut tota soris and intus oculis pateant. Beza.
is there any creature that is not manifest in his sighi; but all things are
naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. If then the
Question (which is a very material one) be asked, What is that which will carry
us through the greatest sufferings? I answer, that a God reconciled in Jesus
Christ, a Conscience pacified, and a Righteous Cause, i. e. when we suffer for
Righteousness sake, will make us Conquerors, and more than Conquerors, as the
Romans 8. 37. (...), supervincimus, quoniam in eruce etiam gloriamur, nedum ut,
animam despondeamus. Cypr-Epist. 26.
word very emphatically imports, mentioned by the Apostle, Romans 8. 37. (...)
supervincimus. Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerors, through
him that loved us.

CHAP. VII. Where the Heart is sincere, there will be a pressing forward
toward Perfection.
Charact. 7. A pressing forward toward Perfection.
sincere Heart; and this both an Apostolical Character, and an Apostolical
Practice; viz. A pressing forward toward Perfection. St. Paul propounds his
own Example as a Pattern for our imitation, and what he had experimented, and
known to be good experimentally, he communicates to us, and exhorts to reduce
into practice. Not as (says he) though I had already attained, either were
already perfect, but I follow after, that I may apprehend that for which also I
am apprehended of Christ. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended,
but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things which are before; I press toward the mark for the price
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus: Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect be thus minded, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15. This progressive motion David
lays dowor is a sign of such who are blessed, Psalm. 84. 6, 7. Who passing
through the valley of Baca make it a well, the rain also fills the pool: They
go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appears before God.
Their endeavors are indefatigable, and their motions are continued and
progressive in the service of God. Hence judicious Calvin observes upon the
place; That the faithful recollect Ae si dicerunt fideles collectis subiade
viribus ascendere ad moatem Zion nec lassitudiae ulla tardari, donec conspicia
at Dei faciem. Calv in Psalm. 84. verse. 7.
their strength, and ascend unto the mount of Zion, and are not hindered by any
weariness till they behold the face of God. Our grand endeavor should be to get
grace, and truth of grace; and to be diligent in searching whether we have got
special and more than common grace; and whether we mistake not parts for
graces. We must still be sitting, examining, and trying whether our grace be
true and genuine, sincere and saving grace: And our endeavor must be continued
to get growth in grace, and more accessions thereunto. If we would be preserved
from apostasy and backsliding, we must grow in grace; for growth in grace is a
special preservative to keep us from falling from our stedfastness. For so
says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know
these things before, beware, lest ye also being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. A sovereign remedy to prevent the
danger of Apostasy, is prescribed in the following words, verse. 18. But grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. A growing
Believer is a new born Christian. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the word, that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Likewise augmentation of every
particular grace is required: We must labor for true grace as to the quality
of it; and as to the quantity of it we must still be adding thereunto. So says
the same Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue
Est insignis hic locus, si quis alius verae Christianae vitae summam,
descriptis illius veris tum crusis tum effectis spectandam praebens. Beza.
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness charity: For if those things be in you, and abound, they make you that
ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. We have need of every grace; and the more we have of any grace in
sincerity and in truth, the more we shall value it, and the more we shall beg
supplies of God, and increase from him. The Apostles prayed, Lord, increase our
Faith. If we have any grace already really wrought in us, we shall be sensible
what need we have of, and shall pray for, a continual augmentation.

a justifying faith, Romans 5. 1. such as works by love, Gal. 5. 6. and purifies
the heart, Acts 15. 9. (for this only is of the right stamp:) or whether our
faith be only historical, dogmatical, and only temporary. If we search exactly,
upon mature and deliberate reflections upon our selves, we shall find some
failings and deficiencies in our faith: For though (questionless) the
Thessalonians had true faith, yet they had something lacking in their faith.
And yet they were such for whom the Apostle gave thanks to God in an especial
(...) (i. e.) omnibus (...)ris fidem vestram aa huc imperfectam absolvamus.
Beze in Loc.
manner, 1 These. 3. 9, 10. For (says he) what thanks can we render again to
God for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God
night and and day, praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and perfect
that which is lacking in your faith? And as we should labor for more faith, so
should we labor for more love, more meekness, more humility, and more
self-denial. If then through the pride of our own hearts we should flatter our
selves as if we had grace enough already, it is evident that we never had any
grace at all in sincerity and in truth; for wherever true grace is planted in
the heart, it fructifies in the life and conversation. Grace is no withered
dead plant, but a living and growing plant; where the seed of grace is sound in
the heart, it takes root downward, and brings forth fruit upward throughout the
practice of our whole lives. He then who labors Qui desinit prosicere, incipit
deficere. Bern.
not to grow better, begins to grow worse, as a Father says. Though
covetousness, and a greedy carking care after the World are unlawful, yet here
is a lawful covetousness; for to desire more grace is a holy covetousness. To
be rapax and tenax, i. e. to get get and grasp all that one get, and not to be
willing to part with any thing, are characters of covetous Earthworms; but to
be eager (...) Stadium exigit and majorem quandam in compara^dis soiritualibus
cupiditale. Theoph.
and greedy after increase of every grace, and when we have got grace, to be
careful to the utmost to keep it, this is the only lawful kind of covetousness,
recommended by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 13. Covet earnestly the best gifts. And
grace is the best gift, Christ himself only excepted: Gifts of Tongues, and
gifts of Wisdom and Understanding, etc. are highly to be valued, but this gift
of Grace is of far greater value. Grace is Quid constitutivum; i. e. that which
constitutes a true Christian. Though Tongues, and Arts and Sciences are
precious in their kind, yet many bad men may have them, and many good men may
want them; but Grace is of absolute necessity, for without it we cannot come to
Heaven; and without holiness we shall never see the Lord. Wherefore let us cry
out for Grace, as Solomon makes mention of the Horsleeches two Daughters, Give,
give, Prove. 30. 15. Wherefore we should not rest satisfied and contented with
these measures of Grace whereunto we have at present attained, but we should
make it our great business, study, and endeavor to grow from one degree of
grace unto another: We must no^ only follow holiness, Heb. 12. 14. but perfect
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. We must strive after perfection of
grace; though we are encompassed with many imperfections in this World, yet we
must not allow our selves in them, but mourn for them; and still go on in
adding grace to grace here, till at length grace be swallowed up in glory; and
we then shall attain to the end of our hope, the salvation of our immortal
Souls.

CHAP. VIII. Showing, that where the Heart is sincere, there is a strict Watch
set upon the Heart and Life, to keep us from bosom Sins.
THe eighth Character of sincerity is a Charact. 8. A strict Watch against
bosom St^s.
strict Watch set upon the Heart and Life, against all and every bosom and
beloved Sin: Be thy sins as dear and as near as a right hand, or a right eye,
they must be cut off, and plucked out; for so says our Savior, Observem^s in
hac Christi admonitione quo serio qno fervore quamque vehementi cautione opus
sit regnum Dei quaere^ibus ut offendiculorum occasiones undicunq^e irruentes
amputent. Musch. in Loc.
Matthew. 5. 29, 30. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it
from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish,
and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell. And if thy right hand
offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee
that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be
cast into Hell. But these words may not be understood literally, of mutilating
and of dismembring of our selves, but we are to understand them as spoken by
way of caution, and of strict command, not only to avoid all sins, but all
manner of appearance of evil; and likewise all sorts of occasions and
temptations to sin. The Psalmist gives a clear note of distinction between him
whose heart is upright, and him whose heart is not upright toward God, Psalm.
18. 23. I was (says he) upright before Neque quisquam ia pietatis siudio
perget, nisi qui sedulo se custodiet ab iaiq^itatc sua. Caiv. in Loc. Ab
iniquitate mea, i. c. ad quam natural mea proius sum, h. e. ne quid pravi
admilterem aut nescclus admitterem quas antea admisissem. Vatabl.
him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity. It Is plain and evident from that
Scripture, that every bosom sin, which David calls mine iniquity, ought in an
especial manner to be watched against, and prevented; and if we be overtaken
with it, we should loathe and leave it. That sin is a bosom sin which is
peccatum in deliciis, a darling sin, like a Delilah in the bosom; an Agag, a
ruling sin; a Gibeonite, a pretending sin: any sin that pleads with an
Exceptive, as Naaman did, 2 Kings 5. 18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy
Servant, that when my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there,
and he leans on my hand, and I bow down my self in the house of Rimmon, the
Lord pardon thy Servant in this thing. All these, and such like Apologies and
pleadings, pretenses and excuses for sin, must be utterly abhorred and abandoned
altogether. Suppose thy sins may be lesfer comparatively than some others, yet
no sin can be so little, but it is greatly hated and abhorred by Almighty God,
and deserves his wrath to be poured down upon the Sinner unto all eternity. As
for instance, suppose thou accustomest thy self to petty and lesser Oaths,
frothy and vain discourse, jesting lies, etc. yet all these have filth and
guilt in them, and are odious and abominable in the fight of God, and therefore
we ought to detest and utterly forsake them. One of the ancient Fathers, of the
highest rank, declares his judgment, That none ought Augusti
to tell (though but one) a lie, although the telling of that one lie might
save the whole World. The Reason of that Assertion is grounded upon that
Proposition of eternal Truth, We may not do evil that good may come thereof.
Ancient sins, which are of long standing and custom, such as are sins of
pleasure and profit, such as suit most with the genius, complexion, and
constitution of particular men, and conduce most to the satisfaction of carnal
lusts, and to the pleasing of flesh and blood, and corrupt nature, are so far
from being extenuated, as notwithstanding Custom and Antiquity, they carry a
greater Aggravation with them. Thieves, Murderers, and such notorious criminal
persons, cannot expect to fare a whit the better, but the worse altogether, for
pleading a custom and habit in their wickedness: Wherefore then let us in good
earnest loat he and detest all sins, and after loathing and detesting, leave
and forsake all manner of sins; and break off both acts and habits of sinning
by unfeigned repentance, and conversion to God. And let us fulfill that
Prophecy by our daily practice, Isai. 30. 22. Ye shall defile also the
covering of thy graven Images of Silver, and ornament of thy molten Images of
Gold. Thou shall cast them away as a menstruous Cloth; thou shall say unto it,
Get thee hence. Let none presume to plead for any sin, as Lot pleaded for Zoar;
Is it not a little one? and my Soul shall live. A little leak in a Ship, if it
be neglected and not stopped up presently, may sink the Ship, and so all in the
Ship may be suddenly drowned. A little Thief put into a Window may open the
Door, and let in a multitude of such desperate Cutthroats, as may quickly
destroy a whole Family. A little Penknife, a little Aul or Bodkin, may kill a
man as soon as either Sword, Spear, or Gun. Sisera the General of Jabin's
Forces, ran away on his feet, and so escaped the edge of the Sword in the open
field, but by Jael he was killed in the Tent: for we read, Judges 4. 21. That
Jael, Heber's Wife, took a Nail of the Tent, and took an Hammer in her hand,
and went softly unto him, and smote the Nail into his Temples, and fastened it
into the ground, (for he was fast asleep and weary) so he died.

is not to be regarded, as if it were either a little one, or none at all,
(without repentance and pardon, purchased through the Blood of Christ) thy Soul
and Body may be cast into that Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone to
all eternity. One of the chiefest rank of the Roman Historians relates what
Hanno said of Hannibal, That such a Parvus hic ig^is iace^dium ^^geis
exuscitet. Iav.
little Spark might cause a great Flame. The Embers of an evil Thought may set
the whole man in combustion: sinful thoughts which are in embrione, and not yet
come to maturity, yet being not crushed not disallowed, may in a short tract of
time bring forth evil words, and afterward full-born actions of all sorts of
abominations. As soon as Goliath, that insolent proud-daring Champion, was
brained, and his Head with his own Sword severed from his shoulders, then
forthwith the whole Army of the Philistines was routed, and utterly overthrown.
If then all Champion-reigning Sins (such I call so which are darling bosom
Sins) be conquered and destroyed, then all other sins which are of more than
ordinary incursion, will the sooner be vanquished and subdued. We read that
when the King of Syria went to join battle against Ahab King of Israel, 2 Kings
22. 31. that he gave strict command to his thirty and two Captains, that had
rule over his Chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, save only
with the King of Israel. Now if the Question be made, Why was the battle
principally designed against the King of Israel? The Answer is at hand, Because
the King of Israel was the worst Enemy, and most hating, and most hated.
Although in our spiritual warfare we must valiantly encounter and fight against
every sin, yet in an especial manner we must with renewed strength fight
against all bosom sins; because the more they are delighted in, and hugged in
the bosom, they prove more mischievous; as Vipers and Serpents, who being once
received into the bosom, suddenly destroy those who give them entertainment.
Questionless every sin is of a poisonous and destructive nature; yet a beloved
sin carries with it more aggravating circumstances, and so proves more
mischievous and destructive; as may be abundantly evidenced by the sad
consequences thereof, as daily experience witnesses abundantly.

capacity, harbor Vipers, Adders, Scorpions, Toads, and such like noxious and
hurtful creatures in his house? would any entertain such kind of dangerous
creatures in his bed, and lay them in his bosom, and so venture to sleep with
them? None can easily imagine that any there are who are so far sequestered from
common sense and reason, as to venture to give a bosom reception to such kind
of creatures which are offensive and destructive unto mankind. The chiefest of
the Heathen Orators tells us, That Principio generi animantium omni est a
natura tributum, utse, vitam corpusque tueatur, deelinetq^e ea, quae ^ocitura
videantur. Ci^. off. Ib. 1.
naturally all creatures must defend their life and body, and avoid all those
things which are hurtful. Wherefore let us consider seriously, and after mature
deliberation we shall confess, that any beloved Sin is worse than any Viper,
Scorpion, Adder, or Toad in the bosom; and whilst thou embracest and please
thy self in any beloved Sin, thou take a ready course to destroy both thy
Body and Soul. Wherefore, Oh Christian! if thou have any love, any regard or
commiseration of thy immortal and heavenly-born being Soul, give not thy self
the least allowance or dispensation in any beloved Sin: for if thou pleadest
for thy Sins, thou art the greatest Enemy to thy own Soul. Let not any
voluptuous man plead for his pleasures and sensual delights; let not any
unchaste man plead for his Strumpet, or for any wanton lascivious carriage; let
not any vain frothy Jester and Scoffer plead for any wittily contrived lie,
collusion, or any abusive carriage; let not any Tradesman excuse his lying, and
overreaching in his Trade, and vending of sophisticated wares, and refuse
commodities; let him not flatter himself with vain pretenses, as if his lying,
equivocating, and juggling, would much conduce to his profit; let him not
pretend that he cannot keep open shop, and maintain his family; and if he
should once leave his lying, and swearing, and couzening, his family would be
utterly undone. All such kind of pleadings are odious and abominable in the
sight of God. Neither Antiquity nor Custom, nor pleasure nor profit will excuse
thee in the least, nor relieve thee before the impartial Tribunal of Jesus
Christ: When thou shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, then all
sinful pleadings, and all vain Apologies, will be so far from extenuating or
lessening thy sin at that great day, as that they will aggrava^e them both as
to the silth and guilt of them. And then Christ will pronounce against thee
that dreadful sentence of condemnation. We read Matthew. 25. that sins of
omissions could not in the least excuse them: And some in an especial manner
have bewailed their sins of omission; how then shall the Bishop Usher late
Primate of Ireland.
commissions of scandalous sins excuse thee at that great day of account; and
amongst other sins, such as are beloved, bosom and customary sins, most
pleasing to flesh and blood; these will aggravate both thy sins and thy
punishments at the day of Judgment.

CHAP. IX. A desire and universal endeavor against all and every Sin, is a
Character of a sincere Heart, and it is accompanied with the Practice of all
Duties.
Charact. 9. A desire and endeavor against all Sins, and for the practice of
all Duties.
in a desire universally extensive, and an equal endeavor against all manner
and all sorts of Sins, and a desire and endeavor as extensive to yield
obedience unto all Command, and to practice all Duties.

The desire and endeavor must be The desire and endeavor must be extensive
against all sins.
extensive against all manner of all sins. There must be a desire and endeavor
to refrain from every evil way; and not only from one sin, but from all sins of
all sorts, and all manner of sizes; though as considered comparatively they may
not be pleaded for at all, (though less than others) but they must be utterly
abandoned and forsaken, as well as others of a greater filth and guilt. Thus
the Psalmist professes, Psalm. 119. 101. I have refrained my feet from every
evil way, that I may keep thy word. By feet we are to understand, the whole
course of our lives and conversations in a comprehensive sense, taking in the
whole duty of man. And that we may keep the Word of God, and keep close to his
Statutes, we must wage war against every sin, and Significat se bellum
indixisse omnibus vitiis, ut se Deo in obsequium dederet. Calv.
refrain our feet from every evil way. There must then of necessity be an
universal loathing, and an universal leaving of every sin; for in every sin,
even in such as some call a peccadillo, there is poison and venom, for which
there is no other Antidote but the Blood of Jesus Christ. There is no sin which
is in its own nature venial, unless the Blood of Christ make it so. Wherefore
that commonly received distinction amongst Papists, of venial and mortal sins,
is to be discarded altogether, as a rotten distinction: The Papists may rather,
according to their own practice, call sins venal, because they set sins to sale
and grant Indulgences for money; and so hope to make a good Market of Peoples
bad lives, thereby intending to enrich the Popes Coffers, and the Priests
Purses. But they in the mean time presumptuously derogate from the Merits of
Jesus Christ, by presumptuously arrogating to themselves a power of forgiving
of sins, upon the payment of moneys for Indulgences. Against them may be justly
retorted the same censure which the Apostle pronounced against Simon Magus,
Acts 8. 20. for offering of money: Thy money perish with thee, because thou
have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. As for Popish
Pardons and Indulgences, both Givers and Takers are abominable, because they
undervalue the pardoning Mercy of God in Jesus Christ. It Is an undoubted sign
of all those who love God, to hate evil. So says the Psalmist, Psalm. 97. 10.
Ye that love the Lord, hate evil. And this hatred must be an universal hatred
of all manner of sins, without exception; and it must be a perfect and
irreconcilable hatred. Deadly fewds (such as Chronicles mention) between
Family and Family, were barbarous and abominable, and tended to the utter
subversion of many Families: But here, a deadly fewd is lawful; i. e. to
perpetuate our hatred and enmity against all manner of sins and corruptions.
David declares his utter hatred and indignation against all the Enemies of God,
Psalm. 139. 23, 24. I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee. And am not I grieved
with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, I
count them mine enemies. David hated their sins rather than their persons;
though he loved their persons, yet as they were God's enemies, for their
notorious rebellions against God, he hated them with a perfect hatred. It Is an
universal charge enjoined by the Apostle, Romans 10. 9. to all without exception,
Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. Not only one
Cockatrice, but all the breed of Cockatrices are of a poisonous and destructive
nature, and mischievous to mankind, and therefore not only such as come to
maturity, but those also which are in the Egg ought to be destroyed. So every
sin is of a poisonous and mischievous nature, and therefore ought to be stifled
in the fir^^ conception, and be prevented from proceeding to any ripeness. For
any Woman to stifle and destroy the fruit of her womb (though the conception be
very early) is abominable murder in the sight of God; and if such courses be
practiced, they tend to the rooting out a succession of all mankind: But as for
all manner of sins and wickedness, though newly committed, and gone no further
then a thought, yet that very evil thought should be checked and disallowed. The
School men have coined quaint notions, and amongst them are mentioned motus
primo primi; let them not mince nor extenuate sins by such Cob-web
distinctions; for those beginnings, (to speak more plainly) which by them are
called primo primi, are sinful; those first risings and motions, as sinful, are
to be destroyed, mourned for, and never suffered to proceed to any further
maturity.

2. An endeavor to practice all Gods commands.
abstaining from all manner of sins, so there must be an endeavor to obey all
Commands, and practice all Duties. Hereupon the Psalmist professes, Psalm. 119.
6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments.
It is an infallible and undoubted sign of a gracious heart, neither to divide
in duties nor in commands; neither to make exceptions and distinctions, as if
one grace was to be got, and not another. Neither may we plead a dispensation
from any duty, whether it be commanded in the first or second Table. For
instance, whoever he be that pretends a strict observation of the Sabbath day
(I mean only the Lords day Sabbath) and pretends a hatred of swearing and
lying, and of all manner of Idolatry, and yet this man is dishonest and unjust
in his dealings, he is without doubt an errand Hypocrite; and likewise whoever
he be that pretends to deal justly and uprightly between man and man, and to
pay every one his own, (which is both necessary and commendable) and yet this
man makes no conscience at all of observing the Lords day, nor of keeping his
Word or Oath, nor of using the Name of God with reverence, such a man is but a
mere formalist, and a stranger to the power of godliness: For the same God who
commands one duty commands another, and lays an equal obligation to yield
ready and cheerful obedience unto both Tables. For the whole Law of God is
copulative, and Lex Dei est uta tota copulativa. Illyric.
one Commandment is joined to another as a link of the same golden Chain. Hence
it appears in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21. that there is a
concatenation and connection between all the Commandments of God. Neither shall
thou commit adultery, neither shall thou steal, neither shall thou bear false
witness against thy neighbor, neither shall thou desire thy neighbors wife,
neither shall thou covet thy neighbors house, his field, or his manservant,
or his maidservant, his ox or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbors.
From which Scriptures we conclude, That there ought to be an equal regard unto
one Commandment Q^jcquid (...) cum si, equali^er sit.
as well as another; for there is one only holy Lord God, who commands one
Commandment in the Decalogue as well as an other. This was the very trade, or
grand employment which St. Paul did drive, Acts 24. 16. To keep a conscience
void of offense, toward God and toward man. The Apostle did not shift and put
off this grand negotiation from himself, as if he were unconcerned, and
therefore left it to others; but it is said, herein do (...).
I exercise my self. Neither did the Apostle sit fast and loose, and (as we
say) exercise himself by fits and starts only, but he made it his business,
exercise and employment; for it is said, always. Neither (...).
will any sort of conscience, at a venture, serve the turn; because there are
many bad consciences: but the Apostle only values and exercises a conscience
(...).
void of offense. And such a conscience, in its extent and latitude, is a
(...), or an infallible note of the sincerity of that heart, which in the
Apostles language, keeps a conscience void of offense, toward God and toward
men. Farther the said Apostle makes mention of three significant Adverbs, which
comprehend the whole duty of man; viz. soberly, (...).
righteously, and godly. As to all commands, and to all sorts of duties
commanded in the Word of God, we must make it our business to manifest our
through and impartial obedience, not picking and choosing, as if when we had
performed an easier duty, then we might obtain a dispensation for a greater
commandment. But all such manner of halving and dividing is odious and
abominable in the sight of Almighty God; for every divided heart is faulty, as
the Prophet says, Hos. 10. 2. Their heart is divided, therefore they shall be
found faulty. Wherefore Universality of the subject, the whole man, which in a
comprehensive acceptance takes in all the members of the Body, and faculties
of the Soul, Universality of the object, the whole Law, and Universality of
time and place, are essentially requisite to the completing of the obedience
of every sincere hearted Christian. This Character searches very near the
heart; and he who has it, without all question is a sincere hearted man. By
this Character let us in an especial manner try our selves; even by the
universality of our hatred of all manner of sins, and by the universality of
our obedience unto all God's commands; and by the universality of our
endeavors to grow in every grace. Universality is both a divisive and
constitutive difference, for it distinguishes a half nominal and formal
outside Christian, from a sincere Christian; and it constitutes a Child of God.

CHAP. X. Where the Heart is upright with God, it is without guile and
hypocrisy.
THe tenth Character of sincerity, is Charact. 10. A spirit without guile.
Sect. 1.
a spirit without guile and hypocrisy. Nathanael had this testimony from
Christ, John 1. 47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. And to
have a spirit without guile, is that grand distinguishing Character which the
Psalmist appropriates to a blessed man, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Elessea is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the m^n unto whom
the Lord imputes not iniquity, (...) in whose spirit there is no guile. Who
are they who are thus blessed? Such whose sins are forgiven, and not imputed to
them. And who are they whose sins are forgiven, and not imputed to them? Such
in whose spirit there is no guile. Only those who are pure in heart shall see
God. Purity of heart is one of those transcendent Beatitudes mentioned in our
Saviors Sermon upon the Mount, Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God. They are said to be pure, in opposition to profaneness; and
pure in heart, in opposition to hypocrisy. They only shall be partakers of the
blessed Vision, whose hearts are pure, (i. e.) sincere with God. True
Believers, whose hearts are upright, and their lives holy, they shall see some
manifestations of God by his Word, and by his Providence; and they shall see
the footsteps and outgoings of God in the Sanctuary. But what they see here,
is but little in comparison of what they shall see and enjoy in glory. For
(says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 12.) we see through a glass, darkly, but then
face to face. Now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known.

And they are simplicity, singleness, and sincerity.

The first word is simplicity; and this 1. Simplicity.
is opposite to a double heart, and to such a heart as is usually called, a
heart and a heart. This simplicity of the heart was a ground of the Apostles
rejoicing, and of all true Believers: For says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 12. For
our rejoicing is (...).
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, etc. And it is the
high commendation ascribed to the Children of Zebulun, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33. that
they were not of a double heart. St. James stamps a brand of infamy upon a
double minded man, in that he is unstable in all his ways, (...).
James 1. 8. He is unsixt, unplaced, and so unsettled, as you know not what to
judge of him, nor (as we use to say) where to find him: A man may as soon hold
the wind in his hand, as hold fast an unstable man.

A second word is singleness: Now 2. Singleness.
singleness and uprightness differ only in the sound of the name pronounced;
they agree in the same sense altogether, as being of a synonimous
signification. Of this singleness of heart we have a clear evidence of the
Primitive Converts, Acts 2. 46. They continued daily (...).
with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, and eat
their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God. It Is the
observation of judicious Mr. Calvin upon the place, Quia in laudando Deo non
potest esse cordis simplicitas nisi constet in omnibus vitae partibus, ideo
certum est ejus fieri mentionem hoc sensu quod fideles eain ubique colueriat.
Calv. in Loc.
That simplicity of heart, and praising of God, are joined together: And the
reason he gives is this; Because in praising of God, there cannot be simplicity
of heart, unless it consist in all the parts of our lives, etc. This single and
undivided heart is highly esteemed of in the sight of God: Wherefore we are
commanded to turn unto the Lord with all our hearts, Joel 2. 12. And the
Psalmist professes, Psalm. 119. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee: O
let me not wander from thy commandments. An entire, single, one heart, are all
one in sense; and such a one only obtains acceptance in the sight of God, the
searcher of all hearts.

A third word is godly sincerity; so I 3. Sincerity. 2 Cor. 1. 12. (...). (...)
site cera.
call it, because it is so called by the Apostle; godly sincerity, or the
sincerity of God. Hereby is necessarily to be inferred, that we must not only be
sincere in all that we do toward men, but in all that we do toward God.
Simplicity and godly sincerity are joined together by the Apostle, and they
cannot be parted asunder. The Apostle likewise prays for the Philippians, Phil.
1. 10. That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere,
and without offense till the day of Christ. In this place here are two
significant words to be explained; one is, sincere: (...) in the Original, and
according to the received Etymology, derived from (...), sol, and (...),
judico: And this is as (most say) an allusion to the practice of Eagles, who
turn the faces of their young ones to look upwards toward the Sun, and if they
cannot behold the Sun, they throw them down as spurious, and not of the breed
of Eagles. Thus far this allusion may be improved, That all our thoughts, words
and actions, should be so genuine, and so rightly ordered, as they may behold
the Sun of Righteousness, and be approved of by Almighty God. Another word to
be opened in that Text, is (...). Qui inoffenso cursu pergit. Qui non possit
offendi qui nusquam offendat.
inoffensive; in the Original it is (...): (i. e.) We should so look to our
steps as that we may not stumble; and we should walk so prudently, as we may
neither give nor take offense. This inoffensive walking the Apostle injoyns in
the extent and latitude of it, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give none offense, neither to the
Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. The same Apostle gives in
special charge to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6. 1. We then as workers together
with him, beseech you also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. And
how must they evidence their not receiving the grace of God in vain? He adds
verse 3. Giving no offense in any thing, that the Gospel be not blamed. All
Ministers, in an equal manner, ought to keep up the honor of their Ministry,
by a faithful and diligent discharge of their duty, and by the holiness of
their lives and conversations. Many foul-mouthed rash Censurers are so ignorant,
as not to distinguish between the Ministers and Ministry, and therefore blame
the whole Ministry for the default of some particular Ministers: Wherefore
Ministers and People, especially such as are Professors of Religion, must
labor to walk so unblamably, as they may (what in them lies) preserve the
Reputation and Honor of the Gospel Ministry. Inoffensive and circumspect
walking, is the wisest walking. See (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 15.) how
circumspectly (...).
you walk. Not only the matter, but the manner is required; and this precise
walking is the wisest walking. Not as fools, but as wise. They who walk in
dissolute courses, and live without God in the World, they are the fools, and
so will be found to be another day: And an especial effect of circumspect wise
walking consists in redeeming of time. Redeeming the time, because the days
are evil, Ephesians. 5. 10. He then whose heart is without guile, evidenceth it so
to be in the integrity of his life and conversation; as a good tree is known by
the good fruits which it bears. And this upright walking is the only sure and
safe walking; but the contrary thereof is always accompanied with variety of
dangers and mischiefs: As Solomon says, Prove. 10. 9. He that walks
uprightly, walks surely; but he that perverteth his ways shall be known.

CHAP. XI. Of Mortification of the Deeds of the Body.
THe eleventh Character of a sincere Charact. 11. Mortifiation of the Deeds of
the Body. Sect. 1.
Heart, is Mortification of the Deeds of the Body; i. e. all manner of Lusts,
and the evil fruits of corrupt nature. Carnal lusts, and all the works of the
flesh must be mortified. And that we may the better know what they are, the
Apostle gives us a large Catalogue of the works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20,
21. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, and such like. Our duty is to confer the strength of our best
endeavors, to set upon the practice of mortification of all those
forementioned, and not of those only, but of all other sins: For not only one
particular member, not only one particular act, not only one particular
affection or faculty must be mortified, but the habit, nature, and
constitution, even the whole body of sin must be mortified. Every sin must have
a mortifying blow, and not only be left half dead, but dead altogether. I have
heard an observation made of two eminently Learned and Dr. Job. Reynolds, and
Dr. Guil. is bitaker.
Valiant Champions of the Truth, that one of them fought so long with his
Adversary, that he conquered and slew him in his Disputations; the other did
not only slay his Adversary, but buried him. Thus must we deal with every sin;
our endeavor must be to destroy all our sins utterly, to kill and bury them,
that so they may never rise against us in this World to our shame, nor in the
World to come to our condemnation. Wherever we find the cursed fruits of sin,
we must utterly destroy them; neither must sin only be destroyed in the fruits,
but in the roots also: both root and branch must be plucked up. When the plague
of Leprosy was spread in any house, God gave a special command, That the
Priest should break down the house, and the Levit. 14. 45.
stones of it, and the timber thereof, and all the mortar of the house. Sin is
a spiritual infectious Leprosy; and wherever it is, it ought to be rooted out.
The mortar of a Leprous house may not be made use of for daubing of any house;
no more may any sin be mingled in the worship of God. We read of the barbarous
cruelty of Pilate, Luke 13. 1. who mingled the blood of the Galileans with
their sacrifices. But it is most just for God to reject all our services, and
destroy us, when we mingle our sins, vain fancies, and sinful inventions, with
the purity of his worship. Nadab and Abihu are standing examples and
warningpieces against offering strange fire unto the Lord. And that is strange
fire which is after our will worship, and devised by our own brains, and not
according to divine Institution. We have the History upon record, Lev. 10. 1.
And Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron took either of them his censer, and put
fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the
Lord, which he commanded them not. And there went out fire from the Lord, and
devoured them, and they died before the Lord. We may not offer to God the lame
and the blind. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if
ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy Governor;
will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, Mal. 1. 8.
says the Lord of hosts? As for all those who put such a high affront and
indignity upon God, as to offer the refuse and worst of their services, (as if
they thought any good enough for him.) they incur that dreadful curse, Mal. 1.
14. But cursed be the deceiver, who has in his flock a male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King, says the
Lord of hosts, and my Name is dreadful amongst the Heathen. If then we would
offer any acceptable sacrifice unto God, we must mortify our sins and
corruptions, and offer unto God the best of our services: the male in the
flock, and the best male.

etc. yet he rejected the sacrifices of the Jews, and had no respect to their
persons, nor to their sacrifices. Thus the Lord expostulates the case with
them, Isai. 1. 12, 13. When ye come to appear before me, who has required this
at your hand, to tread my courts? And the Lord forbids them to bring such kind
of sacrifices, verse 13. Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an
abomination unto me.

Quest. But might not they truly have replied, that incense, oblations,
sacrifices, etc. were all of Divine institution? God commanded them all, why
then should not they yield obedience to the command accordingly?

Answ. I answer, They were commanded to offer sacrifice; but they offered
sacrifice in a wrong manner: For in every service which we perform to God, we
should do it in a right manner, and for a right end; not only the action it
self, but the manner of performing it must be regarded. The Jews rested only in
the Ceremonial service, and in the multitude of external sacrifices, having no
regard at all to their own hearts and lives: these they should have offered up
to God pure and holy; but their hearts were exceeding foul, and their hands
were full of blood; therefore God rejected both their persons and their
sacrifices. For thus says the Lord, verse 15. When ye spread forth your hands,
I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when you make many prayers, I will not
hear; your hands are full of blood. First then before we can offer any
acceptable sacrifice unto God, we must set upon the practice of mortification
and slaughter of all our sins. Wherefore the special charge of the Apostle is,
Col. 3. 5. Mortisie therefore your members which are upon the earth:
fornication, uncleanness, in ordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is idolatry. Not a^ lust may be spared: All carnal lusts
may be compared to those brats of Babylon, which are appointed for utter
destruction. To this purpose we may apply that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 137. 8,
9. O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall he be that
rewards thee as thou have rewarded us. Happy shall he be that takes and
dasheth thy little ones against the stones.

Quest. Some make it a Question, (though good Christians make no Question of it
at all) Whether self-murder be lawful?

Answ. For Answer: It Is murder in the highest degree, and an apparent breach
of the sixth Commandment, Thou shall do no murder. As no murder should be
committed against another, much less against a man's self: But for every one of
us to slay our sins, and destroy our corruptions, is no self-murder; for then
a Christian lives best of all, when he has slain his sins and corruptions. We
must make it our daily prayer, that God would destroy our sins, and save our
Souls. Every sin we must account a Benhadad, designed for destruction.
Therefore Benhadad being appointed by God for utter destruction, Ahab by
sparing him brought inevitable ruin upon himself and his people. For thus
says the man of God to Ahab, by the word of the Lord, 1 Kings 20. 42. Because
thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction,
therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. If
then we give quarter to any one sin, and hug it in our bosoms, we take a
speedy course to destroy our own Souls; for by showing foolish pity to spare
any one sin, we prove cruel to our precious Souls; we our selves being the
greatest enemies to our selves.

Col. 3. 5. and calls it Idolatry. Now Idolatry is a sin of a high aggravation,
for it endeavors to rob God of his honor, and to ascribe that honor and glory
to Mammon, and worldly rich men, which is only due to the eternal Creator, God
blessed for ever. Likewise we must observe what a wide difference the Apostle
makes between carnal living, and the practice of mortification; the difference
is as great, as between life and death, and so are the different effects and
issues of both. For says the Apostle, Romans 8. 13. Ifye live after the flesh,
ye shall die; but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body,
ye shall live. We read of that glorious Victory which the Lord wrought for
Israel against Amalek, an inveterate enemy; after this Victory was obtained, we
read that Moses built an Altar, and called the name of it Jehovah Nissi; for he
said, because the Lord has sworn, that he will have war with Amalek from
generation to generation, Exodus 17. 15, 16.

Quest. The Question may be asked, Why was war to be made and continued from
generation to generation against Amalek?

Answ. The Answer is obvious; they were cruel and bloody Enemies, destitute of
all manner of mercy, and bowels of compassion, and therefore God charge Moses
to make a Record of this signal Deliverance. And the Lord said unto Moses,
write this for a memorial in a Book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua; for
I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under Heaven.

Quest. But it will be further asked, Wherein consisted the particular sin of
Awalek?

Answ. For Answer, Moses gives a full relation, Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18, 19. Remember
what Amalek did unto thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all
that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint; and he feared not God.
Therefore it shall be when the Lord thy God has given thee rest from all thine
enemies round about, in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee for an
inheritance to possess it, that thou shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek
from under Heaven; thou shall not forget it. As war by Gods appointment should
be waged against Amalek, so it is the appointment of God that we should continue
fighting and warring against our sins and corruptions. In this case only it is
lawful to perpetuate a deadly fewd, and remain always implacable and
irreconcilable against all our sins; we must not make the least peace, nor
admit of any parley for peace for any sin, though it be of long standing, custom
and antiquity, and pleasing to flesh and blood.

To what has been mentioned, I will add for further explication two
significant words; viz. (...) and (...), of which the Apostle makes an
emphatical mention, 1 Cor. 9. 27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection; lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a castaway. The first word is (...), rendered, I keep under my body:
but there lies in the word a greater emphasis; for the word signifies to beat
the body black and blue; and further yet in the propriety of the word, it
signifies (...) est part saciet quae oculis est subjecta, contuendo suboctum,
seu dejectu^ premo. Beza.
to beat under the eye, and to leave a mark there of redness and blueness. The
other word is (...), and this properly signifies, to bring into subjection:
it is a Metaphor took from Oxen, whom we bring under the yoke; or from any such
Creatures whom we enslave or captivate, and bring them into subjection, for our
use and service. We should then endeavor so to bring down our bodies, and
subdue them, as to make them serviceable to our souls, and subject and obedient
to the yoke of Christ; if so, we have well learned the Doctrine of
Mortification. A learned moral Heathen will condemn many dissolute livers, who
call themselves Christians, and yet live without God in the world: I am (says
Seneca) greater, and born to greater things, than to be a slave to my body.
Every Drunkard is a slave to his Cups, and every Whoremonger a slave to his
Harlot, and every covetous Worldling is a slave to his Mammon: But our design
must not be to enslave our Souls to our Bodies; but the design which we drive,
must be to make our Bodies serviceable to our Souls. It was an excellent saying
of Ephrem Syrus, who flourisht in the third Century after Christ; He that
feasts his Body, and starves his Soul, is like him that feasts his Slave, and
starves his Wife.

CHAP. XII. Vivification of the Fruits of the Spirit is a Character of a
sincere Heart.
THe twelfth and last Character of sincerity Charact. 12. Vivification of the
fruits of the Spirit. Sect. 1.
(which I shall only mention) is, The Vivification of the Fruits of the Spirit.
After mortification of the deeds of the Body, there must necessarily follow,
the Vivification of the Fruits of the Spirit; for where Christ dwells in a Soul
by faith, and by the influence of his grace, the Body is dead, (as the Apostle
says, Romans 8. 10.) because of sin; but the spirit is life, because of
righteousness. A Learned and Judicious Writer thus interprets that Scripture;
Quam vis peccatum morfi nos adjudicet quatenus in nobis remanet primae naturae
vitiosibus spiritum tamea Dei esse victore noc obstare quod tantum primitiis
donati sumus quia vel una ejus sciatilla vi^ae semen est. Calv. in Loc.
Although (says he) sin condemns us to death, so far as the remainders of
corrupt nature, and the vitiosity thereof remains in us, yet the Spirit is
Conqueror: wherefore notwithstanding out primitive corruption, one spark of
the Spirit of God is a seed of life to us, though in this world we receive only
the firstfruits thereof. All those who by nature are dead in trespasses and
sins, can never be brought from death to life, and from the state of nature
into the state of grace, any other way but by the quickening virtue of Jesus
Christ. For says the Apostle, You has he quickened, who were dead in your
trespasses and sins. Such as are now (through grace) in a state of regeneracy,
were in their natural condition in a state of unregeneracy; and such who are
now quickened, were formerly in a dead condition: As it is said of the converted
Prodigal in the Parable, Luke 15. 32. He was dead, and is alive again; and was
lost, and is found. The Apostle discovers the great difference between the
state of regeneracy and unregeneracy, (and the difference is great, as great as
the difference between life and death.) Let Us diligently review the words of
the Apostle, Wherein Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
in time past ye walked according to the course of this World, according to the
Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience: Among whom also we had our conversation in times past, in the
lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires (or wills) of the flesh, and of the
mind, and were by nature (...).
the children of wrath, even as others. And what is the sole moving cause of
all? it follows verse. 4, 5. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love
wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us
together with (...). Sect. 2.
Christ; by grace ye are saved.

Quest. But the Question may be asked, How may such who are regenerated and
quickened by Christ, be distinguished from such who are unregenerate, and yet
dead in their trespasses and sins?

Answ. I Answer, as a tree may be known by its fruits which it bears; i. e. a
good tree, by good fruits; and a bad tree, by bad fruits; so may regenerate be
distinguished from unregenerate: unregenerate bring forth the fruits of the
flesh, as adultery, fornication, uncleanness, etc. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. before
mentioned; but regenerate persons bring forth the fruits of the Spirit. St.
Paul gives us a double Catalogue; one is short, but very comprehensive, Ephesians.
5. 9. The fruit of the spirit is in all goodness, righteousness and truth. The
other is a large Catalogue, Gal. 5. 22, 23. The fruit of the Spirit is love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance,
against such there is no Law. If then the fruits of the Spirit exert and
manifest themselves in the holiness of our lives and conversations, it is an
infallible sign of our vivification by the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

By those twelve forementioned Characters of a sincere Heart, we may and must
put our selves upon a strict search and enquiry, whether our hearts be sincere
and upright toward God? We must then with all diligence and impartiality make
a strict search into our hearts; we must ask, What have I done? Jer. 8. 6. we
must commune with our own hearts, Psalm. 4. 4. and (as the Church resolves, Lam.
3. 40.) Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. And I am
persuaded, that if we have one of those Characters forementioned in sincerity
and in truth, we have the rest; for they are all Links of one and the same
golden Chain, and there is such a concatenation between them, as one cannot be
separated from another.

CHAP. XIII. Containing the Comforts pertaining to sincere Christians in their
Lives in this World.
HAving laid down those twelve forementioned Characters and Signs of Sincerity,
I thence infer this Conclusion, That it is the grand Duty incumbent upon us all,
and every one in particular, to propound the Question (as in the presence of
God) to his own Soul, Am I a sincere-hearted Christian, yea or no? Let us with
deliberate thoughts consider of those twelve abovenamed Signs and Marks of
Sincerity, and examine our selves by them accordingly: herein consists the
grand Labor and Work, to busy our selves with all frequent and serious
self-reflections, and heart-examinations; and let us as one man, every one
particularly, propound the Question (as in the presence of God) to his own
Soul, saving, Is my heart sincere and upright toward God? There are many
needless Questions propounded, which gender strife, and it were better that
they had been buried in silence altogether; but here is the Question worthy of
our studying and stating, viz. Whether our hearts stand sincere toward God? As
for all those whose hearts are without guile, as Nathanael's was, John 1. 47.
who have truth in the inward parts, (as God requires, Psalm. 37. 6.) who are men
after God's own heart, (as David was) whose hearts are perfect with God, as
Hezekiah, Asa, and Jehosaphat were, these notwithstanding infirmities incident
to human nature, shall find the comfort and benefit of their uprightness and
sincerity in their lives, and in their deaths, and after death to all eternity.

Sincere-hearted Christians receive Sincere persons receive comfort in their
lives.
comfort in their lives: Although God's dear Children meet with variety of sore
and grievous afflictions in this present World, and encounter with many
tentations, and great troubles and vexations, insomuch as they are the very
Butt and Mark against which their implacable Enemies shoot their keenest and
sharpest Arrows, poisoned and destructive: yet notwithstanding all their
sufferings, a good od, a good Cause, and a good Conscience, will carry them
cheerfully through all their troubles, and abundantly quiet and support their
spirits. And the least glimpse of God's reconciled countenance in Christ, will
infinitely compensate for all the frowns and fury of implacable Adversaries;
inward comforts will make amends for outward troubles. A good Conscience, like
Ahimaaz, will bring good tidings; or like a Halcyon, (as is said) appears in a
storm, as an emblem of a calm approaching. Or a good Conscience may resemble
Noah's Dove, which brought an Olive-leaf in her mouth, in token that the waters
were abated. As Aaron's Rod swallowed up all the Rods of the Magicians; so a
pacified Conscience, by the consolations of God's spirit, will swallow up all
manner of troubles and vexations whatsoever. A sincere heart, and the answer of
a good conscience, and the apprehension of God's reconciled countenance in the
face of Christ, will compose and quiet our spirits, and becalm and make them
sedate, and settle all manner of fluctuating and tumultuating thoughts. To this
purpose I Will cite an excellent passage of St. Augustine. Tumultuosis
varietatibus dilaniantur cogitationes meae, intimae viscera animae, meae donet
in te coajinam purgatus and li^uidus g^e amoris tui. Aug. conf. l. c. 29.
My thoughts (says he) are torn in pieces with variety of tumults, even my
inward bowels are torn in pieces, until I make haste to be purged, and and
melted with the fire of thy love. One only word spoken by Christ, suddenly
becalmed a rough and tempestuous Sea; for when the Disciples were afraid,
Matthew. 8. 26. Christ arose, and rebuked the Winds and the Sea, and there was a
great calm. And amidst variety of storms and tempests, even such winds which
blow fiercer than that called Euroclydon, Acts 27. 17. Christ can make all
still: and so can he amidst the greatest inward and sharpest storms of
Christians (when they are at their wits end, and know not what to do) Christ (I
say) can speak a word of peace unto their Souls, saying, Son, or Daughter, be
of good comfort, all thy sins are forgiven thee. Upon the hearing of such a
gracious word, there will follow a marvelous tranquillity and serenity upon the
spirit.

from any command. Sin in a Child of God is a torment to him, like a broken
leg, or a broken tooth; it is matter of dolor and anguish to him. Sin in a
Child of God, is like Garbidge thrown into a running stream, it is still
running and purging away of all manner of filth and impurity. But sin in an
unregenerate man is like Garbidge thrown into a standing pond, there it abides,
and sends forth a loathsome and stinking savor. However, all those whose
hearts are upright with God, make it their continual employment to search their
hearts, and to wash and cleanse them: hereupon after searching of their hearts,
they learn to know them better; and they know more evil by themselves than all
the World can tell them of; hence follows heart-compunction, sighing and
mourning. And being thus apprehensive of their own impotency and unworthiness,
and forlorn condition, they make haste to Christ, and implore his gracious
assistance; and beseech him to cleanse them, and make them white in his Blood.
Wherefore as often as that inveterate enemy Satan, and all malicious and
ungodly men, the Devils instruments, prefer large Bills of Accusations and
false Indictments against the Saints, they make their appeal to the righteous
Judge of Heaven and Earth, who always judges righteously. The Apostle makes
an expostulation, and gives an answer thereunto every way satisfactory, Romans 8.
33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that
justifies. The most bitter Accusations, and most violent Persecutions of them
all are altogether insignificant, and of no effect, force or virtue, against
any of those whom God justifies: for Gods justification and discharge will
fully acquit and exonerate us, and save us harmless and indemnified against all
the demands, charges, suggestions, and libels made against us by the worst of
Enemies. For it follows in the next words; Who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand
of God, who also makes intercession for us. The frequent and serious
meditation of these things, abundantly support and comfort the godly in their
Pilgrimage on Earth. Albeit the best of Gods children meet with conflicts and
antipathies, and are excercised in combats against the Flesh, the Devil, and
the World, those spiritual Enemies of their Salvation, yet through the strength
of Christ they shall return with Trophies of Victory; and by experience they
shall find the flesh to be weaker and weaker, and the spirit stronger: as it
was said of the houses of David and Saul, this grew weaker and weaker, and the
other grew stronger and stronger. But whilst we are in this World we must never
cast down our weapons, but still continue fighting against sin; we must not
expect to rest from our labors till we are dead. Let Us then with all diligence
and fidelity manage our spiritual warfare, and in all things labor to approve
our hearts sincere to God, and we shall at length conclude with the Apostle,
Romans 8, 37. Nay, in all these (...).
things we are more then conquerors, through him that loved us.

CHAP. XIV. Containing the Comforts which sincere-hearted Persons enjoy in
their Deaths.
Solomon says, Prove. 14. 32. The righteous has hope in his death. And hope
grounded on Divine promises affords us superabundant consolation. When the
Prophet Isaiah was sent to Hezekiah, to give him warning of his death, which
was suddenly approaching, then Hezekiah recollects his serious thoughts, and
reflects upon his upright walking with God in his whole life and conversation;
the remembrance whereof administered ground of singular consolation unto his
Soul. The History is on record in holy Scripture; 2 Kings 20. 1, 2, 3. In those
days was Hezekiah sick unto death: and the Prophet Isaiah the son of Amos came
to him, and said unto him, Set thine house in order, for thou shall die and not
live. Then he turned his face unto the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, saying,
I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which was good in thy sight.
Likewise St. Paul, apprehending the time of his dissolution to draw near, thus
raises to himself a ground of strong consolation, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. For (says
he) I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand: I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all
them that love his appearing. We commonly say, That the house of Death is the
house of Truth; and where the senses are exercised, and the memory and judgment
are not extinct, there will be plain dealing, and there will be made plain
discoveries. As for such (for them only I now mention) whose hearts are upright
with God, the remembrance of the sincerity of their hearts, next to the
consolations of Gods spirit, will revive their spirits on their beds of
languishing.

Heb. 9. 27. it is Gods appointment: Would we not then be glad when we are cast
upon our Deathbeds, to have something at that time ^o comfort us? when we are
leaving of these houses of Clay, and unclothing of our selves of our mortal
Bodies, what is that which will be a ground of comfort to bear up our spirits?
Will thousands of Gold and Silver purchase the Favor of God? can the greatest
Manors, Lordships, and Revenues of the World? Can an Imperial Diadem b^ib^
Death to stay a longer time? Can all the Grandees and Poten^ates of this World,
should they all unite as one man, avail any thing to make our peace with God?
No, questionless: For no great Personages, nor great Riches, can either d^^^^er
themselves or us from the stroke of Death, nor pacify their own nor our
Consciences, nor make any peace and reconciliation either for themselves or for
us at that day. Some in this World being arrested for Debt, have made the
Sergeant drunk, and so have made an escape out of his hands. But it is
altogether impossible to deal so with the grim Sergeant Death; none can escape
Deaths dart, wherever they run Death will strike them to the heart. Now then,
when all the Gold and Silver which the Universe can afford, when all the
interest of Friends, though great and potent, cannot administer any comfort,
peace and satisfaction to us when we lie upon our Deathbeds, then Oh then! is
that necessary instant, when the light of Gods gracious countenance, shining
upon us in the face of Christ, can only revive our spirits, and give us real
and durable joy, peace and comfort; when all creature comforts are Physicians
of Job 13. 4.
no value, empty Ciphers, insufficient and unable to give us any satisfaction.
This then is that good which the Psalmist had experienced, and prayed for it
above all besides, Psalm. 4. 6, 7, 8. There be many that say, Who will show us
any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have
put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn and wine
increased. I Aspice nos sereao vultu, ostende te nobis favere, recipe no^ in
gratiam, consolare to, laetifica no. tua praes^^tia: id non famus soliciti quid
fiat in hoc mundo, car impit per veni^at ad summas open, and ecclesia misere
^^primatur. Mollerus.
will both lay me down in peace and sleep; for thou Lord only make me dwell
in safety. Hence it evidently appears, that the only saving good consists in
the light of Gods gracious countenance. For this we must be earnest and
indefatigable solicitors at the Throne of Grace: However the men of the World
may frown on us, and the Riches of the World may forsake us, yet if God smile
on us, and be reconciled to us in Christ, he will never leave us nor forsake
us, no not when we are gray headed, and upon our beds of languishing; and when
our natural strength fails, and our diseases do much afflict us, and the pains
thereof make us roar, the reflection of our wellspent time in giving up our
strength to the service of God, and of improving of our health to glorify God,
will be even our Deathbeds singular ground of consolation, even the reviving
of the memory of such time, strength, and health so employed in the service of
God. When the faithfulest of our Friends, and such as are most willing to do us
good, are not able to help us at all; when learned Physicians have given us
over, as altogether desperate and incurable; and when the pains and pangs of a
long, wasting, lingering and tormenting disease, even a complication of diseases
are inexpressible, and our throats rattle, and the abundance of Phlegm is ready
to suffocate us, and our eye-strings are ready to break, and our eyes are dim
and ghastly, and every breath we take (though with much difficulty) is like to
be our last breathing. Oh! then is the time that the testimony of a good
conscience, that (as the Apostle professes, 2 Cor. 1. 12.) in simplicity, and
in godly sincerity, we had our conversation in this world, will abundantly
comfort us; and the apprehension of the love of God in Christ will revive our
fainting spirits, and give strength in our weakness, and raise up our spirits,
and make us courageous, that we shall not be afraid of Death, the King of
terrors; which though it be terrible in it self, and (as the Philosopher says)
(...).
the most terrible of all terrible things; yet through the mediation of Jesus
Christ, Death is a conquered Enemy; Christ has conquered Death, and took away
its sting. That which makes Death so terrible, is the sting of sin; but when
the sting is took away, Death can no more hurt us than a Snake that has lost
its sting, or an Adder that has its teeth knocked out. The Apostle cries out, 1
Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy
victory? The sting of Death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But
thanks be to God, which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
What is Death to a Child of God, reconciled to him by the (...) hrist? It Is no
more (as a d^ing Saint expressed) then a Child of God can embrace with both his
arms: And he closing his arms together died immediately. To a Child of God
Death is the greatest preferment; by Death he is translated from a vale of
tears and misery, to everlasting happiness. It Is like (...) Jail-deliver,
which delivers the Soul from the Bodies imprisonment, and sets it at liberty to
enjoy the happiness amongst Saints in glory. What Is then the grand duty
incumbent on us all? It is thus: If we would desire to die happily, we must
live holily; if we would die the death of th^^ghteous, we must labor to live
the life of the righteous: we should so live every day, as we desire to be
sound at the last day. And if we desire comfort in our death, we must make
daily preparation, by approving our hearts to God in a holy and circumspect
life and conversation. It is a very great mercy and condescension in God, to
accept Evangelical instead of Legal perfection; and to accept of a willing mind
instead of real performances. For we read, Heb. 11. 17. that by faith Abraham,
when he was tried, offered up Isaac. And likewise the Apostle says, If there
be a willing mind it is accepted, according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not. When then we come to die, to consider that our
hearts are sincere with God, and that our peace is made with him by the
redemption and intercession of Christ, and that all our sins are washed away,
and we are made white in the Blood of the Lamb, these Meditations will comfort
us in Life and in Death.



Old Simeon's Song was sweet before his Funeral, saying, Luke 2. 29, 30. Lord,
now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy Word; for mine
eyes have seen thy Salvation,

Stephen, the Protomartyr, breathed forth this dying Prayer, Acts 7. 59. Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit.

Ignatius, who lived in the sirst Century, (...). Vid. Ignat. epist. ad Romans
who was (as the Ecclesiastical Writers say) twelve years of age when Christ
was crucified, and afterward St. John's Auditor, used frequently to say, My
Love is crucified. And when he was brought to Martyrdom, and the wild Beasts
were let loose to tear him in pieces, he courageously said, I am the Wheat or
Grain to be ground with the teeth of Beasts, that I may be pure Bread for my
Masters tooth: Let fire, rack, pullies, yea and all the torments of Hell come
on me, so I may win Christ.

Polycarpus, when the Proconsul urged him to deny Christ, answered, I have
served Christ Eighty six years, and he has not done me hurt, and shall I now
deny him? When they would have tied him to the Stake to be burned, he desired
to stand untied, saying, Let me alone, I pray you; for he that gave me strength
to come to this fire, will also give me patience to abide in the same, without
your tying.

Cyprian, that eminent Martyr for the truth, after his condemnation, said,
Blessed be God for this Jail-deliver.

Ambrose, on his Death bed, said to his Friends about him, I have not so lived,
that I am ashamed to live any longer; nor fear I death, because I have a good
Lord. Some young men seeing the excellent death of St. Ambrose, and hearing
what rare speeches he uttered, one of those young men turned to his fellow, and
said, Oh! that I might live with you, and die with him.

John Lambert, a Martyr in Queen Mary's days, said amidst the flame, None but
Christ, none but Christ.

Mr. Bradford, at the Stake in Smithfield, embraced the Reeds and Fagots which
were suddenly to be set on fire to burn him, and said, Strait is the Gate, and
narrow is the Way that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it. And he
encouraged his fellow-Martyr, saying, Be of good comfort, Brother, for we shall
have a merry Supper with the Lord this night: If there be any way to Heaven on
horseback, or in fiery Chariots, this is it.

Martin Luther, that great scourge of the Pope, and Champion sor the Protestant
Religion, on his Deathbed said, Thee, O Christ, have I taught, thee have I
trusted, thee have I loved; into thy hands I commend my spirit.

Bucer, an eminent Reformer, said ne^^ his death, No man by talk shall with
draw my mind from Christ crucified from Heaven, and my speedy Depa^ture, on
which my Soul is fixed. When one advised him to arm himself again^ Sa^ans
temptations, he answered, Satan has nothing to do with me; Go^ forbid but that
now my Soul should be sure of sweet consolation.

John Ardley, a Martyr in Queen Mary'^ dai^s, said, If every hair of my hea^
were a man, it should suffer death i^ the faith I now stand in. To the sam^
purpose William Sparrow spoke, and Ag^nes Stanley.

Alice Driver, when the Chain was about her Neck, Here is (says she) ^ goodly
Neckerchief, blessed be Go^ for it.

John Noyes, a Martyr, kissing the Stake sain, Blessed be God that ever I wa^
born for this day. And he added farther to his fellow Martyrs a word of
singular consolation, saying, We shall not lose our lives in this fire, bu^
change them for a better; and for Coals have P^arls. etc.

What need I produce any more Instances? with what joy have many sincere
hearted Christians looked death in the face, so that they had rather die than
live?

Melancthon rejoiced when he was to die, saying; That he should be with Christ,
and enjoy fellowship with him and the Church triumphant; and then be freed from
all those hot disputes and contentions of Divines, which were very great in
those days.

Grynaeus, a great Scholar, when he came to die, said; O happy day, when I may
depart out of this troublesome and sinful world, and to go to those blessed
Souls before departed. He writing to his friend Chytraeus, said; If we never
see one another again in this world, yet we shall meet in that place where
Luther and Zuinglius agree very well together.

Mr. Bolton on his dying b^d said; I am now drawing on apace to my dissolution:
Hold out faith and patience, your work will quickly be attained.

That great Magazine of Learning Mr. John Seldom, when he came to die, said;
That he accounted all his Learning nothing at all in comparison of Christ.

Mr. Giles Workman, a worthy Minister of the Gospel in Gloucester shire, a
little before his death said; That he had a little sincerity of heart, and that
was a comfort to him.

Mr. John Ferriby, a Minister of the Gospel in Essex, when he was dying said;
That he left his Wife and Children with God, and his gracious promises.

Mr. Gifford, a Minister in Northamptonshire, said to his Children upon his
Deathbed; That if they feared God, (to which he earnestly exhorted them) they
should not want; but if they did not fear God, he wished that they might want
till they did fear him.

Mr. Samuel Hieron, a rare Minister, (whose excellent writings praise him in
the gate) on his Deathbed said; That the same God who took care for the Ravens
and Sparrows, would likewise take care for the young Hierons.

And so it came to pass, for God stirred up the hearts of some charitably
affected persons, who carefully educated his Children; and so those young
Hierons were well provided for.

I shall conclude this head with the words of the Psalmist; Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116. 15. Surely he shall
not be moved for ever; the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance, Psalm.
112. 6. And I will only add words of Solomon, Prove. 10. 9. The memory of the
just is blessed.

CHAP. XV. Containing the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven; or the
inexpressible Consolations which the Godly, even all sincere-hearted Persons,
enjoy in Heaven to all Eternity.
IN the third and last place, let us consider, 3. The comforts of the godly
afte^ death. Sect. 1.
or rather admire at the happiness, even the perfection of all comforts and
happiness, which the Saints shall enjoy after death in the highest Heavens to
all eternity. As for all those who lived in hypocrisy and dissimulation, and
lived without repentance, and so died; and as for all such who lived without
God in the world, having no fear of God before their eyes, but have committed
sin with greediness, and have run into all excess of riot, and so die in their
unbelief and impenitency, these are the Goats which shall stand on Christ's left
hand; and against them he will pronounce that dreadful sentence of
condemnation, Matthew 25. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But all upright and sincere-hearted
Christians, who are only Christ's sheep, they shall stand at Christ's right hand;
and he will pronounce to them that comfortable soulravishing sentence of
absolution; Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world, verse 34.

However such who are Gods Jewels, and precious in sight, are vilisied and
trampled on by the wicked of the world, as if they were no better than the
filth of 1 Cor. 4. 13. (...).
the world, and the offscouring of all things^ yet at the general
resurrection, both of just and unjust, there will be a resurrection of the
names and of the causes of the righteous, however in this world they have been
traduced and scorned. Then the meanest of glorified Saints (whom this world
thought they could not think bad enough) shall have the pre-eminence and
superiority above all the ungodly, though they have been never so great in this
present world; for (so says the Psalmist, Psalm. 49. 14.) the upright shall
have dominion over them in the morning. From this Scripture it plainly appears,
that at the general resurrection the godly shall be known to the whole world to
have dominion and Quamvis ^^c demersis sit i^ te^ebris mund is, ex^ri^tur
subito n^va^ mane quod faciem verae and ae^etaae v^^e ^obis restituet. Calv. in
Loc.
pre-eminence above all the ungod^y men of this world. And that all such who
truly fear God, though in this world they were in a poor and abject condition,
yet at that great day they shall be in a better condition, every way rich and
honorable, and infinitely happier than any ungodly, great, and rich men can be
in this present world.

Farther, the godly in glory shall partake of nothing else but joy and
happiness, and the perfection of both; but damned wretches shall be for ever
debarred from all manner of joy, and partake of nothing else but hopeless
sorrow, and endless misery. At the general Judgment, when all without exception
shall appear before the Judgmentseat 2 Cor. 5. 10.
of Christ, then there shall appear a great and wide difference between g^od
and bad, chaff and wheat, sheep and goats: that day will make a great and clear
distinction. Then all the Enemies of Christ and of his Church, who rejoiced in
persecuting Christ here on Earth in his Members, would be glad to creep into
holes (if possible) that they might hide themselves from the wrath of the Lamb.
Then they will wish that the mountains might fall upon them, and that Rocks and
Hills, Dens or Caves might shelter and cover them from the face of the Lamb
incensed against them. The^ those bloody Persecutors of Christ shall see him
whom they have pierced, zech. 1^. 10. Judas, who betrayed Christ with a
hypocritical kiss; Pilate, who (notwithstanding the reluctance of his own
conscience) condemned Christ to please the people, and released Barabb as, an
infamous Thief and Murderer; the Soldiers, who crucified him; and after they
had first been his Executioners, were his Executors to take his Garments: All
these, and all other Enemies of Jesus Christ, shall see him at that great Day
to their terror and condemnation. Those giddy-pated people, who a little before
cried to Christ Hosanna, and afterward cried, Crucify him, Crucify him,
shall appear before Christ's Judgment Seat, and then receive their sentence.
Those cursed Jews, who wished that the blood of Christ might be upon them, and
their Children (except such only who are washed in Christ's blood) shall to
their dread, and horror be condemned for embrewing their hands in the innocent
blood of Christ.

on earth shall be reverst. Pontius Pilate who past an unjust judgment against
Christ, shall have a just judgment past upon him. Luther used to say, that At
the day of Judgment, John Huss and Jerome Luth. Loc. Com.
of Prague shall appear to be good men, when the Pope and his Cardinals shall
appear to be vile, and wicked wretches. St Bernard used to say. That the Day
will Veniet Veniet Dies quando male judicata rejudicabit Deu^. Bern.
come, it will certainly come, when God will judge over again all false
judgment. But as for all those whose hearts were upright with God, whilst they
lived in this world, these after death are translated into an estate of glory
and happiness, and in the highest heavens receive consolations beyond all
expression, and a weight of glory beyond the capacity of any mortal man, which
Christ gives to all his Children, who in their Pilgrimage on earth, endeavored
with their whole heart, and strength, to serve the Lord in sincerity, and in
truth. All those who were on earth Sincere-hearted, and real Saints, shall be
acknowledged to be such by Christ himself at the Day of Judgment. No sin, no
failing, nor imperfection shall at all be laid to their Charge in that day; for
all failings and sins, and all manner of imperfections shall be washed away in
the blood of Jesus Christ. What ever good things the Saints have done on earth,
shall be all remembered, and not any one thing forgotten at the day of judgment.
But whatever was bad and sinful that they committed on earth, shall not be
laid to their Charge, but shall be blotted out of the Book of Gods Remembrance,
and God will cast them into the depth of the sea. O: What a joyful day, and
full of Comfort will the day of judgment be to all the Children of God! Then
they shall lift up their heads with Comfort and behold him who is their Judge,
as their Redeemer, Advocate, Intercessor, and Flder Brother, and he will
pronounce for them a sentence of Absolution. At that day, all glorified Saints
shall have their bodily eyes irradiated with the splendour of glory* and they
shall be enabled to behold the Beatificall Vision, and this is he Happiness of
all Happiness, and this only is their portion, and appropriated to them alone
who are pure in heart. They are blessed (as our Savior pronounces them) Who
are pure in heart, for they shall see God. Then the Saints in glory shall sit
in Judgment as Assessors with Christ, and shall approve of the righteous
sentence of Christ in Condemning their unrighteous Judges. Then they shall see
the Omniporent Eternal Jehovah, the Being of all Beeings the first person in
Trinity uncreated, unbegotten, and unproceeding: Then they shall see Christ the
Mediator of the New Covenant, their only Savior and Redeemer uncreated, but
begotten, and not proceeding, who is the second Person in Trinity: Then they
shall see the holy Ghost the third Person in Trinity neither created, nor
begotten, but proceeding from both. The Glorifyd Saints (what they believed
when they were militant on earth) shall in heaven understand the great Mystery
of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity. One glorified Saint shall know
more, then all the Learned men in the world. I Will conclude with this Doxology.

Now to the holy and blessed Trinity, and one God in Unity, Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor and Glory, Praise and Thanksgiving, Dominion
and Obedience, henceforth and unto all Eternity,

Amen,
THE Contents of this Treatise.
CHAP. I.
OF spiritual poverty p. 1. Sect. I. Spiritual poverty consists in emptying of
the heart of what is self ibid. Sect II. Every humble spirited man is low, vile
and abject in his own eyes p. 3. Sect. III. One who is spiritually poor,
meditates frequently and seriously upon the promises, and makes particular
application of them p. 6. Sect. IV. One that is poor in spirit is weak, fi^k,
and in a distressed condition as to his own apprehension, and makes haste unto
Christ for help p. 9.
CHAP. II.
Concerning the highest prizing and valuing of Jesus Christ p. 11. Sect. I.
It Is an infallible sign of a true Believer to value and prefer Christ before
all the riches of the world p. 11. Sect. II. Of ard^ney and strength of
affection to Jesus Christ p. 14.
CHAP. III.
Of a heart in love with holiness, evidenced in ^ holy life and conversation p.
16. Sect. I. Every true Believer loves holiness for it self, because it is the
image of God ibid. Sect. II. Where holiness is in the heart, it is fruitful in
the life p. 19.
CHAP. IV.
Of ingenuous sorrow for sin p. 24. Sect. I. Ingenuous sorrow is more for the
sin than the punishment ibid. Sect. II. There is a great difference between the
mournings of Cain, Ahab. Judas, etc. and the mournings of. David, Paul, Peter,
etc. p. 25. Sect. III. There Is a great difference between the mourning of
slaves and mourning of children p. 30.
CHAP. V.
Of sorrowing and mourning for others sins p. 33. Sect. I. A godly mourner
mourns for others sins ibid. Sect. II. We must be affected with, and afflicted
for the sins of others, remembering that we are men of like passions p. 37.
CHAP. VI.
Of approving our hearts unto God p. 42. Sect. I. A sincere-he^rted Christian
labors to aprove his heart to God, and put himself upon God's trial ibid.
Sect. II. Though we are subject to many infirmities, we must groan under the
burden of them p. 44.
CHAP. VII.
Of pressing forward toward perfection p. 49. Sect. I. It Is an Apostolical
character, and Apostolical practice, to press forward toward perfection ibid.
Sect. II. Instances in particulars whether we press forward toward perfection
p. 52.
CHAP. VIII.
Of a strict watch set upon the heart against bosom sins p. 55. Sect. I. A
sincere heart endeavors to keep it self from every beloved sin ibid. Sect. II.
No sin so little but deserves damnation p. 59. Sect. III. An illustration by
similitudes p. 61.
CHAP. IX.
An endeavor against every sin, and for the practice of every duty p. 65. Sect.
I. The desire and endeavor must be against every sin ibid. Sect. II. The
endeavor must be to obey all commands, and practice all duties p. 69.
CHAP. X.
Of a heart without guile p. 73. Sect. I. The heart must be without guile ibid.
Sect. II. Every person that is upright is compounded of three words, viz.
simplicity, singleness, and sincerity p. 74.
CHAP. XI.
Of mortification of the deeds of the body p. 80. Sect. I. The deeds of the
body, i. e. all lusts ought to be mortified ibid. Sect. II. Questions
propounded and answered p. 83.
CHAP. XII.
Vivisication of the fruits of the Spirit p. 91. Sect. I. Beside mortification
of the deeds of the body, there must be a vivification of the fruits of the
Spirit ibid. Sect. II. How this is to be discerned p. 93.
CHAP. XIII.
Containing the comforts of sincere Christians p. 95. Sect I. Sincere
Christians have comforts in their lives ibid. Sect. II. Sincere Christians are
sensible of their sins, and mourn for them p. 98.
CHAP. XIV.
Sincere-hearted Christians have comforts in their deaths p. 102. Sect. I. The
comfortable deaths of such as are sincere p. 102 Sect. II. We ought to prepare
for death p. 10^ Sect. III. The ^ying speeches of Saints p. 109
CHAP. XII.
Containing the happiness of the Saints i^ Heaven p. 115 Sect. I. The Saints in
Heaven receive per fection of happiness ibid Sect. II. At the day of Judgment
all fal^ judgments shall be reverst p. 118
FINIS.

