OF The Creatures Liberation from the Bondage of corruption.

Wherein is discussed I. What is most probably meant by (the Creature.) II. The
vanity or corruption from which it shall be delivered, and its unwillingnesse
to that vanity. III. The manner, or way of its deliverance. IV. What Creatures
are conceived as most capable of this, and of their use after restoration. V.
And lastly is discussed that glorious liberty of the Sons of God, into which
the Creature is to be reduced.


Discursu Philosophico-Theologico, by John Wait, B.D.

Ubi enim de re obscurissima disputatur, non adjuvantibus Divinarum
Scripturarum certis, clarisque documentis, cohibere se debet humana
praesumptio, etc. August. lib. 2. de peccatorum meritis, cap. 36. Printed at
York by Tho: Broad, and are to be sold at his Shop near Common-Hall-Gates. 1650.

To the Worshipful, and his especial good friend William White of Bashall,
Esquire, in this life health, in the next happiness.
SIR, the Philosopher in libro Moral. 9. cap. 11. moves this question, (...),
utrum magis opus est amicis in prosperitatibus, quam in infortuniis? whether a
man stands more need of friends in prosperity, or in calamity? He wisely
answers, in utrisque, in them both; in prosperity, for a man's society, friendly
council, delight, and the exercising his favors toward them; in calamity, or
adversity, that from such he may be succored, helped, or upholden, and
defended. The former is more common, for who knows not, si fueris foelix? etc.
yet the latter is more commendable, indicates more charity toward man, and
shall have more reward from God. But tempora si fuerint nubila, are so cloudy
and mistie times, that its heard to see a friend in them. I have read of many
that are content to worship the Sunne-rising, but few or none the
Sunne-setting; yet in this latter posture, you have bin pleased to remember me;
therefore for such your friendship, I am the more obliged. A noble Personage
(as you cannot but know) was once pleased to confess, that he should accept it
as an honor, if I would dedicate this work upon so abstruse a subject unto
him; but that spectatissimus heroes excessit e vivis, and is now at rest. The
next to whom for this work, your self may deservedly challenge the Patronage,
having labored much to have it brought in apricum. But as the Poet writes of
Poesy, Carmina secessum scribentis, et otia quaerunt, so may I say of
Theology. The task was the harder, being undergone, inter armorum strepitus,
fulgentes aere catervas, et crebris ictibus enses, fumantes pulvere campos, et
rorantes sanguine cristas. Yet, through the good hand of God upon me, even in
these times, operi coronidem imposui: and because I know, quod verbum sapienti
sat est, I presume I shall not need to say any more, but that I shall remain.

Yours in the best of his services, John Wait.
e Mu^aeo nostro Gargraviae, 23. Januar. 1649.
To the Christian Reader.
COurteous Reader, some pains I have taken to add one Mite more to the
Treasury of the Church; if thou wilst not believe what labor it cost me,
facito periculum, make a trial thy self of some such like subject, and then I
dare presume that thy censure will be more charitable. Soldiers say, that they
can do no execution without Ammunition. Bees we know can make no honey without
flowers, nor Scholars soundly handle any point of learning, without books;
only such as are sine literis, have reason to be content sine libris. Know
(good reader) that I live procul a Sole, procul a sale, extra Rempublicam
bonarum literarum, ac ingeniorum thesauros; my house has suffered plunder, the
common calamity of the times, and falling in upon my Library, (a Scholars
riches) they asked for the Practice of Piety, as suitable to their work, and I
confess a great stranger to them, and therefore stood need of inquiry after
it. A few broken Regiments I had left, and those now much tattered and torn, in
being forced to march from Town, to Town. News of late have been the most
vendible Commodity; here is a new heaven, and a new earth, new Creatures, all
things new; as God in his wisdom shall think fit: God make thee a new heart,
fitted to enjoy the new estate in the life to come. Reader, here thou have the
fruits of four Months travel, spared and sequestered time from the ordinary
charge of my Ministry, in all which time, that had its share with this,

Det tibi Deus intellectum. Errata.
Page 6. lin. 15. For for read by, p. 27. l. 1. for inanihibabilis r.
inanihilabilis. Heb. p. 55. for (...) read (...) p. 61. l. 21. for God r. good,
p. 133. r. ablatisque for ablutesque. P. 179. r. habebunt for hebebunt. P. 197.
r. innovabuntur for innovabantur. P. 212. in marg. r. fluctuum for fluctum. P.
229. r, Sole for Sol. P. 253. r. autem for aurem. and more I find not.

Of the Creatures liberation from the bondage of corruption.
Romans 8.20, 21. For the Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly,
but by reason of him who has subjected the same in hope.

Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.


OUr Apostle in the foregoing Chapter having had a long dispute about
justification and sanctification, by way of short repetition, he shuts up the
Points, applying all his dispute ad (...), and consolationem fidelium, adversus
multifarias tentationes illatas, to the practice and consolation of the
faithful against many and diverse temptations brought upon them; and then in
the following Chapter proceeds to these intricate Points of Election and
Reprobation, (as the Schools usually oppose them;) but I conceive that Election
and non-Election, or preterition, are more immediately opposed. And whereas the
regenerate are usually disquieted and troubled two ways, Per reliquias
peccati, and afflictiones mundi, by the relics of sin, and afflictions of
the world, the former might seem incongruous to the Saints state of
justification and sanctification; the latter to Gods justice. The Apostle
applies medicinable remedies against both these troubles.

For the Relics of sin he would have them consider, first, that they are
not regnantes, but remanentes, Not regnant, but remanent, being in such as walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit; not after the motions of the
unregenerate, but regenerate part; and post remotionem reatus per
justificationem, gradualiter diminuuntur per sanctificationem, After the
removing of the guilt by justification they are gradually deminished by
sanctification; so that, as the Lord said of the Enemies of Israel, Deuteronomy. 7.22.
that he would consume them by little and little; even so likewise will he do
with our spiritual enemies, our sins, the Lord will kill them and consume them
by the internal power of sanctification, by little and little, and take out
the Macula or stain of them, and subdue the vitulencie of them; for as there
is an increase in grace, 2 Pet. 3. last, so there is a decrease in sin; for
even as the strength and heat of the Sun is increased, the coldness of the
Air is diminished; so the stronger grace and zeal from it grows, the coldness
of sin is more diminished.

And though it be true, that many eminent Divines say, that justificatio is
actus individuus, an individual act, and perfected uno actu, and quasi uno
ictu, at once, and that in it self it admits of no degrees, (properly so
called) but that quoad sensum and manifestationem, in the sense and
manifestation of it to the hearts and minds of men, it admits of diverse
degrees, every one in his sanctification not having the like manifestation of
his justification; some discerning it more sweetly and satisfactorily, and
magis continuate, with less intermission: Others more weakly, more obscurely,
with reluctance; and sometimes doubtingly; who notwithstanding (lucidioribus
intervallis) when the temptation and mist of humane infirmity is dispelled,
and the Sunshine of grace from under this Cloud shows forth its self more
clearly, have more full manifestation of their justification, and the disturbed
conscience more sweetly settled in the sense, and persuasion of it, and labors
by prayer and all good means to have it increased, and to walk in the comfort
of it: yet in what sense its individual would be shown.

Now our sanctification is actus dividuus et gradualis, a dividuall and
graduall act: we are sanctified by degrees, and by such means as God in his
wisdom has appointed to increase sanctification by.

And whereas in justification the peccata praeterita, or fore-past sins
before calling, or praesentia, are pardoned, actualiter in sese, and per
formalem applicationem justificationis, actually, and in themselves, and by the
formal application of justification, yet the peccata futura, or sins not
committed, into which the justified persons afterward may fall by infirmity,
by negligence, by violent temptation, or the like; though these be pardoned
also decretive, intentionaliter et virtualiter personae justificatae,
decretively, intentionally, and vertually to the justified person, being now
put in the road of Salvation by his justification, yet actually and
manifestatively they are not pardoned (in themselves) until they be confessed,
the party be humbled, and have repented himself of them, and for such
particular Acts applies his former justification to him. No man can upon good
grounds deny, but that David before he committed adultery with Bathsheba, was a
justified Person, yet that sin he fell into with her is not said to be put
away, till he (being convinced by Nathan) confessed it, and was sensible of it,
and touched for it, 2 Samuel 12.13. he to whom God has decreed pardon of sin,
has also decreed that he shall repent, to whom sin shall be pardoned. Thus
much for Reliquiae peccati.

For the second, the afflictiones mundi, the crosses and troubles which befall
men after they be in a justified and santified estate, how this can stand with
Gods Justice, having punished their sins in Christ: to which it may be said,
that there are just causes of them remaining in man, and in his secret Counsel
he knows how to make them medicinable to his servants; and these though they
be not poenae satisfactoriae, yet are they poenae castigatoriae, though they
be not satisfactory punishments, as were those that Christ did undergo; yet
were they poenae castigatoriae, castigatorie punishments, by which God keeps
his Children in obedience: for though his sanctified Children obey out of love,
via praevalentiae, by way of prevalencie, yet are there in them still relics
of servile fear, upon which the rod works: and this may serve for the
praecedany to the words of the Text.

Now to fall in nearer to the words themselves. In the 18 Verse we read of a
glory that shall be revealed in us, which glory is that glorious estate which
man (made immortal) shall be invested with from God; which glory God never
manifested in man, whilst man continued mortal; but then our vile bodies
shall be like unto his glorious Body; 1 Cor. 15.49.
when we shall have the Image of Christ perfectly restored in us: and Phil. 3.
last, He shall change our vile body, that it may be like his glorious body.

In the 19. Verse we read of the earnest expectation of the Creature waiting
for the manifestation of the sons of God. The words (...), in the Original are
very significant. Chrysostom will have the word (...) to signify Vehementem
expectationem, A vehement expectation; Ambrose, Assiduam expectationem, A
continued diligent expectation: Erasmus, sollicitam Creaturae expectationem,
The careful expectation of the Creature: Beza says, Ego vero studui Graecum
vocabulum exprimere, But I studied how to express the Greek term; and he
renders it, Exerto capite observans expectat, The Creature waits with a
stretched out neck; even as when a man greedily desiring to see somewhat at
hand, stretches out his neck, stands upon tiptoes, and strains his eyes to
obtain the light; so greedily and earnestly expects the Creature for the
manifestation of the sons of God, 1 John 3.2.
in that glorious luster in which they shall live for ever. It does not yet
appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him; that is, immortal, impassible and glorious, 1 Cor. 15.53.
as he is; for this mortal body shall put on immortality; but we shall be
like him, not similitudine aequalitatis, but similitudine conformitatis, Not
with the likeness of equality, but with the likeness of conformity; for as we
were made conformable, and in conformity to his own Image at the first, then
shall his Image also be perfectly restored in us again. Col. 3.3.4.
Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God: Ephesians. 2.1.
ye are dead, not in sin, as were the Ephesians in their Gentilisme, Romans 6.
la^t.
but to sin, as were the Christian Romans; the old man of sin, and the
corruption of your nature is dead in you, but there is a spiritual life in
you, and an inchoation of glory, which though by reason of so many crosses,
troubles, and infirmities it appear not so clearly, and in the excellency, and
full luster of it, in this mortal life; yet, as it is hid with Christ in God,
and the excellency of it does as yet no more appear to corporal eyes, than
does the excellency of Christ in his glorified body. When Christ which is our
life shall appear; [Which is our life, that is, which is the Fountain and
efficient cause of our life] then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

In the words themselves we may consider these four parts;

First, the Creatures subjugation.

Secondly, the modus, or the modification

Thirdly, the relaxation.

Fourthly and lastly, the melioration.

1. The Creatures subjugation in these words, For the Creature was subject to
vanity.

2. The Modus or modification, and that is twofold, Negative, or Positive;


Negative, Not willingly.

Positive, But by reason of him who has subjected the same under hope, or, in
hope.

3. The relaxation, Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption.

4. And lastly, the melioration, Into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God; or, Into the liberty of the glory of the sons of God, or, of the
Children of God. Let us begin with the Creatures subjugation, For the Creature
was made subject to vanity.

In which words we have two things that call upon us for serious thoughts and
deliberation in explication.

First, what we are to understand by the [Creature.]

Secondly, in what sense the Creature may be said to be subject to vanity. Beza
in locum
For the former Beza by the [Creature,] understands Coelestem machinam, et
elementanem regionem, but not animantia, not ejus incolas; the fabric of
Heaven and elementary Region, but not the living Creatures, and the Inhabitants
of the World. The Syriack version by Tremelius has it, Vniversa Creatura,
Tremel. versio. Sir.
the whole Creature, or Creation; the Greek is (...), The Creature,
indefinitely, and as the new Translation reads it. Indeed verse. 22. there is
(...), Every Creature, as the Geneva reads; Omnes Creaturae, as the Syriack
version by Tremelius, Tremel.
All the Creatures, the whole Creation, as our new Translation; for (...)
signifies as well the Creation as the Creature; Mark 10 6.
(...), ab intio Creationis, from the beginning of the Creation. Aug. in Romans
and in libro 83. q. q. 67.
Augustine in expositione quarundam propositionum ex Epistola ad Romanos, and
Libro 83. q. q. 67. by every Creature understands Man, and would illustrate his
Exposition by that place, Mark 16.15. Praedicate Evangelium (...) omni
Creaturae, Preach the Gospel to every Creature; there indeed by [every
Creature] is meant man. Act. 10.35.
Acts 10.35. Men of every Nation. Gal. 3.28.
Galath. 3.28. not only Jews but Greeks, whether bond or free, all are one in
Christ; yea, Barbarians and Scythians, Col. 3.11.
Colos. 3.11. Omnis creaturae nomine signatur homo, says Greg. magnus in his
29. Greg Hom. 29 in Evang.
Hom. in Evang. by the name of every Creature is meant man, yet do not I think
that upon the same grounds man is meant, that he there alleges, though that
which he alleges be true, namely, because man has something common to all
other Creatures with him; he has Being with the Stones, Motion with the
Heavens, growth common with the Plants, Sense with the Bruits, understands with
the Angels; so that he is a (...), or little world of himself: yet the Spirit
of God does not use to ground Phrases upon such Philosophical niceties;
neither hence need we flow over into so much superstitious diligence with St.
Francis, as to Preach to Wolves, or Crows, or Ravens, or such like incapable
Creatures; yet Gregory grants, that the place also may be meant of men of
several Nations. And when Augustine perceived that nos ipsi was opposed to the
Creature, Verse 23. seeing [man] and the [Creature here] thus opposed by [man,]
he would have man unregenerate, understood such a Creature, quae nondum per
fidem aggregata numero filiorum Dei, which by faith is not yet gathered into
the number of the Children of God. But Pace tanti dicatur viri, with the leave
of so great a light of the Church [this Creature] must needs be the same, which
in the nineteenth Verse has such an earnest expectation for the manifestation
of the Sons of God. Now this cannot be averred of the men unregenerate, as
(God willing) shall appear hereafter, therefore cannot rightly be understood of
them. Again, the difference here between [Nos ipsi) or [we our selves] and the
[Creature] will appear to be specificall and essential, not numericall only
or accidental. O^^g
Origin by the [Creature] understands the Angels and Archangels; Angels,
because he conceives it a subjugation, and Bond put upon them, to be ministering
spirits to us, whereas indeed they do it joyfully and freely, as delighted with
those that shall be Heirs of Salvation: Archangels, because they are set over
Provinces and Battles, (Instrumentally I conceive he means,) to direct,
restrain, govern, from Dan. 10.13. Dan. 10.13. Iun. annot in locum.
which place Junius understands of Cambyses, and his Counselors, and of Cyrus,
and of Christ, chief of the Princes. These things considered we must needs
confess with learned Martyr, Locus quidem est difficilis, truly this is an
hard Text of Scripture; so that I shall conceive it to fall within the compass
of one of those places spoken of by the Holy Ghost in St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.6.
2 Peter 3.16. In St. Paul's Epistles there are (...), nonnulla difficilia
intellectu, some things hard to be understood: this the most accurate, able,
and piercing Divines find most true.

Let us therefore fall on again, and try if we can out of the contextualls,
and (ex re nata) enucleare sensum, pick out the meaning of the Holy Ghost in
this place.

By the [Creature] therefore I conceive is not simply meant every Creature, In
rerum natura, in this Verse, but every such and such Creature in specie, or in
its kind, whether it be sensible or insensible, though man in his kind is not
exempted, as afterward appears; but the [Creature] in this place or Verse, I
say, is opposed to just or godly men, Verse 23. Not only they, but our selves
also which have the first fruits of the spirit.

2. I conceive the Creature here opposed to bad men, for bad men are none of
those creatures that shall be delivered from the Bondage of corruption; from
Physical corruption of substance, we know they shall, but from the moral
corruption by sin, they shall not, nor from the punishment due to it. Job
20.11. Job 20.11.
His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him in
the dust.

Again, such wait not for the manifestation of the sons of God, as this
creature does; but they think of it either exhorrendo, or irridendo,

By exceedingly fearing it, or gracelesly mocking at it.

By exceedingly fearing of it, because the manifestation of Gods wrath will
then fall upon the children of Belial. Apoc. 6 16, 17. Apoc 6.16, 17
They shall say to the Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Nam
venit dies ille magnus irae illius, for the great day of his wrath is come, and
who shall be able to stand.

2 P^t 3.3, 4.
By gracelesly mocking at it, as 2 Pet. 3, 3, 4. There shall come in the last
days (...), irrisores, mockers, or scoffers, such as David mentions Psalm. 1.1.
Psalm. 1.1.
(...) such as walk after their own lusts, who are called their own, because
they are a natura insitae, and Dei donis adventitiis oppositae, because they
are inbred in their corrupt nature, and are opposite to the adventitiall graces
of God; and these say, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the
Fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
Creation. Thus with a sacrilegious boldness, impudency, and contempt they
speak of the last day. As if they had said, We neither see his promise of the
Day of Judgment fulfilled, nor any likelihood or sign of it now, more than was
since the Creation; for there is a continuation of the species of all
Creatures, by renewing themselves in multiplication of their several
individualls, and so may do for ever. Thus they would seem to be wickedly
witty. To which cavil the Apostle answers at large in the following Verses,
from the sixth to the eleventh Verse. And these, as in their hearts they wish
never to see that day, so likewise they are a verse from ever seeing the day of
death, because the conscience suggests unto them it will be a bitter and a
comfortless day. And these I conceive the many reasons why Calvin. Beza.
Melanch. Martyr Paraeus, Willet. and many more. Also before them, Theophilact.
the School. Divines, and diverse more ancient.
Modernitie dissents from Aug. herein.

3. The good Angels cannot here be meant by the [Creature,] because they cannot
be said to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, for under that bondage,
(properly so called) they never were, but the Creature here meant has been
under it, and shall be delivered from it, Verse 21.

4. and lastly, not the Devils or bad Angels, as may appear by these two
Reasons,

First, they are not, neither ever were (...), congemiscentes, groaning
together with us, or, una suspirantes, sighing together with us; but the
Creature here meant does. See Verse. 22.

Secondly, they come not within the compass of those Creatures that are made
subject (...), under hope, but they are locked up under the Hatches of despair,
without any hope of deliverance for ever; therefore the superfluity of Origens
charity may be said to have moved out of the sphaere of verity, Error Origin.
when he judged that even the devils themselves in time should be saved: which
gross error many learned men have sufficiently confuted. Aug. Tom. 6. lib. ad
Oros. cap. 5.
See Aug. lib. ad Oros. tom. 6. cap. 5. though there was another Origin besides
that famous and great Clerk, yet both of them herein erroneous, the latter
being misled by the former of Alexandria.

But here will arise a question, how groaning, earnest expectation for
deliverance, and the like, can be attributed to, or praedicated of irrational
and insensible Creatures? for we must needs say with Augustine in expositione
propositionum ex Epistola ad Romanos, Aug in expos. propos. ex ep. ad Romans
Sensum gemendi, and dolendi, non opinemur esse in arboribus, and oleribus, and
lapidibus, and hujusmodi creaturis, etc. hic enim erat Mantehaeorum error: Not
that we may think that there is any sense of groaning or sorrowing in Trees,
Herbs, Stones, or such like Creatures, for this was an error of the Manichees.
Therefore I answer, that the Apostle here speaks of the^ by a Prosopopeia,
(...).
attributing such things to them as belong to the reasonable Creature, as is
usual in diverse other places in sacred Writ. Man's groaning and waiting, Verse
23. is proper, and not of the same kind with theirs. Thus much for the
Creature spoken of in this place.

Now for the second, namely, in what sense the Creature is made subject to
vanity, For the Creature was made subject to vanity. The word is (...) in the
Greek, which is rightly rendered vanitati, to vanity. You have it again, Ephesians.
4.17. (...), in the vanity of their minds. The word may also signify
frustrationi, to frustration; for nature propagating successively one
individuum from another, may seem to aim at and desire an immortality of the
species, as not only some old Philosophers, but some others have dreamed, but
(...), frustra, in vain: the Creature is made subject to frustration in this
point. So then take it subject to vanity, and the Holy Ghost that cannot err
in Exposition, tells us, that to be subject to vanity is to be subject to
corruption, or the bondage of corruption. Verse 21. where its said, It shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, that was the vanity it was made
subject to for the sin of man: it remains not in that quiet, constant,
entire, sound and firm estate of nature, in the which at the first it was
created, but is now subject fluxae turbidae and evanidae conditioni, to a
flowing, troublous, fleeting, vain, and mutable condition. And Solomon well
perceiving this, Eccles. 1.2.
said, Eccles. 1.2. Vanitas vanitatum, omnia vanitas, Vanity of vanities, all
is vanity, subject to change and and frailty.

If any man object, that the heavens are not of a corruptible nature: I answer,
(and of which point God willing more hereafter) that though by the
Aristotelians they be not of such corruptible nature, or subject to such
vicissitude of change, as compound and mixed Elementary bodies be; yet are they
subject to obscuration, and doing of service to profane and wicked enemies of
God, and to dissolution by their Maker, as well as inferior bodies are. For
suppose the Heavens be incorruptible, corruptione naturali, by natural
corruption; yet are they corruptible and dissoluble Potentia supernaturali, by
the supernatural Power of God, upon whom both the Esse, and Esse tales does
depend, both their Being, and their Being in such estate as they have
continued in since their Creation.

Again, doubtless Nulla natura naturata respectu potentiae Dei absolutae, dici
potest indissolubilis, (vel si liceat verbum cudere) inanihibalis, quamvis
comparative respectu-constitutionis, vel naturae spiritualis, and respectu
potentiae Dei ordinatae, vel respectu sublunarium, dici potest: No created
nature, if we respect Gods absolute power, can be said to be indissoluble, or
[inanihilable] if we may be permitted by the leave of men Learned, to coin a
word for our expression; although comparatively in respect of its nature, or
spiritual Being, or in respect of God having so determined it, or having so
ordered it; and in respect of sublunary bodies, some Creatures may be said to
be incorruptible, or not to be corrupted by any ordinary Physical corruption.

To illustrate this subjection of the Creature to vanity a little more in some
particulars. The Earth we know is cursed for our sakes, or for sin in Adam;
Genesis 3.17.
Thorns and Thistles that was to bring out unto us, Maledicta sit terra propter
te, Cursed is the earth for thy sake, Thorns and Thistles shall it bring out
unto thee. It is smitten with barrenness; as the Psalmist speaks, A fruitful
land makes he barren, for the wickedness of those that dwell therein. Its made
also subject to corruption and destruction, for howsoever Solomon says, That
the earth abides forever, Eccles 1.4.
Eccles. 1.4. his meaning is not, that it abides for ever sub statu jam habito,
in that state and condition its now in, for that is contrary to S. Peter, 2
Pet. 3.10. 2 Pet. 3.10.
Terra et quae in ea sunt opera exurentur, The earth with the works therein
shall be burnt up. Iunius reads it, in seculum, for a long time, which
comparatively may be said to be for ever, in respect of many other Creatures,
that are of much less continuance. And as for the Air, See Psa. 78.69 (...) in
seculum. Iunius Leol^m
its often distempered by contagious, or filthy vapors, extremity of cold, or
burning heat, darkened by Clouds, moistened by Rain, and the like.

The Seas are tumbled, and tossed to and and fro with vehement winds and
tempests. Ovid. lib. 1. Trist. eleg. 2. Ovid. lib. 1. Trist. Eleg. 2.
Me miserum, quanti montes volvuntur aquarum.

Iam jam tacturos sidera summa putes.

I would English it, as near as I could, out of the words of the Prophet, Psalm.
107.25, Psa. 107.25, 26
26. For he commands and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the Waves
thereof; they mount up to Heaven. Then the Poet adds, Iam jam tacturos tartara
nigra putes; the Prophet thus, They go down again to the depth, etc. The Sun,
Moon and Stars are forced to serve the sons of Belial, and such as are
profane men: are subject to extraordinary Ecclipses, and darknesses, and at
the coming of Christ, at that great and fearful day, Matthew. 24.29.
Matthew. 24.29. The Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her
light, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the Powers of heaven shall
be shaken; and then the Creature, that was made subject to vanity, shall be
delivered from it.

The sublunary both by Land and Sea, are subject to corruptions, diseases and
infirmities, death, and many changes are taken and destroyed, not only for
necessity, and the relief of man, but for superfluity, and needless pomp and
vanity; so that no wonder if the Creature groan, and desire to be freed from
this slavery, under which it was cast by man's disobedience. Of which hereafter.

But seeing that the Air is become troubled, the Heavens darkened, the Earth
barren, the Sea encumbered, the sensible Creature diseased, weakened and often
changed in its several Individualls, this should humble man, when he
considers, that for his sin all this misery, mutability, and vanity befell
all these Creatures, all that God brought to him, put him in possession of, and
made him Lord over; for his disobedience to the Creator of both, came this
misery upon the Creatures; yea, over those Flocks that he is Owner of: His
Sheep perish by the rott, his greater Cattle by the Murrain, and many the like
diseases: his Fruits are tainted and unserviceable, the Springs become cold,
the Harvests unseasonable, the Clouds dry, or without water, or else weep, and
wash the face of the Earth, and often thus do disadvantage the Inhabitants
thereof.

Secondly, see the odiousness of sin, in that God did not only punish man,
the Creature that offended, but such other Creatures also as were made for man's
use, to refresh his Senses, feed his Body, be his Servants, in obeying that
Dominion which God gave him over them, and in punishing the Creatures, and man's
Possession, by which he should be relieved; he also by consequent, punishes
man. You have heard how he makes a Land that is fruitful, become barren, for
the wickedness of the Owners. And I fear with S. Augustine, that many grieve
for the barrenness of their Lands, more then for the barrenness of their
lives, yea, and are more sensible of the loss of their Cattle, then of the
loss of Gods countenance; it takes a deeper impression in them, they are more
stirred and moved at it: and indeed many of them may say, as Laban did of his
Idols, Genesis 31.30. Genesis 31.30.
their gods are gone; or as Judah said of Jacob, Genesis 44.30. Genesis 44.30.
anima illius hujus animae devincta est, His life is bound up in the Lads life;
so their mundane life may be said to be bound up in the life and increase of
their Goods; if these die or decay, their life is vexed in them, and they cry
out bitterly, and say, they are undone utterly; as though the arm of the Lord
were shortened, and as though it were not easy with the Lord, to make a poor
man rich again. Prove. 10.22.
Proverbs 10.22. Benedictio Domini facit divites, The blessing of the Lord
makes rich; and though they labor to regain or restore what they lost, with
tears, as Esau did his Birthright, Heb. 12.17.
Heb. 12.17. yet can they not say to the God of Jacob, as Esau did to his
father Isaac, Genesis 27.38.
Genesis 27.38. An benedictio unica tibi est Pater mi? Have thou but one Blessing,
O my Father? So, has but God one way or means to bestow the Blessing of Goods
upon men? Happy were men if they could considerately say with Job, Job. 1.21.
Job 1.21. Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away blessed be the Name of the
Lord. The Sabeans, Chaldeans, Fire, and Wind had taken away, yet they did it
but instrumentally, God permitted this, and had a hand of Providence in it: so
should man conceive of his losses and crosses, he should labor to see Gods
hand in them, and be humbled; and consider, that God can do to him as to
Joseph, when evil was intended against him, God turned it to good, Genesis last
20.
Genes. last. 20. And of this odiousness of sin, by which Possessions come
to be punished, as well as Persons, and the Owners of them, we may see, Genesis
7.21.
[Expiravit itaque omnis caro] And all flesh died that moved upon the earth,
Genesis 6.17.
for so the Lord had threatned] Genes. 6.17. And Exodus 9.3. Exodus 9.3.
the hand of the Lord was upon the Cattle of the Egyptians that were in the
field, upon the Horses, upon the Asses, upon the Camels, upon the Oxen, and
upon the Sheep, a grievous Murrain light upon them. Exodus 9.25.
And Exodus 9.25. the Hail smote every Herb of the field, and brake every Tree
of the field: And Verse 31. Verse. 31.
the Flax and the Barley were smitten. Esa. ^8, 46, 47.
Psalm. 78.46, 47. reflecting upon these Passages, He gave also their increase
unto the Caterpiller, and their labor unto the Locusts; he destroyed their
Vines with Hail, and their Sycomore Trees with Frost. Amos 4.9 I have smitten
you with blasting and Mildew, Amos 4.9.
when your Gardens and your Vineyards, etc. increased, the Palmer-Worme
devoured them. Zeph. 1.3.
Zeph. 1.3. I will consume man and beast, I will consume the Fowls of Heaven,
Genesis 19.25.
and the Fishes of the Sea, etc. Genes. 19.25. when Gods anger was kindled
against Sodom, not only man that offended, but the senseless Creatures were
also punished by reason of his sin; he overthrew those Cities, and all the
Plain, and all the Inhabitants of the Cities, and that which grew upon the
ground; so that when man sees this punishment upon his Possession, upon his
Lands, Fruits and Goods, he may say properly, as David did metaphorically, 2 Samuel last. 17. 2 Samuel last 17.
Lord, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly; but as for these Sheep, yea,
and these Lands, these Fruits, these goods, [quid fecerunt] what have they
done? Yet we see that for our disobedience that were Lords, they that were
servants were also made subject to vanity. Hactenus de Creatura, and ejus
subjugatione, Thus much then of the Creature, and its subjugation, or being
subject to vanity.

And now are we to fall upon the way how it was subjugated; but before we come
to that, we are to observe the averseness from, or the unwillingnesse to this
subjugation found in the Creature, (...), non volens, not willing, the Creature
was not willing to it. Tertul. Beza.
[Invite] as Tertullian, it was, non sua sponte, as Beza, not of its own
accord, Paraeus.
that is, non ex nativa propensione, as Paraeus, not of any natural
propensitie to it; Cicer. lib. 1. Offic.
for as Cicero observed, lib. 1. Officiorum: Generi animalium omni est natura
tributum, ut se, vitam corpusque tacatur; Its natural to every Creature to
preserve its own being in nature: and Scaliger contra Cardanum exercit: Scal.
de sub lit. Exerc. 12. sect. 3.
12. sect. 3. Nam quae natura consumit sua principia? What Creature is there in
nature that would give way to destroy its own Principles?

The natural Philosopher tells us, that Omnis creatura naturali inclinatione
fertur, ad suipsius conservationem: Every Creature is carried on with a
natural inclination to its self-preservation; therefore no marvel that the
Apostle expresses it with an (...), Non sua sponte, Not of its own will, or
accord. Ex pede Herculem, or, ex ungue Leonem, as we say, Let us guess at the
whole series of the Creature by some particulars. We see by daily expeperience,
that the sensible or irrational Creature is not willing to corruption, neither
the Fowls of Heaven, nor the Fishes of the Sea, nor the Beasts of the Earth,
but are a verse from it, and resist it to the utmost of their skill and
cunning; the very Elements are not willing to yield to forcible corruption, for
when the fire would lick up the water, or the water would quench the fire, you
know there is pugna, or a great strife between them, one of them [quoad posse
sui quanti] resisting the other, as not willing to be corrupted, or forcibly
changed from its nature, and one reason [as the learned know] why the guttae
pluviales, or dropps of rain do fall down [figu^^ rotunda] in a round form, is
(...), propter incolumitatem, for the more safety of their nature, and greater
strength to pass through the Air undissipated, as natural Philosophy
teaches.

Secondly, we see how the Creature tends ad centrum, tanquam ad locum proprium
praeservationis, as to the proper place of its preservation; thus levi^ do
tendere sursum, gravia deorsum, tanquam ad locum proprium, et naturalem, et ubi
illis sit optime; light things move upward, as fire, smoke, and the like heavy
things downward, as Stones, Earth, Brass, Iron, Lead, and such like mixed
bodies, because that's their natural place, and such as agrees the best with
the preservation of their nature, and when they are detained elsewhere, it is a
violent detension, so that it is supposed if an hole could be dug through the
Body of the earth, as it is through the Nave of a Wheel, and a Millstone cast
done by it, that it would not rest until it came at the Center, having nullum
impedimentum, or corpus crassum interpositum, having no impediment in its
motion, or gross body to interpose it and the Center: yea, and though that by
violence of the motion, or gathering strength in its continuance, it should
exceed the Center, yet would it not rest until it reverted to its proper place.

Thirdly, observe the sensible Creature, if it be sick, or weak, or in danger
of corruption, or of resolving into its Principles, by instinct of nature, it
has appetition of such things as will help it, or of such places as will
secure it; Look but upon the Swallow, and wild Bees, Flies, and such like,
which in the extremity and unmercifull season of the stormy, and sturdy Winter
appears, yet have they an appetition by nature to Caverns and Holes, where they
preserve their Being, until the tenderhearted and gentle Spring invite them
to appear: the Dog by instinct of nature, knows how to give himself a Vomit,
and some Physicians write, man first learned this point of Physic from his
practice. The Fowls can scowre themselves by gravel, the Cattle by licking up
of Mould. The Salmon wounded, by his present return to the salt waters, which
exsiccate and dry up his wound, but if he want opportunity to return, or be
detained in the fresh Streams, by Nets lying in his way in the Summer season,
by great and high locks built in the water, or the like, and grow weak upon his
wound, the ingluvious Eels no sooner discern an imbecilitie in him, but
presently they fall upon him, bite him, toss him, and tugge him out of his
very Skin, and devour him. And this I have seen and observed with mine own
eyes, at a place called the Force, in the River of Kent, near unto the House
of Sir Henry Bellingham, and not far from the Town of Kendall in Westmerland,
and therefore dare more confidently report it; yet when many such things are
reported to be in nature, from the credit of learned men, the ignorant believe
them not, because themselves have not seen them. Plutarch in Grillo. Origanum.
Plutarch in his Moralls in Gryllo, writes of the Swallows, Vt quando Viperam
adederunt, supermandant origanum, When they have eaten or fed upon a Viper,
presently they eat wild Marjorane, and this delays the Poison; and, quis
instituit Hierundines? who (says he) did teach the Swallow this Medicine? Who
would believe it if it were not a common experiment, that the Ducks should take
the most venomous Toads, and by instinct of nature are so careful to preserve
themselves from distaining or dying by Poison, they toss them and swill them
up and down in the Water or running Streams, until the virrulency be quite
washed out of their substance, and then devour them, and degest them without
any the least hurt or danger; and by instinct of nature they can tell or know
when they are edible, and before then they will not eat them; and I may say,
quis instituit anates? who taught these poor Creatures this skill? The wild
Boar that he may be armed against the danger of the Sword or Spear of the
Hunter, will rubb himself against the Bark and Moss of Trees, till he make his
Bristles as slippery, and hard as Horn, of which the mouth of the sword is
scarcely able to bite: and of him I may say, Quis instituit Aprum Silvestrem?
who taught the wild Boar to make such armor for his defense?

Plutarch in the aforenamed place tells us of the Craetian Goats, Plutarch in
Grillo. Origanum.
the which cum sagittis sunt vulneratae dictanum sectentur, quo gustato
cuspides ejiciunt; When they are hitt with any Arrows, they betake themselves
to eat of the Herb Ditanie, or Dictander, otherwise called Garden-Ginger, which
if but tasted, bitteth the tongue, and having eaten of it, it is of that nature
that it will work out the Head of an Arrow, and so procure the safety of the
wounded Creature. It is a thing commonly reported by Fowlers, and also known
for a truth to many others, that if the Gallinago minor, the Snipe, the
Lapwing, or the Plover be taken in the Lime-twiggs, and her Wings so glued
together with that tenacious matter, that she finds her self unable to fly,
and to escape with her life, she will not rest until she come to the Water, if
she be able to move, and there belabours her self with all her might, and
without ceasing, until she have washed off the viscositie and tenaciousnesse
of the Lime, without which means she could not escape to save her life

I have heard it with mine own ears from a skillful hunter of the Badger, that
when two of them take an earth-Hold or Hole together, and those kind of Dogs
called Terryers, put into the Hold after them, that the one of them will stand
upon his defense, to keep off the Dogs, whiles the other works further into the
ground, and as way is made, still follows backward, and holds off, until so
much mould be cast up within the Hold, that they may hide their bodies in it,
and the Dogs may trample over them thus covered, and cannot find them, but
return without them; which the Hunter perceiving, and not seeing how by any
means they could escape, have dug off the ground above them, and into the
Mould that had been lately cast up, and there has found them, as you have
heard. So that I may say, though there be not reason in these, and such like
Creatures, properly so called, yet they have rationem metaphoricam, or (...),
they have somewhat in them answering unto reason in man, by which every
Creature is guided to preserve its Being, as man is by his reason; for though
they have no reason by which they are capable of the Art of the Apothecaries,
how to compound Medicines, nor of systemes or Rules directing how to practice.

Plutarch in Grillo.
Plutarch in Grillo, Necessarios vero non ab aliis ascitus, neque mercede
traditus, neque conglutinans meditatione, et compingens praeceptorum quodque
cum quolibet, sed sua sponte, ex seipsa velut legitimas, et nativas fundit:
Those necessary Medicines or ways by which they help themselves, are not taken
from others, nor taught them for hire or reward, nor framed by Meditation, nor
compacted into Precepts received from any, but of their own accord, from their
natural instinct, the Creature puts it self upon such Medicines as are most
agreeable to relieve its nature. Animalium quodquae non modo ad medicandum per
se eruditum, sed and ad victum, etc. Every living Creature is not only taught
by nature how to play the Physician, but how to get its living, etc. quatenus
cujusque naturae convenit, as far forth as is needful to the nature of any
of them, etc. Si enim id quod est facere velis, horum esse naturam Magistram.
And if we but grant that which is truth, nature, or instinct of nature is the
Mistress in all these, Plutarch de Animant. compar.
Plutarch de animantium comparatione, writing of the Lion, says, Semper
contorti^ ingreditur pedibus, tanquam vagina conditis intus unguibus ne aciem
attriti retundant, neve vestigantibus notam relinquant, etc. He goes always
with his feet writhen together, hiding his sharp Claws within the skin and
flesh, as within a Scabbard, least he should blunt the sharpness of them, and
least the Hunter should find any print of his foot. The Ichneumon or Indian
Ratt being to encounter that dangerous Beast the Crocodile, takes care to arm
himself to the battle, Crasso limo adoriturus crocodilum loricat, et vestit,
He all to bedawbs his body with thick Slime or Mudd, making hereof to himself a
Brigandine, or herewith arming himself as with a Coat of Mail, against his Foe.

Anseres aquilarum formidine transcensuri Taurum, grandem lapidem ore capiunt,
velut obturantes et fraenantes garrulitatem, etc. Whilst the Wilde-Geese do
fann the Air with their Wings over the Mountain of Taurus, for fear their
gaggling should betray them to the Eagles prey, every one takes a good Peeble
stone in his mouth, to hold them from making any such noise, till they be past,
and out of their danger. The Fox being to pass over any deep covered with Ice,
harkens diligently whether it crackle or no, Quae si percipiat ex strepitu
prope undam delabentem, conjiciens non altum esse gelu, sed tenue, et infirmum,
subsistit, ac ni prohibeatur, regreditur, si strepitum non sentiat, transit
fidenter: that is, If he perceive by the crackling or noise, the water ready to
break up, he conjectures that the Ice is not thick enough, but weak and
slender, and therefore he stays from going any further: And lest he should not
safely return, he comes back upon it; but if he perceive it not to crackle, he
passes on boldly, as out of danger. What may we see in all these passages in
particulars, but the truth in the Text, there is an (...), an unwillingnesse in
the Creature to be subject to vanity or corruption.

I shall but add one instance more in fishes, and so shut up the Point, upon
which I had not dwelt so long, save only that I would illustrate the truth of
this point in hand.

It is commonly observed in Fishes, that in great Winds they have always a
care by natures instinct, to swim against them, if they be occasioned to
move, especially in violent water, or swift and heady currents, and any
considerable distance, lest if the winds in their swimming coming behind them
should by the violence of the waves, and water, beat up, and beat off their
scales, ruffle their Fins, and often clash (in Branchias) into their Gills,
which would much vex and disquiet them; but if they be afraid, or in eminent
danger, then will they move contrary to their natural bent, though with danger
of their lives. I have observed in fishes of small quantity, and such as
usually shove, shoale, or swim together by many in a company, that even in a
calm season, and quiet current, yet when they have come to the fall of a stream
or break of water, they have all together made head against the stream, and
suffered the water to drive them down backward. So of this no more. I now come
to the way how they became subject to vanity, as thus, First, if we consider
the meritorious cause, why they were made thus subject to vanity, it was the
sin, or disobedience of man, as in part you have heard.

After the whole creation was finished, God made him lord of the sublunarie
creatures, but he soon abused the honor conferred upon him; true it is, Psalm.
49. Psalm. 49. last.
last, Homo cum esset in honor, Man in honor had no understanding, but is
become like unto the Beasts that Perish, as it has been vulgarly read, and
then some of the Ancients have understood it of man in the estate of innocence.
Aug. in locum.
August. in locum, Factus ad imaginem et similitudinem Dei homo praelatus
jumentis, etc. God having made man according to his own Image or similitude,
and preferred him before the Beasts of the field, and, Fecit Deus Hominem cui
servirent jumenta, made him such as that the Beasts should do him service; yet,
non intellexit, he understood not, he well considered not this height of honor
in which God had placed him, but being made in the Image of God, he made
himself like unto the Beasts that perish: For though superstites a morte erunt
eorum animae, id minime obstabit quo minus in aeternum dedecus mors ipsos
demergat, as Calvin notes, Although their souls remain after death, yet that
hinders not but that death may swallow them down into eternal shame and
infamy. But if the place be well pondered, it will rather make for man,
indefinite, indefinitely; not Adam in particular, but what man soever. The
Original is thus, Adam. bicar viso jabin
(...) Homo in excellentia, et non intelligit, A man in his excellency, and yet
understands not. Iunius, Iunius.
Homo qui est in precio, neque intelligens, A man that is in esteem, and
understands not; bicar
for the word (...) comes of the root (...) preciosum esse, in honor, jacar
gloria, et pretio esse, To be precious, or of great value, to be in honor, in
glory, or renown, or account; a man that is such and not considerate of it,
similis fit jumentis quae intereunt, may be said indeed to be like unto the
Beasts that perish. Though the Lord had said to man, Psa. 32.9.
Psalm. 32.9. Ne estote ut Equus et Mulus, expertes intelligentiae, Be not as
the Horse or the Mule, which have no understanding: yet a man in honor, and
not understanding it, is like unto these, Propriam dignitatem non advertit, nec
rationaliter vixit, nec Coelestem et Angelicam beatitudinem concupivit, sed in
rebus temporalibus, at que carnalibus se immersit, nec per rationem passionibus
suis praevaluit, Dyonys Carthus. in loc.
as Dionysius Carthasianus in locum: He considers not his own dignity, nor
guides his life by the rule and law of reason, nor covets after that Heavenly
and Angelical happiness, but plungeth himself in the carnal cares and
affairs of this life, and makes not use of his reason that God has given him,
to subdue or control his affections.

God gave Adam a Law in Paradise, where he had put him, Gerard. Vossius These.
Theol. These. 1. de primo pecc. Adami, and potuit, and facile potuit evitare.
and when he had made him able to keep it, and was no way necessitated, or
straightened to break it, but willingly failed in his obedience, he had voluntatem
a Deo, but he had abusum voluntatis a Diabolo, defectum a seipso, He had his
Will from God, but the abuse of it from the Devil, and the defect of it from
himself. Aug. in Enchirid. ad Leur.
See August. in Enchirid. ad Laurentium, chap. 27. Praeceptum sui Creatoris
(quod custodire facillime posset) sua male utens potestate calcavit, etc. The
command of his Maker which he then might most easily have kept, by the ill use
of his power he trod under foot. The Will which he had of God was good. Aug.
lib. 5. de civit. Dei. c. 9.
August. lib. 5. de Civit. Dei, cap. 9. Malae voluntates a Deo non sunt, quia
contra naturam sunt quae ab illo, etc. Ill Wills are not of God, because they
are contrary to that nature which God created good in man. Aug lib 83. qu. qu.
3.
August. lib. 83. qu. qu. 3. Est vitium voluntatis quo homo fit deterior, Its
the fault of man's own Will, by which he became worse then God made him: for,
voluntas potuit deficere a nullo incitante, multo magis a Diabolo seducente; A
created Will might fail though none incited it, much more when the Devil
enticed it. Gregory, Deus Author est naturae, non culpae, God is the Author of
our nature, Gregor. magn. lib. 19. Moral. cap. 21. Aquin in 1, 2. qu 80. art,
1. in corpore.
not of our sin. Moral. lib. 29. cap. 21. Aquinas in 1, 2. Sum. qu. 80.
artic. 1. In corpore: proprium principium actus peccati, voluntas est, etc. The
Will is the proper principle, Pet Martyr. clas. 1 locor. com. cap. 14. sect. 12.
or cause of sin. Peter Martyr, class prima locorum communium, cap. 14.
sect. 12. Malarum ergo actionum causa deficiens quaerenda est, et inter caetera
pravi affectus, et inclinationes reperientur, etc. istae causae sunt interiores
peccati, sed potius deficientes quant efficientes; A deficient cause is to be
sought for of evil deeds, and amongst the rest, our depraved affections, and
inclinations, will be found to have an hand in them, these are more inward
causes of sin, but rather deficient, than efficient causes. Much like
Augustine lib. 12. de Civitate Dei, cap. 7. Aug. lib. 12. de civit. Dei. c. 7.
Mala res non habet causam efficientem, sed deficientem, That which is evil
has not an efficient but a deficient cause. True, if we speak properly, for
causa efficiens proprie dicta non producit effectum toto genere a se diversum:
(as the Logic Schools informs us) An efficient cause properly so called,
cannot produce an effect in its whole kind differing from it self, and there
fore produces an entative effect. And we are taught in Metaphysics, quod
bonum et ens convertuntur, Every Being is good. And e contra, for Entia per se
mala non sunt, sed entium defectus: Beeings of themselves are not evil, but
the defects of Beeings. The Devil though he be a cause of sin, yet is he not
causa propria absoluta, Diabolus non est causa absoluta and immediata, peccati.
et plenaria peccati nostri, ac immediata; The Devil is not the proper,
absolute, plenarie, and immediate cause of sin, for nothing can properly be
said to be the cause of sin, but that which can movere voluntatem ad agendum,
move the Will inwardly to sin, which sin being a defect, an evil, God
cannot be the cause of it thus; for Deus non irritat voluntatem ad peccandum
infundendo malitiam aliquam in voluntatem ipsam, Deus non infundit maliti. am
in volunt.
for God never infuseth any wickedness into the Will it self, by which he
might provoke it to evil, but failing from its obedience, it inclinatively
moves to sin. Sola voluntas hominis est direct causa peccati ejus, Only the
Will of man (says Aquinas) in the place before named, Aquin. loco quo sup^a.
is directly the cause of his sin. Now the Proper and immediate cause is
such, quod ea posita necessario sequitur effectus, if that be put to work, the
effect does necessarily follow; but the Devil cannot always in his
suggestions cause them necessarily to take effect, but he comes to have his
suggestions executive, Mediante corrupta nostra voluntate, Our corrupt Will
giving way to them, and coming between the suggestion and the sin. And
howsoever the motus Physicus, or natural motion of the Will, in quantum
simpliciter motus, for so far forth as its considered as a motion, be of God;
yea, and the motus moralis tum in quantum ad bonum: The moral motion also is
of God, so far forth as its moved to God. Melchior. Canus, lib. 2. Melchior.
Canus lib. 2. loc. com. cap. 4.
locor. commun. cap. 4. Causa moralis non agat nisi per voluntatem movens, id
est movendo voluntatem, A moral cause, works not but by moving of the Will.
And Aquinas in his 1, Aquin. 1.2. qu. 80 art. 1.
2. qu. 80. art. 1. In corpore nihil inclinat interius voluntatem ad volendum,
nisi vel ipsa voluntas, vel Deus, Nothing inwardly inclines the Will to will,
but either the Will it self, or else God. The Will it self quantum ad
exercitium actus secundum rationem finis, For as much as concerns the exercise
of its act, and in regard of the end.

But it may be objected, that the Will cannot be both movens and mota, the
thing moving, and the thing moved; I answer; eodem respectu, in the same
respect it cannot. Non omne movens est actu quod movetur, est in potentia. I
answer, quod potentia voluntatis est sibi semper actu praesens, sed ista
potentia quae semper sibi sit actu praesens, non semper est potentia actualis,
The power of the Will is always indeed present to it, but that power of it
that is thus present, is not always actuated, actus volitionis quo vult finem,
et ea quae sunt ad finem, non semper est sibi praesens, The act of volition for
the end, and those Mediums that are conducible to it, are not always present
to it.

The Will as it is moved, may be said to be in potentia, in regard of these,
and yet has potentiam actu sibi praesentem, qua seipsam moveat, A power
actually in Being, by which it may move it self, ipsa movet seipsum in quantum
per hoc quod vult finem, reducit seipsam ad volendum ea quae sunt ad finem, hoc
autem non potest facere nisi consilio medianti. So Aquinas 1.2. qu. 9. art. 4.
Aquin. 1.2. qu. 9. Art. 4. in corpore.
in corpore: It moves it self in as much as thus, in that it would the end, it
reduces it self to will those things that are conducible to the end, and this
it cannot do except by counsel coming between. Cajet. com in locum.
Cajetan thus, Semper cum voluntas move^ se utitur seipsa, Always when the
Will moves it self, it makes use of it self, applicando se ad volendum, vel
nolendum, By the applying of it self to be willing or nilling: but Principium
motionis quoad exercitium actus, est ex fine, quia omne agens agit propter
finem appetitum, The principle of the motion it regard of the exercise of the
act of the Will is taken from the end, because every agent works for the end
desired of it? for prima inter causas est causa finalis, The final cause is
the first amongst the causes, namely in intention; and we are taught from the
Logicians, quod finis perse and sua natura tantum est bonus; That the end of it
self, and own nature is only good; whence we say usually, Finis and bonum
convertuntur, The end, and that which is good, are things convertible; and the
object of the Will we know is bonum, that which is good. Yet it may be
objected, that finis non est actus, qui sit principium agendi, but finis est
(propter quem) principio agendi agens agit, The end is not that act, that is
the beginning of the doing of a thing, but the end is that, for which the great
Agent works from the Principle of acting. To which it may be answered, that
finis ut objectum voluntatis est ratio agendi tali potentiae cujus est objectum
proprium; That the end considered as an object of the Will, may be a reason of
the working of that faculty, whereof it is the proper object. Thomas, Thom.
1.2. qu. 9. art. 4. respond. ad 1.
prima primae qu. 9. art. 4. respond. ad primum, Vnde motus voluntarius etsi
habeat principium proximum intrinsecum, tamen principium primum est ab extra;
The voluntary motion of the Will, although it have the next principle
intrinsecall, or within it self, yet notwithstanding the first principle is
from without it. Thus we may see that the Will has Principium internum, et
formale suae motionis, The Will has an internal, and formal Principle of its
motion. See for the like Scaliger de subtilitate contra Cardan. Scaliger.
exercit contra Hier Card. 307. sect. 25.
exercitat. 307. sect. 25. in ipso limin. Aquinas prima secundae quaest. 9.
artic. 6. motus voluntatis est ab intrinseco, Aluar de auxiliis great. lib. 9.
disp. 85. sect. 3. Ostendens quod lib. arbitrium subordinatur gratiae efficaci,
etc. subordinatur Deo ut causae priori non so lum suadenti vel moraliter
moventi interius, sed tanquam causae vere efficienti, etc.
The motion of the Will is from an intrinsecall principle.

Secondly, God inclines the Will morally to good, yet inclines it freely
according to its nature, suasione, but not suasione tantum, quamvis non
excludit, quia inserviat ad movendam voluntatem humanam ad agendum congruenter
naturae suae libere, et deliberate, By swasion, but not by it only, although
it be not excluded, seeing it may serve to move the Will of man to act
congruously to its nature; deliberately and freely, but motio sola suasoria non
est motio vera, realis, ac immediata, sed remota, et quasi metaphorica: Guil.
Twiss. in his vindic. Gratiae, lib. 2. c. 15. digres. 3. sect. 2.
[as acute Dr. Twisse in his Vindiciae gratiae] A motion of the Will only by
way of swasion is not a true, real, and immediate motion, but a remote, and as
it were a metaphorical motion; for swasion works but per modum proponentis
objectum, ut Bellarmin', et objectum, quantumvis idonee propositum, non agit
genere causae efficientis, sed finalis, alliciendo tantum, non vere, et
realiter in ipsam voluntatem operando; at gratiadei est efficax, etc. agit
potenter, naturae tamen uniuscujusque convenienter: it works but by way of
proposal of the Object, as Bellarmine has it; and the object, although it be
fitly proposed, works not in the kind or nature of an efficient cause but
final only, by way of enticing or alluring, not truly and really working upon
the will, or in having efflux, or operation into the Will it self; but the
grace of God is effectual, etc. and works powerfully, yet agreeable to the
nature of every thing. Aqu. 1.2 qu. 9, art. 4. respond ad 3.
Aquinas prima secundae, quest. 9. art. respondend. ad tert. confesses, Aluar
de auxilas great. li^. 3. disp. 18. sect. 3. Necessarius est previus Dei
influxus, in ipsas causas quo ad operandum moveantur, etc.
(not only that God moves the Will, sicut universalis motor, ad universale
objectum voluntatis quod est bonum etc.) sed tamen interdum specialiter movet
aliquos ad aliquid determinate volendum quod est bonum, sicut in his quos movet
per gratiam; As an universal Mover to the universal or general object of the
Will, which is good, etc. but sometime notwithstanding he specially moves some
men to will determinately, that which is good, as it is with those that he
moves by grace; but God moves no man to evil, (formally so called) as it is
(...), or (...), iniquitas or inordinatio, iniquity or disorder. Deus volens
iniquitatem tu non es, Thou art not a God that wills, or takes pleasure in
wickedness. God wills it not voluntate approbationis et effectionis, Paraeus
in castig, Bell. de amiss gratiae and statu peccati.
as Paraeus in his Castigation of Bellarmine, De amissione gratiae, et statu
peccati, With an approbative and an effective will, he wills not evil. Aquin:
Aqu. 1.2. qu. 49. art. 2. respond. ad 2.
in his prima secundae qu. 49. art. 2. resp: ad secundum: effectus causae
secundae deficientis reducitur in causam primam non deficientem, Aluer. de
auxilii^ gratiae l. 3. disp. 18. sect. 21
quantum ad id quod habet entitatis, et perfectionis, non autem quantum ad id
quod habet de defectu, The effect of the second cause deficient, is so far
forth reduced to the first cause not deficient, as it has any thing of
Entitie, or perfection; not in regard of that which is defective in it, for
that is to be imputed to the second cause, Actio non est mala in ratione Entis,
etc. sed mala moraliter, and defectiva, sive in quantum est peccatum, and sub
hac ratione solum reducitur ad causam deficient.
as is claudication in motion: the motion is from the motive power in the
creature, but claudication in the motion is a curvitate cruris; from some lame
leg of the thing moved; thus conconceive of the Will of man as it is a Will,
and taken as a depraved Will, and then, Paraeus in cacastig, Bell. de amiss.
lib. cap 5
as Pareus in castigat. Bellarmine, de amission: gratiae, etc. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Per se et proxime actionis malae causa semper est mala hominis, vel Sathanae
voluntas: The evil will of man, or of the Devil is by it self the next, or
nearest cause of an evil deed. For I conceive him to take the word [action
simply there, for the aberration of of the action, or the evil in the action.
And the Devil cannot compel or move the Will to sin, without the concurring
willingness of it self, Aqu. speaks most excellently to this point in his
1.2. qu. 80. art. 1. Aqu. 1.2 qu. 80, art. 1. in corp.
in corp. Diabolus non sit causa peccati direct, vel sufficienter, sed solum
per modum persuadentis, vel proponentis appetibile. The Devil cannot directly,
or sufficiently be said to be the cause of sin, but by the way of persuading
or proposing such objects as are appetible, or such as we affect, and so one
may also be the cause of sin to another. The Devil did propose the forbidden
fruit, as objectum appetibile cum intention tentandi, As an appetible object,
with an intent to tempt our first Parents to eat it, and so to sin, and that
he might the better and more easily prevail, he persuades them sub specie
alicujus boni, under the show of some good, that should redound unto them by
it, Genesis 3.5. Eritis tanquam Dij, Ye shall be as Gods, etc. Yet, as Augustine
has it in Psalm. 91. Though the Devil has astutiam suadendi, August. in
Psalm. 91.
yet he has not potentiam cogendi, he has craft and cunning enough to
persuade, but he has not power, or strength to compel: voluntas non
necessario movetur ab objecto appetibili proposito, but the causa immediata, et
interior peccati est voluntas: The Will of man is the immediate cause of sin,
and the inward moving to it. Now indeed apprehensio partis sensitivae, et
appetitus sensitivus esse potest causa remota peccati, nam appetitus sensitivus
aliquando moveat appetitum intellectivum, qui est voluntas; The apprehension of
the sensitive part, and the sensitive appetite may be a remote cause of sin;
for the sensitive appetite may sometime move the appetite intellective, which
is the Will; yet it moves it not necessario, necessarily, but ex part objecti
sub ratione boni, by way of an object, and under the show of that which is
good. Jam. 1.14. Iam. 1.14.
Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed: now,
non abstraheretur a concupiscentia, nisi moveretur voluntas ab appetitu
sensitivo, qui seeds est concupiscentiae, it should not be drawn away of lust,
except it were moved from the sensitive appetite, which is the Seat of
concupiscence. Aug. in Ps. 58.
And Augustine says of the Devil in Psalm 58. Certe princeps est omnium
peccatorum, certe seductor est ad peccandum, Truly the Devil is the Prince of
all sin, surely he is the seducer to it, but we must consider how, and that
is indirecte et occasionaliter, indirectly and occasionally, and so he may be
said to have been causa omnium nostrorum peccatorum in quantum induxit primum
hominem ad peccandum, ex cujus peccato in tantum vitiata est humana natura ut
omnes ad peccandum proclives sumus: He may be said indeed to have been the
cause of all our sins, in as much as he allured the first man to sin, from
whose sin our humane nature comes to be so much defiled, that by reason of it
we are all prone to sin.

If any object, quod sicut Deus movet ad consilium bonum and honestum, et per
hoc est direct causa bont, ita Diabolus movet ad consilium malum, et per hoc
Diabolus sit direct causa peccati, thus, as God moves to that counsel which
is good and honest, and by this means is directly the cause of good; so on the
other side, the Devil moves to that counsel which is evil; and if one by
that means may be said [directly] to be the cause of sin, to this receive
this answer, that God so causes that which is good, Vt interius movet
voluntatem, quod Diabolus non potest: differunt ergo in modo causandi. God
inwardly moves the Will, as Phil. 2.13. Phil. 2.13.
It is God that [works in you] both (...) velle, and (...) perficere, Deus non
tantum habet fluxum si multaneum cum voluntate, sed etiam fluxum praecedaneum
in voluntatem
to will and to do, etc this the Devil cannot do, as I have shown: therefore
they differ in the manner of causation, God doing it interne movendo, by moving
the Will inwardly, secundum conditionem, according to the nature and condition
of it; the Devil externe suadendo, and appetibilia proponendo, by externally
persuading, and proposal of appetible objects. Gerard. Voss. These. Theol.
These. 4. de primo pec. Adami.
To which Gerard Vossius accords, These. Theolog. These. 4. de primo peccato
Adami, nec necessitas ulla a Diabolo fuit, quia consilium dare potuit, cogere
non potuit. The Devil did not any way necessitate Adam to sin; he could
counsel him, but he could not compel him: Aug. lib, 1. c. 13 de civit. Dei.
which assertion he strengthens from August. in lib. 14. de Civit. Dei, cap.
13. Diabolus hominem non cepisset, nisi jam ille sibi ipsi placere cepisset:
The Devil had never so catched and deceived man, if he himself had not first
begun to please himself in what he heard. And the Fathers falling upon this
point, send their judgments all down one Channel: to quote so many as may
evidence the point, and such as are most pregnant for it. Aug. de correptione,
and gratia, etc. cap. 11,
August. de correptione and gratia ad Valent. c. 11. Acceperat posse sed si
vellet, non habuit velle quod posset, nam si habuisset perseverasset; posset
enim perseverare etiam si vellet, quod ut nollet, de libero descendit arbitrio:
He had received an ability to have stood if he had would, but he had not a
willingness to do what he could; for had he been willing to have so willed, he
had still persevered; for he might have persevered in his (created Estate) if
he had would, the which that he would not, descended from his own free will:
for as the same godly and learned Father, says, l. 3. contra Iulaianum; c. 5.
Aug. cont. Iul. lib. 3. cap. 5.
sicut voluntas mala ipsa est origo peccati, id est, a voluntate mala peccatum
exortum est, and peccati origo voluntas mala est, ita nisi voluntas mala, non
est cujusquam ulla origo peccati, etc. as an evil will is the original of
sin, that is to say, from an evil will sin did arise, and an evil will is
the beginning of sin; so except the will were evil, there should not be the
beginning of any sin. Tertullian lib. 2. adversus Martionem, cap. 8. Tertul
lib. 2. advers. Marc. cap. 8.
Sicut Deus homini vitae statum induxit, ita homo sibi mortis statum attraxit,
and hoc non per infirmitatem, etc. As God brought man into the state of Life,
so man attracted to himself the state of death, but not by infirmity, etc. for
we have heard how able his Maker had made him; so that this defect for want of
ability given him, could not be imputed to his Maker, Chrysostom. in Genesis 3.
Chrysostom. in Genesis 3. Hom. 15.
Hom. 15. Nusquam necessitas, nusquam violentia, He was no where necessitated
to sin, nor from any place had he any violence offered him. And the same
father in Hom. de interdictione arboris ad Adam, utcumque habuit in potestate
and Deo parere, quod noluit, and Diabolo non consentire, quod voluit, He had
both in his power, either to obey God, and he would not; or to consent to the
Devil, and that would he. Fulgentius de Incarnatione, and gratia, to the same
purpose, chap. 6. he was so created ut bonum facere in propria facultate
haberet, and male, si vellet: He had it in his power to have done good if he
would, or to have done evil: now he that God had made thus able to stand,
could cast no just fault upon his Maker; if he did fall, his failing was from
his own mutable Will, his Maker had not promised to continue him immutably
good, without any condition, and himself implored not his aid in his
temptation: but not relying upon the truth of God, he was enticed, willingly to
give way to his Wife and the Devil: so that from the truth of this point, so
far discovered unto us, we may by the way discover three errors to be
confuted.

First, that of the Manichees, Manichees
qui crediderunt peccatum omne esse a necessitate naturae, quia Deus
coagmentavit hominem ex bona, malaque substantia; and that sanatio, was per
separationem malae substantiae, non per sanationem vitiosi accidentis, etc.
That God compacted or joined man together of a good and ill substance, and so
they did believe that all sin was from the neccessitie of nature, and that the
healing of man of this hurt was by separation of the evil substance from the
good, not by curing of his vicious qualities. Augustine has somewhat tending
to this purpose, Aug. lib. de haeres. c. 46.
lib. de haeresib. chap. 46. Iste duo principia inter se diversa, etc.

Pricillianists.
Secondly, that of the Pricillianists, those Heretics did affirm, unumquemque
hominem nasci sub constitutionibus Stellarum, and hoc in adjutorium sui erroris
assumit, etc. sed paulo post neque enim propter stellas homo, sed stellae
propter hominem factae sunt. Greg. Hom. 10 in Evang.
Greg. Hom. 10. in Evanglia, they held that every man was born under the power
and ordering of the Stars, and this they affirm to help on their aberrations,
etc. but a little after (says Gregory) man was not made for the Stars, but
the Stars for man. The like was affirmed of them by August. lib. de haeres.
cap. 70. Aug. lib de haeres. cap. 70.
Astruunt etiam fatalibus astris homines colligatos; They say that men are
bound to do this, or that, by the power of the Stars. And I cannot well omit
the explication of that passage by learned and laborious Danaeus, Lambertus
Danaeus in Aug. de haeres.
to whom I remember Reverend Beza gives this testimony, that he was homo
incredibilis diligentiae, A man of incredible pains, study, or diligence. They
affirmed (says he) Invitos nos malos fieri and peccare, and vi syderum
coactos: non sponte, neque animi electione. Hoc a stoicis sumptum, qui peccata
hominum fato suo tribuunt, sed plane falsum, nam perditio nostra a nobis ipsis
est, non a stellis, and earum vi, and impulsu: that is, That we were made evil
against our wills, and compelled to sin by the power of the Stars, not of our
own accord, or Election. This opinion, says he, they had from the Stoics,
which attributed men's sins to their inevitable destiny, which verily is
false, for our destruction is of our selves, not from the Stars, or from any
force or impulsion in them; Johan Damas. lib. 2. de Orthod fide, c. 7.
for the which he further referres himself to Damascen. lib. 2. de orthodoxa
fide, cap. 7. Thus would these have excused men in their sinning, as
necessitated thereunto by inevitable and impulsive Fate, or by the working and
power of the Stars in their Wills, and over them.

Georg. Pauli Cracoviensis minist.
Thirdly, that of Georgius Pauli a minister of Cracovia, who, as Wigandus
testifies, lib. de Deo contra novos Arrianos, taught, quod Adam and Eva nunquam
habuissent, unde stare potuissent in statu innocentiae: That our first Parents
never had that strength and power in the state of innocence, by which they had
been able to have stood, which is a very false assertion, as has been made
fully to appear. So then, man thus sinning willingly and freely, and in abusing
of that ability which God had given him in his Creation, he might justly put
upon him such punishments as his sins deserved. Yea true, but that the
Creature should feel the effect and misery of this sin of man, from that you
have heard, they were a verse by nature; yet the misery, that they were liable
to, was but temporal, but man their Master that offended, he was liable to
eternal.

Nay, and not only the Creature was thus troubled, but the eternal Son of
God was troubled also for the sin of man: when he took man's nature upon him,
John 12.27. John 12 27.
Anima mea turbata est, My soul is troubled. Yea, and no marvel, for Luke
12.50. Luke 12.50.
I have a Baptism to be baptized with, (which was the Baptism of Blood, and
of his Passion,) (...), quomodo coarctor, as the vulgar has it, How am I
straightened? constringor, as Beza, how am I bound together; multum premor, as the
Syriack version by Tremelius, I am much pressed until it be ended. Phil. 2.6,
7, 8.
And Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God. But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form
of a servant, and was made in the likeness men, [yet without sin] Hebr. 4.15.
Heb. 4.15.
] And being found in the fashion of Man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient to death, even the death of the Cross; that painful, shameful,
lingering, and accursed death: But here was a difference, Christus passus est
quia voluit, Christ suffered because he was willing. John 10.18. John 10 18.
no man could take away his life from him, but he laid it down of himself, etc.
He was (...), willing to do it. But the Creature in its kind was not so. We
have heard of an (...), an unwillingnesse in it, it was made subject to vanity,
but not willingly.

Again, though Christ were willing to subject himself to infinitely more
misery, yet it was impossible for him to be subject to vanity, neither as man
saw he any corruption, he had none in soul, and so had none in body. Psalm. 16.
Psalm. 16, 10.
10. Thou will not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Act. 2.26, 27. Act.
2.26, 27.
My flesh also shall rest in hope, because thou will not leave my soul in Hell,
neither will thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Yea, but Christ was
innocent, how should he be come justly to suffer for the nocent? To which it
may be answered, First, that he was willing so to do, (as you have heard,) he
had compassion of mankind, and would not that they should utterly and totally
perish; and therefore, though innocent in himself, yet no wrong done to him
from his Father, for he that knew no sin was content to be made sin for us,
2 Cor. 5. last.
2 Cor. 5. last, He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin. Sin
for us, that is, a sacrifice for sin, for us. Hostiam and victimam pro nobis,
ipsi enim imposuit nostrum reatum, Gualt. Hom. 24. in loc.
as Gualt. Hom. 24. in locum: He imposed the guiltiness of our sin upon him,
that knew no sin of himself. Pro nobis fecerit mortem obite, perinde ac si
peccator esset is, and maleficus, ct. in lacum.
as Theaphilact in locum, He made him to undergo death for us, as if he had
been a sinner, and an evil doer. Gal. 3.13. Gal. 3.13.
He was made a curse for us, for its written, Deuteronomy. 21. last, Deuteronomy. 21. last.
He that is hanged, is accursed of God. In Gal. 3.10. Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree. This curse of God Christ was
willing to undergo, to free us from the eternal curse of God, which man's sin
had deserved. Esa. 53.3, 4. Esaias 53.3, 4.5, 10.
He is despised and rejected of men. Vir dolorum, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief, etc. Surely, he has born our grief, and carried our
sorrows, etc. Verse. 5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised
for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. And Verse 10. When thou shall make his soul an offering
for sin; in this sense he was made sin for us, and thus became Author of
Salvation to all that obey him. Heb. 5.9.
Heb. 5.9. But not every one who walk according to their own lusts, and then
tell of Christ, of the merits of Christ, the mercies of Christ, and the like;
have Christ often in their mouths, but seldom in their minds; often in their
words, but seldom in their works; such walk not as they have Christ for an
example, but as enemies to the Cross of Christ.

2. As he was willing so likewise he was able to undergo the punishment for us.
Thou have laid help upon one that is mighty, so he did indeed, when he laid it
upon Christ. Acts 2.24. Acts 2.24.
It was not possible that he should be holden of the pains of death, John 2.19.
John 2.19. Solvite templum hoc, etc. Destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it up again, for I have power, I have ability and strength so to
do. John 10.18. John 10.28.
Potestatem habeo deponendi eam, and potestatem habeo rusus eam assumendi, I
have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up again.

3. And lastly, hoc praesupposito, this being praesupposed, that man should not
be saved, except Gods infinite justice was satisfied, and actually in the
fullness of time was to be done, then none but one of an infinite value, as
was his Son, could have made this satisfaction, or have paid this price; no
mere Creature, Man, or Angel could have done it. So that being brought to this
point, though Christ was innocent, yet was it thought fitting in the wisdom of
his Father, that he should suffer. Romans 3.25. Romans 3.25.
God has set him forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood.

Secondly, though the Creature was innocent, and kept that station wherein God
had set it, and placed it, and was not Created in any gift of reason, by which
it was enabled to receive, conceive, or obey any positive Law, yet was God an
absolute Lord over it; and having neither determined nor made any absolute
promise to the contrary, might dispose of it, as he in his great and
overruling Wisdom thought fitting, and God having given it to man for a
Possession in the state of innocence; when man sinned, God (as you have heard)
did not only punish the person that offended, but his Possession also: and
being absolute Lord over the Creature, he was not bound to conserve it in that
integrity in which he first created it; but as it was subject to mutability in
it self, so likewise might he change it, as in his wisdom he would. And though
the Creature [as we have heard] had not propensity to be changed from the
better to the worse, yet the sovereign Lord of it can be touched with no
injustice in making this change; and as the creature was punished, and made
subject to vanity for the sin of man, so man is in some sort punished by the
Creatures, some of them run wild, live out of his compass, and will not
obey him; other some obey him, but by constraint, and unwillingly: others rise
up against him, to destroy him, some by venom, and some by violence; and many
times God arms the Creature against man, to revenge himself of his
disobedience, and how often have we instance of this in the Book of God? yea,
even by insensible Creatures, as the Elements, either Fire, Water, Earth, or
Air: by Fire, as, Genes. 19.24. Genesis 19.24.
Brimstone and Fire were rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 7.4.
out of Heaven. By Water, Genesis 7.4. I will cause it to rain upon the earth
forty days, and forty nights, and every living substance that I have made,
will I destroy from the face of the earth. By the Earth, Numb. 16.32. Number.
16.32, 33.
The Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their Houses, and all
the men that appertained to Korah, and all their Goods: and Verse 33. the earth
closed upon them, and they perished from among the Congregation. By the Air
corrupted, Deuteronomy. 28.22.
Deuteronomy. 28.22. where amongst other Plagues God threatened to plague the
disobedient Israelites with Blastings, Aere corrupto, as the Vulgar reads it,
with corrupt Air. Thus we see how by all the Elements God can punish man.

If we take a short view of the sensible Creatures that are made subject to
vanity, by reason of the sin of man, we shall find them to appear in a great
number, (letting pass the noisome qualities of diverse Herbs and Plants) that
God has often armed with vengeance to punish man, whose sin occasioned the
bringing of them within the common course of corruption. First let us begin
with the Lion, which is accounted the King of the Beasts of the field, and
stoutest of any. When David (let me say) in carmine lugubri, or in his Elegies
for Saul and Jonathan, would much magnify them, he said, 2 Samuel 1.23. 2 Samuel
1.23.
that they were Leonibus fortiores, stronger then Lions. 2 Samuel 17.10. 1 Samuel
17.10.
when Hushai would set out the valiant among the soldiers of Absolon, he
says, And he also which is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a Lion,
etc. By these God has punished man, whom he once made Lord over them. 1 Kings
13.24,
1 Kings 13.24. a Lion met the disobedient Prophet, and slew him. 2 Kings 17.25.
2 Kings 17.25. when the King of Babylon had carried the Israelites Captives,
and had sent the Gentiles into their Possessions, so it was in the beginning of
their dwelling there, that they feared not the Lord, therefore the Lord sent
Lions among them, which slew some of them: So that the Idolatrous Gentiles felt
the smart of Gods revenging Hand within his Land, as well as did the Idolatrous
Jews: and ignorance of worshipping the true God, proved no shelter to save them
from his stroke. These instances are remarkable out of the holy Story, how many
more might I add out of humane Stories, written by men of great judgment and
credit, to show how God in other ages has done the like? Sebast. Munst. in
Cosmogr. de terris Asiae Majoris lib. 5. in ipsa calce.
Sebastian Munster in his Cosmographie writing de terris Asiae Majoris, tells
us of the City of Sana, and the Countries thereabout, and that in the Inlands
more remote from the Sea, there is an exceeding high Mountain, and a large,
abounding with all manner of wild Beasts, and amongst the rest, Palantur ibi
complusculi Leones, hominibus supra modum infensi, idque efficit ut illac tutum
iter non pateat, nisi centum simul viatoribus, qui frequentiori numero
perterreant feras: that is, there are Lions there in great abundance, wandering
and ranging abroad, and are above measure moved with anger against men, or do
hate them, in so much that no journey can safely be taken thither under the
number of an hundred men in a company, that by their multitude they may make
those wild Beasts afraid. And how obvious in Histories are many such passages?

Secondly, the Bear, who is a cruel Beast, and a raging in anger, yea such,
that when God himself would express the height of rage, he instanceth in this
Beast. 2 Samuel 17.8.
2 Samuel 17.8. when Hushai would express to Absalom the rage and fury of
David, and his men of war, he told him they were mighty men, and chafed in
their minds as a Bear robbed of her Whelps in the field, or in saltu, in the
Forest, as some read, the which if the greatest Potentate amongst the sonns of
Adam, had taken by Birth, Blood, or Command, she would fly upon him without
fear, and tear him in pieces, if his strength were not able to withstand her.
Prove. 17.12.
Prove. 17.12. Let a Bear robbed of her Whelps rather meet a man, than a fool in
his folly. Hosea 13.8. I will meet them, Hosea 13.8.
as a Bear that is bereaved of her Whelps, (says the Lord, when he would
express his fury against them) and will rend the Caul of their heart, and
there will I devour them like a Lion. As if he should have said, I will do it
fiercely and furiously. 2 King. 2.23, 24. 2 King. 2. two last.
when Elisha was going to Bethel, as he was going up by the way, there came
little Children out of the City and mocked him, saying, Go up thou bald-head,
go up thou bald-head* These Children were the Children of Idolatrous Parents,
that used to go to Bethel to transgress, as Iunius thinks; Iun annotat in
locum. Osiand.
and Osiander supposes them to have flocked together out of the City to some
convenient place for their puerile recreations, (as now we see Children every
where do) and seeing the old Prophet traveling by the ordinary way, they began
to mock him, and reproached not only his person, but his Office, therefore the
Prophet [no doubt but moved by God that was offended] cursed these ill-taught,
and wicked Children in the Name of the Lord, not out of any private spleen, and
there came two Shee-Bears out of the Wood, and tare forty and two Children of
them. And many other Countries have also been infested by them: and it appears
by the speech of Jacob, when he saw the Coat of Ios ph, that mankind was then
molested by cruel Brutes; and so it appears by the consultation of his
Brethren. For when they were consulting about the killing of him, and how they
might frame some credible excuse to their father when they had done. Genesis
37.20. Genesis 37.20, 33
Let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say, some evil Beast
has devoured him. As if they had said, This our father will believe, and we
shall be blameless; and if their Father could be satisfied, it never troubled
them, that we read of at that time, how God should be answered for the effusion
of their Brothers innocent blood, but were framing how to add a lie to
fratricide. Verse. 33.
And Verse 33. you may see how apt Jacob was to believe this, for so soon as he
saw his Sons Coat, he said, Some evil Beast has devoured him, Joseph no
doubt is rent in pieces. Peretius in locum.
And Pererius notes upon the place, Terra enim Syria, cujus pars est Palestina,
abundat feris, maxim vero Vrsis and Leonibus: 1 Kings 17. 2 Kings 2.
and for this quotes the place, 1 Kings 17. 2 King. 2, which are also quoted
before for the same Point. The Land of Syria, (whereof Palestine was a part)
abounded with wild Beasts, especially with Bears and Lions. Levit. 26.22.
Levit. 26.22. God did threaten them that were his People, even the Seed of
Israel, that if they did despise his Statutes, and disobeyed him, that he would
send wild Beasts among them, which should robb them of their Children, and
destroy their Cattle, and make themselves few in number; and that their
Highways should be desolate, which he also did. And thus though the Creature
was punished by the sin of man, yet we often read how God makes the Creatures
Instruments to punish man, for whose sin they are so punished.

Thirdly, the next eminent enemy of mankind, is the Evening Wolf; Lupus
vespertinus, as Iunius, often mentioned in Holy Writ: Ier. 5.6.
as Jeremiah 5.6. where he threatens, that a Lion out of the Forest shall slay
their great men, and a Wolf of the Evening shall spoil them, etc. which though
it aim at Nebuchadnezzar, and his mighty and terrible Armies, as Verse. 15.
yet because they should symbolize in some qualities with these and the like
Creatures, therefore are they set out under the names of such strong, cruel,
and terrible Creatures, with whom in these things they should symbolize. Thus
Zephanie 3.3. zeph. 3.3.
Her Princes within her are roaring Lions, her Judges are Evening Wolves. And
Habak. 1.8. Habak. 1.8.
Their Horses also are swifter than the Leopards, and fiercer then the Evening
Wolves. Historians write of the Leopard to be so swift, that as the Tiger, when
men steal away her Whelps, being well mounted on the speediest Horses, yet
she pursuing the footsteps, and with that exceeding diligence and velocitie,
they have no way to escape from being overtaken, but by setting of Glasses in
the way, at which when she comes in pursuit, she stands so long in viewing of
her own likeness, that they gather ground, and out-ride her, or else cast down
one of her Whelps in the way, which she taking up, is retarded with its
carryage, and so the Rider is safe: for the which you may read Sebastian
Munster in his Geographie, Sebast Munst. in Cosmogr. lib. 5. cap. 85.
lib. 5. cap. 85. So the Leopard is very swift and active, and therefore the
enemies Horses herein resembled to her. The latter, which is the Wolf, is
called the Evening Wolf, because that is the time when he creeps out of his
lurking places to seek for his Prey. Psalm. 104.20.
Psalm. 104.20. Thou make darkness, and it is night, wherein all the Beasts
of the Forest creep forth: and how this English Island has been infested in
former ages by these cruel Creatures it may appear, in that we read in the
Histories thereof, how some of its Kings, viz, Edgar, have caused their Rents
to have been paid to them in Wolves Skins, to the end they might be hunted
for with more diligence, taken and destroyed: so that this Land [praised be
God] has not of a long season been troubled with these dangerous and
ingluvious Beasts.

Fourthly, the serpent has been an instrument not only to deceive our first
Parents, but to punish many of their posterity. Amos. 9.3. Amos 9.3.
Though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, thence will I
command the Serpent, and he shall bite them. And Numbers 21.6. Number. 21.6.
When the people, which he had brought out of Egypt, murmured against him, he
sent fiery Serpents amongst them, and they bit the people, Deuteronomy. 8.15.
and much people of Jsrael died: and Deu: 8.15. In that terrible wilderness
were fiery Serpents, and Scorpions. Now they are called (fiery Serpents)
either [qualitative] in regard of themselves, because they had much choler, and
fiery nature in them; or else (effective) because they caused burning like
fire, or an extreme and painful heat in the flesh of those whom they had bit,
Lucas Osiand. in locum.
etc. Lucas Osiander thinks they might be so called from both: morsu suo
venenum ealidissimum infectis infunderet, ut pestifero ardore correpti miserime
vitam finirent. that kind of Serpent did in its biting or stinging of them,
infuse a most hot venom into such as they infected, so that being struck into
a grievous heat, they died most miserably. Conrade Pelican thinks, that
ferventi et venenoso anhelitu, they did inficere both corpora et aerem, that
with their fiery hot and venomous breathings, they did not only infect their
bodies, but even the Air also, and no marvel then if many of the people died.

Fifthly and lastly, see how by more contemptible, sensible creatures, he has
punished man (to let all the insensible pass) as if the whole creation, or
every creature were willing to be revenged of him, for the forfeiting of Gods
favor, and the bringing of such a misery, or curse, vanity, or slavery upon
them. To let Ratts and Mice Pass, with which we read whole Islands to have been
vexed and plagued: I will but briefly instance in those poor, base, and
contemptible, and impotent creatures, sensible, which God used in the plaguing
of Egypt.

Exodus 8.3. Exodus 8.3
God threatened to plague Pharaoh with Frogs in such abundance which the
river should bring forth, that they should go up, and come into his house, and
into his bedchamber, and upon his bed (and these in such multitudes, to glore
upon him, as come to devour him, could not but for the present exceedingly
affright him) and these were to do the like in the houses of his servants, and
of his people, and to come up into their Ovens, and into their kneading
troughs: which could not but be loathsome, and troublesome to look upon. See
the like by as contemptible things. Exodus. Exodus 8.17.
8.17. All the dust of the Land became Lice, upon man, and upon Beast, and this
the Magicians of Pharaoh were not able to imitate; God suffered them to go no
further, least they should have been thought to have been as potent to have
done Miracles, as Moses and Aaron. Therefore when they saw this, they confessed
Verse 19. Digitus Dei est hic, Verse. 19.
this is the Finger of God. Yet by as contemptible as these, Exodus 8.24. Exodus
8.24.
He sent such a swarm of Flies into the House of Pharaoh, and into the houses
of his servants and people, that the Land was corrupted by reason of that swarm
of Flies. Yet howsoever God suffered the Magicians to bring out some Froggs, by
the skill of the Devil, in applying natural causes, or at least in outward
show and appearance; yet Non potuerunt abigere, they were not able to drive, or
take away the Froggs, that Moses, and Aaron had brought up, but Pharaoh must be
forced to sue, and seek to them for that. And the Lice you see they could not
produce, that Pharaoh and his servants might the better consider, by what
means they produced the Froggs.

Lastly, See but what he did by the Locusts, Exodus 10.4, 5, 14, 15.
Exodus. 10.4.5.14, 15. Never were any such Locusts seen before, yet so long as
they did but affright, and Plague them, and struck them not dead, in great
number; but struck their Cattle, their grounds, their fruits, afflicted their
bodies, but took of his hand before he took away life, so long, tho they were
afraid of Israel, and could have wished them well quit of them, but yet the
Courtiers and men about the King, were not so vehemently urgent for their
departure, but now when Pharaoh and his peoples wickednesses were at the full,
now God fell upon the Son that sprung out of his own bowels, yea upon him
that should have succeeded him in his Throne, upon all the Noble men's Herds in
Egypt, upon the Gentry and Commonalty, all had a like share, the rich could
not any way avoid the last and most terrible blow, any more then the poorest
beggar. Exodus. 12.29.30.31.32.33, Exodus 12.29, 30, 31, 32.
At midnight the Lord smote all the first born in the Land of Egypt, from the
first born of Pharaoh that sat upon his Throne; Qui sessurus erat super
thronum ejus, as Junius reads, which was about to sit upon his Throne, or was
to succeed Pharaoh in sitting upon his Throne. Others, Versio vulgaris
Qui sedebat in solio ejus which sat on his seat. Some think that his first
born was Adultus, come to be a man, was of ripe years and did sit on the Throne
with him to be accquainted with the government of the Kingdom. Yet if we look
upon the words only Grammatically, and in themselves, without collation with
the contextualls, we may referr the Relative qui, to Pharaoh, ad primogenitum
Pharaonis, qui scilicet Pharao sedebat in solio ejus, id est, in Throno suo
Regali, to the first born of Pharaoh which sat upon his throne, that is, which
Pharaoh himself sat upon his own regal Throne, and not unto his first born. If
you urge the Pronoune [ejus] which sat upon (his) Throne: And would conceive
it spoken as Emphatically, rather then simply declaratively, and so have it to
note out diversity of persons, though the same place. I answer: Though I shall
not oppose this, because I know many learned men do so conceive of it, yet if
we stand upon Grammaticals, I see not how the text will necessitate the reader
to that sense, for (his) may have relation to [Pharaoh] as well as to his
(first born) as I have said. And collate it with the next Pass thus, Vsque ad
primogenitum captivi, qui erat in ergastulo, as Iunius reads; or, usque ad
primogenitum captivae ancillae, quae erat in carcere, as others, unto the
firstborn of the Captive that was in Prison, or in the Dungeon. Now [qui] in
that place may have relation as well to the Captive, as to the firstborn; for
it may be the Captive was in prison, and not his first born. This rather I
conceive to move, to understand it rather of his Son, then himself, according
to our version, or the version of Iunius and Tremelius, because they read qui
s^ssurus, [as you have heard] which was about to sit upon his Throne hereafter.
Or [the Throne] and [his Throne] may be conceived as different, if we read
thus, From the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat upon [the] Throne, then would it
make plainly for Pharaoh, and not for his primo genite. But if upon [his
Throne] as thus, From the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat upon [his Throne,]
then it may make for the primogenite of Pharaoh, as well as for himself, and
let it pass for him. This was, you have heard, the last Plague upon Egypt,
before Isreal's departure; but not upon the Egyptians, God made a full end of
them by water, who would not be warned by all his wonders he wrought upon the
Land. Exo. 14.27, 28
Exodus 14.27, 28. and though all Egypt perished not, yet as many as pursued
Israel, perished in the waters, there was not one of them left. When they
perceived that God took off their Chariot Wheels, and could see and say, Exodus
14.25.
that God fought for Israel against them, Verse. 24.
Exodus 14.25. and this caused them to fear, Verse 24. as the Geneva Translation
has it. Josh. 24.7.
And Joshua 24.7. he put darkness between the Israelites and the Egyptians,
which darkness was a Cloud, black, thick and dark, so that the Egyptians who
marched so fast and furiously with their Horse, could not now see or discern
how far Israel was distant from them, which in humane judgment they might
soon otherwise have overtaken, and destroyed. Josephus.
For Josephus writes, that besides those six hundred chosen Chariots, mentioned
Exodus 14.7. there were 50000 Horse, Exodus 14.7.
besides 200000 Foot, if we may give any credit to his testimony herein. Lyra
in locum.
Lyra says, that they saw not only Magnam multitudinem, a mighty and a great
multitude, but been armatam and doctam ad praelium, well armed they were, and
expert Warriors, well Trained; which when the people saw and considered,
together with the weakness of themselves, want of Training, want of Arms; for
in their slavery in Egypt they might not use the one, nor be expert in the
other, no not in common policy; for Egypt was afraid of their multitude,
therefore said their King, when he saw them increase in great abundance, and
growing mighty in the Land, Exodus 1.7.
Exodus 1.7. Agedum sapienter nos geramus, Exodus 1.10.
etc. Exodus 1.10. Come on let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply,
etc. They being in no better posture for war than in humane probability they
were then, looking but upon the arm of flesh, it was not like but that they
should have been utterly foiled by so potent an Army, therefore when they saw
them, they cried out unto the Lord, and were sore afraid, Exodus 14.10. Verse. 11.
Exodus 14.10. and Verse. 11. they mock Moses, saying, Were there not Graves in
Egypt, that thou have brought us hither to die in the Wilderness? Verse. 12.
And Verse. 12. puts him in mind what forewarning they had given him of this,
that it had been better for them to have served the Egyptians, (or, which was
as much in effect, as to have been their Slaves still) then to have offered to
have made an escape, and then not be able, but be furiously fallen upon by the
great Dragon of the Waters, Pharaoh and his puissant Army, and be miserably
hewne in pieces. Thus did the carnal minds of Hypocritical Hearts amongst
them reason, notwithstanding all the wonders their eyes had seen, and which God
had wrought for them. But among a great multitude there usually are some
naught, who fare the better, and are spared for the righteous sake. Many such
escaped Pharaoh, and the Red Sea, that perished in the Wilderness, as you may
read, 1 Corinthians. 10.5. 1 Cor. 10 5. Heb. 3.17.
and Heb. 3.17. But with whom was he grieved forty years, was it not with
those that had sinned, whose Carkases fell in the Wilderness. Thus God
threatened them, Numb. 14.23.
Numb. 14.23. seeing that they had seen what he had done in Egypt, and at the
Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, Number 14.22, 23.
Number. 14.22, 23. and yet so basely murmured, and made such a faithless
complaint at the relation of the difficulty to conquer the Land, what should
become of their Wives and Children? The Lord makes answer, Number. 14.29, 30, 31.
Numb. 14.29, 30, 31. Your Carkases shall fall in the Wilderness. As if he had
said, you do not believe you shall ever be able to see the promised Land, and
therefore you shall not. And all that were numbered of you, according to your
whole number, from twenty years old and upward, which have murmured against me,
doubtless ye shall not come into the Land concerning which I swear to make you
dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Iephumeh, and Joshua the son of Nun.
But your little ones, that you said should be a prey, them will I bring in, and
they shall know the Land which ye have despised.

Two things made Gods last blow most terrible to Egypt, the destroying all the
first born, and that at midnight, at a time of deepest rest and silence,
whereupon Conrade Pelican notes, Conrade Pelican in locum.
nihil charius habetur primogenitis filiis etc what is dearer, or more esteemed
amongst men then their first born? whereupon Micha says, Micha. 6.7. Micha 6.7.
shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the
sin of my soul? as if they should have said, what have we more dear under
the Sun then these? And Zach: 12.10. Zach. 12.10.
And they shall be in bitterness for him (or lament, or mourn for him) as one
that is in bitterness for his first born. As if he should have said, the first
born as they are most dearly beloved, so they are most deeply lamented: and in
the like speeches alluding to that in Exodus, Exodus: 22.29. Exodus 22.29.
The first born of thy sonns shall thou give unto me. And for the latter,
bringing this plague upon them at midnight, nocturno tempore horribiliora sunt
omnia adversa quam interdiu, Pelican.
as Pelican notes; upon the night time all troubles are more terrible then
upon the day, wherein some comfort may he had And as for Egypt, they had in all
probability dealt thus with many of the first born of Israel, therefore no
marvel if God also thus dealt with them; and not only with Pharaoh, his
Nobles, and People, but with the Captives in prison. Exodus 11.5.
Exodus: 11.5. Unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill.
Quia Captivi et Captiva cogebantur operari in Carceribus, Lyra in locum.
as Lyra notes, because their captives, both me^ and women were compelled to
work in their prison houses. And they are said to be behind the Mill, because
as they made servants of their Captives, so trudebant molas, as Junius notes,
Iunius in loc.
they caused them in their prisons to thrust their Mills about, for the doing
of which they stood behind them. And thus you may read how the Philistines did
with Samson, Judges 16.22. Judges 16.22.
When they had taken him, and put out his eyes, they caused him to grind in
the prison house. And God dealt thus in destroying the first born of the Cattle
also. And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all his servants, and all the
Egyptians, and there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not an house,
where there was not one dead: so that there was a General Lamentation through
the whole land. To have seen what wringing of hands, knocking of breasts,
doleful complaints, vehement outcries were made in every Town, and City, of
Parents, Kinsfolks, Friends, throughout the whole Land, from one end of their
dwelling to another, so that as it was said of them at the burial of Jacob,
Genesis last. 11.
Gen: the last. 11. Luctus gravis hic est Egypto, or, Planctus magnus hic est
Egyptiis. This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptitians; so I may say of this
nights mourning, Planctus magnus hic erat Egyptiis, This was a grievous
mourning to the Egyptians. A grievious mourning they had when old Israel went
out of their Land, but a more grievous when the seed of Israel was to go out;
not for the love they did bear unto them, but for the love they had to their
own, which they lost when they were to part with the^. And now might they feel
by woeful experience, in the loss of their own children, what heavy hearts
they made to the poor Israelites in the killing of theirs. Exodus: 1.22. Exodus
1.22.
Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, every son that is born ye shall cast
into the river, etc. when he saw that the male children were not destroyed by
the midwives occulte, voluit hoc facere manifest, as Lyra notes; when not
secretly, Lyra. in loc.
then would he have them destroyed openly. Ac cum neque labores, Iunius in loc.
neque molestiae procreationem minuerent liberorum, neque obstetrices clam
natos eorum tollerent, in apertam tyrannidem perrupit, et immane de
submergendis pueris decretum promulgavit, as Junius. And when he saw that
neither labor nor grievances would hinder the increase of the people, nor yet
that the Midwives would kill them secretly, he broke out into open Tyranny, and
published a wicked and cruel Decree concerning the drowning of their Male
Children: Et sperabat tum Satanas; se hoc modo stirpem e qua Christus ^ess^t
^nasciturus extirpaturum; Lucas Osiander.
as Osiander observes, And by this means Satan hoped, says he, to have rooted
out that stock, and race, of which Christ was to spring. And when God would not
suffer him thus far to prevail, see how he stirred Herod up again against all
the Male Children, that were in Bethlehem, Matthew. 2.16.
and the Coasts thereof: but all in vain, Consilium suum stabit, as said the
Prophet, his Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure, Isa. 46.10.
Isai. 46.10. True it is indeed, that this was a great grief and affliction to
the people of Israel, yet many of them were Idolaters, and served the Idols of
Egypt, and complied with them in their Idolatry, with the which the Lord was
grieved. Ezekiel. 20.7, 8.
Ezekiel. 20.7, 8. Cast ye away every man the abomination of his eyes, and defile
not your selves with the Idols of Egypt; for I am the Lord your God. But they
did not forsake those Idols of Egypt, and therefore the Lord was resolved to
pour out his fury upon them, and to accomplish his anger against them, in the
midst of that Land. Exodus 1.13.14. Exodus 1.13, 14
As for themselves, the Egyptians made them serve with rigor, and they made
their lives bitter with Mortar, and Brick, and in all manner of Service in the
field: all their Service wherein they made them serve, was with rigor. They
chidd them and reproached them Verbis duris, Lyra.
and pungitivis, as Lyra, with harsh, hard, and pricking provoking words. They
had dura verba, but duriora verbera, hard words they had, but their stripes and
blows were harder. Exodus 5 16.
Ex. 5.16. Behold, thy servants are beaten, but the fault is in thine own
people; or, En Famuli tui flagellis caeduntur, as the Vulgar, Behold, thy
servants are beaten with whipps. And no marvel if their lives were bitter unto
them, Josephus.
if Josephus say truth, both propter gravitatem et vilitatem operis, for the
grievousnesse and greatness of their labor: having such hard tasks set them,
which might not be abated; and likewise for the baseness of their works, being
compelled, Exportare faeces, et immundicias, de vicis extra civitatem, to carry
dung, and all manner of filth out of their Streets to without their Cities.
They built Pharaoh two Cities, Exodus 1.11. Exodus 1.11, and 14.
Pithom and Raamses; and these they built him of brick, and mortar, verse 14.
and there he laid his fruits, and his treasure. And they used them also for
drudgery, in tilling of their ground, and any manner of husbandry in the field;
and their children also you see how they were destroyed before their eyes,
which did grieviously vex the hearts of them. Thus would God have them
punished, in the middst of the Land of Egypt, for their vileness and Idolatry,
yea herein they were so vile, that after Gods wonderful deliverance of them,
yet they fell to it again in the wilderness, as you may see, Exodus
32.1.2.3.4. Exodus 32.1, 2, 3.4.
Yet when God saw their enemies insult, and considered not that God had given
them that power over them, he cursed their enemies, and slew the chief of all
their strength, even their primogenite, as you have heard, in which their
hearts did most rejoice, thus Jacob speaks to Reuben Gen: 49.3. Genesis 49.3.
Thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the
excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power. My might, that is Primus
effectus naturalium virium, Iunius annot. in loc.
as Iunius; the first effect of my natural strength, and might, the excellency
of dignity, and the excellency of power. The excellency of dignity, because
chief of thy brethren. Of power, because to have had a double portion, Deuteronomy.
21.17.
and in thee my family began to be increased, and gather might. And thou wast
the excellency of dignity, because of the Priesthood; and of power, because of
rule and Princedome, both which thou forfeited by thy incestuous wickedness.
Nicholaus de Lyra in loc.
Now when the firstborn; or first of their strength was thus destroyed
throughout all Egypt, in every house, such a hideous Cry was made, that Pharaoh
started out of his Bed on the night time, and finding his son, his
firstborn, to whom he intended his Crown, to be dead, he wanted no
affrighting: seeing Gods Arrow strike into his house, yea, to hitt the chief
Member of it, next to himself, he was afraid lest the next Arrow might hitt
himself. Jam tua res agitur, paries dum proximus ardet; you know who spoke it,
When the next house is on fire, its high time to look to our own. Now Pharaoh
needed no more entreaty, he was willing to let the people flock, and all go.
Now not only men, but women and children must go also; and not only they,
but Flock, and Herd, and what they would, so they would be gone, before Egypt
was totally destroyed: for they were afraid, that if they were not let go, the
rest of the Egyptians would also be destroyed. And now might an Israelite have
had a Furlong from Pharaoh upon reasonable terms, to have passed all his
Scouts, and Guards. Yet because the Devil could not be content to lose
Pharaoh, no more than Pharaoh could lose Israel, therefore he stirs up
Pharaoh to pursue. And Solomon has it, Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved, Prove. 29.
and hardens his neck, shall be destroyed suddenly, and that without remedy.
And was it with him and with his army any otherwise, even when he presumed that
Israel was in his Jaws; and when he thought they had missed their way in the
wilderness, and were Man, Woman, and Child at his mercy: Goods, Cattle,
and all they borrowed of the Egyptians, and all they had: then was he the
nearest his fearful ruin. Exodus 14.2, 3. God bid Mos^s speak to the Children
of Israel, that they should turn and Encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol
and the Sea, over against Baal-zephon, etc. divertant, let them turn aside, as
Iunius and Tremelius read: Iunius Trem. Exodus 13.17.
God gives a reason for it, Chap. 13. Verse 17. God set them not through the
way of the Land of the Philistines, although that was near, for God said, Lest
the People repent, when they see War, and they return to Egypt. So he that
could work without means, would use means to keep them forward. R versi sunt,
as the Vulgar, they turned again; yea, Aliquantulum versus Egyptum, a little
toward Egypt, as Lyra has it; as though they had meant to have either come
back again into Egypt, or else wandered in the Desert they knew not wh^t^er. For
being before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol, and the Sea, Josephus.
over against Baal-zephon, Ios^phus observes, that they had ex uno latere mare,
ex alio montem magnum, and asperrimum, They had the Sea on the one hand, and a
great and steep Mountain upon the other, and had no way to pass on dry land,
but that way that Pharaoh was coming against them with his Army. And instead
of e regione Phiai^oth, Iunius Versio, etc.
(as the Vulgar,) over against Pi-hahiroth. Iunius reads, ante fauces Montium
Chirotharum, before the narrow passages or straits between the Mountains of
Pi-hahiroth, or before, between Migdol and the Sea, over against Baal-zephon.
What manner of place that was, Pharaoh explanes in the next Verse, which God
foretold he would use; or inwardly so say, and think in his mind, They are
entangled in the Land, the Wilderness has shut them in: or, Coarctati sunt in
terra, (as the Vulgar) they are straightened or shut up in the Land. Or, irretiti,
as others, They are ensnared in the strait places in the Wilderness, amongst
the steep and high Hills, and are kept in on the other hand by the Sea. For
thus had Pharaoh gotten intelligence by his Scouts, and Spies, and therefore
made haste to the prey, little questioning but that all was his own. But Exodus
14.24, 25. Exodus 14.24, 25.
In the Morning Watch the Lord looked unto the Host of the Egyptians through
the Pillar of Fire, and of the Coud, and troubled the Host of the Egyptians.
This Cloud and Fire is that mentioned before, Verses 19, 20.
Verses 19, 20. which came from before them, to behind them, to guard them
from the Egyptians. The morning Watch was the three last hours of the night, as
says the Geneva Note; and how he troubled the Host of the Egyptians, we see
Verse 25. He took off their Chariot Wheels, so that they drove them heavily. I
do not think that the Spoaks and Wheels were only clogged with much tough,
thick and tenacious heavy Clay, which stuck to them, as some do; that indeed
would retard them, but that was not all; the Text says, He took off their
Chariot Wheels. Iunius
Ablatesquerotis, as Iunius, and their Wheels being taken away, subvertit rotas
curruum, as the Vulgar, He overthrew their Chariot Wheels, Vulg. versio.
so that they had much trouble in the driving of their Chariots. If he did but
only take them off, it would be a great trouble and stay in their March, in
putting them on again; and who knows how often God might take them off? for
that is not expressed in the Text. But it may be objected, if the Wheels were
taken off, how could they drive at all? Osiander answers, Lucas Osiand.
Rotis momento vel detractis, vel confractis currus everterentur; The Wheels
being removed, or in a moment broken, the Chariots would soon be overturned. It
may be when God took them off, they were made more unserviceable then before,
broken or bruised, so that they could but drive them slowly: God did by this
means so retard their motion, that they could make no great haste after the
Israelites. And Psalm. 77.17, 18. Psalm. 77.17, 18
the Clouds powered out water, the Skies sent out a sound, thine Arrows also
went abroad. The voice of thy thunder was in the Heaven, the lightnings
lightened the world, the earth trembled and shook, so that the Egyptians said,
Let us fly from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them against the
Egyptians: so that they would presently have retreated, which when the Lord
saw, he caused Moses to strike the waters again, and so drowned them before
they could have time to return. Lyra in loc.
But Lyra notes, that this was after the Israelites were gotten out of the
compass of the Sea, to the dry Land on the Sea shore, or much before them,
that the waters should not hurt them; for when Pharaoh and his Host first
entered the Sea, Filii Israel jam essent multum elongati a litore; The Children
of Israel had then passed on a great distance from that Shore on which Pharaoh
entered. jam enim Israelitae alveum maris egressi erant et versabantur in
continenti, as Osiander; Lucas Osiand.
Now the Isralites were gotten out of the channel and bottom of the Sea and
remained on the continent. And I might note here how God punished Pharaoh, and
all his puissant Host, by an insensible Creature, but letting pass those, let
me answer one objection and so on. Exodus: 14.13. Exodus 14.13.
Moses told the Israelites, when as yet they were not entered the Sea, but stood
trembling and quaking to see the mighty Host of the Egyptians, that the
Egyptians they saw that day, they should see them no more for ever. Verse. 30.
And yet Verse. 30. its said, the Israelites saw the Egyptians dead upon the Sea
shore. The answer is very easy, for the Israelites saw them no more as any
living or pursuing Enemies, but saw dead upon the Sea shore. Some think upon
that shore next Egypt, but that is not like. Others, that they were wrecked and
cast out of the Sea to that shore, on which the Israelites landed, that they
might the more be incited to give glory to God, and be encouraged against their
enemies. And Josephus adds, Josephus
Vt haberent arma little ad defendendum se contra Hosts insurgentes, that so
the Israelites might be furnished with their Arms against all such enemies as
might arise against them in the way. Iunius.
But Junius reads it, Videruntque Israelita Egyptios morientes in littore
maris, The Israelites saw the Egyptians dying on the Shore; that is, says he,
e litore, maris trajecto hosts suos morientes spectarunt, The Israelites
themselves standing now safe, being passed through the Sea, did from the Shore
see their enemies sinking, and dying in the waters of the Sea. Exodus: 15.5.
Exodus 15.5.
The depths covered them, they sanke into the bottom as a stone, so that no Art
of swimming could help them; no, verse. 10. Verse. 10.
They sanke as Lead in the mighty waters, Exodus: 14.27. Exodus 14.27
The Lord over-threw the Egyptians in the middst of the Sea. Thus God caused
those mad and raging waves, and proud Billows, to swallow that mad, proud, and
raging people.

Secondly, This judgment must fall on them at such a time, as it was most
terrible, as you have heard, so that the circumstance of time did increase the
plague that God inflicted on them. The more suddenly and unexpectedly that any
trouble assailes us, the more grievously it afflicts us, and especially on the
night, when we are settled to rest. The old Moralist plainly, yet truly, said,
Levius laedit quicquid praevideris ante, Things foreseen less hurt us when
they fall upon us, because in the interim we prepare our selves against they
fall: praemonitus, praemunitus, forewarned, fore-armed. The efficient cause of
the Creatures subjection to vanity, was God, who [as you have heard] was the
absolute Lord of the Creature, he has subjected the same (...), sub spe, under
hope.

Hope is here ascribed to the Creature as unwillingnesse was, as expectation
was, which, as you have heard, cannot properly be predicated of the Creature
here mentioned, Chrysostom. Theophylact. in. locum.
but as Chrysostom observes, the Apostle here faineth a certain person of the
Creatures, attributing unto them affections, as will, desire, hope, sorrow,
grieving, etc. Beza has also well observed, Beza in locum
that Totus hic sermo per Prosopopaeiam accipiendus, That this whole passage,
and text of the Scripture here concerning the Creature, is to be conceived of
by way of prosopopaeia, as in part you have heard, Figuratively, attributing
unto them humane affections.

(...), Under hope, or in hope: but of what? I answer, under hope of being
delivered from the bondage of coruption, for he that has subjected the
Creature to vanity, yet intends not forever to involve the Creature under the
curse; no, you have heard verse 19. that there is an earnest expectation of the
Creature, of the manifestation of the sonns of God, the Creature stands as it
were upon tipptoes and as stretching out the neck, waiting with great
earnestness and desire to see that day when the sonns or children of God shall
be manifested in that glorious state, which in this life, during their mortal
bodies, cannot be seen, and the hope of the Creature is nothing else but the
natural expectation of liberation from the incumbent corruption. For there is
appetitus naturaliter insitus, qui sane non erit perpetuo irritus, There is a
natural appetite in the Creature, which doubtless shall not be continually,
or forever frustrate of this expectation.

And in that the Lord of the Creature made them thus subject to vanity, we may
collect, that this vanity or corruption, to which they are now subject, was
not natural, or imbred, or connaturall to the Creature, God made it in a more
excellent and healthful constitution; but this was adventitiall, by reason of
the sin of man, who having displeased both his Maker and theirs, brought them
into an ill condition, but himself into a worse; them liable to vanity, but
himself to perpetual and eternal misery.

Secondly, hence we see the horrible burden of the punishment of sin, in that
not only man is punished that sinned, but even the brute Beasts, yea such
Creatures as are insensible also; and so heavily, that the Creature groans to
be delivered from this bondage of corruption, or from the burden. How much
more may wicked men look to be punished for their own sins; yet these never
groan under the weight of them, whilst they are in this life, and therefore
shall they gnaw their tongues, gnash their teeth, and groan for ever in the
world to come, where the Worms shall never die, and their Fire shall never be
quenched; and where they shall have no rest day nor night.

Thirdly, we see the greatness of Gods power, in that he could make the
Creature subject to corruption; he that made it in a better estate, could also
bring it to a worse, for the sin of him that had the possession of it: and
the Creature must be subject, it must obey. For what was the Creature to stand
it out against the Creator? it was impossible for it to do it, but must yield
to be in a worse estate than that in which it was created, though with an
(...), not willingly.

Fourthly and lastly, observe how God mingles his judgments with his mercies,
in that the Creature has a metaphorical hope in it, that this corruption or
vanity, to which it is subject, shall once come to an end. If the Devils, or
the Damned in Hell had but such hope as the Creature here has, which were
short of that created excellency that they were created in, it would elevate
their minds to think of it; but they are under the Hatches of eternal
despair, without any the least hope for ever. Oh what Soul seriously considers
this, and trembles not? and sets not all things apart to betake it to such
means, as will help toward heaven, and miss that misery? and then may man
have a more noble hope, than the Creature here mentioned can have. Thus I have
done with the positive part of the Creatures subjugation.

Let us now come to the third part of the division, the relaxation, Because the
Creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption. The
doctrine and parts in this Text, may not unfitly be resembled to Ezekiels
waters, Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5
Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5. which at the first measuring were but to the Ankles, at the
second, but to the Knees, but at the third were to the Loins, and at the fourth
were rises to such a River, as a man might swim in, and could not be passed
over, at least not without doubt and danger.

But to the third point, Because the Creature also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption; what was meant by the Creature we have heard before, but
the (...), as we say, or the main matter to be decerned, is (how) the Creature
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and (what Creatures) shall
be so delivered. De re constat, disputatur de modo, Its certain enough that
there shall be such a deliverance from the bondage of corruption, we have an
(...), fecit, an ipse dixit here in the words; and we have it in terminis, in
express terms; but all the difficulty consists in the manner of the
deliverance, after what manner the Creature shall be delivered, and what
Creatures they are that shall be delivered. For the former, concerning the
manner of the deliverance, so far as may fall within the compass of reason,
or a rational discourse, we conceive it can but be one of these two ways,
either privative, and terminative, or reductive, and transmutative; either it
must be delivered by being deprived of its Essence or Being, and then as we
say, Non entis non sunt accidentia, of a non-Being there can be no accidents,
there can be no vanity, slavery, weariness, corruption, or the like; for when
they cease to be, they cease to be subject to such miseries, immutabilities,
instabilities, and the like, then their being subject to vanity, is terminated
as is their being.

Or else reductive, and transmutative, by being reduced into their former
estate, in which they were created, and in which they stood before man sinned,
and changed from corruption into incorruption, from which estate, they shall
never more be changed. But whether of these two ways the Creature shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, is dignus vindice nodus, a knot worth
unloosing, and a point that requires a serious scrutinie. If by the Creature
here we might upon sound grounds understand man only, or at least man as yet
in the state of nature unconverted, as Augustine does, (as you have heard
before) then might we say with Bullinger, Bullin. in loc.
Locus hic difficilimus erit facilimus, The place which is conceived most
difficult, would be exceeding plain; or this hard, and intricate knot were
easily loosed: Its to be understood of other Creatures besides man, as may
appear by the reasons before alleged, and also by the judgments of diverse
most learned and able Divines. Dr. Willet qu. 27. in Romans Expos. 5.
Dr Willet shows in his 27 qu. upon the eight Chapter to the Romans,
Exposition the fifth, that the most general and received interpretation is, to
understand corporalia, and irrationalia, things corporal and unreasonable,
comprehending the Heavens and Stars, with the earth, together with living
Creatures of all sorts, Trees, and Plants, and quotes Ambrose, Calvin, Martyr
for this sense. If by the general and received Interpretation he means the
most general, in regard of the subject matter, of which their interpretation
is, it must needs be true. And I believe, the sense that himself flies to in
his Exposition sexta, will not come so near to the mark. But that remains to be
handled in the next place, to which we shall reserve it, and the Authors he
quotes for that he calls the more generally received, are not many, though the
very truth is, that if a man look fully upon the face of these passages in Romans
8.19, Romans 8.19, 20, 21.22.
20, 21, 22, etc. (for the places in Scripture are like Beacons upon Hills,
which give light one to another,) it would much move him to this sense, which
that pious, painful and learned Divine before-named calls The most general
and received interpretation; as when we read of the earnest expectation of the
Creature indefinitely, as Verse 19. the Creature was made subject to vanity,
Verse 20. And the Ceature it self also shall be delivered from the Bondage of
corruption, (that is, the same Creature before mentioned.) Verse 21. And the
whole Creation groaneth, etc. Verse 22. These places I say, in themselves
considered, would move us to understand a freedom and liberation of the whole
Creation. But this I conceive would easily be granted, for it can neither with
faith nor reason be opposed: but then how the whole Creation shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption, so as to be brought into the glorious liberty
of the Children or sons of God, hic haerendum est, here we must pause a
while. The whole Creation doubtless (in its latitude here meant) shall be
delivered the one of those ways before mentioned; but thus, as to be brought
into the glorious liberty of the Children of God, will admit of a further
dispute.

So far as the Scriptures hold out any light, or a rational discourse will
carry, so far a man may go in this point; but I have never as yet read,
either in the Fathers, who touch upon this point, whereof Chrysostom seems
most resolute, and for that generally or most general received opinion, and
interpretation beforementioned, nor in the Schoolmen, or middle, or modern
Divines is this matter in hand absolutely, clearly, and satisfactorily
determined and stated. Neither do I think that it can be clearly and
indubitatively determined in this life, but probably and conjecturally. Only
Calvin, having asserted, Calvin in loc.
that Deus simul cum humano genere Orbom nunc collapsum in integrum res^it^et;
that God, together with mankind will restore the now-decayed world into an
entire, or uncorrupted estate, adds, Qualis vero futura sit integritas illa tam
in pecudibus, quam in plantis, et metallis, curiosius inquirere, neque expedit,
neque fas est, etc. quaerunt arguti, (sed parum sobrii) an immortale set
futurum omne genus animalium, his speculationibus, si fraenum laxetur, quorsum
tandem nos abripient? hac ergo simplici doctrina contenti simus, tale fore
temperamentum, and tam concinnum ordinem, ut nihil vel deforme, vel fluxum
appareat; but what manner of integrity, or incorruptednesse that shall be as
well in Beasts, as in Plants of the earth, and in Metals under it, to make too
curious an inquisition, is neither expedient, needful, nor lawful, etc.
quicksighted men (but in this not very wise) do ask whether every Kind, or all
sorts of living Creatures shall be immortal, or no? If we give but scope to
these speculations, whether at length will they carry us? let us therefore,
says he, be content with this simple or plain truth, the moderation and order
after the restitution shall be so fine, so sweet, or excellent, which God will
make, that nothing shall appear either uncomely, or unstable. Therefore I have
said, that so far as the Scripture holds out any light, or by a rational
discourse, or grounds of sound reason that a man may go, so far he may
labor; and, est aliquid prodire tenus, it will be found somewhat to go thus
far. As for that sound and worthy Divine Peter Martyr, we shall have occasion
to scanne him more narrowly hereafter, which though at his ingresse to this
point, he may seem to favor the most general and received opinion, yet after
a large dispute of it, the reader will find him not so resolute: of whose
words God willing by and by, though he will not conclude against it.

All Divines that I have read, or met withal, fall but upon one of these two
ways, by which the Creature is to be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
either abolitione, or purgatione, by abolition, or the total and final taking
away the Being of them; or else by the purging out the dross and corruption
from such Creatures as shall remain for substance. But whether of these two
ways will the better stand with the sense of the Apostles words, is the grand
quaere, and I conceive this to be one of those abstruse points, de quibus
optimis etiam Theologis liceat, (...), morari, ignorare, vel dissentire, salva
charitate; concerning which it may be lawful or safe, even to the best
Divines, to demurre upon, to be ignorant of, or to dissent in, without breach
of charity, or hurt of piety. In such cases the saying of Saint Augustine is
good, August: lib: 8. de gen: ad lit: Cap: 5.
Lib. 8 de genesis ad literam, cap. 5. Melius est dubitare de occultis, quam
litigare de incertis, It is better to stand in doubt of such things as God has
kept secret, then to strive, or too vehemently to contend in such as are
uncertain; and only so far to believe as he sees either light from the
Scriptures for, in terminis, or vertually included in them, or soundly deduced,
or collected from them: for, quicquid vere and direct potest colligi ex
Scripturis, dici potest Scriptura; whatsoever can truly and directly, or by
sound consequence be drawn or gathered from the Scripture, may be called
Scripture, because its vertually and implicitly in those terms, in which it is
not always verbally expressed, but may be thence deduced, and by sound
consequence concluded; to which, amongst many others, Zanch: de Religio:
Christ: Cap: de Scripturis. These: 11.
profound Zanchie accords in his Book de Religione Christiana. cap. de Script.
These. 11. and which is a commonly received truth amongst all learned Divines
that are Orthodox: Nihil de religione statuendum esse in Ecclesia Dei, quod aut
non habeat apertum in libris Canonicis testimonium, aut manifesta necessariaque
consecutione inde evincatur; nothing ought to be determined in the Church of
God concerning Religion, that has not either open proof in Canonical
Scriptures, or by manifest and necessary consequence, may be thence evinced:
but by either of these ways a point is made good by Scripture, and that may be
called the Scripture by which its so made good. Or else so far as he can see
sound reason, or good grounds brought, such as are not against the Scripture,
but rather fall in with it. And in treating upon such intricate passages as
this, its wisdom for us to do as skillful Seamen do upon dangerous and narrow
Seas; they still take care to Plumbe or Sound, so that they fall upon no Rocks,
nor Shelves, and so long they sail safely, though they find not their desired
Haven, for the present; so God willing shall we do, we shall so sound the Sea
of the Scriptures, and plumbe the road of reason, that we shall not shipwreck
truth upon any Shelves of Error, and so far the Bark of our discourse may
floate safely, though we accomplish not our intention for our desired Haven.

First then let us sound the Scriptures, and see how far they will go with
us, for the deliverance of the Creature from the bondage of corruption, by
abolition, or by a total and final destruction of the Being of the Creature
here meant. Let us begin with Psalm. 102.26. Psa. 102.26.
speaking of Heaven and Earth, the Prophet says, they shall perish. This of
the Prophet is repeated by the Apostle, Heb. 1.11. Heb. 1.11.
Ipsi peribunt, they shall perish: Job. 14.12.
and Job 14 12. Vsque dum non erunt Coeli, till the Heavens be no more.

Secondly, Luke 21.33. Luke 21.33.
Coelum and terra transibunt, Heaven and Earth shall pass away.

Thirdly, Apocapalyp. 21.1. Apoc. 21.1.
I saw a new Heaven, and a new earth, for the first was passed away.

2. Peter 3.10.
Fourthly and lastly, to insist upon no more places, 2 Pet. 3.10. The heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat: the earth also and the Works therein shall be burnt up. These places make
fair for the deliverance of the Creature from the bondage of corruption, by an
abolition or destroying of their Beeings, an so by consequence [as you have
heard] they cannot any longer be subject to vanity, any more mutability or
corruption. And from these and such like Places, many learned men have
concluded an utter abolition of the Creature here mentioned, save only some
few, of which hereafter. But how the Heavens shall be set on fire, the Elements
melt, and the Earth with the Works therein burnt up, the Scriptures have not
clearly discovered unto us, only the penetrating School-Divines, who conceived
themselves more Eagle-eyed then the rest, and could cast stones at an hair
breadth, they have rationally conjectured, that all may be set on fire, either
per radios solares ex repercussione multiplicatos, by repercussion of the Sunn
beams redoubled, or by collecting them into a narrower compass, as so to
unite their forces more closely as in a burning glass; or per discensum ignis
elementaris jussu divino, by the descent of the element of fire at Gods command
or injunction. In these philosophical speculations we cannot deny but that
there is a rational probability, it may be a verity, though we do not conclude
it by way of infalibilitie; for as God has determined that the world shall be
destroyed by fire, so we know that he neither wants wisdom, nor power how to
effect it, though to us he has not clearly revealed the manner how, we may say
with Saint Augustine, lib. 20 de Civitate Dei. Cap: 16. August: lib: 20. de
Civit Dei, Cap: 16.
he says he knew no man that did know, (that is as I conceive) that did
infallibly know, Quisnam aut unde futurus sit ignis ille deflagrationis, what
manner of fire, or from what place that fire should come that shall burn the
world.

But when scoffing Porphyrie understood this to be a received opinion amongst
the Christians, that the world should be destroyed, as his manner was, he much
derided them for it, being a most bitter enemy against Christianity; him Saint
Augustine mentions lib: Aug. lib 20. de civit. Dei, cap. 24.
20. de Civitate Dei. Cap: 24. to have followed Plato in this, which in Timaeo
holds; mundum caepisse, s^d non interiturum, that the world had a beginning,
Plato in Tim.
but that it should never have an ending; and so some of the most ancient Poets
held, as might be shown at large out of Orpheus and Hesiod: Orph. Hesiodus.
yet Plutarch thus relates the opinion of Plato, and Pythagoras, lib: 2. Plut.
lib. 2. de de Philosoph. placit. caP. 4.
de Philosophorum placitis et decretis, Cap: 4. Pythagoras ac Plato genitum a
Deo mundum et sua quidem sponte interiturum, etc. haud interiturum tamen
providentia, et conservatione divina, it should never decay, yet not so firm of
its own nature, but sua sponte interiturum, of its own accord (think they) it
would ruin in time, or become deficient in its principles, and so could not
perpetuate it self. Epicurus.
For Epicurus thought that the world was genitus, begotten of God, and so had a
beginning, as you have heard the other two affirmed, s^d animantis et plantae
modo occasurum, It should come to an end as Plants, and living Creatures did:
but that it was conserved by a divine Providence and conservation. But
Xenophanes, not so far more ancient then Plato, as he was wide of truth, he
held the world to be sempiternum, to be everlasting, and neither to have had
beginning, nor should have ending. And this opinion Aristotle took up, adhered
to it, and went about to defend it by arguments, Arist lib Phys. 8. and lib. 1.
de coelo calcem versus.
as we read lib. Physicorum 8. and in the last Chapters of his first Book de
Coelo; whose opinion herein diverse others have followed, as Pliny, Proclus,
Simplicius, and Averroes most pertinaciously: yet all the arguments that great
searcher of nature brings, Arist. lib. 2. de coelo cap. 1.
in lib. 2. de Coelo cap. 1. are of no concluding validity against the
contrary assertion of Christian Philosophy, and have been shot through and
through, tota Doctorum Philosophorum Christianorum Phalange, by a whole and
strong Army of learned Christian Philosophers. Yet Julius Scaliger would
gladly draw him to have bin a patron of the worlds beginning, Exercitatione 61
sect: 3, Scalig. exerc. 61. sect. 3.
agnovit enim ille quoque Deum opt: max. esse mundi creatorem, he also himself
acknowledged God to be the Creator of the world, for which he quotes him in
lib: 2. Arist lib. 2. de genesis
de generatione, (...), etc. Some indeed excuse him for his calling it (...),
in generabilem, and that it had no beginning, etc saying, his meaning was, it
had no beginning, per generationem, but yet had per emanationem, ut lux a
Cand^la, not by generation, but by emanation from the word of the power of the
primum Ens, (and this were to make Aristotle agree with Moses, Genesis 1.1. Genesis
1.1.
) even as light flows from the flame of a Candle. But this I fear, were to
make more of his words than he ever meant, and like some of later times that
would have brought him within the compass and possibility of a Saint. True it
is, many Divine sentences, and scattered passages are found here and there in
his prima Philosophia, and the Books de Caelo, but whether he had them from
Plato his Tutor, under whom he remained twenty years, or those de Coelo were
not his, as some have thought, and hereupon questioned it. In Demosthenis
Elogiis, Translated per Hyeronimum Wolfium, Hieron. Wolf.
and set before his Orations out of Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Dionys. Halicarn.
we have this testimony of him, his Father being dead at 18 years of age, he
came to Athens (then the most famous Universitie of all Greece) (...), etc. Et
Platoni commendatus, viginti annos cum eo exegit; He was in Athens commended to
Plato, [who had been both a great Traveller and a great Scholler] and with him
he spent twenty years.

2. Plutarch, and the Ancient Philosophers have not interpreted Aristotle for
any Patron of the Worlds beginning. True, say some Neotericks, he held it had
no beginning, or any generation, ex materia aliqua praeexistenti, or per
mutationem e contrario; of no praeexistent matter, or by mutation from any
contrary subject, as ordinary generations are; Arist. lib. 1. Physic cap. 5.
and as he asserts lib. 1. Physic. cap. 5. yet simply denies not the generation
of it, after any manner or way at all, it might be generated or produced a
prima causa, from the cause of causes, which was God; and then, Scalig. loco
quo supra.
quid aliud diceret Christianus? says Scaliger loco quo supra, what else could
a Christian say? Heb. 11.3.
Heb. 11.3. Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the Word
of God, so that things that are seen, were not made of things which do appear:
(...), secula, the worlds, as the Vulgar, and Erasmus has it. The same words
we have, Heb. 1.
Heb. 1.2. but because its spoken per enallagen numeri, in putting the Plural
for the Singular number, therefore Beza reads it mundum, the world, and so John
1.10. John 1.10.
the world was made by him. Or if by the woe lds you will understand all the
several parts of the world, all the several Creatures, of which the world
does consist, then may we conceive it of all things in the (...), or the (...),
or the universe, as the Philosophers term it, which make up the (...), or
complete world, for one such there is, but as the great naturalist goes about
to prove, and affirm by grounds of natural reason, lib: 1. de caelo. Cap: 8,
9. Arist lib. 1.^ coelo, cap. ^
and this (...), he will have to be as much as (...), semper existens, because
he held that mundus was aeternus, yet sometimes indeed aevum is taken for an
age, or life, Hieron: took it pro septuaginta annis, for the space of 70 years.
Hieronym. Paraeus in loc.
Paraeus thus, res omnes cum ipso tempore, the (world) that is says he, all
things with time it self, yea quaecunque usquam, unquam extiterunt, extant, aut
extabunt, as Beza upon the place, Beza in loc.
whatsoever has, does, or shall have existence. John 1.3. (...), John 1.3.
Omnia per ipsum facta sunt, all things were made by him; and by faith we
understand that they were made by the word of God, not only (...), John. 1.1.
by the substantial word of God, but (...), as here in the Heb: by his
potentiall or mighty word of his power, jussu Dei as Paraeus, Paraeus in loc.
by Gods command. How often have we a dixit Deus, Genesis 1.
God said? Deus, that is, Pater, Filius, et Spiritus sanctus, et sic deinceps
in opere creationis, Iunius annot. in loc.
as Iunius has it; God, that is, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and
so all a long conceive the word (God) in the work of Creation: for this was a
work of the whole Trinity, as the fathers constantly teach us, Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, the works of the Trinity to without, are
undivided. Psalm. 33.9.
Ps. 33.9. dixit, et factum est, he said, and it was done. Thus by the word of
his power he made the world but the things that are seen were not made of
things that do appear, non ex apparente, Beza.
et jam existente materia, as Beza, not of any matter that we now see to
appear, oris non existent, non ex materia aliqua visibili, Paraeus in loc.
sed ex nihilo, as Paraeus, to the same sense, Paraeus in loc
not of any visible matter, but of nothing did God make the world, so that the
usual axiom of the natural Philosophers came far short in this, Ex nihilo
nihil fit, of nothing perexistent, nothing can be made; not in their way, by
the ordinary production of Creatures successively, by way of generation, but
by creation its otherwise, of which they were ignorant.

The second opinion is, for the deliverance of the Creature from the bondage of
corruption, by way of mutation, and repurgation, (...), secundum qualitates;
and not a total abolition, (...), secundum substantiam; and the most are of
this judgment, that the heavens and some other Creatures shall not perish,
(...), wholly, or quoad esse substantiale, but quoad esse accidentale, their
corruptible qualities shall be changed, but not the substance totally destroyed
or annihilated; Voss. These. Theol. de mundi fine These. 3.
and to this also Vossius in These: Theolog: These: 3. de mundi fine, agrees, and
does acknowledge, and that truly, as all men of any extent of reading know,
that this is Communior sententia, the more common opinion, non (...),
periturum, sed esse renovandum, that the world shall not simply and totally be
abolished in its parts, but renewed; for the truth of which he quotes this
subject we are now upon. Romans 8.20, 21.
Romans 8.20, 21. To the former of the senses he names, we have said somewhat
already, and to the second (God willing) we shall in due time. Yet thus he
concludes, Thesi qua supra, Gerard. Ioh. Voss. Thesi qua supra.
Quocirca nec eorum sententiam praefracte rejicere audemus, qui mundum secundum
substantiam periturum esse arbitrantur, praesertim cum nihil de eo antiquitus
Synodo ulla sit definitum, quidam praestantes sane viri de eo dissentiant:
Therefore we dare not stubbornly or obstinately reject their opinion, who
judge, or suppose that the substance of the world shall perish, especially
seeing nothing is defined or determined by any ancient Synod concerning this
point, whether way the Creature shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption: and truly there be diverse excellent and worthy men that dissent,
[yea, and I have said, may dissent, salva charitate] without breach of charity
in this point: and I shall desire to be moderate in it, and wish the reader to
go no further a long with me herein, then he (if he be judicious) can either
see light of Scripture for, or sound and well grounded reason to induce. I had
rather sail in these straits, placida rationis aura, then turbido
affectationis vento, with a sweet and pleasant gale of reason, then with a
strong wind, and stormy blasts of affectation; as ready to judge every man
that herein differs in judgment from me. I rather say with the Poet, vel his
utere mecum, vel ede tua, either make use of these with me, or else give better
grounds of thy own farther to instruct me. The former I hope shall do thee no
harm, the latter would do me much good; and because I shall fall in with those
learned men that have given their judgments for a liberation of the Creature
by mutation and repurgation, rather then by total abolition of the material
or visible Creature, I think it will better satisfy to give answer to the
arguments brought for the contrary opinion, or to such places, in sacris, from
whence some learned men have grounded it, before we produce any witnesses for
the second, which God willing we will do as briefly as the matter will admit
of.

To the first Psalm. 102.26. Responsio Argum digladiantibus pro sententia
totalis abolitionis.
Heaven and Earth shall perish; repeated Heb. 1.11. Ipsi peribunt, they shall
perish: and Job. 14.12. Vsque dum non erunt Coeli, Till the Heavens be no more.
To the places in order. Having spoken of the Earth and Heavens in the foregoing
Verse, he adds, They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea, all of them
shall wax old like a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they
shall be changed. Neque antiquitas, n^que tam pulcher coelorum ornatus eximent
ab interitu, as Calvin in locum, Calvin in loc.
Neither can antiquity nor that goodly adorning of the Heavens, that have so
stood for so many thousands of years, keep them still safe or exempted from
destruction. And he further adds upon the fame place that which most of Divines
know to be true, Calvin loco quo supra.
Non uno modo exponunt interpretes [coelos perire,] that is, that all
Interpreters do not understand this perishing of the Heavens after the same
manner, quidam simpliciter intelligunt de mutatione quae speci^s quaedam erit
interitus. Et si enim non sunt redigendi in nihilum; ipsa tamen naturae
alteratio (ut ita loquar) absumet quod mortale est, ac corruptibile ut alii
esse caeli incipiant, ac novi. Secundum alios subaudienda est conditio, si deo
ita placuerit, quia absurdum esse existimant coelos corruptioni subjici, etc.
Some men understand it simply of such a change as is a kind of corruption, or
destruction; for although the Heavens be not to be reduced into nothing, yet
notwithstanding the very alteration of their nature, [if I may so speak] shall
consume and take away that which is mortal and corruptible in them, that they
shall begin to be others, yea, new Heavens. According to some others the words
are conceived on conditionally, as thus, (if God so please,) because they
conceive it absurd, to think, that the Heavens are subject to corruption. But
this condition rather hinders the sense, than otherwise, says he. Deinde falso
coelis tribuunt immortalem statum, quos Paulus non secus ac terram aliasque
creaturas gemere, and parturire dicit, usque ad diem redemptionis, eo quod
subjectae sint corruptioni, non sponte, vel natura, sed quia homo se
praecipitans totum mundum in ejusdem ruinae societatem secum traxit: Moreover,
they do untruly attribute to the Heavens a state of immortality, which Paul
says, do groan, and desire deliverance no otherwise than the earth and other
Creatures unto the day of redemption, in so much as they are made subject to
vanity, not willingly, or by any natural inclination, but because that man
casting himself headlong from his happy estate in which he was Created, drew
the whole world to share with him in his ruin, to be subject to vanity and
corruption, as well as he. These two things then are to be holden, Nunc
obnoxios esse Coelos corruptioni propter hominis lapsum, and ita renovatum iri,
ut merito Propheta dicat, perituros, quia non iidem erunt, sed alii: The
Heavens are now subject to corruption by reason of the sin of man, and are so
to be renewed, as that the Prophet might justly say, they shall perish, because
they shall not be the same, but others: others, not for substance, but for
quality. As before also you have heard, that this was communior sententia, the
more common opinion. He that would see the judgment of particulars, Vossius
Thesi qua supra.
let him but read Gerardus Joh. Vossius Thesi qua supra, who herein has saved
me much labor, in quoteing both the Greek and Latin Divines, for this
opinion; with whom Calvin, you hear, and most of our sound Modern Divines do
agree, too many to be particularized in such a Cloud of Witnesses, would
overspread much clean Paper. All of them shall wax old as a Garment, as a
Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed. They shall wax old
as a Garment, respectu durationis, or continuati temporis, in regard of
duration, or continuance of time, at least, if not respectu imminutionis, or
defectus virium naturalium, if not in respect of any impairing, or deficiencie
of their natural strength; in this respect a garment may be said to wax old,
namely, in regard that its long since it was made, though it be not decayed, or
much worse for wearing; yet we say in this sense, that its an old Suit, because
long since it was made, though it appear not old in regard of decay, or any
deficiency in the Woof, but in this sense may be as good as a new one, Deuteronomy.
last. 7. Moses was old duratione, but not immunitione.
as we say. See, Deuteronomy. last, 7. Moses was an hundred and twenty years old; yet
natural strength not abated.

And as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed. Now a
vesture may be changed two ways, either totaliter abolendo, or accidentaliter
commutando, either by the total taking of it away, as burning of it, or
casting of it aside, etc. as of no more use; or else by an accidental change
of it, as washing of it, scouring of it, dressing of it, or coloring of it
anew, or the like; and this is to change a vesture, but it is but an
accidental change of it; the substance is still the same. The like change is
co^ceived to be had in the Heavens. Dyonys. Carthsianus in loc.
Dionysius Carhusianus in verba, Nec coelum, nec terra peribit substantialiter,
sed peribunt in fine mundi, quantum adesse formae accidentalis, quoniam alium
statum hebebunt, quam modo, etc. Neither shall the Heavens nor the earth perish
in regard of their substance, but they shall be accidentally changed in the end
of the world; for after the judgment day they shall be put into another state
or condition, then that in which they now are, and not changed, as Joseph
changed his garment or vesture when he appeared before Pharaoh, Genesis 14.14.
Genesis 41.14. Taking new for substance, and casting away the old, mutata vest,
so changed he his raiment.

To that in the Hebrews the same answer may be given, seeing its but the
repetition of the same thing.

Job. 14.12.
To that in Job, Vsquedum non erunt coeli, Till the Heavens be no more. So man
lies down, and rises not till the Heavens be no more. I answer, some, more
Philosophically, than Theologically, conceive of it thus, That even as the
Heavens, by their own nature and Principles are such, that they of themselves
would never decay, but be for ever; even so likewise man lying down in the
grave, by nature, or his own strength, would not arise again, or could so
arise, till the Heavens were no more, or ceased to be, and that they conceived
would be never, because the Heavens would never cease to be.

Secondly, others, that are for a total abolition, they would understand it
thus, that at the last day, when the general resurrection shall be, then shall
the visible and sphaericall Heavens totally perish, and then shall man arise
again, and till then he shall not.

Thirdly and lastly, most thus, Till the heavens be no more, not simpliciter,
but secundum statum praesentem, not of simply or absolutely being no more at
all, but no more according to that present state and condition, in which they
now are, and to which the sin of man has made them subject, 2. Pet: 3.7.
2 Pet. 3.7. (...), Qui vero [nunc] sunt coeli ac terra, The heavens and the
earth that [now] are, till they be no more in the same state or condition they
are in now; but changed for quality, or condition into better, when they shall
be refined, and purged by burning. Even as when we see a lump of Metal
melted, (be it of Gold, Silver, Lead, Tin, or any other) the dross we know
is taken out, and the substance is thereby refined, but yet the same substance
still remains: so may we also conceive of the Heavens, when they shall be
burned and purged. And thus much may serve for answer to the first Argument.

Luke 21.33.
To the second, Luke 21.33. Coelum and terra transibunt, Heaven and earth shall
pass away. Matthew has it thus, Matthew. 5. Matthew. 5.18.
18. Till heaven and earth pass, (or as the Geneva, perish) one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. (...), as
the Original, Donec transeat coelum and terra, as the Vulgar, Vsquedum
praeterierit coelum and terra, as Beza, Quod donec transeant coelum and terra,
as the Syriack Version by Tremelius. Here we have some diversity in words, but
all to one and the same sense; and some conceive the words not simply, but
co^paratively spoken; as thus, that the truth of the Law is so firm, that even
such things as seem most durable shall perish, before any jott of it perish:
yea, Heaven and Earth are not so stable as the truth of it in all the parts of
it. Yea, so strictly does Piscator urge this place, Piscator in in verba.
that as he hence observes the Law to have been written of old, with pricks in
the Hebr. Tongue: so likewise he notes, that God will have such a special care
in preserving of the Scriptures, that not so much as the least Vowell, or prick
of it shall perish in the Hebrew tongue, nor the least iota, or least letter
with which its written in the Greek Tongue, the least Letter, or the least
truth of the Law of God shall not perish, or be changed, so wisely was it
given. Calvin, Musc: Bucer in verba Psalm: 102.27.
To the which sense Calvin, Musculus and Bucer agree. Beza parallels the Greek
word (...), Beza.
with the Hebrew word (...) Psalm. 102. Iahhaloph.
27. signifies sic praeterire, ut etiam mutetur, so to pass away, as also to be
changed in the passage.

In Luke its positively set down, as likewise in the Hebrews, before cited,
heaven and earth shall pass, or they shall perish, yet it will not hence
follow, that they shall pass, or perish totally, or by the whole destruction
of the substance, but in regard of this their present state and condition, or
in regard of their qualities, or outward form. The same words are also
positively used, Mat: 24.35. caduca eorum conditio, their frail and brittle
estate, and condition shall pass away; but that will not conclude, that
therefore their essence and substance shall totally, and finally be abolished,
but that they shall not remain in the state and condition, that they are now
in for ever, as the Philosophers that followed Aristotle dreamed, holding the
heavens aeternall, and inalterable; but shall perish, or be changed. Now Ipsi
peribunt, they shall perish, or pass away, will not conclude a total
abolition of substance, as I have said, but alteration of their present state,
quality, and condition; no more then justus perit, Esa 57.1. Esa. 57.1.
The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; now the righteous
perish not so, as to suffer a total abolition of their substance, but the
mortal, and natural man suffers so, and perishes so, as to have his
natural, and mortal estate changed, his present estate, condition, and
qualities; but shall arise again in the same bodies for substance. 1 Cor. 15.
1. Cor: 15.53.
53. Oportet enim [hoc] corruptioni obnoxium, induere incorruptam naturam, For
(this corruptible) that is, this corruptible body, not another for substance,
shall put on incorruption. Verse 44.
Verse 44. Seritur corpus animale, excitatur corpus spirituale, it is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body: so that though the state,
qualities, and condition be more excellent when it is raised, then when it was
cast into the grave, yet the substance shall be the same.

Apoc. 1.1.
To the third, Apoc: 21.1. for the first heaven, and the first earth was passed
away and there was no more sea. (...), abiit, as the vulgar, or abierat, was
passed away. Saint Mat: and S. Luke say (...), shall pass away. John here in a
vision says, (...), the first Heaven, and the first Earth were passed away
already; this he spoke prophetically, and as foreseeing what should befall them
in the end of the world; but for the manner how they shall pass away, we
answer as before, for I conceive, that the same answer for substance will solve
the objection, and therefore we will produce Aretius assenting to the same
judgment, quoting also Rev: 20.11. Aretius in loc.
from whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no
place for them; which might seem to argue indeed a total abolition of them;
but says he, they fled (...), from the state, or condition of corruption, to
incorruption, and they fled from their former estate, from before Gods face, as
ashamed of that estate. For you have heard how usual it is in Scripture, to
attribute to senseless, or irrational creatures, that which belongs to
rational. And whereas mention is made of John's seeing a new Heaven, and a new
Earth. Apoc. 21.1.
Apoc: 21.1. revera eadem sunt, solum deposita corruptibilitate In very deed
they are but the same, having put off their corruptible estate, and condition;
so that you see for substance the Heaven and Earth remains; yet because their
qualities, present state and condition are changed, they are called new, and
such you see S. John saw them, thus Aretius. We may in some degree illustrate
it thus, 2 Cor. 5.17. 2 Cor. 5.17
If any man be in Christ, says the Apostle, he is (...), nova creatura, a new
Creature. Now he is not new for substance, either in body or soul, for he has
the same for substance, which he had before God wrought any change, but not for
state, quality, and condition; for, in regard of new qualities infused into
his heart and mind from God, he is called a new Creature, or a new man; veteri
illa condition abolita, as Beza, Beza in loc.
his old condition being abolished. Ephesians. 4.22.23.24.
Thus Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. mention is made of putting off the old man, and
putting on the new man. This old man is said to be corrupt, according to the
deceitful lusts. That is, he is denominated an old man, from vicious
qualities, and that corrupt state of nature, in which he was born. Ephesians. 2.3.
Ephesians. 2.3. By nature we are children of wrath. But the new man is denominated
from new, and supernatural qualities, in regard of our lapsed estate. This new
man after God is Created in righteousness, and true holiness, that is, which
after, or according to Gods Image is renewed and changed, by instauration of
such qualities in some good measure, and degree, which we lost in Adam. The
Scholies, Schol: Graec:
from the Greeks, have it thus sensed, (...), Veterem hominem non nomina vit
ipsam naturam, sed operationem peccati, veterem vocavit in peccatis, etc. he
calls not nature it self the old man, but the corruption of nature; for our
nature was of old corrupted by the filthiness of sin. According to which
Zanchie upon the place, Zanchie in loc.
Vetus homo est vetus naturae corruption, atque pravitas, quam ex Adamo quisque
hausit: the old man, says he, is the old corruption, or pravity of nature,
which we all drew from Adam. Et paulo post, Quid vero deponere jubetur? numquid
suam substantiam? minime vero, sed vetustatem suam, and pravitatem naturae: But
what is a man bidden to put off? whether or no is he bidden to put off his
substance? no truly, but that old corruption of nature. And the putting on the
new man, is to have new Created qualities in us from God, by which we put on
Christ, and his righteousness; for Christus habitat in nobis per fidem, Ephesians.
3.17. Christ dwells in the hearts of his Children by faith. And thus the heavens
and the earth may be called new heavens and new earth, or old Heavens, or the
first Heavens, or old earth, or the first earth, in regard of their several
qualities, states, and conditions, and yet the substance remain the same in
them, as well as in the old man, and new man. This may suffice for the words
that have been urged.

But yet there are more words behind in the forenamed places, which seem more
strong then the former that have been urged, and answered, and the answer
illustrated.

Apoc. 20.11.
In that its said, there was found no place for them, and there was no more Sea:
Apoc. 20.1.
To the former words, There was found no place for them, that is, says
Aretius, non apparerent, they would not have made any appearance before him
that sat upon the great white Throne, Nullibi reperirentur, ne ad tribunal
sisterentur, nam quorum locus non reperitur, illa latent, and occulta manent,
they would have been found no where, least they should have stood before Gods
tribunal; and they whose places are not found out, they still lie hid, and
remain in secret. Yea, but I conceive not this sense to agree so well with the
Greek Text, it accords better with Beza's Version of that place, Quorum locus
non est inventus, whose place was not found. Apoc. 12.8. Apoc. 12.8.
speaking of the Angels that fell, (...), neque locus little amplius inventus
est in Coelo; Neither was their place found any more in Heaven; that is, they
had no more any more place there for ever. And if the place of the first heaven
and earth should be no more found than theirs, then should it never be found.
True it is, it is not said The place, scilicet where once they had been, but
their place, where locus must be conceived of by way of relation to the locati,
Heaven was never found any more a place for them. The Original has it,
Apocal. 20.11. Apoc. 20.11.
(...), which the vulgar Translation renders verbatim, Et locus non est
inventus eis, and there was not a place found to them, or for them. Now a place
may be said non esse inventus, not to be found, two ways, either via essendi,
when there is no such place, and so that which is not cannot be found, by
reason of the defect of the thing, though there were no defect in the Seeker;
or via detegendi, by way of the detection of it, though there be such a place,
yet it cannot be found out. Now there is no place in Heaven to the lapsed
Angels, in the former sense. I shall not need to stand upon this point
Philosophically, to show how the Angels can be said to have been in loco,
physically, and tanquam corpora naturalia, non sunt in loco, quia non habent
dimensiones, non sunt quanti, etc. but at least definitive, we say they are in
loco, because being but finitae creaturae, finite Creatures, they must needs be
alicubi, some where: yet we usually say, they are not in loco
[circumscriptive,] because they are immateriales, immateriall substances; and
so, Heaven was the locus communis, the common place to all the lapsed Angels.
Locus we say, is immobilis per se, immovable by it self, though the locata be
moveable, so that the locus, or place may receive diversa locata, successive,
diverse things placed in it successively. Now though I say there be a place in
Heaven, and that place which they once had, yet it is not now locus little,
their place; theirs it is not relative, and formaliter, by way of relation to
them, and formally; but by way of detection, Psalm. 37.10.
that place which was theirs, may be found, is found, and is known; but other
(locata) are, and shall be placed in it, John 14.2. (...), John 14.2.
vado parare vobis locum, as the vulgar, I go to prepare a place for you.

Again, for the more plenary illustration of the answer, as we have considered
of (...), and (...), of the place, and of the finding of it, or not finding of
it, so must we also distinguish of the (...), or of the locata, the Heaven and
the Earth; it is not simply said, that there was no place for Heaven, and
Earth, Apoc. 21.1.
for the first words of the Verse in Apoc: 21.1. are, (...), vidi Coelum novum,
et terram novam, I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, therefore there was some
place to be for Heaven and Earth, but (...), but the [first] Heaven and the
(first) Earth passed away, (...), et locus non est inventus eis. Apoc. 20.11.
Apoc: 20.11. and there was no place for them, namely for the first Heaven, and
the first earth, for they were made subject to corruption, and vanity, as we
have heard, by the sin of man; and no Creatures that are subject to vanity,
or any corruption, shall any more find any place for them after Christ shall
sit upon his great white Throne, at the day of judgment; for when man shall
put on incorruption, then all the Creatures that shall remain after that day,
shall put on [by way of analogie] incorruption too. To which sense Musculus
upon the words accords, Musc. in locum.
Nam sicut sole adveniente, fugantur tenebrae, sic Christo apparente in gloria
fugabitur omnis infectio, elementorum corruptionis noxiae et omnia
innovabantur, for even as when the Sun arises, all darknesses, or mists do
vanish away; even so when Christ shall appear in his glory at the last day,
all infection, or hurtful corruption of the Elements shall be chased away, and
all things, (namely that shall remain after that day) shall be made new, or
become new; so that then the first Heaven, and the first Earth, shall be
changed, and become new, and there shall be no more place found for them as
they were at Christ's coming to judgment, in that state and condition that they
remained in after man had sinned, but a better and far more excellent estate;
for they shall then be so changed and freed from their former corruptible
estate, and so refined and qualified with new qualities, with a new estate and
condition, that in this respect they may be called, a new Heaven, and a new
Earth.

Esa. 65.17.
But let us yet drive the nail a little farther, Esa: 65.17. Ego creaturus sum
Coelos novos, et Terram novam, neque commemorabuntur haec priora, neque venient
in animum; behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth, and the former shall
not be remembered nor come into mind. Creation is ex nihilo, therefore if God
create new Heavens, it may be urged that the former, as also the Earth shall be
totally abolished, and so be no more remembered, nor come into his mind.

To which for answer first, take the Geneva note, Nota Genevensis.
I will so alter and change the state of my Church (namely in the time of
Christ under the state of the new Testament) that it shall seem to dwell in a
new world. So diverse conceive this Place meant of the excellent gifts that
shall be in great abundance in the time of the new Testament, when he shall
make such a restoration, as if Heaven and Earth were changed, or made new,
Esa. 25.6, 7, 8.
this is more fully expressed. Esa, 25.6.7.8. where by corporal things he sets
out spiritual blessings. In this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto
all people a feast of fat things, etc. yet this seems not to be the complete
sense of the place, neither shall all those blessings be fully attained, and in
their highest perfection and degree, until God shall make a new Heaven, and a
new Earth, after the day of judgment, and when things shall have their
renewing; for such a new Heaven and new Earth God shall make, as we learn from
Saint Peter, after the former Heaven and Earth shall be burnt with fire, 2 Pet:
3.13. and that he promised to make such: and what promise find we so plain as
this in the forecited place of Esa 2. if the word [creation] be urged farther
for the new Heavens and Earth, which shall be after the destruction of the
first. I answer, Esa last. 22. God says he will make the new Heavens, and the
new Earth, and that they shall remain before him. 2. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Cor: 5.17. If any any man be in Christ he is nova creatura (a new) Creature. A
new Creature, not in regard of substance, (as we have heard) but in regard of
qualities; divine habits or qualities which are infused into him from God, they
grow not out of the accursed soil of nature, but are spiritual and divine
qualities, created of God, or by him, by which man is so changed that he is
called a new Creature. Creation, (if we take it properly) est motus ex nihilo
adesse, a making something of nothing, thus God made Heaven and Earth, [as we
have heard] of nothing: Gen: 1.1. Genesis 1.1.
or ex nihilo tali, of nothing by nature apt to have any such thing produced of
it, as to have the body of Adam framed of earth, Aquin. in loc.
or red earth, or Eve of a Ribb taken from Adams Side. Aquinas comes home to
this sense upon the place, having quoted that passage in Gal. 6. Gal. 6.15.
15. neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature; ubi notandum
(says he) quod innovatio per gratiam dicitur creatura, where it is to be
observed, that the renewing of us by grace is called a Creature, yea this
renovation is a spiritual creation. And whereas creation, properly and
strictly taken, is a production of a thing out of nothing, or of a being out of
a non-being; and whereas there is a two fold being, esse naturae, et esse
gratiae, the being of nature, and the being of grace, the first being was of
old corrupted, which was our being in nature, which we drew from Adam. Oportet
ergo esse novam creationem, per quam producerentur inesse gratiae, it was
needful there should be a new creation, (says he) by which they should be
produced into the being of grace. Answerable to which I co^ceive that place
Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good
works, (...), opus, as Beza, Beza. Versio Vulgar.
factura, as the Vulgar: his work or making, created in Christ Jesus to good
works: and, ne putaremus Apostolum loqui de primo opere Dei, deque prima
creatione, qua scilicet omnes nos creat in uteris maternis, adjunxit creati in
Christo Jesu, etc. as Zanchie in locum; Zanc. in loc.
least we should suppose the Apostle to speak of the first work of God, and of
the first creation, to wit of that by which we were all created in our mothers
womb, he adjoyns created in Christ Jesus. For duplex est creatio hominum,
says he, Prima, et Secunda, et utraque in Christo, et per Christum, there is a
double, or twofold Creation of men, the first, and the Second, and both of them
in Christ and by Christ. The former is the substantial Creation of our Nature,
the latter the qualitative Creation of our Grace, Aretius in loc.
to which Aretius also assents and more fully illustrates thus, Creatura nihil
confert ad suum creatorem, sed id opus totum est in manu creatoris positum, sic
regenerandus ad sui regenerationem nihil confert, etc. even as the Creature
brings nothing to his Creator in its Creation, so he that is to be regenerated
brings nothing with him that makes for his regeneration; both are wholly in the
Power, and the efficiencie of God. Regeneratio est opus regenerantis, in actu
primo, its also opus regenerati in actu secundo; Regeneration is the work of
God in the first act, its also the work of man in the second act. In the
first, man is merely Passive in regard of God, who renews and heales our
corrupt nature; and subdues our vicious qualities, by the infusion of new
qualities into each of our faculties: and then acti agimus, being wrought upon,
we work on together with God, in actu secundo, in the second act, Gods grace
is the principium a quo, man is the subject on which this grace works, and is
the principium quod, as the Schools use to speak, and then both concur in
the production of every holy action: and man thus helped by Gods grace, he
willingly moves himself to what is good: and by reason of this concurrance of
man with God, these operations of grace are properly called man's work, not
Gods work, as it is thus done by man; so that when a man believes, though his
faith be infused by Gods Spirit, yet it is exercised by man voluntarily moving
himself to that act of believing, and therefore we say that its man that
believes, not the spirit in man; for though this habit be infused by the
spirit, yet the spirit is not subject to any infused habits. Thus briefly for
the fuller illustration of the word Creation.

Pererius in Genesis 1.1.
Pererius upon the word creavit, in Genes. observes it to be promiscuously
used, not only for production, ex nihilo, but also sundry times for production
out of some praeexistent matter, not naturally apt for any such thing, as is
produced out of it. Barth. Kecker. lib. 7. systemat. Physic. Wolleb. Christ.
Theol. compend. lib. 1. cap. 5. canon. 1.
This Keckerman calls Creationem mediatam, lib. 7. System. Physici. Woll bius
in compendio Christianae Theologiae. capite 5. canone 1. to the same purpose
lib. 1. Creare, non tantum est ex nihilo aliquid facere, sed etiam ex materia
inhabili supra naturae vires aliquid producere; To Create is not only to make
some thing of nothing, but also to produce somewhat of a matter unfitting for
such a production, as above the strength of the nature of it, or above the
strength of nature, so that we may see creating does not always import
production out of nothing; and you have heard out of the same Prophets, that
whereas he uses the word Creating, or he will Create, in one place of his
prophecy, he uses the word make in another, and both of them spoken of the
same thing.

If we further urge that in Esaias, Esa. 65.17.
before mentioned, neque commemorabuntur haec priora, neque venient in animum,
the former shall not be remembered nor come into mind, as if they should be so
totally abolished, that they should never more be seen, or thought upon. To
which we afford a further answer, that a thing may be said not to be remembered
two ways, either absolutely, or comparatively; absolutely, God cannot be
touched with oblivion or any such defect, so as to forget what he has once
known; for, Petrus Lomb. lib 1. sent. did. 39. lit. A.
as Lombard says well, lib. 1. Sent. d^stinc. 39. lit. A. Dei scientia omnino
immutabilis est, nec augeri potest, nec minui, the knowledge of God is
immutable, it can neither be increased nor deminished: if therefore God once
knew the old Heavens and the old Earth, he can never absolutely be said so not
to remember them, or not to come into his mind, as absolutely to forget them.
Lom 1. lib. 1. sent. did. 41. lit. G. in fi^e.
And lib. 1. sent. did. 41. lit. G: in calce. Indubitanter ergo teneamus Deum
semper omnia scire, quae aliquando scit; having argued the Point concerning
Gods knowledge, thus he concludes, Therefore we hold it for an undoubted truth,
that all things which God knows at any time, he knows them always.

But it may be objected, Ier. 31.34. Ier. 31.34.
I will remember their sin no more, speaking of the sins of his people: To
which I answer, where the Lord says, that he will remember their sins no
more, we cannot rightly understand it thus, that he has absolutely forgotten
that ever his people had had any sins, but as Mattyr well says, Class. 3.
locorum communium, Peter Martyr Class. 3. loc. com. cap. 9. sect. 18. in calce.
cap. 9. sect. 18. in calce, Deum oblivisci, atque non recordari, est nolle
punire, neque p^enas de aliquo sumere. In this sense for God to forget, and not
to remember, is as much as not to punish, or to take revengement upon a man. I
conceive that that passage in the Gospel according to S. John, will come up to
our purpose: John 16.21. John. 16.21.
Mulier cum parit, dolorem habet, quia venit hora ejus; quum autem peperit
puerulum, (as Beza reads) jam non meminit oppressionis, quod gaudeat hominem
esse natum in mundo, or quia natus est homo in mundum, as the vulgar, A woman
when she is in Travel has sorrow, because her hour is come; but as soon as
she is delivered of the Child, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that
a man is born into the world. Now where it is said that [she remembers no more
the anguish,] we must not understand it simply and absolutely, as though she
had quite forgot the extremity of her pain, as if it had never been; but
comparatively she remembers it not, in regard of that joy with which she is now
filled, that its passed over, and that a Man-child is born into the world.
Even so the Lord may be said not to remember the former Heavens and Earth, and
that they come no more into his mind; not absolutely, as we have heard, but
comparatively, or in regard of the glory and excellency of the new Heavens and
Earth that he will make. And thus much may suffice for answer to that objection.

I have but one branch more of the allegation to answer, and then the objection
is solved. Apoc. 21.1. Apoc. 21.1.
before alleged, And there was no more Sea. To which I might first answer,
that there is no such express Scripture for a new Sea, as there is for a new
Heaven, and a new earth in particular.

Secondly, by the [Sea] Sunt qui putant turbulentam hujus saeculi vitam, (qui
maris nomine aliquoties Scriptura significatur) tum cessuram significari: Some
suppose that by the Sea is signified the troublesome and unquiet estate of this
world, (which sometimes is set out in Scripture by that term) shall then
cease: but I conceive that the word Sea, is to be taken as Heaven and Earth are
in the same Verse, not metaphorically, but literally, and properly, and no good
reason can be shown to the contrary.

Thirdly and lastly, taking the word Sea properly, as Heaven and Earth is
taken, Aug. lib. 20. de civit. Dei cap. 16.
I answer with Augustine lib. 20. de civitat. Dei, cap. 16. who doubts whether
those words be so simply and absolutely to be understood, Vt mare prorsus sit
desiturum, utpote jam deflagrationibus exhaustum, and exciccatum, etc. vel
futurum sit, Aquin. supplem ad 3. qu. 74. art. 5. resp. ad 2. remanebit quoad
substantiam, non quoad falsedinem, and commotiones fluctum.
sed innovatum, and immutatum: that is, whether the Sea shall then altogether
cease, as being exhausted, and quite dried up with the flames of fire, or it
shall be renewed and changed, so that it shall be no more raging, roaring, or
turbulent Sea, but more quiet and pleasant. And Meyerus judges thus, Meye. in
verba
that as the Sea, ad varios usus, ac hominum utilitatem, optimi creatoris jussu
deseruit, innovabitur ergo cum caeteris elementis, and a fervitute restituto
homine, liberabitur: and grounds his opinion upon Romans 8.21. As the Sea,
Romans 8.21.
by the command of its great Creator, served for diverse uses and profits of
mankind, so it shall be renewed with the rest of the Elements, and shall be
delivered from its bondage, when man is restored.

And for further illustration of this place, that in Esa. 60.19. Esa. 60.19.
may come up to help us, the Sunn shall be [no more] thy light by day, neither
for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto
thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Which place must first be
conceived (as the learned observe) of that great light, and prosperity that
shall be in the Church under the state of the new Testament, when both Jews,
and Gentiles were to have the knowledge of the everliving God, and when the
knowledge of the true God should be spread over the earth, as the waters cover
the Sea; but then the aeternity, and perfection of this excellency, was to be
completed when God should make new Heavens, and a new Earth, in those glorious
Mansions, where a far more glorious light then the Sunn of the firmament
shall shine, and whereas then there shall be, dies unus perpetuus, nox nulla,
one perpetual day, and no night at all; that light and excellency that shall
shine and flow out to the sonns of God in the state of the new Testament, both
in spiritual knowledge and divine graces, is but as a glimpse of their glory
and excellency which shall be completed in the life to come. And some Divines I
find who call this their excellency under the state of the new Testament,
whether for time we refer it to the primative, or Apostolic Church, as
some; or to the middle times, as others; or to the latter times, as a third; or
to all these from Christ's time, to the last in their several degrees, and in
times when the Church had her Lucida intervalla, her halcion days, or days of
free professing of the Gospel; not in her times of the storm beating by
general persecutions, or darkning by the clouds of affliction, as a fourth:
this their spiritual excellency I say, under the state of the new Testament,
they call (typum) a type or figure, or resemblance of that excellency, and
glorious estate of the Sonns of God in the life to come, wherein the excellency
of their estate shall fully appear, so that the Prophets sometimes make a
transition from the one to the other, and promise to the Church in its complete
estate (in regard of sanctity and freedom from sin) those things that shall
in their height and perfection be obtained in the state of glory, which you
have heard in this life may be resembled or shadowed out. 1 Cor. 13.9.
1 Cor. 13.9, 10. For we know in part, and prophecy in part, but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. And he
adds in the 11. and 12. Verses, when I was a child, I spoke as a child, I
understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put
away childish things: for now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face; now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known. We
know in part, parum enim ex multo cognoscimus, Versio Syriac. per Trem.
as the Syriacke version by Tremelius, for we know but a little of much, we
know but here after an imperfect manner, in comparison of what we shall know
there. Our knowledge here is but compared to Childhood, in regard of a perfect
and well instructed man. The knowledge of a Child is but small, even so small
and weak is our knowledge in this life, in comparison of what we shall have in
the life to come. Here we discern Divine truths more darkely, there we shall
discern them more clearly, and fully. And where it is here said that we know
in part, Non est sensus doctrinam salutis nos tantum ex part, non integram
habere, proinde revelationibus, aut traditionibus aliis opus esse. Nequaquam,
sed est collatio praesentis et futuri status circa cognitionem Dei, et rerum
divinarum. Etenim summa hujus vitae scientia nihil est ad futuram perfectionem
collata, Paraeus in loc.
as Paraeus has it. This is not the meaning of the words, as though the
doctrine of salvation were but had of us in part, and not wholly, and that
therefore we should stand in need of other revelations, or traditions to make it
out; not so, but collation or comparing of our estate in this life present,
with that which is to come, concerning the knowledge of God and Divine things.
For, the chiefest knowledge that we have in this life, is nothing in comparison
of that perfection we shall attain unto in the life that is to come. We
prophecy but in part, in comparison of the excellent light, and clearness of
judgment in Divine mysteries, that we shall attain unto then; for when that
which is perfect shall come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away, not
corruptive or destructive, but absorptive ac perfective, not quite abolished,
corrupted or destroyed, but swallowed up into that knowledge which is more
excellent, and more perfected, even as childhood is swallowed up of youth, or
youth into a perfect man; or as Chrysostom gives it, Chrysostom. in verb.
Non abolebitur scientia ut nulla sit, sed desinet esse imperfecta, this
knowledge which we now have in part shall not be absolutely abolished, that it
be none at all, but it shall cease to be imperfect. Even as that knowledge
which a man has in any liberal Art, or Science, when he is but Bachellour in
Arts, and when he knows them but in part, is not totally abolished when he
proceeds to be Master in them, but swallowed up into greater knowledge, and
perfected; so our knowledge in part, or imperfect knowledge of Divine mysteries
in this life, of that excellent and perfect knowledge in the next life. Now we
see but as in a Glass, more darkly, then more clearly. And as in a Glass the
nudae species rerum apparentium, as the natural Philosophers speak, the nudae
species, or likenesses of things are but to be seen, not the things themselves.
Here we see Gods vvisdome in his Works, his power, his excellency; here we
know that his Son was incarnate, that he made all things of nothing, and the
like; but this we know not perfectly, till we shall see God himself face to
face; and know as we are known, namely of God himself: 1 John 3.2.
for 1 John 3.2. We shall see him as he is, non comprehendendo totam essentiam,
sed conspiciendo per modum ineffabilem, habendo imaginem Dei perfect
renovatam, labemque omnem totaliter deletam, ac deperditam: not by
comprehending his whole Essence, for that is beyond the sphaere of the ability
of any Created and finite nature; but by the beholding of him after an
ineffable manner, having the Image of God perfectly renewed in us, and all
spott, or contagion of sin, totally taken away from us, and destroyed: for
until then we cannot see him as he is. Moses in this life saw but his back
parts, the Fathers under the Law saw him but in symbolis, in certain outward
signs of his presence, as in the fire, in the Cloud, in the smoke, or the
like; but we shall see him clearly, as he is, 2 Cor. 5.6, 7. 2 Cor. 5.6, 7.
We know that whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord;
for we walk by faith, and not by sight: but then we shall see what we have
believed, yea, him in whom we have believed, which whilst we have but mortal
eyes of flesh, and bodies subject to sin, and infirmity, you have heard, we
cannot do. And whereas it is said, the Sun shall be no more thy light by
day, etc. but the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, which far exceeds
the light of the Sun; yet we cannot hence conclude infallibly, that those
Planets and natural Lights of Heaven shall totally cease and perish; but
comparatively they may be said to shine no more, in regard of that unspeakable
splendour which God shall give in glory in the presence of all his Elect; so
that the Sun shall be no more necessary to them in that manner it was whilst
they were upon the earth. But in that God shall make a new Heaven, it is not
probable that this new Heaven shall be less adorned than the old one, or less
glorious. The Stars are integrall parts of Heaven, they are densiores parts
Orbis, the thicker or more compact parts of their Orbs, for if the Corpus
stellarum, or body of the Stars, were aequae (...), or tralucidum, equally
translucent to the rest of their Orbs, then would they neither receive, keep
or give any more light than the rest of the Orbs do. Aristotle lib. 2. Arist.
lib. 2. de Coelo cap. 7.
de Coelo, cap. 7. shows, that they have eandem essentiam and naturam cum
Coelo, the same Essence and nature with the Heavens; eadem materia and forma
constant, cienturque eodem motu: they consist of the same matter and form, and
are also moved with the same motion; therefore if the Heavens be made new, and
more glorious than they are now, shall not these, as parts of them, be so too?
Matthew. 24.29.
and if so, then not totally abolished. Yea, but Matthew. 24.29. the Stars
shall fall from Heaven; Apoc. 6.13.
and Apoc. 6.13. the Stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth, as a Fig Tree
casts her untimely Figgs when she is shaken of a mighty vvinde. And Heaven
departed away as a Scroll, when it is rolled, and every Mountain and Island
were moved out of their places, etc. This latter allegation seems to me to
have been taken from Isaiah, Isa. 34.4. All the Host of Heaven shall be
dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a Scroll, and all their
Host shall fall down as the Leaf falls off from the Vine, and as a falling
Figg from the Figtree. And if so, then these integrall parts shall be
abolished: for when God shall shake both Heaven and earth, as Heb. 12.26. Yet
once more, and I shake not the earth only, but also the Heaven, etc. and you
may allege, that God by his power is as able to shake the Stars out of the
Orbs of Heaven, as the wind the Figgs from the Figtree, or Leaves from the
Vine. To these allegations I would give satisfaction in order, concerning the
Stars and Planets of Heaven, for as for the body of Heaven we have answered
already.

First then to the allegation, Matthew. 24.29. The Stars shall fall from
Heaven. The Ancient Divines have differed upon the sense of these words, so
also have the Modern. And how the Sun and Moon shall be darkened, we may more
easily conceive then how the Stars shall fall, for they may become so either
by great and fearful Ecclipses, or nubium obtectione, or innatae lucis
privatione, or majoris luminis obscuratione; by being deprived of their innate,
light, or by being obscured by some greater light; as by the glorious coming of
Christ. Chrysostom. exposit. 1. and 2.
But by whether of these two later, Chrysostom is not at one with himself, as
may appear in Expositione prima and secunda. Yet Astrologers say, that Sol and
Luna simul Ecclipsim naturalem, pati non possunt.

Secondly, its observable that in the Prophets, when any great and fearful
day of the Lord, by executing of his terrible judgments upon any people or
Nation, was at hand, they expressed it by these terms: all which judgments
were specimina quaedam extremi judicii, certain examples and patterns of the
last and great judgment; as upon those of Tyrus, of Babylon, of Egypt, of the
Jews, Idumaeans, or the like. For Tyrus, and Zidon, and the Coasts of
Palestine, when God threatens recompense to them for what they had done to his
Church, which he takes as done to himself. If ye recompense me, etc. he says.
Joel, 3.15. Joel. 3.15.
The Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their
shining, which shall be signs of Gods wrath and anger; so that the Creatures
Lamps of light should be suspended from yielding that comfortable light and
Service unto sinners, which formerly they did.

For Babylon. Isaiah 13.10. Isai. 13.10.
The Stars of Heaven, and the Constellations thereof shall not give their
light: The Sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the Moon shall not
cause her light to shine.

For Egypt. Ezekiel 32.7, 8. Ezekiel. 32.7, 8.
And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the Heaven, and make the Stars
thereof dark. I will cover the Sun with a Cloud, and the Moon shall not
give her light. All the bright Lights of Heaven will I make dark over thee, and
set darkness upon thy Land, says the Lord God.

Joel 2.10.
For the Jews. Joel 2.10. The Sun and the Moon shall be dark, and the Stars
shall withdraw their shining.

Esa. 34.4, 5.
For Idumaea. Isa. 34.4, 5. amongst the rest of the Enemies of the Church of
God, they were to be punished, and then (says he) all the Host of Heaven
shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a Scroll, and all
their Host shall fall down, as a Leaf falls from the Vine, etc.

Musc. in loc.
Thirdly, concerning the Stars falling from Heaven, Musculus is of opinion,
that they shall fall indeed; and quid opus est disputare de modo, quo ventura
sunt haec signa? to what end should we despute of the manner how these signs
should come to pass? says he. Of the same judgment is Bucer and some others,
Bucer. in verba
Yet judicious Calvin, Calvin in loc.
and many other learned Divines, are not of this judgment, that the Stars
shall really be separated from their Orbs. Stellas non reipsa casuras
intelligit, sed secundum hominum sensum: ideo apud Lucam tantum praedicit fore
signa in Soli, Luna, and Stellis, sensus ergo est, tantam fore machinae coeli
concussionem ut Stellae ipsae cadere putentur, etc. his meaning is not that the
Stars shall fall indeed, but they shall seem to fall in man's apprehension,
and the reason he renders, is in Luke 21.25. where he only foretells that there
shall be signs in the Sun, the Moon and the Stars: the meaning therefore
is, that there shall be so great a concussinn, or jumbling, or shaking of the
Fabric of Heaven, that the Stars themselves may be thought to fall. Some of
the Rabbis think, that men shall be so perplexed, that they shall verily
think, that the Stars are a falling from Heaven, and take no comfort from any
light of those golden Firebals, as I may term them. Others think, that the
fiery Meteors, shall fall in such abundance at that time, that the Stars of
Heaven shall be thought indeed to fall; which yet shall but be Stellae
cadentes, such fiery meteors, as we call falling-Starres. The School Divines,
[that are Aristotelians for their Philosophie] are much bent against the real
falling of the Stars from their Orbs; which though they must needs grant with
the Text, that they shall fall, yet they dispute the modus, or manner how, and
will not be brought off natural reason, in the contemplation of a miraculous
and supernatural work, to grant that the Stars shall fall a fitu, from their
situation in their Orbs, any more then the Orbs themselves, seeing that they
are parts of them; and therefore have distinguished about the manner of their
falling, as God willing, we shall hear. True it is, if we respect Gods absolute
power, and miraculous and supernatural way of working, he can pull the knots
out of the Timber, and yet the rest of the substance remain. Thus God can cause
the Stars to fall from their Orbs, and yet the Orbs remain. And as you have
heard, he can more easily do this, then the violent wind can cause the Figs
to fall from the Figtree. And if with Musculus, Bucer and some others, we
should go this way, I cannot conceive the consequence in Divinity to be of any
great danger. Now if we go a Philosophical and rational way to work, as do
the School Divines, then we must rather incline to their non separation a situ,
as keeping us within he sphaer of natural reason, above which Divinity often
goes.

For first, if they should fall, then must their fall of necessity be toward
the earth; and if so, then shall their motus be deorsum, downward, which is
contrary to their natural motion, which we know is motus circularis, a
circular motion, as the motion of the Heavens is: from which the Philosopher
proves, that Coelum est corpus simplex, Arist. lib. 1. de Coelo text. 8.
because it has motum simplicem, a simple motion, and that circular, keeping
an equal distance from its Center. Not rectus, a straight motion, such as have
the Elements, nor compositus, a compound motion, such as mixed bodies, and
Elementary have. For from the motion the Philosopher would conclude, that the
matter of the Heavens is quinta quaedam essentia, a certain quintessence, and
not ejusdem materiae cum inferioribus, of the same matter with these inferior
bodies. Indeed many of the ancient Philosophers before Aristotle's time, were of
opinion, that the Heavens were of Elementary nature; he was the first that made
this opinion famous in the Schools, that the Heavens were of a quintessence,
differing from the nature of the Elementary bodies. And diverse Divines there
are that opine the heavens to be of the same matter with sublunary bodies, as
well as did many of the Ancient Philosophers. Averroes lib. 1. de coelo, text.
7.
Averroes lib. 1 de coelo, text. 7. would needs be so subtle, that he would
allow no matter at all to be in the Heavens: but this opinion is so gross,
that its contrary to common experience, and sense. The greatest argument, by
which the Philosopher would prove his quintessence, is this, quaecunque materia
communicant, Arist. de genesis and corruptione lib. 1. cap. 1. text. 1.
ea ad invicem transmutantur. At coelum, and inferiora ad invicem non
transmutantur. Ergo. And quae non sic transmutantur, dissimili constant
materia: Those bodies that commumunicate in the same matter, may be changed one
into another, as Elementary bodies we see are, which are in a capacity of the
successive receiving of more forms than one. But the Heavens not so, but their
matter is in potentia tantum ad formam suam primo a Deo inditam: Only to their
first form which God first gave them, and this was never changed since the
first Creation, as the forms of other sublunary Bodies have been, and thus he
thought it should still continue, and that the Heavens should be eternal, and
immortal, and never be dissolved. Again, it was conceived, that if the matter
should be the same both of the Heavens, and the Element of Fire contiguous to
it, or next unto the sphere of the Moon, that then the Element of Fire might
kindle in the sphere of the Moon, and so Heaven might suffer from the fire, and
the fire from it, etc. Scalig exer. 61.
To which Scaliger makes answer, Exercitat. 61. Coeli vero forma non agit in
haec inferiora per univocas qualitates, cum his inferioribus qualitatibus; The
form of Heaven works not upon these inferior bodies by such qualities, as are
univocall with these inferior qualities. And the naturc of the Elemenrary fire
is so pure, that it burns not, nor consumes any part of Heaven, nor is hurt by
any part of Heaven, but is rather conserved and nourished by the circular
motion of it, therefore need not the contiguitie to the sphaere, or concavo
Lunae be feared. Scalig exer. 9.
Scaliger exercit. 9. Non enim Coelo inimicus est, cui obesse profecto nequit
ulla vi: its no Enemy to Heaven, which in very deed it cannot hurt by any force
it has. And he adds, in Coelo nulla est affectio ejusdem generis cum iis
affectionibus quae in igne insunt: in Heaven there is no disposition of the
same kind, with those dispositions that are in the Element of fire. Non erit
item effectio contrariorum, therefore there is not the effect of contraries:
Contraria namque sub eodem genere sunt. Nemo igitur qui sit bonus metaphysicus,
dixit materiam coeli ab ignis qualitatibus destrui posse, etc. Contraries are
under the same genus, (true say the Logicians, either proximo, or remoto)
therefore none (says he) that are expert in Metaphysics, will say that the
matter of the Heavens can be destroyed by the qualities of fire. The reason the
Peripatetiques urge, is, because they are not of the same common matter; but
that he sleights, but with no great strength of Argument, as far as I
conceive, yet he will have the reason why the matter of the Heavens is not
combustible, or obnoxious to the Element of fire, to be, because they differ
per corruptibile and incorruptibile, as corruptible and incorruptible; and the
qualities of Heaven non sunt eum ignis qualitatibus generis ejusdem: they are
not of the same kind with the qualities of fire, as in part you have heard
before: but what real difference he can assign between the Philosophers
quinta essentia, and his incorruptible, I have not as yet understood, seeing
the Philosopher meant, that the matter of the Heavens was incorruptible,
because it was a quintessence, the difference is only verbal.

Secondly, we read not that the Sun and Moon shall fall from Heaven, or the
rest of the Planets, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, or the like; but the Stars,
which is conceived to be meant of the fixed Stars. Now when Heaven is shaken,
why these should be loosened from their eight sphaere, more than any of the
Planets out of their several Orbs, in nature we can give no reason.

Thirdly and lastly, if what Aristotle writes in l. 2. Arist. lib. 2. de Coelo.
de coelo, be true, that stellae coelumque eandem habent substantiam, that the
Stars, and the Heaven it self have the same substance, and that they differ
but densitate, and raritate, in density or raritie of the parts of that
substance; and that as Scaliger speaks Exercitat. 61. Scalig. de subttl. ad
Card. exer. 61.
de subtilitate ad Cardanum, si sidus be coelum suum densum, and coelum be
sidus suum rarum, if the Stars be the Heaven made thick or thickened, and the
Heaven be the Stars rarefied, or made thinner, (for he likes not the
illustration of the old Philosophers, who compared them to knots in Timber) Non
admittenda veterum Metaphora, qui Stellam in coelo, velut in tabula nodum
arbitrabantur: the Metaphor of the Ancients (says he) is not to be allowed of,
who supposed a Star in the Heavens to be like a knot in a Plank, or in the
Timber. Yet may not a man as well say, that nodus is tabula sua densa, and
tabula is nodus suus rarus, as he the other, except a man were now and then
delighted to make singularity, a subtlety; and if so, how that quantum
continuum should be so separated, as to have the parts densiores to fall, and
the parts rariores of the same substance to remain after them, in natural
reason cannot well be conceived; therefore the school-divines were moved to
judge, that the Stars should have no real removeall, by falling (a situ) or
from their situation, but that their falling from Heaven should be after some
other manner. And the Scriptures sometimes speak of things, not as they are in
themselves, but as they appear unto men: as Matthew. last, Matthew. last. 2.
2. an Angel is said to roll away the stone from the Sepulcher: Mark last, 5.
yet Mark last, 5. this Angel is called a young man, not that the Angel was so,
but because he did appear so unto others, having assumed that shape, and so was
in a visible form. And thus the Schoolmen think, that then shall be such a
terror upon the Creature, and men so perplexed at the coming of this great
and fearful Judge, and the Sea roaring, the earth trembling, the Heaven
shaking, that the Stars of Heaven shall be thought to them to fall; yet not
existentia, but apparentia, say they; Dionysius Catthus. in verb.
and so Dionysius Carthusianus upon the place: They shall fall from Heaven, not
from their existence in their sphaeres, but in appearance unto the Inhabitants
of the Earth. Except you had rather say that the Stars, quoad statum
corruptum, according to their corrupt state by the sin of man, should have
their corruption to fall from them, being burned, as the Heavens shall be. And
howsoever that of Aquinas in his sense be true, in supplemento ad 3. Aquin.
suppl. ad 3. part sum. qu. 74. art. 1. in corp.
partem sum. qu. 74. art. 1. in corpore, that res corporalis subjectum
infectionis culpae proprie esse non possit, tamen ex culpa quaedam
incongruitas, etc. that is, infectio, or impuritas, though things corporeal
cannot properly be said to be the subject of infection by fault, yet by the
fault of another, (namely of man) for whose use in some sort they were made,
there may be a certain incongruitie, infection, or impuritie from their first
estate put upon them, the which if it were not removed, would keep them from a
better, and a more perfect estate, therefore will God purge them in the fire,
at the last day. For purgatio mundi ad hoc erit, ut removeatur a corporibus
dispositio contraria perfectioni gloriae, quae quidem perfectio est ultima
rerum consummatio, Aquin. suppl. ad 3. qu. 74. art. 4. in corp.
etc. Aquin. supplemen. ad 3. partem sum. qu. 74. art. 4. in corp. the purging
of the world by fire is to this end, that from the corporeal Creatures may be
removed that disposition now in them, which is contrary to the perfection of
glory, which perfection truly is the last achievement of things that can be
attained unto.

Now come we to the last allegation for the liberation of the Creature, by
total abolition. 2 Pet. 3.10. 2 Pet. 3.10.
The Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be
burnt up. To which I answer, (as in part before) that though the Heavens be
thus burned up, yet it will not follow, that the substance of them shall
totally be annihilated, but that their esse accidentale tale, their accidental
estate be renewed, their corruptible qualities shall be changed, and that
impuritie, they became liable to by the sin of man, shall be taken away, that
so they may be reduced to a better estate. Metal we know that is melted, or
dissolved in the fire, is not totally destroyed, quoad substantiam, in the
substance of it, but the dross and baser qualities of it purged out. Thus we
conceive it to be with the Heavens, when they shall be dissolved; so that
neither will this last allegation evince an asolute abolition of the substance
of the Heavens. And thus much in answer to the Arguments or Allegations for the
liberation of the Creature from the bondage of corruption, by way of total
abolition.

I now come to the second, which you have heard in part, is sententia
communior, the more common opinion, not only of the Fathers, both of Eastern
and Western Churches, but of Modern Divines, as also of the Schools. And
because I have formerly referred you to Vossius, where you may see them
nominated particularly, as also the places in them, I shall not need here
again, crambem recoquere, to make mention of them, being so many. But now this
puts me upon the fourth point, what Creatures are conceived, as most capable of
this liberation from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the Sonns of God; for here those that are for liberation by way of repurgation,
or the taking out the baser qualities, or impurity, saving the substance from
total abolition, yet they are not all of the same judgment what Creatures
shall be partakers of this liberation.

Give me leave to rank them thus, either such as were created at the first, in
the state of innocence; Or secondly, those that had existence in the world
since; Or thirdly, those only that shall be found remaining at Christ's coming
to judgment: Or Fourthly and lastly, the Heavens, the Earth, and mankind.

Some think, that those Creatures shall be restored from the bondage of
corruption, that were made the first subject to vanity, which were Created in
a pure, firm, and sound estate, and yet lost this integrity by the sin of man,
and so became subject to instabilitie, vanity, and slavery, and yet was this
no wrong to the Creature says Chrysostom: Chrysostom.
Nam si propter me factae sunt, nihil admittitur injustitiae, si propter me
patiantur: If they were made for me, they have no injustice, says he, if they
suffer for me. And then he renders a reason for it; aequi, and iniqui ad res
inanimas, and ratione carentes no^ esse rationem transferendam: There is no
reason to be rendered of right or wrong done to any such Creatures as want life,
or that wants reason, or understanding; yet a man may sin in perverting the
use of the Creature in cruelty toward it, or in the abuse of it, this God
permits him not, but he may offend against God who gave him dominion over it.
Hom. 22. in Genesin, Chrysostom. Hom, 22. in Genes.
he shows, that it is not injustum, or absurdum, si creatura propter homines
aliquas calamitates cogatur far, either unjust or absurd, if the Creatures be
compelled to bear some calamities by reason of man. And he illustrates it by
this simile, (for the which manner of teaching and writing he is the most
excellent of all the Fathers] si quis incurrat in iram Regis, ipse non modo
supplicio afficitur, sed etiam omnis ejus familia opprimitur: homo propter
peccatum factus est obnoxious maledictioni, and irae Dei, quare non est mirum si
universa Creatura quae hominis familia est, ingemiscat una cum eo, ac doleat:
that is, If any man incur the wrath of his Prince, he is not only punished,
but his whole Family is oppressed; even so man by sin being made subject to
the curse, and wrath of God, what marvel is it if the whole Creation, which is
the family of man, do groan, and sorrow together with him: yet of these only
it cannot be said, Romans 8.22.
as Romans 8.22. that they do travel in pain together, (...), usque ad hoc
tempus, even until now.

Secondly, some understand all the Creatures the whole Creation, that has
groaned, but that all, and every of the Individualls of every age, multiplied
since the Creation, should be restored, is not probable: Who can conceive that
the Earth should contain them? their number would amount as in infinitum, or
what use for so many of them?

Thirdly, others therefore who seem to come nearer the mark, rather understand
it of such only as shall remain at Christ's coming to judgment; but then
again whether only the species, or several kinds of every Creature shall be
restored, or all of every species then remaining? is another difficulty, and
that which God has not clearly revealed unto us. But if the Lord deal in the
second destruction of the world by fire, as he did in the first by water, then
the species shall remain, but not all Individualls of those species; for all
the individualls multiplied at the time of the Flood, were not preserved, but
only some of every species; so it may be, that at the second destruction of
the world, God will restore some of every species, and yet not all and singular
individuals of every species; for as when the species or several kinds of
Creatures are said to groan, the whole Creation may be said to groan; eve^ so
likewise when the several species, or kinds of creatures are delivered from
the bondage of corruption, the whole Creation may be said to be delivered from
the bondage of corruption; for when Paul says, (...), that omnis creatura
ingemiscit, (or una gemiscit) and una parturit usque ad hoc tempus; that every
Creature of the whole Creation groaneth, or groaneth together with us, or
travelleth with us in pain, as a woman travelleth of Child, with great desire
to be delivered, yea, even until now. It is not like that he means every
individual that has had a Being of any kind, since the Creation, whereof
thousands and millions were dissolved into their Principles before his time,
and had no Being in rerum natura, as we say; that these should groan, and
travel, as a woman traveling to bring forth (...), ad hoc usque tempus, even
unto that time that Paul writ these words, but that the several species of
Creatures, or the Creatures of every several kind, did groan and travel in
pain, even until that time, and will do, till the glorious revelation of the
Sons of God, which the Creatures expects earnestly, and longs for, that it
may be delivered from the bondage of its corruption. This I conceive rational
and probable, and the ordinary gloss understands not singula generum, but
genera singulorum. Glossa ordin.


Now let us hear the judgments of godly, expert, and pious Divines upon this
point, to which also we will add the judgment of Aquinas from amongst the
schoolmen, though many of them run upon the last point. Doctor Willet (as you
have heard in brief before) in his qu. 27. D. Willet qu. 27. in Romans expos.
quint.
upon Romans. 8. expositione 5. has by diligent reading observed, that the
most general and received opinions, by the Creature, to understand corporalia
and irrationalia, corporeal and irrational Creatures, comprehending the
Heavens and Stars with the Earth, together with living Creatures of all
sorts, Trees, Plants, etc. for this he quotes Ambrose upon the place, Ambros.
in loc.
Calvin and Peter Martyr, Calvin.
with some others. Calvin thus: Rursum hinc apparet in quantam gloriae
excellentiam evehendi sint filii Dei, ad quam amplisicandam and illustrandam
creaturae omnes innovabuntur. Again, hence it may appear into how great an
excellency the Sons of God shall be elevated, into how great an excellency
of glory; for the amplifying and illustrating of which, all Creatures shall be
renewed. Peter Martyr thus, Petr. Martyr in loc.
certe videmus omnia ita creata esse a Deo, ut se maxim cupiant conservare
^^itaque plantae, animalia, petrae, metalla obluctantur, and resistunt pro se
quaeque ne perdantur, and esse desinant, etc. Truly we see all things to be so
Created of God, that they have a special to conserve themselves, therefore
even Plants, living Creatures, that have sense and motion, Rocks, Metalls, do
wrestle and resist, striving every one of them for themselves against their
destruction. And a little after, Quumque ea videamus reniti, ne perdantur, and
pereant, veniat nobis in mentem, qualis illis insitus sit appetitus, is aurem
naturalis est, and ideo in universum frustrari non potest, etc. and when as we
may see how they resist destruction, least they perish; we may call to mind
what an appetite or desire is put into them by nature, and in so much as it is
natural, it shall not lie frustrate for ever. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom says, facta est propter nos corruptibilis propter nos etiam
immortalitate donabitur; The Creature, became corruptible (says he) because of
us, and it shall also be rewarded with immortality, because of the same. And
again, says the same Father, Si affliguntur nostra causa, quum apparebit
nostra foelicitas, una etiam instaurabuntur; If the Creatures be afflicted for
our sakes, when our foelicity shall appear, they shall be restored together
with us. Chrysostom de reparand laps. ad Theod.
And lib. de Reparandis lapsis ad Theodorum, he shows, that post diem judicii
omnia sunt renovanda, after the day of judgment all things shall be renewed.
And Apoc. 21.5. Apoc. 21.5.
and qui insidebat throno dixit, ecce nova facio omnia; and he that sat upon
the Throne said, behold, I make all things new. Some suppose this to be meant
of the Kingdom of Christ under the new Testament, after the abolishing of the
old Ceremonies of of Moses, and to be taken from the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. ult.
22. having foretold the calling of the Gentiles, and how he would take of them
for Priests and Levites, he adds, For as the new heavens and new earth which I
will make shall remain before me, says the Lord, so shall your seed, and your
name continue, etc. but as I have said before, this is not the complete sense
of the place, though all this do quadrate to the Kingdom of Christ; for as God
will make new his Church here, which is the chiefest part of his Creature next
to the Angels, so will he also make the rest of the Creatures new, at the day
of judgment. To which Aretius assents upon that place in Apoc. 21.5. Aretius
in loc.
Loquitur autem Dominus de totius Creaturae renovatione, in qua principalis
habetur ratio Ecclesiae suae. Ideo eandem sententiam Apostolus, 2 Cor. 5.17. ad
novam Creaturam in sanctis applicuit. Si quis est in Christo, nova est
Creatura, vetera praeterierunt, ecce nova facta sunt omnia; The Lord in this
place speaks (says he) of the renewing of the whole Creature, in which
principal respect is had to the Church of God, therefore the Apostle applies
the same saying to the new Creature in his Saints, 2 Cor. 5.17.
2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are
passed away, behold all things are become new. Meyer. in verb.
Meyerus just to the same purpose, having spoken of the forenamed passage in
Esaias, he says, Omnia satis regno Christi per Apostolos propagato, verum et hic
vterque vates altius prospexit, nempe, ad regenerationem futuri seculi, quando
plenissime renovato homine, omnia restituentur, et in melius commutabuntur; All
things here spoken by the Prophet Esaias, do fitly agree to the Kingdom of
Christ propagated by the Apostles, but yet in this saying both prophets (that
is, both Isaiah, and Saint John) looked a little higher, or a little beyond
this, to wit, to the new birth of the world to come, when as man being fully
renewed, all things shall be restored, and changed into a better estate.
Theophylact. in loc. ad Romanos.
Theophilact in locum ad Romanos, haec mundi machina, et creata omnia
immutabuntur in melius; The frame of the world, and all things that are created
in it, shall be changed into a better condition. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom sets it out by two similies, first, thus, Nutrix diu laborat
alendo infant, at cum ille adoleverit, et regnum, aut principatum nactus
fuerit, illa quoque praeclaris honoribus afficietur; The Nurse for a long time
undergoes great pains in nursing, or nourishing a poor Infant, but when the
Infant is grown, and has obtained a Kingdom, or Principality, then the Nurse
also is rewarded with excellent honors; and so the Creature that has suffered
much slavery under us, and for us, when we shall be glorified, and brought into
a better estate, they shall be lifted up to a better estate also; they shall
then be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of
the Sonns of God.

The second simile is this: Reges enim quo die volunt filios suos inangurari,
curare solent, non solum ut illi singulari apparatu, and pompa prodeant, verum
etiam ut servi illorum quam honestissime culti instructique incedant: In the
days that Kings would have their sons inaugurated, they take care that not
only they come forth most gallantly apparelled, and in pomp, but that their
servants also that attend upon them be handsomely adorned, and provided for:
even so likewise when Christ, which is the King of heaven shall come in his
glory to judgment, then the just that are his Sons, shall receive a Kingdom,
and the Inheritance prepared for them; and then omnes creaturae ornamentis
admirabilibus, and insigni splendore illustrabuntur: all the Creatures, that as
their servants wait upon them, shall be decked with admirable adornings, and
goodly beauty. Now we may further know, that the species of of the Creatures
may be called All the Creatures, as well as the Indvidualls may of the several
species, Genesis 2.1. Genesis 2.1.
when Heaven and Earth were finished, the species of the Creatures, when as yet
they had not multiplied, nor increased in Individuals, are called omnis
exercitus illorum, all the Host of them. Gen 2.19.
And Genesis 2.19. the several species of the Beasts of the Earth, and of the
Fowls of Heaven, Moses calls, omnes bestias agri, and omnia volatilia coeli,
every beast of the field, and every Foul of the Air; or all the Beasts of the
field, and all the Fowls of the Air: And in the same Verse they are called
[every living creature] and whatsoever Adam called every living Creature, that
was the name thereof. So I conceive, that all Creatures may be said to be
renewed, when their several sorts, Gas. Olevian. in cap. 8 ad Romans
or species shall be renewed. Gasper Olevianus in cap. octavum ad Romans having
made the question^, what that earnest expectation and hope of the Creature here
spoken of, should be, Answers, certum est non esse nihil alioqui spiritus
sanctus tot et tam significantibus verbis non esset usus, it is certain that it
is not nothing, otherwise the spirit of God would not have used so many
significant words as it has; but seeing that the Creatures some of them want
sense, others reason, they cannot properly be said to expect, or to hope, as we
do, as you have heard before: but these are metaphorical speeches borrowed
from the reasonable Creature, ad exprimendum occultum illum instinctum a Deo
inditum, quo feruntur ardenti veluti quodam desiderio ad sui instaurationem,
qui tamen instinctus cum Dei opus sit, non minus firmus est, et constans, quam
si claros gemitus ducerent, adeo ut Creaturae quae tacent, clament, says he,
to express that secret instinct that is put into them from God, by which they
are carried, as with a certain ardent desire to their restoration, which
instinct, seeing it is the work of God, is no less firm, and constant, then if
they plainly groaned; so that the Creature that is silent, may be said to cry
out, or utter a sound. And even as the point of a Needle in a Dyall, being
touched with a Loadstone, has a constant and continual inclination toward
the North; yea, though a man be far remote from it that carries it, and in
the darkest and lowest Cavern of the earth, and himself knows not which is the
North point, yet will the point of the Needle thus touched, still incline that
way, by the secret operation of nature, though it have no reason. Thus the
Creature being touched by an instinct of nature, or natural appetite of
liberation put into it from God, it has a metaphorical hope of attaining it,
which works constantly in it, and in which it remains with vehement desire and
expectation, though it want reason; yea, though like the Needle touched with
the Loadstone, it want sense. Diverse others I might easily produce, who
concur with the same judgment. And as D. Willet has rightly observed, (as
you have heard before) it is the most generally received opinion. And howsoever
Estius argue the point to, and fro, yet he says, Estius in cap. 8. ad Romans
Nota est Theologorum doctrina in resurrectione hominum futuram renovationem
totius creaturae etc. that doctrine or opinion of Divines, says he, is known,
that when man shall rise again, there shall be a renovation of the whole
Creature. Aquin. in supp. ad 3. part. sum. qu. 74. art. 7. in corp.
Aquinas in suppl. ad 3. part. sum. qu. 74. art. 7. in corp. Tota creatura suo
modo renovabitur, The whole Creature in its way, or manner, shall be renewed.
And quotes for the ground of his opinion Romans 8. D. Willet qu. 27. expos. 6. ad
Romans 8.
yet D. Willet declines this, in his 27. qu. upon the Romans, expos. 6. and
rather falls in with the last rank of the Creatures before mentioned: his words
are these; Therefore it remains, that we understand by the Creature only
inanimata, insensata, things without life and sense, as the Heavens, the
Elements, and the earth, with the things therein. Oecum. in loc.
Oecumenius, sensu carentem creaturam, The Creature that wants sense. Beza in
loc.
Beza (as you have heard before in the Creatures subjugation) by the Creature
understands Coelestem machinam, et elementarem regionem, but not animantia, not
ejus incolas, the fabric of Heaven, and the elementary regions [those indeed
are insensible, and inanimate or without life and soul] but he would not have
the living Creatures, or the indwellers of the world included. To the same
purpose he quotes Bucan, loco, 37. qu. 8. Bucan. loc. 37. qu. 8.
with some others, yet affirming, that the things attributed to the Creature in
the context, agree to these; he sees something in Verse 22. that may breed
some scruple in this his 6. exposition, to which he most inclines, for there
mention is made of the whole Creation, or, every Creature; yea, and Verse 20.
these only are not the Creatures made subject to vanity; therefore he tells us
he will give reason, or show why [every Creature] is there named, and yet but
these forenamed be partakers of the liberation, in qu. 32. D ^ 32.
but he that reads that will find no great satisfaction from it, for having
quoted Ambrose, Origin, Augustine, Ambros. Origin. Augustine.
from which he dissents in this point, and I conceive upon rational grounds,
properly, and strictly considered and taken, he confesses Peter Martyr and
Calvin are both against his sense, Martyr. Calvin.
in exposit. 6. as indeed they are, whose words I have formerly produced. These
(as you have heard) with many more, are for the sense, which he confesses is
most generally received; and himself is not very confident of this his sixth
Exposition, to which he most inclines: and though P. Martyr be not clear, yet
is he rather biased with the general opinion, and so he conceives of him. We
will modestly examine his Arguments and Reasons that move his dissent from the
most generally received opinion. The first is this, the Brute Creatures, which
now only serve for our necessary use, shall not be partakers of the glory of
the sons of God: whence thus, those Creatures, which are delivered from the
bondage of corruption, shall be partakers of the glory of the Sons of God.
But Brutes shall not be partakers of the glory of the sons of God.

Ergo.

The major is denied. Wherein judicious Calvin might have given satisfaction,
whose words he also quotes; Porro (says Calvin) non intelligit consortes
[ejusdem gloriae] fore creaturas cum filiis Dei, sed (suo modo) melioris status
fore socios, quia Deus simul cum humano genere, orbem nunc collapsum in
integrum restituet: Having considered how the Creature shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sonns of God, he
adds, Certainly he does not mean that the Creatures shall be partakers of the
same glory with the Sons or Children of God, but that in their kind, after
such a manner as is suitable to them, they shall be partakers of a better
estate, because God together with mankind, will restore the whole collapsed
world to its integrity, or to that state God Created it in, and in which it
stood before man sinned: or into a more excellent estate. Aquin. paul. supra.
And you heard out of Aquinas a little before, in suppl. ad tertiam part. sum.
qu. 74. art. 7. in corp. that tota Creatura (suo modo) renovabitur; the whole
creature, every creature, or the whole Creation shall be renewed after its
manner, or in such a way, as is suitable to the nature of it; and yet not be
partaker of the same excellency of glory, or unspeakable joy, and ravishment,
that the Children of God shall be, as being in the presence of the Lamb, in the
Seat of glory, or in the third Heaven, into which other creatures shall not
come, neither are capable of it. This well weighed, the Argument will not
firmly conclude against the most generally received opinion. Again, in the
forenamed place, which he referres his Reader to for satisfaction, he brings in
the glossa ordinaria, showing, (as you have heard) that by tota, or omnis
Creatura, or Creatura indefinite sumpta, is not meant singula generum, but
genera singulorum; not all Creatures of every kind, but every kind of all
Creatures.

His second Argument this, (and it is not only his, but the Argument of diverse
others,) There shall then be no more any use for any such Creatures. Whence
thus, Those Creatures that shall remain after the day of judgment, shall be
for some use.

But of Brutes, Plants, and such like, there shall be no use. Ergo.

P. Mart. in loc.
To the major we say with Peter Martyr, Hoc tamen mihi certissimum videtur,
quodque omnino affirmari debeat; istas naturas rerum non mansuras in extremo
die, nist aliquod opus habiturae sint. Pugnat enim and cum natura, and communi
ratione, aliquid constituere quod omnino sit otiosum. Quae autem Deus his rebus
opera sit adscripturus, facile nos fateamur ignorare: Notwithstanding this to
me seems a most certain truth, and such a one as ought altogether to be
affirmed, because the natures of those things should not remain after the day
of judgment, except there were some use of them: for it is both against nature
and common reason, to ordain any thing that is of no use at all. But what
employment God will appoint these Creatures, we may easily grant or acknowledge
our selves to be ignorant; says he. Lombard lib. 4. sent. did. 48. in ipso
calce, Lom. lib. 4. sent. did. 33. in calc.
answering to that question, what use there shall be of the light of the Sunn,
and Moon after the day of judgment, says, fateor me ignorare, quia in
Scripturis non memini me legisse, I confess my self ignorant of that, because
I do not remember that I have read of it in the Scriptures. For the which his
modesty, and plain dealing in this point, Peter Martyr commends him, and
wishes he had dealt thus in other passages; Vtinam in aliis rebus definiendis,
uti voluisset pari modestia, and fide: I would to God (says he) that he would
have used the like modesty and truth in his defining or determining of other
points, but this he did not. This for the major proposition.

To the minor, But of Brutes, Plants, and such like, there shall be no use,
etc. I answer, that if by [use] he mean usum communem necessitatis, the common
use of necessity, and such as man stood in need of the Creatures for, in the
state of his mortality and natural abode upon the earth, then I grant there
is no such use for them; as for the Creature to carry burdens for his use, to
draw, to run at his service, etc. to nourish him, to cloth his body, etc.
for after this life we shall not stand in need of any such supplies. But if by
[use] he mean usum ineffabilis claritatis, an use of ineffable excellency: he
is not certain that there shall be no such use of them, which God in his
wisdom may appoint them for. I make it out thus, he grants that the Sun and
Moon shall remain after the day of Judgment, yet shall there be nullus usus
communis necessitatis, no common use of necessity for them, such as the
Creatures had of them in the state of mortality; neither yet of the earth,
which he also grants shall remain after the last day. In his 31. qu. upon Romans
8. D. Willet qu. 31. in 8. ad Romans
he grants, that the Sun and Moon shall not then serve to give light unto the
world, there shall then be no darkness, etc. true; therefore as I have said,
they shall not serve for any common use of necessity, as now they do. But
whereas it is said, Isa. 30.26. Esa. 30.26.
that the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun shall be sevenfold, etc. Howsoever this may be meant of the
glorious restoration of the Church in the time of Christ, Esa. 35.17, 18.
compared with Isaiah 65.17, 18. Yet I have formerly shown, that this is not
the complete sense of the words, they stretch to a further thing; as S. Peter
shows, 2 Pet. 3.13. 2 Pet. 3.13.
therefore S. Hierome says thus upon the words, Solemn tum accepturum mercedem
laboris sui, that then when the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, the
Sun shall receive a reward of its labor; or it shall be brought into a more
excellent estate, as other Creatures shall be; and if so, then it shall shine,
though not by way of common necessity, but for some other use. And then
reckoning up some other particular uses of it, he concludes, But then all the
Creatures shall rest, and their ministry and service (such as is now) shall
cease. This we grant (such as is now) shall cease, for that is common use of
necessity. And whereas its commonly added by diverse, that the motion of it
shall then also cease, because the Scripture says, tempus non erit amplius,
Apoc. 10.6.
Apoc. 10.6. Time shall be no more. Secondly, because the Philosophers say,
that motus is causa efficiens generationis and corruptionis perpetuae rerum
inferiorum, and naturalium; the motion of the Heavens, or especially of the
primum mobile, is the cause efficient of generation and corruption, which is
continually amongst these inferior and natural bodies: but these shall then
cease, there shall then be no more any such generation, or corruptions, or
changes amongst the Creatures. To both which we will recite the answer of
learned Peter Martyr, P. Martyr com. ad 8. Romans
in his Commentaries upon Romans 8. To the former, Tempus non erit amplius,
Ergo nec motus, for time is the measure of motion. Verum haec ratio non est
firma, fieri enim potest ut coelum moveatur, sed pro magna illa luce corporis
Christi, corporumque omnium beatorum, and Solis, and Lunae, minime possit
observari, quare durare potest motus et si tempus non existat: But this reason
is not firm says he, for it may come to pass, that the Heavens may be moved,
and yet the motion cannot be observed, by reason of the great light of the
glorified body of Christ, of the Saints, of the Sun, and of the Moon;
therefore motion may endure, although time be not. His reason he gives, is
this, Tempus enim non est nisi ex motu observato and numerato: for time is not
simply from motion, but from motion observed and numbered, and so are days,
months, hours, years, etc. yet we must know that time is twofold, internum, or
exterrum tempus, internal or external time: internal time is nothing but
du^atio creaturae a principio ad finem; the duration of the Creature in its
being, from the beginning to the end of it; and this internal time, or
duration, those Entities have, quae non comparentur ad motum Solis, that are
not measured by the motion of the Sun; for the Sun was but framed the
fourth day, as you may see, Genesis 1. from 14. Genesis 1. from 14. to 20. Kecker.
lib. 1. System. physici cap. 7.
to 20. where Keckerman observes the ground of this distinction of time, and
the necessity of it. Lib. 1. Systematis Physici, cap. 7. for then says he
begun but the tempus externum, which was to be from the Sun, and that but
quoad materiale, neither the formale temporis externi, was not to the world,
before God made man to observe and number it, which was not till two days
after. Again, if there be not an internal, as well as an external time, (in
which later sense the natural Philosophers commonly handle time) then he
shows, that corpora illa omnia quae erant creata tribus primis diebus, in
tempore non creabantur, quod si, tum ab aeterno, quod absurdum, etc all those
bodies that were created in the three first days, were not created in time,
which if so, that they were not created in time, then it would follow they were
from eternity, which were absurd to affirm. Arist lib 4. Physic. cap. 11.
Aristotle lib. 4. Physicorum. cap. 11. defines, that tempus externum, to be
mensuram motus per prius et posterius, for time is successive, and Ens fluens.
If we object with the natural Philosopher, that tempus est motus accidens
inseparabile, time is an inseparable accident of motion, and therefore if motus
be continuus, then tempus too; if motion be continual, then also must time
continue too. I answer, as before, it may so continue, quoad materiale, or
quoad rem mensurantem, but not quoad formale, or ordinem mensurandi, for it
shall not, it need not then to be observed, for any distinction sake, as now by
men whilst they are mortal.

But it may be again objected, that tempus proprie dictum habet ut initium, sic
etiam finem; [that time properly so called] that is external time, commonly
handled by the natural Philosophers, as it had a beginning, so should it also
have an ending. I answer, it is true, [though Aristotle thought it should be
perpetual, because he held the motion of the heavens naturally to be so] for
if motus, yet not observatus, if there be motion, and yet it not observed time
external has his end. And in this sense Dr. Willet says true, for so they
shall not be for times, etc. But for motion, I would have this observed, that
not every kind of motion, but that which is violent, involuntary, or slavish,
or for the benefit of base objects, shall cease; otherwise Apoc. 14.4. Apoc.
14.4.
the glorified Saints shall follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, therefore
shall have some kind of motion, but not as opposed to their Heavenly rest,
wherein they rest from sin, death, slavery, and misery. Again, the Heavens,
the Sunn, and Moon moved in those five days, or at least in the time before
man was created, and so by consequence before he had sinned.

As then you have heard, there was no external time observed from their
motion, neither then could their motion be any slavery to the^, neither then
were they compelled to serve any base objects, or wicked, and rebellious men;
but their motion was suitable to their nature then, and why may it not also be
the like after external time shall cease? therefore from the cessation of
external time, we cannot infallibly infer the cessation of all motion, but
only probably, or as a service of common necessity.

To the second, motus est causa efficiens generationis, et corruptionis, etc.
motion is the cause efficient of generation, and corruption, but when these
shall cease, then motion may cease also; true, if these were the sole ends of
motion; but motion was also for other ends beside these. And to this Peter
Martyr answers thus, Ratio quidem ista probabilis est, at non necessaria;
poterit enim ille Coelestis motus, etsi non generationi, et corruptioni, tamen
alii alicui negotio, quod nos ignoramus inservire. that reason truly is
probable, but not necessary; for though the motion of the Heavens serve not for
generation, and corruption, yet may it serve for some other thing unknown to us.

And as a new Heaven, so a new Earth shall remain, yet not for any common use
of necessity, so much D. Willet grants qu. 31. D. Willet qu. 31. in 8. cap. ad
Romans
ad 8. Romans the Earth shall not then yield fruit for the use of men, as now,
yet may it remain for some other use. For himself grants qu. 34. qu. 34.
that the heavens by the continual sight of their great glory, shall serve to
stir up the Saints to praise and magnify their glorious Creator; if now the
Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament show his handy works, Psa.
19.1.
Psalm. 19.1. much more then, if as the Prophet has it, and as this Author
grants it then also to take place, as well as in the Kingdom of Christ; the
light of the Sun shall be increased seven fold, Isa. 30, 26.
Isa. 30.26. yea, and the light of the Moon as the light of the Sun, as you
have heard.

His third Argument, The faithful wait for the adoption, to wit, the
redemption of their bodies: other Creatures are not capable or partakers of
adoption; Ergo, neither of the redemption of their bodies to immortality. I
answer, this is the weakest Argument brought into form, of any other. Thus all
Creatures that shall be renewed, shall be partakers of adoption, and redemption
of their bodies to immortality.

But the irrational and insensible not so. Ergo.

First, I answer, Romans 8.23.
that this Text is not pertinently alleged, for it makes an express
distinction between the rest of the Creatures, and the faithful, that had the
first fruits of the Spirit, Not only they, but we, etc.

To the major proposition, thus, the major is false, if properly taken,
strictly and eminently. For first, adoption (if we take it properly and
eminently for adoption spiritual,) is beneficium Dei, per quod nos propter
Christum in filios recipit, and haeredes Coeli, aeternaeque vitae cum ipso
facit,. Amand, Polan. lib. 6. Syntag. Theol cap. 38.
Amandus Polanus, lib. 6. Syntagmat. Theolog cap. 38. Adoption is favor or
benefit from God, by the which for Christ's sake he receives us, to be sons
and Heirs of Heaven, and of life Eternal, he makes us together with him. Now
all Creatures that shall be renewed, shall not have this privilege, this is
proper only to the Sons of God. Romans 8.15.
Romans 8.15. those that have the Spirit of Adoption can cry Abba, Father: thus
cannot any Brutes do, which are not capable of any such testimony; they are
never called children that God has given Christ to. Heb. 10.13.
Heb. 10.13. as the adopted Sonns of God are: They are never called all one
with him, or his Brethren, as the adopted Sons of God are. And as no divine,
so neither any humane, or civil adoption of any irrational or insensible
Creature, between which you may see the difference in Amesius his Medulla
Theologiae lib. 1. cap. 28. Amesius lib. 1. Medul. Theol. cap. 28.


Secondly, redemption, if taken spiritually and properly for redemption, by
price, or (...), depenso, by a price paid to God, by which we are redeemed from
the guilt of sin, Gods wrath, the Devil, and eternal damnation, to be put
into the state of grace here, and eternal felicity hereafter, of such
redemption they were not the subject, neither could they sin, nor be subject
to Hell fire, and therefore need no such redemption: but there is a corporeal
and metaphorical redemption, taken for liberation or freedom from any state
of slavery, or temporal misery; and for such a redemption the Creature looks,
as you have heard before, Romans 8.21. the Creature shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, etc.

Thirdly, I answer, that if we take the terms of the Proposition conjunctim, as
thus, [adoption] and [redemption,] then there may be in it fallacia, (...), or
plurium interrogationum, whether the Creatures may be said to be adopted, and
redeemed; the one (you have heard) they cannot, yet the other, in some sense [as
put for freedom, or liberation from slaverie, or corruption, or vanity,] they
may.

Again, if we consider the word (redemption) sejunctim, in its self, then
there is in it fallacia homonymiae, as the Logicians term it, which arises, a
similitudine significationis in terminis, and therefore is numbered one of the
fallacies, [in dictione] for it either signifies redemption spiritual, or
corporeal, and metaphorical, as you have heard; and how they cannot expect
the former, yet do they the latter in the sense you have heard.

Fourthly, and lastly, if no Creatures shall be redeemed, but such as shall be
partakers of Adoption, and Redemption in its spiritual sense, then shall
neither the Heavens nor the Earth be renewed, which is contrary to what he
grants; for these were not capable of adoption, neither of redemption
spiritual, and proper, but metaphorical, or a kind of freedom, and
liberation. And as for the terminus ad quem, or the redemption of their bodies
to immortality, Chrysostom answers, Chrysostom.
that as the Creature was made corruptible because of us, so propter nos
immortalitate donabitur, as you have heard, the^ so for us shall the Creature
be rewarded with immortality. Petr. Martyr in 8. ad Romans
And Peter Martyr denies not, but that there may be, analogia quaedam, a
certain analogy, or likeness, between our glorified bodies, Aug lib. 20. de
civit. Dei, cap. 16.
and the Creatures made immortal: For Aug. had said lib. 20. de Civit. Dei
cap. 16. that the Elements should put off such corruptible qualities, as they
had, when our corruptible bodies were framed of them, and should then put on
other qualities, which should be suitable corporibus nostris immortalibus, and
glorificatis, to our immortal, and glorified bodies. For though they shall not
be immortal in such a glorious, joyous, comfortable, and unspeakeable manner,
as we shall, that have immortal souls, or spirits by nature, and they not
immortal by nature, but dono gratuito, yet shall they have such an immortality
as is suitable to their nature, as a gift from God unto them, they shall no more
be changed, be subject, to vanity, corruption, or the like. This to the third.

His fourth, they were not ad immortalitatem condita, made for immortality.

To which I answer, if we respect their nature, they are not immortal, as are
Angels, and Spirits, because their nature is elementary, and being mixed bodies,
they consist of contrary qualities, and therefore are corruptible, and
dissoluble into their Principles, and therefore not so made for immortality, as
never to have change, or corruption befall them, condition naturae,

Secondly, Peter Martyr (as he acknowledges,) says, that ista immortalitas
liberale, et merum sit donum Dei, non potest pendere a modo and vi aliqua
naturae, that immortality by which the Creature becomes such, is merely the
free gift of God, it cannot depend from any manner, 1 Timothy 6.16
and force of nature. 1 Timothy 6.16. (...), God only has immortality, etc. dico
came complecti aeternitatem, id est, principium, and finem existendi secludere,
as Lambertus Danaeus in locum; Lam. Danaeus in loc.
I say that that immortality comprehends aeternity, that is, it secludes both
the beginning, and the ending of existence: that which is properly immortal
from it self, is eternal, as well a part ante, as a part post, and paulo
post, nec Angeli, nec humanae animae per se sunt immortales; id est, sua vi,
and potestate propria, sed quatenus a Deo in sua natura sustentantur, and
conservantur tales permanent: neither Angels, nor the souls of men are
immortal by themselves, that is, by their own force, and power, but as they
are sustained, and conserved in their nature, from God, they remain such.
August. lib. de immortalitate animae: Aug. lib. de immortal. animae.
And though the Angels and souls of men be immortal by nature, yet this
immortality, and aptness of nature for it, we have from God. God only is
immortal, ex se, and independenter, of himself, and independently; Angels, and
the spirits of men, secundario, ac dependenter, ac ab ipso; secondarily,
dependently, and from God. Iam. 1.17. God is immutable, Iam. 1.17.
with him there is no variableness; but the Angels lapsed, and the soul of
Adam sinned, these were both mutable. God is immortal, (...), Angels and men
(...), God only immortal by essence, Angels and men by participation, or
communication, as they have their nature sustained from a better Principle,
Aman. Polan. lib. 2. Syntag. Theol. cap. 16.
as Amandus Polanus lib. 2. Syntagm. Theolog. cap. 16. and Peter Martyr says,
Vis enim illa Dei, qua and coeli, and elementa restituentur ad immortalitatem,
conservare etiam potest reliquas orbis parts; that power of God by which the
Heavens and Elements shall be restored to immortality, is also able to conserve
the rest of the parts of the world; so that immortality being the mere gift of
God, he may bestow it upon other parts of the world, then only those which
that Doctor names. And howsoever many Individuals of every species, have, and
shall perish, so likewise have parts of the Elements perished, though not the
tota, so the species of several Creatures shall continue as long, as the
Elements that now are, shall; and why then by the gift of immortality may not
these species continue, of which many Individualls have perished, as well as
the Elements from whom parts have so much, and so often perished?

His fifth, Those Creatures that shall be delivered shall be glorified, and
immediately pass from their corruptible estate into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God: but the unreasonable Creature not thus.

Ergo.

I answer: To be glorified properly is incident to the rational Creature, he
only shall enter into the glory of God in the third Heaven, and have the Image
of God perfectly renewed in him.

Secondly, the Creature may come into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God,
and yet be not thus glorified, but suitable to its nature immortalized, dono
gratuito, as we have heard, and have an Analogy to glorified bodies.

Again, where he says, they fall into corruption, and their life and spirit is
extinguished with them, etc. true, to all that shall not be renewed this shall
come to pass; but whether God shall not renew the species of them, is adhuc
sub judice; and to affirm he shall not, is but to beg the question, and to
conclude that for a certainty, which is in controversy. And whereas he
renders this reason, why the Heavens and earth shall rather be restored then
the rest of the Creatures, namely, because they have been from the beginning to
the ending, subject to vanity, after man had sinned, but other Creatures that
succeed by generation, but a while.

I answer, this had been some reason, against the Individuals of the species,
but against the species none; for the species of the Creatures have been as
long subject to vanity, as they, though not their successive individualls.

His sixth: If any such Creatures restored, then either the same that were
before, or some other of the same kind newly created. But neither of these.
Ergo.

I answer, this will fall to be handled in the fourth, and last rank of
Creatures, but in all probabilty, not those that are already perished in
individualls.

Secondly, we say they shall have a renovation, or restoration, not a new
Creation for substance, but shall be renewed in their qualities, state, and
condition, as we have heard before.

His seventh, and last Argument produced against the most generally received
opinion, is this, Nulla promissio facta est, there is no promise made for the
restitution of any such Creatures, as there is for Heaven, and Earth; Ergo,
they shall not be restored.

To this I answer, that there is a promise, as I conceive, in general, though
not so particularly, as for Heaven and Earth. For this I conceive a promise, as
also do many others, in that the Scripture says, the Creature shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, Romans 8.21.
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God; and before [the Creature] was
made subject to vanity. But Heaven, Earth, and man, were not all the Creatures
that were made subject to vanity. Peter Martyr to the same purpose in 8. P.
Martyr in Romans 8.
ad Romans quamvis enim Scriptura harum Creaturarum mentionem seorsim, and
express non fecerit, satis tamen est quod in genere Creaturas restaurandas
significaverit, neque unquam quicquam exceperit, says he, Although the
Scripture make no mention of the Creatures severally, and expressly, as it
does of Heaven and Earth, yet its sufficient that it has signified, that the
Creatures shall be restored in general or indefinitly; neither any where has
it made any exception.

Thus have you seen the Arguments, and reasons of that laborious and learned
Divine answered, upon which reasons and Arguments he dissented, (as much
following Bucan) from the most generally received opinion.

Let us now come to the fourth and last rank of the Creatures, the Heavens,
the Earth, and Mankind, this last rank many of the School-Divines fall upon,
which Peter Martyr also mentions, in oct. ad Romans thus, P. Mart. in 8. ad Romans
Scholastici (says he) putant, homine, qui praecipua est pars Orbis terrarum,
renovato, etiam Creaturas esse restituendas, quae sententia verissima est:
colligitur enim ex dictis Pauli, quod autem ad parts attinet, tantum Coelum
and Elementa, and hominum corpora putant esse relinquenda. The Schoolmen
(says he) do suppose, that man, who is the chief part of the world being
renewed, the rest of the Creatures also shall be restored: which sentence is
most true, for its gathered from the sayings of Saint Paul; but concerning what
Creatures they think that Heaven, the Elements, and the bodies of men, shall be
restored, for they think that not the Earth only, but also the rest of the
Elements shall remain. Beda indeed says, glossa in 2. Beda in gloss. in 2 Pet.
and ult.
Pet. and last. quodignis duo ex toto consumet, duo vero in meliorem restituet
faciem, etc. that the fire shall totally consume two of the Elements, and
renew, or purify other two. Others think, quod manebunt omnia quoad
substantiam, sed mutabuntur quoad imperfectionem, sed duo retinebunt propriam
formam substantialem, scilicet Aer and Terra, sed in igne, and aqua non
remanebit forma substantialis, sed ad formam Coeli commutabuntur, and sic tria
Elementa, Ignis, Aer, and Aqua, dicentur Coelum, quamvis Aer retineat eandem
formam substantialem quam nunc etiam habet, quia et nunc etiam Coelum dicitur,
etc. That all the Elements shall remain for substance, but shall be changed
from their imperfection, but yet two of them, that is to say, the Air, and
Earth shall retain their own substantial form, but in the fire, and water
that substantial form shall not remain, but shall be changed into the form
of Heaven, and so three of the Elements, Fire, Air, and Water shall be called
Heaven, although one of these, that is to say, the Air may retain the same
substantial form which now it has, and because now the [Aire] is called
Heaven. And this they would collect from Apoc. 21. Apoc. 21.1.
1. because mention is made only of Heaven and earth; but others reject this
opinion, because (say they) repugnat Philosophiae, quod corpora inferiora sint
in potentia ad formam coeli, cum materiam non habent ejusmodi: this is
repugnant to Philosophy, that bodies sublunary should be in capacity to be
informed by the form of Heaven, when as they are not of the same matter with
the Heavens, for so Aristotelians, as you have heard. It may also resist
Theology in the most generally received opinion: for if two of the four
Elements should be taken away, Non salvabitur perfectio universi cum
integritate suarum partium; The perfection of the universe should not be safe
with the integrity of its parts. Others therefore by Heaven, understands
quintum corpus, a fifth body distinct from the Elements: and that omnia
elementa intelliguntur per te ram, all the Elements are understood by the
Earth, and that all the Elements shall remain, both quoad substantiam, and
quoad proprias qualitates; both according to their substance and proper
qualities, or substantial forms, and proper qualities, because the proper
qualities are effects flowing from their forms: it is not like therefore that
they should be removed, and the forms remaining, but that they shall be freed
from that infection and impurity cast upon them, by reason of the sin of man,
and which by mutual action and passion has befallen them; or from those
dispositions by which they were liable to corruption, which is conceived to be
the meaning of S. Augustine in the place before quoted, Aug. lib. 20. de civit.
Dei cap. 16.
lib. 20. de Civit. Dei cap. 16.

And for this last rank of Creatures to be renewed, not only Dr. Willet goes
this way, but many Schoolmen, as you have heard; some Protestant Divines, and
some Papists also fall upon this last rank, Buc. loc. com. 37 qu. 8. Roll. Beza.
as Bucan, quoted by him locis communibus, loco 37. qu. 8. Roll. locus Scotus
in verba Beza to the same purpose, with some others of the Protestant Divines,
For the Pontificians, I will only content my self with Bellarmine, which is
known to have been a great and eminent Schoolman amongst them; Bell. Tom. 3.
lib. 6. cap. 2. de amiss. great. and stat pecc.
Bellarm. tom. 3. lib. 6. cap. 2. de amissione gratiae, and stat. pecc. tells
us, that it is the common consent of such as have writ upon the fourth Book of
Lombards sentences, did. 47. that post di^m judicii nullae erunt amplius
Plantae, nulla animantia, nulla corpora mixta, hominibus duntaxat exceptis;
after the day of Judgment there shall be no more any Plants, no living
Creatures, no mixed Bodies, except only men. His reason is this, Neque enim
perpetuo duratura sunt, nisi quae vel in toto, vel ex part incorruptionem ab
ipsa natura sortita sunt; ejusmodi autem sunt primum corpora coelestia, quae
and secundum totum, and secundum parts incorruptibilia sunt. Deinde elementa
quae secundum totum licet non secundum parts a natura incorruptionem habent.
Denique homines qui secundum partem quae est anima rationalis, non secundum
totum immortales sunt. Caetera corpora sunt omnia, tum in toto, tum in partibus
corruptibilia, says he: For there are not any perpetually to endure, but only
such as have obtained incorruption, from their nature, either wholly, or in
part; but such especially are the Caelestiall bodies that are incorruptible
both in the whole, and in the parts of them. Afterward the Elements that have
incorruption from their nature, according to the whole, though not according to
every part of them. Finally men, which according to that part which is the
reasonable soul, are incorruptible, or immortal though not according to the
whole of them. All the rest of the Creatures are corruptible says he, both
according to the whole, and according to the parts of them. This was the way I
told you, that many Schoolmen fell into, Comment. in 4 Lib. sent. Lomb.
especially those upon Lombard, in librum 4. sen. as he also says, loco quo
supra. To this I need not say much more then what I have said in answer to the
Arguments of Willet, who has produced the most, (if not all) the reasons upon
which Bellarm. and the rest dissent from the most generally received opinion.
Concerning immortality, or aptitude thereunto by nature. See the answer to Dr.
Willets 4. Argument. And I also answer unto the several instances brought by
Bellarmine, first, to the Heavens that are simple, or a simple Body, in which
is no contrariety of qualities: I answer with Scaliger, de subtilitate,
exercitat. 61. lib. 5. Scalig. de subtle. ad cardam. exerc. 61. l. 5.
Omne ens ab alio est per se corruptibile, etiam si nullam habet materiam, est
enim finitum: every being from another is corruptible by its self, yea though
it have no matter in it, or be not material: and therefore shows that the
Heavens may be said to be corruptible, though they were immateriall. Licet enim
non habeat contrarium, non tamen habet causam a se essendi, potest igitur e sua
natura non esse, et paulo post, quod enim actus purus non est, compositum
aliquo modo est, ergo et resolubile; Although that Heaven have no contrary in
it, yet notwithstanding it has no cause of being from it self, therefore may
it come to a non-being, from its own nature. And a little after he says; That
which is no pure act, in some respect, may be said to be a compound, and by
consequence resoluble, therefore even the Angels that are not such acts,
considered in their own nature, might fail, because they may be said to have
potentiam et actum in them, which are instar materiae et formae, in other
Creatures, their gift of confirmation in their integrety, is from God; and that
which has its being depending of the being of another, if that being upon
whom its being does depend, substract its assistance, then the being
dependant must needs fail and fall; but such are the Beings of all Creatures
upon God, who only has immortality dwelling in himself, as you have heard,
The souls of men are immortal, but [as you have also heard] from a better
Principle then from themselves, they are made immortal from God, and being
Spirits, and of such an excellent nature, there is no Creature that can change
their Being so, as to annihilate it; nay, God has decreed they shall be to
eternity, but he never did so concerning these Heavens. Yet if we respect
potentiam Dei absolutam, and not ordinatam, then there is not any created
Being, but he were able to reduce it to a non-entitie: but having decreed
otherwise, it shall not be in such upon which the Decree is past, but their
nature and substance shall remain for ever; upon which he has passed such a
Decree [take it for granted] that the matter of the Heavens are ex quinta
essentia peripatetica; and that the Heavens be not corrupted a contrario
naturali, from any contrary quality in nature, as are the Elements. Yet says
Scalig^r, loco quo supra, Coelum corrumpitur a nutu Divino, Scalig. loc quo
supra.
the Heavens shall be corrupted from Gods power and command. So then these
heavens are not immortal, but shall be dissolved, as well as other bodies, and
their nature is not so freed from incorruption, as to exempt them from
dissolution; the fire shall fasten upon them and dissolve them. 2 Pet. 3.12.
2 Pet. 3.12. The Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved. Therefore the
nature of the Heavens simply considered, makes them not of eternal duration,
but the gift of immortality from God, seeing (as you have heard) immortality
is merum Dei donum, the mere gift of God.

Again as immortality is liberali ac merum Dei donum, the liberal, and mere
gift of God, and not simply from any Principle in nature independently, but as
such a Principle immortalized, as Angels, the spirits of men etc. which are
not defectible in substance from any created nature, as natural, or sublunary
bodies, which are mixed or elementary; so God can immortalize any Creature a
part post, which he would have to endure forever, as well other Creatures, as
the Heavens. For he which made the matter of the Heavens, and their form, to
satisfy that matter, and keep the matter from privation, or appetition of any
other form, and thus has so long continued them, without alteration or
corruption; The same God can as well make the matter and forms of other
Creatures immortal, suitable to their kind, and by way of Analogy to
glorified bodies, and the immortal bodies of men, as before, who are Elevated
into a more eminent estate, as also before, and such an estate, as you have
heard, that irrationalls, and insensibles [though immortall] are not capable of.

To his second instance in the Elements, that have incorruption from their
nature in respect of the whole, though not in respect of their parts, Arist.
lib. 3. de coelo cap. 3.
Arist. lib. 3. de coelo cap. 3. handles the nature of them; and I conceive of
them thus, that they are corpora simplicia homogenia, ex quibus alia
componuntur, and in quae resolventur: The Elements are simple Homogeneall
bodies, of which all other mixed bodies are compounded, and into which again
they are resolved; these are alterable and corruptible, quoad parts, but quoad
totum (he says) they are uncorrupted. I answer, that though they be quoad
totum incorrupta, yet are they corruptibilia, though as yet they are
incorrupted in regard of the whole, yet are they corruptible, they may be
corrupted. 2 Pet. 3.12. 2 Pet. 3.12.
The Elements shall melt with fervent heat.

2. I answer, that as the Elements are not corrupted, quoad totum, no more are
the species of Brutes, Plants, or inferior bodies: for though the Individuals
and particulars of those several species be corrupted, as parts of the
Elements are; yet the species themselves shall continue as long as the Elements
shall; and this aptitude to continue, they have from their general nature,
given them of God: from this therefore it will not follow that they should
continue after the day of Judgment, any more then the several species of
Creatures besides.

To the third, Man, in that he is incorruptible in the one part, though not in
body.

I answer, that corpus etiam hominis ab initio sic factum fuit, ut potuit non
mori, sub condition gratiae; even the body of man was so made in the
beginning, that it might have continued without a death, had a possibility of
immortality; and he that made it such in the beginning, can make it better, in
glorifying it at the ending.

Mart. in loc.
Secondly, I answer with Martyr, quod haec ratio duplici nomine infirma est:
this position does vacillate in a double respect. First, nulla subnixa
authoritate verbi Dei, a nullis partibus Orbis removet instaurationem: it is
made out, or born up by no authority out of the Word of God, removing
restoration from all the rest of the parts of the world. Secondly, says he,
id quod assumit aeque dubium est atque id quod concluditur: that which is
assumed is equally as doubtful as that which is concluded on, videlicet, ea
tantum immortalitate reparanda, quae ex institutione ad eum videantur idonea:
to wit, that those Creatures only are to be repaired by immortality, which
seem fitted to it from preparation, or from the appointing such aptitude to it
from nature, whereas you have heard that this immortality is liberale ac merum
dei donum, the free and mere gift of God, and not from any power of nature
created, simply considered: but God can as well conserve the rest of the parts
of the world, as he can restore the Elements to immortality; and by the same
power preserve the species, and make them immortal, or without any more
alteration or corruption, suitable to their nature, as well as the Elements.
This for dilution of the Arguments and Reasons to establish the fourth rank of
the Creatures, against the most generally received opinion.

Estius in 8. ad Romans
For which the most generally received opinion, Estius in. 8. ad Romans writes
thus, Certe Paulus in hac epistola cap. 1. creaturam generaliter accepit, semel
and iterum, imo and hoc capite generaliter eam intelligit, cum dicit: Neque
creatura alia poterit nos separare a charitate Dei, etc. truly Paul in this
Epistle, Romans 5.25.
cap. 1.25. and served the creature more then the Creator, has taken the word
creature generally once and again, or several times, in several Chapters:
Yea, and shows, how even in this eighth Chapter the word is taken generally; as
Verse last, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God. Romans 8. last.


Now for the species of the Creatures, I would have these things taken into
consideration by the judicious Reader: First, that in the liberation of the
Creature, not only the terminus a quo is promised, but also the terminus ad
quem, not only from what the creature shall be delivered, but also into what:
not only shall deliverance be from the bondage of corruption, for that might
be, (I mean customarie corruption in this life:) by privation of the being of
the Creature, or by total abolition: but so it should not be delivered (as I
conceive) into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; for this glorious
liberty of the Sons of God, is the terminus ad quem, as well as being freed
from the terminus a quo, or corruption and misery in this present life; which
misery and corruption, etc. I say, was but the terminus a quo. If the
Scripture had gone no further, but only promised to the Creature that it
should be delivered from the bondage of corruption, then our argument had not
been of so much validity: but it affords more, it shall be brought into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God: but that state it cannot, it should not
attain to, if it had a total privation of its essence, and had no more being:
But being reduced into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, it is made
immortal, in that sense you have heard, having this gift bestowed upon it from
God. For to what I have formerly said, Aquin. 1.2. qu. 109. art. 2. resp. ad 2.
I will add out of Aquinas in his prima secundae qu. 109. art. 2. respond. ad
secundum: Vnaqueque enim res creata sicut esse non habet, nisi ab alio, and in
se considerata nihil est, ita indiget conservari in bono suae naturae
convenienti, ab alio potest enim per seipsam deficere a bono, sicut and per
seipsam potest deficere in non esse, nisi divinitus conservaretur: every
created nature, as it has no being, but from another, and in it self
considered, is nothing; so it stands in need to be conserved in good,
convenient to its nature, from another; for by it self considered, it may fail
from good, as also by it self it may fall into a non-beeing, or fail to
nothing, except it be conserved by Gods divine power.

Secondly, let it be considered, that praecipua pars corruptionis est
interitus, as Calvin observes upon the place; Calvin. in loc.
The chief, and greatest part of the Creatures corruption, is destruction;
they have a customary corruption of Individualls here, but they should have a
final destruction of the speces there, which were worse; for here, as the
Individualls of several species are corrupted, so also others are multiplied
of the same kind, and so the species is still preserved: but if all but the
Creatures of the last rank, be totally destroyed, yea in the whole species,
then is the corruption of the Creature, greater, and more then ever: and how is
this a liberation from the bondage of corruption, when the greatest corruption
befalls the Creature, that ever it had?

Thirdly, consider that the liberation which the Creature shall have, shall be
such, as is expected with great earnestness, and desire to attain unto it,
even as a woman in travel, that is in pain, disquiet, and misery, desires to
be delivered, and to be in a more quiet, and contented estate, as you have
heard. But total abolition cannot with any vehemence of natural appetion be
thus longed and looked for, because nothing naturally desires the non-being of
it self; the Creature rather desires a being in slavery, then by a total
abolition to be brought to a non-entitie.

Fourthly, consider what the great searcher into the bowels of nature, Arist.
lib. 2. Physic. cap. 8.
says, lib. 2. Physicorum cap. 8. Natura nihil frustra, and temere agit, sed
agit omnia finis alicujus gratia; nature does nothing in vain, nor rashly, but
all things for some end. The tree has its end in bringing forth leaves, ad
tegendum fructum, to cover the fruit it bears, both from the heat of the Sunn,
and violence of the weather. The Bird in building her Nest to keep Eggs, and
young. The Spider in making her web, to catch Flies for her nourishment, and
the like. Now the Logicians teach us, that finis efficientem ad agendum movet,
the end moves the efficient to work; if it were not moved with desire of
obtaining the end, it would not stir: now we know that in these Creatures
that there cannot be appetitus volunarius, but naturalis, a natural
appetition, or desire; yet has appetitum aliquem intelligentem, ac superiorem
a quo regitur, some superior appetite and intelligent, from whom its guided,
and directed. This appetite in the Creature for deliverance is put into it from
God, its instinct of nature which is not given it in vain, neither [as you
have heard] shall its appetite be perpetually in vain. Again, finis est quod
maxim volumus, and quod maxim volumus, est maxim appetibile, and appetitus
sua natura, semper ordinatur ad bonum, as also we are taught from the
Logicians; the end is that we most especially have a will unto, and that which
we are most especially willing unto, is most appetible, or desirable; and
appetite from its own nature, always tends to that which is good. And finis
per se, and sua natura, tantum est boni, the end aimed at, by its self and of
its own nature, is only of that which is good, its evil by accident, when its
seemingly good, and not so indeed, the end which the Creatures aim at in such
groaning, and such vehement expectation, is their deliverance from the bondage
of corruption, at the time of the revelation of the glory of the sons of God,
as a thing most appetible to them, and if they have an end in their
expectation, and that most appetible, and suitable to their nature, and nature
desires its being, then surely, a total abolition cannot be the thing, or end
that is so much and so earnestly looked for, by their natural appetite, as far
as reason can lead me.

Fifthly, let it be considered, which Peter Martyr also objects, speaking of the
Sunn, and Moon, Non minorem esse reliquis Creaturis propentionem, and naturalem
appetentiam ad seipsas conservandas, quam Soli, Lunae, Coelo, terrae, quare si
illa suo desiderio frustranda non sunt, ne haec quidem frustrari oportere.
There is no less propensity to the rest of the Creatures, nor natural desire
to conserve themselves then there is to the Sunn, the Moon, the Heavens and the
Earth, and therefore if they be not frustrated of their desires, no more also
ought these. So he.

Sixthly, and lastly, consider, Si plures Creaturae nostra causa affliguntur
plures etiam una cum nostra faelicitate instaurabuntur, at plures nostra causa
affliguntur.

Ergo.

The major you have heard is a verred by Chrysostom, that as they are
afflicted, and made subject to vanity for our sakes, so likewise for our sakes
they shall be restored.

The minor we know is most true, that more Creatures then the inanimata, and
insensata, the Heavens, Earth, Elements, are subject, etc. therefore is it not
rational, that the rest of the Creatures, or other species of them be
restored, as well as these: Let the judicious reader ponder these things and so
judge; these are the Arguments or reasons I would have considered, for the most
generally received opinion, and what have bin produced, for the last rank of
Creatures, you have heard, as also the answer unto them.

But it may be objected, If every Creature that is afflicted because of us,
shall also be restored for our sake, then every Individual shall be restored.
But not so. Ergo.

To the major I answer, by denying the sequel, because by every Creature may
be meant the species or general nature subsisting in some individualls, or the
Creatures of every species, (as we have heard) and not all, and every
individual of those species, for the Text says in the Romans, the whole
Creation groaneth, expects, etc. not the whole multiplication, now the
multiplication you have heard was in thousands, and millions dissolved into its
Principles, and could not groan or expect in the Apostles time; but the whole
Creation may be said to groan and expect, when all the species of the Creatures
which God created, do so. And though every Individual be afflicted for our
sakes, of the several species, yet it will not necessarily follow, that every
particular should be restored, but the several kinds, or species in so many
Individualls as God shall think in his wisdom fitting, for then (I say) every
Creature may be said to be restored. Peter Martyr in class. 3. Pet. Martyr.
clas. 3. loc. com cap. 17. sect. 24. Idem etiam in 8. ad Romans
loc. commun. cap. 17. sect. 24. as also in cap. 8. ad Romans when he said, that
by (all) sometimes some parts may be synecdochically meant; true, but still the
question remains, whether it may be so taken here, or no; for the whole
Creation, or every Creature groaning, or is subject to vanity, cannot here be
meant synecdochically: and if the Creature be as large, (as for any thing to
the contrary in the Text, seems to me) then that will not serve here; for its
not said that some creatures shall be delivered, or some of the whole Creation,
but having mentioned the [whole Creation,] he adds for a remedy to this, The
Creature shall be delivered: what Creature? that which was made subject to
vanity, this shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption; not all only
of one species or kind. The instances brought by that famous Divine, John
10.8. 1 Cor. 6.12.
John 10.8. 1 Cor. 6.12. All that came before me, etc. All things are lawful
for me, are meant only of an (all) in such a kind: all false prophets, not
all Prophets: and all things indifferent, not all things in any kind, without
exception.

Again, says he, when Paul says the Creature shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, posset generaliter intelligi de mundo, quod ille non
amplius cogendus sit renovare creaturas per novam generationem, non tamen ex eo
sequitur omnes creaturas quod singulas species attinet esse renovandas, they
are his own words; It may be generally understood of the world, that it shall
no more be compelled to renew its Creatures, by any more new generation; yet
notwithstanding it will not follow from that, that all Creatures that belongs
to every species, should be renewed. True, I grant, if no more be intimated by
the Creatures liberation, than a cessation from generation, which is by
corruption of some other pre-existent matter: for its a commonly received truth
amongst Philosophers. From Arist. lib. 1. Arist. lib. 2. de genesis and cor. text
17.
de genesis and cor. text 17. that, generatio unius, est corruption alterius: yet
this axiom is not to be understood formaliter, but causaliter, because these
two do tend ad diversos terminos; but the Apostle says, that they shall have
more then a liberation from generation by way of precedanie corruption; for
they shall also be delivered into the glorious liberty of the children of God,
as we have observed before. And in the conclusion Peter Martyr will not
absolutely determine for the most generally received opinion. Neither yet for
the last rank of the Creatures, as Dr. Willet inclines to, with some others;
but Pii igitur animi esse censeo, neutram partem pertinaciter affirmare, nihil
enim habemus alterutram in partem satis certo definitum: I judge it to be the
part of a godly mind therefore to affirm neither opinion obstinately; his
reason is, because we have nothing certainly enough, defined, or determined for
either opinion; true, if he mean expressly and in particular, otherwise we
might again make use of his own words in 8. P. Mart. in 8. ad Romans
ad Romans satis tamen est quod in genere creaturas instaurandas significaverit,
neque unquam quicquam exceperit: though the Scripture mention not their
restoration expressly, or in particular, yet its enough notwithstanding that
it has signified the Creatures to be restored in general, neither has any
thing any where excepted. And if we demand which of the ranks of the Creatures,
or out of which this renovation shall be, he answers, loco quo supra, Hoc tamen
ausim dicere, exillis creaturis quae interierint, tantum homines esse
excitandos a mortuis. De aliis vero creaturis post diem judicii conservandis a
coelo and terra, quarum Scriptura non meminit, nihil dicendum arbitror:
Notwithstanding this, I dare be bold to say, that of all those Creatures that
are already dead, or such as have perished before the day of judgment, only
men shall be raised again from death; but of other Creatures that shall be
conserved after the day of Judgment, which Creatures the Scriptures have not
mentioned, I suppose nothing is to be said. In particular, and expressly they
are not mentioned, as you have heard, but in general you have heard himself
say, and without exception, which, says he, satis tamen est, notwithstanding
that other Creatures be not so expressly named, as heaven and earth is, etc.
yet its enough, they are promised to be delivered in general, and no exception
any where made of other sort of Creatures, that they shall not be restored any
more than of heaven and of earth. But how many Individualls God shall renew of
every sort, that is left to his wisdom, and good pleasure, as it was when he
preserved the several species at the time of the Flood. Paraeus dubio decimo
in 8. ad Romans
Paraeus dub. 10. in octavum ad Romanos, judges, quod sit probabile res
corruptibiles plerasque omnes abolendas esse: its probable [saith he] that all
corruptible Creatures, for the greatest part of them, shall be abolished; for
man (as you have heard) shall stand in need of no ordinary use of them, as
formerly; but God in his wisdom can preserve so many as may (I say) continue
the several species, amongst which there shall be talis concinnus orde, so
fine, so sweet an order, and such a disposal of them, that there shall neither
be redundancy, nor deficiencie. Tale fore temperamentum, and concinnum ordinem,
ut nihil deforme, vel fluxum appareat, as you have seen before out of Calvin
upon the place; Calvin in loc.
there shall be such a moderation, and fine order amongst the Creatures that
shall be restored, that nothing shall appear either foul, or superfluous, or
ill-favored, or unstable, which is enough for us to know in this life.

Now for the use of the Creatures that shall be restored, though it shall not
be for any common necessity, as before, yet may it be for an use of ineffable
excellency, wherein the multifarious wisdom of God, in regard of the Objects
upon which its shown, may appear, and remain, as upon record, in the several
and great variety of the species for ever: Vt delectationi visionis
intellectualis, addatur delectatio visionis sensualis; ut Joan. de combis lib.
7. comp. Theol. veritat. cap. 20. And if the Heavens declare the glory of God,
why may not these also, when they are renewed? Aug. in lib devidendo Deo.
August. in libro de videndo Deo, because the corporeal eye non potest ad
essentiam divinam pertingere, cannot reach to the Divine Essence, (though we
shall see God face to face, yet when we are glorified, we are but still finite
Creatures) idcirco ne oculus congrua delectatione distituatur, ornatum Coelorum
mirificum, and rerum jam instauratarum pulchritudinem illi tum esse offerendam,
ut habeat non solum unde se oblectet and gaudeat, sed etiam unde Dei potentiam
and infinitam sapientiam, admiretur: therefore least the eye should be
destitute of light congruous or convenient for it, he offers to it the
wonderful adorning of the Heavens, and the beauty or fairness of the
Creatures that are restored, that man may have not only wherewith he may
delight himself, but also may rejoice, and also whence he may admire the
power, and infinite wisdom of God. To which Peter Martyr says, Probabilia
quidem sunt ista fateor, sed ea sacris Scripturis non confirmantur: I grant
(says he) that these things are probable, but are not confirmed by holy Writ.
True it is, that they are not clearly, and in terminis confirmed in holy Writ.
But first we have seen what has been alleged for the renovation of the
Creature. And secondly, if so, God will have uses for it. Thirdly, if the
particular uses be not clearly made known to us in this life, yet it will not
thence follow, that therefore God has no use for them at all; and though it be
also true, that they shall see God himself face to face, the glorified body
of Christ, and an infinite company of the glorious bodies of the Saints,
brighter then the Sunn, and therefore you may say cannot be so much delighted
with the looking upon any of the Creatures renewed, as with these; I answer,
take it for granted, that they cannot be so much delighted, because the objects
are not so eminent in degrees, yet it will not follow that therefore they may
have no delight by these at all; for this may delight them, that they see the
poor Creatures, their old, and quondam servants freed from vanity, slavery, and
misery, and now restored to liberty, and from that corruption they fell under,
by reason of their former disobedience, and impiety; this I say as rational,
and probable.

But it may be objected, that the Saints in the highest Heaven, or in the
Heaven of Heavens, shall have no occasion to contemplate these, seeing in their
Fathers house there are so many Mansions, John 14.2. John 14.2.
and joy unspeakable and glorious I answer, it is true, that there is such joy
even in that place, yea greater then the heart of man can conceive; for eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it as yet ever entered into the
heart of man what joy God has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. 2.9. 1
Cor. 2.9.
Yet as when a man would show his friend some stately fabric, the manner of
the contriving of it, and his several rooms, he does not only show him his
treasury of Plate, his lodging chambers curiously adorned with all variety, his
bedding, hangings, stools, chaires, or such like furniture, his several
Cubberds of richly wrought plate, seilings, playsteings of his Chambers,
stately Windows hewne, etc. but for varieties sake, he shows him such as with
which he cannot so much be taken, as his Hall, Buttery, Kitchen and such like
places; even so likewise from Heaven God may show the Sons of glory,
sometimes for varieties sake, the Creature renewed, the several species of
them, the wonderful order amongst them, etc. wherein the great variety of Gods
Wisdom may appear; though the somtimes-contemplation of these be much
inferior for content, to those unspeakable joys in the seat of the blessed,
yet I say the variety of Gods Wisdom may appear in them. This I say, as not
irrational, or altogether against reason, but probable, because the Scriptures
are not so clear in this particular, therefore we may not be so resolute, as to
dedicate, or affirm it in any higher nature, or like some Article of faith, of
infallible certainty; I may not wade so far, but only give a probable
conjecture in this speculation, leaving the judgment of the rationalty of it to
the judicious, and considerate reader: and this I conceive is to deal
moderately, and not with so much confidence and resolution, as laborious D.
Willet [which I name with reverence] has done in his resolve upon this
passage, [as God willing we shall show hereafter] but upon how much better
grounds, judicet lector, let the reader judge. 1 King. 10.3, 4, 5.
1 Kings. 10.3, 4, 5. When the Queen of Sheba came to the Court of Solomon,
she did not only hear his wisdom, and see the house which he had built (with
both which she was delighted in an high measure) she must also have shown
unto her the meat of his table, the sitting of his servants, and the
attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, his cup-bearers, and the
assent by which he went up to the house of the Lord, and there was no more
spirit in her, when she had seen all this, she was astonished; now all these
things though she was wonderfully delighted with them, and elevated in her
thoughts even to admiration, yet we may conceive that the objects were not
equally delectable, the meat on his table could not raise her to so high a
pitch of admiration, as the hearing of Solomon's wisdom in resolving all her
hard questions, and the seeing of the house which he had built, and the assent
by which he went up to the house of the Lord: yet for varieties sake, those of
inferior delight were showed her, as well as those that were superior, or
transcendent: Thus God may deal with his Elect, in the enjoying of those
unspeakable comforts of the highest Heaven, and then sometimes contemplating
from thence, objects of inferior delight here below, for varieties sake, and
for the contemplating of the great variety of the wisdom of God, in the
several sorts of Creatures, as you have heard.

Again, secondly, let us take another instance from the Angels, which seems to
quadrate more to our purpose, for illustration; they, we all confess, are in
glory, in the seat of the blessed, and in those unspeakable joys the Elect
shall attain unto; they behold the face of God, and the glorious body of
Christ, and the great variety of spiritual delights there to be found, yet do
they desire to behold also other varieties. Ephesians. 3.10. the Apostle having
spoken of the Calling of the Gentiles into consociation of one Church together
with the Jews, and those Gentiles out of so many several Nations, and
Languages, having made a promise to Abraham, and his Seed of the Messiah,
having made a Covenant with him, and given him a sign of Circumcision to
confirm it, gave a law to his posterity to guide them, and in all these the
Gentiles excluded from the Church, as without God in the world, and without
hope of Salvation. Ephesians. 2.12, 13, 2 Ephesians. 2.12, 13, 14.
14. at that time (namely when you were in your carnal estate of Gentilisme)
ye were without Christ, [namely as a mediator for you] being aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise; having no
hope, and without God in the world. As if he had said, Ye had nothing to do
with the Laws and immunities which belonged to Israel, nothing to do with the
promises made to them. Psa. 147.19, 20. Ps. 147.19, 20.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and judgments unto Israel, he
has not dealt so with any Nation, as for his judgments, they have not known
them. But now in Christ Jesus, says Paul, ye that were far off sometimes,
are made nigh by the blood of Christ; for he is our peace, who has made both
one, and has broken down the partition wall, or the middle wall of partition,
between us. And that Christ should be the Head to both, being both God and man,
that so few of the Jews should be called to embrace Christ, and such abundance
of these Gentiles, who were without such Covenants, such promises as they had,
without Law, without Circumcision, without any good works, etc. and yet by the
voice of the Gospel these should be called; and by faith in Christ, and that
faith freely given from God, these should be saved, and be made fellow-Citizens
with the Saints, and one body with the faithful in Israel; this was such a
point of Gods wisdom, and so admirable, and such a way of collecting a
Church, and out of so many several Languages, that the Apostle cries out, Romans
9.30, 31.
O altitudo divitiarum sapientiae, etc. Romans 9.30, 31. The Gentiles which
followed not after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the
righteousness which is of Faith: But Israel which followed after the Law of
righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness, etc. This is
that (...), that multiformis, as Beza, with the vulgar, or multivaria, that
manifold wisdom of God, which is now made known by the Church, to the Angels:
for they see aliquid novum, tanquam in speculo, and prius sibi incognitum, some
new thing, as in a glass, which formerly was unknown to them. And they may be
said to know this, per Ecclesiam, by the Church; non instrumentaliter, and
subjective docentem, sed objective indicantem, the Angels seeing such a Church
now gathered. Yea, 1 Pet. 1.12. 1 Pet. 1.12.
this is such an admirable thing, (namely, that the greatest part of the world,
that so many Gentiles, that for so many years had lived in darkness, and in
the way to death, should now be called to make up one Christian Church with the
Jews, and be under one Head with them) that desiderant Angli introspicere, the
Angels desire to behold it (...), in the Greek, to bow down, so as to peep
into any thing. Now the Angels in Heaven enjoy unspeakable comforts, as you
have heard, and yet they desire to peep into, or to look into the manifold
wisdom of God shown here upon Earth, in calling the great varieties of
Gentiles to make up one Church of Saints with the Jews; why then may not the
Elect in Heaven with the Angels sometimes desire to contemplate the wonderful
wisdom, or (...), multifariam sapientiam, the manifold wisdom of God, in the
great varieties of the renewed species of the Creatures, that are below them?

But Thirdly, it may be objected, that it will be ultra sphaeram activitatis
oculi ullius corporei, beyond the ability of any bodily eye, to behold, from
the seat of the blessed at any time, any Creatures here upon the Earth. To this
I would answer thus, Acts 7.56. Acts 7.56.
that if Stephen, here in a mortal body, could from Earth behold Christ
standing at the right hand of God, when the Heavens were opened, why cannot the
Saints in immortal bodies see from Heaven down unto the Earth, for God can as
well make way through the medium from Heaven to Earth, as he did from Earth to
Heaven. Calvin in loc.
Calvin in locum, data Stephano nova a^ies, quae per obstacula omnia usque ad
invisibilem regni cael^stis glo iam penetraret, a new sight was given to
Stephen at that time, by which his eye was strengthened beyond the ordinary
ability of nature, so that he could pearce through obstacles, even to the
invisible glory of that heavenly Kingdom; otherwise though the Heavens were
wide open, yet the ordinary ability of man's fight, or the natural strength of
it, were not of sufficient power, to behold an object at such a distance. Its
needless therefore to dispute much de visu naturali, of natural sight, cum
facillimum Deo fuit Stephani oculos insolita acie donare, Gualt. Hom. 55. in
Apost. Act.
as Gualter says, Hom. 55. in Acta Apostolorum; when as it was an easy thing
to God to give unto the eyes of Stephen a sight above ordinary: such shall the
sight of glorified bodies be, far more excellent then that we now have in
these frail and mortal bodies. And this shall serve for the fourth point.

I now come to the fifth, and last, namely, the glorious liberty of the sons
of God, or the children of God, into which the Creature is to be reduced,
(...), etc. in libertatem gloriae, into the liberty of the glory of the sons
of God. What we are to understand by the sons of God, we may easily perceive
by that which we have heard already, the Elect people of God, predestined to
life, called, justified, and glorified; But what we are to understand by the
liberty of their glory, that must be inquired into. Theodoret.
Theodoret referrs it to the time, in which the Children of God shall come to
this liberty, and no doubt but the deliverance shall then be, when they come to
theirs. For as Estius observes from Verse 20, Estius in loc.
they were made subject under hope: under what hope? sub spe liberationis in
illud tempus, quando filii Dei, quibus subservit, suam libertatem consequentur,
under the hope of deliverance at that time, when the sons of God, to whom
they have bin subject, and done service, shall obtain their liberty, the object
of their hope, was this deliverance into the glorious liberty of the children
of God. The time may be granted, and yet this glorious liberty not fully
explained, for that is but the circumstance, not the thing it self.

Chrysostom.
Chrysostom, by (...), in the Greek would understand (...), for (in libertatem)
propter libertatem, that as they were made subject to vanity, because of man
sinning, so should they also be freed by reason of man's freedom: yea, and not
only so, but also brought into this glorious liberty, ut gloriam filiorum Dei
cumulet, atque illustret, as Paraeus; Paraeus in loc.
that thereby he may add to, and more illustrate the glorious liberty of them,
which liberty of glory shall be so great, as that for their sakes these shall be
set at liberty also.

I close with the judgment of those which is also related by Estius, who say,
that they shall be delivered, in imitationem gloriosae libertatis filiorum Dei,
vel ad exemplum, to an estate imitating the glorious liberty of the sons of
God. For as their glorious liberty exempts them from any more corruption, toil,
misery, or the like; so likewise shall their deliverance exempt them; so that
it may be called deliverance into their glorious liberty, because it shall be a
liberty suting to their nature, or analogically a glorious liberty, as the
liberty of glory properly is suitable to the rational nature of the Children of
God. As the liberty of the glory of Gods sons shall exempt them from the
forenamed vanities, so also shall their liberty exempt them; so that thus
they may be said to be delivered into the liberty of the glory of the sons of
God, though not into the glory of their liberty, properly, and eminently so
called, as you have also heard. Thus by the help of that good hand of God upon
me, I have finished this fifth and last Point also, which is all I promised in
the Frontispiece of this Work. And if I may have leave to speak without
prejudice, experience has taught me thus much, that it is opus arduum, ac
dificile, hard in its self, and painful to me, and troubleous, what it might
have bin to great wits, I dispute not, only I dare avouch it for a speculation
worthy of such.

Two things more there are upon which I would gladly express my thoughts, as
being appendices, or pertaining to the foregoing Argument. The former, what
Heavens they are, which are to be burnt, and purified by fire? The second,
[which I conceive more difficult] which as yet I have not seen clear
satisfaction in, is this, in what sense righteousness may be said to dwell in
the new Heaven, and in the new Earth, which God shall make? The former question
I move, because I find diverse of the Pontifician Divines [binding too much upon
Aristotle, in his dispute against Plato, and upon Gregory the great,] that hold
stiffely, that the Coelum Aereum, not Aethereum is it that shall be burned with
Fire, the Airie, Heaven, not the Sidereall, Sphaericall, or that above the
Element of Fire, because this they conceive to have bin more corrupted then the
other: for this Aereall Heaven, Bellar. tom. 3. lib. 6. de Amiss. gratiae cap.
3.
not the Aethereall, you have Bellarm. pleading Tom. 3. lib. 6. de amissione
gratiae, etc. cap. 3. Neque enim de Coelo sidereo, sed de Aereo sermo est.
Estius in 2 Pet. cap. 3. Estius in 2 Pet. cap. 3. Aqu. in 2 Pet. cap. 3.
Aquinas in eundem locum, who also foreseeing the objection (of Heavens)
whereas the Air is but an Heaven, answers, that by the Heavens in Peter is
meant the Air, et dicitur Aer Coeli pluraliter propter diversas regiones Coeli
Aerei, and propter ejus plura hemisphaeria: And the Air is called heavens, in
the Plural number, because of the diverse Regions of it, and because it has
more Hemisphers in it than one, as natural Philosophy teaches; yet in
Scripture we read but of three Heavens. 1. The Coelum Aereum, Matthew. 6.26.
as Mat. 6.26 Volatilia Coeli, the Fowls of the Air. 2. Coelum Aethereum, or
the Heavens sidereall, above the Element of Fire, Deuteronomy. 17.3. Deuteronomy. 17.3.
or any of the host of Heaven. 3. Coelum altissimum, or sublimissimum, or
beatarum sedium, the highest Heaven, or seat of the blessed, Esa. 66.1. Coelum
ipsum mihi solium, Isa. 66.1.
Heaven it self is my Throne. Now the sidereall Heaven is often called Coeli,
or Heavens, in the Plural number, as Matthew. 3.16. (...), Matthew. 3.16.
et aperti sunt ei Coeli, and the Heavens were opened to him. Thus Acts 7. Acts
7.56.
56. Stephen saw the Heavens opened. Psalm. 8.1. Psalm. 8.1.
who have set thy glory above the Heavens. Psalm. 19.1. Psalm. 19.1.
The Heavens declare the glory of God, etc. The highest Heaven above all these
is called Coelum tertium, 2 Cor. 12.2.
the third Heaven. 2 Cor. 12.2. this is Gods division of the Heavens, who made
them. Now for as much, as I remember, the Coelum aereum, or Airie Heaven, is
still called (Coelum) in the singular number, when it stands in oposition to
the rest, Matthew. 6.26. Psa. 104.12.
as Matthew. 6.26. and Psalm. 104.12. Volatilia Coeli, the Fowls of Heaven. 1
Kings 18.45.
1 Kings 18.45. the Heaven was black with clouds; Levit. 26.19.
and Levit. 26.19. your Heaven, etc. and not Heavens.

And though it be true that Philosophers do place the meteora aquosa, as nubes,
etc. the watery meteors, in medio Aere, in the middle region of the Air, such
meteors as are the Clouds, etc. and so might be called Heaven, in regard of
that region, yet that region which is infimus Aer, the lowest region, in which
the Birds do fly, is also called Heaven, etc. but the Scripture terms but the
totum corpus Aereum by the name of Heaven, for as far as I can remember;
therefore when (Heavens) are mentioned, somewhat more then the Air only is to
be understood. Again, both the forenamed regions may be termed (Heaven,)
because they are parts similares ejusdem Aeris, or Coeli Aerei, simular parts
of the same Aereall Heaven, and therefore receive eandem denominationem cum
toto, the same denomination with the whole.

Secondly, Saint Peter, speaking of the world to be destroyed by fire, makes a
difference between the Heavens, and the Elements, whereof the Air is one. 2
Peter 3.10. 2 Pet. 3.10.
the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, or with a great hissing; and
then it follows, The Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also
with the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Where we see a plain
difference made between the Heavens, as one thing, and the Elements as another;
Aquin in loc. Estius in loc.
neither can the skill of Aquinas, or Estius upon this place, by all their
evasions, avoid it. The former, by saying that since the world was destroyed by
water, Aer erat spissior, etc. the Air was thicker, and therefore stood need
of purging; as the other did not. The latter by considering with Augustine,
that a comparison is here made between the Heavens that now are, Aug lib 20. de
civit. Dei. cap. 24.
and those that perished, lib. 20 de civitate Dei. cap. 24. and those were the
Aereal Heavens, or the regions of it. To which I answer, that the comparison in
Peter is not between the Heavens that then perished, and these that now are,
being indeed for substance still the same: but between the world that then was,
2 Pet. 3.6.
is qui tum erat mundus, 2 Pet. 3.6. that is, as Beza well has it, Beza in loc.
aspectabilis ille terrae decor, and quaecunque animantia in terra degebant,
iis duntaxat exceptis quae in arca erant inclusa, nec enim aquae in coelos
redundarunt; imo ne ipsa quidam terrae substantia periit, sed futurae
conflagrationis long alia erit ratio, ideo coelum and terram, id est, rerum
universitatem, distinct nominavit in proximo versu: that visible comeliness
of the earth, and whatsoever living Creatures then was upon it, except only
those that were shut up in the Ark; neither did the Waters then reach unto the
Heavens, yea, not so much as the very substance of the earth perished: But the
matter shall be far otherwise about burning of the world by fire; therefore
in the next Verse he distinctly named the Heaven, and the earth, that is the
whole world, to which the forenamed world was opposed. And Beda by the Elements
understands all the four Elements, Beda in verba.
yet thinks two only shall utterly perish, that is, Fire, and Water; and other
two remain renewed, that is, the Air and earth, called the new Heavens, and the
new Earth. Yet what has been said against this before, shall suffice; neither
does this pl^^se the Pontificians. Others think only three here meant, Water,
Earth, Air, because they cannot see how the Element of fire should be consumed
by fire.

To which I would answer with Aquin in suplem. ad 3. Aquin in supplem. ad 3.
part sum qu. 74. art. 3.
partem summarum qu. 74. art. 3. respond. ad 1. having shown, that the fire,
that shall burn the world, shall be of the same species with ours, he adds, non
tamen est idem numero, notwithstanding its not the same in all respects with
ours. And we see (says he) that in two fires of the same species, one may
destroy the other, major scilicet minorem, the greater the less, consumendo
materiam, by consuming the matter of it, etc. Again, loco quo supra, Respond.
ad secundum, Loco quo supra Resp ad 2.
the fire, that shall burn and purge the world, shall not have its calefactive
power, ex principiis essentialibus, sed ex divina vir^ute, vel operatione, out
of its own essential Principles, [as usually it has, but from the Divine
power, or operation of God in it, as his Instrument, enabled from him to
produce this effect. And actio instrumenti magis manifestat virtutem moventis,
quam virtutem moti; the action of the Instrument rather manifests the power and
efficacy of the Mover of it, or Worker by it, then of it self: and the fire
which God shall stir up to purge the world, shall have such efficacy in it
from him, that it shall work beyond the ordinary course of nature, and shall be
able to melt the Elements, and that with fervent heat, as S. Peter speaks: yet
non ad eorum funditus consumptionem, sed solum usque ad eorum purgationem; not
to the total, or utterly abolishing of their substance, but to the purging of
them from their grosser attracted qualities. Neither will that of Gregory hold,
Greg. magnus.
who says, in tantum accendet ignis Judicii, in quantum ascenderunt aquae
diluvii: the fire shall burn as high toward heaven, as the waters of the Flood
ascended; but that should be no higher than fifteen Cubits above the high
Mountains, which would not extend to the melting of all the Elements, much
less to the burning of the Sphaericall Heavens. Dr. Willet, qu. 29. in 8. Dr
Willet. qu. 29. in 8. ad Romans
ad Romans there is not any visible thing, that had a beginning, but shall also
have an ending. In which he says truth, and for which the Psalmist will
warrant him, Psalm. 102.25, 26. Psalm. 102.25.26.
The Heavens are the works of thy hands; they shall perish, but thou shall
endure: they [all of them] shall wax old like a garment, as a vesture shall
thou change them, and they shall be changed. If any visible thing should escape
change, these were likest; but not these must escape. And Heavens are here
taken as opposed to the Earth: as Genesis 2.1. Genesis 2.1.
Thus the Heavens and the earth were finished, and all the Host of them. Psalm.
8:3: Psa. 8.3.
When I consider thy Heavens, the work of thy Fingers; the Moon and the Stars
which thou have ordained. Even these heavens, in which are the Moon, and the
Stars, shall perish, shall be burned with fire. Thus much briefly for the
former point, that Aethereall Heavens shall burn, as well as the Aereall.

But as we have seen what Heavens shall burn, let us a little consider what
Heaven shall not burn. When I say the Aethereall heavens, I mean, the
Sydereall, and all the sphaericalls under the highest, or third heaven, as the
primum mobile, and the coelum crystallinum, etc. but the third heaven I mean
not, which is the Seat of the Blessed, and which was a Creature created the
first day; Genesis 1.1. Genesis 2.4.
Genesis 1.1. and Genesis 2.4. These are the generations of the heavens and the
earth, Heb. 11.10.
when they were created. Heb. 11.10. Abraham looked for a City which has
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. This Heaven is corpus supremum,
immobile, incorruptibile, amplissimum, ac totum lucidum, etc.

First, it is a body, and a substance, though most subtle; for that in which
bodies are contained, its necessary that that should be corporeal; for inter
locatum and locum, inter contentum and continens, there must be aliqua
proportio, some proportion, between the things contained, and the thing
containing. Now the body of Christ is already in the highest heaven, and ours
shall be; howsoever the bodies of Enoch and Eliah now be.

Secondly, quicquid est apertibile est corpus: But so was the highest heaven,
Acts 7.56. Acts 7.56.
otherwise Stephen had not seen Christ standing at the right Hand of God, if
that Heaven had not been opened: for howsoever I know that some think there was
nulla scissura in coelis, no division at all in the Heavens, and that miraculum
non fuit in coelis, sed in Stephani oculis: not in the opening of the Heavens,
but in the eyes of Stephen: Others, that he saw this in a Vision, etc. or
mental contemplation, not with bodily eyes; yet, Gual. hom. 55. in Act.
says Gualter, Hom. 55. in Acta, Ego haec illi revera visibiliter, apparuisse,
nec mentis duntaxat contemplationi objecta fuisse intelligo; I do think that
these things appeared unto him visible in very deed, and were not only
represented to the contemplation of his mind.

Damas. lib. 2. orth. fid. cap. 6.
Again, Damascene lib. 2. orthodoxae fidei cap. 6. (...), Coelum est ambitus
visibilium, and invisibilium creaturarum, Heaven is the compass or circuit
both of visible, and invisible Creatures. Keckermannus lib. 2. Kecker. lib. 2.
Syst. Phys. cap 1.
Systematis Physici cap: 1: Spiritus non potest corpora ambire and concludere,
A Spirit cannot compass about, or shut up bodies within it. This is that which
the Philosophers call Coelum Empyraeum, which is suprema, and excellentissima
illa Coelorum series, Thronus gloriae divinae, and domicilium electorum
Angelorum, atque hominum, as the same Author lib. 2. cap. 5. de partibus Coeli:
Idem Auth. lib. quo supra cap. 5.
This is the highest and most excellent order of the Heavens, or rank of them,
the Throne of Gods glory, and the abiding place of the elect Angels and men.
And presently after he calls it partem corporis coelestis, part of the body of
Heaven. See the like from Augustine lib. 22. de Civitate Dei, cap. 4. Aug. lib
22. de civit. Dei cap. 4
showing, Coelum beatorum esse corporeum, the heaven of the blessed to be
corporeal. This is called coelum coelorum, the Heaven of Heavens, Deuteronomy. 10.14.
Deuteronomy. 10.14.
and is far above all other Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. that is above all the
sphaericalls: This is immobile, ac incorruptibile, immovable, as seated above
the primum mobile, and is the place of ease, and rest of Gods Elect.
Incorruptible, as having no privation to concomitate that most pure, pleasant,
and exquisite matter of it, or no contrariety of qualities to make opposition,
or corruption in it, full of light also, and therefore is called of the
Graecians (...), ob plurimum splendorem, aut plurimam lucem, because of the
abundance of light that is there, far above that of fire. Some do think that
Aristotle had a glympse of this, Arist lib. 1. de coelo cap. 9.
because 1 lib. de Coelo cap. 9. he mentions quaedam entia collocata supra
mundum, ac Coelum, eaque immutabilia, et impatibilia, beatissimam vitam
sempiterno aevo degentia, etc. certain beings placed above the visible Heaven,
and visible world, being immutable, and impassible, living there for ever a
most blessed, and contenting life: yea, and some also do think, that the
ancient Poets had learned somewhat concerning it, when they so often speak of
the Mansions of their gods, (...), that they had such shining and glorious
Mansions, full of light. But of this no more, save only that we may conceive,
that it is the most ample of the Heavens, and yet cannot contain its Maker. 1
Kings 8.27. The Heaven, nor heaven of Heavens cannot contain him.

I now come to the latter point, how righteousness can be said to dwell in the
new Heavens that he shall make, and the new Earth. For this passage has matter
worth inquiry in it. Some interpreters do with such places as travelers do
with deeps, or boggs in highways, when they come at them, they wisely pass
by them, or say little to the openings of them, to give the reader
satisfaction. Others that note somewhat, yet come not home to the mark. Others
perceiving this, have taken up more resolution, and I much doubt if they have
not over shot the mark. To let pass those of the first rank. For the second
I will mention Musculus, Musc. in loc.
in the which nullum peccatum, nulla injustitia locum habebit, no sin, no
unrighteousness shall have any dwelling in them; which is true: but the text
seems to aim at some what more, as not only negatively, not to dwell, but
positively, for righteousness to dwell in them. Bullin. in loc.
Bullinger thinks per (...), or alterationem, that justitia, is put for justi,
righteousness for righteous men; this we grant for two Reasons. First, because
righteousness, as inherent, is a quality, and therefore cannot be supposed
without some subject. Secondly, because the new Heavens and Earth, are subjecta
insensibilia, insensible subjects, and therefore not inherently capable of such
qualities, therefore some other subject, and what but just men? but how these
can be said to dwell in the new Heavens, which are sydereall, and in the new
Earth, is more difficult to conceive. Dr. Willet qu. 34. Dr. Willet, qu. 24. in
8. ad Romans
in Oct. ad Romans is bold to affirm, that though the Heavens only are now the
seat of the blessed souls, yet both the new Heavens, and the new Earth, shall
be then the habitation of the righteous, and so righteousness may be said to
dwell in them; for which opinion he quotes Bucan loc. 39. qu. 17. Bucan loc 39.
qu. 17.
by which Author he is much ledd in this point; as also Origin. in Matthew. 5.5.
the meek shall inherit the Earth, not this visible Earth; but the other, which
eye has not seen, his reason is, because he there speaks of a blessedness
which is not to be found in this Earth; Psa. 114.16.
he might also have alleged, Psalm. 114.16. the Heaven, even the Heavens are
the Lords, but the Earth has he given to the children of men. But to this
last, Bellarmine answers truly, and herein agrees with our Orthodox Divines,
lib. 6. de amissione gratiae cap. 3. he gave the Earth to the children of men,
Bellarm lib. 6. de Amist. great cap. 3.
dum mortales sunt, et egent Aere ad respirationem, et fructibus terrae ad
alimentum, whilst they were mortal, and stood in need of Air to breath in,
and nourishment from the earth to live upon. For the other, that the meek
shall inherit the Earth, we know it may befall them in this life as a temporal
blessing, though not without some intermixture of disturbance, this place
seems to me to have bin taken from Psalm. 37.11. the spirit of God being
pleased to make use of it again by the Evangilist, But the meek shall inherit
the Earth, and delight themselves in the abundance of peace. And verse 9. Evil
doers shall be cut off, but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit
the Earth: whereupon Calvin notes the Antithesis between the two members, Calv.
in loc.
the wicked that shall be cut off, and the Godly that wait upon God, to be
delivered from under the Cross, he assigns the haereditary right of the
earth, so to them that intellgit sic victuros, ut Dei benedictio ad mortem eos
usque prosequatur, he understands they shall so live, that the blessing of God
shall follow them even unto their death; this then he understands of a
temporal inheritance, when they are mortal. And though they be often driven
from place to place in the Earth, in hac tamen inquietudine non eripitur ista
terrae possessio, cujus meminit David: quia et certo sciunt se legitimos esse
mundi haeredes: unde fit ut tranquilla conscientia pane suo vescantur, et
quamvis inopia laborent, Deus tamen ipsorum necessitatibus in tempore
succurrit, etc. Yet in this their unquietness that possession of the Earth
which David mentions is not taken from them, because they know assuredly that
they are the lawful Heirs of the world [ viz. in a spiritual right]
whereupon it comes, to pass that they eat their bread in quietness of
conscience; and though they be sometimes in want, yet God in good time sends
supply to their necessities. So then these grounds in the judgment not only
of the aforenamed Authors, but of diverse others, will not clearly bear out his
opinion, to hold the new Earth for an habitation of the righteous, as well as
the Heavens, seeing it is verified of a temporal inheritance here, and
therefore only, and necessarily cannot involve that sense, he would put upon
it by Origens astipulation.

Yet this I will say, that if the new Heavens be to be an habitation for the
righteous, this would, in my judgment, be a better Argument against the motion
of the Heavens, that they should no more move after the day of judgment, then
any he has yet produced.

Secondly, I will say, that if by the Creature to be delivered, we were sure
that only Heaven, and Earth were to be understood, etc. then may these be said
to be delivered into the glorious liberty of the Children of God, when they
shall have liberty to live in these, both in the new Heavens, and in the Earth:
and then need not the most accurate, and pearcing Interpreters so much perplex
themselves about the understanding of this place. But this is to be delivered
into the liberty of their glory, passive, passively, to be enjoyed of them; not
active, actively, for the Creatures to enjoy it.

He urges also Revelations 14.4. they shall follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, shall visit the Earth also, and shall go and come, as it pleases God.

I answer, that though they follow the Lamb whithersoevever he goes, yet
except it can be proved, that he goes on to the earth, as well as in Heaven,
the quotation will not help him; and Verse the 5. these are said to be without
fault before the Throne of God, absolved by divine judicature; and these
followed the Lamb in this life, in persecutions, troubles, afflictions, yea
many of them unto death it self, hunc eundem sequuntur in vitam aeternam quo
prior ipse abiit, as Aretius in loc. this same Lamb they follow also into
aeternall life, whither he himself is first gone before them.

Aretius upon the place in Peter thus, Aret. in. loc.
Nova habitatio, novos requirit incolas, these Heavens being made a new
habitation, they require the Inhabitants also to be new. And a little after,
Nova terra mansio erit justorum, the new Earth shall be a dwelling place for
the righteous.

And Bullinger in 1 Pet. 3.13. Bullin in 1 Pet. 3.13.
Novi enim Coeli parantur justis, justitiae ergo studendum est iis, qui novi
Coeli velint esse incolae, the Heavens are prepared for the righteous,
therefore it behooves them to study righteousness, which would be the
inhabitants of these new Heavens; these men seem to me to be of this
judgment, that when the sphaericall Heavens shall be made new, they shall also
be for the righteous, as well as the highest Heaven is now, and that their
glorious habitation shall then extend as low as the face of the Earth: but
whether the new Heavens, and the new Earth, which God shall make after these be
burnt up, shall have eundem situm, the same situation, or place, that they have
now, is questioned by some. Dionysius Carthusianus in 5. Dionys. Carth. in
Matthew. 5.18.
Matthaei, verse 18. thinks that they shall be changed, not only quoad
qualitatem, but also quoad situm, etc. not only in their qualities, but also
in their situation; yet alleges no reason for it.

But this I would observe by the way, that if they shall go, and come from
Earth to Heaven, and from Heaven to Earth again, as God shall please, as says
Dr. Willet. loco quo supra, Dr. Willet loc. quo supra.
then may the Creatures upon the Earth, serve for some use of contemplation,
for the which he would find no use before. Now this I say, that if God shall
enlarge the seat of the blessed, and shall make the new Heavens a like glorious
to the highest Heaven, to contain all the bodies of his Elect, as well as the
souls, (though its very probable, that the highest Heaven is more spacious for
those, then Hell for the innumerable number of the bodies of the damned,)
though there shall want no compass for either, but both shall have such
confines, as God in his wisdom shall appoint, the one for joy, the other for
pain and misery, then may the spacious liberty of the saints glory extend to
the earth, as to the one term of their continent, as the top of the highest
Heaven is the other; and so righteous me^ may be said to dwell in both, as
living within the situation of both, as the^ in part of their glorious
liberty. D. Willet concludes thus, Dr. Willet loc. quo supra.
But here we must not be too bold, to wade without ground, how the Saints shall
be disposed off, whether some to heaven, some to earth; whether the same shall
be sometime in heaven, sometime in earth, or how else as it pleases God, we
leave these as great mysteries, not revealed: yet thus he adds, But that the
Saints shall then be upon the earth, we are certain out of Scripture, as has
been showed. But I should rather conceive it within the Continent of these, as
parts of their liberty, if enlargement of their glory be granted, then upon
the Earth, as upon the subject matter; if the site of it remain where now it
is: and to the places he grounds upon, I have answered, and will add to them
one more: Apoc. 5.10.
Apoc. 5.10. And have made us unto our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall
reign upon the earth; not corporeally, with the Geneva note. Nota Genesis.
Others of our modern Divines conceive it of the spiritual reign in this
mortal life over sin, Satan, persecuters, opposers, and the like. Romans 6.6.
Romans 6.6.
Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed.
And Verse. 12, Verse. 12.
let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in
the lusts thereof: No, but reign you over it upon the earth, and not it over
you. Aretius in loc.
Aretius upon the place thus, Commemoratis Christi beneficiis pollicentur
gratitudinis ergo constantiam in confessione, intelligo enim haec ab eis dici
in persona militantis ecclesiae, quae regnat super terram, praestando Deo
constantiam sub cruce, mortificando carnem suam, opprimendo peccati
concupiscentiam, praescindendo peccandi occasiones, etc. having rehearsed the
benefits of Christ, in token of thankfulness, they promise constancy in their
confession. For I conceive these things to be spoken of them in the person of
the militant Church, which Church reigns upon the Earth, in performing
constancy to God under the cross, by mortifying their flesh, by oppressing the
concupiscence of sin, by cuting off the occasions of sinning, etc. Thus
(says he) they reign.

1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
That passage in 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. has holden many off from falling in so fully
with the Doctors resolve, as to set it down for a certainty. And therefore
Aquinas upon the place in Peter, Aquin. in 2 Pet. 3.
[with some of the School-Divines,] considering this of Paul to the
Thessalonians, will by no means fall in with his resolve, nor such as pitch
upon it. Non quod justi habitaturi sunt in mundo inferiori post judicium, sicut
nunc, not that the just shall dwell in this inferior world after the day of
judgment, as they do now, but it shall be pars habitationis, says he, a part
of their habitation, sicut Rex non manet in coquina, and tamen dicitur pars
habitationis suae, even as a King abides not in his Kitchen, and yet
notwithstanding its called a part of his habitation.

To which I say thus, that though his resolve may have some ground of reason,
yet his instance does not well quadrate to the matter in hand; For if a King
should build a Palace and have a Kitchen in it, and then it be said, [in
quibus] it would conclude both.

Others therefore thus, In which dwells righteousness, that is Jesus Christ,
say they, who is called our righteousness. Ier. 23.6.
Ierem. 23.6. and this is his name by which he shall be called, Dominus,
justitia nostra, the Lord our righteousness; but to this I say, that where he
is, there shall his elect be also; John 14.2.3. I go to prepare a place for
you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also: as if he had said, if
I go, I mean not to reign alone, but I will also receive you that have
suffered with me, that ye may also reign with me. 2 Timothy 2.12.
2 Timothy 2.12. Christus non discessit a nobis ut nos desereret, sed potius ut
nos secum in Coelos tandem attolleret, as Iunius: Iun in suis Annot.
Christ did not depart from his to that end, that he might forsake them, but
rather that at length he might take us up into Heaven together with him; quae
doctrina ad totam eccl^siam pertinet, as Beza, Beza in loc.
which doctrine belongs to the whole Church. Hic de extremo judicii die
loquitur, quo tandem veniet ad suos colligendos, as Calvin, here says he, he
speaks of the last day of judgment, in the which at length he shall come to
gather up all his, etc. and then shall they all be both in body, and soul,
where he himself is. And Apoc. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to
sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my
Father on his Throne. Sedere cum Christo, est regni illius esse consortem,
says one, to fit down with Christ on his Throne, is to be partaker of his
kingdom with him: so that if he dwell in the new Heavens we shall also dwell
there with him, as in the enlargement of glory, or the place of his glorious
presence.

Beza in 2 Pet. 3.13.
Lastly, Beza resolves thus upon the words, Nevertheless we according to his
promise, look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.
Having mentioned other expositions, he concludes thus, vel denique supplendum
est [(...),] nos ut ita convertas, sed Coelos novos, et terram novam expectamus
(nos) (in quibus habitat justitia nimirum Christi, ut explicat Paulus, Phil.
3.9.
Phil. 3.9. or else, finally, says he, we must supply the sense, with this
word (we) that thou may thus read, But we look for new Heavens, and a new
Earth, (in which we) righteousness dwells, even the righteousness of God by
faith, Phil. 3.9. as Paul has it; and Ephesians. 3.17. that Christ may dwell in
your hearts by faith. 1 These. 4.17. 1 These. 4.17.
Paul speaking of the resurrection, and the order of it, says, verse 16. The
dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which are alive, and remain, shall be
caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so
shall we ever be with the Lord, In aeterna beatitudinis gloria, Hemingius in
loc.
as Hemingius has it, in eternal glory, and blessedness. Aquinas, long
before him, gave the same sense, ostendit beatitudinem sanctorum, Aquin. in loc.
quia semper erunt cum Domino eofruentes, here he shows the blessedness of the
Saints, because they shall always be with the Lord, and enjoying of him.
Theophylact to the same sense, Theophylact. in loc.
perpetuo sunt apud hunc mansuri, they shall continually abide with Christ,
whom they shall meet in the Air. Estius to the same sense, Estius in loc.
speaking of meeting Christ in the Air, he says, inde in Coelum cum eo
subvecti perpetua praesentia fruituri sumus, semper cum eo regnaturi; from
thence we shall be carried with him into Heaven, where we shall enjoy his
perpetual presence and reign with him for ever.

To which I will add, that not the Earth, but the Heavens are the place, where
our inheritance is described to be, and that by him that purchased it, and best
knew the situation of it. 1 Pet. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.18. etc
As ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, neither were ye born of
corruptible seed; verse 23. so neither is there provided for you a corruptible
inheritance. 1 Pet. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.4.
God having begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead, he adds, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us; that fades not away like
flowers or garlands, so that we shall never be weary of the joys of Heaven,
though they endure for eternity, but they shall be as fresh and new; and Ephesians.
2.6. Ephesians. 2.6.
he has raised us up together, and made us sit together (...), in
caelestibus, as the Vulgar, in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: we have the
like word Ephesians. 1.3. (...), Ephesians. 1.3.
in coelestibus in Christo; in Coelis, Beza in loc.
as Beza has it in both places. But to the former, And made us sit together,
in coelestibus, id est, l^cis, as Beza, in Heavenly places, yet our selves as
yet actually sit not in those places in person, but in our Head, Cujus spiritu
coepimus peccato mori, vivere Deo, donec in nobis opus suum perficiat idem qui
inchoavit, by the power of whose Spirit we have begun in this life to die unto
sin, and live unto God, whilst the same that has begun the work, perfect it
in us; we sit with him now in spe, afterward in re, he being our head, he
will draw up all the members to him. But in none of these places is any mention
made of the Earth, Zanchius in loc.
as for the Saints to have any inheritance on it. Though vertually we be risen,
and are in heavenly places, in our head Christ Jesus, yet in us these benefitts
of resuscitation together with him, and this sitting in heavenly places, suum
habebunt complementum cum nostra corpora resumptis animabus excitabuntur a
mortuis, ac resurgent ad vitam immortalem, vitaque fruentur sempiterna; shall
have their full accomplishment when our bodies resuming their souls, shall be
raised up again from the dead, then shall the whole man sit together with
Christ in Heavenly places, such places shall be their aeternall inheritance,
not upon the Earth. Neither would the Patrons of that opinion, a constant
dwelling upon it, but at sometimes. But if we respect these new Heavens, and
Earth, for the place where the righteous shall dwell, as a part of their
enlarged inheritance, yet I conceive, that the Earth is more fitly put here,
for the terminus, or boundary of their liberty, than the subject, upon which
they shall trample a live. And to me that place in Peter is very considerable,
1 Pet. 1.4. where the inheritance is set out by many excellent Epithites, and
the place of it described to be Heaven, and not any part or portion of it
mentioned to be upon the Earth. Thus have I expressed my thoughts upon this
point also, according to that small Talent God has given me, and have also
made answer to such places where the Earth is mentioned, in which it will
appear, that they are not so clear for the opinion for which they have been
quoted, as the quoters of them have opined, I will therefore at length wind up
all with that saying of Bellarmines, lib. de amissione gratiae, cap. 3. Non est
de rebus quae pendent a divina voluntate al quid esserendum, nisi Deus ipse in
Scripturis sanctis tale aliquid revelaverit; we may not affirm any thing in
those matters that depend upon Gods divine will, except God himself have
revealed some such thing unto us in the holy Scriptures: so far as they have
given me light, I have gone, and as far as I could wade upon the firm bottom
of reason, I have adventured.

(...).

Finis.

