COUNSELS AND COMFORTS FOR Troubled Consciences. Contained in a LETTER, lately
written to a FRIEND.

By HENRY WILKINSON, D. D. late Principal of Magdalen-Hall in OXFORD.

Prove. 18. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded
spirit who can bear? Aug: de interiore Domo, C. 1. Nunquam ille dimittit, nisi
prius illum dimiserit LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1679.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Am neither ignorant, nor forgetful, that there are several choice Treatises
which at large insist upon some of those Proofs and Arguments which I endeavor
to prosecute in my ensuing Discourse, entitled, Counsels and Comforts for
troubled Consciences. One of those Treatises bears this Title, The Souls
Conflict. The Dr. Sibs Master of Katharine-Hall in Cambridg. Isa. 50. 4.
Author was a profound and experienced Divine, and had (as the Prophet Isaiah
makes mention) the Tongue of the Learned; for he well knew how to speak a word
in season to him that is weary. And as his heart was frequently and seriously
busied in inditing a good matter. Psalm. 45. 10.
so his tongue was the pen of a ready writer. That whole Book may well be
compared to a string of pearls, and precious stones, whose price is far above
rubies. That learned and experimental Writer plainly shows himself as another
Barnabas, a Son of Consolation.

Another Treatise resembles the former, being good old gold of the same piece,
as to the choice matter therein handled (though in a loftier style) the Title
of this Book is Instructions for a right comforting of afflicted Consciences.
Mr. Bolton.
The learned Author (whose excellent works praise him in the gate) was for a
long time together exercised with the violent assaults and buffettings of
Satan, and was under great horror of spirit; but at last (through the riches
of divine mercy) he returned with a glorious victory over Satan. Wherefore he,
as a valiant conqueror, having won the field, and as an experienced Soldier,
he incourageth his fellow Soldiers to fight Christ's battles. He communicated
his experiences to others, and himself being converted he makes it his grand
design and business to convert, strengthen, and comfort his brethren. It was
our Saviors counsel to Luke 22. 32.
Peter, When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

A third Treatise (to mention no more) is called, The deserted souls case and
Mr. Symonds of Ironmonger-Lane.
cure. The experienced Author, and faithful and diligent Preacher of the
Gospel, has took elaborate diligence in what he wrote. His good name is like
precious ointment poured forth. And though that learned Writer be dead, yet he
speaks and lives in that choice Book.

Although those worthy Authors have gone before me not only in time, but much
more (as I judge) in estimation and value; and though I account my self (as the
common saying is) unworthy to carry their Books after them, yet I know that
there may be room left for additions to, and for farther clearing up former
attempts and labors of those who went before me. And sometimes it comes to
pass (however I think meanliest of my self) that a Pigmy standing upon a Giants
shoulder, may have a farther prospect. Wherefore I am not at all discouraged
from offering my mite (though small) to their rich Treasury, hoping and
desiring that my willing mind and cordial design of endeavoring all the good I
can (whilst I yet remain in the Land of the living), may obtain acceptance with
God and Man; For (says the Apostle) if there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted 2 Cor. 8. 12
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

I use to make honorable mention of Dr. Sybbs, Mr. Bolton, and Mr. Symonds
forenamed, and I acknowledge my self very much their debtor for what I have read
in their Excellent Labors; yet I am so far from being a Plagiarius, or a
Filcher (which Reproaches I utterly abhor) that I have not at all (to use the
words of that Hebrew Proverb) Ploughed with their Heifer. As for the subject
treated on, a correspondence and harmony I acknowledge between them and my self,
for I vary not from their Principles; but as to the manner and method of
handling of them, a variation easily may appear to any unprejudiced Reader.
Vtile est plures libros a pluribus fieri diverso stylo, non diversa fide etiam
de questionibus eisdem ut ad plurimos res ipsa perveniat. Aug. lib. 1. c. 3. De
Trini^ate.
I am not ashamed to confess, that what I here make public, is the same for
substance, which I have formerly enlarged in a public Congregation, and what I
have preached and wrote of (To God alone be the praise ascribed): which I have
found to be experimentally true to my exceeding great and abundant consolation.
Both in preaching and writing it is, and has been the desire of my soul, to
speak and write first to my own heart, and then to others, that so I may
comfort others with those comforts wherewith I my self have been comforted in
particular.

Not willing to stay long in the entrance, Two things I shall only praemise,
viz. The particular occasion of this Publication, and the matter therein
contained.

1. For the Occasion. An ancient 1. The Occasion.
and worthy Friend of mine, of more than thirty years acquaintance, desired me
to have conference with one (a good Christian as I am persuaded) who was much
assaulted with the sufferings and temptations of Satan, who was much perplexed
with variety of doubts and fears, who was too apt to believe Satan's Objections,
as imagining the present condition much worse than it was, and more ready to
urge many Scriptures against that particular condition, than any one that might
seem for relief and comfort. Wherefore to what I said in private discourse, I
wrote a Letter to that person, and have now much enlarged it, hoping that what
was spoken or written, either one or other, may leave such a deep impression
upon the heart of this Christian Friend, as to administer some grounds of
settlement and consolation amidst many doubts and perplexities.

And because upon mature and deliberate thoughts, I present the following
Letter (now formed into a small Treatise) unto public view. My aim and end is
(if my heart deceive me not) not only to consult the good of that particular
person (whom I much respect) to whom my Letter was directed; but also to impart
something by way of advice and comfort for the good of many others, who either
are or may be in the same condition. For the self-same spiritual Remedies
applied to the like sores, may (through Gods blessing) be instrumental for a
spiritual cure.

2. I shall make some mention of the 2. The subject treated on.
subject, or matter treated on in the ensuing discourse. The sum whereof partly
prescribes Counsels, and partly insists on Comforts. The Order propounde^, is
first to discover and remove some impediments and obstructions, which as a
Remora to a Ship stops the sailing, or as a stumbling block laid in the way of
such who run a race, hinders their passage: After the removal of those
hindrances, some Duties are commended to point of practice, and for a
conclusion some Grounds of Comfort are as seasonably mentioned, and as
necessarily to be applied to humble, penitent, and brokenhearted sinners.

It Is abundantly known to such who are no strangers to the new birth, and to
all such who have been trained up in the School of affliction, and have
experienced the Conflicts and Antipathies between the flesh and the spirit, and
(as Job had) have the Arrows of the Almighty Job 6. 4.
sticking in them, that many black clouds, storms and tempests, even
Euroclydons, desertions, suspensions, and withdrawings of Gods gracious
countenance, have for a time been the lot and portion of the dear children of
God, whom God has took into Covenant with himself. Job, David, Heman, St.
Paul, and many other precious Servants of God have met with various
dispensations, and variety of trials and perplexities of spirit. Their
condition may be resembled to high water and low water, ebbing and flowing, and
yet the water runs still, and is not dried up. Christians sometimes may be in a
prosperous condition, other-times in an adverse condition, and yet in both may
have fixed and settled hearts. So David had, as may appear upon reading of Psalm.
57. 8. and Psalm. 108. 1. Then he was in great adversity, for that 57th Psalm
was penned when he fled from Saul in the cave: The Title of that Psalm was
Altaschith Michtam of David, or destroy not; and then he confessed, that his soul
was among Lions, even Psalm 57. 4.
among them that are set on fire, even the Sons of men, whose teeth are spears
and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. Afterward he was in great
prosperity, when he penned Psalm. 108. and yet in both Psalms David professes, O
God my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise even with my glory: His
tongue he accounted his glory, and so he employed it in celebrating the praises
of the Lord: such a condition may befall the Children of God, as they cannot
tell how to understand it, nor what to make of it at the first, as we read
Zach. 14. 6, 7. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not
be clear, nor dark; but it shall be one day, which shall be known to the Lord,
not day, nor night: but it shall come to pass, that at evening-time it shall be
light. We know that there is a considerable distance of time betwhen sowing and
reaping; and though the seed may be under clods, and not visible to our eyes
for the present, yet afterward it may fructify abundantly, and yield many
handfuls for the reaper. Light is sown (says the Psalmist) for the Ps. 97. 11.
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Let us seriously consider,
that such as are inwardly afflicted, and have wounded spirits (however they may
argue against themselves) are not alone, and without company, though it so
falls out, that they complain amidst their heavy pressures, that never was any
ones case like theirs. The Apostle rectifies all such mistakes; For (says 1
Cor: 10. 13.
he) there has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man: but God
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it. Many Eminent Servants of God have been encountered by Satan, and through
mercy have returned with Trophies of victory. It Is one of Satan's masterpieces
of policy to take advantages of sick beds, and corporal infirmities. and so to
act his inveterate malice with the greatest violence. Many instances might be
produced, as of Luther, who was assaulted with such violent temptations, that
neither speech. sense, blood or heat appeared in him. Mr. Bolton (as it is
reported in his life) much resembles Luther, who when the sense of sin and the
guilt thereof were set home upon his heart, he roared for grief of heart, and
rose out of his bed by reason of the anguish of his spirit.

I may add the Examples of Mrs. Katharine Brettergh, and Mrs. Margaret Corbet,
who were much assaulted by the Temptations of Satan upon their sick-beds, and
yet after those storms and tempests, they enjoyed a mavelous calm and
serenity of spirit before their dissolution.

But hastening to a Conclusion, I shall insist only on three more Examples of
men eminent for Parts and Graces: One is of Mr. Peacock a Bachelor of Mr.
Peacock*
Divinity, and then Fellow of Brazennose College in Oxford. He was a great
Scholar, and a laborious Tutor in that Society, and Divinity-Reader of
Magdalen* Hall. His life and conversation was unblameable; and notwithstanding
in the sickness whereon he died, he complained against himself, That he had no
Grace at all. Dr. Ayry, Mr. Dod, and many others visited him in his sickness,
and imparted spiritual counsels and comforts to him; and he told Mr. Dod, That
he had no love for Gods children; and a little after he said so, he manifested
his love to Mr. Dod, by the great care he took for him; for he gave charge that
something should be provided for the refreshment of Mr. Dod, and that his
Clothes should be dried because they were wet with the rain. After a dark
night, light appeared, and God graciously settled the heart of this good man in
a holy tranquillity and peace (as it is published in Print.) For (said he a
little before his See Mr. Peacock's Visitation.
death) you all expect that I should declare what I think of my own Salvation:
God is so indulgent to those whom he has ever loved, that he never forsakes
them, and therefore I am assured that I shall go to Heaven. Most happy are
those fetters into which I was cast by a most merciful God.

I shall add another instance of Mr. Mr. Pemble of Magdalen* Hall, Oxon.
Pemble, a man of great learning, and of a holy life and conversation. He was
Divinity-Reader, and a Tutor in Magdalen* Hall, and the Ornament of that
flourishing Society, where he lived many years. He went to visit his learned
and religious Tutor Mr. Capel, at his house in Estington in Glocestershire
(where he ended his days.) In his last sickness Satan assaulted him with
vehement disputations; and as a Reverend Divine (whose memory I honor)
informed me, that the Devil urged Dr. Robert Harris, late Pastor of Hanwell in
Oxfordshire.
many perplexing arguments, and managed his disputations like an old crafty
sophister, and shot his fiery darts against the said Mr. Pemble; Satan knew his
fittest season to catch advantages, and that now or never he must act his part
(for the time of sickness and extremity was the fittest season for Satan to
play his last game.) But Mr. Pemble entered the lists, and fought against that
inveterate and subtel adversary, and in the strength of Christ overcame him.
And the said Mr. Pemble, as a valiant chamption, won the field, and died in
peace with God and his Conscience. His rare works declare him to be an eminent
Saint on earth, and give us great hopes to believe that he is now a glorified
Saint in Heaven.

A third instance (and so to conclude) I shall produce, is of Mr. Dyer, for a
Mr. Dyer.
long time a Schoolmaster in Aldermanbury in London. He, when he was in the
University, was for some years addicted to vain Company, with whom he misspent
many precious hours in drinking and in gaming, not only on other days, but on
the Lords day. But his Conscience was awakened and flew in his face, and he
felt the flashings of Hellfire in his conscience. He went for advice to a
Physician, who gave him wicked counsel, to go to his companions, and bid them
make him merry. He did so, and found that remedy far worse than his disease.
For though on the daytime he drank largely, and gamed with his companions, yet
at night he could not sleep, for horror of spirit renewed on him. Upon advice
he went to old Mr. Dod, that eminent Saint of God, and he gave him spiritual
counsels, which he followed, and (through the Grace of God) became a very
gracious Christian; and after he was converted, he labored to convert others,
and obtained good success in his labors. This story he himself long since told
me, and I had intimate acquaintance with an old Disciple, of whose conversion
the said Mr. Dyer was eminently instrumental, who confirmed the truth of this
story.

I am now at length come to a close, and I will not detain the Reader from
perusing the following Treatise. If any one shall be a gainer for the
settlement and establishment of his spirit by what I have written, I shall
rejoice, and ascribe the praise of all to God, who is able to do great things
by weak and despised instruments. My design is to do what good I can, whilst I
have day before me, for there is a night coming Joh. 9. 4.
when no man can work. I am sensible that my glass is near run out, and gray
and hoary hairs are upon me. My hearts desire is to improve that one talent
which God has given me for his glory, and the good of my own and others souls.
One request I earnestly beg of thee (Reader) is, that thou would remember me
in thy Prayers, that I may grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

I commend these lines (Reader) to thy serious perusal and acceptance, and I
commend thee to Gods gracious Providence, and remain

From my Study in Great Cornherth in Suffolk near Sudbury, June 17. 1679. Thy
Souls Servant, Henry Wilkinson.

A Letter of Advice and Consolation to a Friend troubled in Conscience.
Christian Friend,
Sect. 1.
SINCE you have been pleased to communicate your present condition to me, I have
seriously laid it to heart, and I have studied what answer to return unto you
(as I desire and hope) for your satisfaction. And after seeking of God in your
behalf, and after mature deliberation, I offer to you my retired and studied
Counsel and Comforts, which (my hearts desire is) may be so seasonably
administered unto you, as (through the blessing of God) you may apply them (as
Solomon says); A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver. Prove. 25. 11.
Which if God vouchsafe to set home upon your heart, and give to you an answer
of peace and comfort, you may (through riches of mercy) obtain the same blessed
success after your prayers, as Hannah did after she had poured out her soul
unto the Lord. We read that after Eli had retracted his former censure, and
prayed for her, The God of Israel grant thee thy 1 Samuel 1. 17, 18.
petition that thou have asked of him; so the woman went her way and did eat,
and her countenance was no more sad. May the like happy issue befall you as to
the Settlement of your spirit; the same Omnipotent God is as able to comfort
and quiet your spirit, as he did the spirit of Hannah, after her earnest
prayers and supplications.

What I am to write for your better Method propounded.
retaining of it in your memory, I shall digest into a plain and easy method;
which is,











Sect. 2. 1.
In pursuance of the Method propounded: 1. I shall premise a few Particulars for
the Information of your judgment, and that in four Particulars only.

1. You are to understand, that to 1. Head for Information of the judgment. 1.
It Is a good sign to be sensible of sin.
be thoroughly awakened from security and stupidity, and to be sensible of, and
mourn for sin, is a very good sign, and a characteristical note of a hopeful
condition. On the contrary to be lulled asleep in the cradle of security, and
to be stupefied and senseless, is a sign of a dangerous estate: For such as
sleep in the cradle of security, have the Devil to be their Rocker, who
afterward (if mercy interpose not) will be their destroyer. But to complain of
sin, and to be affected with godly sorrow for it, and to cry out for a
deliverer; this was Saint Paul's condition, O wretched man that Romans 7. 24.
I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death! By the body of death,
comprehensively, he meant Original sin as the fountain, and actual sins as the
streams flowing from it. The Apostle was (questionless) a truly converted and
regenerate person; and his sensibility of the body of sin, and vehement crying
out for a deliverer, discovers him to be a regenerate person: And those
antipathies and conflicts between the flesh and spirit mentioned in the
precedent verses, are frequently incident unto Verse. 20, 21, 22, 23.
the dearest children of God. For as in nature a crying child declares that
there is life, so in grace, where is a spiritual life, and mourning for sin,
there holds the same rule of proportion. And to have heart compunction, and to
be affected with, and afflicted for sin, is an evident sign of a regenerate
estate.

Sect. 3. 2. Heartwounding usually goes before heart healing. Vna eademque
manus vulnus opemque tulit. Act. 2. 37. (...), Dolorem sensere, Grot. The word
signifies to wound punctually, even the least part and point of the heart,
worse than the point of a sharp and impoysoned Dagger. Mr. Bolton. Act 9. 3, 4,
5.
2. Consider further, That it is the usual method of God first to wound before he
heals, and to cast down before he raises up. And we must know, that the
self-same hand which hurts us, heals us. Of the Jews (after they were convinced
of their horrid and execrable murder in imbruing their hands in the innocent
blood of Jesus Christ) it is said, Now when they heard this, they were pricked
in their heart, and said unto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and
brethren, what shall we do? The scope of the question was, What they should do
to be saved? What should they do to get pardon of their sins? There was a
particular word a This, which struck them to the heart, and (as it were) smo^e
them in the fifth rib, and so touched them to the quick, as they were
constrained to enquire after a healing-remedy. Likewise Saul (though a great
Persecutor, when he went on the high Priests Errand) he was cast down to the
ground, and stopped in his mad career; for we read^ And as he journeyed, he came
near Damascus, and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven.
And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? There follows a wonderful alteration in Saul; for when he
was in his unconverted estate, his question would have been, What would the
high Priests have him do? He was then their vassal, ready to do the worst of
their commands; but as soon as the work of Conversion was begun in Saul, we
read, And he trembling Verse. 6.
and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Further, we read of
the converted Jailer, who after he heard an earthquake, shaking of the
foundation of the prison, and when he saw all the doors opened, and every ones
bonds loosed, he propounded a Question of the greatest concernment in all the
world, and submitted himself to the resolution Act. 16. 30 Agnita Dei poten^ia
non modo Paulisper territus suit and mox ad priorem ferociam rediret, sed se
D^o obedientem and sanae Doctrinae cupidum ostendit. Calv.
of his Prisoners, * Sirs, what must I do to be saved? It Is a probable
conjecture, that the Jailer thought that the day of Judgment was already come,
and that his account was dreadful, not only for his former old sins, but for
his late sins in exercising great cruelty upon the Apostles; wherefore he spoke
not a syllable concerning the Miracle that happened, but only he enquires after
the way and means of his everlasting Salvation.

None can deny but that the Births of some are easier, and others are sharper;
and as in the natural birth, there are sore throws and pangs, so it falls out
in the supernatural birth; some meet with such a sharp birth, as Colaphum
Satanae ut nec calor, nec sanguis, nec vox super esset. Luth. in Epist. ad
Melancth. The Life and Death of Mr. Bolton.
Luther called Satan's buffeting, so that neither heat nor sense, nor any voice
remained. In the life of that eminent and faithful servant of Jesus Christ Mr.
Robert Bolton late Pastor of Broughton in Northamptonshire, it is said. And to
augment his spiritual misery, he was exercised with sharp temptations, called,
Horribilia de Deo, terribilia de fide. But after such like sharp workings prove
Physic to Gods children; and after sore pains and heart-sickness, through
mercy a perfect cure is wrought; wherefore let Act. 19. 4. (...). Aperuit Deus
illa. sinente aperiri, imo etiam aperiente suo modo ut apparet. Apoc. 3. 20.
Grot.
none despair, or be discouraged by reason of the pains and pangs of the new
birth, for these are in order to a cure; all have not (for it is very rare) the
easy birth of Lydia, of whom it is said, Whose heart the Lord opened, that she
attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul But it is to be observed,
that she was before a Worshipper of God, but by the Preaching of St. Paul she
had the Gospel more clearly revealed, and was more fully instructed, and
established in the truth.

Sect. 4. What fears and doubts befall some, have befallen, or may befall
others. Psalm. 10. 1.
Consider further, that whatever fears, doubts and desertions have already, or
may befall you, are no other than have been or may be the lot and portion of
the dearest children of God. To produce an Instance or two; David a man after
Gods own heart, thus expostulates with God, Why stand thou afar off, O Lord?
Why hidest thou thy self in times of trouble? But it is likewise to be observed,
that as he expostulates the case concerning the deserted condition of Gods
chilchildren, so he prescribes the best and only remedy, Dr. Sibs Souls
Conflict.
Why art thou Ps. 42. 11. Psalm 43. 5.
cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God,
for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. In
two several Psalms the Psalmist uses those words, thereby intimating that a
greater remark ought to be put upon them. To David I Will only add Heman, a man
of a rare and excellent spirit, and yet he was under sore and heavy desertions
and troubles, (as may appear by his doleful complaint), Lord, why castest thou
off Psalm. 88. 14, 15.
my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? I am afflicted and ready to die,
from my youth up; while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. Wherefore then,
do neither prejudg nor misjudg your self, as if your condition was singular, or
as if by your present sufferings, therefore you may conclude that you are a
greater sinner. Our Savior rectifies that mistake, and neither charge the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices, nor those Eighteen
upon whom the Tower in Siloam, fell to be greater sinners than others, but thus
he determines, I tell you nay; but except Luke 13. 2, 3, 4, 5.
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Sect. 5. 4. Gods children meet with variety of afflictions. Luke 9. 23.
4. Consider, that the best of Gods children have met with, and may still meet
with variety of afflictions and troubles in this present world: For says our
Savor, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross daily, and follow me. As we pray for our daily (...). Qui nonest
Christianus, and non est Crucianus, Luth. in Genesis c. 29. Act. 14. 22
bread, so we must prepare for our daily cross. Wherefore Luther used to say,
That he is no Christian, who is no cross-bearer. The Apostle speaks upon
experimental knowledge, We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom
of God. And likewise the Apostle acquaints us, that we are appointed unto
afflictions; For (says he) that no man should be moved by 1 These. 3. 3
these afflictions, for your selves know that we are appointed thereunto.

Sect. 6.
Solomon, The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a Pro. 18. 14
wounded spirit who can bear?

Job complains -- The Job 6. 4.
Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit: The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. But David
complains of broken bones, but they were caused by breaches, first made upon
his Conscience in the matters of Vriah. Though David was a great King, and full
of riches and honor, and though he was an excellent Musician, and of a
sanguine complexion (and those naturally are most cheerful); yet he had inward
as well as outward trouble: For so he complains, I am feeble Psalm. 38. 8.
and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart. But
what must be done in this case? You must make have to God the only Physician,
who can cure you, and apply the Blood of Christ, which is the only Medicine. As
you ought to be sensible of your wounds, so you must seek speedily for cure.
Imitate those who were stung with the fiery Serpents, and presently looked up
to the Brazenserpent and were cured. The Command was from the Lord unto Moses,
Make thee a fiery serpent, and Number. 21. 7
set it upon a pole; and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten,
when he looks upon it, shall live. And what was commanded, Moses obeyed,
accordingly good success followed; And Moses made a Serpent Verse. 8.
of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass, that if a serpent had
bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived. The bitings of
the Serpent represent the dreadful stings of sin; and the looking up unto the
Brazen-Serpent, represents the looking up unto Christ with the eye of faith:
Christ the best Expositor thus expounds that Scripture, And as Moses lifted up
Joh. 3. 14, 15.
the serpent in the wilderness; even so must the soon of man be lifted up: That
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.

When sorrows have almost drunk up your spirits, as you complain of your
disease (whereof you ought to be sensible), so you must seek after a Remedy.
There is a vast difference between poor doubting Christians, and confident
presumptuous sinners: these are overhasty to apply Comforts which appertain
not to them, and are not in the mean time affected with sense of their sins,
nor afflicted for them with godly sorrow: Whereas the other dare not apply
promises (though they have a right unto them) but stay too much in beholding
their wounds, and mourning for them: both these extremes must be removed As on
one hand, we may not be confident on our condition, and be too hasty to apply
comfort before we have been cast down with godly sorrow; so on the other hand
we must not deny our selves those comforts which God appoints ^or godly
mourners. For what was prophesied of Christ's preaching, he actually
accomplished: The spirit Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Luke 4. 18.
of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek: he has sent Hinc colligimus Isaiam proprie de Evangelio
loqu^ Lex enim data est ut superbos and turgentes inani fiducia animos
prosternat: Evange lium vero afflictis destinatur (i. e.) iis, qui se omni bono
vacous esse s^iunt ut colligant animos ac sustentent, Calv.
me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the capt^ves, and the
opening of the prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year
of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God: to comfort all that mourn: to
appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the
Oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praises for the spirit of heaviness,
that they might be called trees of righteousness. Make haste unto Jesus Christ,
and apply this great promise for the comfort of your soul.

Sect. 7.
I fear that I am not concerned in this promise, because it belongs to such as
are brokenhearted only, and godly mourners?

There Is help laid upon one that Ps. 89. 19.
is mighty: And this is Jesus Christ. Go therefore (laying aside all delays,
excuses, and demurs) unto Christ quickly; for he is an absolute and
Allsufficient Savior; Wherefore he is able Heb. 7. 25.
also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them.

Sect. 8.
But farther you will say, that my afflictions are judgments, and tokens of
Gods wrath?



I shall distinguish of two sorts of judgments, the one is of chastisement, and
the other is of punishment. As for this of punishment, this is only
appropriated unto ungodly men, who many times even in this world receive part
of payment, and an earnest of those judgments which shall be their full
portion, and full payment in everlasting burnings, in that Lake that burns
with fire and brimstone: these are firebrands of Hell. But then there is a
judgment of chastisement, and fatherly correction; and this befalls Gods own
dear Children in this present world; For (says the Apostle) judgment begins at
the house 1 Pet. 4. 7.
of God: And chastisements are lovetokens unto Gods Children, For whom the Lord
loves he chastneth, and scourges Heb. 2. 6.
every son whom he receives. Such then are in a happy condition, who make a
right improvement of afflictions; For (says the Psalmist) blessed is the man
whom thou chastneth, O Lord, Ps. 94. 12.
and teach him out of thy law. And then a Christian is well improved by any
affliction, when it is sanctified to him, and he made more holy by the
affliction; for God chastises us for our profit, that we might be partakers
Heb. 12. 10
of his holiness. And though afflictions for the present are irksome and
grievous, yet afterward they yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them, which are exercised thereby. Verse. 11.


Wherefore then, as you must not (...). Haec significant patientiam and
perseverantiam in flagellis, Lyra. Heb. 12. 5.
on one hand slight afflictions, and be insensible of them; so on the other
hand, you must not sink under the burden of them: For so the command is, My
son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. Take then heed, and beware of murmuring, and of repining
thoughts, by reason of afflictions, but labor to profit by them; and then you
will profit by them, when they purge out dross, and take away tin; so it is
promised, And Isa. 1. 25.
I will turn my hand upon thee, and purge away thy dross, and take away all thy
tin: It Is likewise prophesied, And some of them of understanding shall Dan^ 1.
35.
fall to try them, and to purge them, and to make them white: God me^^s and
try* his people, and refines them in the ^urn^ce* of affliction; and by
afflictions God empties them from vessel to vessel, and pu^geth out pride,
anger, unbelief, earthly-mindedness, etc. Afflictions are like a shepherds Dog,
to bring home a straggling sheep to the fold of Christ; or like a Scullion, to
scower away rust and filthiness; or like a Fan, to separate the wheat from the
chaff: Though afflictions, as considered simply in themselves, are not bona;
yet as they are Relatively considered in respect of the good effects which come
of them, they are in bonum to the Children of God. Gods own Children are not
Filii irae, yet they may be Filii sub ira for a time. So then, when afflictions
are instrumental means to purge out our corruptions, and to work in us the
saving graces of the Spirit; and when by them we are more weaned and alienated
from the love of the world, and made more in love with Christ and heavenly
things, then we may say every one in particular with David, It was good for me
that I have Psalm. 119. 71. Verse. 75.
been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. And he farther confesses, I
Know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and that tho^ in faithfulness have
afflicted me. Amidst all your afflictions, whether inward or outward, be sure
that you have recourse to the Word of God for Counsel, and for Comfort; for the
Testimonies of God are both Counselors and Comforters. And the Psalmist
declares his own experience, This is my comfort in my affliction: for Ps. 119.
24. Verse. 92.
thy word has quickened me: Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then
have perished in mine afflictions.

Sect. 9.
Having premised these four particulars beforementioned for the better
information and establishment of your judgment, I come in the next 2. Head.
(...) to be removed.
place (according to my method propounded) to premonish you of some
Obstructions and Impediments which you ought to remove.

The first Impediment to your peace Imped. 1. Keeping of Satan's counsel.
and tranquillity, is keeping of Satan's counsel. You must not take advice from
him, nor hearken to his suggestions, nor believe him, nor conceal from
Christian Friends your condition: some the Devil assaults with more violent
temptations, and especially offers to them such baits as they are most likely
to be caught withal; some he tempts to presumption, and others to desperation,
and a third sort he tempts to carnal security, and a fourth sort to a
licentious liberty. If upon any one of those dangerous Rocks we split our
selves, we shall quickly make shipwreck of faith, and of a good conscience.

To confine my self only to your particular case: Notwithstanding your
unblameable life (as to the eye of the world), yet the Devil tempts you to
despair, suggesting to you, that you are a hypocrite, and that there is no
mercy reserved for you; but be advised to beware of the Devils sophistry, and
beg wisdom of God, that you may discern and beware of the Devils methods,
depths, devices, snares and subtilties; for he is an old and cunning Sophister,
and deluder. Melancthon, an excellent man, thought with himself, that he could
be hard enough for Satan; but afterward he consest, That the old Dragon was
too hard for young Melancthon. The Apostle tells us in his own name, and
others, Lest Satan should 2 Cor. 2. 11. (...) est astuta cogitatio,
ratiocinatio sophistica, hinc latini etiam noema vocant irrisoriam inventionem
and subsannatio^em, Aret. in I. oc.
get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his devices. Wherefore
great care and vigilance are requisite against Satan's temptations: The Devil
will tempt you to neglect Religious Duties, as praying, hearing, and reading of
the Word of God, and he will tell you, that Duties will be useless to you, and
no whit available for your good: And if the Devil cannot prevail with you to
lay aside Duties altogether, then he will tempt you to do them slightly and
superficially, and so to offer the refuse to God. But read what Mal. 1. 8.
the Prophet Malachy says, And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not
evil? And if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy
governor, will he be p^eased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord
of Hosts? God requires the best of our services. In the spiritual sacrifices,
the Lamb without blemish was to be offered, and the purest Meal, and the purest
Oil; and in spiritual sacrifices we must offer to God the best: There Is a
dreadful curse against the Deceiver, who puts God off with a refuse Commodity:
Mal. 8. 14. (...) Cyr. Alex.
But cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth, and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. Wherefore hearken not to Satan's
temptations, either one way or other, whether it be to lay aside Duties, or
else to do them after a slight and careless manner. Neither may you venture to
hold a Parley with Satan, for he is both a subtle Sophister, and an inveterate
adversary, and lies at the catch to take all advantages against you. Beware of
too much reservedness, but unburthen your soul, and communicate your condition
to such experienced Christians, who will commiserate your case, and have a
fellowfeeling thereof, and will endeavor to comfort you with those comforts
wherewith they themselves have been comforted.

Sect. 10
Two or three things I commend especially to you as Preservatives against
Satan's Temptations; and although he may tempt you, yet he may (through the
strength of God) be worsted, and driven away as a conquered enemy.

1. Stand upon your watch. If 1. Stand upon your watch.
Sentinels neglect their watch, a whole Garrison may be soon betrayed into the
hands of Enemies. When one who should have been a Watchman slept upon his
watch, a Commander slew him, saying, I found him dead, Mortuum inveni, and
mortutum reliqui. Mat. 2 5. 13. Mark 13. 36, 37.
and left him dead. There Is a necessity, that you should stand upon your watch.
Our Savior frequently presses this duty of Watchfulness, and the Apostle Paul
presses watchfulness, Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men be
strong. And the Apostle Peter lays a special charge, Be sober, be vigilant,
because 1 Cor. 16. 13. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour. More particularly, watch over your thoughts; the thoughts may be
compared to Reuben the firstborn; yet as he was, so are thoughts, they are
unstable as water. We must Genesis 49. 3, 4.
not give any lodging to vain thoughts. Though they are apt to crowd in upon
us, yet we must not give any entertainment to, nor approbation of them; you
must likewise watch over your words, and labor to reduce David's resolution
into practice, I said I will Psalm. 39. 1. i. e. That I sin not, or miss not. By
a Bridle, the untamedness of the tongue is noted, which must by force and
watchfulness be restrained. Ainsw. Phil. 1. 27. 1 These. 2. 12.
take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. I will keep my mouth with
a bridle, while the wicked is before me. And you must watch over your whole
life and conversation, and labor to walk as becomes the Gospel, and to walk
worthy of God.

2. Be furnished with spiritual 2. Be furnished. with spiritual Armor.
Armor; you had need be well provided and appointed with every piece of that
Divine Panoply mentioned by the Apostle. And in an especial manner, the shield
of faith is a defensive weapon to ward off Satan's fiery darts; for (so says
the Apostle), Above all taking the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6. 16.
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And
the same Apostle charge us to put Ephesians. 6. 11.
on the whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the wiles of
the Devil.

Faith is a principal piece of this spiritual Armor; and if we be steadfast in
the faith, we take a ready course to resist him; Whom resist steadfast 1 Pet. 5.
9.
in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your
brethren that are in the world. Themistocles when a Battle was lost, asked,
Whether his Buckler was safe? Faith is both a Shield and a Buckler for defense.
Amidst variety of losses, if we keep Faith for our Shield and Bucklar, there is
strong encouragement left, notwithstanding other losses.

3. Another Preparative against 3. Resist the first onset and assault of Satan.
Satan's Temptations is, to be careful to resist the first onset and assault of
Satan: We say in Proverbs, Nip bad fruit in the very bud, and crush the
cockatrice in the egg. And Physicians Obsta Principiis*
say, Resist beginnings. In an especial manner let us resist this old Serpent
Satan in his first attempts: As a Serpent, if he can get in his head, he will
soon wind in his whole body; so Satan, if he be admitted at the first, and be
not repulsed in his first motions, he will proceed more and more to do greater
mischiefs: Wherefore, when Satan injects wandering, vain, and unbelieving
thoughts, resist them presently, and hold no compliance with Satan nor carnal
reasonings, but (as the the Apostle 2 Cor. 10. 5.
exhorts) Casting down (...). Intelligit de consilio ratiocinationis humanae
non sincerae sed corruptae. Musc.
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Sect. 11. 2. Imped. 2. A misrepresentation by a false glass.
A second Impediment to be removed, is a misrepresentation of your self by a
false glass, and so making a judgment upon your self according to your own
misrepresentations; your own fancies, conjectures, and imaginations, are all as
so many false glasses for you to look in. You may peradventure think that you
have no faith at all, because you want feeling; whereas feeling is an
afterthing. In whom (says the Apostle) Ephesians. 1. 13.
ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth the Gospel of your
Salvation: In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy
spirit of promise. It Is the saying of Reverend Mr. Greenham, That we Greenham's
Works.
hold Christ by faith, and not by feeling. Likewise you may imagine that you
have no faith at all, because you have not so strong a faith as some other
Christians have. But you must know, that there are good Christians and good
Scholars in Christ's School, who all are not of the same form; some may be
higher, and some may be lower, and yet Christ may own them for his Disciples.
Abraham had a faith hardly to be paralleled, He staggered not at the promise of
Romans c. 20.
God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. He had
full assurance of faith. But the man in the Gospel partly between says and
doubting cries out, Lord, I believe, Mark 9. 24.
help thou mine unbelief. Yet this man had a true faith. A little piece of Gold
may be precious Gold, though as to the quantity less than many others. But he
that has a little says (if this be true) labors for a farther augmentation
of it, as not satisfied with what he has attained unto: Take heed then as on
one hand of judging too well, so on the other hand of judging too ill of your
self. Your grand duty is to give up your self to the rule and guidance of the
Word of God, and to rely and depend on Christ alone, Who is the true light
which lights Joh. 1. 9.
every man that comes into the world. No light shines clear, and directs
aright, save that only which is enlightened by the Lamp of the Sanctuary, which
is the Word of God.

Sect. 12.
Object. To come nearer to your particular case; your complaints are often
repeated, That you cannot pray, and that you hear and read the Word of God, and
yet you cannot profit, and that Exhortations are lost upon you, and that your
memory cannot retain what you have either heard or read; hence you conclude,
that the Promises belong not to you?

Answ. For answer to these surmises of your misgiving heart, I ask you, Whether
you do not love the duty of Prayer? and whether you do not desire the Grace, as
well as the gift of Prayer? And whether it be not the desire of your soul to
pour out your heart before the Lord? And does not your soul pant and breathe
after God? And do not you sigh and mourn for every sin? And are not you sorry,
that you can be no more sorry for your sins? If this be your condition (as my
hope it is) you can pray better than you are aware of: For (says the Apostle)
the Romans 8. 26. (...) Onus vicissim attollit ex altera part, ne sub eo
fatiscamus. Beza.
spirit helps our infirmities. The Original word is very Emphatical. It
follows, For we know not what we should pray for as we ought but the spirit it
self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. Herein
consists the great duty, to be importunate with God for the assistance of his
holy Spirit, and to apply the promises, That God will give Mat. 7. 11.
good things to them that ask him. And what is that good thing? even the best of
all things is promised? Your heaven Luke 11. 13
ly Father shall give the holy Spirit to them that ask him.

Object. And whereas you complain of your barrenness and unprofitableness under
the means of Grace, and of your slippery and failing memory.

Answ. I answer, that it is a good sign to be sensible of your failings, and to
bewail them. It Is a grand Duty incumbent on you to be heedful and vigilant.
It Is the Apostles caution, Therefore we ought to give Heb. 2. 1.
the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we
should let them slip; or (as (...).
the Original implys) let them run out, as leaking vessels do, and let out
precious liquor as soon as it is poured into them. At for your
unprofitableness, if we all in particular reflect upon our selves, all our
faces will gather blackness, and we have all cause to complain that when we
have Luke 17. 10.
done all that we can, we are unprofitable servants. Wherefore being conscious
to our selves of our great unfruitfulness under the means of Grace, and
notwithstanding fatning Ordinances we have lean souls, let us supplicate Isa.
48. 17.
unto the Throne of Grace. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer the holy one of
Israel, I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to profit, which leads thee
by the way which thou should go.



Answ. I answer, That it is more than you know: For a poor doubting, trembling
Christian may have the root of the matter in him, and a right to the promises,
though at present he may want the manifestation of those consolations which the
promises afford. But do not you judge your self unworthy of eternal life. Cast
not away the Anchor of your hope; let not go your hold on the Promises, for
they are a stay and a staff for you to support your soul upon, when you
apprehend your self even in a tottering condition. Are you thirsty after
Christ? Apply your self to the Promises, for they are as so many Wells of
Salvation, Therefore with joy shall Isa. 12. 3.
ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. Do you desire a word of comfort
to be spoken to your Soul? Make have to the Promises, for they are the breasts
of consolation, which Isa. 66. 11.
can satisfy you.

Sect. 13.
A few Questions I propound unto you, and after your most serious and composed
thoughts, I expect your Answer.

Do not you love God? Q.


You cannot say but you do. A.
Then the Promise is your portion: And we know that all things work Romans 8. 28
Qui dicit omnia excipit nihil.
together for good to them that love God. Observe, that all things are
promised, and nothing is excepted. Your present troubles of mind (though for a
time they may be grievous) yet in Gods good time shall all work together for
your good.

Do not you hate the ways of sin, Q.
and love the ways of holiness?

If so (as I have no reason to think A.
otherways) then you are in a hopeful condition. The Psalmist professes his
love to the Law of God, and his utter hatred and abhorrency of every false way,
and especially lays down an evidence of his uprightness, by keeping himself
from bosomsins; for said he, I was also upright Ps^ 18. 23.
before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity.

Another Question I shall only propound to you, Do not you love the Q.
Children of God? You dare not say otherways, for those are the company with
whom you converse and delight.

Hence you may evidence, that you A. ^oh. 13. 35
are a Disciple of Jesus Christ: By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another. This is an evidence of regeneration, to love
the Brethren: We know (says 1 John 3. 14.
the Apostle) that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren: he that loves not his brother abides in death. I knew one upon his
deathbed who took great comfort in this evidence, of loving the Children of
God.

A Third Impediment to be avoided, 3. Imped. Too much retiredness and
respectiveness.
is too much retiredness and reservedness. Do not feed and nourish a
melancholy humor, by separating your self from the society of such who would
gladly administer comfort to you. The society of experienced Christians, and
frequent conference with them, may be of great advantage to you for the
establishment of your heart by giving seasonable and suitable Answers to those
doubts which trouble you. One Coal may inkindle another, and one Iron may
sharpen another; and so one Christian may be instrumental both for inkindling
and quickening the Graces of Gods Spirit in another.

I advise you to be very seldom alone during your Troubles and Temptations,
unless in two special cases: As first, when God is speaking to you in his Word,
when you read the Word of God, and faithful Writers and Expositors thereof:
Which read, you must labor to digest by Prayer and Meditation, and make of all
particular application unto your own Soul. And secondly, When you are speaking
to God in Prayer and Supplication, then is a fit season to be alone, and in
your secret recesses to pour out your heart unto the Lord.

My further advice unto you, in love is, That you would beware of idleness and
sloth. Although I suspect you not, nor can accuse you, yet in love to your
precious soul, I cannot but premonish you both to avoid the sin of idleness,
and the miserable consequences thereof: For if the Devil can prevail by his
temptations to gain you to idleness and sluggishness, and to the neglect of
your duties which concern both your general and particular calling, then he
will get ground of you, and lay his Snares and Gins to entrap you, and so go
away Conqueror. That therefore you may prevent the mischievous designs of
Satan, I counsel you to be industrious in your particular calling and
employment, with diligence and care, provided that you above all regard your
general calling as a Christian.

I am not ignorant, that every thing is beautiful in its season; sometimes
retiredness, and sometimes conversing with others have their peculiar season:
As for retiredness, there is an allowable separation in some cases (as the wise
man informs us) Through desire a man having separated Prove. 18. 1.
himself, seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom. For the gaining of Wisdom,
and improvement thereof when so gained, we must sequester our selves from
Company, and hide our selves for a time in our Closets, that so we may have
better conveniences for the exercise of Prayer and Meditation. There is a time
when God calls for retiredness, for so we read, Come my people, enter thou into
sa. 26. 26
thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for a
little moment, until the indignation be overpast.

Such a retiredness as this, is both necessary and comfortable; For a Christian
to pour out his Soul in Prayer to God (when no eye of man sees him, nor any
ear of man hears him) and so meditate on the Word of God, by such a
retiredness he gains a sacred communion and acquaintance with God, such a one
as Eliphaz exhorts Job 22. 21.
Job to get: But as for any retiredness and reservedness to nourish a
melancholy and dumpish humor, and to sequester your self from profitable
soul-friends, that kind of retiredness I advise you against altogether.

Likewise there is a fit season for spiritual conference. This was much
practiced by the ancient Servants of God; for we read, Propheta non tantum
dicitquemque privatim tactum fuisque resipiscentia sed inter se loquutos quo
significat debere studium nostrum extendi ad fratres nostros. Calv.
Then they that Mal. 3. 16.
feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard
it, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the
Lord, and thought upon his name. God sometimes manifests himself in one
Ordinance, and sometimes he manifests himself in another; though we are tied
and bound to wait on God in every Ordinance, yet he is a most free Agent; and
as the Wind blows where it lists, so he works where he pleases. Sometimes we
may not get comfort by the Word, or by Prayer, or by receiving of the Lords
Supper, yet we may receive abundant comfort by godly conference. Therefore be
sure that you neglect not the Society of such, who are able and willing to
build you up in your holy faith, and to speak a word of comfort in due season
unto your Soul.

Sect. 14. 3d. Head.
In the third place, in pursuance of my method, I shall make it my business to
exhort you to the practice of some particular Duties, and they are these six
especially.

Be frequent and serious in reading Duty 1. Be frequent and serious in reading
of the Scriptures. 2 Timothy 3. 5
of the holy Scriptures, for they alone can make you wise unto salvation. The
Scriptures in some places are so plain (as some observe) that a Lamb may wade,
and in other places so deep that an Elephant may swim. The Scriptures Quae
nullis non convenit annis Lacte rigans pueros, pane cibans validos? Prosper.
Psalm. 119. 24. Verse. 50.
suit all ages, and all sexes, and all conditions (as is observed). Tertullian,
an ancient Father, says, I adore the fullness of the Scriptures. The Psalmist
declares, Thy Testimonies also are my delight, and my Counselors. And when he
would raise to himself a ground of comfort, he fastened upon the Word of God,
and there stayed: This (says he) is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word
has quickened me. And unless he had received comfort from the Word, he was
sensible that he had been utterly undone; Unless thy Law had been my Verse. 92.
delights, I should then have perished in mine affliction.

Questionless all Scripture is precious, and the Lord would let none of
Samuel's words, much less would he let any of his own words fall to the ground;
and every part and parcel of the Holy Scripture is of the same piece of pure
Gold, and more to be valued than the gold of Ophir, or the gold of Parvaim; yet
considering your present condition, I advise you to the serious perusal of
these ensuing Scriptures, as most suitable unto your particular case. One
Scripture is mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah, Who is among you Isa. 50. 10.
that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in
darkness, and has no light: let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God. Another Scripture is, Light is sown for the Psalm. 97. 11.
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Between Seed-time and
Harvest, there is a considerable interval of time; yet what has been sown,
will come up in the appointed season. Add hereunto a third Scripture
homogeneous to the former, Unto the upright there arises light in Psalm 112. 4.
darkness. To these Scriptures; I shall add some others, which have abundantly
supported the afflicted Servants of God: One is, Return Psalm. 116. 7.
unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. A
second is of the Prophet Isaiah, For Isa. 57. 15.
thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones. A third Scripture is, I came not to call the righteous,
Matt. 9. 13
but sinners to repentance. A fourth is, Come unto me all ye that labor Matt.
11. 28. 1 Timothy 1. 25.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. A fifth is, This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief. A sixth only which I shall mention is in the
Revelations, And Rev. 22. 17
the Spirit, and the Bride say, come. And let him that is a thirst come. And
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.

There are peculiar Psalms, which I commend to your frequent and deliberate
perusal and meditation, viz. Psalm. 16. 18. 23. 25. 27. 32. 34. 42. 61. 62 and
63. Any one of these Psalms, if you ponder them in your heart, and pray that
God would write them in your heart, O! how abundantly may you profit thereby!
Read frequently, (and to reading, add prayer and meditation) Christ's
incomparable Sermon Preached in the mount, Matt. 5 6, 7. and likewise Christ's
farewell-Sermon contained in Joh. 14. 15, 16, 17. Add hereunto a serious
reading and meditating on Romans 8. Though I exclude not other Scriptures (for
all are precious) yet considering that many Christians have gained so much good
by reading of those Scriptures, I commend them to your reading, meditation, and
particular application, and I hope (and my hearts desire is) that through the
Grace of God some word or other may leave such deep impressions upon your heart
both for instruction and consolation, as that you may be better for them all
your days.

Sect. 15. Duty 2. Be much in heartstudying.
2. Be much conversant in the studying of your own heart. It Is very needful to
be well acquainted at home. For this self-acquaintance and knowledge of a man's
own heart, is a very necessary knowledge, and a profitable acquaintance. This
is a great business, and an useful employment for every one to busy himself in
searching of his own heart; and he that is thus employed, and makes it his
business to know and understand himself, will know more evil by himself, than
all the world can tell him of. I have read of Heraclitus a weeping Philosopher,
who being asked what he studied, he answered, To know himself. (...).
And it was the saying of one of the wise men of Greece, Know thy self: And
this knowledge we shall never attain unto, unless we study our own hearts. This
was the resolution of the Church (though at that time under hatches) Let us
search and try Jer. 3. 40.
our ways, and turn again to the Lord. First, there must be searching and
trying, and then follows a turning to God. And in this turning there are two
terms, one is from what we Terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem.
turn, and this is from sin; and the other is to whom we should turn, and this
is to God. The heart is exceeding filthy and defiled, and therefore frequent
washings and cleansings are required: So runs the word of command, O Jerusalem
wash thy heart Jer. 4. 14
from wickedness, that thou may be saved! How long shall thy vain thoughts
lodge within thee? In the Levitical Law, when a beast was slain for sacrifice,
there was a special command for the washing of the inwards, and the legs. Lev.
1. 9.
These washings were typical, and put us in remembrance of washing of our
hearts and lives. For both inward and outward pollution ought to be avoided,
and we ought to cleanse our selves from both, For 2 Cor. 7. 1.
(says the Apostle) having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. And both outward and inward purity ought to be
endeavored after. It Is the Apostles command, Let us draw near Heb. 10. 22.
with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled
from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed wi^h pure water. Now let the
heart be washed first, then the conversation will be purified. The heart may be
compared to a fountain, if that be pure, the conversation as so many streams
flowing from that fountain will be pure. The more we search our hearts, the
more pollution we shall find in them. We shall find them to be a cage of
unclean birds, and a cinque of all manner of impurity. Wherefore above all
keepings, we ought to keep our hearts; for so says the Wiseman, Keep thy heart
with all diligence, for Prove. 4. 23.
out of it are the issues of life. Let it be therefore your greatest care and
endeavor to approve your heart unto God, in sincerity and in truth.

Sincerity is that which constitutes a Christian, and distinguishes a child of
God from an hypocrite. Look then especially to the inclination, vergency, frame
and propension of your heart, whether it tend directly toward God, or
obliquely toward the world.

The difference upon Scripture-record is very great between Asa and Amaziah,
(although neither one nor other* were without their failings); Asa failed in
several things, yet the root of the matter was in him, for his heart was
upright toward God, so it is evidenced in the Scripture, Nevertheless the heart
of 2 Chronicles. 15. 17.
Asa was perfect all his days. As for Amaziah, though he went a great way, yet
he came far short of the main thing required; for this brand of infamy is left
upon record, And he did that which was right in 2. Chron. 25. 2.
the sight of ^^^ Lord, but not with a perfect heart. It Is the common lot of
Gods dearest children to have Infirmities, yet notwithstanding they can take
comfort in the integrity of their hearts: So the Spouse confessed, I sleep, but
my heart waketh. Cant. 5. 2.
The sleeping of the Spouse implied that she had her Infirmities, but her heart
waking declared her sincerity.

Sect. 16. Duty 3. Be frequent and fervent in secret prayer. Prove. 18. 1.
3. Be frequent and fervent in secret prayer. Though separation from the
Assemblies of Saints is unwarrantable, yet there is a warrantable separation,
of which the Wiseman makes mention, Through desire a man having separated
himself, seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom. There is a time for
retiredness into our Closets; of this our Savior speaks, But thou when thou
prayest, Mat. 6. 6.
enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father
which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee
openly. For this retirement God Isa. 26. 20.
calls upon his people, Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut
thy doors about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment* until the
indignation be over-past.

Wherefore in your short recesses and retirements (which you must take
frequently) pour out your heart unto God; and when you are remotest from
company, and from the hearing of men, then be more earnest in wrestling with
God in prayer and supplication. Sometimes you may find a listlesness and
indisposedness upon your spirit, and by reason of such dullness and deadness,
you may be afraid of venturing upon any holy duty; yet you must take heed of
neglecting any duty: For dullness, deadness, and indisposedness of spirit, are
no warrants to neglect any duty; but you ought the rather to be more
sollicitous unto the throne of Grace for quickning-vertue, that God would raise
and dispose your heart for his service. Although at some time, you may be so
straightened in your spirit as you may not be able to utter a word; yet you may
sigh, and mourn, and groan, and breathe after God; and these sighings,
breathings, groanings, and mournings, are all known to God: and as for the
compunctions of the heart, God takes notice of them all. We read that the Lord
said unto Moses, Why cryest thou unto me? The Exodus 14. 15.
time that Moses thus cried, was when Pharaoh and his host pursued the Children
of Israel: A potent furious Enemy was behind them, and the Red Sea before them,
and whether they went forward or backward, their danger was exceeding great,
either to be drowned in the Water, or slain with the Sword of the Enemy. It Is
worth our observation, that there is no particular word specified that Moses
spoke, but the crying mentioned there, was the cry of the heart which came up
to Heaven, and the Lord gave a gracious answer unto his cry. When none sees you
but God, and none hears you but God only, then be in an especial manner an
importunate supplicant and beggar, That the Lord in mercy would subdue your
corruptions, and strengthen you by his grace to mortify sin, and quicken you
unto holy duties. Amidst all the clouds, and darkness, and gloominess that are
incident unto yon, be earnest with God, that he would smile on you. This is
that saving, real good to be desired principally, There be many that say, who
will Psalm. 4. 6. 7.
show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou
that have put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and
their wine increased. Likewise you must be informed farther, That as you ought
to pray, so you ought not to use prayer only as a duty commanded, but likewise
you ought to use Prayer as a means to obtain a blessing. Neither should you
only desire the gift of Prayer, but especially the grace of Prayer. The gift of
Prayer may be acquired by study, memory and strength of parts; and a faculty of
expressing of your self in fit and proper words it to be much desired: but
principally you must look after, and search your heart, whether you have the
grace of Prayer. This is promised, and this should be begged of God, And Zech.
12. 10.
I will pour upon the house of David, * Long excellentius est effundit in nos
spiritum gratiae quam gratiam ipsam, quia nisi spiritus gratiae penetret in
animos nostros and instillet nobis sensum gratiae erit inutilis^ Calv.
and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications.
And where this gracious and praying spirit is, there it is accompanied with
godly sorrow for sin; for it follows in the same verse, And they shall look
upon me, whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns
for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn.

Sect. 17.
Further, That you may so pour out your heart to God in Prayer, as you may have
a sure ground of hope to obtain acceptance with God, I shall prescribe to you
(as I have the Scripture-warrant) these six ensuing qualifications.

1. You must pray in humility: 1. Pray in humility
We are all poor, blind, miserable and naked, even dust and ashes, and shall
dust and ashes be proud? We are all beggars to God, and shall beggars be proud?
It Is a saying that deserves a remark to be set upon it, That there is nothing
worse than Nihil est superba mendicitate deterius. Qui sibi vilis est Deo
charus est. Bern.
proud beggary. When we have to deal with God we can never be humble enough.
And the more vile a man is in his own eyes, the more he is esteemed of in the
eyes of God. When Abraham interceded for Sodom, he acknowledged himself but
dust and ashes; and Jacob acknowledged Genesis 18. 27. Genesis 32. 10. Psalm. 22. 6.
Cum sis kumi limus, cur non es humillimus? Bern.
himself not worthy of the least of the mercies of God. And David accounted
himself a worm and no man. When we lie low, and are vile in our own eyes, and
pray in humility, we are the more capable of receiving a blessing.

2. You must prefer all your supplications, 2. All Prayers must be put up in
the name of Jesus Christ. Mat. 3. 17. Act. 4. 12.
prayers and requests to God the Father in the Name of Jesus Christ For of
Christ, a voice came from heaven, saying, this is my beloved son, in whom I am
well pleased. There is no other name but the name of Jesus for salvation,
Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under
heaven, whereby we must be saved. The promise which Christ made unto his
Disciples is, And whatsoever Joh. 14. 13.
you shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in
the son. Luther makes mention of Non solum periculosu^ est, sed horribile, de
Deo extra Christum Cogitare. Luth. Loc. Com. 3. Prayer must be made in Faith.
Matt. 21. 22.
the danger and horror of thinking of God without Christ: For God without
Christ is a consuming fire, but with Christ he is a gracious and merciful
Father.

3. You must pray in faith. To such who pray in faith, the promise belongs, and
only to them. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye
shall receive. There is no coming unto God the Father without Christ; for he is
the only Mediator; neither is there any coming unto Christ without Faith. For
(says the Apostle) without faith Heb. 11. 6.
it is impossible to please God. It Is storied of the Persians, that when they
had offended their King, they brought his Son in their arms, and so obtained
favor; we have all offended God, and we must present Christ unto the Father in
the arms of faith, and by him we shall obtain acceptance and remission of all
our sins.

4. You must add fervency to the 4. Prayer must be made with fervency. Genesis 32.
24. Filius Dei luctator fuit. v. 25. v. 26.
frequency of your Prayers. This fervency the Scripture represents by
wrestling; for of Jacob we read, And there wrestled a man with him until the
breaking of the day: And though the hollow of Jacobs Thigh was out of joint,
yet he continued wrestling with the Angel. The Angel said, Let me go, for the
day breaks: And he said unto him, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.
Whether Jacobs wrestling was a corporal, or a spiritual wrestling only, I shall
not peremptorily determine: For the latter, the Scripture is express; And
though this may be eminenter, in a more eminent manner; yet, non exclusive, not
excluding a corporal wrestling. Read what the Prophet Hoseah says, Yea, he had
power over Hos. 12. 4.
the Angel and prevailed, he wept and made supplication unto him. This servent
Prayer, is as it were a besieging and storming of Heaven, and taking it by
violence, And from the Matt. 11. 12.
days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence,
and the violent take it by force And this holy violence and importunity in
Prayer is acceptable unto God. What Is that Prayer which avails much? It Is an
effectual servent Prayer. For (so ^ith the Apostle) The effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous Jam. 5. 16. (...) 8. (...). Quasi dioas deluosam (i. e.)
ardentem and assiduam oppo^i puvan^ perfu^^oriae. B^z^. Esth^^^ 16.
man avails much. This is (a^ the word imports) an inwrought, an inward
working prayer, a heartprayer, indit^d by the Spirit of God. Go (...) to God in
the name of Christ, and be an importunate beggar at your Fathers door: Resolve
not to be driven from your F^thers door, nor to take any repulse. Though God
seems not to hear, you must cry the louder; though he forbears to open, you
must knock the harder. It was an h^roi^al resolution of Queen Hester in a good
cause, I also and my maidens will fast likewise, and so will go in unto the
King, which is not according to the law; and if I perish, I perish. Resolve
through the strength of God to go on in your duty, and if you perish, you will
perish in the arms of Christ: And in his arms there is security. Resolve, I will
go on in Prayer, though I meet with many repulses. Jacob was a gainer by his
wrestlings, for notwithstanding his lameness and halting, he obtained a
blessing which made amends. It was an excellent resolution of Job, Though Job
13. 15
he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Consider your interest in adoption, and
this consideration will set the spirit of prayer a working, And because Gal. 4.
6.
ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts,
crying Abba, Father. Go to God, as a Child to a Father, and cry earnestly for
grace and mercy. God is a tender and compassionate Father, and he will open his
bowels, and regard the cries of his Children.

5. Always remember, that what 5. Prayer must be according to Gods Will.
you pray for, must be according to Gods will. Consider therefore in your most
serious and deliberate thoughts, whether you pray for lawful things, such as
God commands you to pray for, and promises to grant them: For there is no
promise of hearing and accepting of any Prayer, unless it be according to the
Will of God, And this (says the 1 John 5. 14.
Apostle) is the confidence, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us. Many things we ask for, which would be a judgment if they were
granted: As for instance, we ask for satisfyings of our carnal lusts, and
sensual appetites; or when we ask for satisfaction of our pride, malice,
revenge, and inordinate passions; and for superfluities, and things unnecessary
and inconvenient, it is just with God that we should miss and be frustrated of
such things which we desire and expect, when we ask amiss; For (says the
Apostle) ye Jam. 4 3.
ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that you may consume it upon your
lusts. Our duty is to study the revealed Will of God in the Holy Scriptures,
and accordingly we must frame our petitions, submitting our wills in all things
unto the Will of God. The matter of our Prayer must be lawful things; the
manner of our praying must be with faith and fervency; and the end must be for
the Glory of God, and the eternal good of our precious and immortal Souls: and
the time of answering of our prayers, we must wholly refer unto the Will of
God, for he knows what is better for us, than we know for our selves, and he
will do abundantly for us more than we can ask and think.

6. And Lastly, You must pray 6. Prayer must be with perseverance
with perseverance: As it is your duty to pray, so you must hold out, and
persevere in Prayer. Concerning the Hypocrite, Job says, Will he delight Job
27. 10
himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God? Wherefore be sure that
you omit not secret Prayer; though you find your heart disordered, dull and
indisposed, yet you must pray, that God would set your heart in order, and
quicken and dispose your heart for his service. Notwithstanding that you are
perplexed with tumultuous perturbations, and fluctuating thoughts, and variety
of fancies (which are a grief and vexation unto your spirit) it is a good sign
and character that your heart is right with God, when through the Grace of God
you continue praying; and although at present your desires are not answered,
yet you have good ground for hope that God intends good to you, because he
keeps your heart in a praying-frame. You must not only pray, but continue
instant in prayer, (for so says the Apostle) Continuing instant in prayer: The
Romans 12. 12. (...) 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. (...).
original word implies strength and valor. Neither must we pray by fits and
starts, but we must pray without ceasing (i. e.) We must readily embrace all
opportunities of praying, and be in a praying-disposition.

Sect. 18. 4. Duty. Keep close to all Gods Ordinances.
A fourth particular duty, is, To. keep close unto all the Ordinances of God. As
I have insisted in the last particular on the Duty of Prayer (which is a choice
Ordinance, and is both the privilege and duty of Gods Children); so I shall
mention other Ordinances which you ought conscientiously to observe. Three only
I shall instance in (not excluding any other Ordinance); And they are Hearing
of the Word, receiving of the Lords supper, and the strict observation of the
Sabbath.

1. You must be swift to hear the 1. Be swift to hear the Word of God.
Word of God preached. You must not content your self with reading of Gods Word
in your Closet, but you must stir abroad to hear the word faithfully preached;
this is the arm of the Lord revealed, and it Isa. 53. 1. Romans 1. 16
is the power of God unto salvation. Attend therefore at the Posts of Wisdoms
gate. Lie in this way where Christ comes by; wait (as the impotent creeple did)
at the Pool of Bethesda; multitudes of impotent folk Joh. 5. 4.
lay there waiting for the moving of the water; for an Angel went down at a
certain season into the Pool, and troubled the water; whosoever then first
after the troubling of the water stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever
disease he had. Neglect not therefore the diligent hearing of faithful
Ministers, whose endeavors are (...) i. e. to divide the word aright; and
(...), i. e. to walk rightly. From such as are sound in Doctrine, and holy in
life and conversation, absent not your self; the word preached and delivered
viva voce with warm affections, and in the demonstration of the spirit and
power, mirabiles effectus habet; for it is instrumental to humble the proud
heart, to soften the hard heart, and to level mountains as low as the valleys;
now every instrumental-cause must be reduced unto its efficient cause. It was
not Elijah's Mantle that parted the waters of Jordan, but the Lord God of
Elijah: Elisha took up the 2 King. 2. 13, 14.
mantle of Elijah that f^ll from him, and went back, and stood by the bank of
Jordan, and smote the waters, and said, where is the Lord God of Elijah? So
it is the powerful operation of the Spirit of God which accompanies the Word,
and makes it effectual. And the Word quickened by the Spirit, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
works wonderful things: For it is mighty through God to the pulling down of
strong holds, Eis comparat ratiocinationibus Philo sophorumquae Evangelio
opponebantur. Grot.
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the kn^wledg of God; and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ. The Word of God is one piece of our Spiritual armor, And Ephesians. 6. 17.
take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit which is the word of
God. A sword is both an offensive and a defensive weapon. And the Word is a
two-edged sword: Heb. 4. 12.
For the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
sword, Leviticus culter pervenit ad minim^ quales sunt nerve in junctur is, and
ad intima quales sunt medullae sic and sermo Dei and intima and minima animi
penetrat, inque ea agit, Grot. Isa. 51. 21. De calamitatibus loquutus est nempe
dubitent, ut fideles non quin parata sit eis a Domino consolatio tametsi
extrema quaeque patiantur. Calv. in loc.
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints
and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. The
Word of God powerfully preached may (through the blessing of God) meet with your
particular condition, and speak comfort to you: For there is a particular and
suitable word, which frequently God directs his Ministers to preach, and so to
reach the hearts and conditions of the hearers. One only Scripture I shall
mention of the Prophet Isaiah, Therefore hear now this thou afflicted, and
drunken, but not with wine. The meaning is, that notwithstanding fore pressures
and afflictions which they endured, yet they should not doubt nor despair of
Gods comforts; there is a This, i. e. a word of God to comfort the afflicted.
Keep close to the Word, and be frequent in meditating of what you hear, and in
applving of it particularly to your own soul.

Sect. 19. 2. Receive the Lords Supper.
2. To the diligent hearing of the Word of God, you must join the receiving of
the Sacrament of the LordsSupper; this is a great strengthening, supporting, and
comforting Ordin^nce, and you ought not to deny your self so great a privilege
which belongs to you. As it is a fault and a great one in many, presumptuously
and unpreparedly to come to the Lords Supper, so it may be a fault in you who
have knowledge to discern the Lords Body, (and your life is holy) to debar your
self of that choice Ordinance. As you may not come unpreparedly without serious
self examination, so you may not stay away after due preparation: For after a
thorough ex^mination follows 1 Cor. 11. 28.
participation. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup. Neither should such who have right to this
sealing Ordinance content themselves with seldom receiving; but they should
embrace fr^quent opportunities for Communicating at the Lords-Table; they will
find many things wanting in their faith, and love, and repentance, and
therefore they should come frequently to strengthen their faith and love, and
to renew their repentance, and to renew their covenants with God, and to walk
more humbly and holily in all manner of conversation. The Text says, For as
Verse. 26.
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death
till he come. The Adverb there used is (...), and that implys, (...), Mr.
Pemble on the Sacrament.
often; that shows that we ought to do it often. At other times we ought to
have an habitual preparation; but for receiving of the LordsSupper, we ought to
have an actual preparation; we ought to act faith, love, repentance, and other
graces. Now because you find sin to be burdensome, and loathsome, and you
account your self unworthy, therefore you should not deny your self the
Lord's Supper; you ought the rather to come, and to make haste unto Christ,
beseeching him to prepare you for the receiving of the Ordinance, and to make
it effectual unto you.

I shall give a distinction which (I hope) may give you satisfaction: There is
a Legal and an Evangelical Righteousness. As for Legal righteousness, to be
exact, and to perform the whole Law to a tittle, none could do it but Christ
alone; and in a legal sense none of us can come worthily to the Lord's Supper;
for we all come short of our duty, and when we have done all we can, we must
confess, that we are unprofitable Luke 17. 10. Isa. 64. 6.
servants, and that we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags. But there is an Evangelical righteousness; and through
Christ's righteousness imputed to us, we are accounted righteous, and accepted
of God; and notwithstanding infirmities (which we are sensible of, and mourn
for them) if our hearts be sincere toward God, we may expect a blessing of God
upon the Ordinance. For though we are not (as of our selves) any ways worthy of
receiving so great an Ordinance, yet the God of the Ordinance will be pleased
to accept of the uprightness of our hearts. Let us then make our addresses to
God as Hezekiah did for the people concerning their failings about receiving of
the Passover, The good Lord pardon 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20.
every one that prepares his heart to seek the God of his Fathers, though he
be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary. And the Lord
hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.

3. Labor to the utmost to be 3. Labor to be strict in the observation of the
Sabbath. Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11.
conscientious and strict in the observation of the Sabbath day. The fourth
Commandment pre^ixeth a peculiar Memento for the observation of the Sabbath
day: Remember the Sabbath* day to keep it holy: six days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work, but the seven^h* day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates.
The Sabbath was to be observed the seventh day of the week from the Creation to
the Resurrection of Christ; since, we are to observe the first day of the week
in memory of Christ's Resurrection, and this is the Christian Sabbath, commonly
called the Lord's Day. On this day Christ rose from the dead; on this day
collection was to be made 1 Cor. 16. 1. Act. 20. 7. Rev. 1. 10.
for the Saints; on this day the Disciples came together to break bread; and
St. John was in an especial manner ravished in the Spirit: Diem Dominicam vocat
primam ^ebdomadis feriam, qua Dominus a mortuis resurrexerit, etc. Pareus in
loc.
I was in the spirit on the Lords day. This day is the souls market day, the
souls harvest-day, the souls rejoi^ing-day. Prepare for this day, before it
comes; meditate of the duties of the day, and sanctify your souls for the
sanctification of the Lords own day. The word Remember necessarily implys
prepartion and a previous consideration of performing the works of the day in
its own day. This day ought seriously to be remembered before it comes, and the
heart ought to be prepared, and sequestered from all worldly intanglements. On
this day we should rise earlier in a morning than other days. Mary rose early
that day, and had a joyful sight of the Lord Jesus. Shake off sloth and
drowsiness, and beware of idleness (for spiritual idleness on this day is as
bad as bodily labor: give unto God his own day, a whole day, and employ your
soul in the works of the day, and the works are works of piety, mercy, and
necessity; and beg of God a Sabbath-frame and temper of spirit. As for such
works as concern our secular calling (though they are lawful and necessary on
other days of the week, yet) on this day they are neither necessary nor lawful;
much less are corporal-recreations, as games or sports, etc. to be allowed on
this day. On this day double diligence ought to be used for the performing of
double duties; to hearing of the Word in public, add reading in private; and
to reading, add secret prayer; and to prayer, add meditation; and to
meditation, add conference (as next is to be mentioned.)

Sect. 20. Duty 5. Communicate your Doubts to experienced Christians. Mal. 2.
7. Isa. 50. 4.
A fifth Duty is to communicate your Doubts and perplexities to such experienced
Ministers or people who are able and willing to administer spiritual comfort
unto you. The Prophet tells us, For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and
they should seek the Law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of
Hosts. Impart your case to faithful Ministers, to whom God has given the
tongue of the Learned, and to other experienced Christians, who (through the
Grace of God) may speak both by way of counsel and comfort something for the
settlement and establishment of your spirit. Frequent the society of such who
fear God; and be a companion to such here on earth, whose company you hope to
enjoy to all eternity.

It was the saying of an eminent servant of Jesus Christ upon his Deathbed, Mr.
Robert Bolton.
I shall change my place, but not my company. Be therefore ready and willing to
lay hold upon those opportunities which are offered for spiritual conference;
and be glad of the prayers and counsels of such as are Mnasons and old
Disciples, and experienced Christians, and Practitioners of Religion. Spiritual
conference is no new practice, for it is of great antiquity; and I heartily
wish that it were more revived and put in practice than it is now-adays. The
Prophet Malachy makes mention of such Religious meetings, Then they that feared
the Lord spoke Mal. 3. 16.
often to one another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his name. Upon perusal of those words, it is evident that the
people of God met together and conferred about each others spiritual estate. And
there ought to be a great deal of care and conscience in the managing of such
meetings, for God takes notice of all that is done or spoken, and puts them upon
record. O! how much and abundant soul-satisfaction may be gained by the society
of such as are godly! to such you ought to unbosom and unburthen your soul;
they may be instrumental for the good of your soul. And as I advise unto
conference, and correspondence with godly Christians, so I advise you to the
making choice of godly Writers, and to peruse them with diligence and
seriousness of spirit. Let the holy Scriptures always have the pre-eminence
both in your judgment and affections. Next to them, I commend unto your
frequent reading, sound and orthodox Writers, such as are Calvin's Institutions,
Greenham, Perkins, Dod, Dyke on the Deceitfulness of the heart, Scudder,
Buroughs gracious spirit; and in an especial manner (because it is very
suitable to your condition) I commend to your reading, Dr. Sibs of the souls
conflict. The precious Author is dead, but his memory is blessed, and both the
Author and his Works are like precious ointment poured forth.

The sixth and last particular Duty Duty 6. Wait upon God.
(which I advise you unto) is to wait silently, patiently, and submissively
upon God. Labor therefore to bring your will to Gods will; God is infinite in
Wisdom, and knows what is better for you, than you know for your self, and
better than you can either ask or think. And believe that Gods time is always
the best time; and therefore wait on God, till he be pleased to speak a word of
peace to you. Let faith and patience hold out, and join them both together, and
imitate those who Heb. 6. 12.
through faith and patience have inherited the promises. The Church of God
(though under hatches and in a very low condition) yet did exercise faith and
patience, And I Isa. 8. 17.
will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I
will look for him. The Church of God was much afflicted and vexed with briers
and thorns, and was neither quiet at home, nor abroad, yet notwithstanding we
read of an Heroical resolution of the Church, Therefore I will look unto the
Lord: Mic. 7. 7.
I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me. In this verse,
Faith, Patience, and Assurance, are all joined together: for looking implys
that there was an eye of faith; and waiting implys the exercise of patience;
and that God would hear, was a strong ground of assurance that the faith and
patience there mentioned were successful. In Habbakkuks time the Vision was
very dark, For (said Hab. 2. 3.
the Prophet) the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come,
it will not tarry. Waiting-Christians are exceeding much gainers by all their
waiting; so says the Prophet, The Lord is good to them that wait Lam. 3. 25,
26.
for him, to the soul that seeks him. It is good that a man should both hope,
and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. Wherefore if God speak not
comfort so soon as you desire and expect, yet know that it is your duty to hold
out, and continue waiting, and not in the least to presume to limit the holy
one of Israel to any time or means, Let God (as an ancient Eligat
opportunitatem qui libere dat misericordiam. Aug.
Father says) choose the opportunity, who freely gives thee mercy. There is no
mercy but it is worth waiting for; and the more quietly and submissively we wait
on God, the mercy will be more acceptable when it comes. The Prophet Isaiah
prophesies abundance of comfort to a waiting-people, And it shall be said in
that day: Isa. 25. 9.
What day was that? I answer that it was a reviving and comfortingday, after
all those great and many Canticum sanctum post exactas hujus vitae aerumnas.
Pool's Synops:
sufferings which befell the people of God. It follows, Lo this is our God, we
have waited for him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for
him, we will be glad, and rejoice in his salvation.

What strength and courage do waiting-people obtain, the same Prophet
expresses in several particulars, He gives power to the faint; and to them
that have no might, he increases Isa. 40. 29, 30, 31.
strength. Even the youths shall faint, and be weary, and the young men shall
utterly fall, but they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they
shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary; they
shall walk and not be faint. Let faith, prayer, patience, and experiences be
exercised, and in Gods good time comfort will flow abundantly into your soul
with good measure, full pressed, and running over.

Sect. 21. 4. Head, Questions propounded, and answered.
I now come in the fourth place, to give an answer to a question or two, in
which I shall endeavor to answer such scruples as you may be ready to raise:
Two only questions I shall make mention of, and give in particular answers unto
them.

The first Question is, Whether God Q. 1.
sometimes hides his face from his own Children?

I Answer, he does. The affirmative A.
is evident by David's complaint, Why hidest thou thy self in times of Psalm. 10.
1. Psalm. 108. 29. Psalm. 88. 14.
trouble? Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled. Heman, a rare man, thus
expostulates the case, Why casts thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face
from me? But though God thus hides his face, yet it is but for a moment: For a
small moment have I Isa. 54. 7. 8.
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I
hid my face for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. For a time, God hides his face from his own
people for wise ends and purposes, as to make trial of their love, and whether
their faith and patience will hold out, and whether (as Job resolved) they will
trust Job 13. 15
God, though he should slay them. Further, All Gods withdrawings, and
suspensions of his gracious countenance, should excite Gods Children to pray
the harder, and search and try their ways more exactly, and turn unto the Lord.

The second Question is: What Q. 2.
special Duties are incumbent upon us to be reduced unto practice, when we are
grieved by reason of desertions, and the want of the manifestation of Gods
gracious countenance?

I shall give an Answer to the Question, A.
in these ensuing particulars.

1. Your duty is to search into the 1. Search into the cause* Genesis 25. 22.
Cause: As Rebeccah when she felt struglings in her womb, She said, if it be
so, why am I thus? and she went to enquire of the Lord. And if you meet with
variety of troubles, whether inward or outward, beg of God to teach you to
understand the cause, and what is his meaning and good pleasure for you to obey,
and wherein you have offended, and what you ought to amend. I shall be your
remembrancer of the words of Elihu in the Book of Job. Surely Job 34. 31
it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend
any more. That which I see not, teach thou me: If I have done iniquity, I will
do no more. You should consider, that afflictions, desertions, and all manner
of withdrawings of Gods countenance, are as so many Rods of chastisement, and
fatherly correction, and for instruction to the Children of God; and these Rods
come not from the dust: They have a cause, and what is our duty the Prophet
informs us, Hear ye the Rod, Micah 6. 9.
and who has appointed it. When Israel was repelled and put to the worse by
the men of Ai, the cause was inquired after, and Achan the grand Delinquent was
found out and stoned; and afterward, The Valley Hos. 2. 14.
of Achor was a door of hope. When there was a tempestuous storm, and the Ship
like to be broken, we read that the Mariners took up Jonah and Jonah 1. 15.
cast him forth into the Sea, and the Sea ceased from her raging. Hug not
therefore a Delilah in your bosom, nor foster an Herodias; give no quarter to
Benhadad or Agag, nor to any greater and more commanding sins; make no league
with a Gibeonite, a pretending sin: Beware of giving the least allowance to any
beloved sin, though it pleads antiquity, and is pleasing to flesh and blood;
and though it be a sin more suitable than some others to thy Genus, complexion,
and constitution. As soon as Goliath was brained, the whole Army of the
Philistines were routed and ran away. So then, when a Champion or ruling sin is
destroyed, other sins of more ordinary incursion will easilier be subdued. It
was a character of David's sincerity, I was upright before him, Psalm. 18. 23.
and I kept my self from mine iniquity. Rachel sat upon the Stuff, and made but
a very slender Apology; there must no Apology be made for any sin: however a
sin may be pleasing to corrupt nature, yet there must not the least allowance
be given to any secret sin. It was the Prayer of the Psalmist, and we ought
accordingly to pray, Who can understand Psalm. 19. 12.
his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.

Sect. 22. 2. Pray with fervency.
2 You must pray with all importunity and fervency, for the restoration of the
light of Gods gracious countenance. As you ought to be assiduous and serious in
Prayer for other things, so in an especial manner that God would restore unto
you the light of his countenance. It was the Psalmists prayer, Make Psalm. 51. 8.
me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice. And he further prays, Restore v. 12.
unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit. Now is a
peculiar time to add more fervency to our prayers, when God absents himself
from us. Now especially we should double and redouble our prayers, and cry
aloud with more faith and fervency: So did David, Give ear, O shepherd of
Israel, Psalm. 80. 1.
thou that leadest Joseph like a flock* that dwell between the cherubims,
shine forth. It Is took for granted of the Church in affliction, to be much in
Prayer, Lord in trouble have Isa. 26. 16.
they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chast^ing was upon them.
Go on then, O Christian! and persevere in thy duty, in frequent and fervent
prayer; though at present God (who knows all and hears all) seems not to hear,
yet be thou more earnest in Prayer, and cry the louder; and though God forbears
to open, yet thou must knock the harder. If when God knocks, thou readily opens
the door of thy heart, Christ himself will be thy guest (and he is the best of
all), and thou shall be his guest both active and passive. For so says the
Angel of the Church of Laodicea, Behold I stand at the door Rev. 3. 20.
and knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him,
and will sup with him, and he with me. David makes mention of the Generation
Psalm. 24. 6, 7.
of them that seek the face of God. And what is their great Duty and Privilege,
is specified, Lift up your heads O ye gates, and he ye lift up ye everlasting
doors, and the King of glory shall come in.

This (as a learned Author observes) Ainsworth in loc.
may be referred to Christian men which are the true Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.
17. at the door of whose heart Christ knocks to have entrance; and by the
King of glory, or glorious King, is meant Christ who is called the Lord of
glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8.

3. Notwithstanding Desertions, be 3. Keep fast your hold.
sure that you keep your hold fast, and the anchor of your hope firm and
steadfast. Though God hides his face from you, yet you must cleave fast to him,
and depend wholly upon him as your God and comforter, for so the Church
confesses, Verily Isa. 45. 15.
thou art a God, that hidest thy self, O God, of Israel the savior. I was
informed by a worthy Son of Mr. Dod who wrote on the Commandments.
an eminently worthy father, that one in great distress came to him, and told
him of his great perplexities and desertion, saying, that there was none like
unto him, and that he thought never was any one in such a forlorn and miserable
condition as himself; for by reason of his desertions, he concluded, that he
had no evidence at all for his salvation: To whom Mr. Dod, that good old
Disciple, and Servant of Jesus Christ, answered thus, What think you of Jesus
Christ? For of him these dying words are recorded, My God, my God, why have
Matt. 27. 47.
thou forsaken me? And yet notwithstanding that desertion, there was a plain
evidence by his appropriating God unto himself, when he said, My God, my God.
Sometimes there may be a faith of recumbence, though faith of evidence may be
wanting. Both sorts of faith are worth the laboring for, though in the absence
of the one, the presence of the other may be a strong ground of supportation
and consolation. It Is storyed of Synagirus by an ancient Historian, Instar
rabidae ferae mortu navem detinuit. Just. Hist.
that when he was cast over Shipboard, he held one part of the Ship with both
his hands; the enemy cut off one hand, yet he held by the other: presently that
hand was cut off, and then he held the Ship by his Teeth. Let this Story be
thus applied, That we should never let go our hold and dependence upon God, but
whatever our troubles be (though never so numerous, yet) let us resolve with
that holy man Job, Though he slay me, yet will I trust Job 13. 15.
in him; but I will maintain mine own ways before him.

4. Act Faith on Promises: For the 4. Act Faith on Promises.
Promises are the stay and support of your soul* God's Promises are his Bond;
and though men on earth will not take it well to be sued upon their Bonds, yet
God will take it well, and he likes us the better for suing him upon his Bond.
God speaks comfort to his people in his promises, and not one tittle of the
word of God shall fail. God has said it, and therefore we must believe it, Say
to the righteous it shall be Isa. 3. 10.
well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. Solomon likewise
assures us, That though a sinner Eccles. 8. 12.
do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know it
shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him. Hereunto we add,
that great and weighty promise full of comfort up to the brim, But unto Mal. 4.
2.
you that fear my name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in
his wings. Great things the Lord promises to his people, Then will I Ezekiel. 36.
25, 26, 27.
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your
filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.

These are precious Promises, and they both have been fulfilled (as many can
experimentally acknowledge), and they shall be further fulfilled to the people
of God in his appointed time. However God expects and requires that his people
should make their addresses to the Throne of Grace; for though God questionless
will perform them, and will not in the least be worse than his word, yet his
children are obliged to make their applications and supplications to God for
the performance of them: Thus says the Lord God, I will yet Ezekiel. 36. 37.
for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them.

Sect. 23. 5. Ground of Comfort.
Now in the last place, to conclude, (lest that I should exceed the bounds of an
Epistle) To what has been said, I Will add some grounds of comfort, which
(through the Grace of God) may serve instead of Restoratives and Cordials to
strengthen you. And especially have before your eyes, and upon your heart, the
counsel given by Christ unto the Angel of the Church of Sardis, Be watchful,
and Rev. 3. 2.
strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die.

Amongst others which might be mentioned, I shall insist only on four principal
grounds of comfort, which all true Believers should apply unto themselves, and
stay and rely upon them.

The first ground of Comfort is 1. Ground of Comfort from the Divine Attributes.
drawn from the Divine Attributes. Consider that you are a poor, weak, frail,
and feeble creature, yet the Lord God whom you serve is the only omnipotent
Lord God, and his strength will be perfected in your weakness. Your extremity
will be Gods opportunity, which he will in mercy improve for your succor and
consolation. It Is the comfort of all Gods children, That there is help laid
Psalm. 89. 19.
upon one that is mighty. You complain that you are subject to variety of
changes; your case is not alone: An ancient and learned Author ^aith, That
every created thing is subject to (...) Damasc.
change. Consider, that all the changes here below are ordered and disposed of
by the wisdom of God, and yet they make no change in God, for he is
unchangeable: For I am the Mal. 3. 6.
Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. And the Lord
Jesus, as he is an all-sufficient Savior, so he is unchangeable, Jesus Heb.
13. 8.
Christ is the same, yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. And the Covenant
which God makes with his people, does not change with our changes, but is
ordered and sure, and unchangeable. What was a strong ground of consolation to
David, you should apply in particular to your own soul. Deus obligavit se
aeterno faedere, ideo non claudetur tenebris. Pet. Mart. in loc.
Although my house be not 2 Samuel 23. 5.
so with God: yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things, and sure, for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he
make it not to grow.

You complain that you want Wisdom, you must consider that God is a God of
Wisdom, and blessed are all they that wait on him. You are so bewildred and
involved in many perplexities of spirit, as you know not how to extricate your
self out of them. O! make haste to God, and beg Wisdom of him: For (says Jam.
1. 5.
the Apostle) If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

But you complain that you want the sense of the pardon of your sins?

For answer, you may have a pardon, though at present you may not apprehend it.
For there may be a pardon in the Court of the Judge, although that pardon for a
time (when a Christian is in a dark condition) be not manifested in the Court
of the Conscience. Therefore apply these Attributes for your stay, support and
comfort. The Lord, the Exodus 34. 6, 7.
Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering and abundant in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin.
Plead these Attributes as your stronghold; and likewise beg of God, that not
only your sins may be pardoned, but that they may be subdued also, Who is a God
like unto thee, that pardons Micah. 7. 18.
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage* he
retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy? As then you
beg mercy to pardon you, so you must beg mercy to purge and sanctify you; and
as you pray that the guilt and punishment of your sins may be took away; so you
must pray, that the filthiness of them may be took away; and what God
promises, you must with a sincere heart pray that it may be performed to you
in particular. Then will I Ezekiel. 36. 25.
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness,
and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. Now to be earnest in prayer with
God, that you may be sanctified as well as pardoned, and that your sins may be
subdued, and conquered, this is an evident sign of a sincere heart.

A second ground of comfort is to 2. Ground of Comfort from the divine
^^omises. 2 Pet. 1. 4. (...).
be had in the Divine Promises. Of the Promises I shall add somewhat (though
little) by way of supplement to what I mentioned before. The Promises are great
and precious Promises. And all the Promises are in Christ, Yea and Amen; Gods
Promises are not off and on, sometimes faster, sometimes looser, (as men's
Promises are) but they are sure, and certain, and infallible. That I may write
what I conceive most proper and suitable for your condition, I Will lay down this
Distinction: There are two sorts of Promises, viz. promises to Grace, and
promises of Grace.

1. For Promises to Grace: one is, 1. Promises to Grace. Joh. 3. 16. Joh. 6. 35.
Whosoever believes on him, shall not perish, but shall have everlasting life.
Another is, He that comes to me shall never hunger, he that believes in me
shall never thirst. A third promise is, All that the Father gives me, Verse. 37.
shall come to me; and him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. A
fourth Promise is, He that has my Joh. 14. 2^
commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me: and he that loves
me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self
to him.

Q. But it is probable that you Q.
will say, That you question whether you have faith in God, and love to God?

I answer, Is it not the sincere desire A.
and endeavor of your soul to love Christ, and to believe in his name? And are
not you grieved for want of faith and love? If so, then,

Secondly, I will add for your comfort, 2. Promises of Grace.
that (as I showed before) as there are Promises to Grace, so there are
Promises of Grace; i. e. what God requires of you, (however you come short of
your duty) he will in mercy give it to you. As for instance, there is a word of
Command, Circumcise your selves, and take away the foreskins Jer. 4. 3.
of your hearts. You may be apt to plead the impossibility of your performing
of that great thing commanded: Therefore apply to your comfort that special
good word of promise, And the Lord thy God will Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. Likewise God
commands, Make you a new heart, and a new spirit. You will be ready Ezekiel. 18.
31.
to object, that it is not in your own power to make your heart new. I answer,
though it be not in your own power, neither can you by your own strength change
your heart, yet you are obliged to confer your utmost endeavors to wash and
cleanse your heart, for so the command runs, O Jer. 4. 14.
Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved. How long
shall thy vain thoughts long within thee? And your duty is to apply the
Promise, A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put Ezekiel.
36. 26, 27.
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. What God
commands of us, he promises to give unto us.

Sect. 24. 3. Ground of Comfort from many Invitations. Isa. 55. 1.
A third ground of comfort wherewith you may support your self, is founded on
those many and special Invitations. Ingens in nobis requiritur desiderium ^t
tantoru^ beneficiorum participes esse possimus. Call. in loc.
One is, Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has
no money, come ye, buy, and eat without money, and without price. By waters are
understood the Divine Ordinances; by buying without price, the riches of free
grace and mercy in Christ are represented; by coming is meant the using of
those means which God has prescribed, as believing, repenting, hearing of the
Word, receiving the Lords Supper, etc. Another Invitation suitable hereunto is,
If any man thirst, let him Joh. 7. 37.
come unto me and drink. A thirsty soul who is sensible of his want of Christ,
and that he is lost and undone without him, has a special invitation to come
unto him.

The third Invitation (which is suitable to the former) runs thus, And the
Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears say come, and let Rev.
2. 17.
him that is a thirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely. For Explication of that choice Scripture, there is a special remark to
be set on these particulars.

1. Consider who are invited, and 1. Thirsty persons are invited.
they are thirsty, necessitous, indigent persons, who are apprehensive of their
absolute necessity of having Christ, and that no other waters but such
living-waters as flow from Christ, can satisfy them; these only have a special
Invitation.

2. It Is said, Whosoever will; though 2. Whosoever will.
a willing mind is commended and accepted of by the Almighty God; yet this
willing mind is first given to us by God, before we can employ it for God. We
read that God stirred up Ezra 1. 1.
the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia to build the house of the Lord God of Verse.
3.
Israel (he is the God) which is in Jerusalem. After the command of Cyrus, the
issue thereof follows, Then rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah, Verse.
5.
and Benjamin, and the Priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God
had raised to go up to build the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. As
those who were builders of the Temple in Jerusalem had their spirits raised by
God for that great work, so all those who will do any spiritual and acceptable
service unto God, must first have their spirits raised, and have a willing mind
vouchsafed by God unto them. Unless we have assistance from Christ, and be
acted, guided and governed by his Spirit, we can do nothing pleasing unto God.
All our fresh-springs are in Christ. Phil. 2. 13. (...). Chrysostom.
All our sufficiency is from God. And it is God that works in you to will,
and to do according to his good pleasure.

A fourth Invitation (to name no more) is that which Christ himself makes to
such as are sensible of the heavy weight and burden of their sins, Come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy-laden, and I will give Mat. 11. 28.
you rest. Some understand the words, of crosses and afflictions; and others of
the rigor of the Law, and others of sin; of all these burdens Christ can ease
us. (...) laboribus frangere and lassare te significat. Bilson de perpet.
Guber. Hales. (...), Sarcina proprie quae humeris fertur, item quae navi
imponitur. V. Leigh. Crit. Sac.
The Original words are Emphatical, and intimate, that such as are even ready
to sink under their burdens, are invited to come to Christ for help and
succor. Put then the Question home to your own soul, Are you sensible of the
heavy burden of sin, and weary of it? Is sin more grievous and burdensome to
you, than an aching Tooth or a broken Arm? If this be your condition, be not
dismayed, but with all expedition go to Jesus Christ, who alone can remove all
your burdens, and give you rest.

Sect. 25. 4. Ground of comfort, the particular application of Christ's merits.
I conclude all with the fourth and last Ground of comfort, and with some
suitable Scriptures appertaining thereunto. As for this Ground of comfort
(though I name it last, yet it is the chiefest of all) it is the particular
application of the merits of Christ, as offered in the Gospel to your own soul.
We usually say, that Medicines cure not in their preparation (though to prepare
them is necessary) but in their application. The Sovereign Medicine of the
blood of Christ is of infinite dignity, price and value. One drop of his Blood*
and one dram of his Grace is sufficient for you. The Apostle was once a great
persecutor, and afterward was a zealous professor, and Preacher of that Gospel
which he formerly persecuted. He ascribes the great change wrought in him to
the grace of God: Quod dignitati suae tribuere non potest tribuit gratiae Dei,
and agnoscit se alium esse personae de meriti sui indignitate, and alium per
gratiam Dei, Musc. in loc.
By the grace 1 Cor. 15. 10.
of God, I am what I am, and his grace which was bestowed on me, was not in
vain, 1 Timothy 1. 17.

However you may be troubled with variety of strong Tentations (as the Apostle
was) and you may 2 Cor. 12. 17.
have a Thorn in the flesh, even (...), (i. e.) immissus mihi a satan^* Grot.
the messenger Satan buffeting of you; yet if you wholly cast your self, and
rely upon the free grace of Christ tendered in the Gospel, you will find all
sorts of help in his merits, for justification, sanctification, and consolation
in this world, and for glorification in the world to come. It Is to be supposed
that (...), Hunc comparat sud^ ac paxillo: quemadmodum sudes praeacuti carnem
pungendo afficit, sic sit illius infestationibus veluti punctionibus
afflictatus. Musc. in Loc. 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. 1 John 17.
the thorn in the flesh, was some strong Tentation wherewith the Apostle was
assaulted, and he made haste to God in earnest prayers and supplications. This
was the right and only means to obtain cure: For the same wise God, who
exercised the Apostle with such trials, could only give a blessed issue out of
them all. You must after this example go and do likewise. For this thing (says
the Apostle) I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart: And he said unto
me, My grace is sufficient for thee. For my strength is made perfect in
weakness. You complain that you are defiled with sins, you must apply the Blood
of Christ (for it is cleansing blood) to your soul: The blood of Jesus Christ
his son cleanses us from all sin. You frequently complain that you are a great
sinner; for an answer to your complaints, I thus distinguish: There are two
sorts of sinners, viz. impenitent, and penitent sinners. You dare not say after
deliberate and composed thoughts upon heart-examination, that you would not
repent; neither, that you would not endeavor to repent; neither, that you do
not beg of God grace to repent. Your sensibleness of your sins, and mourning
for them, and complaining against your self, and your praying with the Apostle
to be delivered Romans 7. 24.
from the body of sin, plainly evidenceth that you are not an impenitent
sinner: And only impenitent sinners who live and dye in their sins, shall
perish: for (so says our Savior) Except ye repent, ye Luke 13. 3.
shall all likewise perish. But as for penitent brokenhearted sinners, such as
are affected with compunction of heart, and godly sorrow for sin, and are poor
in spirit, and sensible of their lost and undone condition as in themselves,
these have a peculiar invitation to come unto Jesus Christ: Matt. 9. 13.
For (says he) (...). (i. e.) Eos qui sibi justi videntur: quibus opponuntur
peccatores (i. e.) qui suorum peccatoru^ sensu vulnerati ad unam Dei
misericordiam confugiunt. Bulling. in loc
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Comfort your self
with the serious. meditation of those grounds of comfort before mentioned, and
make particular application of them to your own soul.

And now for a close of all, I shall be your remembrancer of some select
Scriptures suitable to your condition, (and O! that God would write them in the
Tables of your heart) which (through riches of mercy) have been my comfort and
support; and I hope that (through the blessing of God) they may be a support
and comfort unto you.

One Scripture is Romans 8. 5, But Romans 8. 5.
God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ
dyed for us.

A Second Scripture is Matt. 12. 20, Matt. 12. 20.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till
he send forth judgment unto victory.

A Third Scripture is Romans 3. Romans 3. 24, 25.
24, 25, Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins, that are past,
through the forbearance of God.

A Fourth Scripture is Heb. 7. 25, Heb. 7. 25.
Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

A Fifth Scripture (with which I 1 John 2. 1, 2.
shall conclude) is 1 John 2. 1, 2, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: And he is the propitiation for our
sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

These precious Truths of God ought to be digested by Prayer, Meditation, and
particular Application, and they will be (through the grace of God) as a stay
and a staff to your afflicted spirit. Remember (though you use the means) to
look above means, and beg help of God. As the Ancients used to hold the Plough
and pray; so you must apply your self to the means prescribed in the Word of
God, and keep close to Gods Ordinances; but above all, you must beg help from
the God of the Ordinances. Be conscientious and diligent in the use of the
means, but look through the means and above the means unto God. Persevere in
your duty, leave the success unto God, who in his own time (and that is best)
can speak comfort to you.

Thus you see what design I drive at, even in prescribing to you such
Directions as may be for the settling and quieting of your spirit. My hearts
desire and prayer to God for you is, That God, in mercy and love to your Soul
(and to any other in the like case), would imprint these things upon your heart
by the effectual operation of his holy Spirit.

I Remain yours in the service of your Faith, H. W.

FINIS.
Books Printed for; and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
ONE hundred of Select Sermons.

By Tho Horton.

Sermons on the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians. By Mr. J Daille,
Translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Thomas Goodwin's, and Dr. John Owen's
Epistles Recommendatory.

An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Mat. 4. and Peter's Sermon to
Cornelius; and circumspect walking. By Dr. Tho. Tailor.

A complete Martyrology, with Lives. By Sam. Clark.

Books Quarto.

The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration. By George Swinnock,
M. A.

Dr. ^ollins Sermons on the Canticl.

An Exposition on the six first Chapters of the Revelation. By Chapter Phelps.

The Saints Triumph over the last enemy, in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr.
James Janeway. By Not Vincent.

The vanity of man in his best estate, in a discourse on Psalm. 39. 5. at the
Funeral of the Lady Susanna Keate. By Richard Kidder, M. A.

The Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the principal errors of the Church of
Rome detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture, Preached by several Ministers
of the Gospel in or near London.

Dr. Wilds Letter of Thanks and Poems.

The Intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or the
particular Believing soul: in several Lectures on the whole second Chapter of
Canticles. By John Collins, D. D.

Octavo's.
Reading and Spelling made easy. By Tho. Lie.

Captives bound in Chains made free by Christ their Surety. By T. Doolittle.

Eighteen Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture. By William Whitaker.

The Saints care for Church Communion; declared in sundry Sermons, preached at
St. James Dukes place. By Zach. Crofton.

Cases of Conscience practically resolved. By John Norman.

The godly man's Ark, or a City of Refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mrs. Moors Evidences for Heaven. By Edmund Calamy.

The Almost Christian discovered, or (...) Professor tried and cast. By (...)


