Oliver Cromwells GHOST: OR OLD NOLL Newly Revived.
Roused from Infernal Caverns void of Light,
Where Traitors Souls keep an Eternal Night:
Through the Earths friendly Pores at last I come
To view the Fate of mangled Christendom.
Treason, and Blood, Ruin, and Usurpation,
Deceit, Hypocrisy, and Devastation;
Envy, Ambition, and untamed desire,
Still to gain more, still to be mounted higher:
Wars, Ianglings, Murders, and a Thousand more
Vices like these, you know were heretofore.
The only grateful Bantlings, which could find,
A kind Reception in my gloomy Mind --
-- But now alas I Am changed -- the Pondrous guilt
Of Treason, and the Sacred Blood I spilt;
Those crowds of Loyal Subjects I made groan,
Under pretense of strickt Religion,
When I my self, to speak the Truth, had none:
Too weighty for my struggling Soul did grow,
And pressed it downwards to the Shades below,
Where it these Twenty Years has Silent lain,
Tormented with Variety of Pain,
Too great for fleshly Mortals to sustain.
Nor had it budg'd as yet -- but that the Fame
Of Plots, Conspiracies, and Murders came
To the Infernal Gates so fast, that I,
For others Good, forgot my Misery:
And whilst the busy Demons were employed
In culling out a Bloody Regicide,
I bilkt my Keeper, and with wondrous Pain,
Once more I mount my Native Soil again;
Where to my Grief, more Villainies I view,
Than Heaven e're Pardoned, or than Hell e're knew.
Since Lucifer's like Rome's Destructive Pride,
Both Damned himself, and all his Imps beside:
Though old in Artful Wickedness I be,
Yet Rome, I now Resign the Wall to thee:
Thou in this single Plot, have now done more,
Than Mankind, helped by Hell, could do before.
What! was thy swelled Ambition grown so wide,
That naught but Kings could satisfy thy Pride?
Must Monarchs, whom the Heaven it self does prize,
Now become Morsels for thy gaping Vice.
Methought, though hot with Gluttony thou burn,
A Pious Justice might have served thy turn;
Especially when, (to content you more)
Spitted on's Sword, and Pickled in his Gore;
But now your aim we better understand,
He was the Whet -- you gaped for all the Land.
Strange Cormorant! that in her Monstrous Breast,
Could at one Meal three Butchered Lands digest.
Ye Powers! I thought my Countries Innocence,
(When in fierce Whilwinds you had born me hence)
And by the Power of your most just Command,
Restored the Scepter to the Owners hand)
Would have sufficient bin to Wall you free
From the Assaults of such an Enemy.
I little thought, when last I took my leave,
And sadly entered my unwelcome Grave,
That e're the Porphry Idol could command
So great a Friendship in our Native Land;
As by that means to hope to circumvent,
With black Design, both King and Government.
But yet take heed ye Romish Idiots,
That have a hand in these most Hellish Plots;
Who by your base contrivance, hope to bring
Ruin to Nations, Death unto a King
Beware, I say, by my Example, do,
For there is a God above does all things view:
Tho wrapped in Clouds amongst the Skies, he dwells,
Yet he discerns you in your closest Cells;
See's your Contrivances, and whilst you poor
Conceipted Traitors think your selves secure,
He your clandestine Plots does plainly view,
And will divulge them, and their Actors too.
Trust my Experience, one, who if you will
Believe, what all the World says of him still,
Had no small share of Pride, Ambition, Wit,
Courage and Conduct too to manage it.
By which I wrought my Cursed designs so high,
I could have matched my Brewers Family
With the best Blood in Britain. Right or wrong,
Or Life or Death, attended on my Tongue:
All the three Kingdoms truckled to my Will --
But what of this? -- I was a Traitor still.
Nay, so intemperate was my folly grown,
I boldly offered at the Sacred Crown;
Which though I mist, -- yet by a holy Cheat,
At last I gained to fill the tottering Seat;
And made Ten thousand Soldiers Armed, appear
With Roaring Guns, to plead my Title there.
Not doubting but that happy Seat should be
Transferred from me to my Posterity.
But all was insignificant, when Death
Unkindly Robbed me of Beloved Breath:
My Titles all forsook me, and my Race,
Instead of them, inherit my disgrace.
This is the Fate of Traitors here; but know,
That could you think what they endure below,
I Am sure you would be Loyal; but the Pope
By prating Jesuits, has so raised your hope,
That I in vain those Tortures now should tell,
You Will know them when I meet you there -- Farewell.
R. W. D. D.


