TREATISE COLLECTED OUT OF the Statutes of this Commonwealth, and according to
common experience of the Laws, Concerning THE OFFICE AND AUTHORITIES OF
CORONERS AND SHERIFES.

Together with An easy and plain method for the keeping of a Court Leet,
Court Baron, and Hundred Court, etc.

By JOHN WILKINSON of Bernards Inn, Gent.

To which is added the return of writts by John Kitchen E sq Now all published
in English.

London, Printed for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, R. Best,and G. Bedell and are to be
sold at their shopps in Fleetstreet and Grayes In-Gate. 1651.

To the Courteous Reader.
WHereas many wise and learned men have written of things that they have
gathered by reading, I do publish what I have practiced, warranted by
authorities in Law. And because the end of writing books is to benefit others,
I know it will be acceptable to all that are not deeply studied, to make u se
of these things which I have collected: neither can it offend the best learned,
to s ee that plainly set out, as it were by demons tration: which they by
learning already understand.

The Office of a Coroner, the Office and duty of a Sheriff, and the Office of
a Steward, and and the manner of keeping of Courts in Hundreds, Leetes,
Baronies, are daily exercised by many, yet few know the true forms that are to
be kept in keeping of those Courts: For their sakes therefore I have
undertaken this pains, and dare be bold to say, that they shall not much err,
if they follow what is here in this Book set down, for direction for them
herein. To which I have added the Return of writts, Originally written by the
learned John KitchinEsquier, as generally useful, as any of the former Tracts
(which with much care and diligence, are now all Translated into English, for
thine, and the public good. If thou find in this work any small errors,
be pleased to excuse it, being the first that has adventured in this
untrodden path: And your good acceptance may further encourage me to continue

Your faithful Servant, J.W.

A COMPENDIOUS TREATISE, WHEREIN is set forth the Office and authority of a
CORONER.
THE FIRST BOOK.
A Coroner is an ancient Officer of this common- wealth, and ordained to be a
principal preserver of the Peace, and to carry the Records of the Pleas of the
capital Office of the upper Bench, and of his own view, and of abjurations,
outlawries, appeals, etc. And this definition of him is given by Britton an
ancient writer, fol. 3. with the which agrees the book de tit Coron in Fitz.
Not Br. page 186. where he amplifieth his power more largely, viz. That he
should carry Records of his own view, Abjurations, Outlawries, Appeals,
accusements of thieves done before him, and of all non suits in appeals, and
of all other things done in the County, that appertain to the coroners office:
and also in the court of freemen, which have franchises of infangtheef, etc.
And in the presence of the Coroner shall all appeals of Robbery and Larceny
be framed. The se things do declare the office of a Coroner to be an Office
of trust, and of great authority: and for that cause it is requisite that it be
committed to a wise man, and of good behavior, as it was well perceived by our
ancient Fathers and predecessors, and chiefly by those that made the Statute
at Westminster the 1. chp. 10. which rehear seth, for that that people of small
condition, and not of the wisest, be now lately cho sen to the office of
Coroners, and much meeter it were, that wise men, loyal, and sage, should
intermeddle with that office, It is provided, that through all Counties be
chosen s ufficient men to be Coroners, of the most loyal and most s agest
Knights, which best know, can or will attend to that office, and that they
lawfully keep and present the pleas of the Capital office of the upper Bench:
And that the Sherifes have counter-rolles of the Coroners, as well of Appeals
as of Inquests concerning Attachments or other matters appertaining to that
office. And that no coroner shall demand any thing, or take any thing to execute
his office, upon pain of a great forfeiture to the Keepers of the liberty of
England by authority of Parliament to the u se of the commonwealth.

The Statute commits this Office to Knights, and not to any others, and
therefore it was held to be a maine cause to remove and discharge a coroner
from his office, if he be not a Knight: but Master Fitzherbet in his Natura
brevium in his writ de Coronator. eligend would not allow the s ame for a
sufficient cause at this day, alleging; That those words were put into the
Statute, to the intent that a Coroner should have sufficient within the county
to answer for all that he does or ought to do by his said office.

Also this Statute requires such a Coroner as can, will, and may attend to
execute the said office. And therefore if such a Coroner be elected and chsen as
cannot, will not, nor may not attend the execution of the same office, he is to
be removed and dis charged by Writ from the same office: and the cause of his
not attendance or ins ufficiency must be rehearsed in the writ, viz. that he
is occupied in other of the commonwealths affairs, or that he is not in
health, or aged, or unapt for the same Office, or that he is insufficient in
lands, or that he has the palsy, or that his abode is in the uttermost parts
of the county, or that he is nominated Sheriff, or Ranger of a Forest: but if
any of these causes be untrue, and the Coroner thereby discharged of his office
by a false suggestion, Then he may if he will go to the Chancery, and there
by petition pray a Commission to inquire of this false suggestion, the which if
it be found, and returned to the Chancery, then the Keepers of the Liberty of
England by the authority of the Parliament may grant a Supersedeas to the
Sheriff of that County, that he remove not the said Coroner from his office,
and if he be removed before the Supersedeas come, then that he permit the
Coroner removed to execute his office as he did before his removal, as it
appears in Master Fitzh. Not. Bre. in and by the writs de Coron. elegendo,
and de Electione viridariorum.

But it shall be far more commendable for him that is chosen a Coroner, that
if he perceive any of the said impediments to be in himself, that he then do
purchase a Writ to discharge himself from the s aid office, which Writ he
shall find in the Register, fol. 177.

This Statute also wills that no Coroner shall take any thing for doing of
his office, etc. for this purpose, that he wholly may be at liberty to do and
execute Justice and Right, and therefore within twelve years after there was a
Statute made to punish that corruption and extortion, which is called Statutum
Exoniae, made the fourteenth year of E. 1. which you shall find in the book
called s ecunda pars veterum Statutorum, by the which also it appears that a
Coroner ought to take nothing for executing of his office, which I find not
altered by any Statute until 3 H. 7. cap. 1. which gives him in murder 13. s.
4. d. of the goods of the murderer, if he have any goods, but if he have none,
then the Coroner is to have his Fee by amercing of the village for suffering
the Murderer to escape, and if any particular person shall be found guilty of
s uch escape, the Coroner has power to enquire thereof by the same Statute.

But I find, tit Cor. in Fitz. fol. 321. and 371. that a Coroner has a Fee
belonging to his office, viz. of every Visne one penny, when they appear
before the Justices of Air.

But that Fee is not repugnant to the Statute of West. 1. for he receives not
the same to do his office, but as a right due to him though that he executes
no part of his office, etc.

Also the Statute of 1 H. 8. cap. 7. prohibiteth a Coroner to take any thing
for doing of his office, upon pain of 40. s. for every default.

And also upon like penalty, where he gives not his attendance when he is sent
for and required to make Inquisition upon the death of any dead corpse, etc.

And since the Stat. of Westminster the first, it was ordained and enacted by a
Statute made An 14. Ed. 3. cap. 7. that no Coroner be chosen if he have not
lands sufficient in the same County wherewith he may answer all manner of
people. This Statute is in the negative, and therefore the not s atisfying of
the same Statute, is good cause to remove him from his office, by the Writ
before remembered, the which Writ declares how he shall be said, to be
sufficient, and in what sort the same shall be examined, viz. if he have lands
in the county upon the which he may dwell agreeable to his degree, for the
exercising of the same Office.

Also after by another Statute made anno 28 Ed.3. cap. 6. it was enacted, That
all Coroners of every County should be chosen in the open Counties by the
Freeholders of the said county, of the most convenientest and most loyalst
people that may be found in the said Counties, to execute the said Office:
always saving to the Keepers of the Liberty of England by authority of the
Parliament, to the use of the Commonwealth, and other Lords their Seigniories
and Franchises.

And note, that when a Coroner is chosen, he shall remain Officer so long as
he behave himself well therein and is not changeable every year, as the
Sherifes and Escheators are, quoth vid. Hill 4 E. fol. 44.

Also when he is elected, the Sheriff of the same County, or his Undersherife,
mus t give him his oath thus as follows.

His Oath for the due execution of his Office.
YOu shall swear that you well and truly shall s erve the commonwealth in the
office of a Coroner, and as one of the Commonwealths Coroners of this County of
Southampton, and therein you shall diligently and truly do and accomplish all
and every thing and things appertaining to your Office, after the best of your
cunning, wit, and power, both for the Commonwealths profit, and the good of the
inhabitants within the said County, taking such fees as you ought to take by
the Laws and Statutes of this Weal public, and not otherwise. So help you
God, and the holy contents of this book. And so let him kis se the book to
affirm his Oath.

First, when he has notice to take the view of the body of any person slain
either with his will or against his will, he must then make his precept to the
Con stables and Tythingmen of the Hundred where the party lies dead, to summon
a Jury to appear before him at a day and a place certain, to enquire thereof
upon a pain of 40. s. before remembered. And the form of his Precept is thus:
viz.

South.
By virtue of mine office, these are in the Keepers of the Liberty of England by
the Authority of Parliament name, to will and require you immediately upon the
receipt hereof to summon and warn 24 able and sufficient men to be and appear
before me at A. the 10. day of February next coming after the date hereof, or
to morrow being Tuesday the 10 day of February at the Townhall there, if there
be any, or at any other place certain, then and there to do and execute such
things as on the Commonwealths behalf shall be given them in charge, whereof
fail you not, as you and every of you will answer the contrary at your perils.
Dated under my hand and seal this ninth of February, ann Dom. 1638.

Per me Io. W. unum Coron. Reipub. com. prad.

To the Constables and Tithingmen of the Hundred of B. in this behalf, jointly
and severally greeting.

ANd when he comes to the place appointed, he must then call for the
Constable and Tythingmen to whom he did direct his warrant for their return,
and when he has that, then he must cause one of them, or some other for them
to make three proclamations or Oyes, and call the Jury thus: You good men which
be returned to appear here this present time, to enquire for the Keepers of
the Liberty of England by authority of Parliament, answer to your names as you
s hall be called, every man at the first call, upon pain and peril that may
fall thereon. This done, when you have a full Jury of 14. or 15. call the
foreman to the Book, and swear him thus; You shall duly enquire, and true
presentment make of such things as s hall be given you in charge, according to
your evidence, so help you God, and the contents of that Book. Then call the
rest of the Jury, and swear them by four at once, and swear them thus.

ALL such Oath as A.B. your Foreman has taken before you on his part, you and
every one of you shall well and truly observe and keep on your parts, so God
you help, and the contents of that book. And when they are all thus sworn, call
them again, and let the Crier count them after you, and then bid them s tand
together and hear their charge.

Then begin your Charge thus.

The Charge.
SIrs, you that be sworn, you shall understand what the cause of our meeting
is here now at this present, It is to inquire and present or find, how A.B.
came to his death: for when any man, woman, or child do come to to their death
by any casualty, or untimely means, then the Keepers of the Liberty of England
by authority of Parliament have appointed Coroners in every County to inquire
thereof by the oaths of men: And therefore by virtue of mine Office, I have
caused you to be called hither, and have impannelled and sworn you to that
purpos e, to the end that the Keepers of the Liberty of England aforesaid, and
their immediate Officers may be truly certified how and by what means a
member of this Commonwealth is lo st: Therefore now your charge is, to inquire
how and by what means the said A.B. came to his death, that a true record may
be made thereof; If he was slain in fight, then you must inquire by whom,
when, and where, and in what manner, and with what weapon, as near as you can,
and what goods, chattells, lands or hereditaments the offender had at the time
of the fact committed, or at any time sithence, and whether he be fled for
the same or no; For I must tell you, that Coroners have authority to enquire by
their Office of all manner of homicids and s laughters of men, especially above
all other things, and that by the oaths of men s uper visum Corporis, and not
otherwise: And these homicides and slaughters of men are of diverse kinds or
degrees, but they are all comprehended within two kinds, viz. spiritual
homicide, and corporal homicide: the first is the slaughter and des truction
of the soul, which is Gods part, if he dye in the faith of Christ: and the
other is the slaughter of the body, which is the Commonwealths part, that must
take his end by the due execution of Justice for the offense committed against
the Law: and a corporal homicide is twofold, that is to say, Lingua, and
facto, Tongue and Fact; Lingua, by the Tongue is three fold, viz. in
commanding, in giving of counsel, and in desending: Facto, by Fact, is four
fold, viz. in execution of Justice, Homicide willingly done, Homicide done by
chance, and Homicide done by necessity: Homicide done by Justice, is when a man
is justly condemned and executed for his offense: Homicide willingly done, is
either murder, or at the least man's laughter: Homicide done by chance, is by
some accidental means, as where one is killed by casting of a stone unawares,
or shooting of an arrow, or such like, and kills one against the will or
intent of him that casts or shoots. And Homicide of necessity is when a man
cannot choose but he must either kill or be killed, and that will be taken to be
in his own defense: then there is Homicide inevitable for the advancement of
Jus tice; And that is where a Sheriff or other officer by warrant pursues a
Felon which will not obey or yield himself, but offers violence, and so is
killed in apprehending, or where a man kills a thief which would rob him: In
these cases he which commits such Homicide shall be acquitted, and neither
lose life, lands, or goods for the same. There are other Homicides which are no
Felony, and that is where a mad man either kills hims elfe or any other person
when he is mad, or where a child is killed in the mothers belly not in rerum
natura, and that for two causes, viz. one because it had not the name of
Baptism, and the other because it cannot be certainly known whether the
mother killed it by some other means or no; but if an Infant of nine years old
kill a man, woman, or child, if such Infant then knew good from evil, it is
felony in such an Infant, and that will be well known and perceived by the
answer of such an Infant to such que stions as may be demanded of him: or here
also if a man take upon him to be a Phys itian or a Surgeon, and not allowed to
use and practice such faculty, if he take upon him a cure which dies under his
hands by his ignorance, it is held to be Felony in such Phys itian or Surgeon.
Also if a man keep a dangerous beast, as a Bull, a Bear, a Dog, or such like,
he knowing them to be dangerous, and yet does not keep them tied, but wilfully
suffers such beasts to go at large without a keeper, if such beas t kill a
man, woman, or child, it is held to be Felony in the owner of such Beast: Also
there is another kind of Homicide, which is a kind of Murder called Felo de
se,and that is where one hangs, or kills, or drownes himself for lack of
grace: for as it is Murder and Felony for one man willingly and wilfully to
kill another; so likewise it is murder and felony for a man to kill or drown
him self willingly and wilfully, yet they are not both in one case and
predicament; for the first does forfeite by that fact both his lands, and his
goods, and the other forfeites but goods and chattels, and no lands. There is
also another kind of Homicide, not done by man, but by casual means, and that
is called Homicide by misadventure or misfortune, by a Horse, or a Cart, or a
Bough of a tree, or such like: and in this case, omne quod movet cum eo quod
occidit hominem deodand est Reipublicae; every thing that moves with that
which kills a man is Deodan, unless the Keepers of the Liberty of England by
authority of Parliament have formerly granted the same away to some Lord of a
Liberty, as is commonly done, then if it happen to be within such liberty, it
belongs to the Lord of the Liberty. But if any of these Homicides fall out to
be wilful Murder, which is a mo s t bloody and a crying sin, and cannot be
too severely punished, and therefore by the Law, the offender herein ought to
lose both life, lands, and goods, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.
And if Manslaughter, if the offender can read well, then he may in favor of
life, by the Keepers of the Liberty of England aforesaid mercy, have the
benefit of his Clergy, and so save his life, but he shall lose and forfeite
both his lands and goods, and yet the Law of God not therein satisfied: The
goods mu st be found, appraised, and valued, of such offenders, and left in the
Township or Village where s uch offender dwells, by them safely to be kept,
until the offender be acquitted or convicted by due course of Law; in the mean
time the offender must be maintained with his goods, so as he may be kept alive
to answer his fact, and what shall remain when he is convicted, those to whom
such goods do belong by the Law must have them, and not before, and thereof di
scharge the Township or Village which had the custody of such goods. And as for
the offenders Free land, if he have any, immediately after conviction, the
Keepers of the Liberty of England by authority of Parliament to the use of the
Commonwealth mu st have annum, diem, and vastum therein, and after the Lord of
whom it is holden shall have it as an Escheat. And thus having dis coursed at
large of all these things incident to my office for your instruction, I will
make an end and trouble you no more at this time: and so you s hall hear your
evidence.

Then if the evidence be ready, they must be called and sworn thus.

THe evidence that you shall give to this enquest, shall be the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God, and the contents of
this book. And if the evidence be not ready, then you must appoint the Jury a
day and a place to come to you to receive their evidence, and lest they or any
of them should fail to come to the plac at the time appointed, you may bind
them by recognisance in x. li. or xx. li. a piece, and in the mean time you
may send your Warrant for the witnesses to come before you to be examined, and
to deliver their knowledge concerning the matter in question, and be sure to
take their examinations in writing under their hands, and if it be about the
trial of any man's life, then you must bind over all the witnesses in xx. li. a
piece at the lea st, to appear at the next Affises then following, to deliver
their knowledge therein viva voce, if they shall be thereunto required.

The form of which Recognisance is thus;

South.
The third day of October, etc. the year, etc. James S. of B. in the County
aforesaid, acknowledges himself to owe, etc. under condition, etc.
That if the said I.S. do personally appear before the Justices of Assise and
Goal delivery, at the next Assizes to be holden at the Castle of W. for the
said County, and then and there deliver and set forth his knowledge touching
the death of A.B. and do not depart thence without license of the said Court.
That then this present Recognisance to be void and of none effect, or else the
same to stand, remain, and continue in force, s trength, and virtue.

Taken and acknowledged the third day of October in the year 1617. aforesaid
before me J.W.Gent. one of the Coroners of the county aforesaid. J.W.

Of wilful Murder.
This office is the highest and greatest offense that a Coroner is to meddle
withal by his office, and it is defined by Bracton to be secret killing of
strangers and men known, none knowing or seeing it besides the murderer and
his aiders, so that no Hue-and-cry of the County presently follow, etc. And so
you may s ee how that Englechery, that is, that he is English, etc. was
presented in ancient time until the fourteenth year of E. 3. At which titme
by a Statute made the 14. Edward 3. cap. 4. the presentment of Englechery was
wholly abrogated and adnulled, the letter of which Statute is thus, viz.

Item, for that there are many mischiefs happened in many countries in England,
which knew not how to present Englechery, for which cau se the Commons of the
Counties oftentimes were before the Justices in Air amerced, to the great
grievance of the people; It is therefore agreed that at no time hereafter any
Justice of any Air shall put any article or opposition presenting Englechery
to the Commons of the Counties, nor against any of them. But that for ever
Englechery and the pre s entment thereof to be wholly omitted and made void; so
that none for this cause be from henceforth impeached: By the words of this
Statute it appears, that the presentment of Englechery was so diverse by the
diverse cus tomes of several countries, that the countries knew not well how to
satisfy the Justices in the presenting thereof, but for the undue presenting
thereof, they were often amerced and sore grieved: And yet Bracton s aith,
Because in diverse Countries Englechery is differently pres ented in every Eire,
the custom of presenting it is to be inquired from the beginning. Als o he
puts there in his Book many things which excus eth the Country by the
Common Law from that amerciament or payment of lxvj. marks, for he says in
this manner, That is weighed sometime, etc. And that also was the common Law
appears in Britton fol. 15. which agrees throughout with that which Bracton
has here written, the which common Law is changed as I have said before by the
said Statute made in the 14. year of E. 3. wherefore a man at this day may
define murder in other manner than Bracton and Brittondid, viz. It is murder
when any man of malice prepenced kills another fellonious ly, having no
regard whether he kill him openly or secretly, or whether he be an Englishman
or not, so that he live in the Weal public under the Parliaments
protection, and Homicide that is done in such manner is called Murder at this
day; for the name of Murder was not at any time changed, but the Law retained
the same continually, for the hainousnes of the crime, to put a difference
between homicide Chance-medley and Murder: And therefore if a man be indicted
of Murder, at this day, a pardon of all Felonies will not help him, and that
is by the Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 1. the letter whereof you may see hereafter:
And also the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. cap. 12. which ins ueth, videlicet. Provided
also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all wilful killing by
poisoning of any person or persons that at any time hereafter shall be done,
perpetrated or committed, shall be adjudged, taken, and deemed wilful Murder
of malice prepenced, and that the offenders therein, their ayders, abettors,
procurers, and counselors shall s uffer death, and forfeite in every behalf,
as in other cases of wilful murder of malice prepenced.

Of Manslaughter.
Manslaughter is where one kills another having no malice prepenced so to do,
yet it is felony, and he s hall lose his lands and goods, and his life too, if
he cannot read well, as is said before in the charge: The which thing if a mad
man do, it is no felony in him, nor he shall not be arraigned for it, when he
is of good memory, as it appears in Fitzh. fol. 33. and 21 Hen. 7. tamen in
the Eyres of Northampton in 3 E. 3. It appears there, that he should purchase
his pardon of course e: And with that agrees 26. li. ass. And the same Law
which serves for a man lunatic, serves for a man that is deaf, and dumb,
as ye may find in the same Plea. And if one of the age of 12 years or more,
kill another, that is Felony: the same Law is if he be but nine years old at
the time of the killing; so that it may be perceived that he understands good
from evil, as by his excuse, or by any act done s ince the killing, videlicet,
in hiding the dead corpse in any secret place to the intent it should not be
found and known, Because in s uch ca se malice supplies age. 3 H. 7. and tit
coron 51. And there they respited execution of him to the intent they might
procure his pardon. And Bract. said in those e cases of Lunaticks, and of the
infant, one the want of judgment s aves, the other the weakness of fact
excuses.

And if a Surgeon or a Phys itian allowed, have one in cure, which dies
presently after, or within a short time after, that is no Felony, for that he
did nothing feloniously: but if he killed him with Physic or Surgery, it was
done against his will, quod vide titulo Coronae 163. et Britton fol. 14. c.
Contr.

Also if a man have a Bull, a Bear, or a Dog, which is accus tomed to do
hurt, and his master or owner well knowing the s ame, yet do not tie him but
suffer him to go at large, and being so at large, he kills a man, this is
held by Fitzherbert, 311. to be Felony in the owner of the beast, by reason of
the sufferance, for thereby the owner seems to have a will to kill: And note
that in ancient time, the will was so material, that the same was taken for
the fact, ut patet titulo 1. E. 3. where one compassing the death of another,
wounds him so grievously that he leaves him for dead, and afterward flies,
and the man wounded reviveth: And yet notwithstanding, it was then adjudged to
be felony, insomuch as the will appears to have killed him; the will shall
be taken for the deed. And with the same agrees Bracton,who says, In things
ill done, the will, not the end is looked upon, not material whether any man
kills, or be the cause of death. But this Law is not now in force, for he must
be dead indeed before it be adjudged Felony. And if a man hurt another with an
intent to beat him, but not to kill him, yet notwithstanding if he die of such
beating, it is felony in him that so did beat him, wherefore at this day a man
may convert the text to Bractons opinion, and say, The end in things ill done,
not the will alone is looked upon, as in the case next before, etc. vide titulo
memorato, where for the malicious words of a woman 2. men fought, and the one
killed the other, the woman in this case was arraigned of the death of him that
was slain: The like case if three men go together to make a dissame, and one
of the se three does kill a man, the other two in this case are taken to be
principal Felons, and yet they did it not of any evil will, but only came in
one company together, quod vide titulo Fitz. 305. So that many cases may be
found, where the end is looked upon, not the will only, as before is said;
wherefore to conclude, we may say, that the will, unles se the fact ensues the
same, makes no offense at this day, but in treason given by Statute, etc.

It is a general opinion, and commonly agreed upon, that if a man have
judgment to be hanged, and commandment given to the Sheriff to see execution
done according to the judgment, if the Sheriff after of his own authority do
behead the prisoner which was appointed to be hanged, then this is felony in
the Sheriff, because the order of the Judgment is not observed, in putting the
prisoner to death. The same Law is, if one that is not the Sheriff will kill a
prisoner as he is going to the gallows to be hanged, of his own head, and
authority, quod vide 35 H. 6. And for this Felony the wife of the prisoner may
have an appeal against him that killed her husband: But Scrope is of opinion
that it s hall be otherwise, if he that is killed be attainted by outlawry,
as it appears 2 E. 3. where he that is indicted alleges, that he for whose
death he is indicted was and is outlawed of Felony, Scrope, It may be that that
outlawry is reversed, or that he had his charter of pardon, wherefore he mu st
make search and send into the Chancery, to understand there if he had a charter
of pardon, and in the mean time he shall be let to bail till a certain day
that the truth be known; and he said further, that if he found that the
outlawry was not reversed, nor that the prisoner had not any charter of pardon,
that that then the def. shall not answer any further but be discharged of the
Indictment: Also it seems to be lawful for any to kill a man attainted in a
Praemunire, because the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. cap. 21. de producionibus wills
that a man do against them, as again st the enemies of the Weal public
without any Impeachment, etc.

Of homicide done by necessity inevitable justifiable.
A Sherifes Bailife, or any other Officer that has warrant to arrest any man
that is indicted for Felony, may justify the killing of him, if he will not
suffer himself to be arrested, but in such sort stands in his defense, that
the Officer cannot arrest him without killing of him, in this case the Officer
shall be discharged without suing forth of his pardon of course, ut patet22.
lib. Ass. and 22. E. 3. where Thorpe says, that any man may take and arrest a
thief, and if he will not yield, but stand in defense of himself, or else
fly, in such case he may kill him without blame, ergo he that has no warrant
as well as he that has a warrant, by this authority may kill and justify. And
there he recites, that where a Jailer came to the Jail with a Lanthorn in his
hand, to see his prisoners, which had broken their Irons, and standing all
ready to have killed him, they beat him, and wounded him very s ore, but
killed him not: and he having a hatcher in his hand, therewith he killed three
of the pri soners, and being called in question for it, was discharged thereof,
for it was adjudged by all the Council, that the Jailer had done well, etc.
And therefore note ye, as a man may justify the killing of a man before an
arrest, even so he may jus tifie the same after an arrest, so that the same do
arise upon an inevitable nece ssity, as before is said. And therefore one is
arres ted of Felony, and as he is carrying to the Gaol he makes debate and
flies, and the other in such sort pursues him, that he cannot take him again
without killing of him: this manner of killing is justifiable, quoth vide 3. E. 3,
etc. And the ca se is there, That a man did fly to a Church for felony, and
after in the night he went from thence, and the village that did watch him in
the Church did pur sue him, and killed him, for that he would not yield
himself, and it was allowed as well done, tamen in codem tituto 3. Ed 3. Lowth
does doubt of this killing, in that it may be that he that was arrested was nor
guilty of the felony, although he was indicted thereof; and nothing like the
case where one is pursued upon a robbery done, and the thief killed. But by
the book aforesaid it appears that such killing is not felony, nor that any
thing s hall be forfeit for the same, nor that any pardon is needful, sed vide
ibid. fol.344. that in that case it is finable, and a fine of xl. s. was paid
for the same, sed quaer. whether the same was for the killing, or for the
escape. And note, that if he which kills another by reason of any matter
inevitable ut s upra to be found before him by rea son of any jurisdiction that
he has to inquire of Felonies, he shall not be di scharged upon such
indictment found, until such time as he be arraigned upon the s ame, and the
matter also found by verdict, ut patet ejusdem titulo, for that he himself
was Judge thereof. Otherwise it is if the finding of the same be before other
Commissioners, vide le Statute de malefactoribus in parcis, made the one and
twentieth year of Ed. 1. which gives power to Forresters, Parkers, and
Vvarrenners to kill the offenders if they will not be justified, etc.

Homicide in a defending of a man's house and his goods against thieves, lawful
and justifiable for the urgent necessity thereof.
As for example: Many do come to burn my house, my self being within the
same, and they compass about the hou se, but they burn it not; and I shoot
out of the same house and kill one of them, this is not felony, ut patet 26.
lib. Ass.The same law is if they come to my house and rob me, and my boy or my
man that is with me in my house kills one of them, quod vide in Fitzh. ritulo
Coron 3 E. 3. per Lowth and ibidem p. 505. where it was presented that a man
had killed another in his own hou se defending himself, and it was demanded of
those that made the presentment, if he that was so slain did come to rob
him, for in that case one man might kill another, though that it be not in
defense of himself, etc. And in all such like cases a man shall go quit
without any forfeiture, or without expecting any pardon, in that my house is
unto me as my Castle, out of which the Law will not constrain me to fly, etc.
The same Law is, if one come unto me when I am out of my hou se, and will rob
me, wherefore I kill him: for in 26. lib. Ass.the case was that a thief
assailed a man in his ship, and he purs ued him so hardly, that the man killed
him, and generally it was affirmed, that the man s hold be discharged and quit
without pardon. And note well this latter book, for that makes express
mention that he shall go quit without pardon; but the other books speak
nothing neither of pardon, nor yet of the sorfeiture; wherefore it may be
doubtful to some, whether he shall forfeit his goods, and whether it shall be
needful to have a pardon or not, and therefore to take away all doubts, a
Statute was made Ann24. H. 8. the letter whereof is this, Forasmuch as it has
been in question and ambiguity, that if any evil disposed person or persons
do attempt seloniously to rob or murder: and so see the Statute at large,
that it is lawful to kill him.

How necessity shall be interpreted in Homicide in defense of ones self
Note, that the necessity ought to be so great, that it ought to be esteemed
not avoydable, or otherwis e he shall not be excused, for in this case ye have
not to do with, as in the case before, but with a just man. And whether the
person that is so killed, or the person that does kill, does begin the
affray, it is not material, but the whole matter consists in the necessity
inevitable, without which the killing by any means is not excusable: wherefore
to make a definition of Homicide done in a man's own defense, we must say, that
properly it is when A. does make an affray upon B.and hurts him, and A.
flies as much as he can for safeguard of his life, so that he is come to a
strait, beyond the which he cannot fly, and A. continues, whereby B hurts
and kills him: this is called Homicide in a man's own defense. For if B. might
have avoided the same and did not, but when A. had hurt him, he then had hurt
A. again even to death, then was it manslaughter, and so felony in B. ut patet
in Fitzh. 226. But when A. hurts B.B. hurts him again but not deadly, and
afterward B flies, ut supra, and A. pursues him till that he comes into a
strait ut s upra, and then B.does kill him, that is not felony, but in his
own defense. And s o ye may note, that although B. gave to A.diverse wounds,
that is not material, because he flies from him as much as he can before he
gives to A. the deadly wound. And that ye may see in les Eyres of North. etc.
3 E. 3. And Bracton has a case for the confirmation of this Law, Of Law it is,
that what a man does for the safety of his body, he shall be esteemed to do
justly. And note, that it appears before in 43. li. ass. before noted. And it
is not a sufficient verdict to say that the pri sooner killed another in his
own defense, but they ought to show the matter, es pecially in what manner it
was done. And although it be specially found upon the indictment, yet
notwithstanding he shall not thereby be dis charged until he have purchased a
charter of pardon for the same, the which is a confession by amplification of
the indictment, or else otherwise wholly to estrange himself from the fact,
and to plead not guilty, and so to be found. And this is so done to the intent
to induce the forfeiture of his goods, being forfeite by the same offense, ut
patet 4 H. 7. And where the Statute of Glouce st. cap. 9. says, that he ought
to put himself upon an Enquest for good and evil, that it is to be understood
when he is indicted of Murder, or Homicide, and not where in the indictment the
special matter is s ound; for to such an indictment of Murder or Homicide, it
ought to be pleaded not guilty; for to plead the special matter, viz. that he
killed him in his own defense, it is no plea, in that it should be as a
justification; whereas such kind of Homicide is not in any manner justifiable,
wherefore he ought to plead not guilty, and then that s peciall matter found by
verdict shall give him advantage, etc. Contrariwise it is in Tree spasse, for
there the party shall not take advantage of a justification found by verdict,
if it be not pleaded by the party. And so note, that he shall not be dis
charged of this special matter, till such time as he has purchase ed his
pardon, or else be acquitted thereof by verdict: and then his discharge shall
be in this manner, viz. if he require to purchase his pardon, he shall first
be letten to Mainprise, and then he shall sue forth his Writ of Certiorari
directed to the Judges of A s sise, before whom the indictment lies, to
certify the Record to the Lords Commissioners of the great Seal of England,
who will make him a Charter of pardon, in such a ca se of course. And for the
se matters vide tit. 44 Ed.3.15. E. 3.15. and 3 E. 3. where it is said, that
when a man is acquitted before the Judges of Assise, of the death of a man in
his own defense, he shall have a Writ from the chief Jus tice, within which
shall be contained the whole Record of his acquitall, to the Commissioners, who
will make his Charter of pardon. And note ye before, that in the Eyres of
Northampton the Jury did find that he fled for the Felony, for which cause he
shall forfeite his goods, quasi diceret,that he should not forfeite his goods
unles se such a flying away had been found; but the Law is not so as it
appears. 44. and 15. Ed. 3. and 1 H.7. before noted, wherefore we are to
think, that the inquiry of a flying was surplus age and void, etc And consider
well the words of the Statute of Gloucester,which be these; It is ordered and
agreed, that hereafter no Writ shall issue out of the Chancery to enquire for
the death of a man, if a man has killed another by misadventure, or in his
own defense; or in any other manner without Felony, but he shall be
imprisoned until the coming of the Justices of Gaole-delivery, if he cannot
find pledges for his appearance before them, and then he shall put himself to
his trial by the country de bono and malo. And if it be sound by the country
that he did the same in his own defense, or by mis adventure, then the Justices
of Ass. are to certify the Keepers of the Liberty of England by authority of
Parliament thereof into the Chancery, and from thence he shall have his pardon
of grace. This Statute makes mention of Justices errant, and of Ju stices of
Gaole-delivery: wherefore it seems that if any be indicted before them, that
he killed one in his own defense, that that Indictment is as good as if the
same had been found before the Coroner, upon the view of the dead body,
otherwise it is if such Indictment be found before Justices of P. for that they
have not any authority to to take any such indictment. And note, that it
appears 44. E. 3. before cited, that there is one ca se where one shall be
killed by Chancemedly, and yet he that kills him shall not forfeite any
thing; As if A. strikes B. to the ground, and thereupon A. draws his knife
to kill B. and B. lying upon the ground draws his own knife, and A. is so
hasty to kill B. that he choppeth himself upon the knife which B. had in his
hand, and so A. was slain. And it was adjudged in this ca s e, that the said
B. was not culpable of the death of A. nor shall forfeite his goods, because A.
in a manner killed himself, etc. And as it is in the Eyres of North. before
page 286. and 297. there is a case not much unlike to this case, which has a
contrary judgment, and yet if collation between them be made, ye shall find
that they are not both alike, for there he did not lie upon the ground, but
stood upon his feet, insomuch that he might have made other defense for the s
aving of his life then the other could that did lie upon the ground. And the
case there was this, viz. A. did s trike B. and B did fly till that he came
to a strait, as it is before s aid, and then B. perceiving that A. would kill
him, did hold a pitchforke between him and A. and A. was so fierce that he
ran upon the pitchforke, and so was slain; and yet notwiths tanding this
matter, B. was put to purchase his pardon of course, and bes ides forfeited his
goods, etc.

Homicide by misadventure or misfortune
And that is, if a man without any evil intent cast a stone or shoot an arrow
whereby one is hurt unawares and slain, going to the market or about any other
necessary and lawful business e, this manner of killing is Homicide by
misadventure, for the which the offender shall have his pardon of course in the
like sort as before in the case where a man shall have it for killing of a man
in his own defense. And that is by the said Statute of Gloc. ut patet 3. E. 3.
and he shall forfeit his goods, as before in the case of killing a man in his
own defense, vide the Statute of Marlebridge cap. 15. that says, Misfortune
hereafter before the Justices shall not be adjudged Murder, Murder is to be
taken only of those that are killed by Felony. By which Statute it appears,
that misadventure by the Common Law was adjudged for Murder; But that ought to
be with a dis tinction which Bracton hereafter has made, That is to say, where
one has done a thing lawful and where not, for if he have done an unlawful
thing, and if any misadventure do thereof ensue, whereby any one is slain,
that is Felony at this day, if it be not Murder; And therefore if A. strike B.
and C. comes between them to part them, and is deadly wounded by the said A.
or B. without any evil intent, yet notwithstanding if C. upon that hurt do dye
within a year and a day next after such hurt given, it is Felony in him which
hurt C. and not a misadventure, for that the fact which A.and B. did was
unlawful, ut pat tit Coron 22. libr. Ass. And if A. and B. did intend one to
kill the other, then it is Felony in them both, ut pat. 22. Ed.3. And note that
the same order is to be observed in pleading the verdict, forfeiture, and
pardon of one that kills any by misadventure as is aforesaid, to be of one
that kills another in his own defense, and the said Statute of Gloc.
extends as well to the one as to the other.

Homicide called Felo de se^
Bracton defines felo de se in this manner, viz. in the s ame manner that a
man may commit Felony by killing another, may he commit Felony by killing
himself, if any man taken for some crime done, viz. for the death of man,
manifest theft, because he is outlawed or any other wickedness e, and fearing
the punishment over him, shall kill himself, he commits Felony of hims elfe;
he shall have no heir, he has convinced himself of the Felony before done,
viz. theft, death of a man, or such like, and the fear of Conscience in the
guilty is as much as the confession; Agreeing to Bracton, ye shall see the
book titul Coron in Fitz. 259. where a Felon of himself shall forfeite his
lands, but whether he had before he killed himself committed Felony or not
appears not by the book, Ideo quaer. if this distinction that Bracton has
made be Law at this day, for it appears in diverse other books, that a felo
de se shall forfeite his goods only, and no lands, as page 301. 362. 420. tit
jam dicto, and there also it appears, page.324. That if one that is Frantic
from day to day do kill himself, that such a man shall forfeite no goods or
chattels, but otherwise it is if he be not frantic from day to day, but only
at s ome times. Also there page 244. was pres ented, A certain Lnnaticke
struck himself with his knife, recovered his wits, after the Church Rites
performed to him, dyed of his wound, his chattels were not forfeited. The
contrary whereof you shall find page 142. But the Law is clear, that if a man
which is of good memory, commits the s ame fact in such manner and afterward
recovereth, and yet notwiths tanding dies of the same plague that he gave to
himself, he in that case shall forfeite his goods, vide ibid. the case page
94. that was before remembered, That is to say, where A. strikes B. to the
ground, and thereupon A. plucketh out his knife to kill B. and B. lying upon
the ground plucketh out his knife, and A. is so hasty to kill B. that he
choppeth himself upon the knife of B. and s o is slain, in this case A. is a
Felon of himself, and that case agrees with Bracton heretofore.

Homicide not committed by man, but by some casualty whereof comes Deodans.
Deodand. est where any person comes to his death by misadventure of any
thing that shall fall upon him, or by misadventure of a fall that he takes
from a Cart or a horse, or any other thing, the same not being occasioned by
any other person, the thing that so occas ioned the death shall be forfeited,
and taken as a Deodand. to be distributed in alms, for the benefit of the s
oule of the dead person; And note that it is not material whether the thing
that kills him be moving at the time that he was killed or not, for although
that it be not moving, yet notwith standing it shall be called a Deodand. as
well as that which was there moving, as it shall be hereafter expressed; And
therefore when you speak of a thing moving, that it is only to this intent,
viz. That all things moving with the thing that is the occasion of the death,
shall be forfeited, as well for a Deodand. as the principal thing, quod vide
tit. Fitz. 403. where it is said, that every thing which moves, with that which
kills a man, is a Deodand to the King, or to the sea of the Clerk; and
therefore ye shall find ibid. page 398. where a man did cut down a tree, the
which did fall upon the bough of another tree, which bough did fall upon a man
and killed him, and was adjudged that as well the tree as the bough should be a
Deodand. And the same Law is, where a man does ride upon a Cart, and the Cart
falls upon him and kills him, here as well the Horses which drew the Cart,
as the Cart it self, shall be Deodans, ut pat. ibid. page 388. and ye shall
find, page 397. That a man being upon a cart laden with fagots, and binding
it, fell with the motion of one horse in the cart by the which he dyed, and the
horse es and the cart were adjudged for Deodans. Also page 405. A beam on which
did hang a bell, did fall upon a man and killed him, the bell as well as the
beam were adjudged for Deodans, notwithstanding they were goods of the Church,
but of grace, and out of honor to the Church, the chief Justice gave them
back. Et page 326. A man falls out of a cart loaded with hay, and the wheel
of the cart does break his legs, whereof he dies, and the hay was adjudged to
be a Deodand as well as the cart, tamen page 342. A man falls out of a cart,
and breaks his neck, as he was loading of it with straw, by the moving of
the horse, the horse and cart were all adjudged Deodans, and not the straw, by
reason that the straw was not the occasion of his death, quaere differentiam,
etc. Et page 401. One riding his horse drownes himself, the horse is adjudged
a Deodan,etc. Hitherto we have spoken of things moving which do cause
Deodans;Now let us speak of things not moving, and yet shall be De^dans. Vide
titulo jam dicto page 409. Where a Carter clyming upon one of the wheels of his
cart to gather plums, and falls from the cart whereby he dies, and because
it is witnessed, that neither the horses nor the cart moved, only the wheel
is a Deodand. The same Law is where a man does fall into a pond of water, which
water carries him under the utter wheel of a Mill, by which wheel he was
oppressed and killed, and the wheel only in this case was adjudged a Deodand,
ut patet ibidem page 389. Vide ibidem page 348. where it is said, if a man fall
from a load which is worth a C. pound, by the which he receives his death,
all the same shall be a Deodand. And also it appears by these cases, that
Deodans s hall be as well of things that move under a man and kill him, as of
things which do not move, but the man all moves himself from them. And note,
that before it is said, that all things moving with the thing that is the
occasion of the death, shall be forfeited. So in like manner, all things not
moving with the thing which is the occasion of the death shall not be
forfeited, as in part you may perceive by the case of the cart and the straw
before cited, Et titulo Forfeitures in Fitzh. 12 R. 2. wherein a mass of earth
fell upon a man and oppres sed him in such sort that he dyed, and it was
adjudged that the said massa terrae only should be forfeited, and not the hole
or pit where he was killed. The s ame Law is where a man falls from his horse
e, and quasheth his head against a block, whereof he dies, the horse only
shall be adjudged for a Deodand, and not the block, in that it moved not at
all, quod vide ibidem page 341. And also Briton titulo Coron fol. 6. says,
That if a man fall out of a Ship sailing, nothing is the occasion of his death
but only the Ship, and yet the things moving may be said to be the causes of
his death, the merchandise lying at the bottom is not any cau se of his death.
This Ship so sailing ought to be upon the fresh water, etc. for if it should
be on the salt water, it seems that it should not be a Deodand, as it
appears by Bracton titulo Murder, who says there in this manner, A Ship is
not a Deodand, nor a boat, nor other chattels of the drowned in the Sea or
salt water, nor shall there be wreck, if there be any man who can avow them,
and make proof. Et nota, that it seems to one by the books before page 389.
That if he dye by mis adventure, and be within the age of 14. years, that
then nothing s hall be forfeite for a Deodand, for there pres entment was that
A. the son of B. above an. etc. tamen quaere and vide Fitz. titulo de
Indictments page 27. That where a man was s ound dead in the field, Belknap
said that his appeal s hold be given to the Church to pray for his soul,
and should not be taken for a Deodand, and note that every Deodand the Sheriff
shall answer, viz. he shall be charged to levy the price thereof of the
village, notwithstanding the thing was not delivered to them to keep before,
quod miru^ ut patet ibid. page 298. And therefore when such a mis adventure is
found, the presenters should fine, appraise, and value the Deodand, and the
Coroner should return the same in his Inquis ition, and in whose custody the
same remains, so then the Keepers of the Liberty of Englane by authority of
Parliament may know by that Record of whom to demand it by Proce sse out of the
Capital office of the upper Bench.

It is requisite that the thing that is killed be in rerum natura; And
therefore if a man do kill an infant in the mothers belly, that is not felony,
nor he s hall not forfeit any thing for it, and that for two causes; one is,
for that the thing that is killed had not the name of baptism, the other is,
for that it is hard and difficult to judge whether he killed it or no: That is
to say, whether the infant dyed of the beating of the mother, or by any other
occasion, ut patet titulo Corone, etc. page 263. and vid there page 146. A more
strange case, viz. A man did beat a woman great with child of two children, so
that immediately one of the insants dyed, and the other was borne alive and
baptized by a name, and two days after, for the hurt that she had received she
dyed, the opinion was as before, that it was not felony in the man, and vide
the same case in Fitz. titulo Judictments. page 4 But it seems that the
reason where it has no name of baptism, is not of any force, for ye may see
titulo Corone before page 418. that it was presented, A certain woman going
toward the Chapel, brought forth a son, and presently cut his throat and cast
him into the pond and fled, therefore let the exigent issue against her, and
let her be outlawed, for that was homicide, in that the thing killed was in
rerum natura before it was killed, and so nothing like the case before,
scilicet, where the infant was killed in the mothers belly, etc. the which case
Bractonaffirmeth for Law, in his division of homicide before, saying in this
manner, If any man strikes a woman with child, or poisons her, by which he
makes abortion, the birth shaped and animated, especially if animated, it is
homicide; but contrary to this seems the Law as before.

Item, it is requisite to homicide, that if one beat another whereof he dies,
that that death be within twelve months and a day next ensuing the same
beating, ut patet page 303. The s ame Law is, if poison be given to one
seloniously that he dye within the year next after, etc.

It is a common erudition amongst us, That if a Statute Law give a remedy for
any offense, we may understand thereby, that before there was no remedy for the
same offense at the Common Law, other then is not express ed in the said Stat.
except we have read any thing that may induce us to believe the contrary. The
Statute of Westminster the fir st, cap.13. defends Rape in this manner, viz.
The keepers of the Liberty of England by authority of Parliament defends that
none shall ravis h nor take by force a maid within the age of eleven years
with her consent, or without her consent, nor any dame or maid of age, nor
other woman against their wills, and if any s o do, the Keepers of the Liberty
of Engl. aforesaid shall do him common right, and if none commence the suit
within 40. days, then the Keepers of the Liberty of England may s ue, and
those that shall be found culpable shall have two years impris onment, and
afterward shall be arraigned at the Keepers of the Liberty of England afores
aid pleasure, and if he be not araigned, he shall be punis head by more longer
imprisonment, according to the quality of the trespass. The Readers of this
Stat. if they have not read Glanvill and Bracton do think that by the common
Law Law Rape was but trespass, where in truth it was selony, or other more
grievous crime, and first Bracton in his 2. book of Rape says in this manner,
Rape of Virgins is a certain crime which a woman lays upon any, by whom she
she says she was violently oppressed against the peace, and which offense if
it be convicted, punishment follows, to wit, loss of Members, that there may
be member for member, when the Virgin is deflowred she looses a member, he
that deflowred her shall be puni shed in the part offending. Here I have
expounded that which was the common Law in Rape before the Statute of Was tm.
1. wherewith Glanvill agrees, fol. 113. Al so I find amongst the Laws of St.
Edwin, once King of this weal public, this Law, If any man has to do with a
Nune, let him be punished as a Homicide.By the which it appears, that he
which has committed but fornication with a Nun, or with a holy woman, he
should be punished as a Homicide, A multo forciori, then s hold he be punished
if he had ravis head. So that Rape at the beginning was much detested, and
abhorred, and very great and grievous punishment adjoined thereunto, till the
time of King Edward 1. who s eemeth by his law made at West^. 1. to have
mitigated the pain of the same, and afterward espying the great enormities
that ensued the same Law; At his next Parliament holden at Westminster, called
Westminster. 2. cap. 34. did make the same offense of Rape to be felony: The words of
which Statute be these; It is enacted, that if a man does ravish a woman
espoused, a damsel, or any other woman hereafter, whereunto s he neither has
assented before nor after, he shall have judgment of life and members. And in
like manner, where a man shall ravish a woman, dame espoused, damsel, or any
other woman by force, although she assent to the same afterward, he shall
have the like judgment as before is said, so that he be attainted at the
Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament suit, and in that
case the keepers of the Liberty of England before said shall have their suite.

The Statute makes no definition of rape, but leaves the same to the common
Law. Al so it seems to make a difference between ravishment with force, and
ravishment without force, And therefore quaere what manner of fact he
intends, Brittonsaith, fol. 45. that if a woman at the time of the Rape
conceives with child by the Ravisher, that it is no Rape, for that, that no
woman can conceive if she assent not thereunto. Also Bracton says, That it is
a good plea in an Appeal of Rape, to say, that before the time of the Ravis
hment supposed to be done, he held and used the Plaintiff as his Concubine;
Also it is a good Plea for him to say, that though he did lie with her, yet he
knew her not carnally, for that is the force of a declaration in an Appeal of
Rape. And also note, that if a man be to be charged with Rape by way of
Indictment, or otherwise, he ought to be charged expressly by this word Rapuit,
and not by any other words, though they amount to as much as this word Rapuit
does, ut puta carnaliter cognovit and hujufmodi, as it appears 19. E. 4. fol.
27. Also there is another Statute concerning Rape, made an 6. E. 2. the which
does put great penalties and forfeitures upon the woman which cons enteth to
the Ravisher after the Ravishment, and yet nevertheless does give an Appeal
of Rape to the Husband of the wife that is ravished, and if she have no
husband, then to her father or to her next of her blood, and that the def.
shall not gage battle in s uch appeals.

Of treasure trove.
Bractonsaith of Treasure found in this manner, There is amongst the re st a
grievous Misprision against the K. which is as the crime of Theft, sc.
fraudulent hiding found Treasure, etc. Note that Bracton says here, that the
hiding of Treasure found is gravis presumptio; So that it seems, that in
ancient time it was doubtful whether it was Felony or not. And therefore it is
said, tit. Coron. in Fitz. 187. that the punishment of treasure found is taken
away, and is now by imprisonment and fine, and not of life and members, etc.

Et ibidem eodem titulo page 446. It appears Treasure belongs not to the King,
but when it is not known who hid it. So that if it be known to whom the
property is, then the Commonwealth shall not have it, but he to whom the
property thereof belongs, and it seems that if he dye before the finding,
that his Executor shall have the same. And see there, that Treasure belongs to
the King, not to the Lord of the Liberty, if not by words special, or by pres
cription. Briton in his book fol. 26. says, that treasure sound in the sea,
or upon the land, and not in the earth, appertains to the finder, and not to
the Commonwealth, etc. Also he says, that when a man has found it, he ought
pres ently to let the Coroner or Coroners of that County understand thereof, or
else the Bailife and the Coroner without delay ought to enquire if any thing
thereof be purloyned away.

Of a Mayhem.
Note, that Britton says, that Mayhem is properly said where any member of a
man is taken away, whereby he is the more unable to fight, as if the eye, the
hand, the foot, or by bruising of the head, or knocking out of the foreteeth,
but cutting off the ear or nose is no Mayhem but a blemish of the body. Seton
Justice said 29. E. 3. that every singer of the hand shall be said to be a
Mayhem, if it be cut off.

Item 8. H. 4. ye may see there that it is no Mayhem to cut off, the ear of a
man, by the which he loses his hearing, but the knocking out of the teeth is a
Mayhem, for that with them he may defend himself in battle. And
Bractonagreeth therewith, for he s aith in this manner, Mayhem may be said
where one is maimed in any part of his body to fight, by him whom he appeals.

Note that these places and territories here expressed and declared, are
allowed for Sanctuaryes for Felons, if they can get to them before they be
taken, viz. Wells in the County of Summers et, Westminster, Manchester,
Northampton, Norwich, York, Darby, and Launceston, for all such Felons as may
have the benefit of their Clergy by the Laws of this Weal public, and for
none else; For Treasons, Rapes, Burglaries, Robberies by the high way, or in a
house where any are put in fear: burning of houses or barnes wherein corn is
laid: robberies of Churches, Chapels, or other hallowed places: stealing of
Horses, or Mares, and Murder, with their abbettors, procurers, and counselors:
All these offenses are excepted by the Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. and 32.
cap. 11. H. 6.

Of principal and accesiarie.
Note, that in high Treason there is no accessory, but all are principals ut
pat. 3 H. 7. fol. 9. So that what offense s oever makes a man accessory in
Felony, the same offense in high Treas on makes him principal, therefore it
is to be seen who shall be accessaries in petty Treason, or Felony, or in other
like crimes, in which accessaries may be.

Of accessaries before the offense committed.
Note, that if one procure or command another to do a Felony, but is not present
there when the other does the same: This procurer or commander is but Accessory
before the Felony done, ut patet 7 H. 4. fol. 30. but otherwise it is if he be
present at the time and place, when and where the Felony is committed, for in
that ca se he is a principal, ut pat. 7. H. 4. f. 13.

The same Law is, if a man be present at the death of a man, and he moves
and sets on others to wound him and kill him, in this case he is as far
forth a principal as he that killed him, quod vide 13. H. 7.

The same Law is, if he were present, and comes ^hither for the same
purpose, though that at the same time he moves not the other to strike him, or
kill him, nor does any thing himself, yet he shall be adjudged as a
principal, ut pat. 21. Ed. 4. Also vide tit. Co^ on. in Fitz. fol. 309. where
it was found that one that was present, yet did nothing, but would have aided
his companion, if the dead person had made any resistance, and for that he was
adjudged a principal. And according to this vide ibidem page.314.350. and 433.
That all those that come in company in any place, or any ass embly where any
evil is done, be it homicide, robbery, or any other trespass, they shall all
be accounted as principal doers, though that they do no hurt at all. And
therefore a man was condemned in that he was a disseisor where a man was killed,
and it was said by twelve that he came not thither to do any evil. And note,
that as it was of homicide, or murder, even so it is of any other felony, as of
rape or robbery, qnod vide titulo Coron in Fitzh. 228. and 11 H. 4. where in an
appeal of Rape against two as principalls, whereas one did not the act, but
assisted and aided his companion to do the same, and titulo Coron in Fitzh.
fol. 350. and 324. where only one did the robbery, and the other were in his
company, and came with him for the same purpose, etc. But if one do chance to
be present when another is slain, or when another felony is committed, and
comes not in the Company of the felons, nor is of their confederacy, although
he withstand not, or disturbeth not the selon, nor levyeth hue and cry, yet he
shall not be said either principal or accessory: for it is not felony in him
but finable as a trespass. And if such a man be within age, he shall have no
punishment, quod vide titulo Coron 395 and 14. H. 7. f. 33. and vide titulo
praed. 293. where such a man that was of full age, was but amerced in such a
case, etc. Tamen 314. ibid, it appears that such s ufferance is felony, and
so was the opinion of Shard 197 but it is again st the law, as it appears in
the books before cited, etc.

Also if A. hold B. in his arms till such time as C. kills him. A. for that
cause is principal ut pat. 15. E. 3. And note ye, that the law at this day as
concerning accessaries, is as you have heard before, though that in ancient
time s ome judges did vary in their opinions for Law, in that point: for it
appears, tit. Corone in Fitz. 90.216. That in the 40. year of Edward the
third, they took the Law to be, That he that was present when any was slain,
and aiding and commanding the Killer, s hold not be principal, but accessory,
etc. and in that they did agree with Bracton, who says in this manner, viz. If
those that were present joined in the force and fact, etc. And after the
attainder of the principal fact, he goes to those that be appealed of sorce,
and makes the appeal in this manner, viz. A. appeals B. of force, that when
the said A. and C. his brother were in s uch a place, etc. Also he says in
another place. That if two be appealed as Accessories to a third person,
scilicet, one of force, and the other of commandment, they shall wage battle,
before he shall that is appealed of commandment, force in a manner comprehends
the fact which commands not. And so by him that is present when one is killed,
and being counselling, aiding, or in any other manner assisting, so that he
slays him not himself, he is then but accessory, etc. And with him agrees
the Statutes called Officium Coron, made the third year of King Ed.the first at
West. 2. but the Law is not so at this day; and yet the account in every
appeal against the principal is, that every one principally did help, and
did strike the parry slain, deadly; but to that may be said, That those words
be but words of form, and also it is his help in Law, etc. If I command one
to take another, and he goes from me, and takes him and robs him: If I be
ab sent when he does the s ame, that is not selony in me, ut pate tit. Coron in
Fitzh. for that he exceeds my commandment, and my commandment might have
been performed without Robbery, etc.

But if I command one to beat another, and thereupon he beats him to death,
that s hall be Felony in me that commands, ut pat. ibidem 314. for it is
difficult and hard to beat a man in such sort, that it shall be said he shall
not dye of such beating, etc. therefore in such case I am accessory to him that
kills him, by reason that it was done upon my commandment, etc.

Accessories after the offense committed.
That is, where one receives a Felon, well knowing of the Felony that he has
committed, or favors him, or by aideth him, he there shall be s aid to be
an Accessory after the fact. But dis tinguend. est, of this aid or council;
for if he aid him with his good word, and sueth for his delivery, or sends
Letters for his deliverance, that makes him not to be accessory to the
Felony: ut patet titulo Corone in Fitzh. page 195. etc.Nay, this definition is
to be made of an Accessory, it extends only to those that be Accessories to
a principal atteinted; for if after the atteinder one receives and aydeth
him, That is, after he be convicted of the Felony by verdict, outlawry, or
confession, he s eemeth to be an Accessory, though that he knew him not to be a
Felon, in that he is a Felon by matter of Record, of the which every stranger
is driven to take Cognizance, tamen quaere; for ye shall find titulo praed.
page 377. one note, which is thus, scilicet, Note ye, That when a man is
indicted for the receiving a man outlawed for Felony in the same county, then
he shall lose both life and members, Secus esset in alio com etc. Ergo thereof
ensues, That if one be outlawed for Felony in one County, and another
receives him in another County, he s hall not be Acces sorry, for that he
cannot take Cognizance of that which was done in another County, though that it
be matter of Record, etc, And agreeable to this note, I find in Bracton
written thus, If any man s hall give meat to such one after Outlawry, shall
entertain or receive him, nay but hide him, he shall be punished in the manner
the Outlaw should. So that it seems he makes no difference between matter
in fact and matter of record, etc. in that he makes Scientermateriall in the
case, etc. And note ye, that by the Common Law, if one commit Felony in one
County, and before his atteinder one other receives him feloniously in another
County, that was not felony in the receiver for default of trial, in that
those of the County where the Accessory offended, could not have Cognizance of
the principal offense committed in another County, quod vide titul Corone page
33. and 43 Ed. 3. wherefore a Statute Law was made annis 2, and 3. Ed. 6. which
is in this manner: Forasmuch as the mo st necessary office and duty of Laws,
is to preserve the life of man, and condignely to punish such persons that
unlawfully and wilfully murder, slay, and destroy men, etc: Note the preamble
of this Statute. And also it is a common practice amongst arrant Thieves and
Robbers in this Commonwealth, that after they have robbed and stolen in one
county, they will convey their spoil, and part thereof so s tolne, to some of
their adherents in another County, where the principal offense was not
committed, nor done, etc. By this preamble it appears, That if one
feloniously received parcel of the Goods stolen, that he shall thereby be an
accessory, etc. quaer. thereof; for ye shall find titulo Coron. in Fitzh.
page 126. That one shall not be Acces sorry for receiving of goods stolen only,
if he receive not the Felon himself also. And therefore the Indictment was
there, That knowing and seloniously received the Thief, etc. and he was
discharged thereof ratione jam dict. But if he had as well received the Felon
hims elfe, as the goods, then otherwise it were, ut patet 9 H. 4. fol. 1. and
tit. Coron. in Fitzh. page 427. where a Felon did fly to his brothert house,
and his brother did shut the door, and the Country that pursued him were
deceived thereby (...) for they did conjecture that he had continued in the
house, when he did fly thence to the Church; whereupon his brother was
adjudged accessory to that Felony, etc. ut pat. ibidem page 196. That a man may
be an Accessory to an Accessorie: As if a man felonious ly do receive him that
is an Accessory to a Felon, etc. Also it appears there page 48. That he that
receives an access ory of a Felony, is principal, and not accessorv, etc. And
the reason thereof as I understand, is, for that by this receite a new Felony
is committed by him, though that it depends upon the ancient and former
Felony, etc. And note ye, that Bracton counts an Accessory, a receiver of bad
men, etc. ut supra c. 19. fol. 26. and says, that a woman cannot be acce
ssory to her husband.

Access ories by statute.
I have already entreated of Accessories by the Common Law, now therefore I will
entreat of Accessories by the Statute Law. It seems though an offense be
made Felony by Statute, though the same Statute does not speak exprefly of
abettors, procurors, counselors, and receivers, yet it be shall taken to be
within the compass of that Statute, as it appears in the Title of Treason,
19. H. 6. where the consenter and ayder to the counterfeiting of the great
Seal, or the Commonwealths money, was adjudged a Traitor: And yet the words of
the Statute are, if a man do counterfeite, etc. the which thing the other
seems not to have done, in that he ^as not but con senting and ayding to the
same, etc. The same Law is in case of Rape, where one did the fact, and another
assis ted him, and aided him to commit the Rape, he thereby is a Ravisher as
far forth as his companion which did the Rape indeed, as it appears 11 H. 4.
and tit. Coron. in Fitzh. page 120. And yet notwithstanding the words of the
Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 3.4. are, If a man ravish a woman, etc. but that was
the cause of the Rape, without which perhaps the Rape had not been committed:
and pincipall doer, in that he was present when the fact was done, and
therefore as well culpable of the fact as the principal doer is. And if any be
acquitted of a principal fact, he is then acquitted of all offenses as
accessory before the principal fact committed, but not of offenses perpetrated
as Accessory after the principal fact done, as it shall appear after: And
therefore some will argue in this case, as though that Accessories before the
offense committed, be taken to be within the compass of a Statute that makes
Felony, though they be not expres sed, for the rea son before made: yet
notwithstanding that proves not, that accessory after the offense perpetrated,
should be within the compass of such a Statute if it be not expressed. But
hows oever it be, those of the Parliament in the time of King H. 8. provided
for the same, as it appears as well by the Statute of Hunting, anno 32. H. 8.
as by other Statutes which at this instant are not in force. And by a Statute
made in the first and second year of P. and M. against unlawful and
rebellious ass emblies, which Statute is yet in force. And by a-Statute made 1.
M. concerning Egyptians as yet also being in force. The which Statute providech
as well for Acce ssories before the offense perpetrated as after, vide the
Statute of 3. H. 7. of those that take maids, widows, or wives against their
wills, where the words are, that such taking, procuring, and abetting to the
same, and also receiving wittingly the said woman so taken against her will,
and knowing the same, is Felony: And that such misdoers, takers. procurers, and
receivers to the same, knowing the said offense in form afores aid, he
henceforth reputed and judged as principal Felons. Note, as it s eemeth there
is no Accessory in this offense upon the Statute, in that by the words they be
reputed and judged as principal Felons, which makes them as it seems all
principals, etc.

Note, that in an appeal of Mayhem, the Plaintiff may choose to make every of
them principals, or him only that did hurt him, to be principal, and the
others Acces sories, ut patet 215.221. and 199.

How the principal shall first be attainted, and after the accessories.
There are three s orts of attainders, viz. by confessions by verdict, and
default or outlawry, and in all these case the principal ought to be attainted
before the Accessory: but in the manner of proceeding to this attaint, there
are diversities of opinions; for Bracton says upon the attainder by process in
this manner, the causes of Outlawry may be many, etc. So that it appears,
that at that time there was diversities of opinions about the manner of
atteinder of Accessories by Outlawry, which diversity was taken away by the
Stat. of Westminster the first, the which is thus, viz. And for that, that men
have used in some countries to Outlaw the people appealed of commandment,
force, aid, and receiptment within the same term, in which a man should
Outlaw him that is appealed of the fact as principal. It is provided and
commanded, That none be Outlawed for appeal of commandment, force, aid, or
receiptment, until he that is appealed of the fact be attainted: so that one
only Law thereof be throughout the whole Land, etc. But he that will appeal,
should not therefore cease to continue his appeal at the next County against
those, as well as against the Appellees of the fact, but the Exigent against
them shall stay until s uch time as the Appellees of the fact be attainted by
Outlawry or otherwise. This Statute is not to be understood of Appeals
commenced by Bill: for Appeals commenced by Writ, there appears not any to
be Accessory till s uch time as the count be made, the which is not made,
till such time as there be also appearance for the Accessory, ut patet 43.
Edw. 3. fol. 15. wherefore in that case where an Appeal is commenced by Writ,
if the Plaintiff will pray the Exigent against all, he is thereby concluded to
count after, against any one of them as Accessory, for if otherwise, etc. he s
hold not have the Exigent against all them until the principal had been
outlawed, for in that case he is concluded, ut patet tit. Coron. in Fitz. page
80. This Statute wills that the appellee of the fact be attainted before the
Accessory shall be Outlawed: Admit then, that at the time when the Accessory is
at the Exigent, the principal appears, if then the Exigent shall be awarded
against the Accessory, till that the Proce ss against the principal be
determined, etc. It seems not, for notwithstanding that the Process be
determined, yet the principal is not attainted; and until such time as he be
attainted, the Accessory ought not to be Outlawed, ut supra 7. H. 4. fol. 31.
That which is said, extends to that where the Accessory does not appear but
makes default: Wherefore now let us see what shall be done when the Accessory
appears in judgment, and the Principal also, and in respect thereof, note
you that by the ancient Law, the Acce ssory should not be put to answer, till
such time as the principal had been attainted, ut patet per Bracton, If all be
present, those as well of force as of fact, the proceeding must be against all
in order, but those of force are not, to answer till the fact be convinced,
etc. And agreeable unto him is the book of 44. Edw. 3. fol. 9. and tit. Coron.
in Fitz.216. but since that time the Law has been changed, etc. For now, be it
that the principal appear, or make default, the Accessory, if he appear,
shall answer, but if he plead to an issue, process shall cease to be awarded
against him for his trial, until the principal do appear, or or be
attainted of Outlawry, ut pat. and 9. H. 4. and 7. H. 4. but yet those Process
against the Jury shall not cease, unless the Accessory will, for if the
Accessory will pray Proce ss against the Inquest, before the principal be
attainted, he shall have them, in that it is damage to none but himself. And
whether he be attainted or acquitted, it is good, and he shall not be again
arraigned for that offense; for the taking of the Inquest or verdict is not
erroneous for the reason before made, ut patet titulo Coron. 463. The same Law
is if the Accessory will wage his battle with the appellant before the
Principal does come, ut patet ibidem page 8. for he may waive the benefit that
the Law does give him therein, etc.

Note ye that if the plea which the Accessory does plead, be a plea in
abatement of the whole writ, the principal therein shall have the advantage,
notwiths tanding his absence, so that the Exigent that is to be awarded
against the principal shall stay till it be known whether the whole writ shall
abate or not, ut patet 9 H. 4. but if they both do appear, viz. the principal
and the accessory, then the principal must first answer, and after the
accessory, for such answer the principal may make, that the accessory shall
not be put to answer till the answer of the principal be tried. And that is
where the principal does not plead directly to the felony, but some other
plea; As if he plead that he was once before attainted of the same Felony, and
the appellant to the contrary that is not so, and so they are at issue, in this
case the Accessory shall not answer before that is sue be tried, 9 H. 7. Quaere
if the like Law be where the principal pleads in abatement of the whole
writ, etc. But if the Principal plead to the Felony, the Accessory then
presently after such plea s hall plead also: And if they be at issue, a venire
fac may be awarded against them all, ut patet tit. Coron. where
Fortescuesaith, that if at the day in the Court the principal makes default,
the Inquest shall not be taken for the accessory, but that the Inquest shall
go without day, and the principals, manucaptors or sureties, shall make their
fine, etc. And that agrees with that which was said before, s cilicet, that
the Inquest shall stay for the Accessory till such time as the principal
comes to be attainted by outlawry, etc. Note, when I s peake of the
principal, I mean then all the principals; for if there be diverse sued as
principalls, and s ome of them do come, and some do not, yet the Inquest
shall stay until all the principals do come, or be attainted of Outlawry, if
it be so that he be appealed or indicted as access ory unto them all:
otherwise it is if he not appealed or indicted as accessory to one of them;
for there it sufficieth those principals only to come, or to be attainted for
whom he is appealed or indicted as accessory, without having regard to the
residue, quod vid. 7. H. 4. fol. 30. and tit. Coron. in Fitzh. 216. Also note
ye, that it is requisite that this attainder of the principal be in the same
suite in which the accessaryes be sued, for if it be in another suite, that
will not permit the Accessorie to proceed in his Inquest till s uch time as the
principal that is sued with him do come in, or be attainted by Process as
aforesaid. And in an appeal of death, against the principal and the
accessory, the principal before that time is attainted of the very same death,
upon an Indictment at the Keepers of the Liberty of England by authority of
Parliament suite, ut patet 7. H.4. fol. 30. Quaere, if the access ory shall
plead for his discharge the acquittall of the principal in another suite, ut
patet 277. Also it seems, that if the principal since that attainder is
dead, and the Justices before whom such Accessory is sued, have before them the
record of the attainder, that then they may proceed against the Accessory,
otherwise not, 7. H. 4. fol. 23. We have said before that the Inque st shall
not proceed against the Accessory, till such time as the principal do come
in, or be attainted, etc. Admit then that the principal does come in, and will
say nothing, but stand mute; What s hall in that case be done with the
accessory? Hussy s aith, 3. H. 7. That, that notwithstanding, the Accessory s
hall be arraigned, quod vide titulo Corone 36. and 51. where the principal
challenges above the number of 36. which was peremptory to him, therefore he
was hanged without farther trial, because he should challenge but jus t 36. or
under, and not above, and in that case the accessory was tried and found
guilty; and the justices did advise with themselves, what should be done in
that case, for they were of diverse opinions, etc. This attainder whereof we
have so often spoken, though that it be erroneous, yet not withstanding that
court shall proceed with the acce ssory, for the accessory shall utterly take
advantage of that error, quod vide anno 2 R. 3. f. 21. Als o there is one case,
that although the principal be not attainted, yet the Accessory s hal be
hanged, As if one Abjure as Accessorie, and afterward the Principal comes,
not being attainted, Tamen-the Justices in favore vitae, did inquire if the
Accessorie was attainted or not. The same law shall be in the cases abovesaid,
as it seems where the Accessory of his own good will will wage battle, or
have the inquest proceed before the Principal does come, etc.

Whether the acquitall of the principal discharge the acces sorry, or not.
Note, That if the principal be acquitted, the Accessory, is thereby
discharged, for Bracton says, where no fact was, no force, no command ought to
hurt, where the wrong had no effect, etc. Wherefore it is clear, that the
acquital of the principal, is also the acquitall of the Accessory, or if it
happen that the principal cannot be tried, as if he dye in prison before he
be attainted, thereby the Accessory is discharged, otherwis e it is if he die
after the Attainder, etc. The same law is, if before the principal be
attainted of the felony, he is attainted of another felony and hanged, the
accessory hereby is discharged, ut patet tit Coron in Fitz. 378. The s ame law
is though he be not hanged after the attainder, in that case he shall ans were
to any other felony, unless it be robbery or Treason. The same Law is, if it
be found that the principal killed him se defendendo, the access ory is
thereby discharged, ut patet 116. Et tamen there the principal purchases his
Pardon, etc. But that Pardon argues not that he is culpable in any other
manner than se defendende. But of other pardons otherwise it is, for if the
principal does plead his pardon to a felony generally, without any special
matter found, the which should cause the pardon, and is thereby discharged, yet
that shall not discharge the Accessory, but he shall be found guilty of the
felony, ut pat. tit. pred. 260. for by such a pardon the felony is confessed,
of which felony he prays to be discharged ex gratia Custod. Libertatis
Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti, and not by cour se of the Law, as it was done
in the other case, Quaere tamen,for the contrary is agreed by way of argument,
3. H. 7 tit. pred. 53. And also by the opinion of Thyrn. 7. H. fol. 13. And
this reason is, that when the life of the principal is given him by the law,
in what manner soever it be, the felony is extinct in his person, and by cons
equence acquitted.

And so it shall be where the principal takes him to be his Clergy. And with
this case agrees the book of 3. H. 7. fol. 2. tamen Fitz. tit praed. 53. has
reported that book of 3. H. 7. to the contrary, sc. that not withs tanding
that the principal shall have his Clergy, yet the accessory shall be hanged.
And according to that ye shall find ibi. 270. and 266. Sed di stinguendum est,
of the cas e of the Clergy, sc. whether he be Clerk convict, or clerk
attaint, for if he be clerk attaint, by the ancient Books the Accessory shall
be hanged, for that the principal in that case cannot at any time make his
purgation, and otherwise perchance, if he were Clerk convict, in that the
Clerk convict may make his purgation, wherefore in that case they did use to
let accessories to maineprise, until such time as the principal had made his
purgation, etc. ut patet tit. Coron. 145, 176, 252, 376, 193, and 7. H. 4.
fol.13. and 13. Ed. 4. fol. 3. and then upon his purgation to dis charge the
Accessory, and if he died or escaped before purgation, etc. then to proceed to
the attainder of the Accessory, etc. Quaere if the difference will hold place
at this day in that, in the new books before they have expugnancy of opinion in
the case where purgation is to be done, That is to say, in the case of a Clerk
convict, for some would in that case that the accessory s hold be discharged,
and some would not. So that in that case of the Clergy, and of the pardon, the
new books and the old agree not.

Note where it is said before, that the Acquittall of the Principal, is al so
the acquittall of the Accessory, That is to be understood, if it be not in an
appeal when the accessory is to recover damages, for if he will recover
damages, he ought to be tried notwithstanding the acquittall of the
principal, ut patet in Fitzh. page.223. Quaere if that be Law now, by use, for
it s eemeth reasonable that he should have his damages upon the acquitall of
the principal without being tried, or otherwise should ensue that the Court
would admit an Acces sorry whereto then it appears that there is no
principal, which should be inconvenient; for as Bracton has well said, The
Appealers cannot omitting the first and principal Appellee, wage battle with
the Appellees of force and command, etc. Quod nota.
In my Lord Cooks 4. book of Reports, fol.44. In an appeal brought by one
Bibithes, Termino Paschae, anno 39 Eliz. It is there resolved for Law, that
although the principal was convicted by verdict, yet ins omuch that he had his
Clergy, his accessories both before and after the Felony were dis charged, and
the same Law is there resolved, if a principal upon his arraignment confess se
the felony, and before judgment gets a pardon or has his Clergy allowed him,
the acce ssory thereupon is dis charged. 2. E. 3.27.22. E. 3. tit. Coron. 260.
5. H. 4.16.19. H. 4.5.3. H. 7.1. and 3. H. 7. tit. Coron. 53.

An Appeal of Murder and Robbery.
South.
A.G. viz. the late Wife of R.G. in proper person instantly appeals M. D. late
of N. in the County of S. Yeoman, and I.B. late of A. in the County aforesaid
Yeoman, in the cu stody of T.P. Knight Sheriff of the County before said, and to
the bar brought in her own person. of the death of the afores aid R. lately
her husband, of that, that where the s ame R.G. 28. day A. the year, etc. was
in the peace of God, and the said Commonwealth working and laboring in burning
of Coals in the land of I.G. Knight, called S. in a certain place there called
a Coal place, at C. in the county aforesaid, where there came the aforesaid
M.D.and I.B. as Felons of the said Commonwealth, and by assault, and of malice
forethought, the aforesaid R.G. of his goods and moneys to rob and s poyle,
upon the same R.G. aforesaid, 28. day of A. and year, etc. aforesaid, about
the ninth hour after noone of the same day, by force and arms, viz. with
staves, knives, etc. at C. aforesaid, in the place aforesaid, assaults made,
and the same R. G. then and there feloniously and wilfully slew, and murdered,
and the s ame R. so slain incontinently carried away to a certain wood
called, etc. distant from the afores aid place about 10. perches, in the parish
of T. in the same county, and him there in a woody place of Oaks hid and cast
down, and his throat then and there cut against the peace public, and as
soon as the same Felons the Felony and Murder aforesaid had done, they fled,
and the afores aid A. then freshly pursued from town to town, as far as
four towns next and farther, until etc. And if the aforesaid M.D. and I.B.
the Felony and Murder aforesaid, in form aforesaid done, will deny, then the
aforesaid A. is ready the Felony and Murder aforesaid against them to prove, as
the Court here, etc. and she found pledges of pro sec. of this Appeal, viz.
I.W. and C.E. etc.

E.P. of H. in the County aforesaid Yeoman, in his own person, according to the
form of a Statute in the Parliament of the L. King R. late King of Engl. the
second after the Conquest, at Westminster the sixth year of his reign held,
made, instantly appeals I.B. lately of H. in prison, etc. of that, that where
I. the Wife of the aforesaid E.P. was in the peace of God and the Commonw. now
at H. in the County aforesaid, the aforesaid day, etc the year, etc. about the
hour, etc. There came the aforesaid I.B. as a Felon of the Commonwealth. Now
of treachery and assault forethought against the peace of the public, the
day, year, hour, and place aforesaid, the aforesaid A. then and there
feloniously ravished, and with her then and there carnally lay, and the soyd I.
to the same I.B. after the rape aforesaid, in form aforesaid done, viz. and
the day and year, etc. as to the doing the said rape consented, and him for
the s ame rape according to due form of Law refused to punish, and as s oon,
etc.

Appeal of Rape by the next a Kin.
VV.L. next of blood to I. daughter and heir of T.L. now dead, viz. brother of
the aforesaid T.L. father of the aforesaid I. feloniov sly ravished, in his
proper person instantly appeals R.P. of K. in the county of S. Yeoman, and in
the custody, etc. according to the form of the Statute of the L.R. lately King
of Engl. the second after the Conquest, the sixth year of his reign, held,
made, of the rape of the aforesaid I. and of the peace of the Commonwealth,
now broken, of that that where the said I. was in the peace of God and the
Commonwealth at M. in the county of E. the day, etc. the year, etc. about the
hour, etc. there came the aforesaid R. as a Felon of the commonwealth, now by
treachery and assault fore thought, against the peace public, the day, year,
hour, and place a foresaid, and the aforesaid I. feloniously ravished again st
the form of the Statute aforesaid. And as soon, etc.

I A. in his proper person appeals R.L.of D. in the County of S. Yeoman, of
that, that where I. A. was in the peace of the Commonwealth now at C. in the
County aforesaid, the day, year, etc. about the eigth hour afternoon of the
same day, where came the afores aid R. feloniously as a Felon of the
Commonwealth there by treachery and assault forethought against the peace
public, the day, year, hour, and town aforesaid, with a certain arrow
shot the aforesaid I.A. in the left knee, by which the veins and nerves were
dried up, and s o him feloniously he mayhemed, and as soon, etc. and if etc.
the same I. this is ready against him to prove as the Court, etc.

D B. in his person ins tantly appeals R.E. of cutting out the Tongue of him
D. and the peace public broken, for that, viz. that when by a certain
Statute in the Parliament of H. 4. lately King of England, the fifth year of
his reign, at Westmin. held, made; It is ordained, that Malefactors who shall
cut out the tongues, or pluck out the eyes of the people of the Commonwealth,
this duly proved and found, that such fact was done out of malice forethought,
shall incur the pain of Felony, as in the Statute aforesaid more fully is
contained, and where the aforesaid D. was in the peace of God and the
Commonwealth now at H. in the County aforesaid, the day and year, etc. about
the hour, etc. there came the aforesaid R.E. feloniously as a Felon of the
Commonwealth, by treachery and assault forethought, against the peace public,
the day, year, hour, place, and county aforesaid, and with a certain knife,
which he held in his right hand, the tongue of him D. feloniously he cut out;
and at soon, etc.

A Felon appeals and calls for the Coroner.
MEmorand. that on Tuesday, etc. I. R. lately of L.etc. diverse Felonies before
the Keepers of the Liberties of Engl. by authority of Parliament in the upper
Bench at Westminster. acknowledges to have committed, requiring a Coroner of the
Commonwealth for the good of the Commonwealth to be a ssigned him; and an
Approver the said R. became, upon which I I.W. Coroner of the Commonwealth was
assigned to him by the Court, to record those things which the said Approver
would soy or acknowledge before me, and days were given to the same approver
by the Court for his days of appeal, viz. Monday, Tue sday, Wednesday, then
next following, and after, viz. on Monday aforesaid, before me the afores^yd
Coroner, at W. came the approver under the cus tody of the Marsh all of the
Keepers of the Libertyes of England by authority of Parliament in his proper
person and appealed T.C. lately of L. and H. lately of S. of that that the
afores aid T.C. with the approver about the first day of S. in the year, etc.
at B. in the County of M. one piece of Silver to the value of 30 s. of the
goods and chattels of A.B. feloniously stole, and the aforesaid H.R. knowing
them T.C. and the approver so to have committed that Felony, then at B. the
aforesaid fourth day then next following received, and the piece of silver
before said, of them bought, etc.

Let the same manner be observed in others alike.

Otherwise, viz. Thursday next, etc. the year, etc. at O. I.B lately of H.
Yeoman, before L. M. and his companions Justices, etc. assigned the peace in
the County aforesaid to conserve, was indicted of this, that he the day and
year etc. (reciting the Indictment) against the peace public, etc. being
before the aforesaid Justices asked How he would acquit himself of it?
Acknowledged the Felony aforesaid, and an Approver of the commonwealth became,
and requested a Coroner of the Commonwealth to be assigned unto him, upon
which I I.W.one of the Coroners of the Commonwealth of the County aforesaid,
was assigned to hear and record those things which for the good of the
Commonwealth, he would say, or before me acknowledge, and after, viz. such a
day, etc. said before me the aforesaid Coroner at E.the aforesaid approver,
that W.I. of L. in the County of L.Yeoman, and the same approver in the way
public betwixt W. and B. the distance of ten miles from B. aforesaid, the
tenth day, etc.year, etc. upon a certain I.B. assault made, beat, and ill
treated him, and six marks sterling in ready money of the Goods and Chattels
of his I. B. then and there found, feloniously took and robbed, whence the
same approvor the aforesaid W.I. appeals.

THis you hear Sir Coroner that I B.C. am a Thief of one horse, or something
else, or an homicide of one man or more; As a felon of the King, etc. And
because many mi schiefes and robberies I have committed, I abjure, etc. and I
ought to ha ste me to the Port from such place as you have appointed me, nor
ought I to divert to any other way, and if I do, I will that I be taken as a
Thief and Felon of the King, and that at such a place I will seek diligently
my pa ssage, and will not expect but one flow and ebb, if I can pass, and if
in such space I cannot go over, I will go every day into the sea up to my
knees, and trying to pass, and if I cannot do this within forty days
together, I will put my s elfe into the Church as a Thief and Felon of the
King. So help me God and his doom.

But it seems by the Statute of 22. Hen. 8. that this kind of Abjuration is
taken away, and that it was the Kings pleasure that such person which did
abjure, s hold be abjured from all his ability, to some Sanctuary within this
Realm there to continue during his life, and that he should be burnt in the
right hand with this letter A.to the end he might be known to be an abjured
person, and if after he was taken abroad out of the Sanctuary, then he should
undergo such punishment as persons abjured did before the making of the s aid
Statute: And if any Felon refuse to abjure before the Coroner, he shall lose
the benefit of the Sanctuary by the Statute of 21. H. 8. c.2.

This hear you Sir Coroner, that I J.M. of H. in the county of S. am a Popish
Recusant and in contempt of the Laws and Statutes of England, I have and do
refuse to come to their Church, I do therefore according to the intent and
meaning of the Statute made in the 35 year of Queen Elizabeth late Queen of
this Realm of England, abjure the Realm of England. And I shall haste me
toward the port of P. which you have given and ass igned to me, and that I
shall not go out of the Highway leading thither, nor return back again, and
if I do, I will that I be taken as a Felon of the Commonwealth: And that at
P. I will diligently seek for passage, and I will tarry there but one flood
and ebb, if I can have passage, and unless I can have it in such space, I
will go every day into the Sea up to my knees, assaying to pass over: so God
me help and his holy judgment, etc.

The form of a Certificate of an Abjuration.
MEmorand. what happenned at E. in the County of S. on Saturday, viz. the
twentieth day of I. the year, etc. a certain R.S. lately of P. in the County
of L.Yeoman, took the Church Parochial of P. for freedom and tuition of holy
Church there to be had, by occa s ion of diverse Felonyes by him before
committed, and requests a Coroner of our Lord the King to be brought to him,
upon which I I.W. one of the Coroners of our Lord the King of the County afores
aid, came to him to the Church aforesaid being, and he before me the s aid
Saturday in the Church aforesaid confessed and voluntarily acknowledged that
he the 27. day of May then last past at L. in the Parish of Saint S. in the
Ward of F. one Mazer coverect with silver of a certain I.B. in the house of
him I. being, to the value of thirty shillings feloniously stole, for which
felony he required of me the aforesaid Coroner the Realm of England to
abjure; upon which the book being delivered to him by me the aforesaid Coroner,
the same R. the Realm aforesaid before me the aforesaid Saturday, in the
Church aforesaid abjured, into the same Realm never to return, without s
peciall lycense and reconciliation of the King of England, and as s igned was
to the same R. for his passage out of the Realm, the port of Dover, the cross
in his hand put, as the Law and custom of England is.

One taken out of the Sanctuary petitions for restitution.
UPon this came the aforesaid E. and says that he the 14. day of I. the year,
etc. took the Church of Saint G. at S. in the County aforesaid, for diverse
Felonies by him before committed, for safety of his life, and tuition of holy
Church, and requests the privilege of that Church. And that I.L. and others to
the same G. unknown, him then and there out of the Church aforesaid violently
and against his will took and carried away, and this etc. and he sues to be
restored, etc. and etc. to the Felonies not guilty.

An Inquisition in Murder.
AN Inquisition by Indenture taken at B. in the County aforesaid, Tuesday, viz.
the 21. day of December, the year, etc. before me I.S. Gent. one of the
Coroners of the Commonwealth of the County aforesaid, upon view of the body of
a certain E.S. Gentl. there dead lying, by the oath of I.S. etc. Jur. try. and
charged to enquire in what manner and how the aforesaid E. to his death came,
who say upon their oath, that I.H. of S. in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, the
fourth day of Augu st,the year, etc. at B. aforesaid, in the County afores
aid, a bout the hour of ten before noon of the same day. God before his eyes
not having, but by instigation diabolical seduced and moved, of his malice
forethought, feloniously as a felon of the Commonwealth, in and upon the said
E.S. in the peace of God and the Commonwealth being; then and there by force
and arms a ssault and affray made, and that the aforesaid I.H. with a
certain s word of the value of five shillings which the same I.H. in his right
hand then and there held, then and there the aforesaid E.S. feloniou sly
stroke, and with the sword aforesaid gave the same E.S. then and there one
wound mortal upon the left knee of him E. wholely cutting off a certain bone
of the aforesaid knee of him E. called the pan of the knee, the length four
inches, breadth two inches, and depth two inche^, of which wound mortal, the
same E.S. the twentieth day of December, the year abovesaide, at E. aforesaid
in the County aforesaid dyed, and so the Jurors aforesaid, upon their oath
aforesaid say, that the aforesaid I.H. in manner and form aforesaid the
aforesaid E.S. feloniously, and of his malice forethought s lew, and murdered,
against the peace public, and further the Jurors aforesaid, upon their oath
aforesaid say, that the aforesaid I.H. at the time of the felony and Murder
afores aid done had no goods nor chattels, lands, nor tenements in the County
afores aid within their knowledge. In testimony of which thing, as well I the
aforesaid Coroner, as the Jurors aforesaid, to this Inquis ition our s eales
alternately have set, the day, year, and place aboves aid.

By I.S. one of the Coroners of the said Commonwealth, of the said County.

Murder.
South.
AN inquisition by indenture taken at H. in the County aforesaid before me I.
W. Gentleman, one of the Coroners of the Commonwealth of the County
aforesaid, Tuesday, viz. the twentieth day of January, the year, etc. upon
the view of the body of a certain C.B. lately the wife of P.B. of H. aforesaid
at H. aforesaid, feloniously slain, then and there dead lying, by oath of good
and legal men of the town of H. and of three other towns near viz. S.N. and
C. as the manner is, etc. To enquire in what manner and how, the aforesaid C.
to her death came, viz.by the Oath of A.B.C.D. etc. to the number of twelve at
leas t, who say upon their Oath, that where the aforesaid C. the day, year,
place, and County aforesaid, about the hour of two after noone of the same
Tuesday, was in the peace of God and the Commonwealth at H. aforesaid, there
came a certain W.B. lately of C. in the County of W. Gentl. feloniously as a
felon of the Commonwealth, by treachery and assault forethought, against the
peace public, the day, year, hour, place, and County aforesaid, upon the
afores aid C. his Mistress then big with child, and near her time of
Childbirth, as sault made, and with a certain Hatchet of the value of four
pence, which the said W. then and there in his hands held, on the left part of
her head feloniously struck, giving her a wound mortal, of which wound mortal
the same C. instantly dyed, and so the Jurors aforesaid upon their oath
aforesaid say, that the before said W.B. the aforesaid C. his Mistress, then
and there feloniously slew and murdered against the peace public, etc. In
testimony of which, etc.

AN Inquisition, etc. upon the view of the body of a certain J.S. there dead
lying, by oath of A.B.C.C. etc. to the number of twelve at least of Jur. try.
and charged to enquire in what manner and how I.S. to his death came, who say
upon their oath that it so happened, at M. in the County aforesaid, the day,
etc. year, etc. about the hour, etc. that where the aforesaid I.S. was in the
peace of God, and the Commonwealth at M. aforesaid, the same day, year,
place, and hour, there came W.L. of M. afores aid, and S. T. of S. in the
County aforesaid Teoman, as Felons of the Commonwealth of their malices fore
thought, upon I.S. then and there assault made, and the aforesaid W.L. with a
certain Poniard, which in his right hand then and there he held the said I.S.
upon the left part of his body, viz. upon his armehole struck to his heart,
giving him a wound mortal, upon which the same I.S. instantly died. And so the
Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid say, That the aforesaid VV.L. the
aforesaid I.S. at M. aforesaid, in manner and form before said, feloniously
slew and murdered against the peace public, and further the Jurors aforesaid,
upon their oath aforesaid say, That the aforesaid T.S. the day, year, place,
and hour aforesaid was present assisting, abetting, precuring, comforting,
and maintaining the aforesaid W.L. to the Felony and Murder before said, in
form aforesaid doing and committing. In testimony of which, etc.

Manslaughter.
AN Inquis ition, etc. aforesaid. Who say upon their oaths That R.S.lately of
D. in the County aforesaid yeoman, the nineteenth day of December, the year,
etc. by force and arms, viz. with s words, etc upon a certain T.G. at D.
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, with a certain Candlestick of the value of
twelve pence, which the same R. in his right hand then and their held, the s
ame T. upon his head feloniously struck, giving to the same T. then and there
one wound mortal of the length of two inches, the breadeth of one inch, and
the depth of three inches, and after, viz. the same day, year, and place. T.
then and there to the ground thronne, with his hands and knees so fiercely and
violently he shook, that the aforesaid T. of the wound and shaking aforesaid
dyed. And so the Jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid say, That the
aforesaid R. the aforesaid T. in manner and form aforesaid, then and there
feloniously slew against the peace public, etc. And further the Jurors
aforesaid, upon their oaths aforesaid say, That the before said R. at the time
of the Felony aforesaid, by him as aforesaid done, had no goods or chattels,
lands, or tenements in the County aforesaid, nor elsewhere within their
knowledge. In testimony of which, etc.

Robbery and Murder by a man unknown.
South.
AN Inquisition, etc. Who say upon their oath that the twenty fourth of S. the
year, etc. so it happened, that a certain man unknown, God before his eyes
not having, but by instigation diabolical seduced, and moved; with force, and
arms, viz. with swords, etc. betwixt the hours seven and eight of the same
day, at L. in the County before said, in the highway, there in and upon the
aforesaid S.B. then and there in the peace of God and the Commonwealth being,
feloniou sly as a Felon of the Commonwealth assault made, and the aforesaid man
unknown with a sword aforesaid, of the value of four pence which the s ame
man unknown in his right hand then and there held, the aforesaid S.B. upon the
breast then and there feloniously struck, giving the s ame S.B. then and there
with the sword aforesaid, one wound mortal of the breadth of one inch, and
depth of six inches, of which wound mortal the said S.B. then and there
instantly dyed, and so the Jurors aforesaid upon their oath aforesaid say, that
the same man unknown the same S.B. in manner and foresaid feloniously slew and
murdered against the peace public, and further the Jurors afores aid upon
their oath aforesaid say, that the aforesaid man unknown after he the felony
and murder aforesaid, viz. in form before said had done and committed Fled
against the peace public. In tes timony of which, etc.

Murderer of him self who hangs himself; no forfeiture of Lands.
AN Inquisition, etc. Who say upn their oath, that the aforesaid H.W. the
fourth day of April, the year, etc. abovesaid, about the fourth hour after
noone of the same day, God before his eyes not having, but by in stigation
diabolical seduced and moved, at T. aforesaid in a certain Meadow, of the same
H. called Edes Meade, then and there alone being, with one girdle of Leather of
the value of one penny which he then and there in his hands had and held, and
one end thence about his neck then and there put, and one end thence about the
bough of a certain willough tree bound, and himself then and there with the
girdle aforesaid willingly and feloniously hanged and strangled. And the Jurors
afores aid upon their oath aforesaid say, that the aforesaid H.W.in manner and
form aforesaid willingly and feloniously as a felon of himself, himself
murdered against the peace public, and further the Jurors aforesaid upon
their oath aforesaid say, that the aforesaid H.W. the time of the felony
aforesaid, no goods or chattels had in the county within their knowledge. In
testimony of which, etc.

AN Inquisition, etc. as above. Who say upon their oath, that the aforesaid A.
^. the third day of October, the year, etc. abovesaide, about the hour, etc.
God before his eyes not having, but by instigation diabolical seduced and
moved, of his malice forethought, at S. aforesaid, in the County before said,
then and there alone being, in a common brook there himself willingly and
feloniou sly drowned: And so the Jurors aforesaid upon their oath aforesaid
say, that the aforesaid A.P. in manner and form aforesaid, then and there
willingly and feloniously as a felon of himself, himself slew and murdered,
against the peace etc. In tes timony of which, etc.

Of a mad man who drownes himself, it is not Felony.
AN Inquisition, etc. upon view of the body of a certain G.P. there dead
lying, by the ^ath of A.B. etc. sworn to inquire in what manner, and how the
aforesaid G. p. to his death came, who say upon their oath, that the aforesaid
G. P. the fourth day of May, the year, etc. abovesaid at H. being then and
there not s ound of mind, himself into a Spring wilfully cast, and so the
Jurors aforesaid, on their oath aforesaid say, That the afores aid G. B. from
the cause aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid to his death came. In
testimony of which, etc.

Of a prisoner who died in the Jail.
AN Inquisition, etc. upon view of the body of a certain H.C.lately of O. in
the County aforesaid Husbandman, there dead lying, who before then committed
was thither by B. T. Knight ome of the Justices of peace of the County
aforesaid, for suspicion of Felony, by oath of A.B. etc.who say upon their oath
that the aforesaid H.G. the tenth day of January, the year abovesaid, in the
Jail aforesaid, of the visitation of God dyed, and so the Jurors aforesaid,
upon their oath aforesaid say, that the aforesaid H.G. in manner and form
aforesaid to his death came, not otherwise within their knowledge, In testimony
of which, etc.

AN Inquisition, etc.Who say upon their oath that the fourteenth day of April,
the year, etc. abovesaid at C. in the County aforesaid, betwixt the hours
seven and eight before noon of the same day, with one Axe which the said L.H.
then and there in his hands had and held, he cut and threw down one Oak then
growing in a certain wood called, the Cha se, by reason of which throwing
down aforesaid, the aforesaid Oak, then and there by misfortune fell upon the
head of the aforesaid L.H. giving the same L.H. one wound mortal of the length
of three inches, and the depth of one inch, of which wound mortal of the
length of three inches, and the depth of one inch, of which wound mortal, the
afores aid L.H. th^n and there instantly died, and so the Jurors afores aid,
upon their oath aforesaid say, that L.H. in manner and form aforesaid, by
misfortune to his death came. And further the Jurors aforesa^d say, that the
aforesaid Oak is of the value of eight shillings, and that it lies in the
wood afores aid, now in the tenure, custody, or occupation of a certain I.S.
In Tes timony of the which, etc.

Otherwise by misfortune by a Cart with its Load.
AN Inquisition by Indenture, etc. who say upon their oaths, that the aforesaid
R.VV. the eleaventh day of October, etc. the year, etc. abovesaid, at P.
aforesaid in the County aforesaid, going with his Cart from Redding in the
County of B. to Ba singstoke in the County of Southamp. aforesaid, by the way
between R. and B. aforesaid, viz. at P. afores aid, in the County aforesaid,
his said Cart with the load fell upon the body of the before said R.W. and
so broke his body, that of that breaking the aforesaid R. then and there
instantly died. And so the Jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid say,
that the before said R. W. in manner and form aforesaid, by misfortune to his
death came. And further the Jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid s ay,
that then and there three Horses and two Oxen, with the Cart afores aid, and
their Load, viz. six Packs of wool, containing in them by estimaion twenty
four Tods of Wool, moved to death the aforesaid R.W. and that the aforesaid
three Horses and two Oxen are of the price of four pound and ten shillings,
and that the aforesaid Horses, Oxen, and Cart, remain in the custody of I.W.
of P. afores aid, viz. the late wife of the aforesaid R.W. and that the
aforesaid six Packs are of the value of sixteen pound, whence they say, that
two of the aforesaid six Packs are of the value of four pound thirteen
shillings and four pence, and remain in the cus tody of H. P. of B.
aforesaid, Clothier; and that other three packes of the aforesaid six, are of
the value of eight pounds, and remain in the custody of T. B. of Romsey, in
the County of S. Clothier, and the aforesaid one other pack, residue of the
aforesaid Packs, is of the value of sixty s hillings and eight pence, and
remains in the custody of W.B.of R. aforesaid Clothier. In testimony of which,
etc.

The Sherifes Oath for the due execution of his Office.
YOu shall swear, that well and truly ye shall serve the Keepers of the Liberty
of England by authority of Parliament, in the Office of the Sheriff of the
County of Southampton, and do the Commonwealth profit in all things that
belongs to you to do by way of your office as far forth as you can or may:
you shall truly keep the commonwealths right, you shall not assent to
decrease, or lessing, nay, to concealment of the commonwealths rights or of its
Franchses, And what is oever you have knowledge that the commonwealths right have
been concealed or withdrawn, to be in lands, rents, franchises, or suits, or
any other things, ye shall do your true power to make them to be restored to
the commonwealth again: And if you may not do it, ye shall certify the
Keepers of the Liberty of England, or some of them thereof, ye shall not respit
the Commonwealths debts for any gift or favor, where you may raise them
wihout great grievance to the debtors: ye shall truly and rightfully treat the
people of your Sherifwicke, and do right as well to poor as to rich, in all
that belongs to your Office: ye shall do no wrong to any man for any gift,
or other behe st or promise of goods for favor nor hate: ye s hall disturb no
man's right: ye shall truly acquit at the Exchequer all tho se of whom ye shall
any thing receive of the Commonwealths debts: ye shall nothing take whereby the
Commonwealth may lo se, or whereby the right may be let or disturbed, and
the Commonwealth delayed: ye shall truly return, and truly serve all the
Commonwealths Writs, as far forth as shall be to your cunning: ye shall not
have to be your Undersherife any of the sherifes of the last year past: ye s
hall take no bailife into your service, but s uch as you will answer for: you s
hall make each of your bailifes to take s uch oath as you make your self in
that belongs to their occupation, you shall receive no Writ by you nor any of
yours unsealed, or any s ealed under the seal of any Justice, saving the
Justice in Eire, or Jus tice ass igned in the same s hire where ye be sheriff,
or other Justices having power and authority to make any Writs unto you by the
Law of the land, or of the Justices of Newgate: you shall make your bailifes of
true and sufficient men in the country. Also ye shall do all your power and
diligence to destroy and make to cease all manner of here sies and errors,
commonly called Lollaries, within your bailiwick from time to time to all your
power, and assist and be helping to all the Ordinaries and Commi ssaries of the
whole Church, and favor and maintain them as often as you shall be required
by the Ordinaries Commissaries: ye shall be dwelling in your own proper person
within your bailiwicke for the time ye s hall be in the same office except ye
be otherwise licensed by the Keepers of the liberty of England by authority of
Parliament: ye shall not let your s herifewick, nor any bailiwick thereof to
any man: ye shall truly set and return reason and due issues of them that be
within your bailiwick after their estate and behavior, and make your pannels
your self of such per sons as be next, most sufficient, and not suspect, nor
procured, as it is provided by the statutes. And over this, in eschewing and
restraint of manslaughters, robberies, and other manifold grievous offenses
that be done daily, namely by such as name themselves s ouldiers, and by other
vagrants, the which increase in number, and multiply so that the people of
this Commonwealth may not surely ride nor go to do s uch things as they have
to do, to their intolerable hurt and hinderance: Ye shall truly and
effectually with all diligence possible to your power execute the statutes, as
the statutes of Winchester and for Vagabonds. Allthese things ye shall truly
obs erve and keep, as God you help, and by the contents of this book.

Or thus;

You shall well and truly execute the office of Sheriff of the county of A.
during such time as you shall be sheriff.

OF THE AVTHORITY OF A SHERIFF, And how and in what manner he ought to execute
his Office in all things that are in use.
THE SECOND BOOK.
FIrst of all, when he is appointed to be Sheriff, he is then Keeper of the
County, and his power and authority is very great, as hereafter I will set
forth and declare at large: And at the entrance into his Office, the first
thing that he must do, is to go into the Exchequer, into the Remembrancers
office there, and to enter into Recognisance there with sureties, or some for
him, for the payment of his proffers, at or before mense Paschae, and mense
Michael then next following. That done, his Attorney there, will write him a
note, thereby s ignifying that he is Sheriff of such a county, and that he
has entered Recognisance for his proffers, the which note the Sheriff must
deliver to one of the six Clerks in the Chancery, for his warrant to make the
Sherifes tent by, with his Writ of assi stance, and a Writ of discharge to be
de^ ivered to his predecessor, to discharge him (...) his office, the which
would be delivered with all speed, for his own benefit or his undersherifes;
for un^^^ it be delivered unto his predecessor, the precede^. Unders herife may
do execution of Process. And this being done, then if he be so well provided,
he may take his Undersherife with him, and go either to a Master of the
Chancery, or to one of the Judges of the As sises of that Shire, whereof he is
Sheriff, and take their oaths for the due execution of the said Office, or
else he must have a Dedim potestat.out of the Chancery, from the Clerk which
made his Patent, directed to two Justices of the Peace of the same County,
whereof one must be of the Quorum, to give him his oath in the country; but his
Undersherife may be sworn by two Jus tices of Peace, whereof one must be of
the Quorum, without Commission: and until they be thus sworn, they may not
intermeddle with the execution of any process by the Law.

A Sheriff at or before his first County Court, must take over from the old
Sheriff his predecessor, all his prisoners, and writs, precisely by view and by
Indenture to be made between them, wherein all the causes which he has
against every prisoner (at the peril of the old Sheriff) mu st be set forth
and declared, or else the new Sheriff needs not to take any notice of any thing
that is omitted, and left out of the Indenture: for he is not chargeable with
it, but the old Sheriff, as it appears of late in a case adjudged in my L.
Cooks 3. book of Reports, Wesbies case fol. 72. against the She^ife of
London:For although they set him over by In^enture, yet they set not over all
the causes which they ^ad against him, but omitted an Execution, which after
was recovered against the old Sherifes by the plaintiff, and Wesby was at
liberty, and the Sherifes were sans remedy.

All the Writs which are set over in the Indenture between the Sherifes, if
they have been executed by the old Sheriff, then they must be returned by
him, and indorsed under by the new Sheriff thus, I send the Writ as it is
indors ed, to me delivered, it was by R.VV. Knight lately Sheriff if my next
predeces s or, in his going out of his office.

H.C. Knight Sheriff.



And a Sheriff at the first County Court which shall happen to be after his
election, and discharge of the old Sheriff, must read his Patent and his Writ
of Assi stance, and nominate his Undersherife, the County Clerk, and four
deputies of Replevins at the least for ease of the Country, who ought to dwell
12 miles one from another: in every quarter of the County one, to grant
Replevins when need shall require.

The first County of F.P. Knight of the County a foresaid, and so next second
County, the next County Court, held at the Ca stle of Winchest. such a day and
year, setting the Keepers of the Liberties of England Style at large. Then the
Bailife must make an O-yes, and say thus, Essoines and Proffers (before the
Court three times) for this day. And then say, if any man will be essoined or
enter any plaints, let them come in and they shall be heard.

A.B. Is ess oined because he is s ick, or such like. A.B. Complains against
C.D. of a plea of Debt, unjust de tinue of his Cattle, or of a plea of Debts
unjust detinue, trespass, or s uch like, as the case is. This Court ought to be
kept every month upon a day certain of neces sity by reason of the Keepers of
the Liberty of Engl. by authority of Parliament writs of Exigents which must be
read there.

And the Actions must be called there as they are in a Hundred Court, or Court
Baron, and it will not hold plea where the debt or damage is forty shillings,
unless it be by Writ of Ius ticies out of the Chancery, which is a commission
to the Sheriff to hold plea of any sum whatsoever, and yet it is but in the
nature of a Distringas, to dis train a man by his goods to answer there to the
plaintifes action, for his body cannot be touched with it by law, nor his lands.

And the like entries, plaints, answers, bars, and iss ues are to be put in
there, as are used in a Hundred Court, or Court Baron; for this Court is but a
Court Baron. And although it be the Sherifes Court, yet the Freeholders of the
County are the Judges there in all Actions. And the Commonwealths County
Coroners of the aforesaid Keepers are only Judges to give Judgment upon the
Writs of Exigents, and none else; and if they be Freeholders as they ought by
the Law to be, they are also Judges of their actions; if they be not, they
may be removed from their places for lack of Freehold, it is a sufficient
exception in Law to be taken against them in that case.

And the like Process or Precepts as are out of a Hundred Court, changing
things to be changed, are to be made out of this Court, viz. summons,
attachment, and distress infinite

Election for Knights for the Parliament, and of Coroners and Verderers, are
always made by the Keepers of the Liberty of England by authority of
Parliament Writ in the open County Court, and the day and time when, and by
whom, viz. by the Freeholders of the County, and the Knights are to be chosen
between 8. and 9. of the clock in the forenoon, the Court sitting. And the
names of such Freeholders as are at the election of Coroners and Verderers
ought to be set down in the County Court book, for to testify such election,
and the Sheriff is to minister unto the Coroners and the Verderers their
several oaths for the due execution of their offices.

A Replevin.
South.
F P. Knight Sheriff of the County aforesaid, to the Bailey of the Hundred of
H. also to I.S. my Bailey for this time, and to both, and jointly and severally
greeting. Because W.P. has found me sufficient security, as well for the
prosecution of his claim, as for his cattle, viz. one Gelding, three Horses,
etc. which I.C. took and unjustly deteines (a^^s said) to be returned if the
return be thence adjudged. Therefore of the part of the Keepers of the
Liberty of England by authority of Parliament, you and both of you jointly and
s everally I command, that you Replevie and delivery make, or one of you
replevie and delivery make to the afroesaid W.P. of his cattle aforesaid, and
that he put or, etc. by surety and safe pledge the aforesaid I.C. So that he
be at my next County Court at the Castle of Winchest. to be held, to ans were
the said W.P. a plea of taking and unjust detinue of his Cattle afores aid,
and in what manner, etc. to me at my next County certify ye, or, etc. Under
the perrill incumbent. Given under the Seal of my Office, the la st day of
December. the year, etc.

By me Rich. W. Knight, Sheriff.

And if this Replevin be granted by a Deputy to the Sheriff, then he mu st
set his name to the Replevin thus.

By me I.W. one of the Deputies of the said Sheriff, according to form of
Stat. And if the first Replevin be not executed, then the Sherif or his deputy
may grant an alias Replevin, and so a plur. Replevin, vel causam mihi
significes, and after toties quoteis if need be. And upon all these Replevins,
there must be a Bond of ten pound at the least taken of him to whom the
Replevin is granted for his appearance at the next Court after, and prosecution
of his suite with effect against the taker of the cattle, and to make return
thereof, if return be adjudged, the form of which Bond and Condition thereof
must be thus.

Obligation.
KNow all men by these presents, that I W. P. of C. in the County of South.
Gentleman, am held, and firmly obliged to F.P. Knight, Sheriff of the County
before said in ten pounds of good and lawful money of England, to be paid to
him the same Sheriff, or his certain Attorney, Executors or Ass ignes, to
which payment well and truly to be made, I oblige my self, my Heirs,
Executors and Administrators firmly by these presents. Sealed with my Seal.

Dated,etc.
Condition.
THe Condition of this present Obligation is such, that if the above bounden
W.P. do appear at the next County Court to be holden at the Ca stle of
Winchester, and then and there do prosecute his action with effect against
I.C. for the wrongful taking and detaining of his cattle, videlicet, of one
Gelding, and three Horses as it is alleged. And do also make return thereof,
if return thereof shall be adjudged by Law, and also do save and keep
harmless, and indempnified the above named Sheriff, his Unders herife, and
Bailifes, for, touching and concerning the delivery of the s aid cattle, that
then this present Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else the s ame
to stand, remain, and continue in force, s trength and virtue.

And if in this case the taker of the cattle jus tifie the taking as in his
freehold, then this Court can proceed no further therein, but the cau se must
be removed from thence by the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of
Parliament writ out of the Chancery called a Recordare fac loquelam, directed
to the Sheriff retornable the next term following, either in the Upper bench,
or in the court of Common Pleas, which the party will, for they are both common
Law, but they are more properly belonging to the court of Common Pleas, and
this writ ought to be openly read and allowed in the said Court, to the end
that notice may be given thereof to the plaintiff in the Replevin, that he may
appear at the day of the return thereof, and declare against the taker of his
cattle, or else the taker will have A retorn hahend. aver, and so put him to
sue forth the second deliverance, which is a dis advantage to the plaintiff,
for he shall then have no more second deliverance, otherwise he might have
another, and let the Attorney for the plaintiff see well to the s ealing of the
writ of second deliverance with Retorn hend. averior. or else it will fall out
to be manifest error, and overthrow the cause, be it never so just, when it is
an exec, because the writ of R.D. is an original writ, but the def. therein
shall have no costs, it was the case of Nic. M. Gent. against Tho. Newman in a
Replevin for an annuitie adjudged in the upper Bench, Term. Trin. ann. xv. I.R.

Now next, the high Sheriff will look for his security from his under Sheriff
before he will trust him with his office, because he will sleep quietly, and
take his repose in s afty: and for that commonly he has bonds and covenants of
the undersherife and his friends. That men make not void all these bonds and
covenants taken of their undersherifes, Let them look to the stat. 5. E. 6. c.
16. And that gentlemen's Clerks may s ufficiently know how to execute the
office of an undersherife, I have taken occasion to s et forth this book of
directions, sufficiently to teach and ins truct any Clerk that is willing to
undergo the burden of this office for his Master, rather then a Gentleman of
worth shall for a little money hazard his oath or his credit in his country,
for by this means he had better (in discharge of his duty both to God and his
Country in the execution of his office) keep his office in his house, so that
he may take a continual survey of it himself, then trust a stranger upon
bonds and covenants with the whole execution of his Office, which by the
Statute of 23 H. 6. ca. 10. are thought by many opinions to be void or
voydable, for the words of the Statute are these, That no Sheriff, nor none of
his Officers or Ministers shall take or make any Obligation for any cause
mentioned in the said Statute, or color of their office, but only to
themselves, of any person, or by any person which shall be in their ward, by
course of the Law, but in the name of their office, and upon condition written,
That the s aid prisoners shall appear at the day contained in their writs,
bill, or warrant, and in s uch places as the said writs, bills, or warrants
shall require. And if any Sheriff, or any of his officers take any Obligation
in any other form, by color of their office, that it shall be void: And in
this course there can be no loss to the Sheriff, if his Undersherife be
careful to follow the directions here laid before him, for he shall hereby
both get good knowledge and experience and some profit, and his master may give
him good allowance, and yet s ave sufficient out of the honest gains of the
office, to pass his accounts, and to defray part of his other charge, and have
his countrymen well dealt withal, and gently entreated according to his oath;
whereas now as the office is us ed otherwise by undersherifes which buy their
offices, they pay for it, or else the under sheriff must go away a beggar.

The form of an Indenture for s etting ever of Prisoners and Writs, between
two Sherifes.
THis Indenture made, etc. between J.K.Es quire, late Sheriff of the County of
South. of the one party, and Sir H.W. Knight, now Sheriff of the s aid County
on the other party, witnesses, that the said I.K. by virtue of the Keepers of
the Liberty of England by authority of Parliament Writ of dis charge of his
late office to him directed, has delivered and set over unto the said Sir H.W.
these Writs following, viz. A Capias, against W.F. returnable the Oct. of Hill.
at the suite of Andrew Limbon,etc.

Together with the bodies of I.S. in execution at the s uite of G.H. for a debt
of 22. l. and I.H. at the suite of C.D. in execution for 10. l. etc. In witness
s e whereof, etc.

The form of an Indenture made between the High s herife and his
under-sherife.
THis Indenture made, etc. between I.H. of D. in the county of S.Esquire, on
the one party, and H.R. of G.in the said County, Gentleman, of the other party,
witnesses, that whereas the said I.H. being by the Keepers of the liberty of
England, by the authority of Parliament appointed to be high Sheriff of the
said County of S. for this year to come, has upon s peciall affiance,
confidence, and trust that he has and bears in and toward the said H.R.
promised and granted to the said H.R. the u se of the exercising of the office
of his undersherifwick of the said C. together with all fees, fines,
forfeitures of Bonds, profits, commodities, advantages, casualties, allowances,
liberties, franchises, courts, tornes, leets, perquisites of Courts, and other
emoluments certain and uncertain whatsoever, to the office of sherifwick or
undersherifwick belonging, or in any, wise appertaining that any s herife or
undersherife of the said County has heretofore justly and lawfully claimed or
had, to have and to enjoy during, and by all such time as he the said I.H.
shall be, remain, and continue high Sheriff of the said C. of this
appointment or election not discharged. In cons ideration whereof, the said
H.R. covenanteth, grants and agrees, and faithfully promis eth for him, his
heirs, executors, and administrators, that he the said H.R. his heirs,
executors, or administrators, shall and will dis charge, or otherwise
sufficiently save and keep harmless as well the said I.H. his heirs,
executors, and administrators, as also his and their and every of their goods,
cattels, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, of and from all and all manner of
troubles, vexations, suits, actions, informations, complaints, contempts,
fines, forfeitures, amerciaments, penalties, pains, sum and sums of money
payable or levyable to or for the Keepers of the liberty of England by
authority of Parliament, or any other per son or persons whatsoever, for any
matter or thing to be done in or about the said office, and of and from all
losses, hindrances and damages, that shall or may be lawfully moved, stirred,
procured, commenced, prohibited, prosecuted, happen or fall, or lawfully asked,
demanded, or levied upon the said I.H. his heirs, executors, or
administrators, or of or upon his or their, or of any of their goods, chattels,
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, for or by reason of the s aid office of
Sheriff, either by non- suing, or unlawful returning, slow returning, or
misreturning of any Precepts, Writs, Warrants, or Process to the high Sheriff
directed, or to be directed, or for, by cause, or means of any excessive or
unlawful extortion or exaction, or taking of any money, or other gain or
commodity, for the serving or not serving of any such Writs, Warrants,
Precepts, or Process, or for or by reason of any misdemeanour, misusing, or mis
government, negligence, lack of skill, or of ignorance that shall be in the
said H.R. in or about the doing exercising, or executing of the said office of
unders herife, and the said H.R. for himself, his heirs, executors, and
administrators, by these presents does covenant, and grant to and with the said
I.H. his heirs, executors, and adminis trators, in like manner to discharge,
or otherwise to save harmeless and indempnified, as well the said I.H. his
heirs, executors, and administrators, as also all their goods and cattels,
lands, tenements, and hereditaments, of and from all manner of escapes, both
wilful and negligent, of traitors, felons, and other prisoners committed, or
to be committed to his or their safe keeping or charge, in breach of prisons,
and of and from all fines, forfeitures, amerciaments, sums of money, and
penalties that he or they or any of them shall or may incur, bear, pay, or
sustain for any escape or breach of prison during all the time of his
continuance in the said office of high Sheriff of this appointment, and
moreover the said H.R. shall give attendance convenient, and requisite upon the
Courts at Westminster. upon the Judges of Ass. and Just. of the peace, and other
Commissioners and officers within the s aid County, upon whom the said I.H. or
the said H.R. in respect of the s aid office of Sherifwick ought by the Laws
of this nation to attend; and furthermore shall within one year next after the
discharge of the s aid I.H. from his said office, justly and truly make a
perfect account in the Exchequer or elsewhere of all the sums of money, and
other things wherewith the said I.H. shall or may be charged ^s Sheriff of the
County of S. and shall within the said time deliver unto the said I.H. his
heirs, etc. a sufficient acquittance or quietus est.And it is further agreed
upon by the said parties to these presents, that every one of the Bailifes of
Hundreds, and all other the officers under the Sheriff, shall enter into
sufficient bond by obligation, that they and every of them shall truly and
diligently deal in, exercise, and execute their offices during the time
aforesaid, and if any shall refuse to enter bond, or misdemeane himself, that
then it shall be lawful to and for the said H.R. in his di scretion to place
another meet for that office in the room of such person that s hall refuse or
misdemean himself as is aforesaid. In witness whereof, etc.

The Bonds are commonly taken of the under sheriff and his sureties for the
performance of these covenants, and they are ordinary as all other bonds are
for performance of covenants, and therefore here needs no prefident for them.

A condition for a Jailer to enter into the Sheriff, for the safe keeping of
his prisoners.
THe condition, etc. That whereas the above named S.H.W. has at the special
instance and request of the above bounden W.V. constituted and appointed the
said W.V. to be his Keeper of all such prisoners as shall be arrested or
attached by any manner of Writ, Warrant, or Precept, made or to be made, by or
in the name of the said S. H.W. or by or in the name of I.W. his undersherife.
If therefore the said W.V. his deputy or deputies, assignee or ass ignees, or
any of them shall and do well and safely keep all such pris oners as shall be
committed to him or them, or any of them, and therein s hall save and keep
harmless, and indempnified the said sheriff, his heire^, executors and
administrators, at all and every time and times hereafter, of and from all and
all manner of escapes of all manner of pris oners that shall be committed to the
custody and safe keeping of the said W.V. or left under the custody or charge
of any of his deputies or as s ignees, and of and from all manner of
judgments, executions, fines, charges, troubles, and encumbrances whatsoever,
which shall or may hereafter grow or happen to be taxed, imposed, estreted, or
levied upon, of or again st the said sheriff, as sheriff of the C. aforesaid,
or by reason of any such E escape, or Escapes, as aforesaid. And if also the s
aid W.V. his deputy or assignee, shall not discharge or set at liberty out of
his or their custody and safe keeping, any prisoner or prisosoners which now
are, or that hereafter shall or may be by the said sheriff, or by his
undersherife or deputy, or by any of their Bailifes taken, committed,
delivered, or left in the custody of the said W. V. his deputy or servant,
without the special warrant in writing under the hand and seal of the officer
of the said Sherise in that behalf first had and obtained. That then, etc.

A condition for a Bailife to enter into, to the Sheriff.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above named S.B.T. at the special
instance, earnest entreaty of the above bounden I. P. has authorized and
appointed the said I.P: to be one of his Baylifes within the Co. of S.
abovesaid, and in more particular has committed to his charge the Bailiwick of
the Hu. of M. and B. if therefore the s aid I.P. and all such persons, etc. for
and about the executing of s uch things as s hall be given him in charge to
do and execute, as Bailife of the Hun do justly etc. execute his said office
according to the effect and intents of such warrants and precepts as shall be
directed unto him, and come to his hands, from the above named sheriff, or from
his unders herife to be executed, and shall and do upon the view of every
warrant upon mean process from the said sheriff, take sufficient bond with two
s ureties for the appearance of the defendant arrested according to the stat.
in that case made and provided, and shall safely convey or deliver every such
bond, uncancelled unto the said Sheriff, or his undersherife, before such time
as the process whereupon the said warrant is made is returnable, and also shall
at all times, and from time to time, during the continuance of the said s
herife in office of sheriff of the said county, be ready and attendant both
upon the s avd sheriff, and upon his under sheriff, as well at every Assise and
sessions, as also at every C. court to be holden, etc. then and there to
execute his said office as appertains. And also shall well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid to the said s herife or his unders herife, at the Feasts of
Easter and S. Mich. the Archangel now next coming after the date above
written, all and every such s umme and sums of money as has been accustomed
yearly to be paid to the Sheriff of the said county for the Keepers of the
Liberty of England by authority of Parliament out of the said Hundreds, upon
the account of every Bailife of the said Hundreds, commonly called sherifes
turn money: And do in like manner before the said feast of S. Mic. collect
and gather of the inhabitants within the said Hundreds, all sums of money due
to the Keepers of the liberty of England, upon the summons and s cedule of the
green Wax, a sufficient warrant being in convenient time delivered unto him to
that end and purpose, and do accordingly pay the same to the said sheriff, or
to his undersherife within one month next after he has gathered and collected
the same, without covin or surther delay. That then, etc.

A Sheriff is to make warrants upon mean process, or to execute them himself,
which is not possible for him to do execution of all: and they must be made
according to the several natures of his Writs, which for the substance will
direct him, but not for the form thereof, and that does differ in many
counties, but all to one effect, as in the county of Southampton, thus:

A general VVarrant.
SS. F.P. Knight, Sheriff of the County aforesaid to the Baily of the Hundred
of Housholt, greeting, of the part of the Keepers of the Liberty of England by
authority of Parliament, I command thee that thou take A.B. if etc. and him
safely etc. s o that I may have his body before the Justices of the Common
Bench at Westminst. in the Oct. of Saint Hillarie, to answer C.D. of a plea of
debt (or Trespass, according to the Writ,) and this, etc. Given under the seal
of mine Office, the twentieth day of December, the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred forty eight.

A special Warrant.
SS. F.P. Knight, sheriff of the County aforesaid, to the Baily of the Hundred
of H. also to J.W. and T.B. my Bailifes for this time, and to every of them
greeting, of the part of the Keepers of the liberties of England by authority
of Parliament, you and every of you jointly and severally I command that you
take, or etc. A.B. etc. and him safely, etc. so that I may have his body before
the Keepers of the libertyes of England by authority of Parliament, in the
upper Bench at Westminster. on Thursday next after the Oct of Saint Hill to answer
C.D. a plea of Trespa ss, etc. given, etc. as above.

20. day of December. the year of our Lord, 1638.

By virtue of the Keepers of the Liberties of England by authority of
Parliament Writ to me directed, Ret. before the Keepers of the Liberties of
England by authority of Parliament, in the upper bench at Westminst. Thursday
next after the Quindene of Saint Hill. Or if it be out of the Court of Common
pleas, then, Ret. before the Justices of the Common bench at Westminster. in the Oct
of Saint Hill, you shall arrest A.B. if he may be found within my Bailiwick, to
ans were to C.D. in a plea of Trespass, or a plea of Debt, according to the
Writ. Given under my seal of office, the day and year abovesaid, etc.

Per I.P. Mil. Vic:
To I.P. and R. S. my special Bailifes in this behalf, jointly and s everally
greeting.
And in York they use to make their Warrants thus, upon their mean Process.

SS. George S. Knight and Baronet, Sheriff of the county aforesaid,
to all my Bailifes, or to all my Bailifes within the County aforesaid, as
well within liberties as without, also to I. B. and C.D. my bailifes this time
only Itiner. greeting,
of the part of the Keepers of the Liberties of England by authority of
Parliament, you and every of you jointly and severally, I command, that he
take, or etc. A.B.if etc. And him safely, etc. so that I may have his body
before the Keepers of the Liberties of England by authority of Parliament, in
the upper Bench, (if the Writ come out of the upper bench) at Westminst.
Thursday next after the Quinden of Saint Hill, but if the Writ come out of the
court of Common pleas, then it is, before the Justices of the Common bench at
Westminster. in the Oct. of saint Hill. to answer C.D. a plea of Trespass, or Debt,
according to the Writ.

Given under the seal of my office, such a day and year, as above.
And this seems to be the best form of Warrants to have them served: and
there they use to make Warrants upon all their Executions in this form, s ave
only there is added these words before the Test of the Warrant, Provided
always that this present Warrant is to be executed at the Peril of the
Plantife only. And thereupon the Plaintiff will not only pay down the Fee for
the Execution, as much as the Statute allows, but also give bond without
condition, for the saving of the sheriff harmless of the es cape, if any should
happen to be, only they will set down under the Bond, the cause wherefore
the Bond is taken, and the Bond is taken to a stranger, and yet never ques
tioned, which makes execution to be the better done, or else the country is so
spacious, the Sheriff would not be able to do a quarter of his work. And I
see no reason but it may be used in any other country as well as there, and it
will make the Sherifes work much the easier to be done, and all things
considered the more for his profit.

Also they use there to make warrants upon Capias utlagat. in the like form,
and to take Bond, with condition, to bring the defendant to prison if he be
arrested, which makes good execution of these Proce sse; and it were good this
were used in all Countries, then there would not be so much extortion and
indirect dealing used by Undersherifes and Baylifes, to the Weal public, as
there is, or if they take any man upon a Capias utlagatum, they will not only
take money of the Plaintiff for to take the Defendant, but when they have taken
him, for money they will let him go again, and they will alledg for a color,
it is to reverse the Outlawry, which they have nothing to do withal. He ought
to be brought to prison, and there remain until one Attorney or other have
reversed the outlawry for him, and not the Sheriff; for although he be an
Attorney, he ought not when he is sheriff to practice as an Attorney; but yet
notwithstanding they do forestall the Market against the Law and the high
sherifes oath, and it is pity that it is suffered to go unpunished.

The form of a bond for appearance.
KNow all men by these presents, that we A. B.of C. in the county of
southampton Gent. E. F. of G. in the County aforesaid Yeoman, and H.T. of R. in
the county aforesaid Yeoman, are held, and firmly obliged to F.P. Knight,
Sheriff aforesaid, in forty pounds of good and lawful money of England to be
paid to the Sheriff or his certain Attorney, Executors or A ssignes, to which
payment well and truly to be made, we bind our selves, and every one of us
by hims elfe, for the whole and in the whole, the heirs, executors, and
adminstrators of us, and of every one of us, firmly by these presents.

Sealed with our Seals.
Dated the 20. day of December. in the year of our Lord 1616.
The Condition of this present Obligation is such, that if the above bounden
A.B. do appear before the Keepers of the Liberties of England by authority of
Parliament, in the upper bench at Westminster, Thursday next after the Quinden
of saint Hill, if the Writ be out of the upper Bench, according to the return
of the Writ: but if the Writ be returned in the Court of Common pleas, then
the words in the condition mu st be for the defendant to appear before the
Justices of the Common bench at We stm. in the Oct. of saint Hill. or such other
return, according to the Writ, to answer to C.Din a plea of Trespass or Debt,
as it is in the Writ, that then this present Obligation to be void, and of
none effect, or else the same to stand, remain, and continue, in force,
strength and virtue.

Sealed and delivered to the use of the above named sherise in the pres ence of
A.R. and T.S. Two witnesses at the least.

A Sheriff before he return any writ into the Chancery, the upper Bench, the
court of common pleas, and the Exchequer, ought to have an Attorney or Deputy
in every one of those Courts of Record, to answer for him by warrant of
Attorney. And if any Sheriff do contrary to this ordinance in any point, he
forfeits 40 li. every time, and treble damages to the party grieved: one moity
thereof to the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament,
and the other moity to him that will s ue, by a stat. law made anno 23. H. 6.
ca.10.

You shall find in this Book good returns for all manner of writs now in use,
her set down to your view, whenever you shall have occasion to use them, and
also apt returns of all your Excheq. process, with apt and due forms of all
sorts of Inquisitions to be returned there, or elsewhere, with your process.

Sherifes and Undersherifes ought to receive all manner of writs in any place
within the County, without taking of any thing, and making thereof warrant: and
if he refu se to do it, if he make not a return of those writs, he shall be
punished, and render damages to the party grieved by the Statute of 2 Ed. 3.
cap. 5.

Also a Sheriff may arrest men which go or ride armed, and commit them to
prison, there to remain at the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority
of Parliament pleas ure by the same statute. And Also Sherifes and Gaolers must
receive thieves indicted or taken with the manner, without taking any thing for
their receipt, by the statute of 4. E. 3 cap. 16.

Sherifes must return sufficient and reasonable issues upon such persons as
have Lands and goods sufficient: according to the statute of We st. 2. ca. 39.
and 1. E. 3. ca. 5.

Sherifes ex officio may arrest within their County sus pected persons which
walk by night or day, and which are of evil name and same, by the statute of
5. E. 5. ca. 14.

A Sheriff ought to have but one Bailife errant within his County, by the
statute of 14. E. 3. cap. 8.

Sherifes ought to keep their Torns twice every year, viz. one within a month
after Easter, and the other within a month after the Feast of S. Michael the
Archangell, by the stat. of 31. E. 3. ca. 14.

Sherifes must leavy their issues and amerciaments by their extracts under the
s eale of the Exchequer, otherwise they shall render to the party damnified,
treble damages, and also make fine to the Keepers of the Liberty of England by
Authority of Parliament for their offense, which is determinable before the
Justices at their Sessions, by the stat. of 43. E. 3 ca. 9.

Sherifes ought to return their pannels for the sessions 4 days before the
sessions, at least upon the pain of 20 li. and the Bailifes of liberties ought
to make return of their warrants six days before the Sessions at the least,
upon the like pain, by the statute of 41. E. 3. cap. 11.

Sherifes ought four times in the year to proclaim the Statute of Winchester
in every hundred of his Bayliwick, for it is parcel of their oath, yet they
never do it.

Sherifes ought to take the swords, daggers, and weapons from s ervants
laborers, and from servants of Artificers, and Victuallers, if they find them
bearing of any, except it be in time of war, or when they travel abroad into
the Country with their Ma sters, or go in their messages, and they may keep
such weapons until the next se s sions, and there present them with the names
of those that bore them, by the stat. of 12 R. 2. ca. 9.

Sherifes may ex officio apprehend laborers, servants begging and wandering
abroad, and commit them to prison without bail or mainprise, but they can take
no s ees of such persons, neither upon receipt or delivery of them, upon pain
of a C. s. to the Keepers of the liberty of England by Authority of Parliament,
by the sta^. of 12. R. 2. ca. 9.

Sherifes and other of the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of
Parliament Officers, when they have notice of unlawful Assemblies and Riots,
ought to rai se the Country, and with all their power to apprehend such
malefactors, and commit them to prison, there to remain until due execution of
the Law be done upon them, and all Lords of Seigniories, and all other people
ought to be attendant to the Sheriff and other officers, with all their power
and force herein, by the stat. of 17. R. 2. ca. 8.

A Sheriff ought to dwell within the County in his person during the time of
his Sherifewick, and he ought not to let his office to farm, both by his oath
and by the statute of 1. H. 4. ca. 5.

A Sheriff ought to foresee and provide, That neithe^ his Unders herife, nor
any of his Clerks, Baylifes, or Receivers, be an Attorney in any of the
Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament Courts, during the
time of his Sherivalty, both by his oath, and also by the stat. of 1. H. 5. ca.
4.

Every Sheriff ought to proclaim the statute of Purveyors four times in his
year, upon pain of a hundred shillings for every time failing therein, and he
ought als o to deliver that to his successor to proclaim upon the like pain,
by the stat. of 1. H. 6. ca. 2. but this is never done.

Sherifes ought to make due election of Knigh^s for the Parliament by the
Freeholders of the County, and in open County Court, and between 8. and 11. of
the clock in the forenoone of the same day, by the stat. of 6. H. 6. c. 6. upon
pain of a C. li.and a years imprisonment without bail or mainprise.

Sherifes ought to return upon every precept directed unto them from Ju stices
of P. to enquire of forcible entries, upon every Jury twenty shillings issues a
the first day, and Justices of Peace have power and authority to hear and
determine those defaults by Bill or Indictment, and Sherifs shall forfeit for
every default twenty pounds, whereof he that will sue shall have the moity by
the stat. of 8. H. 6 cap. 9.

And Sherifes ought to return in writs of Attaints, in plea of Land of the
yearly value of forty shillings, or in actions for deeds concerning lands to
such value, and in actions of forty pounds or more, such persons inhabiting
within his Baylywick, which can di spend 20. li. per annum, besides all
charges, for term of life at the least, and out of ancient demesne, Gavelkind,
and Cinque ports, and upon the first distress 40 s. and upon the s econd C. s.
and after double issues upon the Jurors, upon pain of 10. li. to the Keepers
of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament, and 10. li. to the party
grieved, and if there be not sufficient persons inhabiting within the County,
which can expend 20. li. per annum, then they shall impanell other persons of
the most sufficient in possession of yearly value of lands, under the value of
20. li. per annum, upon pain of 10. li. to the Keepers of the Liberty of
England by Authority of Parliament, and 10. li. to the plaintiff, by the
statute of 15. H. 6. cap. 5.

A Sheriff may not occupy his office above a year, and if he do he s hall
forfeit two hundred pound, and be disabled ever to be Sheriff of any County
after, by the stat. of 23 H. 6. cap. 8.

No Sheriff ought to let to farm his County, nor any of his Baylywicks,
Hundreds, or Wapentakes, for it is both against his oath, and contrary to the
statute of 23 H. 6. cap. 10.

No Sheriff, Baylife of Liberty, nor any other Officer shall return in any
pannell or Jury any of his Bailifes, Officers, or servants to any of his
Officers, by the Statute of 23 H. 6.

Forfeiture x. li.
No Sheriff, nor any to his use, shall take any thing of any person to be
arrest^d or attached, nor for sparing of any arrest or attachment, for fine,
fee, suit of prison, mainprise, letting to bai^e, or for showing any ease or
favor to any such person so arrested, but only for the Sheriff twenty pence,
the Baylife which makes the arrest four pence, and the Jailer (if the
prisoner be committed to prison) four pence, by the s tatute of 23. H. 6. cap.
10.

And a Sheriff ought to take but four pence for the copy of a pannell, and two
shillings for return of a pannell, by the Statute of 27 El. cap. 12.

Sherifes ought to let to bail all persons being in their keeping, by force of
any Letter, Bill, or Warrant, in any personal action, or upon Indictment of
Trespass upon reasonable s urety, having s ufficient in the County to appear at
the day and place, as those letters, bills, or warrants require, except such
persons as are in their guard or custody upon a capias ad satisfaciend.
utlagary or excommunication, or for s urety of the peace, or by commandment of
any Justices, and vagrants which refuse to s erve* vide Dyerfol.324. He is of
opinion that the Mar s hall of the upper Bench is within the compass of the
stat. of 23 H. 6. cap. 10: But the Warden of the Fleet, and the Keeper of the
prison at Was tm. are not within the compass of that statute, for they are
excepted.

Note, that a sheriff ought to take Bond for the appearance of his pri sooner,
with two sureties, having sufficient within the same County, otherwise the
obligation is held to be void, and it must be made to the sheriff by the name
of the s herife, and not to the unders herife, and there must be nothing
inserted into the condition of that bond, but that the defendants shall appear
in the court from whence the writ issued at the day of the return thereof to
ans were to the plaintiff in his action. Plo. Comment. fol. 68.

If more be ins erted into the Obligation, then is for the appearance of the
party bound, the bond is void, per Mountague chief Justice Comment. 68. s. in
Manninghams case there.

A Bond entered into by a prisoner, to any person save only to the Sheriff for
the enlarging of a prisoner, is not not good, but merely void in law, by the s
tatute of 23. H. 6. cap. 10. And so it is where a Bond is given to the sheriff
by a stranger for the enlargement of a prisoner that is not baileable, per 37.
H. 6. and Dyer, 2. and 3. P. and M. fol. 119.

A sheriff having an Attachment retor^. coram dicto Rege and consilio suo in
camera stellat. apud Westminster. in quindecim Paschae ad respond. dicto Domino Regi
and consilio suo de quodam contemptu and ad fac and resp. ulterius, etc.
Return. before the said King and his Counsel in the Star Chamber in 15. of
Pasche, to answer the said Lord the King and his Counsel a contempt, and to
do and answer further, etc. does arrest the party and takes bond for his
appearance indorsed with such condition, that if the party arres ted shall
personally appear before the Kings Majesty, and his counsel at Westminster in
Quindecim Paschae, and then and there shall answer to a contempt by him
committed, that then, etc. It was a question whether this Bond and Condition
was good in Law or no, because these words then and there were added unto the
condition, which was more than the stature of 23. H. 6. would warrant; and it
was demurred on in Law, but by the opinions of Dyer and Windham, it was thought
to be a good Bond and Condition, notwithstanding those words were added, yet
Mead was of a contrary opinion. But Termino Mich. Anno 2 and 3 El.judgment was
given for the Plaintiff, Dyer 364.

Sherifes ought to take no obligation for any thing whatsoever it be, or by
color of their office, but only to themselves, nor of any person being in
their cus tody but by the name of the office, naming him sheriff in the
obligation, this upon condition that the party shall appear at the day and
place in the writ or warrant specified, and if any obligation be taken by
color of their office in any other form it is void, 23. H. 6. c. 10.

And sherifes ought to take no more but 4. d. for making of any obligation,
warrant, or precept, by the same Law.

And sherifs ought to make proclamation when they have received letters for the
levying of expense of the knights of the Parliament, at the next County Court
after the receipt of the se Letters: and the Coroners ought to be there to
sesse the wages, upon pain of 40. s. and they ought to assesse every Hundred
at a certain sum by it s elfe, and after every village within the Hundred
with a certain sum: and if they do it otherwi se, they shall forfeite for
every default twenty pound, and he that will sue shall have the moity thereof
with treble damages. 23. H. 6. c. 11.

And every sheriff after the receipt of the Kings writ for summoning of the
Parliament for the election of Knights for the Parliament, ought forthwith to
make out his warrants under the seal of his office, to every Major and
Bailifes of Cities and Boroughs within the County, commanding them thereby to
choose Citizens and Burgesses to come to the Parliament: and those Majors and
Bailifes must make a lawful return of that precept to the sheriff by
Indenture made between them and the sheriff, of their election, and of their
names which are elected: And the sheriff must set his hand and seal of Office
to the one part of the Indentures, and then deliver it to the Major or
Burgesses, or Citizens to be kept, and to the other part the Major, and
Citizens, or Burgesses must set their hands and seals, and deliver it as their
deeds, to the sheriff to be certified and returned by him with the writ of s
ummons to the clerk of the Crown, who will have 4. s. for his fees for every
Indenture, as I do take it.

The form of an Indenture for the Knights of the Parliament.
THis Indenture made in the full County of South held at the Ca stle of Winch.
Monday the last day of May, the year, etc. betwixt F.P. Knight, Sheriff of the
County afores aid of one part, and C.H. Knight, H.D. Esquire. and D.B Esquire. etc. and
many other persons of the County aforesaid, and Electors of two Knights, to the
Parliament, in the Writ to this Indenture annexed specified, of the other part:
who as the greater part of the whole County aforesaid, then there being,
sworn and exomined, according to the force form and effect of diverse
Statutes thereupon put forth and provided, chose H. W. and E.M. Knights within
the County before said Commorant, girt with swords, Knights able and most fit
and discreet, giving and granting to the two aforesaid Knights full and
sufficient power for thems elves and the whole County aforesaid, to do and
consent to those things which at the Parliament in the said Writ contained by
the Common Counsel, etc. shall happen to be ordained, in busine sses in the
said Writ specified. In testimony of which, the one part of the Indenture
remaining with the Keepers of the Libertyes of England by authority of
Parliament, the parties abovesayde have put their seals, to the other part of
the same Indenture, the before said Sheriff has put his seal Dated the day, year
and place abovesayd, etc.

The form of the Indenture for the Citizens and Burges ses.
THis Indenture made, etc. reciting the day, year, etc. Witnesses that by
virtue of a Warrant to me directed from Sir F.P. Knight, Sheriff of the county
of Southampton. for the electing and choosing of two Burgesses, men of good
understanding, wit, knowledge, and discretion, for causes oncerning the Weal
public of this Nation, to be at the high Court of Parliament to be holden at
the City of Westminster, the 27 day of October next coming, I I.F. Major of
the Borough of C. in the County of S. with the whole assent and cons ent of
the rest of the Burgesses there; have made choice and election of H. M. of the
Middle Temple Esquire, and W.S. of L. Esquire, to be Burgesses of our said
Borough of C. to attend at the s aid Parliament, according to the tenor of the
said Warrant to me directed in that behalf. In witness whereof I have to
these presents set our common seal of our said Borough, the day and year
first above written.

A Sheriff ought not to execute the office of a Justice of Peace during the
time that he is Sheriff, 1. M. cap. 4.

Where any man by diss imulation, flattery, or by any cunning, slight, means,
or practice do make themselves to be beloved of any sole woman, as maid, or
widow, which maid or widow have great possessions, or great store of goods or
money, and to deceive them of it, and to gain it for themselves, do by fraud
gain the po ssession of such woman, and do convey and keep them in such
places where they will not suffer them to go from them at liberty to dispose
of their own as they list, unless such maid or widow will enter into Bond
or Statute to pay some great sum of money; or el se bind them from marriage
with any but such as they will nominate and appoint, for remedy hereof it is
ordained, that the party so bound shall have a Writ in the Chancery, containing
all the matter of s uch unreasonable dealing, called a special Supplicavit
directed to the Sheriff of that County where such wrong is offered, commanding
him thereby to make proclamation at his next County Court after receipt
thereof, that the defendant appear at a certain day and place prefixed in the
said Writ before the Lords Commiss ioners of the great Seal, or before the
Judges of Assise of that County, or before s ome other person assigned by the
said Lords Commissioners, and the sheriff is bound to execute such Writs
according to the tenor of them, upon pain of 300. l. the one moity thereof to
the Keepers of the Liberties of England by authority of Parliament, and the
other half to him that will s ue by action of Debt, where no wager of Ia
(...), protection or foreign plea shall be allowed, by the Statute of 31 H. 6.
cap 9.

Upon information made to a Justice of P. or other Justices against any person
for retaining or giving livery to any, or against any which is retained, the
Jus tices ought to make process upon this information as upon a recovery in debt
or trespass e, and the Sheriff ought to return no lesser issues in any suite
brought hereupon against any pers on that is sufficient, then 20. s. at the
first day upon the distres se, and at the second day 30. s. and at the third
day 40. s. and so at every day after, more by ten s hillings in issues, upon
pain for every retorn 20. s. ann. 8. Ed. 4 cap. 2.

The ancient Sherifes may return Writs, and execute their office during the
Terms of Saint Michael and Hilarieafter the year their office is ended, if
they be not before that time lawfully discharged of their office, 17. Ed. 4.
cap. 7.

No Sheriff or any other Officer ought to release or take from any pers on
arrested or imprisoned for Felony, his goods, until the same person arrested
or imprisoned be duly convicted and attainted of the same Felony by due
course of Law, viz. either by trial, confe ssion or outlawry, upon pain to
forfeite the double value of the goods so taken, to the party grieved, to be
recovered by action of debt, wherein no wager of Law, essoine, or protection
lies, an. 1. R. 3. cap. 3.

Sherifes which have the custody of the Jail, ought to certify the names of
their pris oners which are in their custody for Felony, to the Justices of the
next general Jail delivery in a Calendar, upon pain of a hundred shillings
for every default, an. 3. H. 7. c. 3.

Also a sheriff nor no other person in his name, or by his commandment, shall
enter any plaints into their Books in any man's name, unless the plaintiff be
there in his proper person, or else by his sufficient Attorney or Deputy, that
is well known to be of good name and behavior, and the Plaintiff ought to
find pledges, such persons as are known in the Court to pursue his plaint.
And a Plaintiff shall have but one plaint for one Trespass, or one contract,
and if the Sheriff, or any of his Officers cause to be entered any more plaints
then the Plaintiff has cause of Action for, then the sheriff or his clerk that
does contrary to this act, shall forfeite for every default 40. s. the moity to
him that will sue and prove the same matter by action of debt or information.

Also the sheriff shall make sufficient Precepts after such plaints entered, but
not before, against the defendants, directed to the Bailife of the Hundred, to
attach or warn the defendant to appear at the next County Court, and answer
to the said plaints, and if there be any default in the said Baylifes in the
execution of their offices according to the tenor of their precept, then they
are to forfeite forty shillings, and to be convicted thereof by examination of
the Justices of P. or by any of them.

Also the same sheriff, nor his deputies shall make any extracts to levy the
shire amerciaments, until that two Just. of P. whereof one to be of the
Quorum, have the sight of their books, and the extracts to be indented between
the Just. of Peace, and the sheriff and undersherife, sealed with their seals,
the one part thereof to remain with the said Justices, and the other part with
the sheriff, for his warrant to levy the amerciament by.

And that those persons that shall be gatherers of the said amerciaments, shall
be sworn by the said Justices, That they take no more money than is forfeite,
and certified in their extracts, sealed with the s eales of the Justices to the
same, upon the same pain of forfeiture as is above rehear sed, to be convict
by examination of the s ame Justices, or one of them. And the same Justices of
Peace shall be appointed at the sessions holden at Mich. by him that is Gustos
Rotulorum,or in his absence by the eldest of the Quorum, to have the
controlement of the said Sherifes, Undersherifes, Shire-Clerks, and others of
their said Officers, and the s aid sherifes amerciaments, and the said Justices
of Peace upon suggestion shall make process against the Sheriff, Unders
herife, Shireclerk or other officers, to appear before them to answer such
suggestion or information, as is used in action of Tr^spas, by the Statute of
21. H. 7. cap. 15.

Also every Sheriff upon a precept to him directed from the Justices of Peace
to return them a Jury to enquire of any Riot, or unlawful Assembly committed,
shall return four and twenty persons dwelling in the Shire, every one of them
having 20. s. per annum of Freehold, or 26. s. 8. d. per annum, copyhold, or of
both, besides all charges, and to return in issues upon every person which
makes default, twenty shillings at the first day, and at the second day forty
shillings, and if default be in the Sheriff for returning of persons ins
ufficient, or for not returning of Issues in form aforesaid, then he does
forfeite twenty pounds, anno 19. Hen. 7. cap.13.

Also if any Riot, or unlawful Assembly be in any part of the Nation, the
Justices of Peace, or two of them at the least, and the Sheriff, or Unders
herife may come with the power of the County, if need be, and arrest and
restrain such misdoers; and these Justices and the Sheriff have power to
record that which they find done in their presence against the Law. And such
misdoers shall be convict by that Record: And if they be gone before the coming
of the Justices and the Sheriff, or undersherife, then the same Justices, or
two of them, ought diligently to enquire thereof within one month after such
Riot or Assembly made, and if the truth cannot be found out within one month
then next ensuing, then those e Justices, or two of them, and the Sheriff or
Undersherife, shall certify the Keepers of the Liberties of England by
authority of Parliament thereof, and of all the circumstances thereof, which
Certificate shall be as an Indictment of twelve men, whereunto they shall be
compelled to answer, anno 13 H. 4. cap. ultimo.

And if the said Riot or unlawful Assembly be not found by reas on of any
Imbracery or maintenances of the savd Jury, then the said Justices of Peace,
and the Sheriff, and Undersherife, over and beside such Certificate that they
must make, according to the Statute of an. 13. H. 4. shall in the same
Certificate certify the names of the same Maintainers and Imbracers in that
behalf, if any be, with their misdemeanors that they know, upon pain of
every the said Justices, and Sheriff, and Vndersherife twenty pound, if they
have no reasonable excuse for non certifying of the same: which certificate so
made shall be one Indictment in the Law, and every person duly proved to be
a Maintainer or Imbracer shall forfeite twenty pound, and be committed to Ward
there, to remain by the discretion of the Justices, Anno decimo nono Hen.
sept. cap.3.

Also that no Sheriff upon Writs and Precepts directed unto him to return
before Es cheators or Commissioners shall return any person to enquire of any
lands or tenements, except he have lands or tenements of the yearly value of
forty shillings, above all charges in the same shire, upon pain of forfeiture
for every person so returned, an hundred shillings, anno 3. H. 8. cap.2.

Also all pannels put in by the Sheriff before any Justices of Jail delivery,
or before Justices of Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum in their open
Sessions, to enquire for the Keepers of the Liberties of England by authority
of Parliament, may be reformed by putting to, and taking from, of the names so
impannelled by discretion of the s ame Justices, and that the same Justice or
Justices shall command every Sheriff and their Ministers in their absence to
put other persons in the same pannels by their discretion, and the same panel
so returned by the Justice to be good, and if any Sheriff do not return the
same pannels so reformed, then every sheriff so offending shall forfeite twenty
pound, half to him that will sue by action of Debt, bill, or complaint, where
such shall happen to be, and no wager of Law, Essoine, or Protection to be
allowed, tertio Henr. octavi cap. duodecimo.

Also upon every Exigent where Writs of Proclamation are to be awarded, the
same Writ of Proclamation is to have the same day of return that the Exigent
has, and to be delivered of Record by the Exigenter of every shire. And the
sheriff is to make a Proclamation three s everall days in his county, whereof
one proclamation is to be made at the general Sess ions in those parts where
the party is supposed to be dwelling, there to yield his body to the sheriff of
the foreign shire, that that sheriff may have the body at the day of the
return of the Exigent to answer to the plaintiff. And that the sheriff of the
County that has such writ of proclamation duly execute, and return the same,
at the day, upon pain to forfeit such amerciament as by the Justices before
whom the said Writs shall be returnable shall be assessed. Ann. 6. H. 8. c. 4.

Also Sherifes which have the custody of goales shall make seals to be graven
with the name of the Castle that they keep for to give and seal letters to
prisoners acquitted to beg for their sees within the hundred where they be
delivered by the space of six weeks next after their delivery, and then to go
to the Hundred where they last dwelled by the space of three years, or where
they were borne: the Sheriff shall not suffer such prisoners to beg for their
fees, nor to depart out of prison to do service and labor, until he deliver
to them such letters, and the Clarke of the Peace is to make such letters
within one day after the Sessions, when such prisoner is acquitted, upon pain
of 12. d. to the keepers of the liliberties of England by authority of
Parliament by the statute of 22. H. 8. cap. 21. and 5. El. ca. 4.

Sherifs ought to keep their County court every month if it has bin accu
stomed to be so kept. Magna chart. c. 33.

The Keepers of the liberties of England by authority of Parliament command
that Sherifes and their Officers which receive the debts, shall acquit the
debtors upon their account when they have received the debts, and then it shall
be allowed upon their accounts in the Exchequer: and if the Sheriff do
otherwise, and be thereof convicted, he s hall then pay three times so much as
he has received to the party grieved, and al so be fined at the Keepers of the
liberties of England by authority of Parliament pleasure, Westminster. 1. ca. 20.

Sherifes and other which have levied the Keepers of the liberties of England
by authority of Parliament debts, and given acquittances to the debtors, and
yet do not acquit them, it is accorded and set down for a Law, that when the
Sheriff is impleaded for it in the Exchequer, if he come not in upon the first
distress, then shall go out another with proclamation, which must be made in
full county, that the defendant do come in at a day certain, and acquit the
debtor of the money which he did receive, and if he come not in then, he shall
be convicted by default, and the debt levied upon him as a debt recovered
against him in the Court of exchequer and the plaintiff shall have therein
damages according to the discretion of the Barons, by the stat. of 14. E. 3. c.
1.

And it is the Keepers of the liberties of England by authority of Parliament
commandment, that all Sherifes and Baylifes which have received their debts of
the summons of the exchequer, if they acquit not the debts upon their account,
that then they shall be punis head according to the statute de Dis trictionibus
Scaccarij ca. 5.

And it is ordained that execution of writs which are brought to Sherifes,
should be done by the Bailifes of hundreds sworn and known, and in full
county, and not by others, unless those Bailifs will not, or cannot execute
them, then they are to be done by other convenient pers on or persons sworn by
the stat. of Lincoln cap. ultimo.

No Sheriff shall suffer a Barretor to maintain any actions or quarrels in
their County Courts, nor stewards of great men or others, which is not
Attorney to his Lord or Master; nor they shall not pronounce judgments there,
unless they be thereunto required by all the s utors, Westminster. 1. ca. 23

It shall be lawful for every Sheriff, Justice of Peace, and Eschea or to
seize to the Keepers of the liberties of England by authority of Parliament
use all s uch goods and chattels as Egyptians have, within their charge, and
thereof to give an account to the keepers of the liberty of England by
authority of Parliament in the exchequer for the moitie thereof, and to detain
and keep the other moitie to his own use, and to pay no fees for the account,
nor for the charge the reof.

In these statutes it appears what things Sherifes ought to do by reason of
their office, and that they ought to take nothing for doing of their office,
but that only which is appointed for them to take by the same statutes, if
they do otherwise, it is extortion in them, and it ought to be inquired of by
the Ju. of P. and by them punished accordingly.

And it is ordained by the stat. 1. H. 4. c. 5. that if any s herife do any
extortion to the people, and thereof be duelyattainted, that he shall be puni
shed for the same extortion at the Keepers of the liberties of England by
authority of Parliament will.

A Sheriff may and ought at his turns to enquire of common Nusances done to
all the people of this common wealth, but not of Assaults made to a sole pers
on Per Martin Anno quarto Hen. sexti, octavo Edw. quarto, quinto. Dyer 234.

A Sheriff ought to keep his turns within a month after Easter, and within a
month after Michaelmas, and if he keep it at any other time after the month,
it is void by the Statute of 13. Ed. 3. cap. 19, and all indictments and pres
entments taken there after the months are expired, are void by the statute of
38. H. 6.

A Sheriff may inquire of blood sheds in his turn, for if any thing be omitted
in a leete, it may be enquired of at the Sherifes turn, for all leets were
derived and taken out of the Sherifes turn, Pasch. 8. Ed. 4.26.43. Ed. 3. and.
20. E. 3.3.

And all the Justices were of opinion, that a Sheriff has authority to
enquire of all things in his turns, that ^s either trespass or felony at the
common Law, except of the death of man, but he cannot enquire of trespass or
felony by statute in his turn, 28. E.3.95 21. E. 4.

If a Sheriff inquire of Nuisance in his Turn, and it is there found, which
should have been inquired of in a Leete: now the Sherif cannot distraine for
his amercia meant, for if he do, he is a trespassor. But if default be ^n the
Lord of the Leet, for that he did not inquire therethereof, it seems then
that the Sheriff by the Lords default may inquire thereof in his turn, 28. E.
3.95.2.9 E. 3.27. 10. H. 21. E. 3.3.

If a man have a Fair or a Market by grant or by pres cription, and does not
keep his fair or market as he ought to do, the Sheriff may inquire of this in
his Turn.

Upon a presentment of a Nuisance in the sherifes turn, the offender shall be
amerced, there the sheriff may distraine for that amerciament. And if a Purpre
sture be presented there, the sheriff may abate it and return it Pasc 25. E.3.

It appears by Master Britton, that all the Freeholders and Terre Tenants
inhabiting within the Hundred, ought to come to the sherifes Turn, none
excepted, but Knights and Clergy men, their wives and children. And there,
twelve at least of the s ufficientest Freeholders within the Hundred ought to
be impanelled and sworn to inquire and present all things there inquirable,
and presentable, and all the rest which appear there, ought to be sworn by
the dozeners and villages to present to the said Jury all such things as shall
be given them in charge, and it seems that the sheriff ought to keep his
turn in every hundred within his County, and there punish all things which
have been omitted at the Leets or law days there.

Also by the same Law it seems, that they ought to Inquire there of petty
Treas ons, Homicides, Rapes, Robberyes, Burglaries, and of all manner of
Felonyes by the Common Law, and of all other things inquirable at a Leete,
according to the statute of 18. Ed. 2. de Vic. Franc. Pleg.

And when the dozeners and villages have delivered their presentiments to the
said Jury, and the Jury, when they are agreed of their Presentiments, then they
must give up to the Steward or Court-keeper such presentiments, as they will
stand to, and avow, and if there be any of Felony, they must deliver up these
by themselves to the steward privily, and the rest openly.

But this Court is now almost out of use, since sherifes have us ed to sell
both their sherifwickes, and bailiwickes to men of mean estate that will not
regard the good of the Common wealth, but altogether their own private gain
and profit, whereby the Keepers of the Liberties of England by authority of
Parliament are many times much wronged, and deceived, between the Vnders
herife, and the Bailifes, of all their waifes, straies, and selons goods, which
are taken up by the Bailifs, and never accounted for, which may touch the
Sheriff in his credit and reputation, for when he enters into his account for
the payment of the Keepers of the Liberties of England by authority of
Parliament debts, he is then sworn to answer and account for all waifes,
straies and felons ^^ods, debts, perquisites, and profits which he seldom or
never knows of, because those ancient Courts are not kept as they ought to be,
and therefore how he may dispense with his oath herein is the question.

There is a Writ in the Register, fol. 174. whereby a Sheriff may remove all
his Bailifes of Hundreds, Wapentakes, Tythings, and Liberties, which have not
Lands or Tenements sufficient within the County. And sherifes bailifes one
year, ought not to be in that office in three years after, by the statute of
1 H. 5. cap. 4. becau se by their continual being in that office, they grow so
cunning that they are able to deceive both the Keepers of the liberties of
England by the authority of Parliament, the s herife, and the country.

And sherifes bailifes ought to be sworn to the Keepers of the liberties of
England, by authority of Parliament, to exercise their office duly and truly by
the statute of 27 Eliz. capitul. 12.

The nature of Executions, and of how many s orts they are.
THey are of six sorts or degrees, viz. upon a Statute Merchant, a statute
Staple, a Recognisance, an Elegit, a Capias ad s atisfaciend, and a fieri fac,
and a sheriff cannot lawfully break any man's house to do execution upon any of
these justifiable, except the Keepers of the liberties of England by the
authority of Parliament be a party, for every man's house is his safest refuge,
as hereafter shall appear. If a man be bound in a statute Merchant, execution
shall be done thereof thus. First a Writ of Certiorare must be sued forth of
the Chancery, directed to the place where the Statute was acknowledged, to
certify the acknowledgement of the statute into the petty bag office in the
Chancery, and upon that certificate shall go out a Capias against the body
only, si laicus sit, returnable in the Court of Common pleas, or in the upper
Bench: And upon the return of that, with the sheriff of that shire to whom it
was directed, that he is a Lay man and is not found in his shire, then within
a quarter of a year after shall go out an Exigent against all the cognisors
lands and goods, and again st his body, and for your better satisfaction
herein, see the Statute de Mercat^ribus 37. Hen. 6. fol. 6. and Fitzherbert
130. G.

A statute staple must be certified in the like manner as statute Merchant,
and upon that shall go forth a writ of exe cution, both against body, land,
and goods, returnable in the Chancery in the Petty bag office there, and not
in the Court of Common pleas, or upper Bench, as the Writ of execution upon a
statute Merchant shall: and upon the return of this Writ such lands and goods
as are taken in execution shall be delivered to the cognisee by the sheriff by
another Writ called a Liberate, and not before. And note that all the Fee
simple lands, which the cognis or had at the time of the acknowledging of the
said Statute, or at any time after, are liable to both the said statutes, but
no intailed Land, but during the cognisors life, nor no copihold land, nor no
goods, nor leases for life, or years, but such as the cognisor has in his own
use and possession at the time of the execution done, Fitz.131. D.

Note, that if a statute staple be returned and filed, the cogni see can have
no Liberate into any other county. 2 R. 3. fol.7.

Upon a Recognisance there shall not go out a Capias, but Scire fac.returnable
in the Chancerie, and upon the return thereof they do use to a ward a Capias,
a Fierifacias, or an Elegit, at the choice and election of the cognisee. 48. E.
3. fol. 14.

By an Elegit the sheriff may take in execution one half of the land of the
cognisor, and all his goods, besides oxen and beasts of the plow, A Capias ad
satisfaciendum is only against the body, which the Sheriff must be s ure to
keep safe, or else he may perhaps pay the debt, if his prisoner do escape
either with his leave or consent, after that he is once in execution, for then
the Sheriff has small remedy or none at all, but if he do escape against the
Sherifes will, and without his consent, then the sheris e may take him again
if he can find him by (...) Writ before the return thereof, or by ano ^^^^
after, though it be in another shire, so that he be foll^ (...) fresh suit, and
taken again before the action bro^^^^ by the plaintiff against the Sheriff,
for the escape, h^^^oever the Sheriff in this case may have his remedy against
his prisoner by his action upon the case, if he be able to make him
satisfaction, otherwise he may keep his body, and his prisoner in this case
shall not be delivered by supersed upon audita querela, because he cannot take
any benefit of his own wrong. But otherwise it is when a prisoner escapes with
the consent of the Sheriff or jailer, for then he shall have and maintain if
he will in Audita querela against a Sheriff, or a jailer, (...) appears in my
Lord Cooks 3. Book of Reports fol.43. and 44. in Boytons case there.

And in my Lord Cooks said third book of Reports, it is re solved for Law,
That if a Sheriff die in the time of his Office, having diverse persons in his
cusiody, and after a new Sheriff is chosen in his place, in this case it
behooves the new Sheriff to take notice at his peril of all the executions
which are against any person which he finds in the Goal, and that is a
matter of necessity, for in that case there is no man in rerum natura to
deliver the prisoners unto him.

Als o in the same case it is resolved, that if a Sheriff die in the time of
his office, and before another be appointed to that place and office, a
prisoner which was in the pris on in execution, breaks the prison, and so is
at large, this is no e escape, and the reason is there alleged, because when
the sheriff died, all his pris oners were in the custody of the Law, until a
new sheriff was chosen, and set in his place. And therefore although that the
pris oners be in the interim out of the walls of the prison, yet the Law has
the custody of them, and preserves them in execution without any fre sh suit
made after them, wheresoever they be, and they may be fetched again in
execution at any time after, if they can be found, and no escape in this case
can prejudice the plaintiff.

Note also that if a prisoner die in execution before payment or s atisfaction
made to the plaintise for his debt for which he is in execution upon a Capias
ad satisfaciend. i^ this case the pl. shall have an Elegit against the
defendants lands and goods, if he had any lands, in fee simple, at or any time
after the Judgment was had against him, or any goods at the time of his death.
And it is Bloumfields case, in the fifth book of sir Edward Gookes Reports, f.
87. and Fitz. not. br. fo. 246.

Also when a man is in the Sherifes custody by the process of Law, and after
another Writ is delivered to the sheriff against the body of him which is then
in his custody, the sheriff in this case must be answerable for his prisoner,
although he do not arres t him by the second Writ, by the judgment of the Law,
for Lex non praecipit inutilia, And this in Frosts case in the fifth book of
Reports, fol, 89, and with this agrees 7. H. 4.30.

If a Capias, viz. a mean process be executed and not returned, the arrest is
tortious and a wrong, for the arrest is made to that end that the def. should
appear to answer to the plaint his action, but in all Writs of execution
except an Elegit, if the execution be duly done, althoughthe Writ be never
returned or filed,, it is no great matter if the pl. have his demand; for then
he has no cause to proceed any futher herein: but in ca se of an Elegit,
because the extent is to be made by an Inquest, and not by the Sheriff alone,
that ought to be returned, or else it is nothing worth, as it appears in Hoes
casein the said 5. book of Reports, fol. 90. and by Fulwods case in the 4,
book, fol. 65.

Also it is resolved in Seymans case in the said 5 book of Reports fol. 91.
that a man's house is to him his Castle, as well for his defense against in
jurie and violence, as for his rest and repose, and that a sheriff cannot
justify the the breaking of any man's house to execute a Capias ad s
atisfaciendum, or a Fieri fac, but if he do, it is at his peril, and he is
therein a trespasser, if the Keepers of the liberties of England by authority
of Parliament be not a party, for every man's house is his safest res uge: but
if the Keepers of the liberties of England aforesaid be a party, then the
Sheriff may justify the breaking of a house to do execution of his process, if
he cannot otherwise execute his process, but first he ought to make request to
open the door by the stat. of Westminster. 1. c. 17. and 41. of the Assise placit.
17. if he break the do^res when he may enter otherwise, yet in the said
Seymans ca se, it is resolved, That a sheriff upon an habere fac s eis inam or
possessionem may break a hou se and deliver seison and possession thereof to
the plaintiff, and the reas on therein is, because that after judgment, it is
not the defendants house in right and judgment of Law.

Also whether it be for felony or suspicion of felony, the Keepers of the
liberties of England by authority of Parliament officer may break another man's
house to apprehend a thief, and that for two reas ons, viz. one for the good
of the Commonwealth, and the other is for the service and duty which he owes
to the weal public, for in every felony, the common- wealth has an
interest, and where the commonwealth has any interest, the Writ is A non
omit propter aliquam libertatem, and therefore the liberty or privilege of
any man's house e will not hold against the Keepers of the liberties of England
by authority of Parliament but where the common wealth, has no interest, but
only a common person. A Sheriff although he make request to open the doors,
and denial is made, if he should then break them, and so enter and do
execution: that men in the night as well as in the day, should have their
houses broken upon any fained matter, for although that a Sheriff be an Officer
of great authority and trust, yet it appears by daily experience, that all or
the most part of the Keepers of the liberties of England by authority of
Parliament Writs, are executed, and served, by unders herifes and Bailifes,
which most commonly are persons of small value and account. And all the
authorities which do prove that when the Process concern the aforesaid
Keepers of the liberties of England, that the Sheriff may then break the house
of any man to execute them, if otherwise he cannot execute them, implies that
at the suit of a common person, the house cannot be broken justifiably, and
with this resolution agrees the book in 6. Edw. 4 fol. 9. A fieri facias is
only against the goods and chattels of a man, as moveable goods, or Leases for
years, and the sheriff had need to be very careful how, and after what manner
he does execute this Writ, lest he burn his fingers, for if the goods or
Leases which he takes in execution be not the defendants own goods, or
Leases, although he may find them in the possession of the defendant, which is
the best color in Law to prove them, his, if he use them and take the profit
and benefit of them as appears in Twynes case in sir Ed. Cooks 3. book of
Reports.

Also s ometimes it does fall out, that the goods and chattels which a Sheriff
upon such a Writ takes in execution, are not the defendants, and then the
Sheriff is a trespasser to the Owner of the goods, as if the Lands be pawned to
the defendant, they are none of his until the day of the redeeming of them be
past, 34. H. 8. Pledges, (...) 28. and 4. Edw. 6. distr. 75. So if a man bona
fide make a Lease of his Oxen for years, and after is condemned in a personal
Action, these Oxen during the time sh ^ll not be taken in execution, 22. E. 4.
fol. 10.

In debt where three are bound jointly, and severally, and three Judgments are
had again st them, in this case if execution be done against one of them, the
others shall have a Supersedeas: But in Trespass against three, execution
against one of them suffices not, and the same Law is in a joint debt, 4. El.
fol. 39.

If goods taken in execution upon trial are found to be none of the
defendants, then the Sheriff shall pay damages to the owner of the goods, to
the value of the goods so taken, and costs of suit, although he has delivered
them to the plaintiff in execution, if he have returned his Writs, that he has
taken so much goods of the defendants, and that he has those moneys ready to
tender etc to the plaintiff, then he is at a double mischief; for although the
value of the goods be recovered against him by the owner of the goods, yet the
plaintiff in the action may within the year after execution done, have a Scire
facias upon the judgment and return, and thereby compel the Sheriff to bring
the money into the Court, and after the year he may have an action of debt
against the sheriff for it, if he be not otherwise ordered by the Court where
the Judgment is depending. And therefore in this cas e the surest course for
the Sheriff, is either to keep the goods until the parties be agreed, or
else to take good security of the plaintiff to defend him and save him harmele
sse, and to stay the returning of his Writs, until he may be well advised what
to do therein, for if he take a bond of the plaintiff, it is questionable
whether it be good or no in Law, and not with in the compass of the statute of
23. H. 6. to be taken color. officii: s ed hoc quere.

It is resolved in Mi^tons case in my Lord Cooks 4. book of Reports, fol. 33.
and 34. that both the County C. and the goal are appertinent and belonging to
the Sherifes office, and ought not to be severed, no more than the Sherifes
turn from the office, and it was the opinions of Poph. and Anders. the 2. L.
chief Justices, and with that agrees the Judgments of the Parliament ann. 14.
E 3. ca. 10.

Now next I will say something as concerning a sherifes account, which will
trouble him most of all, if he be never so skillful therein, it is so tedious
and so chargeable, for if he get by his office, he will go nigh to be
stripped clean out of his paying of Exchequer fees, and other extraordinary
charges which he cannot avoid, as experience has taught me, and there is no
way to help it as I think, but by an act of Parliament, and therefore it is
no marvel that the Undersherifes make shipwreck of their consciences, to catch
what they can to save themselves, and that which they had before they entered
into that office, for what between some of their high sherifes covetousnes in
taking money for their office: and extremity showed to them and their sureties
upon every light and small occa sion, and the extreme taking of ordinary and
extraordinary fees of Exch. ^en, a poor undersherife is stripped out of all
that ever he has, or can make, if he do not hedge so, as he may be still in
action every year, as a Fox is stripped out of his skin; and yet few or none
will pity him, for in every Court where he is called in question, the name of
the undersherife is so odious, and many times not without just cause, that
oftentimes an honest man is condemned to be a knave; before he is heard speak
for himself; nay, he is so odious (I mean a lewd extorting undersherife) that
a Thief by a general Pardon, receives more favor then he can, for a thief
is thereby pardoned of all felonies, for the which he might have the benefit of
his Clergy, although he cannot read, but all misdemeanors committed by an
undersherife, are commonly excepted out of the General pardon, which is
somewhat hars h, that all shall be condemned for some, for there is never an
Officer the Keepers of the liberties of Lngland by authoty of Parliament have,
takes more pains, and undergoes more perils, and does the Keepers aforesaid
better service, than an hone st, understanding and a careful undersherife
does, but commonly these do die beggars, by reason of the causes before
alleged.

The entrance into the Sherifes Account.
FIrst, in Hillarie Term next after they are out of office, the high Sheriff
and unders herifes of most Shires are sworn to yield and give a just and true
account to the Keepers of the liberties of England by authority of Parliament
and their officers in the public Excheq. which they shall be charged withal,
by the green wax of the Exchequer, and of all wayses, streyes, and felons
goods, which happened within the compass se of their office, and of all other
profits whatsoever, due and belonging to the weal public, and chargeable by
them to answer for, by reason of their office, or much to this effect. Now when
this is done, the high Sheriff commonly takes no further care, beeause he
thinks himself secure, by reason of his security which he has of his
undersherife, for thereupon he relyes, and seldom or never remembers what oath
he has taken, and so commits all to his undersherife; then if his undersherife
be a careful and an hones t man and have skill and regard to do his best
endeavor to levy the Keepers of the liberties of England by authority of
Parliament debts, and to pay them into the receipt duly and orderly, as they
ought to be, then the high Sheriff may do well enough, and therein dis charge
both his oath and and his Oath and duty, but if otherwise, a lewd, or an
ignorant undersherife, may both undo his high Sheriff, and himself, both in
this world, and in the world to come, by totting and nichling, that is, in
charging or dis charging, unorderly, unhonestly, or or ignorantly, for if if be
totted, that is charged, though it can never be levied: it will now hardly be
avoided, but it mu st be paid, and if it be nichiled, if it be issues of
Jurours, though they be never so bad, and cannot be levied, between the old
Sheriff which returned them, and the new sheriff which nichised them, they must
be paid, though it be seven yearer after, if there come no pardon in the
mean time, by an old Statute made in the 27 year of Ed. 1. and to prevent
this, it behooves all Sherifes before they take upon them to return any Jurors,
to get them a perfect book of all the sufficient Freeholders names in the
shire, and especially of all which dwell in the gildable, howsoever they do of
those which dwell in liberties, but of both is best, that the one may help the
other, and to return sew or none that be mean Freeholders in the gildable,
lest by the said Law they be enforced to pay their issues for them, which is a
thing very hardly to be brought to pass, unless the Justices of P. in every
quarter of the country, do cause the Constables and Ballifs to bring a true
certificate thereof to the first quarter sessions that shall be holden in the
shire, after the election of the new sheriff, to be delivered unto him there,
and this will hardly be done, unless the Judges of Assise of every shire will
be pleased to write their letters to that end and purpose to the Jus tices of
peace of every division.

Now next the Undersherife must go to the foreign Apposer, and with him he must
either tot, nichil, or set over into liberties all the debts and s ums of money
contained in the summons of the green Wax, and in the Extracts of the P. of the
Co. where he was Vndersherife, wherein he must be very careful what he does,
lest he do that which he cannot undo again, and to prevent the danger
thereof, his best way is to examine his book which he is to make of all the
charge contained in his summons and scedules before and with the Baylife of the
shire to have their direction, which are good debts, and which are not, and
which are in liberties, and which are not, if he himself do not know it
before he come to his account, and then make his book accordingly, and then he
s hall be the better able to perform the duty of an hone st man, when he comes
to his Apposals; but herein if the Sheriff know not well the Country, and the
Kee^ers of the Liberties of England by authority of Parliament debtors
himself, he is many times abu sed by the Baylifes, who most dishonestly will
mis-informe him, and for bribes and rewards which they receive of the
Freeholders, will tell him that they are either long since dead, or nothing
worth, when as they are living, and very sufficient, and they will also s erve
him so, with the Recognisances, and by that means dishonest Bailifes do cause
sherifes to deceive the Keepers of the liberties of England aforesaid of many
of their debts by their ignorance against their wills, in trusting of the
reports and informations of their Baylifes; and this cannot be helped unless
the Sherifes will levy the Keepers of the liberties of England by authority of
Parliament money themselves, which they cannot possibly do, by reason of their
other business, or had trusty servants about them to do it truly and honestly,
without grievance of the country, as i^ ought to be.

A Particular of the ordinary Charges of the Account of the Sheriff of the
County of Southhampton, heretofore us ed to be paid, as follows.
Termin. sancti Hill. Cro. Purificationis, when he enters into his Account.
INprimis, to his Attorney in Mr. Osbornes Office, for his warrant of Attorney,
ij. s. vj. d. Item, to him for his fees, and I cannot tell for what else, xxx.
s. Item, to his man for his fees, vj. s. viij. d. Item, to another in that
office for entering of that warrant. xij. d. Item, to the punie Baron for
ministering of the oath, ij. s. Item, to the Cryers and Tipstaves there, xx. s.
Item, to the Marshal then and there, vj. s.viij. d. Item, to the foreign
Apposer for his fee, iij. li. x. s. Item, to his men, x. s. Item, to the Clerk
of the Extracts for his see, xx. s. Item, to his men, x. s Item, to his
Attorney in the pipe for his fees, v. li Item, to his man for his fee, xx. s.
Item, to the deputy of the Pipe for his fees, xxiij. s. iiij. d. Item, to the
Controuler of the Pipe for his fees, xxvij. s. vij. d. Item, to his man for his
fee, x. s. Item, to Ma ster Orms of the Pype for his fees, xvij. s. viij. d.
Item, to the Earon for the Apposell upon the s ummons of the pype, x. s. Item,
to him for his fee for the vicontels, x. s. Item, to his man for his fee for
the same, v. s. Item, to his Attorney in the remembrancers office for ^i fee,
iij. s. iiij. d. Item, to his man, iij. s. vj. d. Item, for a Writ of
Assistance from your Attorney in M. Osbornes office, v. s. vj. d. Inprimis to
the Master of the Pype fot his fee, xviij. li. v. s. Termino Paschae.
Item, to the Ma. of the Wardrop for his fee, v. li. xj. s. ix. d. Item, to him
for a Tally to have thereby an allowance ^iven for it. xvj d. Item, for joining
of that Tally in the Pype, iij. s. iiij. d. Item, for Mast. Elsons fee for the
forre st of Wesbeare in ^amps hire. iij. li. x. d. Item, for the Earl of
Pembrookes fee for Burley wall in ^e new Forest in the s aid County, ix. li.
ij. s. vj. d. Item, to Sir Will. Kingsmill for his fee and reparations (...)
Freemantle Park in the said County, xxix. li.xvij. s. v. d. ob.
All these five last payments are allowed upon the She^^fes account, out of the
Keepers of the liberties of Engl^y authority of Parliament money, which
otherwise should ^ee paid to them.

Item, to the foreign Apposer for his see for allowance of Justices wages to the
Sheriff upon the Extracts of the Peace, xl. s. Item, to his men for their fee,
xiij. s. iiij. d.
And herein the Sheriff of the said County is wronged by the Clerk of the Peace
of the said County, for the Clerk of the Peace there receives all the fines,
and pays the wages, and if there be any surplusage he puts it up in his own
purse, and the Sheriff pays it into the Exchequer, and never has it, becau se
the fines are all certified in the Extracts of the Peace, and many times the
fines do exceed the wages of the Justices which are allowed to the Sheriff for
the wages, for he is allowed but four shillings a day a piece for eight
Justices, and therefore accounting the fees which he pays to the Officers in
the Exchequer for his allowance, he is a great loser by it, and the Clerk of
the peace goes away with the gains, therefore this would be remedyed.

Item, to the foreign Apposer for casting up of the debet upon the s cedules
of the green wax, v. s. Item, to the Auditor assigned for the Shire, for
declaring of the account, x. li. at the least Item, to the Attorney of the Pype
for giving allowance of the Justices wages, before allowed by the foreign
Apposer in the sherifes account, xiij. s. iiij. d. Item, to him for giving
allowance of Elstons acquitrance, vj. s. viij. d. Item, to him for the foot of
the Account, xxxiij. s. iiij. d. Item, to his man for his pains taken therein,
x. s. Item, to the Baron for declaring of the account, vj. s. viij. d. Item, to
his man for his fee, ij. s. Item, to his Attorney in the remembrancers office
for examining of the account, v. ^. Item, to one of Ma. Osbornes office for
receiving of the account, v. s. Item, for copies of the seisures which the s
herife make himself in his year, in M. Osbornes office commonly (...) the
least, v. ^^. Item, for copies of the new seisures on the rememb^^ side,
according to the number of them, but commonly they come to about xx. s. Item,
you must leave with your Attorney in M. Osborns office in part of payment for
making your petition upon your account, for they will cost you iiij. s. a
piece, and you may perhaps have C. x. li. Item, for another Writ of Assistants
there, v. s. vj. d, Item, for entering the view of the account in M. Osbornes
office, vj. s. iiij. d. Termino Trinitatis.
Item, in the alienation office for viewing of the account and for a note of
the charge there, iij. s. iiij. d. Item, if the sheriff take the benefit of a
general pardon, then he must gee to the Clerk of the Extracts to have
scedules made of all, such issues as are pardoned, and they will cost him for
every scedule (as I remember) xx. d. which may come to four or five pound, or
thereabouts Item, to the Clerk of the Extracts man for his pains therein,
xiij. s. iiij. d. Item, then to a Baron for allowing of them, xiij. s. iiij. d.
Item, to the Barons man, iiij. s.
And this must all go out of the Sherifes purse, without any allowance: and it
is better then to oppress the country when they may be eased by the pardon.
For if the Sheriff levy any, he must pay it into the receipt, or else he is
forsworn.

Then if you carried any prisoners by Writ or commandment from the Judges of
Assise, you mus t go to the chief Judge of Assise for his warrant, and get
your allowance under his hands as good cheap as you can, for some of his men
will have money of you for it, x. s. at the least.

And then when you have his hand for it, you must go to the Chancellor of the
Exchequer for his hand to it, and his man will look to have for his pains
therein taken, at the least x. s.

Also in the Alienation office it will cost you for making of the bond and
acquittance, with the scedules of seisures against such as have sold land held
of the Commi ssioners without lycense of alienation, x. ls. vj. d.

Item, for a Warrant for a day to finish the Account until Mich. term, which
now will hardly be gotten without extraordinary favor, xl. s. Item, to the
Attorney in the Pype office, for setting off from the account six amerciaments,
xx. s. Item, to his man for his pains therein to be taken, x. s. Item, paid for
discharging the amerciaments in M. Osbotnesoffice, xx. s. Item, for a warrant
to set off and dis charge in Sir Henry Fanshawes office, xij. s. vj. d.
Item,for another Writ of Assistance, v. s. vj. d. Item, to the Marshal for
liberty if the Sheriff cannot go through with his account in Trinity Term, iiij.
li. vj. s. viiij. d. Item, to his man, vj. s.viij. d. Item, to M^st. Osborne
for ruling of your Petitions, xl. s. Item, more to his Attorney in the said
office for making the petitions, v. li. Item, to his man for his pains taken
therein, xl. s. Item, to the M^ster of the Pype for his fee, xiij. s. iiij. d.
Item, to the Controuler of the Pype for his fee, xxx. s. Item, to his man,
xxij. s. Item, to your At. of the pype for his fee, v. li. Item,to his man,
xxij. s. vj. d. Item,for the acquittances of two tallies in the receipt ij. s.
Item, for striking of those tallies, iij. s. iiij. d. Item, for joining and
allowing of another tally, for payment of a debt de remanent. compoti, v. s.
Item, to two Auditors for casting up of a sherifes ac^ount in the Court when he
is to be cast out of the Court, x. s. Item, to the Baron then, xx. s. Item, to
his men, vij. s. Item, to the Marshall then, vj. s. viij. d. Item, to the
Tipstaves and Cryers then, x. s. Item, to the Clerk of the Pype for Reeusants,
xxx. s. Item, for allowing and joining of the tally for Recu sants debts 6 s.
Item, to the Baron for respects for Recu sants debts 30 s. Item, to the Cleark
of the Pipe for Recusants for alowing of that warrant 10. s Item, to the Master
of the Pipe for the same 3. s. 4. d. Item, to the bagg-bearer 12. d. Item, for
the Qui^^us est to the Sheriffs Attorney of the Pipe 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. Item,
to his man for his pains taken therein 20. s. Item, for the Quieius est for
the Recusants 20. s.
Cum multus alus quaenunc praes cribere longum est. Et sic quietus est.

Summa totalis, etc.

All these sums are paid, besides all his charges and fees which he lays out
and disburs eth in the year that he is Sheriff, which comes to a great deal
more, as experience will teach him.

A Return of Summons of Assizes.
Return of Writs.
BY virtue of this precept to me directed, I made to come before the Jus tices
under written, at a day and place within contained, all the Writs of A ssises
and Juris, certified in the County of S. under written, before whatsoever
Justices, as well by the diverse Writs of the L. P. and M. lately King and Queen
of England, as by the diverse Writs of The Keepers of the Liberties of England
by Authority of Pa liame^t, together with the Panes, Attachments,
Reattachments, and all others helps of Assizes, the Juries, and those
Certificates what way soever corcerning. I have also made to come before the
foresaid Jus tices to the Gaol of the Keepers aforesaid, of the Castle of
Winch, ass igned for the delivery out of Pris ons there, at the day aforesaid,
all Prisoners in the Gaol aforesaid, being together with their Attachments,
Re-attachments, and all other helps tho se prisoners any way concerning, and of
the visne of every Town and place, where the felony for which the prisoners
stand indicted, appealed or arraigned was committed, as well within the
liberties as without, twenty four good and legal men, by whom the truth of the
matter may be known and inquired, such as are not of any affinity with the
prisoners; together with four men, and the chief of the town and place of
those, to do those things which then and there to them of the part of the
Keepers of the Liberties of England by Authority of Parliament, now shall be
enjoined. Publicly al so have I proclaimed through my shire, that all those
who will purs ue against those prisoners, that then and there they shall be as
ju st it may be to prosecute. Also I have made known to all Co^oners, Ju s
tices of peace, senescals of Lords and great men, Bailies of Liberties and
Hundreds of the County aforesaid: That there they be with their rolls,
records, indictments, and other their memorandums, to do those things which to
their offices belong, as within is commanded me.

The residue of the execution of this precept, appears in certainscedules to
this precept annexed.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

And the warrants which the Sheriff must make by virtue of this Precept for
the summoning of the Assi ses to the Bailiffes of Liberties, and Bailiffes of
Hundreds, must contain in them the whole substance of this Precept, but whether
it be in Latin or English, it is not material, so that it be in due form: And
it is needful that the Sheriff keep for himself a particular note of the
names of such pers ons as he nominateth in his warrant to be s ummoned to serve
in the grand Jurie, and not to leave it to the discretion of Bailiffes to put
in and out whom they list in that service.

The form of a Warrant.
ss. RObert O. Esquire. Sheriff of the County aforesaid to the Baily of the
Liberty of C, or the Baily of the Hundred of A. greeting, By virtue of a
certain precept directed to me, I require thee, that thou cause to come before
L.T and L.H. Justices of Assise in the County aforesaid, to the Assizes at the
Castle of Winch, the teuth day of August next to be held, several pers ons
under written, to do those thing which then and of the part of the Keepers of
the Liberties of England now, shall be to them enjoined. Publicly also
proclamation make thou, thy whole Bailiwick through, that all those who will
pursue again st the prisoners in the Gaol of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, and of the County aforesaid, be there against them as just it shall be
to prosecute; Al so known make to all Coroners, Justices of Peace, seneschales
of Lords and great men, that then there they be with their Rolls, Records,
Indictments, and other memorandums, to do those things which to the^r several
Offices belong* And that thou thy self be then there, to do all those things
which to thy office belong, together with this precept under the peril
incumbent: Given under the Seal of my office such a day and year, etc.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Then here at the end of the Warrant under, the Sheriff must set down the
names and dwelling places of such as he will have warned to serve in the grand
Jurie in particular, and keep a note of them, that he may be able to show to
the Court, if need s hall require, who he had determined to have returned for
that service if they had come, and if the fault f^ll out to be in the Bailiffe,
then he shall be punished, and the Sheriff excus ed.

Return of Summons to the Sessions of peace.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have caused to come before the
Justices under written at the Cas tle of Winch, etc. within specified, the day,
year, and place within contained all Con stables, and Bailies of Hundreds
within the County speci s ied. Also from every of the said Liberties and
Hundreds, twenty four Jurors to do those e things which of the part of the
Keepers of the Liberties of England to them then and there shall be injo^ned,
And also I have made known to all Constables, Bailies of Hundreds of the County
within written, that then there they be, having with them all the names of
Artificers, Laborers, and servants in husbandry within the Hundred a foresaid,
against the form of the Statute thereupon put forth and provided, And moreover
sufficient proclamation within my Shire have I made, that all those, who as
well for the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. as for themselves,
against such like Artificers, Laborers, and servants any complaints against
the form of the Statute and Ordinance aforesaid, will complain or prosecute,
that then there they be, their Bills to prosecute, and justice there to
undergo, if they see it expedient for them, as within to me is commanded.

R.O. E sq. Sher.

The Warrant must begin in the same form as the other, that to come you cause
before the Justices of the public peace in the County aforesaid at, etc. all
Constables, etc. according to the substance of the matter contained in the
Writ, and to conclude it as the other is concluded.

The return of this Writ is sometimes thus.

THe execution of this Writ appears in certain Pannels to this Writ joined or
annexed.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ Original in debt or trespass, if the defendant be
infufficient.
Pledge. of prosec. I. Do. R. Roo.


The within named H.B. and C.D. and if there be more defendants than two, then
you must name but one, and the rest of the defendants within named, nothing
have within my Shire, by which they may be summoned, if it be debt, but if it
be in trespa ss, then it must be by which they may be attached, or he may be,
if it be but against one defendant,

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Capias al. and plur.
THe within named A.B. is not found in my Shire (And i^ there be three then let
it be) And the rest of the defendants within named are not found in my Shire.

R.O. E sq. Sher.

Return of Exigent
BY virtue of this Writ, directed to me at my County hell at the Castle of
Winch, in the County of S. within written, Mundav, etc. viz. the twentieth day
of I. the year, etc. within written, I.C. and the rest of the de sendants
within named, (i^ there be above two) first were exacted and appeared not, At
my County of S. there held on Monday, viz. the twentieth day of A. the year
aforesaid, the aforesaid I.C.and the rest of the defendants within named the
second time were exacted and appeared not, At my County of S. there held, on
Mundav, viz. the tenth day of S. the year before said, the aforesaid I.C. and
the other defendant within named, the third time were exacted and appeared not,
At my County of S.there held, viz. the twelfth day of O. the year aforesaid,
the before s aid I C. and the rest of the defen. within named, the s ourth time
were exacted and appeared not, And at my County of S. there held on Monday,
viz. the third day of N afores aid, the aforesaid I.C. and the rest of the
defendants within named, the fifth time exacted were and appeared not,
therefore I.C and the rest of the defendants within named by judgment of I.W.
and W.R.gent. Coroncrs of the Commonwealth, of the County aforesaid, according
to Law and Cus tom of the Commonwealth of England outlawed are, and every of
them is outl^ wed.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ of Exigent with supers ed.
By virtue, etc. at my County of S. there held on Monday, viz. the twentieth
day of A. the year aforesaid, the afores aid I.C. was the fourth time exacted
and brought to me the Writ of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. of
supersed. and it is to this Writ annexed, For which to the farther executing
this Writ I have superseded all together, as to me in this Writ is commanded

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ of Exigent where one renders himself, and all the others
appear not.
BY vert^e, etc. at my County of South. there held on Monday, viz. the tenth
day of A. aforesaid, the aforesaid I.C. and the rest of the defendants within
named the (...) time exacted were, at which day the aforesaid I.C. appeared and
himself rendered to the prison of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, of
the Castle of Winch, whose body before the Justices within written, at the day
and place within contained ready I have, as within to me is commanded, but the
rest of the defendants within named appeared not, therefore, etc. as above.

He that has rendered himself, languishes in prison.

AT my Court, etc. the aforesaid I.B. has appeared, and rendered himself to the
prison of the Keepers of the Liberties of England of the Castle of Winch,
within the County of S. aforesai^, and in the same prison now remains languis
hing, by diverse infirmities withheld, so that because of the weakness of his
body and danger of death he cannot be carried, and therefore the body of I.B.
aforesaid, before the Justices within written at the day and place within
contained, for the present have I cannot, according to the form of this Writ.

Return of the exigent where one renders himself, another brings a Supersed.
the third is dead, and the fourth waved.
BY virtue, etc. at my County of S. there held on Monday, viz. the tenth day of
A. the year aforesaid, I H. R.S. A.C. and D.P. were the fifth time exacted, and
the aforesaid R.S. rendered himself to the prison of the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, etc. of the Castle of Winch, in the County aforesaid,
whose body before the Ju s tices within written, at the day and place within
contained ready I have, to do that which the Writ aforesaid demands and
requires, and the before said D. P. brought me the Writ, etc. of Supersed,
annexed to this Writ, so that as to him farther proceed I could not, and the
aforesaid I.H.dead is, and the aforesaid A.C. waved, Therefore by the judgment
of I.W. and W.R.Coroners of, etc. of the County aforesaid, the aforesaid I.H.
is outlawed, and A.C.waved.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of allowance.
THere were allowed to him four days, at which the within named T.C. exacted
was and appeared not, and further by virtue o^ this Writ at my County held at
the Castle of Winch, in the County of T. within written Monday, viz. the eight
day of N. the year, etc. the aforesaid D. the fifth time exacted was, and
appeared not, Therefore by judgment, etc. as above, he is outlawed.

Return of Exigent betwixt two Sheriffs.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed at my Court of S. held at the Castle of
Winch, on Monday, viz. the tenth day of A. the year, etc. the within named R.K.
exacted was and appeared.

R.O. E sq. Sher.

This Writ as it is indorsed, to me was delivered by R.O. Esquire. Sher, of the
County within written, my next predecessor, in the end of his office, And at my
County of South. held at the Castle of Winch aforesaid, in the County before s
aid on Monday, viz. the tenth day of D. the year aforesaid, the before said R.K.
the second time exacted was, and appeared not, etc. as above.

And if there want Coroners at the Count to give Judgment, Then the Sheriff
shall return his Writs thus, viz. that because of want of I.W. and R.W.
Coroners of the Commonwealth of the County aforesaid, further proceed he could
not, and then upon this return, the Coroners will be fined for every Writ,
unless they can make a good excuse.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ of Proclamation.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed at my County of South. held at the
Castle of Winch, in the County of South.within written, the twenty one day of
March the year, etc. within written, to be proclaimed I cau sed, and at the
most usual door of the Church of B. within written, on Sunday, viz. the tenth
day of April, the year, etc. immediately after divine Service no Sermon in the
s ame Church then and there being, one month at least before the said W. the
fifth time exacted was, to be proclaimed I caused, and at the general Sess ion
of the Peace held at the Castle of Winch afores aid, in the County aforesaid,
the thirteenth day of May the year above said in the parts of B. aforesaid,
again I caused to be proclaimed, that the within named B. should render himself
to me, as within to me is commanded.

Ric. M Kn. Sher.

Return of the Writ of Capias utlag.betwixt two Sheriffs.
BEfore the coming of this Writ I.M. E sq. lately She. of the County of S.
took the within named T.D. and in the prison of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England of the Castle of Winch, in the County of S. aforesaid in his custody
detained, by virtue of a certain Writ of capias utl to the said late Sheriff
directed, which I.D. the said late Sheriff together with the said Writ, to me
I.D. Knight now Sheriff of the County of S. aforesaid, delivered, whose body
with the Writ a foresaid, I the aforesaid now Sheriff, before the Justices
within written at the day and place within contained ready have, to do and
receive what the said Writ shall demand and require.

R O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Original Writ in partition.
Pledges of pros. Joh. Den. Rich. Fen.


Sum. of the within named R.B. and E. his wife W.H. I.F.


R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the original Writ in Covenant.
Pledges of pros. I. Do. R. Roo.


Sum. of the within named I.P. Den. Fen.


R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Sum. in dower.
Pledge of prosec. I. Do. R. Roo.


Sum. of the within named. I.H. I.W. W.D.


And at the Church Parochial of P.where the within named A.B. etc. on Sunday,
viz. the fourth day of July the year within written, immediately after divine
service, nosermon then being publicly, I caused to be proclaimed according to
the form of the Statute, as this Writ demands and requires.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Summons in waste.
Pledges of pros. John. Do. Richard Roo.


Sum. of the within named L.P. William Fen. Richard Den.


And further I R.O. Esquire. Sher. of the County within written, to the Justices
within written certify, that after summons aforesaid, viz. the tenth day of A.
the year within written being Sunday after divine service, in the Church
Parochial of B. within written, no sermon then there being, at the most usual
door of that Church Parochial within which Pari sh the tenements within
writtenly and are, I caused the sum. before said to be proclaimed according to
the form of the Statute in such case set forth and provided.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Pone.
Pledges to pros. Joh. Den. Rich. Fen.


The within named A.B. is attached by his pledges. viz. Joh. Den. Rich. Fen.


Return of the Petit Cape in Dower.
By virtue, etc. such day and year I took into the hands of the Keepers of the
Liberties of England within written the third part of the tenements within
specified, with the appurtenancies as within is to me commanded.

Return of the writ of view in Dower.
To the Justices within written, I certify that by virtue of this writ to me
directed, I made the within uamed A.B. to have the view of the third part of
the tenements within s pecified, in presence of N.C.R.D.W.B. and C.D.four
Knights who were present at the view, and further I certify which I said, that
the four Knights aforesaid be before the Justices within written at the day and
place within contained, to testify that view as by the Writ aforesaid to me
was commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the summons of Assise.
Pledges of pros. I. Do. R. Roo.


The within named W.L has nothing in my Shire by which he may be attached, nor
is he found in it.

Otherwise where he is attached.

The within named W.L, attached is by one Cow of the price of 30. s.

If the party appear not, his Cow is forfeit, and the Sheriff s hall be
answerable for the value, and therefore he had need either to keep the goods
attached, or else to have security to be saved harmless therein.

The residue of the Execution of this Writ appears in a certain Panel to this
Writ annexed.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

The names of the recognitors of Assise of Novel diss eisin betwixt M.C
plaintiff, and T.C. tenant A.B.C.D.

M. of the sum. recognitors aforesaid, and of every of them I.H. R.S.


Return of summons of a Knight of the Parliament.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed, sum. I have made to A.B. Knight, one of
the Knights of my County girt with a Sword by B.T.and C.R. that he be before
the Ju stices within written, at the day and place within contained, as this
Writ demands and requires.

F.P. Kn. Sher.

Return of summons of Parliament.
The execution of this Writ appears in certain Indentures to this Writ annexed.

The within named A B. John Do. Richard Roo.
Issues -- 20. s.

F.P. Kn. Sher.

Return of summons in attaint.
Pledges of pros. John Den. Richard Fen.


Sum. of the within named I.N. John Den. Richard Fen.


The residue of the execution of this Writ appears in a certain panell to this
Writ annexed.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

The names of twenty and four Knights.

Richard M. of M. Esquire. T.B. of A. E sq. etc.
Summons of the Jurors aforesaid H.H. S.S,


Names of the Jurors of the first inquest in the Writ to this Panell annexed
specifies. E.M. gent. H.E. gent. etc.


Pledges of the aforesaid Jury of the first inquest. Tho. Pit. Will. Fit.


Return of resummon.
The execution of this Writ appears in a certain s cedule to this Writ annexed.

R.O Esquire. Sher.

The names of the Jurors of the Jury of twenty four Knights of whom in the Writ
to this scedule annexed mention is made. B.M. of N. Esquire. T.B. of M. Esquire.


Every of the Jurors of the Jury of twenty four Knights afores aid, severally
resum. is, by H.R. and M.N. good sum.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Accedas ad Curiam.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed, in form within written, I came to the
Court within written, and in that full Court caused to be recorded the plea
within written, And that record as it appears in a scedule to this writ
annexed, I have before the Justices within written, at the day and place within
contained, under my Seal and the Seals of I. B etc. four good and lawful men
of my Shire, of them who were present at that record, and to the parties within
written, that day have I prefixed, that then there they be, in that plea as
just it s hall be, to prosecute; as within is to me commanded.

The style of the Court of Alton.
The Court of Richard T. Knight, etc. there held the thirtieth day of March the
year, etc.

I.S plains against W.W. of a plea of taking and unju st detinue of his cattle.

The Bailiffs return of his Warrant to the Sheriff.
By virtue of this precept to me directed, taking with me R.S etc. your
discreet Knights of the Hundred of A. aforesaid, I came to the Court of R.T.
Knight, and caused to be recorded the plea, which is in the same Court betwixt
I.S. plaintiff, and W.W. defendant. And that Record pat. I have under my Seal,
and the seals of the aforesaid four Knights of that Court, of them who at that
Record were, and to the parties aforesaid that day I presixed, as to me
commanded was: in testimony of which matter, as well I R.F. Bailiff of the
Hundred aforesaid, as the aforesaid R.S. etc. four legal Knights of the Hundred
pre sent, our Seals have put to.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Recordare.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed, in my full County held at the Castle of
Winchin the County of Southampt. within written, such day and year, to be
recorded I caused the plea, of which within is made mention, which plea appears
in a certain scedule to this writ annexed, and that record I have before the
Justices within written, at the day and place within contained, under my seal,
and the seals of W.H.E.R. etc. four good and legal Knights of the same County,
of them who at that Record present were, and to the parties within written that
day I have presixed, there in that plea as just it shall be to prosec. as
within to me is commanded.

The residue of the execution of this writ appears in a certain scedule to this
writ annexed.

R.S. plains against T.E. of a plea of taking and unjust detinue of his Cattle.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Fieri feci upon Fieri fac.
By virtue of this writ to me directed, I have made executions of the goods and
chattels of the within named I.H. of a certain demise and grant to the same
I.H. by a certain T.G. gent. by his Indenture made for the term of thirty one
years, to begin from the firs t day of July the year, etc. within written as by
the Indenture bearing date the same day and year, more fully is manifest, and
appears, of our Mess uage or farm with the appurtenances, situate, lying and
being in L. in the Pari sh of F. within my Shire, called or known by the name
of B. together with all and singular Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Woods,
underwoo^s waters, etc. with all their appurtenances, situate lying and being
within the Village of the Parish and fields of F. afores aid and O. viz. in my
Shire, And the afores aid demise, and all and the whole right, state, title,
term of years, pos se ssion and demand which the said I.H. now has, of and in
the afores aid premises, by virtue or vigor of the same demise and grant, or
otherwise, to sale I have exposed and sold to a certain P.H. gent. for the sum
of seventy six pounds thirteen s hillings four pence, and also I have made
execution of the other goods and Chattels of the aforesaid I H. to the value of
sixty five pounds six shillings eight pence, which sums of moneys so in form
foresaid by me levied, in the whole amount to the sum of one hundred thirty two
pounds twleve shillings, and tho se sums before the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, etc. at the day and place within contained I have ready, to render to
the within named E.P. and I. his wife in part of satisfaction of their losses
within written, as by this Writ within to me is commanded, and that the
aforesaid I.H. no other or more goods or Chattels in my shire has, whence the
residue of the aforesaid debt of one hundred sixty five pounds six shilings two
pence, rai se or levy I may, according to the exigent of this Writ.

R O. Esquire. Sher.

Otherwise upon Nihil habet.
The within named R.B. Knight, no goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, has in
my Shire, whence the moneys within specifed levy I may, as within to me is
commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Otherwise upon Fieri fac, execution, and to sale he has exposed.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have levied of he goods and Chattels,
Lands and Tenements, of the beneath named R.B.to the value of two hundred
pounds, and those from day to day to sale have I exposed, and thence sold to
the value of one hundred pounds, which one hundred pounds at the day and place
within contained ready I have, to render to the beneath named I.W. as within to
me is commanded, and the residue of the goods and Chattels aforesaid, are yet
in my hands remaining for default of buyers.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Tarde.
This Writ so lately to me delivered was, so that because of shortness of time
execute it I could not, as this Writ wills and requires.

R.O. E sq. Sher.

Return special upon Habeas Corpus.
I R.O. Esquire. Sher. of the County of S. to the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, etc. at the day and place in this Writ to this scedule annexed,
contained certify, that before the coming of this Writ, A.O. in the said Writ
named was taken within the County aforesaid by W.A. Esquire. lately Sher. of the
County aforesaid, and in the prison, etc. of the Castle of Winch. in the County
aforesaid, safely under the custody of the same lately Sher. detained, by
virtue of a certain Writ of the said Keepers of the Liberties of England of
Cap. against the s aid A. gent. witness at Westminster, the ninth day of Oct.
the year, etc. and return before the Jus tices of the Common Bench at West. the
day of Saint Martin, fifteen days then next following, to satisfy T.D. Gent.
as well of a certain debt of forty pounds, as of thirty shillings for damages,
of which the same A. before the Justices at West. convict was, The body of
which A. so taken and in prison aforesaid, under the custody of the said lately
Sher. for that occasion being determined, I the aforesaid R.O. now Sher. of the
County before said, received o^ the before said lately Sher. in his going out of
his Office, and his body, by me of the aforesaid lately Sher. So received in
prison before said, safely to be kept have I caused, until after, viz. the
tenth day of December the year, etc. I received a certain Writ of the said
Keepers, etc. of Supersedeas to me directed the Tenor of which Writ follows in
these words, The Keepers, etc. by virtue of which Writ of Supers. because there
was not any other cause e to detain the aforesaid A. the said A. to go at la^ge
I s uffered, The said Writ of Capias ad satisfaciendum notwith standing, as by
the said Writ of Supersedeas to me thence was commanded, Therefore the body of
the said A. before the Keepers at the day and place, in the said Writ to this
scedule annexed contained, ready to have I cannot, as the same Writ wills and
requires.

R.O. E sq. Sher.

Otherwis e.
Before the coming of this Writ to me directed, the within named H.H. committed
was, to the Gaol of the Keepers of the Liberties of England,etc. of the Castle
of Winch. in the County within written, under my custody, by virtue of a
certain Warrant of I.C. and I.W. two of the Justices of the peace public in
the County aforesaid to keep, as also diverse Felonies, trespasses, and other
misdeeds in the s ame County committed to hear and determine assigned, bearing
date the third day of A. the year within written, for certain trespass ses and
contempts against the form of the Statute for punishment of Vagabonds, and for
the poor and impotent set forth, and this is the cause of taking and detaining
the said H. yet the body of the said H. at the day and place within contained,
ready I have as within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Otherwise.
I R.O. Esquire. Sher. of the County of S. to the Justices within written certify,
that the bodies of R.T. and the rest o^ the defendants within named, by me not
taken were, but by W.V. Esquire. lately Sher of the County aforesaid, my
predecessor, and to me by him not delivered in the going out of his office,
Therefore the bodies of them before the Justices within written, at the day and
place within contained have I cannot, as within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Otherwise upon languishing.
TO the Justices within written I certify, that the within named I.B. so
languishes in the prison of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. of
the Castle of Winch. in the County of South. by diverse infirmities withheld,
That because of weakness of his body and danger of death, him safely remove I
cannot, therefore his body before the Justices within written, at the day and
place within contained, for the present have I cannot, according to the form of
this Writ.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Otherwise.
I R.O. Esquire. Sher. of the County of S. to the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, etc. certify, that the body of the within named R.T. lies under my s
afe custody in execution at the suit of T.B. for 100 l. ret. before, the
Justices, etc. at Was tminster, from the day of Saint Michael one month,
therefore his body at the day and place within contained have I cannot, as
within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of ^ have required the Baily of the Liberty.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed. I have required the Baily of the
Liberty of Thomas Bishop of Winch, to take and arrest the within named I.S. in
form within written, who has the full return of all Writs and precepts, and the
executions of them within the Liberty aforesaid, And that no execution of this
Writ by me can be made within that Liberty afores aid, which Baily no answer to
me as yet has given, or thus, who me answered, that the within named I.S. is
not found in his Bailiwick, or thus, that he took the body of the within named
I.S. whose body at the day and place within contained ready he has, to do all
those things which this Writ does will and require.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ of Restitution.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed such day and year, etc. within written,
the Tenements within written with their appurtenances I have resei sed, and to
the within named T. and H. full possession and seisin thereupon restored, as
within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Habere fac. possession with Fieri fac.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed the twenty fourth day of May, the year
within written I caused to have to the within named H.H. the possession of his
term within written, with the appurtenances, And also I have caused execution
to be made of the goods and Chattels of the within named W.W. twenty s hillings
parcel of the damages within specified, and those moneys I have before the Jus
tices within written, at the day and place within contained to render to the
aforeiaid H.H. as within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Writ of seisin.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed the twenty sixth day of O. the year
within written, I caused to have to the within named N.S.plenary seisin of and
in the tenements within specified, as within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Writ of Seisin in Dower.
The execution of this Writ appears in a certain scedule to this Writ annexed.

TO the Jus tices of the Common Bench I certify, that by virtue of the Writ of
the Keepers of the Liberties of England to me directed, and to this scedule
annexed the tenth day of Athe year, etc. I caused to have to P.B. widow in the
Writ aforesaid, named, plenary seisin of the third part of the Manner of B.
with the appurtenances in the same Writ specified, viz. of one Hall and Kitchen
of two spares in the tenure of the s aid I. with free ingress and regress to
and from the same, als o the upper part of the Mansion house in the tenure of
E.C. from the entrance toward the South, and of one Close several, called
H.containing by estimation five acres, and of four acres of pasture lying on
the North end of one Close called B. and one acre of pas ture called C. in the
Writ aforesaid specified, to be held by the afores aid P.B. in several by metes
and bounds, in name of the whole dower of the same P. to her P. contingent of
the whole Manor in the same Writ specified, as by the Writ aforesaid to me is
commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Venrie fac.
The execution of this Writ appears in a certain Panel to this Writ annexed.

R O. Esquire. Sh.

A.B. of E. Gent. and so twenty three others.

^e Pa^.
Every Juror aforesaid by himself severally attach. is by pledges. John Do.
Rich. Roo.


R.O. Esquire. Sher

Return of distress of Jur.
The Execution of this Writ appears in a certain Panel to this Writ annexed.

The Panel.
M. of the Jurors aforesaid and every of them. John. Do. Richard Roo.


The Issues of every of them -- 10. s.

R.O Esquire. Sher.

Return of Cap. ad sat.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, I took the body of the within named
A.B. whose body before the Ju stices within written, or before the Keepers of
the Liberties of England by authority of Parliament, in the upper Bench at the
day and place within contained ready I have, to satisfy the within named C.D.
of the debt and damages within specified, as within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Elegit
The Execution of this writ appears in a certain Inquis ition to this Writ
annexed.

AN Inquisition by Indenture taken at B. in the County aforesaid, the tenth day
of I. the year, etc. before me R.O. Esquire. Sher. of the County a^oresaid, By
virtue of the Writ of the Keepers of the Liberties of England to me directed,
and to this Inqui s ition annexed, By the Oath of T B.etc (and so on to twelve
more at least) who say on their Oath, that B.C. in the Writ aforesaid, named
such a day and year, etc. was sei sed in his d^mesne as of Fee, of and in one
Message called, etc with the appurtenances, lying and being in the City of
Winch aforesaid; now in the occupation of A.G. widow of the clear yearly value
in all i s sues ov^r and above the reprises forty shillings, And als o o^ and
in one Garden with the appurtenances, called, etc. in the City and County
aforesaid, of the clear yearly value in all issues over and above the reprises
of twenty shillings, and also of and in one other Message with the
appurtenances in the County and City aforesaid, s cituate lying and being near
the Church there, called Saint Clements Church, lately the land of a certain
R.A. deceased, now in the occupation of B.C. or his assigns, together with all
the gardens and aedifices to the same Message belonging or appertaining of the
clear yearly vaelue in all issues over and above the reprises of five pounds,
And also of and in one other Message called, etc. in the City and County
aforesaid, in the tenure of the aforesaid B.C. of the clear yearly value in all
is sues over and above the repri ses of ten shillings, which all and singular
the aforesaid B.C. lately purcha sed to him and his heirs of certain N.S. and
A.L. his wife, one of the daughters of E. coheir of the s aid R.A. which
Message in the tenure of the before said B.C. together with a garden to the
same Message lying and belonging, with all and singular the appurtenances, for
the mediety of all the Lands and Tenements aforesaid, I the aforesaid Sher.
have caused to be delivered to R.S. in the Writ aforesaid named, to be held to
him and his assigns, according to the form of the Statute thence provided as
his Frank-tenement, until his debt of one hundred pounds together with his
damages in the Writ aforesaid mentioned, fully thence he shall have levied, as
the Writ aforesaid wills and requires, And further the Jurors afores aid on
their Oath aforesaid say, that the afores aid B.C. no other or more has, or
after the recognis ance of the debt aforesaid, had goods or Chattels, Lands or
Tenements, in the County before said within their knowledge: in Testimony of
which as well I the aforesaid Sh^r as the Jurors aforefaid to this inquisition
our seals alternately have put the day of A. and place above said, etc.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of an Extent.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have taken the body of the within
named W.W. whose body at the day and place within contained ready I have as
within to me is commanded.

The residue of the execution of this Writ appears in a certain Inquisition to
this Writ annexed.

R.O. Esquire. Sher

AN Inquisition by Indenture taken at the City of Winche ster in the County
aforesaid, the twelfth day of January, the year, etc. before me R.O. Esquire Sher.
of the County aforesaid, By virtue of a Writ of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England by authority of Parliament to me directed, and to this Inquisition
annexed by Oath of T.B. etc (as above) who say upon their Oath, the W.W. in the
Writ aforesaid named the day of the recogni s ance of the debt in the same Writ
specified, was seized in his demesne as of fee, of and in the manner of A. in
the County aforesaid, of the clear yearly value in all issues, over and above
the repri ses 100. l. and of and in the manner of C. in the County aforesaid,
of the clear yearly value in all issues over and above the reprises 100. l. and
further, the Jurors aforesaid on their Oath aforesaid say, that the aforesaid
W.W. the day of the reconusance of the debt aforesaid, or at any time after no
goods or Chatte^s had, nor other or more Lands or Tenements in the County
aforesaid, within their knowledge, which extended, apprized, or into the hands
of the said Keepers taken or seis ed may be, which Manors, Lands, and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, I the aforesaid Sher, the day of
the taking of this Inquisition took into the hands of the said Keepers, by
extent afores aid. In Testimony of which, as well I the before said Sher. as the
Jurors aforesaid to this Inquisition our Seals alternately have put, the day,
year, and place above said, etc.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of a Recognisance out of the Chancery.
The execution of this Writ appears in a certain Inquisition to this Writ
annexed.

AN Inquisition, etc. as above. Who say upon their Oath that E.M. in the Writ
aforesaid named, the day of the taking this Inqus ition, was possessed of
diverse goods and Chattels following, viz. of Rye to the value of ten shillings,
of Barley to the value, etc. and of certain Household Stuff to the value, etc.
which goods and Chattels I the aforesasd Sheriff have caused to be delivered to
the aforesaid R. by precept aforesaid, as by the Writ aforesaid to me was
commanded, And further the Jurors aforesaid on their Oath aforesaid, say, that
the before said E. the day of the Recogni sance of the debt, in the same Writ
specified, or at any time after, no other or more had goods or Chat^els, lands
or tenements in the County before said, which to the same R.W. in the same Writ
named, cause e to be delivered I may, ^n tes timony of which, etc. as above.

R O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Writ of Wast.
The execution of this Writ appears in a certain Inquis ition to this Writ
annexed.

AN Inquisition etc, Who say on their Oath a cresaid, that H.A. and I. his
wife, in the same Writ named, have made was t, sale and destruction in all
things in that Writ specified, viz by suffering one Hall o^ the price of 30. s.
two Chambers of the price of 3. l. one Stable of the price of twenty shillings,
to be uncovered for default of reparation of the s ame houses, and by tempests
with rain upon them descending, became rotten and corrupt, etc. against the
form of the provis ion in the same Writ contained, and further, the said Jurors
on their Oath aforesaid s ay, that the aforesaid A. and I. no other nor more
waste, sale, or des truction have made, in the houses aforesaid, in Testimony
of which, etc. as above.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ to inquire of damages in Dower, where the Tenant died
seized.
The Execution, etc. as aforesaid.

AN Inquisition, etc. who say on their Oath, that the within named W.K. the
sifth day of January the year, etc. at K. in the County aforesaid died sei sed,
in his demesne as of Fee, of and in the Tenements within s pecified, and that
the Tenements aforesaid, are of the clear yearly value in all is sues over and
above the reprises of 20 s. And that s ix years and three quarters of one year
are passed, from the time of the death of W.K. af resaid, And that the within
named I.D. has sustained damages by occasion of her dower within s pecified, to
the value of ten pounds, in Testimony of which, etc. as above

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Otherwise in Trespass.
The Execution as above.

South.
AN Inquis ition, etc. who say on their Oath, that W.B. in the same Writ named,
sustained damages in the same Writ specified, and for mises, and his Costs by
him about his suit in that part were set twenty shillings, in Testimony of
which, etc.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Scire fac. scire fec.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed by A.B. and C.D. good and lawful men of
my Shire, I have made to know to A.D.that he be before the Justices of the
Common bench, or before the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc, or before
the Barons of the Eschequer at the day and place within contained, to s hew and
propound, if what for himself he has or to say knows why, etc. (according to
the matter contained in the Writ) As within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Nihil, upon scire fac.
The within named A.B. has nothing in my Shire by which him I might make know,
nor is he sound in it.

Return of Devestavit against exec.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have taken into my hands diverse
goods and Chattels which were to H.S. at the time of his death, in the hands of
the with in named R.O. and K. hi^ wife exec. of the Tes tament of the asor said
H. to be administered, being to the value of thirty s even pounds parcel of the
debt within written, which goods and Chattels remain in my cus tody for default
of buyers, and further to the Justices within written, I certify, that the
before said R.O. and K. diverse goods and Chattels which were to the said H. at
the time of his death, to the value of the^esidue of the debt, and the damages
within specified sold and wasted, and the moneys thence arising to their proper
uses converted, so that the residue of the debt and damages within s pecified,
of the goods and Chattels of the same H.S. Levy or execute I cannot, And
further to the Justices a fore said I certify, that the aforesaid R.O. and K.
his wife, no goods have or Chattels of their goods, and Chattels proper, within
my Shire whence the re sidue of the debt and the damages within s pecified, or
any parcel thence execute I may, as within to me is commanded.

Return of Replevin upon return to be had of the beasts.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to be delivered I have cau sed, to the
within named I.B. the beas ts which T.M. took, and to the same T.M. in the
Court of the Common Bench adjudged were, as within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of beasts eloigned upon second deliverance.
Before the coming of this Writ, the beasts within written, by the within named
T.C. eloigned were to places to me unknown, so that the view of them to the
within named H. and T. to be returned have I could not, as within to me is
commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Withernam.
BY virtue of this Writ I took two pots brazen, two skillets brazen, etc. of
the goods and Chattels of I.S. in this Writ named in Withernam, and those to
W.B. to be delivered I have caused, to be had to the same W.B. until the
aforesaid I.B. the beasts of the aforesaid W.B. deliver will, as this Writ
wills and requires: and further to you I certify, that the aforesaid I.H. in
this Writ named no other goods has, nor chattels which in Withernam taken may
be^ or by which be attached he may according to the tenor of this Writ.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ of Collect of the 15. and 10. out of the Exchequer.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to know I have caused to the within
named A.B. And also tho se things which of the part of the Ke pers of the
Liberties of Englandare to be done, I have given in command to the said
A.B.concerning the levying and collection of the sixth Quirisme and Disme o^ six
whole Quiri smes and Dismes within written, and an Obligation according to the
form of the statute within written to the aforesaid A.B. to be shown have
caused, by him of the part of the said Keepers to be s ealed, and as his Deed
to the use of the said Keepers to be delivered, viz. I gave in command: but the
^oresaid A.B. altogether it to seal, or about the collection aforesaid to
intermeddle, refused, and yet refuses, in contempt of the said Keepers,
therefore the said Obligation at the day and place within contained have I
cannot, as within to me is commanded. And therefore I certify that to know I
have caused to the within named C. D. that he about the levying and collection
of he said sixth Quirismie and Disme of the ^foresaid six whole Quirizmes and
Dismes within written diligently do intend, and an obligation according to the
form o^ the Statute within written from the same C.D. have I received, and the
same in the Exchequer, etc. at the day within contained I certify, as within
to me is commanded.

R.O. E sq. Sher.

The return of a Wood writ in the Exchequer.
TO the Barons within written I certify, that P.M. L.S.and T.W. in the scedule
to this Writ annexed, named no goods have, or Chattels, Lands or Tenements
within my Shire, whence the several debts upon them, and every of them imposed
levy I may, but by virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have levied of the
goods and Chattels of H.L.T.K. and I.B. in the said s cedule named, the
several sums upon them and every of them charged, and those moneys before
the Barons within written, at the day and place within contained ready I have,
as within to me is commanded. And further I certify, that I.B. E.A. and W.B.
in the said scedule named, have alleged, that they have wherewith to exonerate
the actions for the s evrall sums upon them and every of them charged, and
for this have I taken of them s ufficient surety and have prefixed them a day
of being here at the Exchequer, within written at the day and place within
contained as within to me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ of Respit of Homage oath Distringas in the Exchequer.
M. of the within named A.B. I. Do. Rich. Roo.


Issues -- xx. s. Or according to the value of the Land more or less.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Seizure in the Exchequer in name of distress.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed the twentieth day of M. the year, etc.
within written fifteenth, into the hands of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, etc. the manor of S. within written, with the appurtenances in S. in
the County aforesaid, which Manor is of the clear yearly value in all is sues
over and above the reprises of twenty pounds of the Land of P.B. in the scedule
to this Writ annexed named, I have taken also into the hands of the said
Keepers one gun called a Petronel, with the Flax and touch box of the value of
ten shillings, in name of distress of the goods and Chattels. of I.C. in the s
cedule aforesaid, named as this Writ wills and requires, etc.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Otherwise where Nihil is returned.
TO the Barons within written I certify, that A.B C.D.and the other persons in
certain scedules to this Writ annexed named, no goods have or Chattels within
my Shire, whence the several debts upon them charged, or any parcel thence
levy I may, nor are they found, nor of them is any found in my Shire, nor are
there any Executors of the Testament, or last Will of the aforesaid several
persons, nor administrators of the goods and Chattels which theirs were, nor
any Heirs or Tenants of Lands of the aforesaid several persons or of any of
them within my Shire which I might distrain, as that Writ wills and requires.

The res idue of the Execution of this Writ appears in a certain Inquisition to
this Writ annexed.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Nihil return.
South.
AN Inquisition by Indenture, etc. who say on their Oath that A.B.C.D. etc. in
the s cedule to this Writ annexed named, several days and years in which first
debtors they became to the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. or at any
time since to this time, no goods had or Chattels, Lands or Tenements within my
Shire, which extended or apprized might be within their knowledge, And that
dead they are but what day and year, or days and years, and where, altogether
they are ignorant of, In Testimony of which, etc. as above.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Where the Land extendable lies in another County.
TO the Barons within written I certify, that all the Lands and Tenements
which were to the within named N.F. or to any of his ancestors lie in the
County of S. and no; in my Shire.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Commorant in another County.
The within named E.S. is Sher. of the County of O. and is Commorant in the
said County of O. and is not found in my Shire.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return for the Sheriff hims elf.
TO the Barons within written I certify, that I H.W.Knight, now am Sher. of
the County of S. therefore my self distrain I cannot, as within to me is
commanded.

H.W. Knight Sher.

Return of the Writ for election of Kn. for the Parliament.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to be chosen I have cau sed, two
Knights with Swords girt, the most fit and discreet of my County aforesaid,
viz. W.F. and I.S. which Knights full and sufficient power for themselves and
the Commonalty of the County aforesaid, have, to do and consent to those things
which at the day and place within contained of the Common Counsel, etc. of
England, to be ordained shall happen, And the aforesaid W.F. and I.S.
mainprised are by I.P.W.B.R.D.and R N. to be at the Parliament, etc. at
Westminsterat the day within contained, to do as that Writ shall exact and
require, I have made also a precept to I.P. and W.S. Bailies of the Liberty of
the town of G. that of the Borough of G. to be cho sen they cause two
Burgesses of the most discreet and most s ufficient, that they may be at the
Parliament, etc. at the day within contained, to do and consent as aforesaid.
Which Bailies so to me answered, that to be chosen they have caused of the
aforesaid Borough of G. two Burgesses, discreet, and the most sufficient to be
at the Parliament aforesaid, viz. S.W. and R.W.

The re sidue of the execution of this Writ appears in a certain Inquisition to
this Writ annexed.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ to receive the order of Knighthood.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, as well within the Liberty as without,
through my whole Shire publicly to be proclaimed have I caused, that all and s
ingular persons, having Lands, Tenements, or Rents, as within written is, whose
names in a certain s cedule to this Writ annexed are written, to the presence
of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, about the Feast within written,
pers onally do appear and come; the aforesaid Order to receive, as within to me
is commanded.

F.P. Kn. Sher.

Return of Rescuous.
The Execution of this Writ appears in a certain scedule to this Writ annexed.

BY virtue of this Writ of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. to
medirected, and to this s cedule anuexed, have I made a certain my Warrant, to
a certain I.M. my Baily itinerant, to take and arrest E.G. in the said Writ
named, which my Baily by virtue of my Warrant aforesaid, the tenth day of I.
the year, etc. at D. in the County of S.before said, took and arrested the body
of the aforesaid E.G. and then and there, him E.G. in his custody had, upon
which F G. of C.aforesaid, in the County aforesaid gent. and T.M. of the same
town and County, gent. then and there by force and Arms, viz. with Swords,
Ponyards, and Staves, upon my aforesaid Baily as sault made, and him my
aforesaid Baily then and there, against the Law and Cus tome of, etc. England,
etc. and against the will of him my Baily impris oned, and him my Baily in
prison, there by the s pace of one how then and there held, and twenty pence
in moneys numerate of the goods and Chattels and pence of him my Baily, from
the pers on of him my Baily then and there, the aforesaid T.M. took, and the
aforesaid E. by force and Arms aforesaid, then and there out of the Custody of
my s aid Baily took and rescued, And als o the same E. himself then and there
out of the custody of my aforesaid Baily res cued, against the will of the same
my Baily, and again st the peace public, and after the same E. was not found
in my Shire.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Otherwise by the Baily of the Hundred.
BY virtue of this Writ have I made a certain my Warrant to W.H. Baily of the
Hundred of H. who thus me answered, that where he by virtue of the Warrant
aforesaid, the tenth day of S. the year, etc. at C. in the County aforesaid,
took a certain I.S. and him to the Gaol of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, etc. of the Castle of Winch. would have brought safely to be kept,
thither came a certain I.G. and R.S. with many others unknown, by force and
Arms, in manner Warlike arrayed, and from the custody of the said Baily at,
etc. the afores aid I.S. took and carried away, and the said Baily would have
killed, unless the same S. to escape he had permitted, and so because of fear
of his death, him I.S. to escape he permitted, And so that cause the body of
the said I.S. before the Keepers of the Liberties of England, in the upper
Bench, etc. at the day and place within contained have I cannot as within to me
is commanded. And further I certify that the aforesaid tenth day, etc. the
afores aid I.S. was not found in my Shire.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Otherwi se by the Baily of the Liberty.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have commanded I.S. the Baily of the
Liberty of D. in the County aforesaid, who has full return of all Writs,
Precepts, Warrants, to him thence directed, And who such day and year at P.in
the County afores aid, T.S. in the Writ to this scedule annexed named took, and
arrested, and him T.S. in his custody by occa sion aforesaid then and there had
and held, And a certain I.C. lately of S. in the County aforesaid Husbandman,
gathering to him many other Malefactors unknown, of the peace of the
Commonwealth troublers, to the number of twenty persons, in manner warlike
arraied, by force and Arms, viz. etc. upon him the Baily then and there
riotously ass ault made, and him beat, wounded, and evil entreated, so that his
life was de s paired, And that I.C. and the others, etc. him T.S. out of the
Custody of the said Bailie then and there took and res cued, and as he listed
at large to go permitted, against the will of the before said Baily, And the
same T.S. himself out of the cu stody of the said Baily then and there in like
manner rescued against the peace public, etc. and after the same T. was not
found in my Shire.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of a Proclamation out of the Chancery.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed publicly to be proclaimed have I
caused, within my Shire, that the within named H. under the pain of his
engagement before the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. in the Chancery
within written, at the day within contained appear, as within to me is
commanded, also to the Keepers of the Liberties aforesaid I certify, that the
with in named H.B is not found in my Shire.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Commis sion of Rebellion.
TO the Keepers of the Liberties of England,etc. I certify, that the time of
the receipt of this Commis sion, to me and others directed, the within named
W.W. taken and arrested was by W.S. Knight, Sheriff of the County of S. by
virtue of diverse Wri^s to the same Sheriff directed, and to the Gaol of the
said Keepers of the Castle of Winch. by the same Sheriff committed was, in
which Gaol I the aforesaid I.W. the aforesaid W.W. by virtue of this Commission
him to be attached have cau s ed, as within to me is commanded, but his body at
the day and place within contained, have I cannot, because the same W. in the
same Gaol, under safe custody of the said Sher. for diverse other causes there
is detained.

I.O. Commission.

The return of a Dedimus potestatem to take the Oath of a Sheriff.
BY virtue of this Writ to us directed such day and year, etc. within written,
we have received the Oath of the within named R.O. Sher. of the County of S.
that office well and faithfully to perform, according to the form of a certain
scedule to these presents annexed, as within to us is commanded, and as this
Writ exacts and requires.

W.S. and B.T. Commiss.

Return of a Writ of Praemunire.
BY virtue of this Writ such day and year by I.S. T.W. and I.F. good and legal
men of my Shire, to forewarn have I c^used W.K.Clerk within named, that he be
before the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. at the day and place
where is oever, etc. to do and receive as this Writ shall exact and require, and
I.B.and the res t of the Desendants within named, nothing have in my Shire, by
which them forewarned make I may, no^ are they found in it.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ where a Clerk has no lay Fee.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to the Justices within written I
certify, that the within named T.H. Clerk, is beneficed in the Bishopric of
London, having no lay Fee in my Shire where he may be summoned.

R.O. E sq. Sher.

Return of the Writ of Election of a Verdour of a Forest.
TO the Keepers of the Liberties of England I certify, that the within named
I.H. before the coming of this Writ to me directed dead was, and that I after
the receipt of this Writ, in my full County held at the Castle of Winch. in my
County, the twenty ninth day of March, the year within written, by assent of
the s ame County in the place aforesaid I. to be chosen have caused, a certain
N.S. Esquire. Verdour of the Forest of B. within written, to do all those things
which to that office belong, as this Writ exacts and requires.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ of Summons before the Justices of the Forest.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to be summoned have I caused the Arch
Bishops, Bishops, Earls, Barous, and all other freeholders who Lands and
Tenements have within the metes of the Forest of the Commonwealth within
written, and four men and the chief of every town within the metes of the same
Forest, And also two good and lawful men of every Borough within the metes
of the said Forest, bound to come as they ought and were wont, that they be
before the Justices within written, at the day and place within contained, as
within to me is commanded, publicly also to be proclaimed have I caused
through my whole Shire, as well in Burroughes as in other Towns, and in Faires,
Markets, and other places public, that all those who by Charter of the Keepers
of the Liberties of England now, or of their Ancestors or Progenitors, or any
other manner any Liberties or Franchises hold, or Liberties to have claim, And
by what Warrant, That they be before the said Justices at the day and place
aforesaid, To be proclaimed also have I caused, that all men attached for Vert
and Venison in the Forre st aforesaid, after the las t plea of the Forest
aforesaid held, and their pledges and mainpernours, who have day by mainprise
aforesaid, to be before the aforesaid Jus tices, to stand to the right, and to
do those things which according to Law of Forest do they ought.

The residue of the Execution of this Writ appears in a certain Panel to this
Writ annexed.

R O. Esquire. Sh.

The Panel.
Anthon. B. of C. gent. and so twenty four for the grand Jurie, and twelve for
the petty Jurie.

When any man shows the Sheriff his Tallies
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to the Barons within written I
certify, that the Fermors within named, after the receipt, to me have shown
their Tallies of payment of their Ferm within specified, For which I have
prefixed them a day to be before the Barons within written, to do and receive
upon their Tallies aforesaid, according to the tenor of this Writ, And
therefore the levying of the sum within specified, I supers. as within to me is
commanded.

W.V. Esquire. Sher.

Return of the Writ to proclaim the Sheriff to render his account by the
Coroners.
BY virtue of this Writ to us directed, to the Barons within written we
certify, that in the full County of S. within written, held at the Castle of
Winchester in the County of S.aforesaid, the twentieth day of A.the year, etc.
within written, And also in the full County aforesaid at W. aforesaid, the
eighteenth day of September, the year, etc. as als o diverse times after in the
County aforesaid, articulately to be proclaimed have we caused, all and
singular the Articles which in this Writ are contained and specified, as by
this Writ to us within is commanded.

I.W. W.R gent
Coron.
R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Capias out of the Exchequer, as well of the body as of the Land in
name of dis tress.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to the Barons within written I
certify, that I have taken the body of the within written I.R. whose body
before the said Barons ready I have, at the day and place within contained,
also the twentieth day of I. the year, etc. within written, I have taken into
the hands of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. in name of Distre
ss, certain Lands and Tenements of the within named I.R. lying and being in B.
of the yearly value of C. s. as this Writ exacts and requires.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Capias in to our hand a Manner.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to the Barons within written I
certify, that the twentieth day of March the year, etc. within written, I have
taken into the hands of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. within
specified, the manner within written, with the appurtenances, as within to me
is commanded. And if it be with Inquisition for the annual value, then thus is
the Writ aforesaid returned.

The residue of the Execution of this Writ appears in a certain Inquisition to
this Writ annexed.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

An Inquisition indented taken at, etc. as the Inquisition is before for the
form, only putting in the new matter.
Return of the Writ of, who is Tenant out of the Exchequer.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to the Barons within written I
certify, that W.B. and M. his wise, are Tenants of the third part of the
Manor within written, in three parts to be divided, and C.A.M.E. and I.B. the
daughter of C.D. deceased, are Tenants of the s econd part of the Manor
aforesaid, in three parts to be divided, and the third part of the Manor
aforesaid remains in the custody of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, by
reason of the Minority of P.B. son and heir of the aforesaid C.B.

M. of the aforenamed W.B. and his wife. John Do. Rich. Roo.


R O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of a Venire fac. out of the Exchequer, or Office of the Coron. in
nature of Summons, where he is insufficient,
The within named A.B. nothing has in my Shire by which he may be attached, or
where summon him I may.

The within named A.B. attached is by pledge. viz. Io. Fen. Rich. Den.


R.O. Esquire. Sher.

The Issues of these 1 Mark^
And further, if these words be receited in the Writ, As also to show, then in
every one ten shillings.

Return of Distringas where part nothing has in the Land.
The within named A.B. nothing has in the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
within written, by which him di strain I may:

Otherwise.
No such manor is there nor any Land or Tenement known by the name of E. lying
in the County of S. upon which the Tenants thence distrain I may, as within to
me is commanded.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Venditioni Exposita.
Kitch. Exponend.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, from day to day to sale have I expo sed
those goods and Cattels to the value of C. s. resid. of the 8. l. which lately
of the goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements of T.E. within named, I took,
and thereupon sold to the value of xl. s. which xl. s. at the day and place
within contained, ready I have to render to the within named C.D. as within to
me is commanded. And the residue of the goods and Chattels aforesaid yet in my
hands remain unsold for default of buyers.

Otherwise of the return of vendition. Exponas.
TO the Barons within written I certify, that those C. sheep in this Writ
specified to sale expose I could not, because that yet they remain in the hands
of the within named R.N. lately Sheriff of the County of S. and never to me the
aforesaid now Sheriff; yet by the aforesaid lately Sheriff delivered were.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of Fieri facias, wherein addition is given to the Defendant.
TO the Barons within written I certify, that there are diverse per sons in my
County of the name and surname of I K. viz. I.K. of B. I.K. of F. and I.K. of
A. and that they are not contained in this Writ, of which aforesaid I.K. etc.
his goods and Chattels the moneys within specified to levy I know not,
therefore to the execution of this Writ proceed I could not.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

Return of a Writ out of the Court of Wards and Liveries.
AFter the receipt of this Writ, and before the return of the s ame, several
sums of moneys within written paid were by several persons within named, to
the receiver of our Lord the King of his Court of Wards and Liveries, therefore
to the execution of this Writ proceed I could not, as within to me is commaned.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

The Return of a Significavit.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have taken the body of the within
named A.B. whose body remains in the prison of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, etc. of the Castle of Winch. under my safe custody until to holy
Church as well for the contempt as wrong to it don, by him shall be satisfied,
as this Writ exacts and requires.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

The Return of a Signific. with Proclam.
THe within named A.B. is not found within my Shire, but by virtue of this Writ
to me directed in my full County held at the Castle of Winch, in the County
within written the 15 day of July the year within written, publicly to be
proclaimed I caused, that the aforesaid A.B. within six days after that
proclamation his body render in form within written, as that Writ exacts and
requires.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

AN Inquisition, etc. who say upon their Oath, that W.F. in the seedule to the
Writ a oresaid annexed named, is deceased; but what day and year, or where,
altogether they are ignorant of, and that W.M. also in the same scedule named,
is resident in London, and I.S. is Commorant at B. in the County of W. and A.R.
in the town and County of Southampt. without the County of Southampt. and the
other per sons in the same scedule named, do so wander and remove up and down
the County aforesaid; that taken or arrested they cannot be. In tes timony of
which, etc.

South.
AN Inquisition, etc. who say on their Oath, that H.S. in the s cedule to this
Writ annexed specific, no others or more Manors has in the County before said,
besides and above the Manor, Lands and Tenements in the s cedule to the Writ
aforesaid annexed specified, which extended, or into the hands of the Keepers
of the Liberties of England,etc. seis ed may be. In testimony of which, etc.

South.
AN Inquisition, etc. who say upon their Oath, that I.W. in the Writ aforesaid
named, the day of the taking of this Inquisition, was poss es sed of a certain
demise for the term of twenty years of one mess uage, etc. in A. in the County
aforesaid, with the appurienances of the annual value in all issues over and
above the reprises of 4. l. which demise I the aforesaid Sheriff the day of the
taking this inquis ition, took into the hands of the Keepers of the Liberties
of England, etc. In te stimony of which, etc.

AN Inquisition, etc. who say on their Oath, that a certain day and year the
late Earl of H. died and where, altogether they are ignorant of, and that he
no goods has, or Chattels in the County aforesaid, which taken and into the
hands of the s aid Keepers extended may be. And further they say, that the
aforesaid Earl of H. the day in which he died, was seized in his demesme as of
see, of and in the Manor of C. with the appurtenances of the clear annual
value in all issues, over and above the reprises of 25. l. which Manor with
the appurtenances before the coming of this Writ, I the aforesaid Sheriff by
virtue of another Writ out of this Court issuing, and of the part of the
Remembrance of the said Keepers of this Excheq. filed to be seis ed have cau
sed into the hands of the said Keepers by extent aforesaid. In tes timony of
which.

Otherwise.
THe Vicar. within written with the appurtetenances in the hands of the said
Keepers, is the Sea of the Bishop. of Winchester, now being vacant.

Otherwise.
THat the Manors, Land and Tenements of the lately W. Lord of Ware, in the
hands of the s aid Keepers are, because T.W. Knight, now Lord of Ware, son and
heir of the aforesaid W. has not sued his livery out of the Court of the said
Keepers, etc. In testimony of which, etc.

The Return of a Writ of Partition.
I R.O. Esquire. Sher. of the County aforesaid, to the Justices in the Writ to this
scedule annexed, spec. Certify, That by virtue of this Writ in my proper
person, the fifteenth day of J. the year, etc. I came to the Message in the
writ afores aid, spec. and there by the oath of A.B, etc. (to the number of
twelve) good and lawful men of the County aforesaid, and of visne in the s ame
Writ spec. (having respect to the true value of the same me ssuage, the same
message with the appurtenances in four equal parts to be parted I caused,
and one part of those parts, viz. etc. to be held to the same H.S. and his wife
in the Writ aforesaid named in severally by metes and bounds in the right of
the said I.E. Another part thence, viz. etc. to be held to I.C. and E. his wife
in the Writ aforesaid named in severally in the right of the s aid E. and two
other parts thence, viz. etc. to be held to the aforesaid I.C. in severally in
his right proper. And I the aforesaid Sheriff, the day and year above said
those to be delivered and a ssigned, have caused, as the same Writ exacts and
requires.

R.O. Esquire. Sher.

The manner and form how to keep a Court Leet, or a Law-day with all things
thereunto appertaining as follows.
The third Book.
Alto^ West brake.
First the Steward must make his precept to warn the Court thus.

I W.Gentleman Steward of R.T. Knight of his Manor, or his hundred of A. to
the Baily of the some Manor greeting; I command thee that diligently warn thou
do^t the Court, with view of Frankpledge of the Manor aforesaid, to be held
the 20. day of October next following, about the hour of nine, before noone of
the same day, at the place accustomed; given under my s eal the twentieth day
of September, the year, etc.

By me I.W. Steward there.

Then enter the Court.

SS. The view of Frankpledge, with the Court of T. Knight there held on Thurs
day, viz. the twentieth day of October, the year, etc.

By I.W. Steward there.

Then cause the Bailiff to make three Proclamations, and say after the Steward
thus.

All manner of pers ons which are Resiants or Dozoners, and owe suit Royal to
this Court Leet or Law day, come in and do your suite, and answer to your names
as you shall be called, every man at the first call, upon pain and peril that
shall fall thereon. Then call the free suitors and dozoners one after another
thus:

L.G. Gent. come into the Court and do your suit and service, or else you will
be amerced, and when you have called them, all those which made default, mark
them over the head thus, Laurente G. is a merced two pence, and when all the
free suitors be called, you must write thus, They are Freehorders of this
manor, and owe suit to this Court, and have made default, therefore every of
them is amerced as it appears upon their heads. Then the Steward must cau se
the Bailiffs to make three Proclamations, and then to say thus, And if any man
will be Ess oined, let him come in and he shall be received, and all such
persons as were Es soined the last Court, let them come now in and warrant
their E ss oines, or else they will be amerced both for this Court, and al so
for the last, that is, they must appear, and not be again Ess oined; for if
that be suffered, it will hinder the service; And if any desire to be Es soined
by their Tythingman or other ne^ghbour, then for the fir st Court they may be
Essoined, and their Essoines must be entered as they are in the hundred Court in
this book.

Then let the Bailiff say after the Steward, if any man will enter any plaints,
let them come forth and they shall be heard.

Then if any come to have any plaints entered, then enter them as they are
entered in the hundred Courts, and if need be, those declarations and pleadings
will serve here.

Then call the Tythingman of every tything with his tything, and demand of him
if his whole tything be there or no, and ask him what Law-day, or hundred
silver he has brought, this done, receive his money, and swear him thus.

The Tything-mans Oath.
YOu shall swear, that you shall make true inquiry, and the same pres ent of
all such Articles and things as shall be given you in charge, concerning the
keepers of the Liberty of England, by the Authority of Parliament, and the Lord
of this Leet or Law-day, wherein you shall no concealment make, you s hall
spare nothing meet to be presented within your tything for love, favor,
affection or corruption, neither shall you present any thing for malice, hatred
or envy, but according as the truth of things have, may or shall come to your
knowledge, by information or otherwise: So shall you make thereof a true
presentment without concealment, So help you God, etc.

Then call the whole tything by name and swear them thus.

The same Oath which A.B. your thythingman has on his part taken before you
and every of you, you shall for your parts observe, perform, and keep in every
Article and thing which shall be given you in charge at the Leet, so help ye
God and the contents of this Book. Then call the Constables of the hundred if
there be any there, and swear them thus:

You shall swear, that you shall make due inquiry, and the s ame present of all
such Articles and things as shall be given you in charge, and of all and every
such thing and things, which are, s hall, or may come to your knowledge m^et to
be presented at this Court concerning your office, wherein you shall spare no
man for love, fear, favor, affection, or corruption, neither shall you present
any man for malice, hatred, or envy, so shall you make both a j^st and a true
pres entment thereof without concealment, So help you God; and the contents of
this Book.

In like manner you shall swear Ale-tasters, Heywards, and other officers, if
any such be answerable, or ought to appear there according to their particular
offices.

Then call to the Bailiff for the names of the Jury, and bid him return them in
writing, whereof must be twenty four, which return made and delivered, bid the
Bailiff make an O-yes and say after you thus:

You good men that be returned to inquire for the keepers of the Liberty of
England, by Authority of Parliament, and the Lord of this Leet or Law-day,
answer to your names, as you shall be called, every man at the first call, upon
pain of amerciament. Then call the Jurors s everally by name as they be
returned, and prick them openly which appear, and none else e, and when fourteen
or fifteen, or more have appeared, then call the foreman to the Book, and swear
him thus:

The foremans Oath.
YOu shall duly inquire, and true presentment make of all such Articles and
things as shall be given you in charge, the keepers of the Liberty of England,
by Authority of Parliament council, your fellows, and your own you shall well
and truly keep, and not disclo se the same, but here in Court you shall pre
sent the truth, and nothing but the truth, so help ye God and the contents of
this Book; and then let him kiss the Book to affirm his Oath.

Then call the rest of the Jury by three or four at once, and swear them thus:

Also such oath as A.B. your foreman has taken before you on his part, you and
every one of you s hall well and truly observe and keep on your part, so God
ye help, and the contents of this Book.

And note that the Steward may impannel any stranger, if there want to make
twelve of the Jury, because it is for the service of the keepers of the Liberty
of England by Authority of Parliament for a presentment made by fewer then by
twelve is traversable.

Jo. Do. Jur. Ri. Roe. Jur. Jo. Den. Jur. Will. Fen. Jur. Wall. Neat. Jur. Jo.
Feate. Jur. Jo. Hye. Jur. Jo. Pie. Jur. J. Miles. Jur. Th. Giles. Jur. Ri.
Cook Jur. and Th. Snooke. Jur.
Then count them.

This done, then command the Bailiff to make Proclamation, and say thus after
the Steward: You good men that are impannelled to inquire for the keepers of
the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament, and for the Lord of this
Leet or Law-day, draw near and hear your charge, and the Court commands all
others to keep silence whilst the charge is given, upon pain of imprisonment.

An exhortation to the Jury before the charge.
MY masters you that be sworn, before I enter to give you your charge, I shall
exhort you in the fear of God, first of all to remember your duties to Almighty
God, next to the keepers of the Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliament,
and la stly to the Lord of this Leet or Law-day, and therein to have a special
regard for the good of the Commonwealth, here within the precinct of the Leet
or Law- day. God delivered to his servant Moses in the Mount Sinai ten Laws or
Commandments, which are divided into two tables, the four first which are the
first table, do teach us our duties to God, the other six which are the second
table, do teach us our duties one toward another: as the body of man is
subject to many sicknesses and diseases, so the Commonwealth is subject to many
mischiefs and inconveniences, and as the one is often curable by physic, so
the other is to be redressed and reformed by the due execution of Laws which
are as the sinews of the Commonwealth, to keep it in good order, and the
execution of the Law is the life of the Law, otherwise it is but as a dead
thing, and therefore good Rulers and Magis trates are said to be as fostering
fathers and mothers to the Commonwealth, as well as natural parents are to
their own children, and the people that honor their Governors, the child that
honoreth his parents, and the servant that honoreth his or her master or
mistress, ought to honor them of duty in singleness of heart, and not for fear
of puni shment, or hope of reward.

England long since was divided into Counties, and so into Hundreds, Ridings,
Lathes, Leets, and Wapentakes, which are all one in effect, though they differ
in name according to the cus tome of every Country. And there is no man living
within this Nation, but he is resident and abiding within the precinct of s ome
one of these and there he ought to appear twice every year, if he be not
otherwise privileged by his place or office, and if any wrong be done unto any
man under the value of forty shillings, there he ought to have redress, and not
elsewhere. Then these Laws were afterward confirmed by the Statute of
Mar^ebridge ca. 38. before the making of which Statute, a Lord of a Leet or Law
day might have kept as many Leets or Law-days in a year as he would, and as
few. But by that Statute men were limited and appointed to keep but two every
year, viz. one within a month of Easter, and the other within a month of
Michaelmas. And afterward becau s e men were of sundry opinions, what things
were inquirable at Leets or Law- days, and what were not, there was another
Statute Law made in the seventeenth year of E. 2. by which it appears what
things are inquirable at a Leer or Lawday, and what are not; and sithence that
time there have been diverse other Statutes made, whereby diverse other Articles
are inquirable at Leets or Law- days, which before the making of the Statutes
were not. Now therefore considering that these Leets or Law-dayes were first
ordained for the causes already delivered by me unto you, con s idering also,
that the redress of all wrongs, and the punishment of all offenders here within
the precinct of this Leet or Law-day rests in you who are here especially
elected, sworn and put in trust as the mo st meetest, and worthiest men within
the precinct of this Court for that s ervice, it therefore behooveth you to
have a special regard to your oaths therein that you may the better perform
the trust which is reposed in you, for now it is your parts and duties to try
right from wrong, and truth from falsehood, and to punish off^ndors, and to
defend the innocent. The Prophet (...) teaches you a good lesson, and that is
this, (...) his says he, in veritate, in judic and in Justicia and amovere
morem and ^merem odium and spem, that is, you must s wear in truth, judgment
and justice, not regarding the substance, authority or power of a rich man, nor
the imbecility or poverty of a poor man, but rather you must follow the rule of
that wise Philosopher Plato, who says thus, That Justumest judicium ubi non
persona sed opera cons iderant. that is a right wise judgment, where the
person of a man is not regarded, but his offense; Et ex co^dibus v^ stris
omnent affectionem expellite, and memores estore quantas minas deus in stituit
pro Juramenti violat. You must if you would do as you ought to do, remove all
affection out of your minds, and call to remembrance what threatenings God has
laid upon such as have violated their oaths, for it is written in the 14. Chap.
of Leviticus,thus, Qui bla sphemat nomen Dom. morte morietur, that is, he that
blas phemeth the name of God shall die the death; and in the fifth Cha^ter of
the Acts of the Apostles, it was s aid to Ananias and Saph^ra, Non vives qui
locutus es mendac and confe stim occisi fue^unt pro men^^c in vendend. Agr.
that is, it was told them that they should not live any longer because they
have dealt deceitfully, and made a lie to color their deceit in selling of a
field, and they were pre sently slain for it: if God did then so punish them
for making of a lie, which thing is so common now a days, what will he do ^o
them which do not stick to lie and wilfully fors wear thems elves? therefore it
behooves us to beware and to learn to be warned by other men's harms, lest we
fall into the like judgment of God our s elves. In doing well, and performing
your duties in this service which you are to take in hand, you shall not only
plea se God therein greatly, and do the Keepers of the Liberty of England, by
Authority of Parliament, and the Lord of this Leet good service; but you shall
also do good to your selves and to your posterities, and therein cause the
Commonwealth to slorish and increase in godliness and piety; but on the
contrary part if you shall be remiss and careless in doing of your duties,
therein you shall not only offend God very greatly, and incurr the danger of
the Laws of England, but you shall also embolden and encourage wicked and lewd
persons to continue still in their own wickedne s s, and to go forward a mal^
adpejus, and so to draw one sin upon s in, as it were with cartropes, to their
utter ruin and des trection. And I would have you to know, that if I find you
careless and negligent in this s ervice, I may then by the law impannel another
Jury to inquire of your concealements, the which if they shall find, then may
I set such fines upon you as I shall think fit, according to the quality of
your offense. But I hope that you will give me no such occasion, but rather
that you will duly and truly inquire of and present all such things as I shall
give you in charge.

And so I will here cease to trouble you any further by way of exhortaion, and
proceed as God shall enable me and your patience to the particulars of your
charge.

Your charge will be somewhat long and tedious, and stands upon many parts,
but I will make it as short as I can, and reduce it into five chief heads o^
parts, viz. Petty Treasons. Felonies by Statute Law. Felonies by the Common
Law. Offenses upon diverse Statutes. Laws and common annoizances.


And so of these in their order.

Petty Treason.
It is petty Treason for a woman to kill her husband, or a Clerk his Ordinary,
and the punishment for these offenses, is death, and loss of lands and goods.

Misprision of Treason.
Next to this is mis prision of Treason, and that is, when any one knows of the
Treason aforesaid, or any of them, and concealeth it twenty four hours, after
knowledge thereof had, the punishment for this offense is loss of goods and
chattels for ever, and of lands during life and perpetual imprisonment.

Felonies by Statute Law, Rape.
18. E. 2. and 1. H. 7.
Next you shall inquire of Felonies by Statute Law, and therein first of Rapes,
and that is if any man have ravished, or had carnal knowledge of any woman's
body against her will, or has stolen or carried away any widow or maid
against their wills, and their friends, though it was done to the intent to
marry them, yet it is felony, and the offender therein shall suffer death, and
lose his lands and goods for it.

Hunters by night.
1. H. 7.
Next you shall enquire of hunters by night, in any forest, park, chase, or
warren, with vi sards disguised, to the intent not to be known, if they be
apprehended and deny it before a Justice of Peace upon their examination, it is
felony, but if they confess it, it is then but a trespass s, and so finable.

Defacers of a man's Phisnomy.
Next you shall inquire if any man or woman has defaced another phisnomy in
putting wilfully his or her eyes out, or cutting out of his or her tongue,
either of both, is felony, and the offender shall suffer death, and lose lands
and goods, 5. H. 7.

Servants imbesselling their masters goods.
Also you shall inquire of servants which have imbesselled their masters or
their mistresses goods, being put in trust therewith, if it amount to xl. s.
and upwards, it is felony. 21. H. ca. 7. and the offenders shall suffer death
in this case, and lose lands and goods.

Witches and Sorcerers.
Also ye shall inquire of Witches and Sorcerers, for if any of them have killed
or destroyed any man, woman, or child, with Witchcraft or Sorcery, it is in
them felony, and the offender shall lo se both his lands and goods for it, 5.
El.

Rebellions.
1. and. 5. Eli.
Also you shall inquire of Rebellions, Riots, Routs, and unlawful ass emblies,
and that is where persons to the number of twelve or upwards, do with sorce
unlawfully go about to alter Laws made by Act of Parliament, or any other Laws
of this Nation, and being requ^^ed by the Keepers of the Liberty of England, by
Authority of Parliament Officers, upon Proclamation to return to their
dewllings, and yet do remain together by the space of one hour after such
Proclamation made, or after do attempt the like thing, it is selony, 1. ^uz.
And so it is where any such number have assembl^d themselves together to break,
or digg up, or cast down any p^^es, hedges, ditches, or other enclosures, or to
pul^ up any pondheads. conduits, or pipes, to the intent to kill or destroy any
Deer in any Park, Conies in any W^^ren or Fish in any Fish Ponds, or have fired
my dwelling house, or any barn, wherein any Corn was said, or any ^ick of Corn,
or ring any Bell. sound any Tru^p^t, o^ D^u^^, wind any Horn fire any Beacon,
or speak any Rebellious words, or bring or send any money, vict^al, harne ss,
or weapon to any such rebellious persons, is felony, and the offenders herein
shall suffer death, and lose lands and goods. Also there are concealers of the
se offe^^es, the which if they conceal four and twenty hours, they are to have
nine months impris onment, without bail or mainprise; and Farmers and
Copiholders ought to lose their Farms and Copiholds if they refuse to go to
suppress such rebellion as is before said.

Felonies by the Common Law.
Next, you shall inquire of felonies by the Common Law, and that is where any
does st^al to the value of twelve pence or upwards, or does steal any marked
Swans, or their signet, or their eggs, or ^ame Deer, or rob Churches, Chapels,
Pigeon-houses, or dwelling-houses, or any upon the high way, though he take but
the worth of a penny from him, it is felony, and the offender shall die for it,
and lo se his lands and goods, and so shall their accessory.

Petty Larceny.
18. Ed. 2.
Also you shall inquire of Petty Larceny, and those be such as steal pigs, gee
se, hens, chickins, corn out of fields, clothes from hedges, or out of windows,
rob orchards, or go in thieves messages: the offenders herein are to have
corporal puni shment, and so their accessaries: but they forfeit their goods if
they have any.

Now I must tell you that all those offenses which I have already spoken of
unto you, are but only to be here inquired of and presented, but not here
punis head, but they are to be punished by the Justices of the shire upon
certificate made thereof by the Steward of a Leet or Law day.

But now follow the offenses which are both here to be inquired of, presented,
and punished.

Affraies and blood-sheds.
And therefore becau se man is the worthyest creature that God made, I will
first begin to put you in remembrance of the Law made for his safety and
preservation. You shall therefore first inquire if any man within your inquiry
have broken the peace, or made any affray or bloodshed: if any have offended
herein, you must present him or them, and the manner of it, with what weapon,
for that it is forfeit to the Lord of this Leet, and the offender or offenders
are to be fined for such offense.

Hue and Cry.
Next you shall inquire whether hue and cry after thieves and robbers have been
duly pursued and followed as they ought to have been or no; if not, then you
must present him or them which made default therein, for he forfeits five pound.

Constables and Tythingmen to punish Rogues.
Also you shall inquire how Constables and Thythingmen have executed their
offices in punishing of rogues, vagabonds, and sturdy beggars which have come
within their charge; for if they have been remiss therein, then they ought to
lose twenty shillings for every default. No man or woman may be suffered to beg
by the Law nor no man or woman may give any alms, upon pain of ten shillings
for every time they give.

Who are said to be Rogues.
These persons by particular are said to be by the statute rogues, viz.
Procters of Spittlehouses, Parent- gatherers, or Collectors for Gaoles,
prisons, or Hospitals, Fencers, Bearwards, common Plaiers of enterludes,
Minstriles wandering abroad, Glass-men, Sailors, Soldiers, Scholars, and all
other idle persons which go about begging.

Stocks in every Tything.
Also for the punishment of these offenders, you shall inquire if there be in
every tything a pair of stocks, according as there ought to be by the statute
or no: if there be not, then the tything do lose five pound.

Artillery to be maintained.
33. H. 8. cap. 9.
Al so you shall inquire whether every one have Bow and Arrows according to the
Statute, or no; for every man-child from seven years old to seventeen ought to
have a Bow and two Arrows, and every man from s eventeen to threescore ought to
have a bow and four Arrows, upon pain of six shillings eight pence for every
default; and parents ought to provide them for their children, and masters for
their servants with their wages, or else they ought to undergo the penalty
thereof.

Buts in every Tything.
33. H. 8.
And also for the exercise of Archers in shooting at times convenient, there
ought to be Buts made in every Tything, Village, and Hamlet, or else e the
Tything, Village, or hamlet ought to lose twenty shillings for every three
months wanting Buts there.

Plays or Games.
33. H. 8.
Also you shall inquire if any Alehouse-keeper or other person do keep any
unlawful games in his or their house or houses or elsewhere, as cards, dice,
tables, loggets, quoits, bowls, or such like, in this case the house- keeper
loses for every day forty shillings, and every player six s hillings eight
pence for every time.

Also Constables ought to search monthly for such unlawful ga^^es and
disorders in Alehouses upon pain of forty shillings, and they may arrest such
as they find playing at unlawful games, and commit them to ward until they put
in sureties not to play any more at any unlawful game.

No man may play at any unlawful game insatiably, unless he can d^ spend a
hundred pound per annum in lands, fees, or offices, for life, at the least: and
he may not play neither in any open place where every one that will may see
him, but in his house, ^or in his Orchard or Garden upon pain of six shillings
eight pence for every time, except in the Christmas time; for then all men may
play. 33. H. 8.

Shooting in Guns.
33. H. 2. cap. 6.
Next you shall enquire of such as shoot in hand-guns, or cross-bows; for no man
may shoot in them unle ss he can dispend a hundred pound per annum in lands,
tenements, offices, annuities, or fees, neither may those shoot at any Phesant,
Partridge, Herne, Duck, Mallard, House-dove, Pigeon, Wigeon, Teal, or
Heath-cock, upon pain of ten pound for every s hoot.

Also by another Law made 1. Jac. Reg. he that shoots in a Gun, Cro ss-bow, or
long-bow at any of the fowls aforesaid, or at any Hare or Deer, and cannot
dispend ten pound yearly in lands, nor is worth two hundred pound in goods, s
hall forfeit twenty shillings for every shoot, which shall be to the use of the
poor of the Parish where such offense is committed, if the same be either confe
ssed or proved by two witnesses, or else if the offender be not able to pay the
said penalty, or will not, then he must have three months imprisonment without
bail or mainprise. But if such offender can dispend ten pound per ann. or
more, then he shall forfeit forty shillings to the use before said, and find
sufficient sureties that he shall offend therein no more.

But by the same law all such as have plackards or licenses, may kill Crows,
Rooks, Choghes, Pyes, Ieyes, Ringdoves, and other small birds for Hawks meat
only, with a gun, or otherwise.

Next you shall inquire whether your high ways be sufficiently amended and
made pas sable, as they ought to be or no, for to that end and purpose there
ought to be two Supervisors cho sen in every Parish, between Easter and
Midsomer by the Con stables and Churchwardens, and there ought to be six days
appointed for amending of the high ways, eight hours every day, upon pain of
twenty shillings to be lost by the Supervisors. And every one that has a cart
ought to send two able men with it, with tools fit for that s ervice, or else
to lose ten shillings for every day wanting, and every hou sholder ought to
find an able man for that service, or else to lose twelve pence for every day
wanting. And they ought most chiefly to amend the ways leading to market
Towns, and they may gather stones in any man's ground, and also digg pits of ten
yards square in any man's several for stones and rubbish (if it be needful)
filling the same up again, without danger of Law. And they must turn springs,
if they can out of the high ways; and trees and hedges which hang over the
public high ways, must be cut and shreded upon pain of ten s hillings for
every default.

Purprestures and Assarts.
18. E. 2.
Next you shall inquire of Purprestures and Assarts, and that is where any Wall,
Hedge, Ditch, or House is set, levied, or abated in the public high way, or
any watercourse stooped or turned into the high way to hinder the pa ssage of
the weal public, or any way annoy them.

Bonds and marks.
Also you shall inquire whether any mear stones or stakes, bonds or marks,
between this Lordship and any other, or between tenant and tenant, has been
removed since the last law day, or before, and not set in the usual place
again, if there be any which have offended herein, you must present them.

Highways or footsteps stopped up.
Also if any high ways or foot paths to Church, Mill, or Market be stopped or
hedged up, which have been accustomed to lie open, you must present him or them
which shut it up, for the people of the Commonwealth must not be stopped of his
lawful passage to Church, mill, or market.

Common Bridges broken.
Also if any common Bridges over Common Streams be broken, that by reason
thereof the people of the Commonwealth cannot pa ss about their affairs and
businesses, you must present those which ought to make them, upon a pain.

Common pounds broken.
And also if common pounds be broken so that they will hold no distress that is
brought to them until they be delivered thence by order of Law, you must
present those which ought to make s uch pounds, upon a pain.

Sleepers by day, and walkers by night.
Also you shall inquire of Sleepers by day, and walkers by night, to steal and
purloin other men's goods and Conies out of Warrens, Fish out of men's several
ponds or Waters, Hens from Henrous e, or any other thing whatsoever, for they
are ill members in a Commonwealth, and deserve punishment, therefore if you
know any such pres ent them.

Eves-droppers.
Al so you shall inquire of Eves-droppers, and those are such as by night stand
or lie harkening under wa^s or windows of other men's, to hear what is said in
another man's house, to the end to set debate and dissension between neighbors,
which is a very ill office, therefore if you know any such, present them.

Forestallers, Regraters, and Ingrossers.
Also you shall inquire of Forestallers, Regraters, and Ingrossers, evil
members in a Commonwealth.

A Forestaller is he which buyeth or causes to be bought any victuals
whatsoever going to any Fair or Market to be sold, and makes any bargain for
the buying thereof before the same be brought into the Fair or Market, or does
make any motion for the inhancing of the price of any victuals, or does move or
persuade any person coming to the Fair or Market with victuals, to absent and
forbear his coming hicher with any victual to be sold there.

Regrator is he that gets into his hands in any Fair or Market, any Corn,
Tallow, or Candles, or any dead victual what is oever, brought to any Fair or
Market to be sold, and does sell the s ame again in any Fair or Market, within
four miles next adjoining thereunto.

An Ingrosser is he or she that does ingross and get into his or her hands, by
buying or promise taken, other then by demise, grant, or lease, of bond or
bill, of Corn growing in the Fields, or any other Corn, Grain, Butter, Cheese,
Fish, or any other dead victual what soever to the intent to sell the same
again for profit.

Their punishment.
For the first offense they ought to have two months imprisonment, without
bail or mainprise, and forfeit the value of the goods bought and sold.

For the second offense they ought to have half a years imprisonment, and to
forfeit double the value of the goods bought and sold.

And for the third offense they ought to be set upon the Pillory, and to lose
all their goods and chattels, and be impris oned during the Keepers of the
Liberty of England by Authority of Parliaments pleasure.

Cattle sold with in five weeks.
Also you shall inquire of such as use to buy Cattle and to sell them again
within five weeks, they ought to lose double the value of their Cattle.

Of Butchers.
No Butcher ought to sell in any open Fair or Market, any other victual then
that which is good and wholesome for man's body, and for reasonable gains, and
not at excessive prices.

Shoomakers.
5. Eliz.
They ought to make their Shoes, and Boots of good and well tanned Leather, and
well licoured, curried and sowed, to keep men dry of their legs and feet.

Tanners.
Also you shall inquire of Tanners that have used the occupation of a
Cordwainer, or a Currier, or that has put any Leather to sale, but red Leather
as it came from the Tan-sat, or that has put any Hide or piece of Leather to
sale, before it be well dried, marked, and sorted, and then sold in open
market, or that has tanned any sheep skins.

Glovers.
Also you shall inquire, whether Glovers, or white Tawers of Leather, do make
any other ware, than that which is good and substantial, well tawed and dried,
and not rotten nor tainted, and sell the same at reasonable prices. And a White
Tawer may taw no Calfe skins except they be put to him to be tanned, upon pain
to loose for every Calf skin twenty pence.

Bakers.
Also you shall inquire whether the bakers do their duties or not, in making of
good and wholesome bread for man's body, of sweet corn, and not corrupted, and
that they make their bread in weight, according to the price of wheat, in three
markets next adjoining, not changing the as sise of bread, but by six pence in
weight in increas ing or abating, and if they do the contrary, and be thereof
duly convicted, then for the first, second, and third time they shall be
amerced after the quantity of their fault, and shall lose from time to time
their bread so found too light in weight, but if they shall be found faulty
herein the fourth time, then they mu st be set upon the pillory in open Market,
whose punishment may not be releas ed for gold or silver.

Also a Baker must set his own proper mark jupon every loaf of bread that he
makes and sells, to the end that if any bread be faulty in weight, it may be
then known in whom the fault is.

Brewers.
5. H. 3.58. E. 3.
Also you shall inquire of Brewers, and Tiplers, whether they make good and
wholesome Ale and Beer for man's body, or not, and s ell and utter the same
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Nation. And also they ought not to
put out their sign or Ale-stake until their Ale be asseyed by the Ale-tas ter,
and then to sell, and not before.

Fishers.
25. H. 8. ca. 7.31. H. 8. ca. 2.
Also you shall inquire of Fishers, whether they do their duties or no, in
bringing to the Market such Fi^h as good and wholso me for man's body, and not
corrup^ to or stinking, and there sell the s ame at reasonable prices, without
taking of any excess ive gains, but only for every twelve-pence bestowing,
one penny clear gains over and besides their charges, and if any Fisher shall
do the contrary, then he shall be grievously amerced from time to time, and his
Fi sh if it be corrupt and stinking to be taken from him and openly burned in
the Market.

Also no person may kill or destroy any young Fry of Fish, in what soever River,
fresh or salt; nor kill or take any Salmon or Trout, or any Pike or Pickeril,
not being in length ten inches of clear Fis h or more, nor any Barbel except he
be twelve inches long in clear fish or more, upon pain of twenty shillings for
every fish so taken and killed being not of the several lengths aforesaid.

Also no man ought to fish with any Net or Engine, angling only excepted, but
with such Net or Trannel as every mea sh shall be two inches and a half wide,
except Nets only to take Loches, Mennas, Butheads, Gudgions, Eeles, and none
other Fish, upon pain of twenty shillings for every time offending, and loss of
the fish and the unlawful Net.

Conspiracy of victualers.
Al so you shall inquire of the conspiracy of Victualers, and that is where any
Butcher, Baker, Brewer, Poulter, or Cook, shall or do cons pire, promise, or
make oath, that they will not sell their victuals but at certain prices, or if
any artifieers, or laborers do con spire, promise, or covenant likewise not to
do the work which others have begun, or will do but certain work in a day, or
will not work but at certain hours and times, then every such person so cons
piring, promising, swearing, and offending, being thereof lawfully convicted,
shall forfeit for the first offense ten pound, if he have it to pay, then he
must pay it within six days after his conviction, or else he is to have twenty
days imprisonment, and have only bread and water for his sustenance, and for
the second offense twenty pound to be paid as is aforesaid, or else to suffer
punishment on the Pillory, and for the third offense, he shall lose forty
pound to be paid as is before said, or else to be set upon the Pillory, and lose
one of his cars, and ever after to be taken as an infamous person. 2. E. 6.
And if such conspiracy shall happen to be made by any Company or Corporation,
they s hall lose their Corporation, besides the penalty and the particular
punis hment aforesaid.

False Waights and double Measures.
5^. E. 3.
Also if any within your inquiry, shall use any false Waights or double measures
in deceiving of the Commonwealth, in buying with a great measure, and in s
elling with a less, the offender thereof therein shall be grievously punis head
and imprisoned until he has made fine with the Keepers of the Liberty of
England, by Authority of Parliament for his offense.

No man ought to sell any corn, ale, bread, or wine, but by a measure sealed
with this letter H. upon pain of forfeiture for the first offense six shillings
eight pence; for the second offense thirteen shillings four pence, and for the
third offense, twenty s hillings and to be set on the Pillory, to the example
of others; and the mea sure not sealed to be broken, all which forfeitures are
to the Lord of the Liberty where such offense is committed, and if it be in a
City, or Borough, then it is to the Mayor and Commonalty.

1. Jacob.
Also you shall inquire of such as use to trace Hares in the snow, or to kill
Hares with harepipes, or other egines, by an old Law they forfeit six s
hillings eight pence for every Hare so killed, but by a latter Law made in the
fir st year of the late King James, twenty shillings

No Lay man may lawfully keep any Greyhound, or Hunting Dog, Ferits, or Nets,
unless he can dispend forty shillings per annum, Freehold, nor no spiritual man
unless he can dispend ten pound per annum, of spiritual promotion, upon pain of
a years imprisonment.

Crow net.
5. Eliz.
Next you shall inquire if there be in every Paris h and Tything within your
inquiry a Crow net, provided to kill and destroy Crows, Rooks, and Choughes,
according to the Statute, or no, if there be not, they ought to lose ten
shillings for every default, and it is not enough to have one, but it must be
used, and scrapes made in the winter to that purpose, upon the like pain, but
housedoves and pigeons may not in any case be taken with it. 5. Jacob.


Apparel.
24. H. 8.
And you shall inquire of such as exceed in apparel contrary to the Statute, for
no man except he may dispend twenty pound yearly in lands for his life at the
leas t, or is worth two hundred pounds in goods, ought to wear any silk on his
hat, hose, shoes, girdle, scabberd or spurleathers, upon pain for every days
wearing of it ten pound, and three months imprisonment; and if any man know
his servant to offend herein, and do not put him away, and not take him again
within a year after, does forfeit a hundred pound for every such offense by the
same Statute, and the se persons only are accepted out of the Statute, viz.
The Council of State, the Barons of the Exchequer, Judges of the Law, Serjants
at Law, Majors and Recorders of Cities and Towns corporate, and their wives.

Refuse to go to muster.
Also you shall inquire if any have refu sed to go to Musters, if there be any
such they ought to lose forty s hilings, and to have ten days imprisonment.

Al so no man ought to water any Hemp or Flax in any running stream, upon pain
of twenty shillings.

Drunkards.
^. Jacob.
Also you shall inquire of Drunkards, for they ought to be presented, and to pay
if they be able for every time they be drunk five shillings to the use of the
poor of the Parish where the offense is committed, if not able, then after con
viction thereof, they ought to sit six hours in the Stocks.

^. Jacob.
Also an Alehouse-keeper ought to lose twenty shillings for every pot they sell
that is not a full quart, and ten s hillings for suffering any Town sman to
sit drinking in their houses, except he be brought thither by a stranger, and
then he may not stay there above one hour.

And Brewers by the same Law ought to lose for every barrel of Beer or Ale six
shillings eight pence, which they lay into any man's seller to be sold there by
retaile by any that is not licened to sell Ale or Beer.

Waifes, s traies, and felons goods.
18. E. 2.
Also you shall inquire of waises, strayes, and felons goods. Waifes are Cattle
stolen and waved out of the possession of him that stole them, and straies are
Cattle strayed out of their haunt, and they ought to be seized upon to the
Lords use, and to be wreathed and put into an open place, and not in a covert,
to the end the owner may have the view of them, and they mu st be cried at
three Market Towns next adjoining to the place where they are s trayed, and if
they be not challenged within a year and a day, then they belong to the Lord o^
the soil where they are, by the Law, otherwife not.

Which is all manner of felons goods which may presently after the felony is
known to be committed, be seized upon, but not take away but left with the
township, for the felon must have his finding out of it so long as he lives
unconvicted or attainted, but when he is convicted or attained, his goods then
properly belong to the Lord of the Leet, if he have words for it in his
Charter, otherwise they belong to the keepe^s of the Liberty of Englandby
Authority of Parliament.

Treasure trove.
Also you shall inquire of Treasure troues, either upon the ground, or within
the ground, for if any has been found within the jurisdiction of this Court,
it belongs to the Lord of this Leet or Law day.

Mortmain.
Also you shall inquire if any man has given any lands in Mortmain, that is,
to any Religious house, or Religious person, or to any Corporation, Guild, or
fraternity, without license, such gift is void, and the Lord may enter by way
of Escheat.

Also you shall inquire if the pains laid at the last Leet or Law-day be
performed or no, if not, then you must pres ent them that have made default,
and then those pains must be read to the Jury.

And to conclude, if there shall any other thing come to your knowledge meet to
be presented, and by any omitted to be given in charge, you shall as well
inquire thereof, and present it as the re s t.

Then cause the Bailiff to make three Proclamations, and say thus: If any man
can inform the Stew^^d of this Leet, or his inque st of any petty Treason,
Felony, petty Larceny breach of Peac^, or of any other matter or thing now
given in charg^, (...) them come forth and they shall be heard.

And if any do come in, then swear them thu^: that the evidence which they
shall give, shall be the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so God them help, and the contents of this Book, then adjorn the Court till
after dinner.

Then at your return from dinner, call all the Tythingmen and take their
presentiments.

And then that done, take the pres entments of the Jury, if they be ready with
them, or else give them a day to bring in their presentiments, and then commonly
is the best service done.

Then swear all the officers to their several offices that are then and there
to be s worn.

Then adjorn the Court until the day given to the Jury to bring in their
presentiments, but if they have no day given them, you may discharge the Court
by Proclamation thus, viz. according as other Courts are discharged.

Then at the day when the Jury delivers in their presentiments, you must first
call them by their names to see if all be there or no, and then ask them if
they be agreed of their pres entments, if they say they be, then receive their
presentiments in writing in Engli sh, under their hands, for the Stewards
warrant.

Petty Treason.
IN primis, The Jurors aforesaid, say and present on their Oath, that R.S. of
A. Gentleman, at A. within the jurisdiction of this Court, as a felon of the
Commonwealth, one hundred pieces of gold, and three hundred groates falsely and
feloniou sly coined, and made, letters patents of, etc. thence first not
obtained, against the peace public, and again st the form of the Statute in
such case put forth and provided.

Felony for burning a house.
Also they present that a certain T.D. Yeoman such a day, etc. at I. within the
jurisdiction of this Court, by force and arms, etc. voluntarily and
feloniously of his malice forethought, the house of a certain I.S. burnt
against the peace public, therefore is it commanded the Bailiff to seize all
his lands, tenements, goods and chattels, that he may answer them to the Lord
of the Manor.

Felon.
Al so they present that W.P. of I. aforesaid laborer, such day, etc. at A.
within the jurisdiction of this Court, by force and arms, etc. and against the
peace public, the close of a certain A.B.at I. aforesaid, broke and entered,
and one s uite of s atten of black color, of the goods and chattels of the
aforesaid A. then and there found, feloniously took and carried away, therefore
is it commanded to the bailiff to seize, as above.

Accessory.
Also they present that W.S. of I. aforesaid Yeoman within the jurisdiction of
this Court, councelled, instigated procured, comforted, and abetted a certain
H.W. etc. one Cow of black color of the price of thirty shillings, of the
goods and chattels of a certain E. F. then and there found feloniously to
steal, take, and lead away, and the foresaid L.by force of the said council, in
stigation, procurement, comfort, and abetting of the before said W.S. the
aforesaid Cow such day, etc. year, etc. feloniously stole, took, and led away.

Rape.
Al so they present that A.B. of I. Yeoman, such day, etc. at I. within the
jurisdiction of this Court, the close and house of a certain C.B. broke and
entered, and upon a certain K.C.the daughter, etc. in the peace of God, and the
Commonwealth being ass ault made, and her by force and arms then and there
against her will ravished, and her carnally knew, against the peace, etc.

Felony.
Al so they present that A.B. of I. aforesaid, Yeoman such day, etc. at I.
within the jurisdiction of this Court, about the hour of nine in the night of
the same day, the house and mansion of a certain C.D. as a felon of the
Commonwealth, broke and entered, with the intention to spoil the aforesaid
C.D. and six Angels of gold, of the goods and chattels of the aforesaid C.D.
then and there in a certain chest being feloniously took and carried away,
against the peace, etc.

Robbery.
Also they present that E.F. of I. aforesaid laborer such day, etc.at I. within
the jurisdiction of this Court, by force and arms, and against the peace, etc.
upon a certain T.B.at, etc. within the jurisdiction of this Court, in the high
way, there in the peace of God, and the Commonwealth, being assault made, and
him T.B. then and there spoiled, and sixteen s hillings, and one Angel of gold,
of the goods and chattels of the aforesaid T.B.in a certain his purse, then and
there being from the person of him T.B.feloniously took and carried away,
against the peace, etc.

Hutes s.
Also they present, that the aforesaid T.B. being spoiled rai sed a great hiew
and cry, and the aforesaid E.F. as a felon of the Commonwealth, the said day
and year, from the aforesaid place where so spoiled he was, freshly pur sued,
as far as the aforesaid town of, etc. and that no inhabitant there the
aforesaid felon upon the hiew before said followed, and so the aforesaid felon
escaped in contempt of the keepers of the Liberty of England, and against the
form of the Statute of Winchest. in such like case put forth and provided,
therefore the aforesaid town of, etc. is amerced, etc.

Flight he made.
Also they present that E.L. of I. aforesaid Yeoman such day and year,etc. at
I. within the jurisdiction of this Court, a certain gelding of black color of
the price, etc. of the goods and chattels of a certain A.B. in the common field
there being feloniously s tole, took and lead away, therefore is it commanded
to the baily to seize two cows of the goods and chattels of the aforesaid E.L.
as an e s cheat, and to the Lord forfeit, and that safely they be kept to the
use of the Lord, or thus, if it be for the Commonwealth, to the use of the
Commowealth.

Es cape.
Also they present, that when a certain B. R. of I.aforesaid Yeoman, taken was,
and arested, for suspicion of a certain felony, and in the stocks put, a
certain I. F. of I. aforesaid laborer such day and year, etc. at I. aforesaid,
the before said stocks by force and arms, feloniously broke, and the foresaid
B.R. then and there to escape, and at large go permitted, against the peace,
Therefore is it commanded to the baily as before, etc.

Felony in rescuous.
Also they present, that T.I. of I. before said, within the jurisdiction of this
Court one Calf of the price, etc. of the goods and chattels of a certain I.B.
then and there found, feloniously took and carried away, and that W.O. baily of
the manor aforesaid such day and year, etc. at I. aforesaid, the before said
T.I. for suspicion of the selony aforesaid arresied, and that W.F. of I.
laborer by force and and arms,etc. at I.aforesaid, the said day and year, upon
the afores aid W.O. in the peace of God and the Commonwealth, being as sault
made, and the afores aid T. I. in the custody of the before said W. then and
there feloniou sly took, got away, and res cued, and at large to go permitted,
against the peace, etc. therefore to the baily commanded is, as above, etc.

Felon of a Dovehouse.
Also they present that A.B. of I. aforesaid, Yeoman such day and year, etc. at
I. within the jurisdiction of this Court, about the hour of one in the night of
the same day, a certain Dove-house of a certain, etc. broke and entered, and
forty Pige^ns of the price of, etc. of the goods and chattels, etc.
feloniously took and carried away against the peace, etc. therefore, etc.

Felon of a Do Dome stick.
Also they present that I.W. of I. aforesaid gentleman, such day and year, etc.
at I.within the jurisdiction of this Court, a certain Do Domestic, and
bearing a caperane about her neck, of the price of, etc. of the goods and
chattels of a certain, etc.then and there found feloniously took and carried
away against the peace, and therefore commanded is it to the bailiff, etc. as
above.

Felon of a trunck broken.
Also they present that I.L. of I. aforesaid Yeoman such day, etc.at I.
aforesaid, within the jurisdiction of this Court, about the first hour of the
night of the same day, a certain trunck of a certa^^, etc. broke, and entered,
and ten fishes called Pykes, of the price, etc. of the goods and chattels of
the before said, etc. from the trunck of the s ame, etc. then and there
feloniously took and carried away against the peace, etc. therefore, etc.

Petty Larceny.
Also they present that P.I. of I. aforesaid Yeoman such day, etc.the clo se of
a certain; etc. at I. broke and entered, and one towel of the value of six pence
of the goods and chattels of the before said, etc. then and there found,
feloniously took and carried away, therefore, etc.

Selling in the Churchyard.
Also they present that W.B. and T.B. of I. aforesaid Butchers s uch day, etc.
within the precinct of the view of Frankpledge laid out their flesh, and other
things venal in the Church, and Churchyard of I. to sell them; which where
divine service is celebrated, and men's bodies are buried, they sold against the
form of the Statute ofWinch. in s uch like case set forth and provided,
therefore are they amerced, etc.

Chattels waved.
Also they present that a certain M.S. came within the juri sdiction of this
Court, and hither brought certain goods and chattels by him stolen, viz. One
Smock, one Petticote, and one Shirt; all which aforefaid are of the value of
twenty s hillings and no more, all which and singular hither by the foresaid M.
were brought, and the same M. here within the jurisdiction of this manor,
these waved left and fled, by which all the goods and chattels aforesaid came
to the Lord of this manor upon the before said. Commanded it was to the Baily
to seize into the hands of the Lord, as an eschete, and to the Lord forfeit,
and so did he, and the goods and chattels afores aid were delivered to the Lord
in this Court.

Common fine.
Also they say that they give to the Lord in certain for the Common fine at
this day of ancient custom six shillings eight pence.

Default of Dec^iners.
Also they pre sent upon their oath that I.R. R.W. and I.W. are resident within
the view of Frank pledge aforesaid, and at this day have made default,
therefore is every of them amerced as it appears upon their heads.

Nuisance of water.
Also they present that R.C. of I. afores aid Yeoman, has diverted the common
cour se of a certain rivolet, leading by the house of a certain T.H. out of the
right course in which it used to run; therefore is it commanded him, to suffer
that rivolet to run in its right and ancient course, by the feast, etc. under
the penalty, etc.

Nuisance of boughs, etc.
Also they present, that there is a certain hedge of great thickness, and that
the boughs thence hang beyond the venelle called the public lane, to the
Nuisance of carriages, beyond the same venelle, to be carried in defect of W.C.
therefore is it commanded to him to cut or lop that hedge by the feast, etc.

Nuisance of a gutter.
Also they present, that there is a certain gutter, leading from the house or
Kitchen of T.I. by which the filthy or stinking water of the said Kitchen is
conveyed into the public way, to the grevious nuisance of the way public, and
of all carriages beyond it, to be carried by the people of the Commonwealth;
therefore is it commanded him, that to amove or stop up, by the feast,and c.

The common ways.
Also they present, That the common way leading by the field called Prebends
field, is the common way for leading or riding, and so used was from the time
whose contrary in the memory of man is not, and because the gate and the bridge
beyond the further bridge, ought to be maintained and kept by the Land tenants,
and now are not; therefore is it commanded, the same gate and bridge, to mend,
and repair before the feas t, etc. under the penalty, etc.

Nus ance of a dunghill.
Also they present that R.W. has erected a certain Dunghill against his house
near the public way, to the nuisance of the people of the Commonwealth;
therefore commanded it is to him, that to amove and eary thence by the
seast,etc. under the penalty, etc.

Nuisance of a Ditch.
Also they present that there is a certain ditch unscoured and unclean in
defect of R.S. to the nuisance, etc. therefore is he amerced twelve pence, and
commanded it is to him that to scour and maka clean by the fea st, etc. under
the penalty, etc.

An Hostess of whores.
Also they present that A.B. widow, is a common Host s s, and receiver of
whores, and of women of bad fame and conversation, to the grievous nu sance of
her neighbors; therefore is she amerced two shillings.

A scold.
Also they present that N.C. widow, is a common scold with her neighbors, and a
common breaker of hedges, and keeps a certain W.C. her son in her house e, and
he is not of good fame or government, therefore are they amerced as it appears
upon, etc.

Trespass.
Also they present that a certain A.B. s ervant of W.C. Baily of the Lord, as
he was leading certain cattle of a certain R G. to the pound of the Lord there
to impound them, came a certain D.P. with great violence to the pound
aforesaid, with one sword of the value of five s hillings, and then and
therethe aforesaid A.B, struck with the s ame sword on his head, and spilt
blood upon the same A.B. by occasion of which blow the aforesaid B. fell to the
ground, as if dead he had been. Therefore the aforesaid D.P. is amerced, and
affer. by the chief pledges to five shillings.

Trespass and Battery.
Also they present that I.S. made an affray within the juri s diction of this
Court, and drew blood, therefore is he amerced six shillings eight pence.

Default of a Constable.
Also they present that W.G. is Constable, and is not here at the view of
Frank-pledge, to present that which to that office belongs, but has made
default, therefore is he amerced three shillings four pence.

Common apprisers.
Also they present that B.R. and W.G.are common apprisers, and ought to be here
to present that which to that office belongs, and made default, therefore are
they amerced three shillings four pence.

Searchers of Victuals make default.
Also they present that R.B. and C.D. are searchers of Victuals, and s hold be
here at the view of frankpledge to pre sent that which to that office belongs,
and made default; therefore each of them is amerced two shillings.

Scowrers of streets make default.
Also they present that T.I. and W.I. are scowrers of streets, and ought to be
here at the view of frankpledge, and made default, therefore is each of them
amerced six pence.

Estray.
Also they present upon their Oath, that the twentieth day of May, the year,
etc. there came within this Lordship, one horse e of color gray an estray, and
remains in custody X.D. to be proclaimed.

Also they present that there is one (...) color bay, of age four years or
more, which came within this Lord ship an estray the ninth day of September,
the year, etc. of the price of twenty four s hillings, and remained in the
custody of the Baily by the space of one year, and one day, after three
Proclamations three several days made according to the form of the Statute,
therefore the property of the same Colt is in the Lord.

Bakers amerced.
Also they present that W M. twelve pence, and R.B. twelve pence, are common
Bakers of man's bread, and diverse times have baked bread unwholesome, and
broken the A ss. therefore is each of them amerced as it appears upon their
heads.

Brewers amerced.
Also they present that R.W. twelve pence, and I.D. twelve pence, are common
brewers of Ale, and have brewed several times Ale unwholesome, and broken the
Ass. therefore is each of them amerced as it appears upon their heads.

Tiplers amerced.
Also they pres ent that E.W. twelve pence, and W.X twelve pence by their wives
are common Tiplers of Ale, and by unlawful measures have sold Ale and broken
the Ass. therefore is each of them amerced, as it appears upon their heads.

Penatly Set.
First, Ordained it is that B.R. make and scour his ditch at the nether end of
great hill-field, containing by estimation twenty perches, by the feast of the
Nativity of Saint John Baptist next coming, under penalty for every perch there
eight pence.

Penalty.
Al so ordained it is that T.M. reform and expose a certain parcel of land
lately by him incr^ched, betwixt Wash-lane and Pickam common, before the fea st
of all Saints next coming, under the penalty for every perch not reformed and
exposed twenty pence.

Penalty.
Al so ordained it is, that no man permit his beasts, viz. his Oxener Cowes to
go into or feed upon the common of this Lord, but in the lanes to this manner
belonging, without a keeper, under penalty of forfeiture to the Lord for every
of them every time two pence.

Penalty.
Al so ordained it is that W.I. amove his dunghill lying by the way public
against his house, before the feast of Easter next, under the penalty of
forfeiture of ten s hillings to the lord of this manor.

Penalty.
Al so ordained it is, that I.F. make an^ maintain a bridge in his clos e,
called great Co^mans, in the way leading from Alton town, under penalty of
forfeiture of ten shillings to the lord.

Penalty.
Al so ordained it is that every man yoke or ring his hogs before the feast of
Saint Michael the Archangel next, and those keep so yoked or ringed until the
feast of Saint John Baptist then next following under penalty of forfeiture to
the lordfor every hog, every week three shillings four pence.

Then there rests no more to be done at a Leet or a Law day, but to minister to
every officer his particular oath, and first the Majors oath, if there be one
there, and that must be thus:

The Majors Oath.
YOu shall swear that you well and truly shall serve the keepers of the
Liberties of Englan^, by Authority of Parliament, and the Commonwealth, in one
office of a Mayor, and as Mayor of this Town and Borough of P. for and during
the space of one whole year now next ensuing; and you shall minister equal ju
stice as well to the poor as to the rich, to the best of your cunning, wit, and
power; and you shall diligently procure such things to be done, as may honestly
and justly be to the profit and commodity of the Corporation of this Town; and
also endevor your self to the utmost of your power to see all Heresies,
Treasons, Felonies, and all other Trespass ses, Misdemeanors, and Offenses
whatsoever to be committed within this Town and Borough, during the time of
your office, to be repressed, reformed, and amended, and the offenders duly
punished according to the Law. And finally you shall support, uphold, and
maintain the Commonwealth within this Town, prescribed customs, rights,
liberties, juri sdictions, tranchises, compositions, and all lawful ordinances
of this Town and Borough; and as concerning all other things appertaining to
your office, you shall therein faithfully and uprightly behave your self for
the most quietness, benefit, worship, honesty, and credit of this Town, and of
the inhabitants thereof, So help you God, and the holy contents of that book.

The O^ th of the Recorder.
YOu shall swear that you well and truly shall serve the keepers of the Liberty
of England, by Authority of Parliament, and the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses
of this Town and Borough of P. in the office of Recorder, and as the Recordor
of this Town and Borough of P. ye s halbe faithful and just and give good
advice and counsel unto the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of this Town, for
and concerning any matter or cause that shall concern or touch the Franchiles,
Liberties, and good orders of this Town, whenever they shall require or
desire you s o to do, you shall not utter or disclose any of their secrets or
council, touching the Fellowship or Corporation of this Town, whereby any
prejudice, loss, or hindrance, or s lander, shall or may arise, grow, or be to
the same Corporation: And further ye shall do to your power, wit, and cunning,
all and every thing that shall appertain to your office for the most benefit,
worcester ship, and credit of this Town, and of the Inhabitants thereof. So help ye
God and the contents of this book.

The Oath of the Town Cleark or Steward.
YOu s hall swear that you well and truly shall serve the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Burgesses of this Town, in the Office of Steward and Town Clerk of this Town
and Borrough of P. and truly to see all Plaints, Actions, Process, and matters
in the Courts to be holden before the Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses of this
Town, and by you or your sufficient Deputy, according to custom and Liberties
of this Town, to be entered and recorded as they ought to be, after the best of
you cunning wit, or power, taking for the same you due fees and the perqui
sits, issues, profits, and amerciaments of the same Courts; you shall justly
and truly write and extract yearly, for the levying and gathering thereof; and
you shall truly and diligently do and accomplish all other things appertaining
to your said office after the be st of your knowledge, as near as God shall
give you grace. So help you God and the contents of this book.

The Oath of the Coroner, if there be any.
YOu shall swear, that you well and truly shall serve the keepers of the
Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliament, and the Commonwealth, in the
office of a Coroner, as Coroner of this Town and Borough of P. and you shall
diligently and truly do and accomplish all and every thing and things
appertaining to your office after the best of your cunning, wit, and power, for
the mo st quietness, profit, ease, and credit of this Town, and the inhabitants
thereof, taking such fees as you ought to take by the Laws and Statutes of this
realm. So help you God, and the contents of this book.

The Oath of the Receiver^.
YOu shall swear that you well and truly shall serve the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Burgesses of this Town of P. in the office of Receivership, and as Receivers of
the s ame Town for and during the space of one whole year now next ensuing, and
ye shall reasonably and honestly procure the profit of the Corporation of this
Town, in those things which touch your office; and ye s hall al so well and
truly Collect, levy, and gather all and all manner Rents, Revenues, Casualties,
Duties, and Profits belonging unto the said Office, and the same shall truly
pay and deliver, and true declaration and account thereof make at the time
appointed for payment and account thereof to be made, without concealment: and
further, you shall diligently give attendance to the Mayor of this Town and
Corporation according to ancient cus tome; and every other thing belonging to
your office you shall well and truly do and accompli sh to the best of your
skill or power. So help ye God, and the contents of this book.

The Oath of the Chamberlain, and general Receiver.
YOu shall swear that you well and truly shall serve the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Burgesses of this Town and Borough of P. in the office of Chamberlain or
general receiver of this Town, and therein shall you do right to all manner of
people both poor and rich in those things which touch your office; the receipt
of the money due or belonging to the Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses of this Town
and Corporation, you shall truly and safely keep, and have always in a
readiness to the use and behoof of the Corporation of this Town whenever
occasion shall serve, and not waste or di spend the same, but make true
declaration and accunt thereof, when you shall be thereunto required without
concealment, according to the credit and trust to you committed in this
behalf, So God you help, etc.

The Oath of a Burgess.
YOu shall swear that you well and tr^ly shall serve the keepers of the Liberty
of England by Authority of Parliament, and the Inhabitants of thi^ Town and
borough of P. as one of the Burgesses of this Town, and shall minis ter equal
justice to poor and rich, after the best of your cunning, wir, and power, and
als o shall well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, and keep all such good
orders, rules, and composi^ions, as are or shall be made, ordered, or es
tablished by the common counsel of this Town, for the good government thereof
in all things to you appertaining, and you shall not utter or disclose any
counsel or secret thing or matter, touching the Fellowship or corporation of
this Town, whereby any prejudice, loss, hinderance, or slander shall or may
arise, grow, or be to the same corporation, but you shall in all things
belonging to the fellowship and corporation of this Town, faithfully, honestly,
and indifferently behave your self, for the most benefit, worcester ship, and hones
ty of this Town, and the Inhabitants thereof, So God you help, etc.

The like Oath is to be minis tred to an Alderman, muratis mutandis.

The Oath of the Cons tables.
YOu and either of you shall swear, that you well and truly shall s erve ^e
keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament, and the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Burge sses of this Town and Borough of ^^in the office of
Constableship, and as Constables of this Town, for and during the space of one
whole year now next ins uing; you shall endeavor your selves to the utmost of
your powers, to see the public peace to be kept, and watch and ward obs erved
and kept in this town, as has been accustomed, and as it ought to be: likewis
e you shall endeavor your selves to learn and understand the contents of the
Statute of Winchest. and diverse other Laws and Statutes of this Nation made for
the puni s hment of rogues, vagabonds, and s turdy beggars, haunting and
resorting within the precinct of your office, and puni sh the offenders
accordingly. Also you shall punish all such persons as do or s hall play at any
unlawful games. according to the Statute in that case made and provided. You
shall also have regard for the maintenance of A^^illery within your said
office, and that you shall do and accomplish to the uttermost of your powers,
So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Sergeants.
YOu and either of you shall swear, that you well and truly s hall serve the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Burge s ses of this Town, in the office of a Serjantship,
and as Sergeants of this Town, for and during the space of one whole year now
next coming; and you shall well and truly serve, do, and execute all and all
manner precepts, warrants, and commandments to you and either of you to be
lawfully given and directed, touching or concerning any matter, cause, or
process, to be moved, had, or depending in the keepers of the Liberty of
England, by Authority of Parliament court, to be holden within this Town,
according to the liberties thereof, or at large, and s hall make due returns
and answers thereunto, and make Certificate thereof, according to the effect of
such Precepts, Warrants, and commandments, taking therefore your ordinary
fees, and none other: And also you shall diligently give attendance unto Master
Mayor, and wait on him, as has been accustomed, and as you ought to do, and
his commandments mess ages truly to do and say, and not alter the same, so that
it may be prejudicial or hurtful unto the said Master Mayor or any other: and
likewise you shall give attendance and be aiding and assisting unto the Con
stables of this Town, in any thing that they or either of them shall reas
onably and lawfully command or will you to do: and you shall diligently and
truly do all other things appertaining to your said office, to the utmo st of
your power. So help you God, and the contents of this Book.

The Oath of a freeman.
YOu shall swear that you shall be true and faithful to the keepers of the
Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliament, and to the government of the
Commonwealth of England, as it is now established, and to your power shall aid
and assi st the Mayor and other officers of this Town for the time being, and
to them shall be obedient and attendant concerning such things as they or any
of them shall lawfully and reasonably will or command you to do; you shall also
well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, and keep all such orders and rules as
are and shall be made and es tablished by the Common Counsel of this Town, for
the good government thereof, in all things to you appertaining: you shall also
give, yield, and be contributary to and with the Corporation of this Town, so
far forth as you ought or shall be chargeable to do, and you shall not by
color of your freedom bear out, or cover under you any foreign person or s
tranger, but according to the best of your skill, wit, cunning and power, you
shall uphold and maintain all the Liberties, Franchises, good customs, orders,
and usages of this Town and Corporation. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Tithing-man or petty Constable.
THe Oath of the Tything-man or petty Constable is in all points as the the
Oath of the Constable, mutatis mutandis, saving further that the Tything-man
must be s worn to be attendant on the Constable when he shall execute his
office, being thereunto required.

The Oath of an Ale-taster.
YOu shall swear that you shall well and truly serve the keepers of the Liberty
of England, by Authority of Parliament, and the Lord of this Leet in the office
of the Ale- taster, or Assizor of this Liberty and Hundred for this year to
come; you shall duly and truly see from time to time, that the bread brought to
be sold be truly weighed, and that the same to contain such weight, according
to the prices of Wheat, as by the Statute in that behalf is provided: likewise
you shall have diligent care during the time of your being in office, to all
the B^ewers and Tiplers within your office, that they and every of them do make
good and wholesome Ale and Beer for man's body, and that the same be not sold
before it be as said by you, and then to be sold agreeable to the prices
limited and appointed by the Jus tices of Peace; and all faults committed or
done by the Bakers, Brewers, or Tiplers, or by any of them, you shall make
known, and present the same at this Court, whereby due punis hment may be
inflicted upon them for their offenses accordingly, and in every other thing
you shall well and truly behave your self in the said office for this year to
come, So help you God, etc.

The Oath of fealty to a Freeholder.
YOu shall swear by the contents of that book, that you will be true and
faithful to the Lord of this Manor, and shall from henceforth bear, do, and
pay to your said Lord and to his heirs, at terms ass igned, all such Rents,
Customs, and Services, as you ought to pay and do for all such lands and
tenements as you claim to hold of him, So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Y^^gling.
THis hear you the Steward and the Court that I shall swear, that I will true
faith and troth bear to the keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of
Parliament, and to the government of the Commonwealth of Englandas it is now
establi shed: And I shall with all my power, wit, and endeavor, defend and
maintain the right and title of this Commonwealth against all foreign Princes
and foreign Potentates, and shall no felony nor treason commit, nor thereunto
assent, but as soon as any trea son shall come to my knowledge, I shall make
the same to be known to the keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of
Parliament, or to the Justices of the Peace public, within four and twenty
hours next and immediately after it shall come to my knowledge, and shall be
obedient to all the Laws of England, and in all things I shall well and truly
behave my self like a true and faithful member of this Commonwealth during the
term of my natural life, So God me help, etc.

The Oath of a Desnier.
YOu shall swear that you I. S. from this day during you life, s hall be
faithful to the Keepers of the Liberty of England, and you shall hear of no
hurt or damage that may befall them, but you shall disclose it, and to the
uttermost of your power you shall defend them, So God you help, etc.

The Oath of the Heyward.
YOu shall swear, that you shall well and truly serve the keepers of the
Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliament, and the Lord of this Leet in
the office of a Heyward for this year to come; you shall duly and truly
execute all such Attachements and other Process as shall be directed unto you
from this Court: and you s hall from time to time signify and present all s
uch Pound breaches as shall happen to be made within your office.

And likewise you shall present all such cattle estrayed, as shall usually come
within your office, and in every other thing well and truly behave your self
during the time before said. So God you help, etc.

The Oath of the Affiers.
YOu and either of you shall swear by the holy contents of this book, That you
will truly and indifferently tax, assess, and affier all such amerciaments as
are pre sented at this Court; wherein you shall spare no man for love, favor,
affection, or corruption, nor raise or inhance upon any man (of malice) more
grievous Amerciaments than shall be thought reasonable, according to the
quality of the offense, and the faults committed, and not otherwi se. So help
you God, etc.

Then must the Steward command all men to s tand by, and the two Affiers to
stand as near him as they can, and he must read unto them every presentment
that ought to be affied, and so that they may rate them accordingly until they
have done, and then discharge the Court thus:

Conclusion.
The Bailiff mus t make an O yes, and say after the Steward thus: If any man
have any more to do at this Court, let him come in, and he shall be heard, or
else every man may depart for this time in Gods peace and the public, and keep
your day here according to custom, if it be a cus tomary Leer, otherwise it
must be upon a new warning. And s o God save the Lord of this Leet or Law-day,
and make us all his servants, Amen.

Now I will show you how Manors took their beginning, and within what Manors a
Court Baron shall or may be kept, and within what Manors they may not, as
follows.

Perkina fol. 127. says, That the beginning of Manors was, when the King gave
a thousand Acres of Land, or more or less, to a man and his heirs for ever.
And before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, A man seized of Land,
infeoffed another of ten Acres, another of twelve Acres, a third of twenty
Acres, to be holden of hims elf, and the Tenants to do him service, and pay him
a quit rent, and so by this means by continuance of time out of the memory of
man, such donor or feoffor had a Manor.

Also, 33. H. 8. tit. Compris e. A man at this day cannot make a Manor; For
although that a gift in tail be made to diverse to hold of the donor by his
services or suit of Court, although this be a tenure, yet it cannot make a
Court, for it cannot be without prescription.

Also if a man have a Manor, and all his free suitors but one do commit
felony, or die without heirs general or special, whereby their land escheats,
or if the Lord purchase their lands, the Manor is destroyed; for it cannot be
a Manor without Suitors, there must be two at the least, as it appears by
35. H. 8. tit. Tenures 102. m. And in 26. H. 8.4. Two Copartners made partition
of a Manor, so that either of them had parcel in demesne, and parcel in
service; in this case either of them has a Manor, and either of them may keep
a Court Baron, i^ either of them have two Suitors; otherwise not. But 12. H.
4.15. Partition is made of a Manor, so that one Copartener has the demeans,
and ^he other the services, suit of Court in this case is sus pended; and so
long as the manor continues so, there can be no Court kept. And 8. H. 7.4. it
is held, That a Court Baron is incident to a Manor, of common right, s o that
within every Manor there ought to be a Court Baron, although there be no s
uiters belonging to it, or although by partition the suit is suspended, as is
aforesaid. And 34. H. 6.53. But note, That diverse are called Manors, where
there are not free Suitors, but only Copyholders, Ad voluntatem Domini
secunaum con^uetu ^linem Manerii. And yet those s eigniories are called
Manors, and there are Court Barons kept to grant Copihold es tates; otherwise
they cannot be granted by Copy, but by lease they may, and by that means a
Manor will be utterly destroyed.

THE Manner and form how to keep a Court BARON.
ss THE Court Baron of I.F. and P. his wife, there held the twelfth day of
October, the year.etc. by me I.W. Steward there. Then command the Bailiff to
make an O yes, and say after you thus, All manner of persons that have any
thing to do at this Court, draw near and give your attendance, and if any man
will be essoined or enter any plaints, let them come forth and they shall be
heard.

Then let the Bailiff say after the Steward, Essoines and proffers of suit or
plea three times for this Court, and if any will be essoined, let the essoiny
for suit of Court be entered thus:

I.S. Essonied is for suit of Court by T.D. And if any will enter any plaints,
then let them enter their plaints thus.

W.K. plains against I.H. a plea of debt or trespa ss, or taking or injust
determing of his beasts, or such like. Then call the Freeholders, and so many
as make default, present their names and mark them over the heads thus.

Richard W. Knight Amerced two pence. and M.B gentleman, Amerced two pence.
are freeholders of this Court and have made default, therefore each of them is
amerced as appears upon their heads.

Will. Kelsey. Jur. Joh. Valor. Jur. Rob. Corse. Jur. Joh. Matthew. Jur. Joh.
Newman. Jur. Matheus Bull. Jur. Joh. Heult Jur. and Thomas L. Jur.


The Foremans Oath.
YOu shall swear that you as Foreman of this Homage, with the rest of your
fellows, shall duly inquire, and true presentment make of all such Articles
and things as shall be given you in charge, and therein you shall not spare no
man, for love, favor, or affection, nor present any man for malice, hatred, or
envy, but according as things here presentable, shall or may come to your
knowledge, by information, or otherwise, so shall you make thereof true
presentment without concealment, So God you help, and the contents of this
book.

Then call the rest of the Homage, and swear them by four at a time thus; The
same Oath that W. Kelsey your Foreman has taken before you one this part, you
and every one of you shall observe and keep of your parts, So help you God and
the contents of this book.

Then let the Bailiff call them by name, and bid them stand near and here their
charge.

An exhortation to the Jury before the charge.
SIRS, You that be sworn, before I enter into your Charge, I purpose by Gods
assistance to deliver unto you the causes of your assembly here together, which
are two; one is, for that you hold lands of the Lord of this Manor, some as
Freeholders, and s ome as Copiholders, and therefore by reason of your tenures
you ought to appear at this Court so often as it shall be kept, and here to do
your suit and service, or else to be amerced; and the other cause of your
coming hither, is to get knowledge by hearing of the Laws and cus tomes of this
Court dilated upon unto you, and hereby you may be the better taught, ins
tructed, and enabled to know how to perform your duties in doing well and
eschewing evil. And for that you shall the better consider and inquire of, and
present all things which are now here presentable, I have ministered unto you a
corporal oath, which oath stands upon three parts (that is to say) upon
Truth, Judgment, and Justice: It s tandeth upon truth, for that you ought to
present nothing but the Truth, and likewise not to omit any thing that is true
and presentable here unpre sented; It s tandeth upon Judgment, that you do not
present any thing rashly or unadvisedly, but certainly to know the truth
thereof before you do present it; And it s tandeth upon Justice, that you do
not for favor, affection, corruption of money, or other reward, for fear of any
man's dis pleasure, or for any private gain or profit, leave any thing
unpresented that is here pres entable, neither for malice to present any thing
contrary to the truth. These three principal things you ought duly to cons
ider of, and so hoping that you will have a special care thereof, according to
your oaths and duties, and the trust that is reposed in you, I will cea se to
trouble you any further at this time by way of exhortation, and proceed to your
Charge.

The Charge.
FIrst, you shall enquire whether all such persons as owe suit and service to
this court, be here to do the same or no: and if any make default, you must
present their names.

And I must tell you, If there be two Coparcenes, or two Joyntenants which do
owe suit and service to this Court for any Lands which they hold of the Lord of
this Manor, the one of them ought to be here to do the same, suit, and the
other ought to be contributer to his charge.

Also if any Tenant having twenty acres of Land grants or lets the same to
twenty several persons, in this case every one of those twenty ought to do such
suit and s ervice as has been accustomed to be done for the same Land.

Also, you shall enquire if any Tenant be dead since the la st Court, or
before, and his death as yet not pre sented, then you shall enquire what Land
he held of the Lord of this Manor, and by what tenure or service he held the
same, whether by Knights s ervice, Soccage tenure, or by Copy; and what benefit
or advantage is fallen to the Lord by his death; whether ward, marriage, relief,
escheat, or any other profit, and who is his next Heir, and of what age he is,
and in whose cus tody he is: For if any Tenant which holds by Knights service
die, and his heir male under the age of twenty one years, and not married, then
the Lord s hall have the ward ship and marriage of such heir male: but if it be
a female and under the age of 14. years, and not married, then the Lord s hall
have likewise the wardship and marriage of such heir female ^ and if the heir
male be 21. years at the death of his ancestor: or the heir female fourteen
years, then the Lord shall have only a relief, which ^s, if they held by a
whole Knights fee, a hundred shillings: if by the moity of a Knights fee, fifty
shillings, and so according to the rate of their tenure.

Also if any tenant which held by Soccage tenure be dead, his heir being under
the age of fourteen years, the Lord ought to have the value of his land for one
year for a relief, which is due immediately after the death of the Tenant; and
the next of kin to the heir to whom the inheritance cannot descend, ought to
have the wardship of such heir.

Al so if any customary Tenant or copiholder, hold two parcels of land by
herriot service, and by several copies, if such tenant dye thereof seized, the
Lord ought to have two herriots.

Also you shall iniquire whether any of the Lords tenants be dead without heir
general or special; if there be any such; then the Lord ought to have his land
by Es cheat.

Also if any Bastard has purchased any land within this Lords hip, and is dead
without issue of his body lawfully begotten, then the Lord ought to have his
land by Escheat.

Also if any Freeholder of this Manor has committed felony, and thereof has
been attainted, that is, either has confessed the felony, or has been convict
by verdict of twelve men, or fled, and thereupon outlawed for the felony, in
this chse the Keepers of the liberty of England by authority of Parliament must
have year, day and wast in his land, and after it ought to come to the Lord by
Escheat.

Also if any Copiholder has committed felony, and therefore has been
attainted as is aforesaid, then the Lord may enter into his Copihold for a
forfeiture.

Also if any Copiholders has lea sed his Copihold for any longer time than a
year and a day without the Lords licen s e, is is a forfeiture of his Copihold,
unless he may do it by the cus tome.

Also if any Copiholder deny to pay his rent, or deny to come to his Lords
Court, or deny to be sworn of the homage, or deny to go with his Lord to
suppress rebels, every one of these denials is a forfeiture of his copihold.
Also if any copiholder has sold any of his copihold land by deed, and made
livery of seisin thereof according to the deed, it is a forfeiture of so much
as he has so sold.

Also if any Copiholder has cut down any Timber trees within his Copihold
without license, or lopped any Timber trees there at an uns easonable time of
the year, by reas on whereof they die, either of both is a forfeiture of his
copihold.

Also if any copiholder s uffer his copihold tenement to decay and fall down
for lack of reparations, it is a forfeiture of his copihold.

Also if a copiholder be a Recusant, if his Lord also be not a Recusant, he
ought to forfeit his copihold es tate according to the statute Law made ann.
35. El.

Also if any copiholder have surrendered his copihold tenement into the hands of
two of the tenants since the la st court to the use of any person, every such
surrender ought to be pre sented at this Court, or else the tenants which took
such surrender, ought to forfeit their copiholds, because it may be thought if
they do not pre sent it, that they go about not only to defeat the Lord of his
fine, but also to disinherit the party to who se use the same s urrender was
taken.

Also if any Copiholder having two Copiholds, has impaired the one to amend
the other, this is a forfeiture of the Copihold that is impaired.

Also if any Villain or Bondsman of blood, has purchased any Land within his
Lordship, the Lord may sei se both it and such villains goods at his pleasure.

Also you shall inquire whether any Tenant of this manor has given any of his
lands in mortmain, That is to s ay, to any religious house, religious person,
and their success ors, or to any Guild, Fraternity, or corporation, and their
successors, without the Keepers of the Liberty of England, by Authority of
Parliaments license, and the Lords of this Manor, for it is here inquirable
and presentable, to the end that the Lord if there be any such grant made, may
make his claim within the year and the day, according to the s tatute in that
case made and provided.

Also if any Tenant has sold his land by Deed, and has not given notice
thereof to the Lord, nor he which bought it has not done his fealty to the
Lord, or suit of Court, so that by reason thereof the Lord does not know who is
his tenant, therefore you ought to present it: for it is very needful and
necessary, that the lord should know who is his Tenant, by reason of his
services and escheats which may grow due unto him.

Also if any Tenant within this Lordship has suffered any house of husbandry
to decay by taking of the land from it to lay it to another, in this case the
Lord ought to have the moity of the profits thereof to his own use, until it
be made and maintained a Husbandry again, and this you ought to inquire of for
the Lords benefit.

Also if any Tenant has enclosed any land which has been accustomed to lie
open without the Lords license and the Freeholders, you must present it, for he
cannot justify the doing thereof.

Also you shall inquire whether any of the Lords lands within this Manor be
withholden from him, and held and occupied without his license, if there be any
such thing, then you must inquire by whom it is withholden, and what land it
is, and what it is worth by the year, and how long it has been withholden that
the Lord may recover his damage for the withholding thereof accordingly.

Also you s hall inquire whether there be any rent custom, or service, behind
and unpayed to the Lord of this Manor, by whom it is due, and what rent,
custom, or service it is, how long it has been withholden, and where the land
lies, that the Lord may dis train for the arrearages thereof.

Also you shall inquire if any Bailiff or other officer of this Manor, has
made any arrest for any rent, cu stome, or service, due to the Lord of this
Manor, and rescouse therein has been made; you ought then to present him or
them which made the rescouse, and where and when it was done.

Also if any distress has been taken and put into the lords pound, and has
been taken out from thence without leave or authority of the law, then such
taking is a pound breach, and here inquirable and pres entable.

Also if any tenant does surcharge the common by putting more cattle there then
by the custom he ought to have go there, or by putting of cattle there not
commonable, as pigs, goats, and geese, and s uch like, you must present them.

Also if any Tenant of this Manor, having two Farm^s, one in this Manor, and
another in another Manor, does use in the Summertime or open time of the
year, when Corn and Hay is housed, to bring cattle from his other farm unto his
farm within this Manor, which has been usually kept at his other farm out of
this Manor, this is called chasing, and here requirable and punishable, unless
these cattle be kept within his own s everal grounds, and not in the common
fields.

Al so if any man has removed any bounds or marks, meer-s tones or stakes,
between this Lordship and any other, or between tenant and tenant, you must
present their names; for it is an evil ossice, and they deserve to be punis head
for it.

Also if any man has fished, hawked, or hunted within this Lord ship, without
the leave or license of the Lord of this Manor, you must present them, for
they are the Lords Realties, and therefore no man can lawfully come here to do
either one or the other without his leave.

Also if any tenant by reason of his tenure ought to grind at the Lords Mill,
if he do it not, you must present him.

Also if you know any man that keeps, deraineth, or withholdeth any of the
Lords evidences of this manor, as court ro^s, rentals, or immuniments
appertenant and belonging to the Lord of this Manor, you must present them,
for it is fit that the Lord should have the cu stody of this Evidence himself.

Also if there was any thing pained at the last Coure to be done, and as yet is
not done, you must enquire who have made default therein, and present his
heirs, or their names: And you shall likewise inquire of all other things which
you shall think needful to be inquired of, by me omitted, and not given you in
charge, a swel as if I had given you it in charge, and so bring in your
presentment in writing by one of the clock in the afternoon.

Then let the Bailiff make an O yes, and adjorn the the Court till after dinner
thus:

All manner of persons that have an^ more to do at this court, may depart for
this time, and keep their hour here at one of the clock in the asternoone.

And then after dinner, call the Jury for their presentiments; and if they be
ready, take them, and swear two Affiers to affier them, as before at the Leet.

This being done, let the Bailiff make an O yes, and discharge the court thus.
All manner of persons which have any more to do at this Coure, let them come
forth and they shall be heard, or else they and every one else may depart for
this time, and keep their day here upon a new warning, and so God save the
Commonwealth of England,and the Lord of this Manor.

Fealty to be ministered to a customary tenant.
YOu shall swear that you shall be true Tenant, and faith and truth shall bear
to the Lord of this manor, and to his heirs, for all such customary Lands and
Tenements as you claim to hold of him, by virtue of your copy for term of your
life: you shall also well and truly bear, pay, and do all such rents,
customs, and services as are and shall be from time to time to be paid and
done for the said lands to your said Lord, and his heirs: you shall also be
justified by your Lord and his officers, in every thing as a cus tomary Tenant
ought to be justified; and you shall in every other thing well and honestly
behave your self o long as you shall be Tenant, So help you God, and the
contents of that Book. And so let him kiss the Book to affirm his Oath.

But this Oath must be ministered before the Court be ended.

The Oath of the Reeve or Bailiff of a Manor.
YOu shall swear that you shall well and truly serve the keepers of the Liberty
of England by Authority of Parliament and the Lord of this Manor for the year
to come, in the office of the Reeve or Bailiff of the same Manor; and you
shall duly and truly gather all such rents, revenues, or other yearly profits
as s hal be extracted out unto you, and thereof you shall make and yield up a
true account at the end of the said year, and in every other thing you shall
well and honestly behave your self in the said office during the time
aforesaid, So help you God and the contents of that Book. This must also be
done before the end of the Court.

And the presentiments are to be put into this form by the Steward of the Court
thus, viz.next after the pre sentment of the freeholders, for their defaults,
the copiholders thus:

Default of Copiholders.
Also the Jury say upon their Oath, that W.I. four pence, and J.R. four pence,
are tenants by Copy Rolls of the Court, and owe suit to the Court, and at this
day has made default, therefore is each of them amerced as appears upon their
heads.

Death.
Also they pre sent that W.N. who of the Lord held freely one message, and
thirty Acres of meadow and pasture, with the appurtinances within this Lordship,
by fealty and s uit of Court and by rent annual of six pence, dyed of such
estate so seized and that R.I. is the son and next heir of the aforesaid W.I.
and is of the age of ten years, and to this Court came the before s aid R.I. and
paid to the Lord for relief six pence, and made fealty.

Alienation.
Also they say upon their oath, that G.B. who of the lord held freely one
message, one Orchard, and six acres of meadow with the appurtinences, by his
deed indented bearing date the sixth day of I. the year, etc. gave, granted,
bargained, and sold, all and singular the premises aforesaid, with the
appurtinences to R.K. of, etc. to have and to hold all and s ingular the
premises aforesaid with their appurtinences to the before s aid R. K. his heirs
and assigns of the chief lords of the fee by the rent s ervices and customs,
etc. thence heretofore due, and of right accus tomed, and the premises he
holds of the Lord of this manner by fealty and suit of Court and by rent annual
of 12. pence, and at this Court the said R.K. made to the Lord fealty.

Legation.
Also they say upon their oath that W.A. who of the Lord held freely one
message or tenement, and twenty acres of land called H. by fealty, suit of
Court and by rent annual of six pence dyed seized, and by his last will written
made, bearing date the 28. day of Sept. the year, etc. devi sed the message or
tenement and the aforesaid twenty Acres of land to certain R.A. and T.A. his
sons, by the name of all his lands, tenements, and hereditaments, situate
lying and being in I. before said, to have and hold the aforesaid message or
tenements to the s ame R.A. and T.A.their heirs and a ssigns for ever, to the
proper behoof and use of them R.T. their heirs and e ssignes for ever.
Therefore is it commanded to the Baily to de strain the before said R.A. and
T.A. according to the form of a Statute in that case provided to pay relief,
and also dis train to do fealty.

Upon Surr.
Also they say upon their oath, that R.R.tenant customary of this manor, out
of Court surrended into the hands of the Lord, by the hands of W.T. and R.W.two
customary tenants of this manor, all that me ssuage and thirty acres of land
meadow and pasture with the appurtenances now in the tenure and occupation of
R.B. to the behoof and use of the aforesaid R.R. for tenure of his life
natural, and after the decea se of the said R.R.then to the behoof and use of
T.B. and the heirs of the body of the said T. lawfully begotten, and for defect
of such issue of the body of the said T.B. lawfully begotten, to remain to I.I.
the son of R.I. gentleman, his heirs and a ssignes for ever; and they say that
the aforesaid R. is dead, and now to this Court the aforesaid T.B. comes and
requires to be admitted to all and singular the premises aforesaid, and at
this Court the Lord by I.Khis seneschal, has granted thence to him seisin by
the verge; to have and to hold to him T.B. and the heirs of his body lawfully
begotten; and for defect of such issue, to remain to the behoof and use of the
said I.I. and his heirs for ever; and the aforesaid T.B. gave the Lord as for
his fine four pounds, and he did to the Lord fealty and is admitted thereof
Tenant.

Surrender by the Seneschal taken.
At this Court witnessed is by W.T. seen s chapter that W.N. on his death bed lying
the tenth day of A. the year, etc. surrendered into the hands of the Lord, by
the hands of the same Senesch. (absent being the Court) in the presence of
R.C.R.P. and C.H one tenement called M. in which now dwells W.G. with all his
lands and tenements, within the manor of I. to the behoof and use of M. his
wife for term of her life, and after the decease of her M. to remain thence to
W. T. the s on of the aforesaid W the father and G the daughter of the same W.
the father, and the si ster of the afores aid W. the son, and to their heirs;
^et upon condition following, that if it happen any of the aforesaid W. the son
or G. the daughter, to dye without heir of his or her body issuing, that then
he or she which soever shall survive, shall have and enjoy the tenements
aforesaid to his, or her and their heirs for ever; and upon this came into this
Court the before said M. and requires to be admitted to the tenement before said
with the appurtenances, to whom the Lord by I. K, his seen sch. granted thereof
seisin by verge to have to her in form aforesaid, at the will of the Lord
according to custom of the manor, and she gives to the Lord her fine for her
entrance thereupon to be had, and makes to the Lord fealty and admitted is
thereof tenant.

Death of the Copiholder.
Also at this Court found it is by the homage that a certain W.W. one of the
sons and heir of R.W. deceased, held of the Lord to him and his heirs according
to the custom of the manor, the moity of two me ssuages or tenements, and of
one garden with the appurtenances in I. and long before this Court dyed thereof
seized within the age of ten years, and in the custody of R.W. according to the
custom of the manor, and that S.W. is the brother and sole heir of the
aforesaid W.W. and of full age, who pre sent is here in Court, and requires to
be admitted to all the Lands and Tenements C^s tomary of which he the aforesaid
W.W.dyed sei sed viz. to the aforesaid moyty of two Messuag^s or Tenements, a
loft and garden with the appurtenances within that Manor, to whom the Lord by
I K. his Seneschal, granted thereof seisin, to have and to hold to him and his
heirs of the Lord by verg, at the will of the Lord according to Cu stome of the
Manor aforesaid, by the Rent, Customs and Services therefore heretofore due
and accustomed; And he gives the Lord for a Fine for his Entrance as it
appears ovet his head; And maketht to the Lord fealty and is admitted thereof
Tenant.

Surr. in Court.
Also to this Court came I.T. and s urrendered into the hands of the Lord ten
acres of land more or less, with the appurtenan^es called S. four Acres of Land
more or less called K. and four Acres of meadow more or les s called C.
customary to the behoof and use of R.B. gentleman, his heirs and essignes for
ever by verge at the will of the Lord, according to custom of the manor
aforesaid, to which R.B.the Lord by his Senesch granted seisin to have and to
hold to him and his heirs of the Lord by the rent of ten shillings by the year,
and other services; therefore heretofore due, and he gives the Lord for a fine
for his entrance thereupon to be had, four pound, and made to the Lord fealty,
and is admitted thereof tenant.

Death of a parcener.
Also the homage say upon their oath, that a certain R.S. who of the Lord held
as parcener by cu stome of the manor, nine acres of land customary, with one
grange, together with T.S. his brother to him and his heirs, dyed about the
last Court so seized, and that a certain I.S. is son and next heir of the same
R. as to the moity of the aforesaid land and grange aforesaid, and is of age
eight years, and upon this as well the custody of the aforesaid I.S. as the
land and grange afores aid are committed to a certain S.I.as to his good
friend, etc. And he found pledge in Court E.N. to render to the aforesaid I.
the profits thereof, when the age of fourteen years he should attain.

Enchrochment.
Also they say upon their oath that R.W.has encroched upon the wast of the Lord
at C. in length ten yard lands, and in breadth one yard land, therefore he is
amerced, etc. and ordained it is that he expose the same before the feast of
Saint John Baptist next under the penelty of forfeiture to the Lord for every
yardland two s hillings six pence.

Rescuous.
Also they say upon their oaths that G. B.the Baily of the Lord such day and
year, etc. within that Lordship des trained H.H. for rent of the Lord then by
the s aid H.H. behind and not paid, And that the aforesaid H. then and there
rescuous made upon the s ame G.B. therefore is he amerced, etc.

The form and manner of diverse grants and surrenders, as well of Copiholders of
inheritance, as also of Copiholds for lives, as follows.

Broxhead.
ss. TO the Court of the manor there held the fourteen day of Febr. the year,
etc. came N. R. and took out of the hands of the Lord one mess uage and
yardland with the appurtinences in B.lately in the tenure of J.A. to have to
him and R.P. his son, and to A. now the wife of the said N. for the term of
life of them, and either of them long st living successively according to the
custom of the manner afores aid by the rent and service, before thence due and
accustomed, and he gives to the Lord for such estate; so thereof to be had
three pound, and make there the Lord fealty, and is admitted thereof tenant,
and the fealties of the aforesaid R. and A.are respited until, etc.

By I.W. Senesch there.

Forfeiture of Cop and retaking.
To this Court, etc. the homage present that P.C. lately the relict of I.C.
which of the Lord held, during her widowhood according to the custom of the
manor one message, etc.with the appurtinences in A. took for Husband R. L. by
which forfeited she has her estate in the premi sses, and so remains it in
the hands of the lord, upon which proclainat. made is, If any one, etc,
whereupon came the afores aid R.L. and took out of the hands of the lord one
message, etc. with the appurtinences, to have to him for term of his life,
according to cu stome of the manor aforesaid, by rent and services thereof
before due, and of right accu stomed, and he gives to the Lord for a fine,
such s tate so thereof to have, six pound and makes to the Lord fealty, and
admitted is thereof tenant.

Grant of reversion.
To the Court, etc. came W.H.and took out of the hands of the Lord, the
reversion of one mes suage, etc. with the in Y. now in the tenure of J.H.widow
lately the wife of W.H. to have and to hold the reversion aforesaid, to the
aforesaid W.H.and B. his son, for term of the lives of them, and either of them
longes t living successively according to the custom of the manor aforesaid,
when by the death surrender or any for feiture of the foresaid I. in any manner
done or committed to the hands of the Lord to come it shall happen, by the rent
and serzices thereof before due and of right accustomed, and he gives to the
Lord for a fine for such reversion so thereof to be had seven pound, and his
fealty is re spited until, etc.

Death.
THe Jurors present, that I.C. who of the Lord held one tenement with its
appurtenances in I.in which I.C. the father of the aforesaid I. lately dwelt
deceas ed about the last Court, whence fell to the Lord for Heriot one Ox of
the price of forty s hillings delivered to the use of the lord of this manor,
whereupon proclam. made was in Court, If any man, etc. upon which came Ann the
relict of the aforesaid I. and claims the premis ses during her widowhood,
according to the custom of the manner by rent works, cus tomes and services
thereof due and accus tomed, etc.

Surr. and retaking.
TO this Court came C.W. who of the Lord held by Copy Roll of the Court dat,
etc. one Tenement, etc. with the appurtenances in E. sometime in the tenure of
R.C. and all those e surrendered into the hands of the Lord, and all his estate
title and interest in the premi sses with that intention that it would please
the Lord a new grant thereof to him the afores aid C. W. and others to make,
according to the custom of the manor afores aid; upon which surrender there
fell to the Lord for He jot of agreement twenty s hillings; and into the same
Court came the said C.W. and took out of the hands of the Lord the said
tenement, etc. with its appurtenances, to have to the s ame C.W. R and I.W. his
sons for term of life of them and either of them longest living successively,
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, by the rent, works, customs,
and s ervices thereof before due and of right accustomed, and for such estate
and entrance so thereof to be had, the aforesaid C.W. gives the Lord for fine
26. l.and makes to the Lord fealty, and so the aforesaid C.W. admitted is
thereof tenant, and the fealties of the aforesaid R. and I. respited are
until, etc.

Grant of Copyhold of Inheritance by the Yard.
AT this Court the Lord granted out of his hands by I.F. his chief Senesch to
T.D. and A. his wife, one Mess, etc. with all the appurtenances lying at B. to
whom the Lord by by his Senes ch aforesaid granted seisin to have to them and
their heirs of the Lord by the Yard, at the will of the Lord, according to the
cu s tome of the Manor aforesaid, and they give the Lord for a fine for
entrance threreof to be had, as it appears upon their heads, and he made to the
Lord fealty, and is admitted thereof tenant

Grant for annual Rent.
AT this Court the Lord granted by I.F. his Seen s chal to T.B. and M. his wife
one Me ssuage with six Acres of land, etc. with the appurtenances, to the
afores aid T. M. their Heirs and As s ignes, at the will of the Lord, according
to the custom of the Manor, rendering therefore yearly to the Lord his heirs
(and successors if the Lord be a Bishop or Dean, etc.) 6. s. 8. d. for all and
singular the services at two terms of the year, viz. at the feast of S. Mich.
the Archangel, and the Annunciation of the blessed virgin Mary, by equal
portions, and they give to the Lord for a fine, etc. and made fealty, and are
admitted thereof tenants.

Court in ancient Demesne.
TO this Court held there such day and year, A. C.the son and heir of I.C.
came, and s urrendred into the hands of the Lord one Message, etc. in D.
within the Jurisdiction of this Court, to the behoof and use of T.H. his heirs
and assigns for ever, by virtue of bargain or partition betwixt them made, and
upon this public proclamation in the same Court made was, that if any man any
right or title to the same Message, Land, etc. or in any parcel thereof
pretend will, or has, he should come and be heard, and no man came at this
Court, wherefore according to the custom of the Manor afores aid, the Mess.
and Land etc. remain should in the hands of the Lord, until the third
Proclamation them concerning be made, whereupon day is given to the parties
aforesaid, to be at the next Court of the Manor before said, to hear thereof
their judgment upon the Premis es.

And at this Court held there such day and year, as well the afores aid A.B. as
the aforesaid T.H. came, and hereupon the second Proclamation made was
concerning the Premis es, that if any man any right or title to the same
Message Land, etc. has or pretends, he should come and be heard, and no man
came, and upon this day was given to the parties aforesaid to be here at the
next C. of the Manor aforesaid, to hear thereof their judgment upon the
premises.

And at this Court there held such day and year, as well the aforesaid A.C. as
T.H. came, and hereupon the proclamation made was upon the premises, that if
any man any right or title to the aforesaid Mess uage land, etc. or in any
parcel of these has or pretends, he should come and be heard, and no man yet
came, whereupon the Lord by I.H. his senescale granted has, sei sin of the
aforesaid Message, etc. with their appurtenances aforesaid to T.H. to be held
to him, his heirs and assigns, according to the custom of the Manor
aforesaid, and he gives to the Lord for a Fine for his entrance, etc. and made
to the Lord fealty, and is admitted thereof Tenant.

Otherwise in ancient demesne where the wife is examinned.
AT the Court held there such day and year, T.B. of N. and E. his wise in the
presence of the Court alone examined and confessed, surrendered into the hands
of the Lord, one Message and half an Oxgang of land, with the appurtenances in
D. called R. to the u se of W.C. of O. whence fell to the Lord one horse for
Heriot, and upon this came the said W.C. and took of the Lord the said
Message, etc. with the appur^ enancee, to have and to hold, to him and A. his
wife, and the heirs and assigns of him W. for ever, according to the custom
of the Manor aforesaid, by the rent customs and s ervices thereof before due
and accus tomed, and they give to the Lord for a Fine for entrance to have in
the said Message and other the Premises, etc. and they made fealty, and are
admitted thereof Tenants.

Surrender to the Baily out of Court.
At this Court, etc. found it is that T.C. out of the Court ^urrend^ed into the
the hands of I.B. Baily in the presence of D.R. and other the Tenants of the L.
of this Manor this witne ss. one acre of Land in R. heretofore the Land of
T.R. to the use of W.I. to whom the, Lord thereof granted ^eisin, to be held to
him and his heirs, etc.

A Surrender upon Condition.
TO this Court, etc. came I.C. and s urrendred into the hands of the Lord, one
Cotage lying, etc. to the behoof and use of I.A. to be held to him and his
heirs of the Lord at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of the
manner, under the Conditions following, viz. if the aforesaid I.A. pay, or to
be paid cause to the aforesaid I.C. xl s. at the Feast of Saint John Baptist,
and all Saints next coming, after the date of this Court by equal portions,
that then the present surrender to be of s trength and effect, and if he fail
in the payment aforesaid, in part or in whole, that then well may the aforesaid
I.C. and his assigns to reenter, and again have the before said Cottage, this s
urrender in any thing notwithstanding, and he gives the Lord for a Fine, etc.
and made fealty, and admitted is thereof Tenant.

Grant of a Copyhold forfeit.
AT the Court, etc. held such day and year, etc. commanded it was to the Baily
to seize into the hands of the Lord, one Tenement with the appurtenances lately
in the tenure of I.B. called R. for that he aliened and sold the said Tenement
to a certain T.V. without the License of the Lord, etc. And thereof shall he
answer to the Lord for the issues until, etc. And in this same Court the Lord
of his grace special has granted the s aid Tenement with appurtenances to the
aforesaid I.B. to whom the Lord thereof has granted seisin to have to him and
his heirs, etc. of the Lord at will according to the custom of the Manor
before said, and he gives the Lord for a Fine, etc. and has made to the Lord
fealty, and admitted is thereof Tenant.

Copy for term of years.
AT this Court the Lord by I.F. his s enescale granted to E.R. one Message,
etc. with the appurtenances called A. to have and to hold to him and his as
signs, from the Feast of Saint Mich. the Archang. next to come after the date
of this Court, to the end and term of forty years from thence next following,
and fully to be completed, rendering therefore annually twenty s hillings at
two terms of the year, viz. etc. by equal portions; provided always that
during the term aforesaid, the aforesaid Lord shall find Timber, Mertar, and
Wood, as often as neces sary it shall be the said Tenements to mend, repair, and
sustain, and he gives the Lord a Fine, etc. and made the Lord fealty, and
admitted is thereof Tenant.

Release in Court of a Title.
AT this Court held, etc. found it is that the Lord by T.P his senescal, at the
Court held at C. s uch day and year granted into the hands of W.P. and to his
heirs one piece of ground containing about three acres of Land more or less, s
ometime the Land of T.C. in A. lying there betwixt the Land of A B. on the
South part, and the Land of W.S.on the North part, to have and to hold, etc. at
the will of the Lord, according to the cus tom of the Manor, and after came a
certain A.W. before the aforesaid T.P. senescale of the Lord, and pretends to
have title to the said piece of Land, and here present in the Court, remis ed,
rel eased, and for ever quit claimed, to the afores aid W.P.and his heirs by
license of the Lord at his right and claim which she ha^^r had, or for the
future have may in the aforesaid piece of Land, and in any parcel thereof, so
that viz. neither he A,nor his heirs, nor any other in the name of them, any
right or claim in the afores aid piece of land hereafer make or challenge may,
but from all action of right or claim be excluded for ever by these present
sand gives to the Lord, etc, and makes fealty, etc.

Grant to the heir after the Fathers death.
AT this Court held, etc. found it is, that I,Bdyed seized, after the last
Court, who of the Lord held to him and his heirs one tenement called E, and
dyed thereof seized, and they say that R.B. his son is next heir, and of full
age, or within age, if he be within age, viz. of 12 years, and in the cu stody
of T.W. or R.M. his brother or kin s man, and present here in Court, sues to be
admitted, and admitted is thereof tenant, to hold to him and his heirs of the
Lord at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor, etc. and
gives the Lord for a fine, etc. and makes to the Lord fealty, etc.

Otherwise of an intail with remainders.
AT this Court found it is, that R.B. of A.at the Court held such a day and
year, etc. at E. surrendered into the hands of the Lord one tenement, etc.
called C. to the use of R.B.the son of the same R. and A his wife, to whom the
Lord granted seisin to hold to them and the heirs of their bodies lawfully
begotten. And if the before s aid R. and A. his wife shall die without heirs of
their bodis lawfully begotten, that then the aforesaid tenements, etc. with the
appurtenances, shall remain to the right heirs of him R.B. And now this Court
is informed by the whole homage, that the afores aid R and A are dead without
heirs lawfully betwixt them begotten, and the aforesaid R B. likewise, and
hereupon comes I.B. brother and heir of the aforesaid R.B. and sues to be
admitted, and admitted is tenant, etc. and by license of the Lord, the before
said I.B. s ues to be admitted to the aforesaid tenement with the
appurtenances, to whom the Lord thereof granted seisin, to hold at the will of
the Lord according to the custom of the Manor, and gives the Lord for a fi^e,
etc. and makes to the Lord fealty, etc.

Otherwise. A copy for life, with diverse Remainders over.
TO this Court came A.T. and surrendered into the hands of the Lord one Message
and 8 Acres of land customary called I, that the Lord may do thereupon at his
will, and the Lord thereof had sei^^n, and of his grace special he regramed
the before said Me ssuage and land to the before said A.T. and K. his wife,
during their lives, so that after the decea se of them, the aforesaid land and
tenement should remain to the right heirs of him A.T.for ever, to hold to the
same A.T. and K. his wife during the life of them by the verge at the will of
the Lord according to the custom of the Manor in form aforesaid, saving the
right of every man, and the afores aid A.T. and K. gave the Lord for a fine,
etc. and made fealty, etc.

Surrender out of the Court and Remainder with condition upon the deathbed.
AT this Court found it is, that R.I.languis hing on his deathbed, surrendered
into the hands of B.R. out of the Court by the hands of I.H. in the presence of
A.C. and B.D tenants of this Manor, this Test. one Mess uage with the
appurtenances, etc. to the use of A. the wife of the afores aid R.I. to hold to
her by the service therefore due according to the custom of the Manor for term
of her life, so that after the death of the said A, the afores aid Mess. shall
remain to I.the son of the aforesaid R. and A, and the Heirs of his body
lawfully begotten. And if it shall happen that the said I. shall die without
Heir of his Body lawfully begotten, that then the aforesaid Me ssuage by the
Executors of either of them longest living be sold, and the moneys thence
received, and arising on the poor, and other alms to be disposed, and
distributed, as to them best shall s eem expedient, to whom the Lord thereof
granted seisin to hold in form aforesaid, at the will of the Lord according to
the custom of the Manor, and they give the Lord for a s ine, etc. and make
fealty, etc.

Supplication of the Tenant to the Lord.
TO this Court came R.C. instantly s upplicating, as he for many times bypast
has supplicated, and proffers the Lord a fine annual, for the reason of
exemption, that he of grace special and favor, because of old age,,
infirmnesse and weakness of his body, may be exonerated hereafter, from all
and singular Inquests, Juries and Offices whatsoever, as well in this town as
elsewhere within the said Manor to be cast upon him and assigned. Wherefore out
of respect of his old age, together with his infirmnesse and weakness under
the fine annual in name of the exemption therefore proffered and his s
uggestion, to the tenants seeming that truly he had testified in the premi ses.
Now the Lord has granted in this Court by I.F. his Senes chal to the aforesaid
R.C. license, his favor and exemption for term of life, and the aforesaid R.C.
gives the Lord for an annual rent, 4. d. payable at the terms usual.

License for suit of Court.
TO this Court came I.S. Villeni of the Lord, and gives for a fine for suit of
Court to be respited for one year, 2. s.

License to marry his daughter.
TO this Court came I.S. Villeni of the Lord of this Manor, and requests
license to marry his daughter within this Lordship or without, and the Lord by
I.W. his Seen schall has granted license, etc.

License to demise Tenem. customary.
TO this Court came T.R. and requests license of the Lord to demise all and
singular his lands and tenements customary, situate, lying and being within
this Lordship to what person or what persons soever it shall please the same
T.R. for the term and to the term of 21. year next following the date of this
Court, to which T.R.the Lord license has given in form aforesaid, for the Fine
of 10 s. paid in the Court to the use of the Lord of this Manor.

Note, that there is no manner of estates made of free land by deed pole, or
deed indented, but the like estates may be made by copy of Court roll of
copihold Land of inheritance, and entered in the Court rolls: and the Steward is
bound by Law and cons cience to be an indifferent judge between the Lord and
his Tenants, and to enter their copies truly, in the Lords Court rolls, the
which are the Lords Register to know his pres idents, cu s tomes, and services:
And al so they are a great surety to the Tenants, that if their copies by any
casual means be lo st, ^hey may resort to the Lords Court rolls, and the
Steward may make them new copies, according to the old president in the Lords
Court roll: like as at the Common Law, when a matter in variance between two
men is passed by verdict, and judgment given thereupon and entered in the
Keepers of the Liberties of England by authority of Parl. Records, there it res
teth of Record to be found if occasion serve to search for it. And also if a
Deed or a Patent be enrolled, there it remains of record to be seen, if need
be, and any man that has occas ion may have a copy thereof, if they sue to
the Judges and the officers of the place where the record lies, and they may
have it exemplified under the seal of the office of the same place where s uch
record lies, if he will be at the charge thereof. And also if a man have
occasion he may plead the same record in any of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England by authority of Parliament Courts. And the Lords steward may do the
like with his Court Rolls.

Pleass of a Court Baron.
R H. plains against C.E. and A.his wife of a plea of Land, viz. of one Mess
uage, two Cottages, twenty acres of meadow pa sture, with the appurtenances in
I. within the Jurisdiction of this Court, and has made protestation to pr^s
ecute this plaint, in form and nature of the Writ of the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, of Formd^n in remainder at the Common Law, and has found
pledges to pro secute that plaint in form and nature afores aid, viz. I.H. and
R.M.and he requires proce ss hereupon to be made him, according to the Custom
of the Manor aforesaid, against C. and A. his wife, therefore according to the
custom of the Manor, the contrary of which within the memory of men is not
used, commanded is it to the under Baily of the Manor aforesaid, and Minister
of the Court aforesaid that he summon by good summons the aforesaid C. and A.
that they before the suitors of the Court before said, at the next Court of the
Manor aforesaid on Thur sday viz. the 20. day of Ju. the year etc. at the
Manor aforesaid to be held, to ans were the aforesaid R.H. of the before said
plea, etc. the same day is given to the before s aid R. here, etc. at which next
Court came as well the afores aid R.H.as the aforesaid C. and A. by I.R. their
Attorney, and the aforesaid Manister of the Court afores aid returned here in
Court, that he by virtue of the precept afores aid to him directed, s ummoned
the aforesaid C. and A. by good s ummons, viz. by I.C. and R.R. to be here at
this Court to answer the a^oresaid R.H. of the aforesaid plea of the before said
Message, two Cottages, twenty acres of Land, twenty acres of Meadow, and twenty
acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances as to him commanded was, and upon this
the aforesaid R.H. demands again st the aforesaid C. and A. the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, as his right and inheritance, s aying, that a
certain W.H. was s eised of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances in
his demes ne as of Fee, at the will of the Lord, according to the cu stom of
the Manor aforesaid, and so sei sed being according to the cust^m of that
Manor, from the time out of the memory of men, used and approved, at the Court
of the Manor aforesaid, held at I. within the precinct of the Manor
aforesaid, Wednesday next after the Feast of P. the year, etc. by I.A. and T.P.
deputies of the Bailies of the Manor aforesaid, in the presence of T.C. T.S.
R.L. I.M. T R. and I.B. then Tenants of the Lord of the Manor afores aid,
surrendered into the hands of the Lord, the Tenements before said with the
appurtenances, to the behoof and u se of a certain M. then wife of the before
said W.H. to hold for the term of her life, and after the deceas of the said M.
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances wholly should remain to a
certain I.H. the son of N.H. the brother of the aforesaid W.H. and the heirs
of his body lawfully begotten, and for defect of such issue of the s aid I. the
aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances wholly to remain to a certain E.H.
daughter of the aforesaid W.H. to hold to her and the heirs of her body
lawfully begotten; and for defect of such i ssue of the same E. the aforesaid
Tenements with the appurtenances, wholly to remain to the right heirs of the
aforesaid W.H,and their heirs for ever. By virtue of which surrender, the
aforesaid M. was sei sed of the Tenements aforesaid in her demesne as of Frank
tenement at the will of the Lord according to the custom of the Manor before
said in the time of peace, etc. taking thereof the explees to the value, etc.
And from the same M.remained a right by form of the surrender before said,
according to the cus tome of the Manor aforesaid to I.H. by which the same I.
was seized of the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances in his deem sne,
as of fee-tail at the will of the Lord, according to the cu stome of the Manor
by form of surrender aforesaid, in the time of peace in the time of the Lord
Edward lately King of Englandthe s econd, taking the Esplers to the value, etc.
and from him I. after the death of E. because both the aforesaid I. and E. dyed
without heir of their body lawfully begotten, remained has the right by form
of the surender aforesaid, according to the custom of the Manor afores aid to
this R,H, who now demands, viz. as son and heir of W.H. brother and heir of the
aforesaid W.H, etc. and thereof produces his suit, etc.

And the aforesaid C and H, by T. their Attorney, come and defend their right,
when, etc. and say that the aforesaid W,H. gave not the tenements before said
with the appurtenances to the aforesaid, and the heirs of his body issuing. So
that if the aforesaid W,H, s hold die without heirs of his body issuing, the
tenements with the appurtenances to the aforesaid R H. and the heirs of his
bod^ iss uing, s hold remain for ever in the form which the aforesaid R,H, by
his Writ and Court aforesaid supposes, and of this, etc. therefore the twelve,
etc.

Plaints of Mort d'ancester.
R.C. plains against W.L. and E.his wife, of a plea of land, viz. of one Mess
uage, thirty Acres of Meadow, and one hundred Acres of Pasture, with the
appurtenances in L. within the jurisdiction of this Court, and made
protestation to prosecute this Plaint in form and nature of the Writ of the
Keepers of the Liberties of England,etc. of assise of Mort d'ance ster at the
Common Law, etc. and he requires process for him to be made, according to
Custom of the Manor in form and nature of the Writ before said to be directed
to the Baily and Ministers of this Court, and that the s ame Baily and
Ministers, by Mandate and precepts of the Lord of this Manor, and according to
the Cus tome of the same Manor sum. by good sum. 12 good and legal men of the
homage of the same Manor, that they be before the senescal of the same Manor,
at the next Court within this Manor to be held, ready by Oath to acknowledge,
if R.C.the Father of the aforesaid R was seized in demesne as of Fee, at the
will of the Lord, according to the Cu stome of this Manor, the day he died, of
and in one Mes suage, 30. acres of Meadow, 100. acres of Pasture of Land custom
of this Manor with the appurtenances called C. within the Jurisdiction of this
Court the day he died, and if the same R. the Father died within fifty years
now last past, and if the aforesaid R. the son be next heir of the aforesaid R.
the Father, and in the mean time the Lands and Tenements aforesaid let them
view, and that they s um. by good sum. the aforesaid W. and E.who the same
Lands and Tenements now hold, that they be there to hear the recogn. and he
found pledges to pros ecute the plaint aforesaid.

I. Do. R. Roo.


Bar.
And now here to this Court comes the aforesaid W.L. in his proper person, and
says that the aforesaid R. Father of the aforesaid plaintiff seized was not in
his demesne, as of Fee at the will of the Lord, according to the Cu stome of
this Manor, the day he died of the aforesaid Message, and thirty acres of
Meadow, and one hundred acres of Pasture with the appurtenances, in manner and
form as by the aforesaid plaintiff before is supposed, and this he requires may
be inquired by the assise, and the afores aid plaintiff likewise, etc.

Enter in the Per and Cui.
TO this Court comes I.N. in his proper pers on, and plains against T.M of a
plea of land, viz. of one Message, one Garden, and one Orchard with the
appurtenances, and he found pledge to prosecute this plaint aforesaid, viz. I
B. and R. R. and he protests to prosecute his plaint aforesaid of one Mes
suage, one Garden, and one Orchard with the appurtenances in S. in nature and
form of the Writ of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. of Enter in
the Per and Cui, saying that the same Message, Garden and Orchard with the
appurtenances, are his right and inheritance according to the custom of the
Manor aforesaid, and into which the aforesaid T.M. has not Entry, but by E.
lately the wife of W.M. and daughter of R.P. to whom the aforeaid R. P. and M.
his wife those demised, who thereof unjustly, and without judgment disseised
R.N.the father of him I.N. within 50 years last past, etc. and he requires
process thereupon for him to be made against the before s aid T.M.according to
the custom of the Manor; therefore according to the custom of that Manor
commanded is it, to I.B. under Baily of the same Manor, and the Minister of the
Court afores aid, that according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, he s
ummon by good summons the aforesaid T.M. that he be at the next Court, viz. the
fourth day of M. next to come here to be held, to an swer the aforesaid I.N.
the plea aforesaid, etc. the same day is given to I.N. here, etc.

Common Recovery in right Patent by cons ent.
TO this Court comes A.B. Citizen and Merchant of L. in his proper person, and
plains against W.W. of a plea of land, viz. of one Message, one Garden, and
one Acre of land with the appurtenances in I. held of this manner by copy of
Court Roll, and makes protestation to pros ecute his plaint a^oresaid, in the
Court aforesaid in form and nature of the Writ of the Keepers of the Lib. of
Eng. etc. of right patent at the Common Law, according to the custom of the
Manor, and found pledge to p^osecute his plaint afores aid here in the Court
aforesaid, viz. Io. Den. and Ri. Fen. and requires proce sse thereupon to be
made, against the aforesaid W.W. according to the cu stome of the Manor before
said, therefore according to the custom of the Manor afores aid, commanded it
was to I.S. Baily of the Manor aforesaid, and Minister of this Court, that he
summon the aforesaid W.W. so that he be here at the next Court of the Manor
aforesaid here, viz. Saturday the 4. of January to be held, to answer A.B.the
plea before said, and that then he have there the names of the summons and this
writ, and the s ame day is given to the demandant here, etc. And now, viz. to
this Court came the aforesaid W.W. in his proper person, and in full Court here
freely offered to answer the aforesaid A.B. the plea aforesaid by good summons,
is to wit, I.D, R.R, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, and upon
this now to this Court the aforesaid A,B, viz. in his proper person, comes and
demands against the aforesaid W,W, the Message aforesaid, Garden and Acres o^
Land before said with the appurtenances in I, aforesaid held of this Manor by
copy of the Rolls of this Court, as his right and inheritance, and whence be
says that himself was s eised of the tenements aforesaid with the
appur^enances in his demes ne, as of the sea and right, according to custom of
the Manor aforesaid in the time of peace, etc. taking thereof the explees to
the value, etc. And that such is his right he offers, etc.

Answer.
And the aforesaid W.W. comes and defends his right when, etc. and seisin, of
which seisin, etc. as of Fee and right, etc. and especially of the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances and the whole, etc. and puts himself upon the
homage of the aforesaid Keepers of the Liberties, etc. of the Court before said,
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, and reque sts recogn. to be
made, whether he more right has to hold the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, as he holds, or the aforesaid A.B.to have the Tenements before
said with the appurtenances as he above demands, and c,

Imparlance.
And the aforesaid A.B. requires license thereupon to imparle until the
eleventh hour before noon of the same day, and he has, etc. and the same hour
is given to the before said W. here, etc. and after the same A.B. again came
here into the Court the same day at the before said hour in his proper person,
and the aforesaid W.W. though solemnly exacted, came not again, but in contempt
of the Court receded and default made, therefore according to custom of the
Manor aforesaid, granted is it by the Court that the afores aid A.B. recover
his seisin against the aforesaid W.W.of the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances according to the custom of the Manor before said, to hold to the
same A.B. and his heirs according to the cus tome of the said Manor quit of
the aforesaid W.W. and his heirs for ever, and the same W.W. is amerced, etc.
and now at this court the Lord in execution of the judgment and recovery
aforesaid, by his Seen schal granted to the before said A. B. of the tenements
afores aid with the appertinences seisin, to hold to him, his heirs and ass
ignes by the yard at the will of the Lord according to the cu stome of this
Manor, and he made therefore to the Lord a fine and fealty, and admitted is
thereof tenant.

And after, to wit) to this same court aforesaid A.B. then present being, came
also the afores aid W.W. and surrendered into the hands of the lord the
tenements afores aid with the appertinences to the behoof and use of the
aforesaid A. B. his heirs and assigns for ever. And further the afores aid W.W.
has remi sed, released, and all things for him and his heirs for ever quit
claimed to the aforesaid A. B. his heirs and a ss ignes, in his full and
peaceable possession and seisin being the day of the making the present, all
his right, estate, title, claim, intere st or demands whatsoever, which at any
time he had, has or by any manner hereafter have may of or in the tenements
aforesaid with the appertinences, or in any parcel of the same, so that, viz.
neither the aforesaid W.W. nor his heirs, nor any of them, any right, title, e
state, claim, interes t or demand of or in the tenements afores aid with the
appertinences, nor in any parcel of the same hereafter exact, claim or
challenge may nor ought for the future, but from all action of right, title,
claim, use, interest and demand therefore to be made, for ever be excluded, and
let every of them be excluded by the se presents. And besides the aforesaid
W.W. grants for him self and his heirs, that he does warrant the tenement before
said with the appertinences to the aforesaid A. B. and his heirs against all
men for ever.

Common recovery in Entry in the Post by consent.
And after (to wit) to this Court came R.M. and W.M. and plain against the
foresaid M.M. a plea of land, viz. of the aforesaid eighteen acres of meadow,
and made prote station to follow this plaint in form and nature of the writ of
the Keepers of the Liberties etc. of entry upon dis seisin in the post; and
upon this the aforesaid R. and W.M. in their proper persons demand against the
aforesaid M.M. the aforesaid eight acres of meadow with the appertinences in
I.within the Jurisdiction of this Court, as their right and inheritance, and
into which the said M.M. entry has not, but after the dis seisin which H.H.
thereof unjustly and without judgment made to R. and W. within thirty years now
last past, etc.and whence they say, that themselves were se^sed of the afores
aid eight acres of meadow with the appertinences in their demesne, as of fee
and right at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor before
said, taking thereof the explees to the value etc. And into which etc. And
thereof they produce their suit, etc.

And the aforesaid M.M. in his proper pers on came, and defends his right,
whence etc. and vouches thereof to warrant the aforesaid W.T. who present is
here in Court in his proper pers on, and freely the aforesaid eight acres of
meadow with the appertinences to him warrant: And upon this the aforesaid R.
and W.M. demand against him W.T.tenent by his warrant aforesaid, the eight
acres of meadow with the appertinences, whence they say themselves were seized
of the same eight acres of meadow with the appertinences in his demesne, as of
fee and right, at the will of the Lord, according to the cu stom of the Manor
aforesaid, in the time of peace, etc. taking thereof the explees to the value,
etc. And into which, etc. And thereof they produce their suit. etc.

And the aforesaid W.T. tenent by his warrant defends his right when, etc. and
further vouches thereof to warrant C.D. who (to wit) present is here in Court
in his proper per son, and freely the aforesaid eight acres of meadow, with the
appertinences to him warranteth, etc. and upon this the s ame R.and W.M. demand
against C. tenant by warranty the before said eight acres of meadow with the
appertinences, whence they say thems elves were seized of the same eight acres
of meadow with the appertinences in his deem sne as of fee and right, at the
will of the Lord, according to the cus tom of the Manor aforesaid, in the time
of peace, etc. taking thereof the explees to the val, etc. and into which, etc.
and thereof they produce their suit, etc.

And the aforesaid R. and W. M.require license to imparle, and have it, etc.
and after the same R. and W.M. again came here into the Court, at the same
Court, in their proper persons, and the aforesaid T. though solemnly exacted he
was, came not again, but in contempt of the Court rereceded, and default made,
therefore granted is it that the aforesaid R. and W.M. recover their s eisin
against the aforesaid M.M. of the aforesaid eight acres of meadow with the
appertinences, etc. and that the same M.M. have of the Land of the said W.T. to
the value, etc. and that the same W. T. further have of the Land of the
aforesaid C.D. to the value, etc. and the same C. is amerced etc. and upon this
the aforesaid R. and W.M. request a precept to make them have plenary seisin of
the aforesaid eight acres of meadow with the appertinences, to the Minister of
the Court aforesaid to be directed, and to them is it granted returnable here
without delay, etc. And after (to wit) this same first day of April, came here
into the Court aforesaid, R. and W.M in their proper persons, and the Minister
of the Court aforesaid, viz. R.W. certified to the Court before s aid, that he
by virtue of the precept aforesaid, to him thence directed the first day of
April, to have made the aforesaid R. and W. M. full seisin of the afores aid
eight acres of meadow with the appertinences as by the precept aforesaid to him
commanded was, etc.

And after, to wit, to this same Court the before said R. and W.M. and the
foresaid W.T. then present being came and surrendered into the hands of the Lord
in the same Court, the foresaid eight acres of meadow with the appertinences to
the behoof and use of the aforesaid M.M. his heirs and assigns, to whom the
Lord by his Seneschal aforesaid granted thereof sesin by the yard, to have and
to hold to him and his heirs, at the will of the Lord, according to the custom
of the Manor aforesaid, etc. and further the aforesaid R. and W.M. and W.T.
have remised released and altogether for themselves and their heirs for ever
quit claimed to the aforesaid M.M. his heirs and assigns in his full and
peaceble possession, being in full Court, all their right, estate, claim,
interest or demands whatsoever, which at any time they have had, have, or in
any manner for the future have may of or in the foresaid eight acres of meadow
with the appertinences, or in any parcel thereof, so viz. that neither the fore
said R. and W.M. and W.T. nor their heirs, or any of them any right, title,
estate, claim, interest or demand, of or in the foresaid eight acres of meadow
with their appertinences, hereafter exact, claim or challenge may nor ought for
the future; but from all occasion of right, title, claim, use, interest and
demand thereof to be made excluded, and let every of them be excluded for ever
by these presents. And further the foresaid W.T. grants for himself and his
heirs, that he does warrant the fores aid eight acres of meadow with the
appertinences to the foresaid M.M. and his heirs against all men for ever, etc.

Upon buying.
G.B. plains against R.G. a plea of debt of xxx. s. iiii. d. for that, viz.
that when the before said R.G. the tenth day of April the year, etc. at I.
within the Juri sdiction of this Court bought of the same G.B.thirteen jars of
oil, called meat oil, for fifteen shillings and three pence, one hundred of
madder for fifteen s hillings and one penny, to be paid to the same G.B. when
therefore required he was, which sums in the whole amount to the foresaid
xxx. s. iiii. d. before said. Yet R. G. though often required he was for the
foresaid xxx. s. iiii. d. it to the s ame G.B. has not yet rendered, but to him
to this time to render it has refus ed, and yet refuses; wherefore he says
that the worse he is, and damage has to the value of x. s. and thereupon
produces his s uit, etc.

And the aforesaid R.G. by A. his Atturny comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. and says, that he ^weth not to the aforesaid G.B. the afores
aid 30. s. 4. d. ^or any penny thereof, in the form which G.B. above against
him plains: therefore granted is it, that the foresaid R.G. wage thereof his
Law of the twelfth hand, pledge of Law I.M. and R.F. and they came with their
Law ^^re at the next Court, in proper person, and said it was (...) the
foresaid Atturny of the fore said R.G. that then ^hey have here the same R.G.
their Master in his proper ^ers on, to the perfecting his Law aforesaid, etc.

At which day here came the foresaid R.G.and perfe^ied thereof his law
aforesaid of the twelfth hand, as it above he waged: therefore granted it is
that the foresaid plain^if nothing take by his plea foresaid, but be amerced
for his ^^lse clamor thence, etc. and that the foresaid defendant go without
day.

And as for all other actions which will lie in this Court, you shall find s
ufficient presidents for them (...) the Hundred Court, parcel of this book,
whereunto ^refer you.

Writ of Grand Cape.
I.W. Seneschal to the baily of the same Manor greeting. I command thee that
thou take into the hands of the Lord, by view of good and legal men of this
Manor the third part of one message, and twenty acres of land with the
appertinences in I. which A.I. in this Court, etc. claims against T.I. lately
of I. as the dower of her, of the indowment of the foresaid C.I. sometime her
husband by writ of dower, whereof nothing she has for defect of him T. and the
day of taking make known to me, and summby good sum the sa^^ T. that he be
here at the next court, thereof to ans were, a^^ show why he was not here at the
last court, as s ummoned (...) was, and leave there the names of those by whose
view this thou have done, the s umm witness, etc.

The enter of the Grand Cape.
A. Which was the wife of C.L. by A.B. her Attur^ offered her self at this
Court again st T.I. concerning a ple^ of the third part of one mes suage and
twenty acres of (...) with the appertinences in I.which the same A. in this
court here claims as her dower of the indowment of the foresaid I.C. sometime
her husband, because the tenements afores aid are within this Lordship, and
women which after the death of their husbands of tenements in I. foresaid
being, dowable are, according to the cus tome of the same Manner of A. time in
which there is not memory of men used, of the third part of the s ame endowed
ought to be, etc. and he came not and is s ummoned, etc. therefore by judgment
of the court let the third part aforesaid with the appertinences b^ taken into
the hand of the Lord, etc. and the day, etc. the fores aid sum that he be here
at the next court, etc.

Petit Cape.
I.W. Seneschal to the baily of the same greeting. Thee I command that thou
take into the hand of the Lord by the view of good and legal men of this
Manor one message with the appertinences which A.C. in this Court claims as
his right, against B.R. by plaint of formdon in remainder, for defect of him B.
and the day of taking known make to me at the next Court, and sum the foresaid
B.R.that he be here before, etc. s uch day, thereof to answer and show, why he
was not here in this Court before, etc. such day next past as sum he was, and
have there this precept, and how, etc.

Enter of the Petit Cape.
T.Q.Esquire. and I. his wife by their Attorney oppose themselves the fourth day,
against H.B. of I. and A. his wife, concerning a plea of land of the third part
of eight messuages, and eight yardlands of land with the appertinences in I.
which the foresaid T.and I. in this Court claim as their dower of her A. of the
indowment of G.S. sometimes her husband, against them, and they came not: And
they had therefore day here until this day, to wit, the tenth day, etc. after
at another time they had appeared in Court; therefore by judgment let the
third part aforesaid with the appertinences be taken into the hand of the Lord,
and they be sum, etc. that they be here the day, etc. to hear thereof their
judgment, etc.

Habere facias seisinam.
I.W. Seneschal to the baily of the same greeting. Know that A.B. in the Court
held such day, by con sideration of the same Court recovered his seisin again
st B. C. of eight acres of land with the appertinences in I. by default of the
aforesaid B. And therefore I command thee that to the same A.B. plenary seisin
of the tenements aforesaid, with the appertinencies, without delay sei sin thou
make to have. And have there this precept, and how, etc.

Given, etc.
The manner and form how to keep an Hundred Court, or Court Baron, commonly
called a three-weeks Court, and a Court of Ancient Deem sne, as follows.
FIrst the Steward must enter in his Court book the Style of the Court thus:

The Court of R.T. Knight, of the Manor or Hundred of A. Westbrook, held there
such day and year, etc. before A.B. and C.D. suitors of the same Court. This
done, then the bailif must say O-yes; that is, he must make an O-yes, and say
Essoines and proffers before the Court three times, and then say. All manner of
persons that have any thing to do at this Court, draw near, and give your
attendance, and if any man will be es soined, let him come forth and he shall be
received; or if any man will enter any plaints, let him come and he shall be
heard.

This done, if any man will enter any plaints, you must enter them after this
manner:

A.B. plains against C.D. a plea of debt, or a plea of trespass, or a plea of
^aking and unjust deteining his cattle, or such like etc. And if any man will
be ess oined, you must enter their essoines thus.

I.S is ess oined for suit of Court by W. D. Also there be four other manner of
essoins which are seldom used to be cast, and these e be they, viz. If a man be
in the wars of the Parliament of England, or Emba ssage, or in any other of
the Parliaments of Englands busine ss, or beyond the seas, or if any man be
sick in his bed, or if any man be let or hindered by water, so that he cannot
come to the court: which es soines must be entered after this manner.

I.S. e ssonied is because he is in the service of the Parliament, etc. A.S. is
essoined because he is beyond sea. T.S. is e ssoined because he is sick in bed.
W.G. is essoined because he could not come for the overflow or height of water.
And there be other two manner of essoines which are in plea, the one after
sum, or attachment, and the other after issue joined, are to be entered after
this manner.

I.S. who s ummoned was, or attached was to be here at this court to answer to
T.K. a plea of debt, or such like, now essoined is by W.D. etc. And the other
mu st be entered after this manner.

I.S. who has day until this court, who the issue joined betwixt T.K. plaintiff
and I.W. defendant, now essoined is by D.W. etc. And if it be upon a wager in
Law, then it must be entered after this manner.

I.S. who has day to this court to make his law against T.K. plaintiff in a
plea of debt now ess oined is by W.D. And in like manner the plaintiff may be es
soined if he will; and if the one party be essoined at one Court, the other
party may be essoined at the next Court following.

And you must understand, that whosover will cast any essoin in these Courts,
he must come at the beginning of the Court when proclamation is made, or else
he ought not to be received.

And note also, that in all these cases following, the party cannot be
essoined: first if he have an Attorney in the self same plea pre sent in the
Court, or if the party himself be seen in the Court, or if there be no plea,
if the party made default at the last Court before, then he cannot be essoined,
or if he come in by Cepi corpus, or distress, or if he come in the end of the
Court, he cannot be e ssoined, as appears by the statute of Essoines made in
the 21. year of E. 2.

And you must also understand, that for every default that the defendant makes
after this appearance, and day given to ans were or do his Law, and then make
default at any day, he shall be called non-s uit, and he and his pledges
amercied, and that is where the plaintiff is a stranger dwelling out of the
jurisdiction of the Court, where he finds pledges, if the case should pass
against him, his pledges mus t then pay the defendants cost, which is a thing
ever reas onable, but s eldome or never used.

And the Steward of the Court, at the beginning of the Court must inquire of
the Bailife how he has served the attachments and distresses, and other
precepts to him directed, and if he say that they were served, then call the
parties, and if the plaintiff have not his declaration ready when the defendant
appears, he must be called nonsuit, thus. A.B. come forth and prosecute thy
Action against C.D. or else thou will be nonsuit: and if he come not forth
sitting the Court, or some for him to crave further time to declare, which the
Court in discretion may grant him, then he shall be nonsuit of course: and if
the defendant make default, process mu st go forth against him: and in a
personal Action the process are summons, attachment, and distress infinite,
which attachments and distresses must be reasonable, and not outrageous,
according to the statute of Marlebridge cap. 4. And if the defendant make
default upon the attachment or distress, they being served, and so returned by
the bailif, then the goods so taken by attachment or distress be forfeit to the
Lord of the Court, and the defendant shall al so be amerced, and a new
Distringas shall go out against him. And if the defendant appear and then after
make default, he shall be condemned by default, and a nihil dicit entered
against him, and the Steward must enter both the effect of the declaration for
the plaintiff, and of the plea or answer for the defendant.

And if the parties plead to an issue triable by an Inquest, process must be
made to summon the Jury, viz. a venire fac, and if the defendant be condemned
either by default or by verdict, then a Levare facs hall be awarded to make
levy of his goods, and thereupon the defendants goods shall be taken, praised,
and sold to satisfy the party plaintiff, and if the defendant have no goods
whereupon levy may be made, then the plaintiff is without remedy, except it be
by a private custom, which is used in some places, to take the body, then the
body may be taken by a Capias ad satisfac and laid in prison, there to remain
until the plaintiff be satisfied: but you must understand that in a county
Court, hundred Court, or court Baron, there can be no plea held where the debt
or damages amount to ten s hillings or above.

And it is a maxim in law, that in all courts which are not courts of record,
the matter if it be for debt, ought to be tried by oath, that is, by wager of
law by the defendant and not otherwise, unless it be by as sent of both parties.

The form of Proce sse in base Courts, which are Courts of Record.
A Summons.
COmmanded it is to the Baily there that sum he make C.D.that he be here at
the next Court to answer A.B. in a plea of debt, detinne, tres pass, or such
like.

An Attachment.
Commanded it is to the Baily there, that he attach C.D. by his goods and
chattels, that he be at the next court, to answer A.B. of a plea of debt, or
such like.

A Distringas.
Commanded it is to the Baily there that he distrein E.D. by his goods and
chattels, that he be here at the next Court, to answer A.B. a plea of debt,
etc. witness I.W. Gent. Senesc. there.

Al dis tring and plur. distring.
Commanded it is to the baily there as else, or many times to thee commanded
was that thou distrein etc. as above.

A Venire fac.
Commanded is it to the Baily there, that to come he cause e twelve good and
legal men of his bailywick, that they be here at the next Court, to try the i
ssue joined betwixt A.B. plaintiff, and C.D. defendant, of a plea of debt, or
such like.

And if a full Jury do not appear, then as many as make default, and be not
essoyned, shall be amercied, and a December tales awarded to summon ten more, as
follows, and the s ame day given to the first Jury.

December tales.
Commanded it is to the Baily there, that he to come cause ten such good and
legal men of his bailiwick, that they be here at the next Court with others,
who to them and there may be a ssociated, to try the issue joined betwixt A.B.
Plaintiff, and C.D. Defendant, concerning a plea of debt, or such like.

At which day as many as make default, and be not e ssoyned, shall be amercied;
and then an Octo tales shall be awarded; and after that, if need be, a Sex
tales.

And if there appear a full Jury, then both the parties shall have their
challenges lawful to the Jurors; and if the Jury find for the plaintiff, then
they must give cost of suit and damages: and in the like manner they shall
assess damages, if they find for an Advowant in a Replevin, etc.

A levare fac.
Command the baily there that of the goods and chattels of G.D. to be levied he
cause xx. s.which A.B. in this Court recovered against him, in a plea of Debt,
or such like, and for his mises and Co sts 12. d. So that those moneys he have
here at the next Court, to render to the foresaid A.B.Witness, etc.

And if the bailife return that he can find no goods of the said C.D. then if
the custom serve, he may have a Capias to take the body and lay him in prison,
until such time as he has satisfied the party. The form of which precept is
thus:

A Cap ad satisf.
Commanded it is to the baily there that he take C. D.and him in his prison
safely to be kept cause, until he has satisfied A B. as well of the xx. s. for
debt which the foresaid A.B. recovered against him, as of the 12. d. for his
mises and costs, etc. witness, etc.

And if any goods be taken wrongfully, then the party grieved may have a
replevin, which must be made after this manner.

A replevin.
I.W. Gent Senesch. of R. T. Kn. to R.F. baily of the hundred of A. greeting.
Because A.B. has found me sufficient s ecurity, as well his clamor to
prosecute, as for his beasts, viz. one ox which C.D. took and unjustly deteins
as it is said, to be return, if the return thereof be adjudged, therefore thee
I charge and also command, that the ox aforesaid to the aforesaid A.B. without
delay replevied to be and delivered thou causest, and put by surety and safe
pledge the foresaid G.D. that he be at the next court at A.aforesaid to be held,
to answer the fore said A.B. a plea of taking and unjust deteining of his ^oxe
aforesaid, and how this my precept shall be executed, to me at the next Court
at A. aforesaid to be held make known, under peril incumbent, together with
this precept given under my seal the tenth day of April, the year, etc.

I.W. gent Seneschal there.

And if the Bailif do not deliver the plaintiff his cattle by virtue of the
said Replevin, then the plaintiff may have an Alias replevin with these words,
vel causam mihi significes,which Replevin must be made after this manner.

Alreplevin.
I.W. Gentleman Seneschal of R.T. to R.F.baily of his Manor or bund of A.
greeting. Because A.B. has found me s ufficient security, as well his clamor
to prosecute, etc. (as in the other replevin) therefore I charge and also
command thee as else thee have I commanded, that the ox aforesaid to the same
A.B. without delay to be replevied thou causest, or the cause to me thou
signifiest wherefore my mandates to thee therefore directed execute thou
would not or might not, and put by suerties and safe pledge, etc. as
before in the other replevin.

And if the Bailif do not deliver the plaintiff his cattle upon this Replevin,
nor show sufficient cause why he did not, then the party may have a Pluries
replevin, vel causam mihi s ignifices, which must be made verbatim as the alias
Replevin was made, only changing this word alias into Pluries. And if the
bailif return upon any of these Replevins; quod averia elongat sunt ad loca
sibi ignot, Ita quod a veria ill pref. C.D. deliberar non potuit, then the
plaintiff may have a Withernam, which must be made in this manner.

A Withernam.
I.W. Gent Seneschal of R. T. Knight, to R.F. Baily of his Manor or Hundred of
A. greeting. Since that A.B. has found me s ufficient s ecurity as well his
clamor to prosecute, as for return to be had of one ox, etc. if the return
thereof be adjudged, which E.D. at C. took, and unjustly detains, as it is s
aid, and the aforesaid baily upon diverse my precepts for replevie to be made to
the same baily directed, me has certified, that the same ox eloygned is to
places to him unknown, so that view of the same have he could not. Therefore
thee I charge and also command, that thou take in Withernam chattels to the
value of the said Ox, of the chattels of the said C.D. to be delivered to the
foresaid A.B. for the Ox before said so eloigned, and put by sureties and safe
pledges the before said C.D. as above in the first replevin, etc.

Deliverance.
I.W. Gent Seneschal of R. T. of the Court of his Manor or Hundred of A.to
R.F.baily of the Manor or Hundred aforesaid; as also to R.B.and I.S. bailies
this time only, greeting. Of the part of the Keepers of the Libert of etc. you
and every of you, jointly and severally I command, that to be delivered you
cause, or one of you to be delivered cause to C.D. his beasts, which A.B. took
and unjustly detained against surety and pledge, as is s aid. And that you put,
or etc. the foresaid A.B. that he be here at the next Court to be held, the
foresaid C.D. to an swer concerning the plea aforesaid, and the answer of this
precept make known to me, or etc. at the next Court. Given, etc.

Al Capias in Withernam.
I.W. Gent Seen sch of R.T. knight of his Manor or hundred of A. to the baily
of the hundred of A. as als o to A.D. and C.B. my bailies for this time
Itinerant, greeting. Because R. E. baily of the hundred aforesaid, at the Court
of this hundred before me held at A. such day and year, etc. to me has
returned that by virtue of my warrant to him many times directed, he came to
the pound of I.D. to ^he place where the beasts aforesaid impounded and
detained were by the same I.D. and these beasts going and eloigned were before
his coming, out of the hundred afores aid, to places to him unknown, by the
aforesaid I.D. for which the beasts before s aid the baily foresaid replevie
could not; wherefore con s idered it is by the Court, willing the malice of him
I. to meet with, that the beas ts of the foresaid I. be taken in Withernam to
the value, etc. and those to the foresaid A.B.be delivered safely and surely to
be kept, until to the same A.B.his beasts afores aid, according to Law,
replevie you can, and according to the tenor of my mandate aforesaid: therefore
you and every of you, jointly and s everally I command, that ye take, or, etc.
the beasts of the fore said I. D. to the value, etc. in Withernam, and those to
the foresaid A.B. to be delivered you cause, or, etc. safely and surely to be
kept until, etc. and distrein ye, or, etc. the aforesaid I.D. so that he be at
A. at the next Court there to be held, to answer the foresaid A.B. the plea
foresaid, and the an swer of this my precept known make ye, etc. at the next
Court. Given under the seal of my Office such day and year, etc.

Note that when the said Replevin is granted, there must be a bond taken of him
to whom it is granted, or of some other for him, to appear at the next Court,
and to prosecute his s uit with effect, or else it may be prejudicial both to
the granter of the Replevin,and to the executioner thereof: and the form of
that bond and condition thereof is this:

An Obligation upon a Replevin.
Know all men by these presents, that I. Anton. D.of A. in the County of
S.Gent. am held and firmly obliged to Richard T. Kn, Lord of the hundred of A.
in ten pounds of good and lawful money of England, to be paid to the same R.
or his certain Attorney, his executors or Assigns: to which payment well and
truly to be made, I bind me, my heirs, executors and administrators firmly by
these presents with my seal sealed. Dated the tenth day of February, the year,
etc.

The Condition thereof.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden A.D.do
appear the next Court of the above named Sir R. T. to be holden within this
Manor of A. in the County of South-hampton, and then and there prosecute with
effect his suit or action against A.B. for the wrongful taking and detayning
of his cattle, as he has alleged, and do make return thereof, if return
thereof s hall be adjudged in the said Court by course of Law, and also do save
and keep harmless the s aid I.W. Steward of the said court, and the balifs in
all things touching or concerning the granting or execution of the said
Replevin, without fraud, covin, or delay, That then this present obligation to
be void, and of none effect, or el se the s ame to stand, remain, and continue
in force, strength, and virtue.

And if it be Ancient Demes ne, then they use to acknowledge Fines, and suffer
recoveries of their land which they buy and sell within Ancient Demesne, and
that is by the Keepers of the Liberty of England by authority of Parliament
their Writ of Right Close, issuing out of the Chancery, directed to the bailif
of the court, and they are entered in the court book after this manner:

Alton Westbrook, the form and manner of a Fine there.
The Court of Richard T. and H. his wife, there held Thursday the tenth day of
I. the year etc. before Richard B. and I. suitors of the s ame Court, according
to the custom of the same Manor, from the time who se contrary in the memory
of man is not. To this Court came I.M. in his proper person, and brought here
into the Court the Writ of the s aid Keepers of the Libert of etc. of Right Clo
se, against I.F.and S. his wife, to the baily of R.T.Knight and H.his wife, of
his Manor of Alton Was tbrook directed, and in form of right according to the
custom of the Manor before s aid, to be executed and determined: of which Writ
the tenor follows in these words: The Keepers, etc. and so reciting the whole
Writ word by word, etc. Upon which the foresaid I.M.according to the custom of
the Manor aforesaid, has made protestation to pros ecute his Writ aforesaid
against the foresaid I.F. and S. his wife, in form and nature of the Writ of
the Keepof the Lib etc. of covenant at the common Law, a Fine thereupon betwixt
them of the tenements aforesaid with the appertinences in the writ aforesaid
specif. to make and levy, requiring that I.F. and S. his wife may keep to him
the covenant of the tenements aforesaid, with the appertinences in Alton
Westbr. and he found pledgto prosecute his Writ aforesaid, viz. I.D. and R.R.
Upon which the same I. F. and S. his wife solemnly exacted are, and appeared;
and upon this the same I.F.and S. his wife request license to concord with the
foresaid I.M.the plea foresaid, and they give the Lord for such license 3. s.
4. d.

And the concord is such, viz. That I.F. and S. his wife do recognize the
tenement before s aid with the appertinences to be the right of him I.M. as tho
se which the same I.M. has of the gift of the foresaid I.F.and S. his wife,
and those have remis ed and quit-claimed from them and their heirs, to the
foresaid I.M. and his heirs for ever: And further the same I.F. and S.his wife
have granted for them and the heirs of I.F. that they do warrant the tenement
aforesaid with the appertinences to the fores aid I.M.and his heirs, against
the foresaid I.F. and S.and the heirs of the foresaid I.F. for ever: And for
this recognizance, remis ion, quit-claim, warrant, fine and concord, the same
I.M. has given the foresaid I.F. and S. his wife xl.Mark s terling, etc.

The style of the Court must be set down as it is before in the fine, mutatis
mutandis, and is as occasion shall serve. Then thus:

The form of a Recovery there.
TO this Court came R.H. and T.S. in their proper persons, and they brought
here in the Court the Writ of the Keepers of the Libert of Right Close against
I.M. to the Baily of R.T. Knight, and H. his wife, of their Manor of Alton
Westbrook directed, in form of right, according to the custom of the Manor
aforesaid, to be executed and determined, of which Writ the tenor follows in
these words: The Keepers, etc. and so reciting the Writ word by word (as above
in the Fine.) Upon which the foresaid R. H. and T.S.according to the custom of
the Manor aforesaid, made prote s tation to prosecute this writ aforesaid
against I.M.in form and nature of the Writ of the Keepers of the Liberties,
etc.of right at the common law, and they found pledge to pro secute their Writ
aforesaid, viz. I. Do. R. Roo. and they require process for them to be made
against the aforesaid I.M.according to the cu stome of the Manor aforesaid,
and the foresaid I.M. s olemnly exacted, appeared, and came here into the Court
in his proper pers on: whereupon the same R.H. and T. S. demand again st the
foresaid I.M. the tenements aforesaid with the appertinences as their right and
inheritance, and into which the same I.M. had not entrance, but after the
disseisin which H.H. unjustly and without judgment made to the foresaid
R.H.and T.S. within thirty years, etc. and whence they say that themselves were
s eised of the tenements aforesaid with the appertinences in their Deem sne as
of fee and right, in the time of peace, taking thereof the explees to the
value, etc. and into which, etc. And thereof they produce their s uit, etc.

And the foresaid I.M. in his own person came, and defends his right, when,
etc. and vouches thereupon to warrant I.F. who present is here in Court in his
proper person, and freely the tenements aforesaid to him warrants, etc. And
upon this the same R.H.and T.S. demand again st him I.F. by his warrant, the
tenements aforesaid, with the appertinences in form afores aid, etc.and whence
they say that themselves were seized of the tenements before said in their Deem
s ne, as of fee and right in the time of peace, taking thereof the explees to
the value etc. into which etc. and thereof they produce their suit. And the
afores aid I.F.tenant by warranty defends his right, when etc. and vouches
thereupon to warranty I.P. who in like manner present is here in Court in his
proper person, and freely the tenements aforesaid to him warrants: and upon
this the same R.H. and T.S. demand the tenements aforesaid with the
appertinences, in form aforesaid, and whence they say that themselves were
seized of the tenements aforesaid, with the appertinences in their demesne as
of fee and right, in the time of peace, etc.taking thereof the expleces to the
value etc.

And the foresaid I.P.tenant by his warranty defends his right, when, etc. and
puts hims elf upon the great assise of the Keep of the lib. etc. and prays
recognis to be made whether he more right has to hold the tenements aforesaid,
with the appertinences as tenent thereof by his warranty as he holds, or the
foresaid R.H. and T.S. to have the same tenements with the appertinences as
they above demand, etc. and the foresaid R.H. and T.S.pray license thereupon to
imparle, and they have it, etc.

And after the same R.H. and T.S.came again here in to the Court, viz. this
same day in their proper persons, and the foresaid I.P. although s olemnly
exacted, came not again, but in contempt of the Court receded and default has
made, therefore considered it is by the Court that the foresaid R. H.and T.S.
recover their seisin agains t the foresaid. I. M. of the tenements aforesaid
with the appertinences, to hold to the s ame R.H. and T.S. and their heirs quit
of the foresaid I. M.and their heirs, as also of the foresaid I.F. and his
heirs, and also of the fore said I.P. and his heirs for ever; and that the same
I.M. have of the land of the fore said I. F. to the value, and that the same
I.F. have of the land of the foresaid I.P. to the value, and the same I.P. is
amerced, etc.

Ex by I.W. Seneschal there.

Now here do follow diverse and sundry forms of declarations and pleadings
incident and belonging to this Court, as follows.
A declaration for a debt upon s pecialty.
WIll. S. sum was to ans were E.F. a plea that he render to him 39. s. which he
to him owes, and unjustly deteineth, etc. and whence the same E. by I.B. his
Atturny says, that whereas the aforesaid the fifth day of March, the year,
etc. at A. within the jurisdiction of this Court by a certain his writing
obligatory had yielded himself to be bound to the same E. in the foresaid 39.
s. to be paid to the same E. when therefore required he should be, the foresaid
W. notwithstanding though often required, the foresaid 39. s. to the same E. as
yet has not rendered, but those to him hitherto to render refus ed, and yet
refuses, whence he says he is the worse, and damage has to the value of xx.
s. and thereof produces his suit, etc. and brings forth here in the Court the
writing aforesaid, which the debt aforesaid in form aforesaid, witnesses, whose
date is the day and year abovesaid, etc.

Pledge of prosecution J. Do. R. Roo.


Bar in debt.
By ready to pay, and offers.
ANd the foresaid defendant came, and defends the force and wrong when, etc. and
says that he at all times from the foresaid fifth day of March the year
abovesaid, hitherto, ready has been and yet is to pay to the foresaid plaint
the foresaid 39. s. and those here in the Court proffereth ready to pay, upon
which the same plaint those 39. s. here in the Court received, therefore the
fores aid defendant is thereof quit, etc.

A declaration upon a bill oblig.
I.H. sum was to answer I.H. a plea that he render him 30. s. which to him he
owes, and unjustly deteineth, etc. and whence the same I.H. by I. B. his
Atturny says, that whereas the foresaid I.H. the fifteenth day of October. the
year, etc. here at A. within the jurisdiction of this Court, by a certain his
bill obligatory which the same J. Hammon with the seal of him J. Holtsealed,
here in the Court brings forth, whose e date is the same day and year,
acknowledged himself to owe to the same J. Ham. xv. s. to be paid to the same
J. Ham. his executors, administrators or assigns, in or upon the fea st of
Pentecost then next following the date of the bill afores aid, and to the same
payment well and faithfully to be made, the same J. Holt had obliged himself,
his heirs; executors and adminis trators to the same J. Ham. in the fores. xxx.
s. which he acknowledged by his bill aforesaid to satisfy, for not payment of
the foresaid xv. s. and the s ame J. Ham. in fact s aith, that the foresaid J.
Holthath not paid the same J. Ham. the xv. s. nor any penny thereof, according
to the form and effect of the bill aforesaid, by which action accrues to the
same J. Ham. to have an exact of the fores aid J. Holt the foresaid xxx. s.
before s aid, yet the foresaid J. Holt though oftentimes required the s ame xxx.
s. to the same J. Ham.as yet has not rendered, but those to him hitherto to
render refused and yet refus es. Wherefore he says that he the worse is, and
damage has to the value of x. s. and thereof produces his suit, etc.

Bar by within age.
ANd the foresaid I. Holt by I.F.his Attorney came, and defends the force and
wrong, when, etc. and says that he with the debt aforesaid by virtue of the
bill before said charged ought not to be, because he says, that at the time of
the making the bill aforesaid he was within the age of 21. years, and this
ready is he to verify; whence he prays judgment, whether the foresaid I.
Hammon his action aforesaid by virtue of the bill aforesaid in form afores aid
made against him to have ought.

Replicat and Rejoinder.
ANd the fores aid. I. Hammon says, that he by any matters praealledged, from
his action before said having, praecluded ought not to be, because he says,
that the foresaid I. Holt at the time of the making the bill aforesaid was of
full age of 21. years, and not within age, and this he prays may be inquired
by the Country, and the foresaid I.H. likewise; therefore the twelve, etc.

Debt upon reteiner for wages.
A.B. etc. sum was to ans were C.D. a plea that he render to him 39. s.which he
owes to him, and unjustly detcineth, and whence the same C. by D.W. his
Atturny says, that whereas the foresaid A. the x.day of March, the year, etc.
at S. within the Jurisdiction of this Court had retained him C. to serve the
same A. from the same day for one whole year next following in the office of
one Valet, the commands and businesses of him A. whatsoever lawful and honest
according to his power and knowledge to the doing, s olliciting and executing,
taking of the same A. for his s alary for that time 39. s.and the same C. the
foresaid A. in the office aforesaid, for the time aforesaid well and faithfully
had served, all his commands and bus ine s ses lawful and honest according to
his power and knowledge, during that time, well and faithfully had done,
solicited and executed, and the fore said 39. s. to the s ame C. for his
salary foresaid, by the time aforesaid behind, were not paid; wherefore action
accrued to the same C. to exact the s ame, and to have of the aforesaid A. the
same 39. s. the foresaid A. notwithstanding that he often required, the
foresaid 39. s. to the same C. has not rendered, but those to him hitherto to
render has refus ed, and yet refus es; wherefore he says that he the worse
is, and damage has to the value, etc. and thereof produces his suit.

Bar by nothing him he owes.
And the foresaid A.B. by I.W. his Aturny came, and defends the force and
wrong, when etc. and says that he owes not the foresaid C.D. the foresaid 39.
s. nor any penny thence in the form which the same C. above against him
warranteth: And this he prays may be inquired by the country, and the foresaid
C. likewi s e. Therefore the 12. etc.

A confession in debt.
And the foresaid A. by I.W.his Attorney came, etc. and says he cannot deny
the action aforesaid of C. before said, nor but that he owes the aforesaid C.
the aforesaid 39. s. as the aforesaid C. above against him has declared:
therefore granted is it, that the foresaid C. may recover against the before said
A. his debt aforesaid and his damages by occas ion of the deteining that debt
to 40. s. to the s ame C. of his assent by the Court here are adjudged, and the
fores aid A. is amerced, etc.

Debt upon he borrowed.
A.B. attached is to answer E.F.a plea that he render him 30. s. which to him
he owes and unjustly deteineth, and whence the same E.F. by I.W. his attorney
says, that the same foresaid A.B. the 10. day of F. the year, etc. At etc
within the Juri sdiction of this court borrowed of the same E.F. 30. s. to be
paid to the same E.F. when therefore required he was; notwithstanding the
foresaid A.B. though often required the fore s aid 30. s. to the same E.F. as
yet has not rendered, but those to him hitherto to render refused, and as yet
refu ses, wherefore he says that the worse he is, and damage has to the val
of x. s. and thereof produces his suit, etc.

Imparlance.
And the fores. A. by S.T. his Atturny comes and defends the force and arms,
when etc. and prays license thereupon to imparle here until the next Court,
and has it, etc. The same day is given to the foresaid C. here, etc.

By threats.
And the foresaid W. by N.E.his atturny comes and defends the force and
wrong, when, etc. and he says, that he to the debt aforesaid by virtue of the
writing charged ought not to be, because he says that the foresaid R. the time
of the making the writing aforesaid, to the same W.such and so great menaces of
his life and mutilation of his members upon him to be brought, unless he the
writing aforesaid to the foresaid R. make and seal would at A. within the
jurisdiction of this Court, impo s ed, that the same W. that writing for fear
of those menaces to the foresaid R. then and there made, and this ready is he
to verify, whence he prays judgment, whether the foresaid R. his action
aforesaid, by virtue of the writing aforesaid again st him to have ought, etc.

Replication, etc.
And the foresaid R. says, that he by any matters praealledged from his action
aforesaid having praecluded ought not to be, because he says that the foresaid
W. the time of the making the writing aforesaid, was in his own power at large,
and that writing of his mere and freewil to the foresaid R. made, and not out
of fear of menaces as the foresaid R. in his plea has alleged, and this he
prays inquired may be by the Country, and the fore s aid W. likewise:
Therefore the 12.

Bar by protestation.
And the foresaid A.B. by T.C. his atturny comes and defends the force and
wrong, when, etc. and he says that the foresaid R.S. his action before said
thence against him have or maintain ought, because he prote sts that no such
collocution betwixt the foresaid A. and R. had there was, that the same A.
should deliver the fore s. R. the fores. two pieces, etc. in part of s
atisfaction of the fores. 39. s. in the declaration afores. s pecif. protesting
also that the fores. A. brought not with him the foresaid C. in this
declaration aforesaid als o specif. the two pieces, etc. to carry away, to
deceive and defraud the foresaid R. of the foresaid two pieces, as in the
declar. afores aid above is supposed, protesting also that the foresaid
A.giving belief to the assumption of the foresaid R. delivered not to the
fores. C. the fores. two pieces etc. by limitation and a ssumps. of the said A.
as in the declar. afores. al s o s upposed is, protesting also that a certain
collocution had was betwixt the foresaid A. and R. that the foresaid R.s hold
deliver upon lone to the foresaid A. 29. s. in moneys numerate, under a certain
condition, and upon which agree they could not; therefore the foresaid
discourse void and of no vigor was, and for plea the same A. says that he
promised not, nor upon him assumed in manner and form, as the fore s aid R.
above against him plaineth, and this he prays may be inquired by the country,
And the foresaid R. likewise. Therefore 12. etc.

Bar by concord.
And the foresaid A. by I.W.his Atturny came, and defends the force and
wrong, when, etc. and says that the foresaid C. his action afores aid
therefore again st him have or maintein ought not, because prote sting that he
acknowledges not any of the things in the declaration before said to be true,
for plea yet he says, that after the assumption and promise before said made,
viz. the 10. day of May, the year, etc. at etc. between the same A. and the
fores aid R. as well of the ass umption and promise aforesaid as of all other
trespasses and offenses betwixt the same A. and the foresaid R. before the same
10. day of May had, were moved and done or hanging, by mediation of friends
betwixt them amicably interveneing was had such concord, viz. that the same A.
in full satisfaction and release as well of the ass ump sit whence the foresaid
R. above him now plains, as of all other trespass ses and offenses by the same
A. before that time to the foresaid R. done, should give to the same R.two
cowes, and that the same A. from that time against the fore s aid R. as well of
the assumpsit and promise aforesaid, as of all other trespasses and offenses
should be quit for ever, and the same A says, that he then and there gave and
delivered to the foresaid R. two cows, and the same R. the se two cows of the
same A. then and there received, according to the form and effect of the
concord aforesaid, and this ready is he to verify, etc.

No such concord.
Praecluded not: because he says there was not had any such concord betwixt
him R. and the fore said A. in manner and form which the same A. in bar
pleading alleged has, and this he prays may be inquired by the country, and
the foresaid A. likewise, etc. therefore 12. etc.

Count upon delivery by another hands.
T.G. sum was to answer N.P. a plea that he render him 30. s. which to him he
owes and unjustly deteins, etc. and whence the s ame N. by R.L. his Attorney
says, that whereas a certain P.R. the last day of I. the year, etc. at
B.within the jurisdiction of this Court had delivered to the foresaid T.G.the
foresaid 30. s. to be paid and delivered to the same N. whenever by the
foresaid N. he s hold be required, yet the foresaid T.G. although often times
required, the same 30. s. to the same N. as yet has not rendered, but those to
him hitherto to render refused and as yet refu ses; wherefore he says, that he
the worse is, and damage has to the value of x. s. and thereof produces his
suit, etc.

Nothing him he owes by Law.
And the foresaid T. by B.C.his Atturny came, and defends the force and wrong,
when, etc. and says, that he owes not the foresaid N. the fore said 30. s.
nor any penny thereof in the form which the same N. above against him declared
has, and this ready he is to defend against him and his suit by the Law of him
T. as the court here shall grant thereof to be made, etc. whence he prays
judgment whether the foresaid N. his action aforesaid agains t him to maintain
ought, etc.

Demurrer thereupon.
And the foresaid N. says, that the fore said defense of the foresaid T. by
his Law to be made pretended, is not a s ufficient issue, nor admitable him T.
against the foresaid matter in the Declaration of him N. contained, from his
action aforesaid having to preclude; wherefore he prays judgment, and his debt
aforesaid, together with his damages etc. for defect of sufficient answer and
iss ue, to him to be adjudged.

And the aforesaid T. since that the foresaid ans were and said defense by his
Law to be made in form aforesaid, sufficient answer and i ssue admitable are in
law, the foresaid N. from is action aforesaid to praeclude, and the foresaid N.
the law of him T. in this part to be made, to admit altogether refuses, he
prays judgment, and that the foresaid N. from his action aforesaid having
praecluded, may be, etc.

Debt brought by execagainst exec upon spec.
A.T. exec of the test of T.B sum was to answer E.W. exec of the test of S.A. a
plea, that he together with C. co exec of the aforesaid T. of the test of the
fores T. render to him 38. s. which from him unju stly he deteineth, etc. and
whence the same E. by I.W. his Attorney says, that whereas the aforesaid T.B.
the twentieth day of August, the year, etc. at P. within the juris diction of
this Court, by a certain his writing obligatory yielded himself to be bound to
the same S. in the foresaid 38. s. to be paid to the same S. in the Feast etc.
the fores aid T. notwiths tanding in his life time, nor the foresaid execut of
his test after the death of the same T. though oftentimes required the foresaid
38. s. to the foresaid S. in his life time, nor to the same exec after the
death of the same S. rendered have not, but those to him to render refu s ed,
and yet refu ses, and those from him unjustly deteineth: wherefore he says
that he the worse is, and damages has to the value of x. s. and thereof he
produces his suit, etc. And he brings forth here in Court as well the writing
aforesaid as the testament, by which it is apparent enough, that he E. is
executor of the te stam of the foresaid S.

Debt brought by Administrators.
W.W. summoned was to answer I. A.Administratrix of all and singular the goods
and chattels of L.A. who dyed inte state, as said is, a plea that he tender her
39. s. which from her unjustly he deteins, etc. and whence the same I. by
I.W.her Attorney says, that whereas the said W. such day and year etc. at
S.within the jurisdiction of this Court, by a certain his bill obligatory,
which the same I. with the seal of W.s igned here in Court brings forth, whose
date is the same day and year, acknowledged himself to owe to the foresaid L.
the fores aid 39. s. in his life time to be paid to the same L.at s uch a feast
next, etc. and to that payment well and faithfully to be made, the foresaid W.
has obliged himself, his heirs and executors by the s ame bill, yet the fores
aid W. though often required, the 39. s. to the foresaid L. in his life time,
or to the same I. after the death of the same L. to whom the administration of
all the goods and chattels of the fores aid L. at the time of his death, by
W.L. of the Laws Doctor, of the Court Prerogative of Canterbury Master, the
twentieth day of May, the year of our Lord One thousand s ix hundred and s
ixteen, at L. aforesaid, after the death of the fores aid L. committed was,
has not rendered, but those to her to render refused, and those to the same
I.to render refus es, and unjustly deteineth; wherefore she says that s he the
worse is, and damage has to the value of twenty shillings, and thereof she
produces her suit, etc. And she brings forth here in Court the letters of
administration of the foresaid W.C. by which, etc.

Non sum informatus. Not informed.
And the foresaid W. by N.E.his Atturny came, and, defends the force and
wrong, when, etc. and said it was to the same Atturny of the same W. that for
the same W. his Master, to the foresaid I. in the plea foresaid, he should
answer; and the same Atturny says, he is not informed by the same W. his
Master of any answer for the same W. to the foresaid I. in the plea foresaid to
be given, and no other thing thence says, by which the fore s aid I. remains
against the foresaid W. thence undefended. Therefore granted is it that the
foresaid I. re^^ver again st the foresaid W. his debt aforesaid, and damages by
occasion of the detaining that debt to 56. s. to the same I. by her assent, by
the Court here adjudged are, and the foresaid V.V. is amerced, etc.

Plene administravit. Fully administed.
And the foresaid A.by T.B.his Atturny came, and defends the force and wrong,
when etc. and says that the foresaid plaintiff his action before said, against
her to have ought not, because she says, that she fully administered has of
the goods and chattels of the foresaid I. at the time of his death, and that s
he no other goods has, nor chattels of the s aid I. at the time of his death
in her hands, administered to be, nor had the day of the entry of this plea of
the plaintiff, nor at any time after, and this ready is she to verify; wherefore
she prays judgment whether the foresaid plaint the action aforesaid against
her to have ought, etc.

Replication, and Rejoinder.
And the foresaid plaint says, that he by any things praealledged from his
action afores aid having, praecluded ought not to be, because he says, that
the foresaid defend the day of the entry of the plea of the foresaid plaint,
viz. such day and year, etc.had diverse goods and chattels of the foresaid, I.
at the time of his death in her hands administered to be, to the value of the
debt aforesaid, whereof the same plaint of that debt have satisfied s he might,
viz. at A. within the jurisdiction of this Court, and this he prays may be
inquired by the Country, and the foresaid defend likewise: therefore 12. etc.

A Special not his Deed.
And the foresaid defend. by G.P. his Atturny came, and defends the force and
injury, when etc. and says, that he with the debt aforesaid, by virtue of the
bill afores aid, charged ought not to be, because he says, that after the same
defend, sealed and delivered had the bill aforesaid to the fore said plaint,
that bill a new written and interlined was in these words, viz. Th Curwen, by
which that bill so anew written and interlined, its force lost and effect, and
so that bill aforesaid is not his deed, and of this he puts him self upon the
Country, and the foresaid plaint likewise, etc. Therefore 12. etc.

Nihil dicit in debito. Nothing he s aith.
And the foresaid defend by A. B. his Atturny came, and defends the force and
wrong, when etc. and nothing says in bar of the action aforesaid, of the
plaint aforesaid, by which the plaint remains against the same defend therefore
undefended. Therefore granted it is that the foresaid plaint recover against
the fores. defendant his debt aforesaid and damages by occa sion of the
deteining this debt to x. s. to the same plaint by his assent by the Court here
adjudged, and the fores. def. is amerced, etc.

Action on the case upon indebted he assumed
G.D. by R.M. his Atturny plaineth against R.D. a plea of trepa sse upon the
case, for that that whereas the fores. def. the day and year, etc. at, etc.
indebted was to the fores. pl in xi. s. lawful money of England for one jerkin
by him the pl to the def afores. before sold and delivered, and so indebted
being after viz. the 1 day of I. the year, etc. at S. within the jurisdiction
of this Court, the fores. defin cons ideration thereof upon him assumed, and to
the same plaintiff then and there faithfully promised to pay to the same
plaintiff the fore said xi. s. yet the foresaid defendant his promise and as
sumption aforesaid not regarding, but contriving him the plaintiff of his
foresaid xi. s. craftily to deceive and defraud, the foresaid xi. s. to the s
ame plaintiff as yet has not paid, although to the same plaintiff to pay them
after viz. the s ame day, year and place within the jurisdiction of this Court,
by the same plaintiff required he was, to the damage of him the plaintiff x. s.
and thereof he produces his suit, etc.

Pledge of prosecution J. Do. R. Roo.


Otherwise indebted he ass umed.
I.C. attached is to answer I.W.plea of trespass upon the case, and whence
I.W.by I.S. his Atturny says, that whereas the fore said I.C. the first day of
Oct. the year, etc. here at S. within the juri s diction of this Court indebted
was to the foresaid I.W. in the sum of 38. s. of lawful money of England for
arreres of rent of one message and one acre of land, and for diverse sums of
pence upon borrowing delivered, and also for diverse other things to the same
I. by the foresaid I. before that time due and payable, and so indebted being,
the same I.C. in cons ideration thereof upon him assumed, that he the s ame
I.C.the fores. 38. s. to the s ame I.W. when therefore required he should be,
well and faithfully to pay and content would, yet the foresaid I.C. his promise
and assump not regarding, but contriving and fraudulently intending the s ame
I.W. in this part craftily and naughtily to deceive and defraud of the fores.
38. s. the same I. according to his promise and as sump aforesaid, though to
this after viz. the 10. day of Octo. the year etc. above said, at S. afores. by
the same I. required he was, he paid not, but those to him altogether as yet to
pay has refused and yet refuses, wherefore he says he the worse is, and
damage has to the value of x. s. and thereof produces his s uit, etc.

Not assumed.
And the fores. I. by I.W. his Atturny came and defends the force and injury,
when etc. and says, that he assumed not to the same plaintin manner and form
as the foresaid plaintiff against him plaineth; and of this he puts himself
upon the Country, and the foresaid plaintiff likewise: therefore 12. etc.

Action upon the case upon together they accounted.
R.S. plaineth of N.W. a plea of trespa ss upon the case, for that viz. that
whereas certain H.VV. and R.H. the 2. day of I.the year, etc. at A. within the
jurisdiction of this Court together accounted with the same R. of diverse
sums of pence, before that time for arreres of rent, and other things to the
same R.by the s ame H. and R. due and to be paid, and upon that account, the
same H. and R. found were in arreres to the foresaid R. in the sum of 36. s.
of lawful money of England, to be paid to the same R. when therefore required
they should be, and whereas the foresaid W. then and there likewise the same 2.
day of I. the year above said, at A. afores. instantly required the fores. R
that the same R. would acquit and exonerate the fore s. H. and R. of the fores.
36. s. and the fores. N. in consideration thereof upon him a s s unted, and to
the same R. then and there faithfully promis ed, that he the same N. the fores.
36. s. to the same R. when therefore required he should be, well and faithfully
pay and content would, and the same R. in fact says, that he belief having to
the promise and assumps of him N. afores then and there acquitted and exornated
the fors. H. and R. of the fores. 36 s. yet the foresaid N. his promise and ass
ump so little regarding, and fraudulently intending the same R. in this part
craftity and naught^ly to deceive and defraud the 36 s. to the same R.though to
this at A. aforesaid within the jurisdiction aforesaid, after viz the last day
of I. the year aboves. by the fores. R. required he was, he paid not, nor in
any manner for the same contented, by which the same R. says, that he the
whole gain, commodity and profit which he with the fores. 36. s. by buying and
selling and lawfully bargaining have had, and gain might, if the fores. N.his
promi se and assump ^fores. so in form before s. made, had held and performed,
wholly lost and missed has: wherefore the same R. says that he the worse is,
and damage has to the value of xx. s. and thereof he produces his s uit, etc.

Action upon the case upon indebted he assumes.
T.E. plaineth again st B.B. a plea of tree spas upon the case, for that viz.
that whereas the fore s. B. the first day of I. the year, etc. at A within the
jurisdiction of this Court, in cons ideration that he fore s. T. at the
special instance and request of him B. then and there upon lone gave and lent
to the same B. 30. s.of good and lawful money of England, upon him he assumed,
and to the s ame T. then and there faithfully promised, that he the same B. 30.
s. of good and lawful money of England to the same T. when therefore required
he s hold be well and truly pay and content would; yet the foresaid B. his
promis e and assump afores. little regarding, but contriving the fores. T. of
the fores. 30. s. craftily and subtly to deceive and defraud, the fores. 30.
s. to the foresaid T. though by the s ame T. after viz. the first day of Oct.
the year, etc. abovesaid at A.before s. required was, according to his promise
and as sumpt aforesaid as yet has not paid, nor in any manner contented, by
which the fores. T. in his credit toward diverse of the people of etc. and es
pecially toward I.M. to whom the s ame T. in the like sum of 30. s.indebted
was, and to whom the same T. the same 30. s. at the right day now long since
past, upon hope and belief of the true performance of the promise and
assumption aforesaid, to pay and content had promi sed, manifoldly hurt and the
worse is, and damage has to the value of xx. s. and thereof produces his s
uit, etc.

Plaint upon replevin.
William L. sum was to answer W.B. a plea of taking and unjust deteining of
his beasts, and whence the same W.B. by R.D. his Atturny plaineth that the
fores. W.L. the fifth day of December, the year, etc. at Q. in a certain place
there called Bu shy close of his W.B. within the jurisdictof this Court, took
his beasts, viz. one Cow of his W.B. and that unju stly detained against suert
and pleg until etc. wherefore he says that he the worse is, and damages has
to the value of 39. s. and thereof produces his s uit, etc.

Avowry for damage doing in his franktenem.
And the said VV. in his proper person came, and defends the force and wrong,
when etc. and well avows the taking of the beasts aforesaid in the foresaid
place in which etc. and justly etc. becau se he says that the foresaid place
in which supposed is the taking of the beasts aforesaid to be, is, and the
aforesaid time of the taking aforesaid supposed to be, was the soil and
franktenement of him W. and that the cow aforesaid was at that time in the same
place, the herb then and there growing eating up, and damage doing, by which
the same W. that cow then and there so damage doing, took and impounded, as
well he might, and this ready he is to veri^ie: wherefore he prays judgment,
and the return of the beasts aforesaid to him to be adjudged, etc.

Avowry otherwi se one in his own right, and otherwi se as a servant by his
command.
And the foresaid R.B.and T.B.by their Atturny came and defend their force and
wrong, when, etc. and say, that the fore s R.B. is, and at the time of the
taking of the beasts before s. to be supposed, was seized of a certain close
called the Coniger, in the fores. Town of E. within the jurisdiction of this
Court, in his demesne as of fee, a certain mare the afores. time in which etc.
was in this close called the Coniger, his herb there eating up, and damage
doing, by which the same R.B. in his own right, and the afores. T.B. by his
command, took that mare, and her impounded, as well they might, without that,
that they took the mare before s aid in that aforesaid place called the Common
Mead, as the afores aid W.T. against them plaineth; and this ready they are to
verify. Wherefore they pray judgment, and return of the beasts aforesaid to be
to them adjudged, etc.

Avowry for amercement in the Leet.
And the fores aid L.P. by T.R.his Atturny came, and defends the force and
injury, when etc. and as baily of T.H. Esqwell acknowledges the taking of the
heifer aforesaid in the aforesaid place in which etc. and justly etc. Because
he says, that the same place in which supposed is the taking of the heifer
aforesaid to be contains, and the foresaid time in which supposed is the
taking of the heifer afores. to be contained 12 acres of land called Reke
fields in W. before s. within the precinct of the Court of view of frankpledg of
the said T.H. within the Manor of M. to be held in the County of South afores.
of which Manor with the appertinen before the foresaid time in which, etc. and
the same time in which etc. the foresaid T.H. was seized in his demesne as of
fee, within which Manor the same Thomas and all those whose e state the same
Thomas now has, and the foresaid time in which, etc. had in the Manor afores.
with the appertin. from the time the contrary of which in the memory of men is
not; have had, and to have, hold and keep have used a court of view of
frankpledg twice by the year, viz. once within a mouth next after the feast of
Easter, and again within a month next after the feast of Saint Mich. the
Archangel at that Manor, before the Senes chal of that Manor for the time
being, and all the inhabitants and res idents within that Manor at the Court
of view of frankpledg of the Manor aforesaid accustomed were to appear, and
there charged to be and sworn of and upon all articles which at the court of
view of frankpledge afores aid belong to be inquired of, and that the foresaid
T. and all tho se whose e state the same T. in the Manor aforesaid with the
pertinen now has, and the fores aid time in which, etc. have had, and from the
whole time aforesaid have used to di strein for penalties and amercements in
the same Court of view of frankpledg imposed, and the s ame L. says, that
before the foresaid time in which, etc. viz. at a certain court of view of
frankplegheld at the Manor afores. within the month next after the feast of
Saint Mich. the Archangel viz, the 30. day of Sept. the year, etc. before W.Y.
Gent. the Senes ch of the Court of view of frank pldeg of his Manor afores. by
certain John N.etc. (reciting all the jurors by their names,) in the same Court
of view of frankpledge, of those things which to the Court of view of
frankpledgafores belong, charged and sworn to inquire upon their oath pres
ented was it, that the fores W.T. resident and inhabitant within the praecinct
of the Court of view of frankpledg afores. then was, and that diverse hedges of
the s ame W. within the praecinct of the Manor afores. open lay, to the hurt
of diverse inhabitants within the Manor afores. for which then and there
commanded was it to the same W.T.sufficient to make his hedges, viz. at the
home breach against the way publ. and his hedgesagainst the lane called Mor^e
lane, etc. before the 15. day of Octo. then next to come, under the penalty of
20. s. before which day the same W. his hedges before s. made not, according to
the precept of the jurors afores. by which the fores. penalty of the fores. xx.
s. by the foresaid W.T. forfeited were; and because the fores. xx. s. for the
penalty fores. the fore s. time in which, etc. to the fore s aid T.H. arrere
were unpaid, the same L. as baily of the fores. T. for the same xx. s. for the
penalty fores. arrer being unpaid, well acknowledges the taking of the heyfer
afores. in the fore s. place in which, etc. and justly, etc. within the
precinct of the view of frankpledgaforesaid, etc.

Bar when beasts enter for default of Inclo sure, and the avowant ought to
make it.
And the fores. T. says, that the fore s. E. the taking of the bea sts afores.
by the reason prealledged justly to avow ought not, because he s aith that the
time of the taking afores. done, a certain W.C. was s eised of a certain close
called R. in M. in the County foresaid, in the fores. place called G.
contiguously lying in his demesne as of fee, and the same W. s o thereof
seized, before the same time in which, etc. at A. that close demised to the
same T. to have to him at will of the s aid W. by which praetext the same T.
the time of the taking before s aid done, of that close was possessed, and the
fore s. E. the same time was seized of the foresaid close called G.in his
demesne as of fee, and the same E. and all those who se es tate then he had in
that place, have made and repaired, and used were to make and repair, as often
as need should be, a certain hedge or clos ure the same place called G. from
the foresaid clos e called M altogether separating and fenceing, from the time
the contrary of which in the memory of men is not, and the same T.s aith, that
he of the foresaid close called M. by virtue of the demise before s aid
possessed, before the foresaid time in which etc. put his beasts aforesaid into
that close to feed there, and because the hedges of the foresaid E. the time of
the taking before said done, and before for defect of reparation thereof in
diverse parts of the same, broken was and wasted, the beasts aforesaid into
that close in the foresaid place called G. by that breach at the time of the
taking aforesaid, escaped and entered, and the foresaid E. then there being, the
beasts then and there took, as by the Court aforesaid is s upposed, and this
ready is he to verisie; wherefore he prays judgment and his damages by
occasion of the taking to be adjudged, etc.

Replicof the pl. the enclosure was sufficient.
And the foresaid E. s aith, that tho se beasts the time of the taking
aforesaid suppo sed to be, the hedge aforesaid sufficiently made and repaired
violently broke, and into the same place called G. entered, and the herb in that
place growing cat up, and damages in it did, for which the same E. tho se
beasts then and there took, as the same E.above alledegd has, and this ^eady
is he to verisie; wherefore he prays judgment, and the return of those beasts
to be adjudged him, etc.

Rejoinder.
And the fore said T. says, that the hedges aforesaid at the time of the
taking afores. s upposed to be, broken and wasted were in the form which the
same T. above alleged has, and this he prays may be inquired by the country,
and etc. likewise: therefore 12. etc.

Action of trover. Finding.

ss. I.P. plains of I.K. of a plea of trespass upon the case, and whence the s
ame I. by I.W. his atturny says, that whereas the fore s. I.P. the first day
of N. the year, etc. at P. within the jurisdiction of this court possessed was
of two ewes of the price of x. s. as of his goods and chattels proper, and so
thereof posse ssed being after viz. the same day and year at P. afores. the
goods and chattels afores. out of his hands and possession casually he lost and
miss ed, which goods and chattels after viz. the same day and year at P.
afores. to the hands and possession of him I.K. by finding came, yet the fores.
I. certainly knowing the goods and chattels afores. to be the goods and chatt
of the foresaid I.P.and to him I.P. of right to belong and pertain, contriving
and fraudulently intending the same I.P. in this part craftily and subtly to
defraud and deceive, the goods and chatt afores. of the fores. I.P. though
often required, etc. as yet has not given up nor delivered, but the goods and
chattels aforesaid after viz. the first day of D. the year abovesaid, to his
own use and commodity di sposed and converted, to the damage of him I.P. of xx.
s. and thereof he produces his suit, etc.

Count in tree spass.
S.S. attached was to answer I.E.a plea why he together with W.L. the close and
house of him I. at B. within the jurisdiction of this court broke, and other
enormous, etc. Whence the same I. by I.H. his attorney plains that the
foresaid S.together, etc. the xxx. day of September the year etc. the clo se
and house of him B. at B. within the Jurisdiction of this court broke, and
other enormous, etc to the grievous damage of him I. whence he says that he
the worse is, and damage has to the value ofxx. s. and thereof he produces his
suit, etc.

For the close and house broken, and herbs taken, then so.
And whence the same H. in his proper person plains that the fores. I.
together with R.R. and I.L. the 1. day of Sept. the year, etc. the clo se and
house of him A. at W.within the Jurisdiction of this court broke, and his herb
to the value of xx. s. now lately growing with certain beasts viz. horses,
oxen, cowes and hoggrels cat up, trampled and consumed, and other enormous
things to him has done, to the damage of him H. xxx. s. and thereof he
produces his suit, etc.

Culpable not pleaded.
And the fores. def. by I.F. his atturny came, and defends the force and
wrong when, etc. and as to so many trespasses afores. besides the breaking of
the clos afores. he says that he no whit is thereof culpable, as the fores.
plaint above against him plaineth, and of this he puts hims elf upon the
country, and the fores. pl. likewi se: and as to the breaking the close afores.
the same def. says, that the foresaid pl. his action against him to have ought
not, because he says, that the foresaid plaintiff before the time in which
suppo sed is the trespass aforesaid to be, one cow of his the def at G.
aforesaid found, without cause reas onable took, and her into the close
aforesaid drove, and her there impounded, for which the same def. that cow
again to have, the close aforesaid the aforesaid time in which etc. entered, and
her then and there took and brought away, as well he might; and this ready is
he to verify; wherefore he prays judgment whether the fores. pl. his action
before said therefore against him to have ought, etc.

Replication of his own wrong without such cause and issue upon it.
And the foresaid plaintiff says that he for any things prealledged from his
action aforesaid of breaking the close aforesaid against the def. aforesaid
praecluded ought not to be, because he says that the fore said def. the day
and year abovesaid, of his own wrong, and without the cause by him the def.
praealledged, the close of him the pl. at C. aforesaid broke, as he above again
st him plaineth, and this be prays may be inquired by the country, and the
fores. def. likewise: therefore 12. etc.

Bar in trespass by offer of reasonable amends.
And the foresaid def. by I. W. his atturny came, and defend the force and
wrong, when, etc. and says that the foresaid plaint his action before said
against him to have ought not, because he says that he immediately after the
foresaid time of the trespass aforesaid to be s uppos ed, viz. the 10. day of
Jan. the year etc. at N. before said, by the proper hands of him the def.
offered to pay to the fore said pl. xi. s. for his damages with the cowes
afores. in the fores. place in which, etc. to the fores. pl. done, which xi. s.
were suffic. amendment for the damages with the Cows before said, in the
foresaid place in which, etc. the same time which, etc. done, which xi. s. the
foresaid pl. of the same def. to receive then and there altogether refused. And
this ready is he to verify; wherefore he prays judgment, whether the fores.
plaint the action before s. therefore against him to have or maintain ought, etc.

Tender of sufficient amends is a good plea in repleg before impounding the
beasts, not after.

Note, that if any man pl. or def. be minded to remove any action out of this
Court, he must do it by the Keepers of the liberty of England by authority of
Parliaments writ, called an Accedas ad cur, which issues out of the Chancery;
and it must be made by a Cursiter of that Shire where the action lies, and
directed to the sheriff of the same County, who will make his warrant to the
bailife of that Court, and the bailife must take his return of the warrant,
thus; First the bailife sends or delivers to the sheriff a copy of the entrance
of the Court when the cause was removed, thus:

Alton VVestbrook.
The Court of R.T. Knight, thereheld on Thursday, viz. the x. day of May the
year, etc. before I.W. G.S. R.H. and T.D. suitors of the s ame Court.

The Copy of the plaint.
I.S. plaineth against W.W. a plea of taking and unjust deteining of his beasts.

By certue of this precept to me directed, taking with me I.VV etc. four
discreet Knights of the hundred of A. foresaid, I came to the Court of
R.T.Knight, and to be recorded caused the plea which is in the same Court
betwixt I.S. pl and W.W. defen, and that record ready I have under my seal and
the seals of the foresaid 4. Knights of the same Court, of tho se who at that
record pres ent were, and to the parties aforesaid the s ame day have I
prefixed as to me commanded was, In testimony of which matter as well I R.F.
baily of the Hundred aforesaid, as the foresaid I.W.etc. 4. legal Knights of
the Hundred aforesaid to these presents our Seal have put.

Thereupon the sheriff makes his return, as to the said writ appears.

FINIS.

