ITER BOREALE.

Attempting something upon the Successful and Matchless March of the Lord
General GEORGE MONCK, FROM SCOTLAND, TO LONDON, The last Winter, etc.

Veni, Vidi, Vici.

By a Rural Pen.

LONDON, Printed on St GEORGE'S Day, for George Thomason, at the Rose and Crown
in St Paul's Churchyard. 1660

ITER BOREALE. Attempting something upon the Successful and Matchless March of
the Lord General GEORGE MONCK, from Scotland to London, the last Winter.
I.
THe day is broak! Melpomene be gone;
Hag of my Fancy, let me now alone:
Nightmare my soul no more; Go take thy flight;
Where Traitors Ghosts keep an eternal night;
Flee to Mount Caucasus, and bear thy part
With the black Fowl that tears Prometheus heart
For his bold Sacrilege: Go fetch the groans
Of defunct Tyrants, with them croke thy Tones;
Go see Alecto with her flaming whip,
How she firks Nol, and makes old Bradshaw skip:
Go make thy self away. -- Thou shall no more
Choke up my Standish with the blood and gore
Of English Tragedies: I now will choose
The merriest of the Nine to be my Muse,
And (come what will) I Will scribble once again:
The brutish Sword has cut the Nobler Vein
Of racy Poetry. Our small drink times
Must be contented, and take up with Rhymes.
Thy're sorry toys from a poor Levites pack,
Whose Living and Assessments drink no Sack.
The Subject will excuse the Verse (I trow)
The Ven'son's fat although the Crust be dow,
II.
I He who whilcom sat and sung in Cage
My Kings and Countries Ruins, by the rage
Of a rebellious Rout: Who weeping saw,
Three goodly Kingdoms (drunk with fury) draw
And sheath their Swords (like three enraged Brothers)
In one another sides, ripping their Mothers
Belly, and tearing out her bleeding heart;
Then jealous that their Father fain would part
Their bloody Fray, and let them fight no more,
Fell foul on him, and slew him at his door.
I that have only dared to whisper Verses,
And drop a tear (by stealth) on loyal Herses,
I that enraged at the Times and Rump,
Had gnawed my Goose-quill to the very stump,
And flung that in the fire, no more to write
But to set down poor Britains Heraclyte;
Now sing the tryumphs of the Men of War,
The glorious rays of the bright Northern Star,
Created for the nonce by Heaven, to bring
The Wisemen of three Nations to their King:
MONCK! the great Monck! That syllable out-shines
Plantagenet's bright name or Constantin's.
'Twas at his Rising that Our Day begun,
Be He the Morning Star to Charles our Sun:
He took Rebellion rampant, by the Throat,
And made the Canting Quaker change his Note
His Hand it was that wrote (we saw no more)
Exit Tyrannus over Lambert's door:
Like to some subtle Lightning, so his words
Dissolved in their Scabbards Rebels swords:
He with success the sovereign skill has found,
To dress the Weapon, and so heal the Wound.
George, and his Boys (as Spirits do, they say)
Only by Walking scare our Foes away.
III.
OLd Holofernes was no sooner laid,
Before the Idols Funeral Pomp was paid,
(Nor shall a penny ere be paid for me;
Let Fools that trusted, his true Mourners be.)
Richard the fourth, just peeping out of Squire,
No fault so much as, The old one was his Sire;
For men believed -- though all went in his Name,
He Would be but Tennant, till the Landlord came:
When on a sudden (all amazed) we found
The seven Years Babel tumbled to the ground;
And he, poor heart, (thanks to his cunning Kin)
Was soon in Querpo honest Dick again.
Exit Protector. -- What comes next? I trow*
Let the State-Hunsmen beat again. -- So-ho
Cries Lambert, Master of the Hounds, -- Here sits
That lusty Puss, The Good Old Cause, -- whose wits
Showed Oliver such sport; That, that (cries Vane)
Let Us put her up, and run her once again:
She Will lead our Dogs and Followers up and down,
Whilst we match Families, and take the Crown.
Enter the old Members; 'Twas the Month of May
These Maggots in the Rump began to play.
Wallingford Anglers (though they stunk) yet thought,
They would make baits, by which fish might be caught;
And so it proved; They soon by Taxes made
More money then the Holland Fishing Trade.
IIII.
NOw broke in Aegypts Plagues (all in a day)
And one more worse then theirs; -- We must not pray
To be delivered: -- Their scabb'd folks were free
To scratch where it did itch; -- So might not we.
That Meteor Cromwell, though he scared, gave light;
But wewere now covered with horrid Night:
Our Magistracy was (like Moses Rod)
Turned to a Serpent by the angry God.
Poor Citizens, when trading would not do,
Made brick without straw, and were basted too:
Struck with the botch of Taxes and Excise;
Servants (our very dust) were turned to lice;
It was but turning Soldiers, and they need
Not work at all, but on their Masters feed.
Strange Catterpillers eat our pleasant things;
And Frogs croakt in the Chambers of our Kings.
Black bloody veins did in the Rump prevail,
Lik the Philistims Emrods in the Tail.
Lightning, Hail, Fire, and Thunder Egypt had,
And England Guns, Shot, Powder, (that is as bad)
And that Sea Monster Lawson (if withstood)
Threatened to turn our Rivers into blood.
And (Plague of all these Plagues) all these Plagues fell
Not on an Egypt, but our Israel.
V.
SIck (as her heart can hold) the Nation lies,
Filling each corner with her hideous cries;
Sometime Rage (like a burning Fever) heats,
Anon Despair brings cold and clammy Sweats;
She cannot sleep, or if she does she dreams
Of Rapes, Thefts, Burnings, Blood, and direful Theames,
Tosses from side to side, then by and by
Her feet are laid there where the head did lie:
None can come to her but bold Empiricks,
Who never meant to cure her, but try tricks:
Those very Doctors who should give her ease,
(God help the Patient) was her worst disease.
The Italian Mountebank Vane tells us sure,
Jesuits powder will effect the cure:
If grief but makes her swell, Martin and Nevil
Conclude it is a spice of the Kings Evil.
Bleed her again, another cries; -- And Scot
Says he could cure her, if 'twas -- you know what:
But giddy Harrington a whimsey found,
To make her head (like to his brains) run round.
Her old and wise Physicians who before
Had well nigh cured her, came again to the door.
But were kept out -- which made her cry the more,
Help, help, (dear Children) Oh! some pity take
On her who bore you! Help for mercy sake!
Oh heart! Oh head! Oh back! Oh bones! I feel
They Have poisoned me with giving too much Steel:
Oh give me that for which I long and cry!
Something that is Sovereign, or else I dye.
VI.
KInd Cheshire heard; And like some son that stood
Upon the Banck, straight jumped into the Flood,
Flings out his arms, and strikes some strokes to swim,
Booth ventured first, and Midleton with him,
Stout Mackworth, Egerton, and thousands more,
Threw themselves in, and left the safer shore;
Massey (that famous Diver) and bold Brown
Forsook his wharfe, -- resolving all to drow,
Or save a sinking Kingdom: -- But, O sad!
Fearing to lose her prey, the Sea grew mad,
Raised all her billows, and resolved her waves
Should quickly be the bold Adventurers graves.
Out Marches Lambert, like an Eastern wind,
And with him all the mighty waters joined.
The loyal swimmers bore up heads and breasts,
Scorning to think of life or interests;
They plied their Arms and Thighs, but all in vain;
The furious Main beat them to shore again;
At which the floating Island (looking back,
Spying her loyal Lovers gone to wrack)
Shriekt louder then before, -- and thus she cries,
"Can you ye angry Heavens, and frowning Skies,
"Thus countenance Rebellious Mutineers,
"Who if they durst, would be about your ears:
"That I should sink, with Justice may accord,
"Who let my Pilot be thrown overboard;
"Yet 'twas not I (ye righteous heavens do know)
"The Soldiers in me needs would have it so:
"And those who conjured up these Storms themselves,
"And first engaged me amongst these Rocks and Shelves,
"Guilty of all my woes, erect this weather,
"Fearing to come to Land, and choosing rather
"To sink me with themselves. -- O! Cease to frown,
"In tears (just Heavens!) behold! my self I drown:
"Let not these proud Waves do it: Prevent my fears,
"And let them fall together by the Ears.
VII.
HEaven heard, and struck the insulting Army mad,
Drunk with their Cheshire Tryumps, straight they
NewLights appeared; And new Rosolves they take, had
A Single Person once again to make.
Who shall be he? Oh! Lambert, without Rub,
The fittest Devil to be Beelzebub.
He, the fierce Friend, cast out of the house before,
Returned, and threw the House now out of door:
A Legion then he raised of Armed Sprights,
Elves, Goblins, Fairies, Quakers, and new Lights,
To be his under-Divels; with this rest
He Soul and Body (Church and State) possessed:
Who though they filled all Countries, Towns, and Rooms,
Yet (like that Fiend that did frequent the Tombs)
Churches, and Sacred Ground they haunted most,
No Chapel was at ease from some such Ghost.
The Priests ordained to Exorcise those Elves,
Were Voted Devils, and cast out themselves:
Bible, or Alchoron, all is one to them,
Religion serves but for a Stratagem:
The holy Charms these Adders did not heed,
Churches themselves did Sanctuary need.
VIII.
THe Churches Patrimony and rich store,
Alas! was swallowed many years before:
Bishops and Deans we fed upon before,
They were the Ribs and Surloyns of the Whore:
Now let her Legs (the Priests) go to the Pot,
(They have the Pop's eye in them) spare them not:
We have fat Benefices yet to ear,
(Bell, and our Dragon-Army must have meat)
Let us devour her Limb-meal, great and samll,
Tithe Calves, Geese, Pigs, the Pettitoes and all:
A Vicaridge in Sippets, though it be
But small, will serve a squeamish Sectary.
Though Universities we cannot endure,
There Is no false Latin in their Lands (be sure.)
Give Oxford to our Horse, and let the Foot
Take Cambridge for their booty, and fall to it.
Christ-Church I Will have (cries Vane) Disbrow swops
At Trinity; King's is for Berry's chops;
Kelsey, take Corpus Chrifii; All Souls, Packer;
Carve Creed, St John's; New College, leave to Hacker;
Fleetwood cries, Weeping Maudlin shall be mine,
Her tears I Will drink instead of Muscadine:
The smaller Halls and Houses scarce are big
Enough to make one dish for Hesilrig;
We must be sure'to stop his mouth, though wide
Else all our Fat will bei'th' fire (they cried:
And when we have done these, we will not be quiet
Lordships, and Landlords Rents shall be our diet.
Thus talked this jolly crew, but still mine Host
Lambret, resolves that he will rule the Roast.
XI.
BUt hark! Me thinks I hear old Boreas blow,
What mean the North winds that they bluster so?
More storms from that black nook? Forbear!(bold Scot)
Let not Dunbar and Worcester be forgot:
What? Would you chasser w'us for one Charles more?
The price of Kings is fallen, give the Trade over.
And is the price of Kings and Kingdoms too,
Of Laws, Lives, Oaths, Souls, grown so low with you?
Perfidious Hypocrites! Monsters of men!
(Cries the good Monck) We'll raise their price again.
Heaven said Amen; and breathed upon that spark;
That spark (preserved alive in the cold and dark)
First kindled and enflamed the British Isle,
And turned it all to Bonfires, in a while:
He and his fuel was so small, no doubt,
Proud Lambart thought to tread, or piss the^ out.
But George was wary; -- His cause did require
A Pillar of a Cloud as well as Fire:
'Twas not his safest course to flame, but smoke;
His Enemies he will not burn, but choke:
Small Fires must not blaze out, lest by their light
They show their weakness, and their Foes invite:
But Furnaces the stroutest Metals melt
(And so did He) by fire not seen but felt:
Dark-Lanthorn Language, and his peep-boe play,
Will-E-Wispt Lambert's New-Lights out of the way.
George, and his Boys, those thousand (Ostrange thing)
Of Snipes and Woodcocks, took by Lowbelling.
His few Scotch-Coal kindled with English fire,
Made Lambert's great Newcastle heaps expire.
X.
SCotland, (though poor, and peevish) was content
To keep the Peace, and (O rare!) money lent;
But yet the blessing of their Kirk was more;
George had that too; and with this slender store
He and his Mirmidons advance -- Kind Heaven
Prepared a frost to make their march more even,
Easy, and safe; it may be said That year
Of the Highways, Heaven it self was Overfeer,
And made November ground as hard as May;
White as their Innocence, so was their way:
The Clouds came down in feather-beds, to greet
Him and his Army, and to kiss their feet.
The Frost and foes both came and went together,
Both thawed away, and vanished God knows whither.
Whole Countries crowded in to see this Friend,
Ready to cast their bodies down, to mend
His Road to Westminster; and still they shout,
Lay hold of the Rump, and pull the Monster out:
A new one, or a whole one (Good my Lord)
And to this cry the Island did accord.
The Echo of the Irish hollow ground
Heard England, and her language did rebound.
XI.
PResto -- Jack Lambert, and his Sprights are gone
To dance a Jigg with his brother Oberon:
George made him, and his cutthroats of our lives,
Swallow their Swords, as JugIers do their Knives.
And Carter Disborough to wish in vain,
He now were Waggoner to Charles his Wain.
The Conqueror is now come into the South,
Whose warm Air is made hot by every mouth;
Breathing his welcome, and in spite of Scot,
Crying, -- The whole child (Sir) divide it not.
The Rump begins to stink; Alas! (cry they)
We Have raised a Divil which we cannot lay;
I like him not -- His belly is so big,
There Is a King in it, cries furious Hesilrig,
Let Us brib Him (they cry all) Carve him a share
Of our stolen Venison. -- Varlet, forbear,
In vain you put your Lime-twiggs to his Hands
Gorge Monck is for the King, not for his Lands.
When fair means would not do, next foul they try,
Vote him the City Scavenger (they cry)
Send him to scowr their Streets -- Well, let it be,
Your Rumpships wants a scowring too (thinks he)
That fonl House where your Worships many year
Have laid your Tail, sure wants a Scavenger:
I smell your Fizle, though it make no Crack,
You Would mount me on the Cities galled back,
In hope she will cast her Rider: If I must
Upon some Office in the Town be thrust,
I Will be their Sword Bearer- and to their Dagger
I Will join my Sword: -- Nay (goodRump) do not swagger:
The City feasts me, and as sure as Gun)
I Will mend all Englands Commons e're I Have done.
XII.
ANd so He did: One Morning next his heart
He goes to Westminster, and played his part,
He vampt their Boots (which Hewson never could do)
With better leather, and made them go upright too.
The restored Members (Cato like no doubt)
Did only Enter that They might go out,
They did not mean within those VValls to dwell,
Nor did they like their Company so well:
Yet Heaven so blessed them, that in three weeks space
They gave both Church and State a better face,
They gave Booth, Massey, Brown, some kinder lots;
The last years Traitors, this years Patriots:
The Churches poor Remainder they made good,
And washed the Nations Hands of Royal Blood,
And that a Parliament (they did devise)
From its own ashes (Phoenix-like) might rise;
This done, By Act and Deed that might not fail,
They past a Fine, and so cut off the Entail.
XIII.
LEt the Bells ring these Changes now from Bow
Down to the Country Candlesticks below,
Ringers Hands of; The Bells themselves will dance
In memory of their own deliverance:
Had not George showed his Mettle, and said Nay,
Each Sectary had born the Bell away:
Down with them all, they are Christened (cried that Crew)
Tie up their Clappers, and the Parsons too;
Turn then to Guns, or sell them to the Dutch,
Nay, hold (quoth George) my Masters, that is too much;
You will not leap over Steeples thus, I hope,
I Will save the Bells, but you may take the Rope.
Thus lay Religion panting for her life,
Like Isaac, bound under the bloody knife;
George held the falling Weapon, saved the Lamb:
Let Lambert (in the Briars) be the Ram.
So lay the Royal Virgin (as it is told)
When brave St George redeemed her life, of old.
Oh that the Knaves that have consumed our Land,
Had but permitted VVood enough to stand
To be his Bonfires; -- VVe'd burn every stem,
And leave no more but Gallow-Trees for them:
XIV.
MArch on, Great Heore! as thou have begun,
And Crown our happiness before Thou Have done:
We have another Charles to fetch from Spain,
Be thou the George to bring him back again:
Then shall thou be (what was denied that Knight)
Thy Princes, and the Peoples Favorite.
There is no danger of the winds at all,
Unless together by the Ears they fall,
Who shall the honor have to waft a King,
And they who gain it, while they work, shall sing.
Methinks I see how those tryumphant Gales,
Proud of the great Employment, swel the Sails;
The Joyful ship shall dance, the Sea shall laugh,
And loyal Fish their Masters health shall quaff;
See how the Dolphins crowd and thrust their large
And scaly shoulders, to assist the Barge:
The peaceful Kingfishers are met togother
About the Decks, and prophecy calm weather,
Poor Crabs and Lobsters are gone down to creep
And search for Pearls and Jewels in the deep;
And when they have the booty -- crawl before
And leave them for his welcome to the Shore.
XV.
MEthinks I see how throngs of people stand
Scarce patient till the Vessel come to land,
Ready to leap in, and if need require
With Tears of Joy to make the waters higher:
But what will London do? I doubt Old Paul
With bowing to his Sovereign will fall.
The Royal Lions from the Tower shall roar,
And though they see him not, yet shall adore:
The Conduits will be ravished, and combine
To turn their very water into wine:
And for the Citizens, I only pray
They may not overjoyed all dye that day.
May we all live more loyal and more true,
To give to Caesar and to God their due.
We Will make his Fathers Tomb with tears to swim,
And for the Son, we'll shed our blood for him:
England her penitential Song shall sing
And take heed how she quarrels with her King.
If for our sins -- Our Prince shall be misled,
We'll bite our nails rather then scratch our Head.
XVI.
ONe English George out-weighs alone (by odds)
A whole Committee of the Heathen Gods;
Pronounce but Monck, and it is all his due)
He is our Mercury, Mars, and Neptune too.
Monck (what great Xerxes could not) proved the Man
That with a word shackled the Ocean;
He shall command Neptune himself to bring
His Trident, and present it to our King.
Oh do it then great Admiral. -- Away,
Let him be here against St George's day;
That Charles may wear His Dieu et Mondroit,
And Thou the Noble Garter'd Honi Soit.
And when thy aged Corpse shall yield to Fate,
God save that soul that saved our Church and State:
There thou shall have a glorious Crown, I know,
Who Crown'dst our King and Kingdoms here below.
But who shall find a Pen fit for thy glory?
Or make Posterity believe thy Story.
Vive St GEORGE.

