THE RECANTATION Of a Penitent PROTEUS Or the CHANGLING, AS It was Acted with
good Applause in St. Mary's in Cambridge, and St. Paul's in London, 1663.
To the Tune of Doctor Faustus.
ATtend good people, lay by scoffs and scorns,
Let Roundheads all this day pull in their horns,
But let Conformists and brave Caviliers
Unto my doleful Tone prick up their Ears.
Take from my neck this Robe, a Rope's more fit,
And turn the Surplice to a Penance-Sheet,
This Pulpit is too good to act my part,
More fit to preach at Tyburn in a Cart:
There I deserved to have taken my degree,
And Doctor Dun should have presented me,
There with an hempen- hood I should be sped,
And his three-cornered Cap should crown my head.
Here I am come to hold up guilty hand,
And of the Beast to give my self the Brand,
Here by confessing I have been in the wrong,
I come to bore my self through my own Tongue.
In learning my poor Parents brought up me,
And sent me to the Universitie,
There I soon found bowing the was to rise:
And the only Logic was the Fall'cies.
In stead of Aristo^les Organon,
Anthens and Organs I did study on,
If I could play on them, I soon did find,
I rightly had p^eferment in the Wind,
I followed that hot sent without control,
I bowed my body, and I sung Fa Sol;
I cozened Doctor Couzens, and e're long
A Fellowship obtained For a Song.
Then by degrees I clim'd until I got
Good friends, good Cloths, good Commons, and what not
I got so long, until at length I got
A Wench with Child, and then I got a Blot.
Before the Consistory I was tried,
Where like a Villain I both swore and ly'd,
And from the Whore I made, I was made free,
By purging of my self incontinent LEE.
B^t as I scorned to Father mine one Brat,
'Twas done to me as I had done with That.
The Doctors all when a Doctor I would be,
As a base Son, refused to Father me,
With much ado, at length by art and cunning,
My Tears and Vows prevailed with Peter Gunning,
Me to adopt and for his love and care,
I will devout my self to Peter's Chair.
Cambridge I left with grief and great disgrace,
To seek my fortune in some other place;
And that I might the better save my stake*
I took an Order and did Orders take.
Amongst Conformists I my self did list
A Son o'th Church as good as ever pi^t.
But though I bowed, and cring'd, and crossed and all,
I only got a Vicaridge very small.
E're I was warm (and warm I never had been
In such a starved hole as I was in)
A fire upon the Church and Kingdom came;
Which I strait helped to blow into a flame.
The Second Part.
MY Conscience first like Balaams Ass, was shie,
Boggled, and winc'd, which when I did epsy;
I cudgel'd her, and spurred her on each side,
Until the Jade her paces all could ride.
When first I mounted on her tender Back
She would not leave the Protestant dull Rack.
Till in her Mouth the Covenant Bitte I got,
And made her learn the Presbyterian Trot.
'Twas an hard T^ot, and freted her (alas
'T^e ^ndeo^nd^^ Amble easier was,
I^^^ght her that, and out of that to fall
To the ^^ntroy of Prelaticall.
I rode her once to Rumford with a pack
Of Arguments for Covenant on her back.
That Journey she performed at such a rate
The Committee gave me a rich piece of Plate.
From Hatfield to St. Albans I did ride,
The Army called for me to be their Guide,
There I so spurred her that I made her fling
Not only dirt but blood upon my King.
When Cromwell turned his Masters out by force;
I made the Beast draw like a Brewers horse,
Under the Rump I made her were a Crooper,
And under Lambert she became a Trooper.
When Noble Monk the King did home conveigh,
She (like Darius steed began to Neigh.
I taught her since to Organ Pipes to Prance,
As Banks his Horse could to a fiddle dance,
Now with a Snaffle or a Twyned Thread
To any Government she will turn her head
I have so broke her she does never start,
And that's the meaning of my broken heart.
I have found out a cunning way with ease
To make her cast her Coat when e're I please;
And if at Rack and Manger she may be,
Her Colts Tooth She will keep most wanton-LEE.
I Will change as often as the Man in the Moon;
His frequent Changing makes him rise so soon,
To eat Church Plum-broth e're it all be gone,
I Will have the, Devils spoon but I Will have One.
For many years my Tongue did lick the Rump;
But when I saw a King was turn up Trump,
I did resolve still in my hand to have
One winning Card, although 'twere but a Knave.
If the great Turk to England come, I can
Make Gospel truckle to the Alchoran;
And if their Turkish Saboaths should take place.
I have in readiness my Friday Face.
If locked in Iron Chest (as we are told)
A Loadstone their great Mahomet can hold:
The Loadstone of preferment (I presage)
To Mahomet may draw this Iron Age.
The Congregation way best pleased my mind;
There were most She Is, and they most free and kind.
By Chamber practice I did better thrive
Then all my livings though I Skimmed five.
Mine eyes are open now my sins to see,
With tears I cry Good people pardon me,
My Reverend Fathers pardon I do crave,
And hope my Mothers blessing yet to have.
My Cambridge sins, my Bugden sins are vile,
My Essex sins, my sins in Ely-Isle,
My Leicester sins, my Hatfield sins are many,
But my St. Albans sins more red then any.
To CHARLES the first I was a bloody Foe,
I wish I do not serve the second so,
The only way to make me leave that trick,
Is to bestow on me a Bishopric
This is St Andrews Eve and for his sake
A Bishopric in Scotland I could take;
And though a Metropolitan there be;
I Would be as Sharp and full as Arch as he.
Now may this Sermon never be forgot,
Let others called a Sermon, I a Plot,
A Plot that takes if it believed be,
If not I shall repent unfeigned LEE
I must desire the Crack-fart of the Nation,
With Reverence to let fly this Recantation,
Our Names tied tail to tail make a sweet Change
Mine only is Stange Lee, and his Le-Strange.
FINIS.

