THE WAY TO HEAVEN BY WATER, Concomitated, By the Sweet-breathing gales of the
Spirit: Wherein, the Point of Original sin is touched; Infants Baptisime
justified, and how far the guilt of Original sin, in the Elect, is therein
ordinarily removed, etc.

Delivered in several Lectures at Kingston upon Hull, by JOHN WAIT, B.D. and
Lecturer there for the present.

JOHN, 3.5, 6. Jesus answered, verily, verily, I say unto you; except a man be
borne again of Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
GOD.

That which is borne of the Flesh, is Flesh; and that which is borne of the
Spirit, is Spirit.

Imprimatur,

Ja: Craford.
December: 2, 1644.


YORK: Printed by Tho: Broad, Anno Dom. 1645.

To the Right Worshipful, Nicholas Denman, Mayor of the Town of Kingston upon
Hull, and to the worshipful, the rest of his Brethren: John Wait in all humble
acknowledgement of his many received favors, dedicateth these his Water-workes.
GEntlemen, it was the saying of that blessed Saint, Acts 3.6. aurum, and
argentunt non est mihi, silver and gold have I none, but such as I have, I give
unto you. Ingratitude is a great defect in duty; but qui beneficitan grate
accepit, says that sententious Seneca lib. 2. de beneficiis cap. 22. primam
ejus ponsionem solvit; he that receives a kindness thankfully, thereby
discharges his first payment. I desire to be no worse, Officia etiam ferae
fentiunt, lib. 1. de ben. cap. 3 even Beasts themselves that have but instinct
of nature, and want real reason, yet can be sensible of kindnesses done unto
them. I came amongst you as a stranger, you received me as a friend, as a
Christian; yea, as a Minister of Christ, allowed me competent maintenance to
support my self in these cloudy and unhappy days: let it be left upon record
for a memorial, and encomium of Kingstone, that its a Town courteous, kind,
respective, generous, and liberal to such as labor in it in the Word and
Doctrine: a Town neither in docile, nor kicking against the pricks: many of
you have seen Gods wonders in the Waters, as the Prophet speaks, Psalm.
107.23, 24, etc. And he that shall but read the Poet, lib. 1. de Tristibus
elegia tertia, Me miserum, quantis nigrescunt aequora ventis,
Erut aque eximis ferver arena fretis,
Monte nec inferior, prorae puppique recurvae,
Insilit, and pictos verberat vnda Deos, etc.


As it follows, might easily be persuaded that the Poet had stolen it out of
the Prophet: seeing that the Scriptures were translated into the Greek Tongue,
by the Septuagint many years before Ovids time: for diverse Historians rank him
born within 60. years before Christ; yea, Saturni Ephemerides, not 50. before
he was born in Augustus his time (in whose reign we know our Savior was also
born, as you may see, Luke 2.1. compared with v. 7. Some Historians say, he was
banished by the Emperor the 9. year of Christ, and dyed in banishment, Anno
Christi 16. So that being Ore vtroque potens, a man skillful in both the Greek
and Latin Tongues; it was very probable, that he saw the Scriptures after they
were translated. In like manner he seconds himself, lib. 2.

Nunc quoque contenti strident Aquilone rudentes,
Inque modum tumuli ^rneavu surgit aqua,
Ipse gubernator tollens ad sydera palmat.
Exposuit votis, immemor artis, opern,
Quocumque aspexi nibil est nisi mortis imago.
Quam dubia timeo menti, timensque precor, etc.
Attigero Portam, etc.
Compare this with Psalm. 107. from 25. to 31. I know that the most ooyu want
not so much learning, but that you are able to conceive of it But more of you
have seen Gods wonders by Land, and what great things he has done for you
already, whereof you have cause to rejoice; for my self, I may say with the
Prophet, Psalm. 31.21. The Lord has showed me mavelous great kindness, in a
strong City; and as for you, and it, it shall be my care to pray for your
prosperity, that God would still watch over you, and that Peace may be within
your Walls, that you may never know the common misery of other men, in these
calamitous times, wherein I have deeply had my share. It is not unknown to the
World, how God had blessed me with a competencie, near the place of my
Nativity, and I might say with Job. Job. 29.2, 3, 4. Oh that I were as in times
past, when God preserved me, when his light shined upon my head, and when by
his light I walked through darkness, As I was in the days of my youth, when
Gods providence shined upon my Tabernacle. But as the poor Exile complained, En
ego, cum patria caream, vobisque domoque,
Raptaque sint, adimi quae potuere mihi,
Ingenio tamen ipse meo comitorque fruorque,
Caesar in hoc potuit, juris habere nihil.


Which I think may not unfitly be rendered thus; Behold my Countries wanting,
(wherein I
Was borne,) Friends, Houses, where I meant to dye,
All I possessed is clean swept away,
Which unto Rogues and Rapin open lay.
Only the gifts of mind, God left as free,
Of which great Princes cannot plunder me.


Yet safely I may add: Ipse ego nunc miror, tantis animique finistris,
Fluctbus, ingenium non cecidisse meum.


Sure I am, that if Gods mercy had not bin many; so great, and grievous
crosses, and losses, and disgraces, as have fallen upon many of the faithful
Ministers of Christ, had been able to have marred their precious wits, and to
have defaced the richest of their gifts: but, Gentlemen, the Lord preserve you
and yours, as in a Land of Goshen, under whose protection, let those lines
walk, of which you have been both the attentive Hearers, and worthy Rewarders:
Thus he commits you to God,

Who is yours, and the Churches Servant, JOHN WAIT.

THE WAY TO HEAVEN BY WATER, Concomitated with the sweet breathing Gales of
the SPIRIT.
JOHN 3.5, 6. Jesus answered, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be
born again of Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh; and that which is born of the
Spirit, is Spirit.


IN this Chapter we have a Divine Dialogue between a most illuminate Doctor,
and a blind Pharisie, Christ and Nicodemus: the Pharisees were chief among the
Jews, but Nicodemus was one of the chief among the Pharisees; he was a Teacher
in Israel, ver. 10. a Ruler of the Jews, v. 1. The Pharisie had got the leading
of all others in a threefold respect: 1. In regard of the repute of their
Learning Mat. 23.2. They sat in Moses Chair, and were accounted for their
knowledge the only Rabbis of those Times, 2. For their Piety, they were
supposed to be the most religious and strict Sect: of this Sect was Paul before
his conversion, Phil. 3.5. By (...) a Pharisie; yea, and Act. 23.6. a Pharisie,
says Paul, and the Son of a Pharisie. And Acts 26.5. After the most strict
Sect of our Religion, I lived a Pharisie: For such was the peoples opinion of
their Piety, though they were Arch-Hypocrites, painted Sepulchers, both proud
and covetous, and the greatest enemies that Christ had among the Jews. How
often does Christ pronounce woes against them, together with the Scribes, and
brands them for their Hypocrisy, Mat. 23. no less then eight times; Woe unto
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, 1. They shut the Kingdom of Heaven against
men, v. 13. They kept back from them the key of pure Religion that should have
made way to enter, and stopped it up by their own tradition. 2. v. 16.
notwithstanding all their supposed knowledge, Christ calls them blind guides:
they wanted the light of Gods Spirit to distinguish between Truth and Falsehood.
3. But outwardly righteous, v. 28. 4. And lastly, they had more Authority in
matters Ecclesiastical, than any others had, John 1.24. the Jews sent them to
examine John Baptist, they that were sent were of the Pharisees; and v. 19.
those Pharisees that were sent, were Priests and Levites, and the chief of them
had Officers to send out, John 7.45. Then came the officers of the high Priests
and Pharisees; And v. 48. Do any of the Rulers of the Pharisees believe on him?
yea, Nicodemus that was one of the chief Rulers, v. 50. yet though he was a
great man, they began to fear him: when they perceived that his judgment was
biased with any good opinion concerning Christ, v. 52. Art thou also of
Galilee?

After Nicodemus had been with Christ, though then full of doubting, and full
of fear, being a great man, and then one that lived in great pomp and command,
and such men you know are put to it; when the question lies, whether they will
forsake their sinful pomp, and follow Piety, or forsake Piety, and follow
their sinful pomp: they would go to Heaven, but they think ill to be
persecuted for Christ, and Religions sake: Let such remember what Christ
endured for them, what contradiction of sinners he suffered; let them set that
before them, and it may the more encourage them. This Nicodemus, I say, after
he had bin with Christ, his journey was not altogether fruitless; he gained so
much from Christ, as wrought upon him, and did so much change his mind, that
all his life long he was afterward better affected There is twice mention made
of him after this Time, and this going to Jesus by night, is inserted in both
places once, John 7.5. And Nicodemus said unto him, he that came to Jesus by
night, etc in the next verse, does our Law judge any man before it hear him,
etc. And secondly, Job. 19.39. when Christ was to be buried, he also joined
with Joseph of Arimathea. There came also Nicodemus which first came to Jesus
by night, etc. Joseph of Arimathea was a great man in the Civil State, a
famous Counselor, he was one of Jesus his Disciples, but secretly, for fear
of the Jews: Nicodemus a great Ruler in the Ecclesiastical State, but came by
night; both of them great men, yet afraid of the Jews; But now after his
death, both are more manifest. Oh, the sweetness of true grace, where it is
once infused, it will grow, and embolden such as have it. Joseph and Nicodemus
grow better and better, and more emboldened, than at the first: You have heard,
that both of them were great men, Stars of a great Magnitude in their several
Orbs, yet not to great to learn the way to Heaven.

Secondly, all the knowledge they had without this knowledge of Christ, could
not have made them happy. This may teach great men not to be too proud, to
submit their necks to Christ's yoke, and to labor for that wisdom in Gods
Word, that the World cannot afford them, 1 Cor. 1.20. Has not God made the
wisdom of this world foolishness? Alas, the height of the wisdom of this
world is but to teach a man how to live like a Politician, never how to dye
like a Christian. So that he that has no more then that, has no more then
Aristotle, and Plato had, and the very Heathen that knew not God. The Doctrine
of Christ is usually more slighted of men that boast of their carnal
knowledge, than any other men. Alas, poor souls, the greatest part of what
they know, is the least part of what they know not: Nicodemus we hear, was a
learned Pharisie, and for contemplative knowledge in the Law, no doubt an able
man: yet notwithstanding in point of regeneration a very novice; a child of
seven years old would scarcely have answered as he did: for when our Savior
told him of being born again, what? says Niondemus, when he heard this, v. 4.
Can a man be born again which is old, can be enter into his Mothers Womb again
and be born? And v. 9. How, says Nicodemus, can these things be? Art thou a
Teacher in Israel, says our Savior, and knows not these things. 2. Tim. 4.2.
Paul instructing Timothy how to preach, tells him, that he must rebuke, as well
as exhort: Christ Jesus gives example for it; for he you see, rebuked
Nicodemus, as well as else where instructed him what to do q.d. if thou be a
Teacher in Israel, it behooves thee to understand such things as come within the
compass of thine office: Maye^ thou not learn out of the Law, and the
Prophets, that all men are sinners, and that sin deserves Gods curse, and
that there is no way to blot them out, bu^ by the blood of Christ, and that
applied by Faith? have thou not read in the Scriptures, 2 King. 5.14. how
Naaman did wash, and was cleansed of his Leprosy? Might not this have taught
thee, that we must bewashed in the Fou^tain of regeneration, before we can be
ordinarily cleansed of the Leprosy (...) original sin? Have thou not read,
Ezekiel. 36.25. I Will power clean water upon them, and they shall be clean, etc.
have thou not read, Zach. 13.1. how a fou^tain should be opened to the House of
David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusal^^ for sin, and for uncleanness? Art
thou a Teacher, and know not by the places the necessity of regeneration? if
thou be blind that art a Teacher, (...) should the people have light, Mat.
23.2. the Scribes and Pharisees ^a^e in M^ses Chair, and Romans 2.19. persuaded
themselves that they were guides of the blind, and a light of them that were in
darkness; but what a light art thou, that knows not this point? yet though
Christ Jesus thus reproved him, of all the Pharisees that we read of, he did
the most kindly and freely reason with him and instruct him, because he came
honestly and plainly to learn of Christ how to be saved; but the rest came
either to catch him in his talk, or else to reason with him out of envy to
dishonor and disgrace him, and then he either answers not at all, as Mat.
21.27. he would not tell them by what authority he taught; or else answers
sharply, so that they had no great mind to meddle with him, Mat. 22.18. Why
tempt ye meye Hypocrites? and if he spoke what they understood not, they were
too proud to be instructed in the meaning. Nicodemus was not so, John 2.19.
when he bid them destroy the Temple, and that in three days, he would build it
up again: in the next verse they reply frowardly, 46. years was this Temple in
building, etc. Thus he spoke of the Temple of his body, but they understood
not, nor desired. And John 8.21. when he had said, Whither I go ye cannot
come. In the next verse they reply, what will he kill himself, because he
says, whither I go ye cannot come, etc. thus when the speeches were dark, they
never desired to know the meaning of them of Christ, as Nicodemus did: for when
Christ had told him of being born again, and he knew not the meaning of it;
yet he behaves not himself like them, nor was to proud to learn, but never
lets Christ rest until he knew the meaning of it; and our Savior seeing him
bent to learn, was as willing to teach him, as here in the Text, Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, that except a man be born again of Water and the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, etc.

In the words of the Text we have these five particulars. 1. A vehement
asseveration, Amen, amen, dico tibi, Verily, verily, I say unto thee. 2. A
change of Life's specification, except a man be born again. 3. The manner of it,
of Water, and the Spirit. 4. The necessity of it, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. 5. Lastly, the reason of it in the latter verse, that which is
born of the Flesh is Flesh, and that which is borne of the Spirit is Spirit. In
order, and first of the vehement asseveration, Jesus answered, verily, verily,
I say unto thee. Jesus answered, that was more you have heard, than he would do
to many of his fellow Rulers. 2. He answered him courteously, and that was more
than he would do to any of them when he did answer. 3. He answers earnestly,
and with a vehement asseveration, as arguing that he desired, to have him
understand the Truth: for you shall never find our Savior using this
asseveration but upon weighty business; and in the Gospel of Saint John more
usually than any where else. Here its doubled, verily, verily, I say unto thee.
Amen, Amen, The word (Amen) is in all the Cardinal Languages its Amen, in the
Hebrew; Amen, in the Greek; and Amen, in the Latin; and we so continue it in
the English in many places; the reason is this, The Septuagint who first
translated the Hebrew Text into Greek, they left is untranslated. The Latin
Interpreters finding it so left of them, they left it so to. Our English
Translators finding it so left of the Latin, they left it in most places so
too. Thus again v. 11. verily, verily, I say unto thee, we speak what we know,
and thou may believe what I say unto thee. I speak authoritative, by that
authority which I have received from the Father; and therefore Mat. 7. two last
verses, it is said, That when Christ had ended his word, the people were
astonished at his Doctrine, For he taught them as one having authority, and not
as the Scribes: the majesty and power of Gods Spirit appeared in his speeches,
they felt the dint of them upon their Consciences, and were not able to
withstand the power of the Spirit by which he spoke, John 7. from 45. forward,
Then came the Officers of the High Priests and Pharisees, and they say unto
them, why have ye not brought him? the Officers answered, never manspoke like
this man. How happy was Nicodemus then to have this man speaking unto him; but
the Pharisees said, are ye also deceived; q.d. we took you to have bin
faithful and firm Officers to us, to have executed our pleasure upon this
deceiver. Nunquid et vos seducti estis; and are ye also deceived? Does any of
the Rulers of the Pharisees, believe in him? yea, John 12.42. many of them, but
durst not profess him, for fear of you; it was more than they knew: and here
Nicodemus one of them, Believes in him, yet durst not let them know as much,
q.d. If he had been a true Prophet, and if his Doctrine had bin from Heaven,
do not you think, that many so wise, and so learned men, and so religious men
would not have received him, and it: No, for Christ and his Doctrine were
received of more poor men, then rich Rulers, and great Potentates of the World,
Mat. 11.5. The poor receive the Gospel, Jam. 2.5. Has not God chosen the
poor, rich in Faith, 1 Cor. 1.26. Brethren you see your calling, how that not
many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. And
Jer. 5.45. as though the poor did not receive correction, nor turn unto God
when they were smitten, yet the Prophet thought that the great men and Rulers
understood more, had bin better educated, could conceive better of Gods Truth.
I said of the other, that they were poor and foolish, and undestood not Gods
way, but he supposed that the great men knew the judgments of their God, but
they proved the worse; for they had altogether broken the yoke, and burst the
bonds. It was therefore an ill Argument, moan of the Rulers nor Pharisees
believed on him; ergo, others might not lawfully do it, or his Doctrine was not
of God. As for this people that know not the Law, that know not the meaning,
nor interpretation of it, as we do, they are accursed: Thus basely and
contemptibly they spoke of those that believed on Christ; these you see, are
but a poor, base, and abject people, come of no great stock, nor bred in any
famous Schools of the Pharisees, what great matter is it what they do: thus
they vent their pride, and labor to block up the passage of Christianity:
well, but Mat. 11.25. these things were hid from the wise and men of
understanding, God opened them unto Babes; And if the people knew not the Law,
the more shame for themselves that should have taught them. Again, if the
people did but follow him that did not know the Law, it seems that it was but
of ignorance that the people did sin, if they had offended in following
Christ. But many of themselves sinned of knowledge, and set malice, therefore
by consequence they will excuse the People, and accuse themselves. But it may
be objected, Mat. 5.37. that our Savior taught, That our communication should
be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever was more came of evil And Jam. 5.12.
let your yea be yea, and nay, nay, lest ye fall into condemnation: but our
Savior seems to use more here; for he does not simply affirm, but with a
double asseveration, verily, verily, I say unto thee.

I answer, the meaning of the words is, that we should simply, sincerely, and
truly affirm what we affirm, without dissembling, oaths, vows, or the like in
our ordinary talk. And secondly, I answer, that this asseveration was but a
more graduall Yea, and vehement than ordinary; or a more intensive Yea: And
thirdly, this were upon a weighty point; otherwise Christ did not use it, and
so in him it was no offense: he did not sin, neither was any guile found in
his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. Blasphemy therefore was that of the Pharisees, who
said, that they knew that this man was a sinner, John 9.24. Then Jesus
answered, and said, verily, verily, I say unto thee, I am the way, the truth,
and the life, John 14.6. and no man comes unto the Father but by me. I am the
Way without wandering, the Truth without error, the Life without death; yea, I
am the Resurrection, and the Life, if any man believe in me, though he were
dead, yet should be live. John 11.25. I that am the good Shepherd, that lay
down my life for my sheep, I say unto thee therefore, mark what I say, 1. Unto
thee blind Pharisee that had too much conceit of the knowledge of the Law, or
else thou might have had more knowledge of the Gospel. 2. A man ignorant of a
main necessary Truth; namely, of the new Birth of regeneration, and continuing
without this, might have dyed and bin damned in Hellfire. 3. Unto thee,
halting between two opinions, between Moses, and the Messiah, whether thou
should embrace; whereas if thou had believed Moses, thou had believed me, for
he writ of me: yet 4. unto ye, because though weak, yet mindful to be made
stronger: therefore, I will not despise thee, nor loath the tediousness of
teaching of thee; for thus it was prophesied of me, Esa 42.3. a bruised reed
shall be not break, nor smoking Flax shall he quench; such art thou, and I
will fulfill the Prophecy 5. Lastly, I say unto thee, though thou came unto me
by night, when I should have reposed my self, and have taken rest, an
unseasonable time, yet I upbraided thee not, nor stood upon it with thee, nor
reproved thee for incivility, but seeing thou was so fearful and weak, thou
durst not come by day; I Will receive thee kindly, take pains with thee, and
teach thee by night: this for the first part.

The second follows, the change of life specified, Except a man be born again;
this (again) notes once being born before; so that hence it appears, that there
is a double Birth, as in Scripture we read of a double death, the first and
the second Death: The first is nothing but separation of soul from body: the
second is a separation both of body and soul from God eternally, Revel. 2.11.
He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death; and what this second
is, you may further see, Rev. 21.8. In the Scriptures we also read of a double
Resurrection, 1. and 2. Rev. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the
first Resurrection, of such the second death has no power: The first
Resurrection, I conceive, (as do many others) to be the resurrection from the
dead estate of sin, to newness of life; so that the first Resurrection, is
the second Birth, Ephesians. 2.1. there is a spiritual Death, and from that, a
spiritual Resurrection; And you has he quickened, that were dead in trespasses
and sins, and this quickening was in Christ, v. 5.1 Pet. 1.23. being born a n^w,
not of mortal Seed, (for so is our Natural Birth) So is our first Birth, but
of immortal by the Word of God, who lives, and endures for ever: there is
our second Birth, far more noble than our first, Luke 8.11. the Seed is the
Word of God. In this Birth they have power to be the Sons of God, John 1.12.
and they are said to be borne of God, 1 Io. 5.1. because they are born anew by
the working of Gods holy Spirit in them: this is the change of life, being born
thus again, except a man be borne again.

1. This being born again, is that which few men eye, but at being borne, Claro
de Stemmale of some noble race, o^ b^oud, that pustes us up as if we were more
than men. I remember I have sometimes read a passage between an upstart
Gentleman, and a facc^tious Herald; the Herald persuaded this Gentleman of the
first Head, that he was able to derive his Pedigree lineally from Adam; This
parchment Gentleman was very importunate to have it effected; but upon second
thoughts, the Herald told him, he had better remain as he was: because, the
nearer (quoth he) that we come unto Adam, such poor men as I shall be found of
kin to you. Truly spoken, all mankind, rich, and poor, are made of the same
Elements.

2. All of them have souls given them of God that are immortal. 3. All are
born naked, there is no King that has any other Birth. 4 All are equally
subject to death; the Poet truly observed as much, when he said, aequopede
puisat mors pauperum tabernas regumque turres. 5. All are equally subject to be
turned again into dust, and to be dissolved into their first principles, and
what better dust do the rich make then the poor? The Scriptures tells us, that
God made of one blood, all Nations under Heaven. Diogenes therefore to quell
the pride of A exander, wh^ bore himself so much by his descent, when he heard
that be was to march that way, got him into the place wherein his, father
Philip had bin buried, and busied himself in tumbling over dead men's bones with
the end of his staff; whom, when Alexander saw, he must needs know the reason
of his employment. I said Diogenes, am here seeking the bones of Philip thy
Father, but they are so like to poor men's that I cannot know them. This might
give Alexander an hint what his pride would come to after his death; Genesis 3.19.
Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return, belongs to all men alike; though
in civil respects God makes a difference, as by qualification of mind, or
exaltation to office, or by the meritorious managing of some humane affairs,
etc. and herein honor to whom honor belongs. Yet alas, small advantage will
this be to them in any spiritual respect, or in matter of salvation; for in
this sense, God is no respecter of persons, Acts 10.34. Therefore, though they
may own the former birth, yet let them labor for the second, and take more
delight in it, and be more thankful to God for their personal worth, than
for their lineall: the former may be advantageous for the next world, but the
latter only for this; Nam genus, and proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi, vix
eanostra voco; as the Poet, That which our kindred, and forefathers have done,
in which we have had no hand, we can scarcely own for ours.

So that as Christ said of food, I say of blood; labor not for the food that
perishes, so labor not for the blood that perishes. It Is a wonder to hear
what hours ambitious men take up in wearying of men's ears, with relating from
how many great personages they are descended, to how many such like they are of
kindred; to how many allied, etc. what famous acts these and these have done:
it may be so, their times afforded them honor for it, and their posterity
others esteem for their sake: but in the mean time what have themselves done;
Their Ancestors I fear, dyed without Executors of any of their Heroic Acts:
the most that any of them have done, is to talk of them in a Tavern; to swear
big at an Ordinary; to fight with shield of Brawne; to flash shoulders of
Mutton, and use the case shot of Olives, and Capers; to march under the colors
of Sack, and Claret, and to give fire upon their friends in a Tobacco pipe,
egregias sane lauds and spolia amplarefertis. Surely, noble achievements, and
high estimates to men of such Memorials, let them know, that God requires
another kind of nobleness, another kind of action to bring them to Heaven; not
the first birth will do this, but being born again. Nisi quis natus
fueritdenua, except a man be born again.

I come now to the manner of it; it must be of Water, and the Spirit; except a
man be born again of Water, and the Spirit. Learned Interpreters are somewhat
troubled about these words; especially, about the word (Water) all agree in
this, that we must be born again, only, de modo, de medio, or de necessitate
medij, is the question, about the manner of our being born again, or the medium
of it, or the necessity of the medium.

Some understand the word (Water) figuratively, for the grace of Gods Spirit,
and it cannot be denied, but that in Scripture it may sometimes so signify, as
John. 4.10. He would have given the water of Life, and John 7.38. Rivers of
water of Life. Yea, but the word (Life) is added to it, which more explicates
it, as it is not in this place: Well, but John 4.14. it is not added there,
Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst
again: Yea, but this is added (the water that I shall give him) and that is
spiritual water, Esa. 44.3. is most like to favor this exposition, I will
power water upon the thirsty, (there is no addition to Water) and floods upon
the dry ground: in that place no doubt but (Water) may be taken for the
spiritual Water of Gods grace. And some would illustrate this Exposition of
the Text, by Mat. 3.11. He will baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire;
whereby (Fire) is meant the zealous and fervent grace of Gods Spirit, and is
exegeticall or expositorie of the former word. Yea, but against this
illustration it is excepted, that when a word is exegeticall it must follow the
word it expounds, not go before it, as it does here; not Water and the Holy
Ghost, but the Holy Ghost and Water. 2. That it ought to be more plain, then
that it expounds, and not more dark, as here. I answer, some reason, and truth
must be admitted in this exception. I conceive that it holds cata polu, but not
cata panto's; it holds true very often, but not always without any exception
and in all places: for sometimes one, and the same thing, one, and the same
truth may be expressed in diverse manner of speaking; metaphorical and
literal, and yet the sense aequipollente, and all one, and sometimes the
latter more dark than the former. Thus Lamen. 3.19. Remembering mine affliction
and my mourning, the Wormwood and the Gall.

Here the manner of speaking is diverse; the one sentence literal, the other
metaphorical; literal, my affliction, and my mourning; metaphorical, the
wormwood, and the gall, yet the sense aequipollent, they come to one, and the
same sense: yet the latter is more obscure then the former. 2. Take the place
of Esaiah before quoted, Es. 44.3. I Will power water upon the thirsty, and floods
upon the dry ground; then it follows, I Will power my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my
blessing upon thy Buds. Here again, the manner of speaking is diverse,
metaphorical and literal, in the words (Spirit) and (Blessing) yet the sense
is aequipollent, one and the same thing is meant by both: so they think that
the like may in this Text (Water) and the (Spirit) though the former be taken
metaphorically, the latter literally; yet the sense aequipollent: of the
Spiritual graces of God, and the Spirit present in those graces. This I have
said, to show the reasonableness of the Exposition of the Text in this sense,
and I know that diverse modern Divines so take it.

But now for the second opinion to understand the Water literally, and so of
the Water of Baptism. I conceive a difference between this speech, (Water)
the Spirit, and this, Water and the Spirit: the former may note out one, and
the same thing: the latter two distinct things. In the former instance where
the words are expositorie, or meant of one and the same thing: they are spoken
without any conjunction between them. The words run not thus, The affliction,
and the mourning: (And) the wormwood, and the gall, but thus, the affliction,
and the mourning, the wormwood, and the gall, without any (And) between them;
and the like we may observe in the latter. Esa 44.3. Rivers and floods, my
Spirit, and my Blessing. Not thus (Rivers and Floods) (And) my Spirit, and my
Blessing; for that might have argued them to have been two distinct things. For
further explication, or illustration, thus, Socrates Philosophus, And Socrates
and Philosophus may admit of diverse meanings; For Socrates Philosophus by
apposition, may be meant of one, and the same man, being a Philosopher. But
Socrates and Philosophus, Socrates and a Philosopher, may be meant of him, and
of some man else that were a Philosopher. So Water, the Spirit, may be meant of
one and the same thing; but Water (And) the Spirit may be meant of different
things; And so Christ speaks here, except a man be born again of Water and the
Spirit: of Water as the outward element, or medium of the Spirit, or of the
operatings and inward graces of God. And this sense the most of the Ancients
give of it, and take the word (Water) literally here, for the Water in
Baptism. And indeed this sense will agree with the like expresses of the
Spirit of God in Scriptures, Act. 8.36. Here is the water, says the Eunuch,
what does let me to be baptized, v. 37. more then water is required of those
that are of ripe years, and that is actual Faith. If thou beleevest with all
thine heart, thou may; the Eunuch answered Philip, I believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God; upon this he was baptized. And Ephesians. 5.26. That he
might sanctify and cleanse, by the washing of Water through the Word, through
his powerful promise made in the Word to do so. This was required in
Nicodemus, as well as the Eunuch, He was to be born again of Water and the Holy
Ghost, Titus 3.5. This washing or second birth, or being born again, is called
the new birth, by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy
Ghost. In this new birth we are washed ontwardly with water, but inwardly by
the Holy Ghost: but God is pleased to use this as an Instrument, by which he
will conveigh the graces of his holy Spirit. Some Divines think that the first
grace is not given in baptism but confirmed and sealed up. Indeed in men of
ripe years it was so required; we hear that Belief, or Faith was first
required in them before they were baptized. Others might say so, and yet felt
not the Faith they then professed; but God having given them a mind to be
baptized, might convey grace to them in their baptism. Its a great question
between us and the Papists, whether the Sacraments be instrumenta Physica or
moralia, whether they Physically convey grace to the soul, as elebore
temperature cure to the mind against Drunkenness, or any drug of medicinal
power to the Patient; Or but morally, which he uses to concomitate according
to his pleasure to make effectual as he will: for as Saint Augustine said long
ago. All that receive the Sacraments of grace, do not receive the Grace of
the Sacrament. Simon Magus was baptized as well as Simon Peter, Act. 8.13.
Simon himself believed also, and was baptized: He believed historically the
Doctrine taught; whereupon he was so far convinced, that he received baptism;
but not salvifically, v. 23. For he was still in the Gall of bitterness, and
Bond of iniquity: yet upon the outward confession of Faith, the Apostles not
knowing the secrets of his heart, he was admitted to Baptism. But it may be
some of the newly minted will quarrel me, for saying that Simon Peter was
baptized, and where I can prove it in the Scriptures? As they do for baptism
of our Children. To which I answer, That all good Christians that oportunely
might, were baptized. But Peter was a Christian, and oportunely might; Ergo,
Peter was baptized: this they must grant, except they will deny Peter to have
been a Christian; and yet we have no particular place, explicit, and totidem
terminis in Scripture, to prove this: Even so, suppose we have no particular
place explicit in Scripture, in terminis, to prove that Infants were baptized,
yet we have such general grounds for it, as out of which we may safely deduce
particulars, as we shall show hereafter. It was no small oversight in Reuben to
devide himself from the rest of the Tribes, when the common enemies threatened
them all, and for this his division there were great thoughts of heart. Its as
little difcretion, for this too highly conceipted generation, who are all for
prescribing of Laws to their brethren, but for the receiving of none; to divide
themselves from the rest of their brethren, and make a rent in the seamlesse
coat of Christ, when the common enemies would take it away all, which has been
no small grief to such as do sapere ad sobrietatem, and are not biased with
that height of singurality, and conceipted infallibility: in stead of which,
God grant unto them a greater measure of discretion, and a more common
expression of Charity. But I return, to the point, whole households were
baptized; Anabaptists, or whosoever except against baptizing of children,
cannot show, that all these whole households were without children, or that none
of them had any in. 2. Where mention is made of Baptism in Scriptures, they
are no where excepted. Which in all probability they would have been, if
Christ had meant that they should not have been baptized. 3. In no other place,
nor upon any other occasion are they forbidden. 4. From the Apostles times
downward, these 1600. years it has been the practice of the Church of God.
Origin upon Romans 6. says, That the Church received baptizing of Infants from
the Apostles themselves. And therefore Cyprian in his Epistle adfidum, would
have care taken for the baptizing of new born Infants. Cyprill upon Levit. 8.
to the like purpose. Herom. lib. 3. contra Pelagianos. August. lib. 4. contra
Donatistes, cap. 23.24. not from the authority of men, or councels, but from
the tradition, or Doctrine o^ the Apostle: what need more for so ancient and
clear a truth. 5. Mat. last, 19. Go and teach all Nations, and baptize them,
etc. But again, this place the exception is, that teaching and baptizing are
there put together; and therefore, they say, that none might be baptized, but
such as were capable of teaching. To which I answer; that there is one
consideration, de ecclesia constituenda; another, de ecclesia constituta; one
consideration of a Church but in framing, another of a Church already framed:
The Church was but in framing when the Apostles went first abroad; and then the
Church was collected of men and women of ripe years, all which were capable of
teaching, and so of baptizing, and therefore are they conjoined: and because
they were then Heathens, and had never heard of Christ, it was needful, that
such should first be preached to, and taught, before they were baptized, to
know what Baptism was, what was required to it, what was the end of it, and
the benefit that came by it; and then the immediatum subjectum baptismi in
sacris were adulti, the immediate subject of Baptism in Scriptures were men of
ripe years: then, no Infants might be baptized, but of such men as had been
first made Christians, and baptized themselves, and so being come within the
Covenant themselves, their Infants were intraducible by virtue of that.

But now, if Christ had meant that Infants should first have been baptized, not
men of ripe years, when the Church was but in framing, and was at first to be
framed, and collected, and when the Apostles first went out to preach; then, no
doubt, but Christ would have named them in particular, and sub ^a notione, as
well as others: but the Church was not first framed, and gathered of such, but
of their Parents, and so they induce their privilege: Yet they were but the
secundarium, or mediatum subjectum baptismi; and therefore it will not follow:
that because Teaching was joined with Baptizing, when the Church was first to
be collected of the Gentiles, and Heathen people, and men of ripe years; as
then the immediate subject of it, that therefore none might afterward be
baptized, but such as were capable of Teaching.

2 When our Savior said, Go teach, and baptize all Nations, he made no
exception of Infants in their Order, out of the Commission general: as thus,
Go ye, and teach all Nations, and baptize such as are capable of Teaching, but
no Children, or Infants, or none else: No, but thus, Go, and teach all
Nations, and baptize them, excepting neither small nor great, young nor old.

3 Go therefore and teach all Nations, as many as are capable of Teaching, and
baptize them first, as the immediate subject of it, as you have heard, and then
all others that are theirs by virtue of them.

4 The word in the origin all is matheteusate, to coin a word Discipulate, make
Disciple; now they might make Disciples, Baptismi administatione, as well as
verbi praedicatione, by admitting them into the visible Church by baptism, as
well as by preaching unto them.

5 Illustrate it thus: Suppose a mighty Prince should send a Message into the
West Indies, into all the parts thereof, and make it known unto them, that he
would be their King, and labor for their welfare, maintain and defend them
against all their enemies, and graciously accept of them for his subjects: Do
you think that the people then of ripe years, that were capable of the
Message, and to whom it was immediately sent, would conceive themselves
concerned in that Message, and Covenant, and none else? Surely no, but though
they were the immediate subjects to receive it first, yet they would conceive
that it should also extend as well unto their children, by virtue of them; even
so, conceive it here.

6 The Jewish children were to be circumcised at 8. days old, and our Baptism
succeeds their Circumcision, Col. 2.11, 12. and why then not the like subject
in the one, as in the other? I know, the common exception; because they say,
there is an express command for the one, and not for the other. I answer, that
there is command in general for the one, from which the particular may soundly
be deduced, as well as for the other. 2. No good reason can be rendered why the
Seal of the Govenant should not as soon be applied to the children of
Christians, as to the children of the Jews, they are under no less privilege
than they. 3. There is no hinderance in the subject of Christian children, but
want of understanding, and that also was equally wanting to the children of the
Jews; and if that be the reason, it might as well have hindered them: But this,
I conceive, it may be said of them, as Christ did of Peter, about the washing
of his feet, John 13.7. What I do, thou know not now, but thou shall know
it hereafter. So, though what Christ does to Infants, they know not then, yet
they shall know it afterward; for though the act of Baptism be transient, yet
the virtue is permanent. 4. The Kingdom of Heaven is theirs, and to such it
belongs: and why then not Baptism, as the way thither?

7. And lastly, We find in Scripture, Infants baptized; as thus, 1 Cor. 10.1,
2. All our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and
were all baptized unto Moses, says Paul, in the cloud, and in the Sea. Now
many hundreds of those that Paul calls Fathers, were then Infants, and
children; yet all then baptized: But it may perhaps be replied, that this
Baptism was extraordinary; never was the like before, nor shall be the like
after. For answer, I say it may be so granted in a twofold respect. 1. In
regard of the Minister, which was Moses. 2. In regard of the manner, as in
coming through the Sea, which was the outward Visible Sign: Their coming out
of Egypt, might signify coming out of the Kingdom of Darkness, the drowning
of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea; the drowning of all our sins in the Red
Sea of Christ's blood; to which Micah may allude, Micab 7.19. When he says,
that God will cast all our sins into the bottom of the Sea. Yet in other two
things it agrees with ours; in Water, as in the outward wisiblesigue; And in
the end, which was for the remission of sins: August. tract. 26. in Joh:
Sacramenta illa fuerunt in signis diversa, in rebus quae significabantur
paeria. We are brought visibly within the compass of that, when we are
admitted members by baptism; except a man he born again of Water, and the
Spirit.

Of Water, not that Water, I say, contains grace Physically, and conveyes it to
the Soul Physically, but Morally; not inhaerenter, but concomitanter: not that
grace is inhaerent in the Water, and there conveyed to the soul: but God waits
upon the the outward means with his grace, to bestow it as he will: Not ex
necessitate, but ex libera voluntate; not of any such necessity, that whosoever
receives baptism by Water, must needs also receive the Holy Ghost, but of
Gods free favor and will, to give the Holy Ghost with the water, or after it,
where he thinks good, 2 King. 5.14. The Water in which Naaman washed, was not
able to have healed him of his Leprosy, by any inherent virtue in it self, so
the Waters of Abana, and Pharpher, Waters of Damascus, might be as good as it:
But when God had appointed it by the Prophet as a means, God was pleased so to
wait upon it with his sanative power, that so concomitantly he was healed by
the use of this appointed Element. God could have healed Naaman without washing
in Jordan, only by a word of the mouth of the Prophet, but he would not: he
would appoint a visible means, and must look upon that, and wait upon God in
his way; that way he will bless: so, he could regenerate us, and we might be
born again without water, only by the Holy Ghost, yet you see God is pleased
to appoint the visible sign, and will have us therefore wait upon it, as a
moral Instrument to convey his grace by.

There are two extremes of this Doctrine, one maintained by the rigid Papists,
the other of the Anabaptists, and of later times some of the newly minted
Separatists; but before them Auxentius Arianus, and his Sectaries; as also the
Pelagi^ms and Petrobraisians, but upon other grounds. The rigid Papists
attribute so much to the Water in Baptism, as Physically to conveigh grace (as
you have heard) and makes it so necessary, that none can be saved without it;
and St. Augustine himself was once deeply enough engaged in this way, and by
reason of this Text: Of the Anabaptists, and the other Sectaries which sleights
it, and think too meanly of it; as if the Elect might be borne again of the
Spirit without this, either Infants, or others. Theodoret lib. 4. cap. 11.
writes, that the Messalians, and the Enthusiasts attributed the means of
Salvation only to the inward work of the Spirit, without any outward means;
but this is not to wait upon God in his way, but to go to Heaven per saltum a
nearer way than God has taught us; wherein they err, and are much to blame.

True it is, Deus non alligatur mediis, God is not tied to means, nor to
outward Elements, if we respect his potentiam absolutam, or absolute Power;
but if we respect, potentiam ordinatam, or that Power by which God ordained, he
would most ordinarily work, then God usually works by means, and we must wait
upon the means, if we mean to have his grace: Yet though the rigid Papists hold
as you have heard, the Sani^res Scholastici, or more moderate Schoolmen; as
Bonaventure in this point, and others, upon the 4. of the Sentences: make not
Baptism of so absolute necessity, as if none could be saved without it. But
whereas they make a threefold Baptism; Baptismus fluminis, Baptismus flaminis,
Baptismus sanguinis; a Baptism with Water, a Baptism with the Spirit, and a
Baptism with blood: a Baptism with Water, as here in the Text; a Baptism
with the Spirit, Luke last, 49. and Act. 2.4. they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost; a Baptism with blood, Luke 12.50. I must be baptized with a
Baptism, and how am I streitghtned until it be ended? Now they say that
baptism of blood may suffice, where a man is crowned with Martyrdom, ex motu
charitatis, and cannot have the other. 2. With the Baptism of the Spirit, Luke
23.43. The good Theife that was a Christian, that dyed so, was not baptized
with Water, but with the Spirit; by which he believed that Christ was able to
save him. 3. Voto, When a man has an earnest, and hearty desire to it, and yet
is prevented by death: Thus Valentinian the Emperor, sending for St. Ambros to
baptize him, yet dyed before he taught him, being but in the way; Ambros was
not afraid to say, that he was baptized voto, and was in caelo, in Heaven, to
the same effect. St. August. lib. 4. contra Donatestas, cap. 22.23. and its
worth our observation, Mat. 16.16. in this point, He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved. Some might object, what needs a man baptizing if he
believe? The Scripture tells us he needs, and you have heard of many that
believed before, and yet must be baptized, then it follows: but he that
believes not, shall be damned; Its not said, he that believes not and is not
baptized: So then, where the Text says, except a man be born again of Water
and the Spirit; we must not understand it absolutely, but in some respect; that
is, when God offers it, and we may have it: if no, then he cannot enter. For as
St. Bernard has it, Epist. 77. its not omnis deprivatio baptismi, but
contemptus, or palpabilis neglectus: not every deprivation of baptism, but
contempt, or palpable neglect, when God gives time enough, and we will not take
it, the death of such a man without it is fearful. 2. Consider to whom Christ
speaks in this Text, to Nicodemus, a man of ripe years: The immediate subject
of Baptism, Except such a one be born of Water and the Spirit; in such a case
as you have heard, he cannot enter: for Baptism is always necessary,
necessitate praecepti, in regard that God has commanded it, though not always
absolutely necessary, necessitate medii: thus much for ripe years especially,
and de ecclesia constituenda.

Now, de ecclesia constituta, of a Church constituted; wherein all that are of
ripe years are actual Christians: in such a Church, Infants themselves are the
immediate subject of Baptism: though I know, that in the primitive Times, or
in the Times of the ancient Fathers, many men that professed Christ would not
be baptized till near their death; because they thought that by Baptism all
their sins were washed away, which they had committed before it; and if they
had been baptized sooner, they were afraid to have sinned again, not well
considering the virtues of it afterward; this they did, de facto, but it was
not commendable in them, nor should be imitable by us, though their intent was
honest.

Now of Infants that dye without Baptism, what shall we say of them? shall we
account them all for damned that dye without Baptism with Water, as rigid
Papists do? or bury them on the North side of the Church, where no Sun can
shine on them, to signify that no Light of Heaven, nor Sunshine of Gods
countenance belongs unto them: Surely no, its an harsh an uncharitable opinion;
for Gods eternal election cannot be over-turned for want of the outward
element, where it cannot be had, God having deprived them of it, in taking them
away by death; Its true, St. August. was of this opinion, Ep. 28. ad Hieron.
and 106. contra Pelagianos. And lib. 1. de anima, cap. 9. disputing against
Vincentius Victor, urges this Text: To which I answer. 1. That St. August. was
driven upon this rock of extremity by the Pelagians importunity, who denying
that Infants were born in original sin, he had no better Arguments than
Baptism, for one, to show the contrary; for if not unclean, then they stood
in no need of washing. 2. I answer, That St. August. did as well arre in the
other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, lib. 1. de peccatorum meritis, cap. 20.
that it was necessary also to salvation for Infants to receive, being mistaken
from John, 6. v. 53. See Maldonate in 6. Johannis, how long this error
remained in the Church: yet since the Council of Trent has condemned it, and
the practice of the Christian World is to the contrary. But Romans 11.16. If the
Root be holy, so are the Branches: If the Parents be holy, we are to think
the best in charity of their Children, till they come to years of discretion,
and declare the contrary, Genesis 17.7. God established a Covenant with Abraham's
Seed, as well as Abraham's self, 1 Cor. 7.14. If either of the Parents be
sanctified, the Children are said to be holy.

2. We know that the Infants under the Law were not to be circumcised before
8. days old: now who knovves not that many of them dyed before that time, and
yet we read not that they might be circumcised before it. Now if all had been
damned that wanted circumcision, then had God been unmercifull to his Creature
to prevent this: but this we know he is not the like; we may conceive of
Infants dying before they were baptized by water, Mat. 2.16. Herod slew the
Males in Bethlem, and in the Coasts thereof, of two years old and under, now
its probable, that many of those were so young, that they were uncircumcised,
yet the Papists acknowledge they dyed Martyrs in Christ's cause and were saved.

3 Josh. 5.5. By the space of 40. years in the wilderness, they were not
circumcised, because Moser still waited for removeall, and so they being sore,
were not so fit for it: Now if all those that dyed there had been damned, Moses
and Aaron had been guilty of an horrible sin.

4. And lastly, we know that in the Primitive Times they baptized but twice a
year, at Easter, and Whitsuntide, which they would not have done, if the Popish
Divinity had been true: but this is no warrant forus to defer baptism when
it may be had, but we are to use the means seasonably which God has
prescribed, and so Cyp. ad fidum, to take care for new born Infants Ep: 3.

The Element must be Water, none else; not Milk, nor Wine, nor Sand, nor the
like. St. Aug: tells us of Seleucus and Hermias, two Heretics, that baptized
with an hot Iron, mistaking that place, Mat. 3.11. but that was fulfilled, Acts
2.3. when cloven tongues of fire fell upon the Apostles. Niceph. lib. 3. hist.
eap. 3.4. tells us of one that was baptized with sand, but when it was known to
the Church, he was further baptized. The former was not sufficient, because it
had not Christ's prescription, for his was the Element of Water, who as it is
the most common liquor to wash filthiness from the body, so it most fitly
resembles Christ's blood, to wash away all manner of filthiness from the soul,
Ezekiel. 16.6. God saw the people of Israel in their blood and in their
filthiness, in that corrupt state of nature that every man is born in; but
verse. 9. Out of His mere mercy, He washed her with Water, and anointed her
with Oil, that was the graces of his holy Spirit. So here, a man must be born
again of Water, and the Spirit. As for the circumstances of Baptism, they are
not so much material, whether the whole body be dipped in water, or it be
sprinkled upon the Party. In the Primitive Times, and especially in those hot
countries, the whole body was put in water, as now its buried under the ground;
hence Romans 6.4. they were said to have been buried with Christ in their
Baptism unto his death, and the taking of them up again, which presented our
resurrection; concerning which, you may read more at large in the Counsels of
Laodicea, and Neocesaria. But we must know, that many of ripe years were then
baptized, that were able to endure it, and for Infants, the Country was hotter
but now where Infants only are baptized, and such as are in cold Countries,
diving their whole bodies into the waters were enough to bury them indeed, o^
cause them to dye, not only to baptize them. Again, in those times, some
dipped them thrice into the waters, some but once: of those that dipped them
thrice, some would signify Christ's three days lying in the grave, as Tertull,
and Cypr. others, the Trinity, in whose name they were baptized: those that
dipped but once, would signify the unity in Trinity; but we stand not upon
these.

And even as a man can but be once born naturally, no more can he but be once
born spiritual, which in the Text is called (being borne again) gross
therefore is the opinion and practice of the Anabaptists, who re-baptize their
prosylited into their error. St. Cypr. fell about rebaptizing of Heretics,
against whom Cornelius did justly oppose himself, etc.

In this Baptism, the Papist say, that original sin is so taken away, that
after it, its but an occasion of sin: but we say with St. Aug. whom all
orthodox Divines in this point have followed, tollitur reatu, remanet actu;
though the guilt of it betaken away in elect Infants; yet it remains a sin,
as a Serpent remains a Serpent when his sting is gone, yet cannot kill, and its
kept under, and diminished in the faithful by degrees. Epiphanius compares it
to a Tree growing in the Walls of some stately building, which may be lopped,
and kept under, but the root will never be pulled out, until the Wall be
pulled down; no more will original sin, until the body and soul be pulled
asunder by death. Original sin, remains a sin in the Elect, and regenerate
after Baptism: Yet secondly, the guilt of that sin is taken away in elect
Infants, And ordinarily in baptism, where it is complete. If I had not bin
occasioned to the handling of these two points, I should not have fallen so
fully upon them, but the most wise God has his providence in every thing I
shall point a little at Original sin, and then come home to the point. And
in it, we will first consider the quod sit, that it is; and secondly, the
quale sit, what it is; for the former, briefly; Ephesians. 2.3. natura filii irae,
and were by nature the children of wrath; that is, by reason of our corrupt
nature infected with original sin, and Romans 7.23. There was a Law in Paul's
members, rebelling against the Law of his mind, etc. by which Law of his
members is meant, vitiositas naturae, the corruption of his nature, which did
inhaerere, stick in them, and as a Law irritated him, to what was evil. 2. The
quale, what such it is, Its a defect of Original justice, with an aptitude to
all manner of evil, haereditarily come upon us, by virtue of Adams guilt. The
School Divines make two branches of it, and in it consider the materiale, and
the formale; the muteriale, they conceive to be concupiscence; the formale, the
defect of original Justice, or privation of it: thus Aquinas, and his
followers, who were both many acute and learned: though other wise carried ^^ay
with the errors of their times. In his pr. sec. qu: 82. art 3. in corporit
calce: thus in particular Cajetan, Alexander Alensis Durandus, this infected
the whole man, both in all the faculties of the soul, or organs of the body,
as instruments to vent and execute that inward corruption, and this is the
Doctrine of all our Orthodox Divines. And Aquinas herein said well, in his pr.
sec. qu: 82. art. 2. ad jum. in peccato originali virtualiter praeexistant
omnia peccata actualia, sicut in quodam principio; In original sin, all our
actual sins do praeexist, as in a certain common root, or principle; but I
would be brief in every passage. And seeing that this is an haereditary
disease, or inhaerent corruption in our nature, not the substantial nature it
self; first hence, Illyricus was much to blame, who in his book de essentia
justitiae, and injustitiae originalis, atque etiam in tractatu quodam adjuncto
disputationi quam habuit cum Victorino Strigetio vivariae, held that original
sin was a substance, a daemone factam, made by the Devil, which was viva, and
essentialis ejus imago, his living and essential Image; not much unlike that
of the Maniches, asserted by Augustine, Tom 7. lib. 6. contra Julianum cap. 1.
Aug. in quod vult Deum haeres. 88. who held that it was extranea mali
naturanostrae naturae admixta. 2. Hence the Pelagians are condemned, who denied
original sin in Infants, contrary to Romans 5.12. 3. The Anabaptists
Armenians, and Albaneuses, as Castrensis has it lib. 12. haeres. And now I
come to the point, that it remains in the regenerate as a sin, even after
baptism, Amesius Tom. 4. lib. 2. Bell. enervati, cap. 3. affirms it to be
sin in such properly. And in the Argument of that book, in the name of the
reformed Churches. 2. Mr. Rogers on the Articles of Religion, condcluded for
the Church of England, whose, propositions thence deduced, were printed by
authority Anno 1585. and 87. upon the 9. Art. concerning original sin,
Proposition 3. Original sin remains in Gods children. 3. Perkins in the
order of causes, page 98. Its the root of all actual sin, and therefore,
even after baptism, says he, it must properly be a sin. in the 9. Art
before quoted it self, this infection of nature does remain even in them that
are regenerate, plainly avouched by the public Doctrine of our Church,
grounded on Scripture, which testimony ought to go beyond any particulars. And
5. how often does Paul manifest as much in himself, Romans 7. calling it, non
bonum, malum odio habendum, crucifigendum, mortificandum repugnans legi
divinae, destruendum miserum reddeus cui in est and ver. 14. He said he was
carnal, sold under sin, and v. 20.21. Sin yet dwells in me, and evil that
was still present to hinder good, 6. Piscator in locum Obs. 8. this says he,
is corruption naturae, the corruption of our nature; atque etiam Synec dochice,
peecatum originis, original sin. And Obs. ultima, a quo renati perpetuo
vexantur, of which the regenerate are continually troubled. See also v. 24. its
a body of death, which he would gladly have been delivered from, it was out of
measure sinful, v. 13.2 Cor. 12.7. He had a thorn in the flesh, a Messenger of
Satan to buffet him; which though he praid against often, yet God would not
remove it from him, but told him his grace was sufficient for him, Jam. 1.14.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn aside of his own lust, and enticed; and
Jam. 4.1. Whence, are wars and contentions, are they not from lusts that fight
in your members? which place the Geneva note collates with the Law in our
Members, Romans 7.23. and so Piscator, in locum 7. how plentiful is St.
Augustine in this point, lib. 1. contraduas Epist. Pelag. cap. 1. as also in
his Book against Julian, and the like: what man of any reading in him knows
not, lib. 1. de nuptiis and concupiscentiis ad velerium, cap. 25. answering the
qu: quomodo concupiscentia carnis maneat in regenerato, in quo universorum
facta est remissio peccatorum, etc. ad haec respondetur dimitti concupiscentiam
carnis in baptismo, non ut non sit, sed ut in peccatum non imputetur, Original
sin remains after baptism in the regenerate, but is not imputed to
condemnation. So that though there be aliquid damnabile in renatis natura sua,
yet not damnandum, because non imputandum. And quamvis reatu suo jam soluto
manet tamen donec sanctur omnis infirmitas nostra; although the guilt of
original sin be taken away in the regenerate, yet it still remains sin,
till we be cured of all sin by death; and lib. 1. ad valerium, cap. 26.
illius concupiscentiae quando remittitur reatus aufertur; when the guilt is
remitted, it is so taken away, that it cannot hurt or condemn us: and on the
contrary, actual sin, though this be transient, yet so long as the guilt of
them remains untaken away in the regenerate, they are damnable: therefore,
says he, actual sins, although praeterierunt actu, yet manent reatu, in the
wicked: but original sin, maneat actu, praetereat reatu, in the regenerate.
The act of sin may pass away, and the guilt remains in the unregenerate, but
on the contrary, the guilt of original sin is taken away in the regenerate,
and yet it remains a sin. And cap. 30.31. he follows those passages at large
mentioned, Romans 7. Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, etc. and
these are contrary; now except it remained a sin, though daily weakened by the
power of the Spirit, there should be no combat. And lib. 5. contra Julianum,
cap. 3. concupiscentia carnis adversus quam bonus concupiscit Spiritus and
peccatum est, causa peccati, paena peccati, concupiscence of the flesh, against
which the Spirit of God does fight, is both sin; the cause of it, and
punishment of it, sin, because it rebels against the Law of the Mind;
Punishment, because it was put upon the disobedience, as its reward and desert;
Cause, of all actual, as we have heard: for omnia nostra peccata immediate
proveuiunt a corrupta nostra natura, ac a diabolo, ipsa medianti, Polan. lib.
6.3 achoriston, inseparabile, nisi morte, all our actual sins, do arise
immediately from our corrupt nature, and upon that, the Devil works us to
wickedness. I might add many more testimonies, both out of St. Aug. the
Scriptures, and the learned of the reformed Churches, than out of all these I
have done: but these make the point plain enough. To these I added the public
doctrine of our Church: to which, I add the confessious of other Churches, as
that of Basil, art. 2. of the Reformed in France, which is the same with that
of Geneva, art. 11. of Saxony, art. 10. of Helvetia, art. 1. cap. 8. to which
add Aquin. himself, pr. sec. qu. 81. art. 3. ad jum. So that I hope its no
blasphemy, to affirm that Original sin, remains a sin, even in the
regenerate after Baptism, the guilt of it having been taken away. But now to
affirm the contrary, that it remains no sin after Baptism, but that both
the guilt and stain is taken away in it, is downright Popery. For so Council
of Trent, sect. 5. the Pontificians do hold, as Bellarm: greg. de valentia,
lib. de peccato, originali, cap. 8. Estius in lib. 2. sent. did. 32. sect. 3.
lit. C. and so the rest, holding it a defect, or weakness, or a fitting the
heart, or disposing it to sin, as tinder, that is no fire, but disposed soon
to receive it without much opposition, and is not causa peccati, nisi
obediatur: but I answer, that nothing can be the cause of sin, per modum
habitus interni, by way of an internal habit, and not be a sin it self;
for as an internal cause inclining to good, is good: so by the like reason an
internal inclining to evil, is evil. Again, all unrighteousness is sin;
such is it. Again, primi motus sunt illiciti, it differs from the rule of the
Law: therefore sin, and these are, ejusdem rationis cum peccato originali, of
the same nature, with original sin. But they say, Romans 8.1. there is no
condemnation to those that are in Christ: so say we, yet there is some what
worthy of condemnation in them, if God should impute it, but the guilt being
taken away it is pardoned. Ob. 2. Deum nunquam remittere reatum, manente
peccato, God will never remit the guilt, and yet the sin remain, says Bell.
Amesius answers, and I am sure he was no Papist, Deus quando remittit non
judicat peccatum non esse, sed ex gratia judicat non esse vindecta pro se
quendum, when God remits the guilt of original sin, he does not judge it to
be no sin, but of his grace, and favor he so remits it, that it shall never
be persecuted by divine vengeance. Ob. 3. Its no more, I, but sin that dwells
in me; that is peccatum naturae, the sin of nature, non personae, not of the
person. In the first sin, persona infecit naturam, in the posterity, naturain
fecit personam. And I answer, it was not he, comparative, in regard of his
regenerate part, but it was he in the unregenerate part, Romans 7.15. I allow not
that which I do, v. 19. the evil which I would not, that do I: For the whole
man is principium [quod] both of good, and bad actions, but the principium
[quo] of evil, is corruption; of good, Gods grace. Ob. 4. The guilt is
inseparable from the sin: I answer, its inseparabile quoad dignitatem paenae,
but its separable, quoad ordinationem ad paenam, and that will serve to keep
us from ever coming into the fire of Hell. Obj. 5. What is properly sin is
taken away by the grace of Christ in baptism, but defect of original justice,
not ergo, Ans. Non ut non sit, sed ut non imputetur. But I may not swell the
bulk, this shall briefly suffice for the former point, that though the guilt of
original (...) be taken away in the Elects, yet remains it a sin even in the
regenerate, invitis Pontificiis, whether the Popish Divines, will or no.

To the second, that their guilt is ordinarily taken away in elect Infants, in
baptism: for the explaining of which, I must praemise the certain proposition
as thus I deny not, but God may, and does give his Spirit to elect Infants,
sometimes before Baptism; for many such may dye before they attain it. 2. He
may do it after, for Baptism is as well sigillum gratiae accipiendae, when it
is once had, as acceptae. 2. When I say in Baptism, I mean by it, as the
Fathers do, Baptismum completum, which includes three things, signum,
significatum, and analogiam; the sigu is outward, the signified inward, the
analogy mixed of both; the resemblance stands us, that even as Water washes
the body, so does Christ's blood the soul: and this union is made by the Spirit
Christ, applying the one, in, and by the the other, as by an outward Instrument,
and if any of these be wanting, the baptism is not complete, but only there
is an outward Sacrament of Baptism; not the grace of the Sacrament. Ambros de
iis qui initiantur Mysteriis, lib. 4. tres sunt in Baptismate, Aqua, sanguis
spiritus si unum borum detrahas, non stat baptismatis in Saeramen^um; that is
in the sense you have heard: therefore when I speak of baptism, to draw it
only to the Baptism of Water, is an insipid conceit, which no man, either of
learning or ordinary brains could in probability be so void of reason as to
affirm, being that I had said they were not Instrumenta Physica; not no
Creature not devoid of common reason and charity, would have once offered for
their own shame to have fastened upon a man. So that I cannot mean only the
act of Baptism, or Institution without operation, nor the materiale of the
Sacrament or the formale of words. 3. And lastly, though all the Fathers that I
have read, speak of Baptism, in definitly, yet I mean not of all in
general, both Elect and Reprobate; for the unregenerate and reprobate never
have the guilt removed, though they be baptized: but of Elect Infants, to
which I have said, God is not so tied to means, as that he may not give it
either before or after, yet having been pleased to set up a standing Ordinance
of Baptism in the Chureh, I say that ordinarily, he takes away the guilt of
their original sin in this, or else it must be an extraordinary thing to
have the guilt of it taken away: Bulling lib. 6. adversus Anabapt. Infautes
habeant rem signatam, gratiam Dei, and remissionem peccatorum. Now whereas I
say, the Fathers speak indefinitely, we must know, that an indefinite
proposition in materia contingenti, is but instar particularis, as Doctus est
pius, this is contingent; therefore not universal, but animal est sensibile,
this is instar universalis: because it is in materia necessaria. Yet now, and
then, a man may gather by what has fallen from the Pens of the Ancients, that
their meaning is of the Elect, when they speak of the efficacy of Baptism.
Again, when it is said (in Baptism, it may either point at the tempus
baptizandi, or the virtutem baptismi; the time of baptizing, or the virtue,
power, and efficacy of it: and howsoever, if we consider the outward Sacrament
of the Elementary materials, and the verbal formale, as no proxima, propria,
or immediata causa gratiae and fidei, as not having grace physically in it, or
absolutam aliquam causalitatem, ad dispositionem recipientis, or any absolute
eausalitie, to dispose the receiver of it self, as Bonavent. in lib. 4. sent.
did. 1. qu: 4. yet they do this as moral Instruments, per quandam
assistentiam divinam, quae proprie est fidei acgratiae causa; they do efficere
gratiam, afford grace, or work it. So that in this sense, we say with Amesius,
aque baptismum aliquo modo causam instrumentalem regenerationis esse non
negamus; in some sort we deny not, says he, the baptism of Water, to be an
instrumental cause of regeneration; for it is an Instrument of the proper
cause, and of the effect of the cause, which is the grace of the Spirit of God,
though you have heard not the proper Proxime, and emmediate cause. Yet I say,
by this moral Instrument, as Scotus, Durandus, Henricus, Bonavent. Alexan.
Ales, and outward visible sign as the standing Ordinance of God in his Church,
he gives grace ordinarily to elect Infants, or else it should be a prognostic
of grace, or a sigillum only: Dr. Featly in his Childrens Baptism justified,
page 41. speaking of its neglect, says, thereby they deprive them of that
ordinary remedy of that original malady, in which they are conceived and
borne, or cata polu, but signum inane aut vacnum, or concerning whom I cannot
but note what I read in that learned, and worthy instrument of GOD in his
Generation, Mr. Tailor, in his Sermons preached in the University in Cambridge,
and in the ears of men, guifted to judge in point of Divinity, and printed as a
comment on Titus, 1612. page 642. toward the end, he thus writes,
distinguishing Infants, into such as are elect, and such as belong not the
election of grace: the latter receive outwardly the element, and not inwardly
washed; The former, (namely elect Infants) receive in the right use of the
Sament, the inward grace: Not that hereby we tie the Majesty of God to any
time, or means, whose Spirit blows when, and where it lists, on some before
Baptism (as we have heard) who are sanctified from the Womb, on some after:
but then mark what follows, but because the Lord delights to present himself
gracious in his own Ordinances, we may conceive, that in the right use of this
Sacrament, he [Ordinarily] accompanies it with his Grace: here according to
his promise, we may expect it, and here we may, and ought to send out the
prayer of Faith for it. And page 643. to such as dye Infants, giving that
Spirit which works either Faith, or some thing proportionable for their
justification, regeneration, sanctification, and salvation; In the latter,
which survive, and live to discretion, vvorking the seeds, and inclination of
Faith. which in due time shall fructify to Eternal Life. See Polan. lib. 6.
cap. 55. quo promissa est gratia invisibilis, and exhibetur. Wallebius in
compendio, Theol. lib. 1. cap. 23. Fidem non secus ac rationem habent, acsi non
in fructu, tamen insemine and radice, etc. They have Faith, as they have
Reason, though not in the act and exercise of it, yet in the Root of Seed or
it; they have virtuall, petentiall, and inclinative Faith; and they have it in
Actu primo, says Walleb. seeing they have spiritum fidei, the Spirit of Faith,
though not in actusecundo. Prosp. de vocatione gent. lib. 1. cap. 18. Originem
verae justitiae in regenerationis Sacramento positam esse, ut vbi homo
tenascitur, ibi etiam ipsarum virtutum veritas Oriatur; Yea, some modern
Divines have afforded them the habit of Faith, Polan. synagmat. lib. 9. cap. 6.
though others cannot see how that should be; of which never after any show
without new instruction. Estius in lib. 4. Sent, d. 4. sect. 6. calls it
habitum sopitum, or qualitatem quiescentem; which, says he, constituat vere
credentes, sperantes, diligentes, etc. although it cannot actuate except the
impediment of the age be removed, and external doctrine or instruction accede
by the outward senses. I say thus, that if by an habit, be meant an inchoat
habit infused, it may be true; but not of a perfect habit, for then the former
exception may take place: but an inchoate habit, and a disposition to a perfect
one, are all one: for Disposition and Habit thus differ not specie, but gradu,
as tempor and fervor, and thus in effect: Its no more then what we heard
before; the Schoolmen that follow Aquin. part 3. qu. 69. art. 6. in corpore,
say thus: for their perfect habit, the impotentia operandinon accidit pueris ex
defectu habituum, sed ex impedimento corporali; even as men that are sleeping,
they have the habits of virtue, though whilst such they cannot exercise them,
Tailor on Titus, page 939. in his doctrine in Calce God (in baptism) not
onelyoffers and signifies, but truly exhibiteth grace, etc. and that vertuall
and inclinative belief in them, is acceptable to God in Christ, as actual, in
aedu it is; it savours therefore too strongly of an Anabapticsticall conceit, to
think that Infants are not capable of inward graces of baptism, unless they
had actual Faith. St. August. To 3. in enchirid. ad laurent. cap. 54. Baptism
itis munere, quod contra origin ale peccatum donatum est, ut quod generatione
attractum est, regeneratione detrahatur, and a little after, unde incipit
hominis renovatio, here man's renovation begins. And Tom. 7. lib. 1. de
peccatorum meritis, cap. 9. speaking of the Pelagians, denying original sin.
Hinc enim etiam in paroulis nolunt credere per Baptismun solvi originale
peccatum: they will not beleove that Original sin is is taken away in
children by baptism, lib. 2. cap. 28. Although Law of concupiscence remain in
our members; manente ipsa, reatus ejus solvitus, though it abide, yet the guilt
of it is taken away, and then it follows: sed eisolvitur qui Saccamentum
regeneration^s accaepit renov ^^ique (jam caepit) its taken away in such as
have received the Sacrament of regeneration, and now have begun to be renewed,
lib. 6. contra Julianum, ergo quia and parvuli baptizantur in Christo, peccato
moriuntur, and a potestate tenebrarum, ubi natura filii ira, fucrant erunutur,
Children are baptized in to the death of Christ, and dye to sin, and although
by nature they were the children of wrath, yet are they hereby plucked out of
the power of darkness, lib. 1. contra 2. Ep. Pelag. cap. 13. and ipsa carni^
concupiscentiain baptism sic dimittitur, ut quanquam tract a sit a
nascentibus, nihil noceat renascentibus, concupiscence in baptism is so taken
away, that though it be contracted to posterity, yet it hurts not the party
regenerate, lib. de nuptii^ and cap. 23. haec in qu am concupiscentia, quae
sola Sacramento regenerationis expiatur, etc. Martyr loc. com. clas. 4. cap. 8.
sect. 2. cham. lib. 5. de Sacr. cap. 4. par. 6. Call. Institutionum lib. 4. cap.
14. sect. 17. Gerar. voss. These. Theol. de paedo baptismo pant 1. These. 15.
Musclai com. q. 1. sect. 8. Junius de paedo bapt. these. 10. August. Tom. 3.
lib. 14. de Tul. cap. 17. This concupiscence, which by the only Sacrament of
Baptism is expiated, or purged; namely, front the guilt, and by the Sacrament
(as you have heard) is then meant the thing signified, as well as the sign.
Nazianzen in laudem Gorgonii, calls it, divinae bonum, the good of divine
beginnings. Athanasius in his book of Questions, dedicated to Antiochus, qu. 2.
propounds this, when a man may know that he has been baptized, and received
the Spirit (in Baptism) being but an Infant when he was baptized. Answ. osper
oun en gastri labousa gune; even as a woman may know that she is conceived with
child when there is life: Even so a Christian by the springing of his heart in
solemn days of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and by the inward joys he then
conceives, oti to pneuma to agion elabe baptistheis, that he received the Holy
Ghost when he was Baptized-Chrysost. Hom. 1. in Acta: Oti to curiotaten to
pneuma esti di hou cai to vdor energei: in Baptism the Spirit is the chief by
which the water becomes effectual, not as any proper cause, or any Phyficall
Instrument, as you have heard, Basil de spiritu sancto, cap. 10. answers to the
question, how Christians are saved; dia tes en too Baptismati caritos, by the
grace he received in Baptism. St. Hierom. lib. 3. dialogorum contra
Pelagianos; asking in cavelling manner, why Infants are Baptized: answers, vt
ijs peccata in baptismate dimittantur; that their sins might be remitted in
Baptism. See further St. Aug. Ep. 23. ad Bonifacium, and the godly and learned
Mr. Prinne, in his Perpetuity, page 354. To which I add, learned Dr.
Whittaker, de Sacramentis ingenere, qu. 4. cap. 2. respon. ad testimonium
septimum, Deus in Baptismo and signifieat remissionem peccatum and sanae ita re
operatur, and veritas cum signo conjuncta est in electis; God both signifies
remission of sins in Baptism, and indeed so works it in the Elect: yet the
truth of the sign is joined with it: this also Dr. Fran. White makes good
against Fisher, page 176. God does not use to mock his people with empty
signs, but by his power inwardly makes good, what by the outward sign he
represents unto us; and what have been said of this of Faith in elect Infants
you have heard, and how in time it fructifies. Dr. Fately in his Childrens
Baptism in page 59. says, the effects of the Spirit are begun at our Baptism,
etc. and p. 60. they have purged away the guilt of their sins, and Christ's
righteousness is imputed to them. Yet only give me leave to relate what St.
August. says of this, Ep. 23. ad Bonif. seem! perceptam parvulis Christi
gratiam non amittit, nisi propria impietate, si aetatis accessu tam malus
evaserit, etc. this grace of Christ once received, the child loses not;
except by his own vileness when he comes to years, and then his actual sins
are not removed by his baptismall regeneration: sed alia curatione sanentur,
they must be healed by actual repentance; and yet as Mr. Prinne Obs. this will
not follow: that therefore a converted child of God may fall, either totally or
finally from actual grace Our own Church Art. 25. printed 1562. they are
called effectual signs of grace? Now if God do not effect grace in some sort
by them, they are not effectual. In our Form of Baptism in the Church of
England, we have been taught thus to pray, That the child may be baptized with
water, and with the Holy Ghost, be received into Christ's Church, and made a
lively member of the same, and that coming to baptism, it may receive
remission of its sins by spiritual regeneration, and give thy Holy Spirit to
this Infant that it may be born again: And after Baptism, seeing now that
this Child is regenerate, etc. and I do not quote this as any authority of its
self, any further then made good by Orthodox Divines, Ames. Tom. 3. lib. 2.
cap. 3.75. page; though all Infants receive not grace in Baptism: neither say
we so, Deum tamen quibusdam cum baptizantur habitum, vel Principium gratiae in
fundere, non negamus Davenant in Col. 2.12. Spiritum gratiae inbaptismo
acceptum, Dr. Featley, Part. 2. inward grace ordinarily accompanies the
outward sign: Except a man be born again of Water and the Spirit. Our Savior,
you see, begins at Baptism with Nicodemus and the Spiritual Birth, when he
would have him a Christian. And as in the Scriptures we read of a twofold
Circumcision, so there is a twofold Baptism; a twofold Circumsiod, Romans 2. two
last, For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumsion
which is outward in the flesh; that is, it is not that Circumcision alone that
makes a man acceptable to God, without the other, whereof that was a symbol,
but he is a Jew which is one within, and the Circumcision of the heart in the
Spirit, not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men but of God: So he is not
an acceptable Christian to God, that is only baptized outwardly with Water,
but he that is one inwardly, baptized also with the Spirit: therefore our
Savior puts them both together, Except a man be born again of Water and the
Spirit. 2 Kings 4.31. When the Shunamites Child was dead, the Prophet sent
Gehezie with his staff to lay upon the face of the child, and to quicken it,
but no life, nor motion did appear by that, then verse. 35. the Prophet
himself comes, and he lays his mouth to the Child's mouth, etc. and then
presently it begins to revive, and life was restored unto it. Thus we may lay
Water alone upon the Body, but it can introduce no Spiritual life; but when
the presence of Gods sanctifying Spirit ^omes together with it, then life is
infused into the soul.

And secondly, as a man can perceive nothing of the things of this life except
he be first born into the world naturally; no more can he perceive any thing of
the sweetness of the life to come, except he be first borne again
spiritually.

Thirdly, even as the Children of Israel when they came out of Egypt were first
to go through the Red Sea. 2. Through the solitary wilderness. 3. To be fed
with Manna. 4. To pass through Jordan. and then 5. and lastly, into the Land
of Promise; even so are we first to pass through the water of Baptism. 2.
Through the Wilderness of Temptation. 3. God therein affords the Manna of
consolation. 4. After both, Death: and 5. and lastly, then that aeternall
Canaan, or rest of glory.

Fourthly, our Savior says, not except this man, or that man be borne again,
but speaks indefinitely, except a man be born again; that is as much as
except every man be born again that may: for the Logitians tells us (as you
have heard) that in materia necessaria propositioni definita est instar
vniversalis; though in contingenti, but particularis. In a matter necessary, an
indefinite proposition is as an universal, so that its not left to every man's
judgment as a thing indifferent, whether he will be baptized, or no; but he
must, if he may, if he mean to enter Heaven.

Fifthly, we may observe, that this is spoken to a Jew, a man that had been
circumcised before; Amen, Amen, dico tibi, to ye, yet to circumsion he adds
Baptism, putting an end as it were to the one, and beginning the other;
therefore, the Jews do wrangle in vain, contending for Circumsion to be for
ever, and never altered; because its said, Genesis 17.7. That God made an
everlasting Covenant with Abraham, and his Seed, and Abraham believed before he
was circumcised, and afterward received the sign of Circumsion, which is also
called a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, and to Ahraham it was given as a
sign, that he believed the divine promise of the Seed to come, Gal. 3.16. He
says not as to the Seeds, as speaking of many, but to thy Seed, as to one,
which is Christ, in whom all the Nations of the Earth were to be blessed.
Circumcision then was an open sign of the confession of this Seed to come: now
the Seed being come, if any man should retain circumsion as still necessary, he
should as much as signify he were not come, Gal. 5.2. Behold, I Paul say unto
you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: So that to the
Jews objection out of Genesis I answer thus, faedus Dei cum populo sempiternum;
but signumillud particul are non esset aeternum: although the Covenant of God
with his people, was to be aeternall, yea their particular sign of
circumcision was not to be so; for though the covenant held, yet the sign of
the covenant was alterable: for circumcision was not pactum, but signum pacti;
circumcision was not the covenant its self, but the sign of the covenant.

Its observeable in sacred Writ, quod Deus ter faedus suum cum homine
renovavit; renewed his covenant three times with man, and the sign was every
time preximius and perfectius, the nearer to him, and the more perfect. First,
he made a covenant with Noe, of not drowning the world again by Water, and his
sign for this was his bow in the Clouds, Genesis 9.12, 13. This is the token of
the Covenant which I make between me and you, etc. I have set my bow in the
Clouds, and it shall be a sign between me and the earth. Secondly, with
Abraham and his Seed; and promised Christ, Genesis 17.10. And that in his Seed all
the Nations of the Earth should be blessed (as you have heard) and then he
instituted the sign of circumcision. 3. And lastly, he renews the covenant in
Christ to all believers, and of this covenant, Baptism was the more perfect
than the former.

Sixthly, observe, that he joins two things in the Sacrament together, that
are valde dissimili, greatly dislike Water and the Spirit, the former
corporal, the latter spiritual; the former visible, and the latter invisible:
and herein answers to the two essential parts of man, his body and his soul;
where of the former is visible, the latter invisible; the Water visible, the
Spirit invisible: the Water washes the body, the Spirit works upon the soul
and mind, John 3.8. the manner of our regeneration is compared to the blowing
of the wind, The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound
thereof, but thou can not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes; so is
every one that is borne of God. Now in the wind two things are observeable. 1.
we feel it blowing, but 2. we cannot see the wind that blows; for though it
be a body, yet natural Philosophy teaches us, that it is corpus tam tenue, so
subtle a body, that we cannot see it: even so it is here, we feel the sweet
working of the Spirit, but we cannot see that spirit that works.

The Papists that hold the Sacraments Phyficall Instruments (as you have heard)
they say that the body is no less sanctified by the Water, than the soul by
the Spirit: and they instance thus, quemadmodum aqua viribus ignis intensius
calefacta, non aliter quam ignis vrit, etc. Even as Water made very hot by the
fire, does no less burn then the fireits self, so the Water in baptism by
the operation of the Spirit of God adjoined to it, does cleanse the body of him
that is baptized, as the Spirit its self: but as some of the sounder School
Divines have well considered, Water being but Creatura insensibilis, an
insensible creature, its not capable to be the subject of any inhaerent grace
as one body or element is capable of the heating by another. 2. You have heard
that Spiritus, is not always necessario sihi adjunctus, the Spirit is not
always and of necessity joined to it. 3. And lastly, the corporal substance
of water cannot immediately touch or work upon the soul. But even as the meat
is first digested inwardly in the stomach, and then by secret passage the
spirit and vigor of it is conveyed to the outward parts of the body; even so
grace first infused into the heart and mind of a man, spread it self into all
the faculties of the soul, and then into all the parts of the body, so that
the whole man is infected So grace when God does infuse it, spreads it self as
far; thus in this sense in regard of parts, where sin has abounded, there
grace also may abound. And in what sense God may be said to have sanctified us
by the water of baptism, you have heard heretofore. But you will say, what
need Christ water in baptism, as any outward sign to sanctify us by? cannot
he sanctify us by his Spirit without this? I answer, what needed our Savior
clay or spittle, or washing in Siloam to have opened the blind man's eyes:
could he not have done it only by a word, and it should have served? Or, why
did God create man of the dust of the earth? could he not have created him of
nothing? I answer yes, but he was not pleased so to do, but would use means,
to teach us not to despise the use of means, but to wait upon God in the use
of them when he appoints them, Romans 9.20. O man, who art thou that disputes
with God, shall thou teach him how he shall work his work, or by what means,
Genesis 1. the latter part of the second ver. its said, That the Spirit of God
moved upon the Waters, even so does it upon these waters to sanctify us by
them, as by an outward sign, giving us by that which we see, that which we see
not, in what sense you have heard before. This water in Baptism is thought to
have been typified, per aquam expiationis, by the sprinkling water mentioned,
Numb. 19.9. But ver. 2. this water must have the ashes of a red Cow mingled,
that which was without blemish; to note out that this water must have the red
blood of Christ without sin, to go with it. As also by the Waters issuing
out of the Sanctuary (as some will have it,) Ezekiel. 47. from v. 1. forward etc.
as also by the Waters of the flood, Genesis 7.7. and this is plain by St. Peter, 1
Pet. 3.21.

Seventhly, he says not, nisi quis baptizatus fuerit, sednisi quis natus
fuerit, ne quis de solo externo baptismo gloriaretur; he says not, except a
man be baptized, but except a man be borne again, least any man should glory
only of his outward baptism, for outward baptism with water you have heard
will not serve, without inward baptism with the spirit, by which the old man
is put off, and the new man put on, or otherwise as many come through the red
Sea, that afterward perished in the Wilderness, and never saw the Land of
Promise, so many may pass though the Water of Baptism, that afterward perish
in aeternall misery, and never see the spiritual Canaan, no more then they did
the temporal.

Eighthly, As in natural generation there is a concurrence of father and
mother; even so in this spiritual generation, the Church, as the mother, she
affords water: and God, as our Father, he gives his Spirit, and so a man comes
to be born a child of Light.

9. And lastly, seeing that a man can but be once borne naturally, no more can
he spiritually (as you have heard) therefore Donatus of old, and the
Anabaptists of these latter times, have been much to blame, to baptize men over
again, seeing that their former baptism was by lawful Ministers, and
according to Christ's prescription, both for matter and form. Donatus upon
conceit that the Ministers were faulty in their lives that baptized them; as
though the efficacy of the Sacrament did depend upon the bounty of the
Instrument, and not upon GOD. Many that have been baptized by faulty Ministers
prove good men; and on the contrary, many that have been baptized by good
Ministers, prove bad men.

But before I pass this point, I cannot but give you one collection from some
of the Papists, out of this Text. You know they hold, that the Fathers dying
before Christ came in the flesh, were not in Heaven, but in Limbo, and that
because, say they, they were not thus baptized of Water, and the Spirit: or
thus born again. Yet when Christ suffered, they say they were baptized with
that water that came out of his sides, and so were conveyed to Heaven, at his
coming out of Hell: but we must know, that this Text will afford them no such
collection; for, first you have heard, that this Text is not meant of absolute
necessity, but in some respect. 2. Though they could not go to Heaven by Water,
yet might they by Circumcision, as the outward sign, or by the Sac^aments of
the old Testament. 3 And lastly, this way to Heaven by Water, was a new way,
and not ordinarily required, before the coming of Christ, this Sacrament was
not restituted before his coming in the flesh: therefore, the Ancients could
not be debarred Heaven, for want of being born again thus, as we may. The
Water as it cannot regenerate without the Spirit, so the Spirit ordinarily will
not without this, where it may be had, and where it is contemned; therefore God
is pleased to joy ne them together, in this sense also then, those things that
God bath put together, let no man separate. Seeing God has been pleased to
put together Water, and the Spirit, let no man separate them, Christ taught
Nicodemus, that he must be born thus of Water, and the Spirit; except a man be
born again of Water and the Spirit.

I now come to the next point, the necessity of it, He cannot enter into the
Kingdom of GOD: except a man be borne again of Water and the Spirit, be
cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD. He cannot enter, you have heard in some
respect, there is an impossibility he cannot take this Kingdom of God by
violence, as they did the Kingdom of God in another sense, Mat. 11.12.

The Kingdom of God is severally taken in Scriptures, as sometimes for the
Administration of the Gospel, in which Christ did reign in men's consciences,
as a King in his Throne, or in his Kingdom; thus 1 Cor. 4.20. The Kingdom of
God is not in word, but in power, which words St. Paul expounds, 1 These. 1.5.
For our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the
Holy Ghost, etc. In the former place its called the Kingdom of God; in this
latter, the Gospel: into this Kingdom of Heaven, the Pharisees would neither
enter themselves, nor suffer others, like Aesops Dog in the Hay, that would
neither eat it himself, nor suffer the Cattle that would have made good use of
it, Mat. 23.13. We therefore unto you, Scribes, and Pharisees, Hyporites,
because ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven before men, for ye your selves go
not in, neither suffer ye those that would enter to come in. 2. For the new
estate of the Church, in the time of the new Testament, under Christ, Mat.
5.19. He that shall break one of the least of these Commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be accounted the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. And lastly (to let other acceptions go) its taken for the Kingdom of the
blessed in the estate of glory; thus, Luke 12.32. Fear not little Flock, it
is your Fathers will, to give you the Kingdom: and that you may see in the
next verse, is meant of the Kingdom of Heaven, Whither no Thieves can come to
steal; and Mat. 25.34. This is the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the world. Acts 14.22. Through many afflictions we must enter
into the Kingdom of God; that is, that aeternall Kingdom reserved for us in
the Heavens, Gal. 5.21. having spoken of the works of the flesh, he tells us,
that they which do such things, shall not in herit the Kingdom of God; that
is, that Kingdom that is here spoken of in the Text, Ephesians. 5.5. its called
the Kingdom of Christ, and of God, not that these are two Kingdoms, but one
and the same, so called in several respects, Christ merited this Kingdom for
us, God gave us the Kingdom which Christ merited. And Luke 22.29. where our
Savior speaks of his Disciples, and how they continued with him in his
Temptations: therefore, says he, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father
has appointed unto me; and that is the Kingdom into which the faithful shall
all enter, but such as are not prepared for it, like the foolish. Virgins, may
cry, Lord, Lord, long enough, and yet the gate of this Kingdom will be shut
against them, Mat. 25.12. Christ will not know them, that will not know him,
they shall not enter into this Kingdom of God; except a man be borne again of
Water and the Spirit, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God.

He cannot enter, Hence observe, That regeneration, is of absolute necessity to
salvation, John 3.3. except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of
God, Heb. 12.14. follow peace and holiness, without which no man shall see
God, for Mat. 5.8. its the pure in heart, that must see God. And Heb. 11.6.
without Faith, its impossible to please God: now where God is not pleased, a
man cannot be saved, and where no regeneration is, there is no faith, and so by
consequence no salvation. I stand not upon the manner of regeneration, whether
it be by Water as the outward sign, and by the Spirit and inward grace, as
here in the Text: or it be by the Spirit without Water where it cannot be had:
or it be sacramentally or habitually, or howsoever: yet there must be a
regeneration even in Infants that dies before they come to riper years, some
means to cleanse, and free a rational nature from the guilt and damnable
nature of original sin, as well as actual in riper years, before there can
be salvation: but before we proceed any further, let us propound two questions
concerning this baptism. First, whether the Water ought to be consecrated, in
which we are to baptize, or no; or we may baptize in common water? I answer, if
by consecrated water be meant that superstitious popish consecrarion, we deny
it, for that is thus performed. 1. By certain careful crossings. 2. By secret
words. 3. By some odd gestures. 4. By these breathing on it, as if like Christ
these blind hypocrites would thus give the holy Ghost. 5. By taking a burning
wax Candle, and putting it thrice into the water, and saying, Let the power of
the Holy Ghost come down into this plentiful Fountain, and let it make the
whole substance of this water faithful with the fruit of regeneration: this
they did upon that gross conceit, that water was a Physical Instrument to
convey grace, we have no such warrant in the Word of God, or direction for any
such thing. But if by consecrated water, no more be meant but water set a part
for an holy use, and good end, and such as concerning which we use prayers
about baptism, and for no other use employed than baptism, this ought to
breed no quarrel amongst intelligent Christians, nor to denominate any man
superstitious: for the thus setting it apart, and revising of it, seeing that
its used in no other manner, nor for any other end, than the Apostles used
water in their times; for we acknowledge no more inhaerent holiness in this,
than in other Water, as the Papists do: and in this sense, water in the Font,
is no worse, than water in the Fountain, nor to be accounted more
superstitious, being but thus used, though the Fonts have been abused: we know
the Apostles, and Apostolical men baptized in common Water, and such as was
most obvious for that occasion, devoy'd of any ceremonious consecration, Mat.
3.6. John baptized in Jordan, in the fair open River, because he baptized many
at one meeting, and those of ripe years, and Acts 8.38. Philip baptized the
Eunuch in the Water by the high way side, as they traveled, and if we wanted
other places as they did, we might also do the like.

Secondly, where our Saviors mentions being borne again of Water, and the
Spirit, but expresses not in the Text who should apply it; the second question
may be, who should administer baptism? I answer, he that has a lawful
calling to meddle in the Administration of the Church Sacraments, and to touch
the people, and can show the nature, the end of them, etc, Mat. last, 19. those
that went out to baptize, went out also to teach, such as were capable of it:
Yea, that is ordinarily; but in case of necessity, may not Laymen baptize, or
Midwives, etc. the Papists say they may: for whom thus much may be said in
brief. First, for private men to administer Sacraments, the master of every
family killed the Passover in his own private house, Exodus 12.^. to 7. and
distributed it to them: why may not private men now as well minister
Sacraments? I answer, that when the Passover was first appointed, then the
Aaronicall Priesthood was not instituted, but the eldest of every Family was a
Priest, if not incapable, and performed all Priestly duties, unto God: but
after the Lord had chosen the Tribe of Levy, and settled the Priesthood in
that, then these things were done by them to whom it appertained, and not by
others. 2. For Midwives, its usually urged, that Zipporah circumcised the son
of Moses, Exodus 4.24, 25. God met Moses in the Inn, and would have killed him
for neglecting the Circumcision of his Child. Let negligent Parents take notice
hence, how Gods anger will be also kindled against them, if they neglect
baptism now, the like to their children: then Zipporah, Moses his wife, took a
sharp knife, and circumcised her son, and then Gods wrath ceased. To which I
answer. 1. That one example makes no rule, as one Swallow makes no Summer, Judge
4.4. Deborah a woman judged Israel, yet it will not honce follow for a rule,
that any woman may be Judge; neither may we hence collect, like that wise man
in Norfolk, who reading how Deborah judged Israel, would needs hence collect,
that a woman might be a Justice of Peace: there are diverse particulars in
Scripture, out of which we cannot well draw general Rules, if we do, we shall
conclude many absurdities. 2. I answer, that this was an extraordinary example,
and therefore can no more make a rule for ordinary actions, than Moses his
baptizing in the cloud, and in the Sea, or his making of Aaron a Priest, Moses
and Aaron among his Priests, etc. this might not be drawn into a rule, no more
might Zipporahs. Objection, that neither do they make this common rule, but in
case of necessity, or in anticulomo^tis, in danger of death. To which I answer.
1. That they make it more common many times then they need, because they would
be doing, and be accounted some body. 2. That there is no such absolute
necessity, as to compel them to abuse the Ordinance of God, as if God had no
other ways ^o save by, but by the pouring on water by the hand of a woman,
they are no such grace-wives, as to confer grace thus. 3. Moses was then
sick, when Zepparah circumcised the child, and was not well able to do it; yet
what if Moses speak of this rather by way of indignation, then any point of
Religion, or commendation of her. 4. She did it not in any love, or reverence
to the Sacrament, but for by respects, she did not perform it in that reverend
manner that Sacraments use to be performed, but very unreverently and furiously
both in deeds, words, and gestures. In deeds, she threw the fore skin in an
anger at his feet. In words, a bloody husband have thou been unto me, grudging
against God that instituted the Sacrament, as well as Moses. In gestures,
frowning, and looking disdainfully upon him. 5. And lastly, though God was
pleased when the Child was circumcised, yet it follows not, that therefore he
was content with the manner of it, or with the approving of the party that did
it, and the case I say was extraordinary. Obj. 2. But howsoever, they may apply
the element, and use the right form of words, and better so, than no baptism
at all. I say that more is required to baptism than water, and the words, and
that is authority from God, and a solemn calling from the Csturch to do it,
which they cannot have, and necessity is no sufficient authority to Priest a
woman, though I know how some have cavelled amongst the reformed, as I have
known such as have been baptized by them, afterward brought to the Minister to
be baptized of him; and we know that the opinion of absolute necessity put
them upon the point. But 1. Christ has had a settled order of men, since the
beginning of the preaching of the Gospel to do this, therefore no need of them,
2 Mat. 28. 19. Teach, and baptize, this is a Sacrament of the Church, and the
Sex of a woman excludes her from Teaching, and by consequence from administering
Sacraments, Joh: 4.2. Jesus baptized not, but his Disciples; which some
understend exclusively, none but they did it; yet no doubt but many Children
were then in danger, 2 Timothy 22. I permit not a woman to teach, that is,
publicly to instruct in the open Congrcgation, 1 Cor. 14.34. Let your women
keep filence in the Church, for it is not permitted them to speak, their Sex
deprives them of such Ministerial functions, Tertullian de velgandis
virginibus, its not permitted a woman to speak in the Church, much less to
teach, or to baptize, or to offer; neither to take to her self the execution
of any man's office, much less the Priests. And Council. 4. Carth aginensi
Epiphanius, disputing against diverse Heretics, and confuting Marcion,
complained that he also gave women leave to baptize: he said the like of the
Quintilian, and Pepatian Heretics: and concerning the necessity of Baptism
by Water (you have heard before) that its not always absolutely necessary
respectu medii, but necessary in some respect, where God offers it, and men may
have it. But this baptism by the Spirit, or regeneration by some means, or
other is absolute necessary, none ever was, or shall be saved without it, 1
Cor. 6.9. Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, etc. The reason is, because no unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, Rev. 21. last, and there shall enter into it no unclean thing? Now
we are all unclean by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. and we by nature, says St. Paul,
were the children of wrath, as well as others; that is, by our corrupt nature,
being born with Adams guilt upon us: so that we may all cry, as the Lepers did
under the Law, I am unclean, I am unclean, Lev. 13.45. and as the Lord said to
Jerusalem, so may we say to you, O Jerusalem will thou not be made clean, when
shall it once be, and you have heard, how this cleansing must be by
regeneration, 1 Cor. 6.11. having spoken of gross sins, he adds, And such
were some of you; but ye are washed, ye are sanctified. q.d. Without this
washing, this sanctifying, this cleansing, ye had been in the same estate with
the unrighteous, and so could not have inherited Heaven.

Well, is this so, that regeneration is absolutely necessary to salvation: this
then may first afford us an Use of exhortation, for every one of us to use the
means to be regenerate, if we mean to be saved: Be diligent in hearing Gods
Word taught: read good books of practical Divinity, and of such men as have
writ for thee that which they have found by experience in themselves: frequent
Prayer, desire it from others to pray for thee, that God would come and make
himself known to thee. God works by means, and not by any means, but by such
as are of his own directing. If we use these means, Gods blessing is ready to
attend them, and make them effectual to as many as he will save.

Secondly, If so, then an Use of Reproof to such as dream of salvation, and
say they hope for it as well as the best, when in the mean time, they labor
not for regeneration: but hates the means God has ordained to save them by
and cannot endure those that use them, but revile them, and slander them, and
persecute them, because they affect not any such goodness themselves. Or else,
2. they use but the means in part, and have not a care to share in all the
Ordinances of God: if they practice one, they will not another if they hear,
they have no great mind to remember, or practice accordingly or to join prayer
to it, that is a weariness to the flesh; before they durst not quando satis
fuit criminis fuesse bonum, when it was matter enough of accusation to have
been good, but now by Gods mercy they may; but because its wearisome to the
flesh, though great comfort to the conscience, they decline if Or 3. if more
amply, yet but of custom, and superficially, not as in conscience, and as in
obedience to Gods direction, or in care to grow in grace, o out of any
experimental sweetness they have found in the Ordinances.

3. And lastly, if so, then an Use of Justification, of such as have a care
(...) labor for regeneration, and experience of Gods love in Christ: so they
must either do, or be damned, its a matter of no less consequence then life
and death. Suppose a man had committed such a capital Crime, as for which he
knew by the Law he was to be hanged, or should suffer some shameful kind of
death: oh how would it break his sleep? and how would he employ all his
friends? how would he ride and run night and day to procure his freedom, or
pardon, which his deeds had merited, and all this, but to free him from a
temporal death: Well, and every unregenerate sinner in that estate, is in as
great danger of Hells eternal Torments, for the sin he has done, as this
man is of his temporal death. Oh! does it not concern them thon to be
disquieted in mind on the night seasan, to procure the prayers of all their
friends: to fast, pray, cry, and what not, and say with those heart-pricked
Jews, Act. 2.37. Men and Brethren, what shall woe do to be saved? who would
rail against such a man as he saw to he troubled, or to run and ride to save
himself from a temporal Death? yet so shameless are many wicked men, that
they revile, and rail against such men as they see thus troubled to escapean
eternal death. Fools and blind, how long will it be ere they understand the
error of their way, how long would they be taught? how should they see their
error, and cry mightily unto God for the pardon of it? Seeing then that
regeneration is of absolute necessity to salvation; let us lay down some
motives to inflame our affections to be in love with that estate: First, God
himself is much affected with it, if therefore we would sympathize with him,
let us be so too. Great men what they affect, their servants either affect the
like, or at leastwise make show of it; to the end, that sympathizing with their
Lords, they may obtain more favor from them: Well, and God I say is in love
with this estate, 1 These. 4.3. This is thr will of God, even your
sanctifieation, and Romans 6.12. he would not have sin to reign in your mortal
bodies.

The second motive may be the reward that men shall have when the work is over,
though this be painful, yet the reward is gainful, Romans 8.13. If ye morrifie
the deeds of the body, by the Spirit, ye shall live, not as Nestor tertiam
aetatem hominum, as long, as 3. men in this life present, but eternal in the
life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable to all things, which has
both the promise of this life, and of that which is to come.

The third, that Christ may attain his end in dying for them; Titus 2.14.
which was, that he might redeem us from all our iniquity, and purge us to be a
peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works, perform them not coldly,
or outwardly, but zealously, and conscionably: for as St. Augustine and Bernard
haze spoken, though they be not causa regnandi, yet they are, vi^ ^d regnum,
though they be not the cause of reigning, yet they are the way hither; and the
Apostle tells us, that we were created in Christ Jesus to good works, that we
should walk in them. I now come to the last point in the Text, the reason of
the other: for that which is born of the flesh, is flesh; but that which is
born of the Spirit, is Spirit. First, for the former branch, quod natum est
excarne, caro est, that which is born of the flesh, is flesh. Its worth our
observation, that when our Savior had told Nicodemus the necessity of being
born again of Water, and the Spirit, that he stays not for Nicodemus his
asking him a reason of this Doctrine, sed ipse ultro rationem raddit; he
willingly renders a reason himself in this verse of the Text, That which is
borne of the Flesh, is Flesh, which may let us see how a sound Teacher should
render a good reason of his Doctrine, and not only dictate, and afford no
proofs, to establish the faith of his hearer. If the men that pretend so much
now light would do so, it werewell, I have lately seen a little Pamphlet
concerning Church offices in New England, wherein it is reported, how that
American Jezabel, one Hutchinson, a Gentlewoman under the pretense of this new
light, did exceedingly trouble the Churches, and yet of a long time could not
clearly discover the original of it, that linen prophetess under pretense of
new light, did so gull and infatuate old Professors, that they slighted and
undervalued their old Teachers in regard of it, whom they had followed by Sea
and Land, and forsaken the places of their nativity for the love of them; which
light, was indeed nothing else but a mere imaginary flash in the Pharisie, by
which the Devil changing himself into an Angel of light, beguiled them,
until at length, her impostures were found out, she after long debate of the
matter convicted, and adjudged to be banished, that their Churches might have
rest; some of the beams of this light are extended to our Nation, there may
be such imaginary illuminates in it, but qua tales, we know they are not of
us. The enemy that too well loves his cross rows, is still in hand with his
A. and his B. ANABAPTISTS and BROWNISTS; but they will not C. that the Church
of England deselaims these Suppose the graces of Gods Spirit may be in such
men, as are of the more tolerable temper amongst them: yet St. Paul would not
forbear Peter, because of his graces, when he did wrong, but reproved him
roundly for it: the peace of the Church should be valued at an high rate, of
all such as do sapere ad sobrietatem, and such as speak not the words of
soberness, as well as truth, deserve censure, as Paul said to Festus, Act.
26.25. Genesis 1.16. God made two great lights, the Sun to rule the day, the other
the night, he made also the Stars, but these borow their light from the Sun.
Now if any man should tell us of new light, and yet after that of more new
light; be it of Candle, or Torch, or the like: I would ask what these were in
comparison of the light of the Sun, Moon, etc. So god made other two great
lights in the Firmament of the Church, the Old Testament to govern the Jews;
the New to govern both Jews and Gentiles, that Lumen innatum, or light God
lent from Heaven contained in them, we willingly receive from them, and all
the Stars of the Churches horrow their light from hence. Lord open their eyes,
to distinguish betweeen this light to be drawn from it, and that lumen
adventitium, or adventitiall light brought to it, Hos. 6. latter part of the 5.
verse. thy judgments are as the light that goes forth.

Now this adventitiall light in comparison of the innate light, is but as a
Candle before the Sun, between which there is no comparison, and where the
Sun can have access, a candle is needltsse: so where the light of the
Scriptures can take place, there is no need of this imaginary light of man. If
a man should conceive that there were not innate light enough in the Sun to
illuminate our hemisphaere, but should devise some new light of Torches, to set
upon every Beacon to illuminate the Air, and let men see how to travel, would
not all men laugh at him, knowing that this was but a superfluous conceit, and
that many ages had traveled well enough without any such light, as well as
with them: even so here, If we shall boast of new light, and more light, which
cannot be found in the Scriptures, nor drawn from them, and set up that, and
magnify it amongst men; as though the other contained not sufficient, may not
men either think them proud, or ridiculous, in not being content to travel by
that light, in which so many ages of the Church have gone to Heaven before
them, surely yes. But they will say, that they have a greater measure of Gods
Spirit infused to see, and interpret that innate light than has been before
them. I answer, 1. That diverse points of their illuminate Doctrine cannot be
made good by the Scriptures, neither are they according to the analogy of
Faith. 2. That Light in the Scriptures, being the Light of Gods Spirit, if
their Light agree not with that, it cannot be from God. 3. Many of Gods people
that have the Spirit in as great a measure as they have, and show it by the
effects, cannot conceive their opinions to be truth, as consonant to that
sacred Truth of God, Es. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak
not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them, let them
boast of what they will, and Gal. 1.8. If an Angel from Heaven preach any other
Dectrine, let him be accursed, 1 John 4.1. Try the Spirits, whether they be of
God, or no, and believe not every Spirit, etc. that is, every Doctrine that is
pretended to come from the Spirit; intimating, that there may not be Doctrines
pretended from the Spirit, that are not of the Spirit, etc. This indeed, I
willingly grant, that there may lie a truth in a text, which a carnal eye may
travel over many years, and not be discovered; thus the Rabbis of the Jews,
the Scribes, and Pharisees, did often read over many Texts in Moses, the
Prophets, and the Psalms, which concerned Christ, and which they understood
not: these very places, Christ himself and his Apostles, whose understandings
he had opened to understand the Scriptures, Luke last, 49. did often quote
against them, and confute them, Hos. 6.6. Its said, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: this, though often read, yet not understood of them; therefore, Mat.
9.13. Go ye (says our Savior) and learn what that means, I will have
Mercy, and not Sacrifice: See again, Psalm. 100.1. The Lord said unto my Lord,
sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy Foes, thy Footstool: This place,
though they had often read, yet they did not understand, as may appear by Mat.
22. from 44. to the end, When those learned Pharifies were assembled, verse 41.
our Savior begun to pose those Owle-eyed Doctors, and moves his question upon
these words, The Lord said unto my Lord, etc. whereas they had said before,
verse 42. that CHRIST was DAVID'S Son, he replies; If be be David's Son, how
does he then call him Lord: but they could not answer him a word, neither durst
any from that day forth, ask him any more questions; thus you see how a truth
may lie in a Text, which carnal eyes cannot discover, though otherwise
learned. But this will not hold; that because they before Christ could not;
ergo, not we. 2. That carnal eyes could not; ergo, not those that are
illuminated by Gods holy Spirit, and being the righteous to whom he reveals
his secrets: these could never be so far over-sighted, but if the light came
from the Scripture, they would see it, as well as others: yet the most
excellent of them cannot find this new pretended light justified there: so
much for that point.

I now come to the last, That which is borne of the Flesh, is Flesh, and that
which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. Our Savior having shown Nicedemus the
necessity of regeneration, stayed not (as you have heard) to see whether he
would ask a reason of it, or no, but willingly renders one, as also the manner
of it, of Water and the Spirit, without which you have, heard, he could not
enter. Now if our Savior had not said thus, man might have imagined that he
might have gone to Heaven by his own Wisdom, or civil righteousness, or
humane strength, or depth of Learning, or the like: nay, alas, whatsoever is in
a man naturally, or from man's natural strength will not do it, for so he is
but flesh, Quod natum est excarne, caro est, That which is born of the Flesh,
is Flesh.

These words are dark, we must therefore draw the veil of them, and then we
shall the more clearly conceive of them; the [Flesh] in Scriptures is taken in
several senses: it will be our labor therefore, to find out the true sense
of it in this place.

First, the Flesh in Scriptures, is sometimes put for this present Life, 1
Peter 4.2. the Apostle would have men for the space of their lives, yet
unspent, for as much time as remained in the Flesh, not to live after the lusts
of men, but after the will of God, and 1 Phil. 1.24. Its better for you (says
the Apostle) that I abide in the Flesh; that is, in this present life.

Secondly, we are sometimes to understand the body of Flesh, the one essential
part of man, Levit. 19.28. Ye shall not cut your flesh for the dead, nor make
any print of a mark upon you, either by burning, lashing, or flashing, as the
Gentiles did. I have not thus taught you to hate your flesh, neither can this
any way benefit the dead.

Thirdly, by the flesh, we are sometimes to understand the humane nature of
CHRIST, 1 Peter 3.18. He was put to death, concerning the Flesh; that is, in
his humane nature; for in his divine nature, he could not suffer, that
supported his humane nature in his suffering.

Fourthly, for the unregenerate estate of a man when he is in his corrupt
nature, which he drew from Adam, and in many actual sins drawn from that
unhappy root: thus, Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not always strive with man,
because he is but Flesh; that is, a corrupt and sinful creature, naturally
devoid of grace, and that which is born of this flesh, is flesh like unto it;
for Job. 14.4. who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness, there is not one
but of sinful nature, is born sinful nature, Genesis 5.3. Its said, that Adam
lived one hundred and thirty year, and begot a son in his own likeness,
after his own Image, and called his name Sheth; that is, he was like him in
Sex. 2. Humano specie, in humane shape, in all the members of the body. 3. And
lastly, after his Image, in the corruption of nature; for he had corrupted, and
defaced that Image of GOD, after which he was created, which was in
righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. for the most principal part
of Gods Image did consist in these, and so did not beget a son in that
Iniage, in which GOD created him, but in his likeness, and after his Image:
such a one as by sinning he had made himself, here was ex earne caro, flesh of
flesh, quod natum est ex earne card est, that which is born of the Flesh is
Flesh; thus again, Romans 8.5. they that are after the Flesh, do savor the
things of the Blesh; that is, those that are as yet in their unregenerate
estate, they affect those courses the most, that suite the best with the
corruptions of nature,, they are in love with them, and do the most delight in
them, and cannot endure to be crossed in them: yet verse 6. The wisdom of the
flesh is death, not only temporally, for so all dye, but eternally, yet how
do men bear themselves by their carnal wisdom; yea, so much, that it
teaches them how to slight the wisdom of God, revealed in his holy Word, and
will, and will be subject no further to it, then where it erosseth not theirs:
but see the misery of their wisdom, verse 7. This wisdom is enmity against
GOD, it is not subject to the Law of God: true, say some, that is de facto, but
it may be, if it will; nay, the next words mar that, neither indeed can be;
and verse 8. they that are in the flesh, cannot please GOD; that is, they that
are in an unregenerate estate, in the pleasure of these sins, and have not
had the guilt of repentance from God: they cannot in this estate please God,
all they do in point of Religion, are but splendida peccata, as St. Augustine
terms them, gilded sins, or sins per accidens, sins in that respect,
that the person is not justified, or sanctified that does them: their cause
therefore is lamentable, the wrath of God abides upon them for sin, though
they will not be sensible of it.

5. And lastly, (to stand upon no more acceptions) the flesh is sometimes taken
for the unregenerate part of a regenerate man; for we are but regenerate in
part, either in faculty of soul, or instruments of body, we are not perfectly
and wholly sanctified; so that no corruption, or sin remains in us:
therefore, in Scriptures that is in us, is called flesh, and the regenerate is
called Spirit: thus, Romans 8.1. you have them opposed, there is then no
condemnation to those that are in Christ, that walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit; and thus again, verse 4. that the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled on us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit,
And Verses, 12.13. therefore Brethren we are not Daughters to the Flesh, to
live after the Flesh; that is, to live after the motions, and corrupt
imaginations of our own corrupt heart, is mind, for of those can come no
good, we are no debtors to the flesh; for any thing we can do after the
wisdom of it, or the direction of it, but we are debtors to the Spirit, who
is still moving to goodness, and to put us forward in that way, which will
save our poor souls. If we live after the Flesh, we shall dye, but if we
mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, we shall live: thus again, Gal.
5.17. the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts against the
Flesh: these are contrary one to another; that is, the unregeneracie that is in
man, strives against the regeneracy that is in him, and these are so contrary
one to another, even as fire, and water, that ye cannot do what ye would St.
Paul found this by experience, you have heard, that he perceived a Law in his
members, rebelling against the Law of his mind, and when he would haved one
good, yet evil was present with him, Romans 7.21. and Romans 7.18. I know that in
me, that is in my Flesh, in me by nature; in me, in as much as such
unregenerate, there dwells no good thing. In quantum renati, for as much, or in
as much as we are regenerate: so far forth, we both will, and do that which
is good, but the defect in either is from the imperfection of regeneracie, or
that unregenerate part that is in us; throughout the whole man, in the
understanding, will, and affections, and in all parts of our bodies, and that
which is born of the flesh, in this sense is flesh also; for we must know, that
our children are ours, naturali propagatione, not spirituali regeneratione, by
natural propagation, not by spiritual regeneration, we beget them as we are
natural, not as we are spiritual we can convey unto them, all that Adam by
guilt, and generation conveyed unto us, but what spiritual grace God
conveyed unto Adam, that was not in his power to convey unto us: it was Gods
free gift to his person, not intayled upon his posterity, and lineally to
descend upon them as was his nature; no more is grace then to any of us, or to
the most holy men in the world, they can but convey what they have by nature,
grace is Gods free gift, not any essential part of man's nature; and that is
the reason why many good men have oftentimes had bad children; as Abraham had
an Ismael; Isaac an Esau; David an Absolam, etc. because they were there by
nature, not by grace. And before God bestowed grace upon their fathers, they
were wicked, and walked, and swayed by sin as well as others, and as they,
though it may be in a more remiss manner. St. Aug. observes of the Jews that
though they were themselves circumcised, yet they begot children uncircumcised,
because themselves were such by nature, even as the corn which if you winnow it
never so clean, in fanning away the chafe, yet if you sow it, it will grow
with chasse on again as much as ever it had before, because it was naturally
so, it was but by art; even thus conceive of the Text, that whether a man be in
the flesh, as to tally unregenerate, uncircumcised, unfanned, or of
regeneration; yet that part of unregeneracie was natural to him, and according
to that estate he begets his children, even as the circumcised Jews begot
uncircumcifed children, as well as did the uncircumcised amongst the Gentiles,
because uncircumcision was in both natural: even so regenerate men beget
unregenerate children, as well as unregenerate men do; because unregeneracie
whether in part, or in whole, is natural in both, and may be called flesh in
both, and in either of these accoptions, fles^; quod natum est ex carne, caro
est, that which is borne of the Flesh, is Flesh: and thus by this time, I hope
you may perceive that the veil is taken from the sense of the Text.

Whence we may observe, that our Parents which begot us, can convey no
spiritual abilities for regeneration, conversion, or salvation of us, unto us;
that we have heard is beyond the power of nature, and by increasing, and
multiplying, they can conveigh no more to us, but that; for if they could, we
should stand in less need to be born again: in which second birth, we have
our abilities from God, Phil. 2.13. Its God that works in you both the will,
and the deed of his good pleasure: your Parents can neither give you wills, nor
good works, for the power of these come ab extra, from without, above the
compass of nature, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man perceives not the things of
the Spirit of God: the natural man, that is, he that has no more abilities
then mere nature can afford him, such as he drew from the loins of his Father,
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned; as if he should have said, a more natural man wants the
means, and the light of knowing of them, nature can afford him no such thing,
Ephesians. 2.3. we are by nature (says Paul) the children of wrath, as well as
others: thus we have the Doctrine illustrated. This may first teach us, that as
we must have a second birth, as well as a first (as we have heard) that for
this second birth, we must rely upon the Lord for ability, we must look higher
than our Parents; not they, nor the Angels of God, nor any creature can be the
Author of the grace of regeneration, or conversion, only God must do that,
Acts 11.14 though Peter by his preaching was an instrument of conversion to
those Gentiles that heard him; He shall speak words unto thee, whereby both
you, and all thy house shall be saved; yet God was the Author of that grace
they then received, v. 18. Then has God also to the Gentiles granted
repentance unto life. And Lam. 5.21. Turn us unto thee, and we shall be
turned. 2 Timothy 2.25. proving if God at any time will give repentance, that they
may know the truth. 2. If whatsoever be born of the flesh, be flesh; this may
let us see what free will we have to any spiritual good by nature, or what
grace to salvation by nature, from it we can receive nothing but nature. Mat.
7.19. do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of Thistles? No, we know that
Thorns naturally bring out no such things, as Grapes, nor Thistles, Figs; even
no more can we look that corrupt nature should bring forth spirituals: no, but
like its self, flesh, quod natum est excarne, caro est, that which is borne of
the Flesh, is Flesh. It follows, and that which is born of the Spirit is
Spirit: In the former verse, the words run thus; except a man be born again
of Water and the Spirit: In these no mention made of Water, or being born of
Water; because, that without the concomitance of this, the other cannot do it,
but whatsoever is born of the Spirit, is Spirit; because the efficiencie of the
birth, proceeds from that, though Water be the outward visible sign, which it
pleased God to use in working; you have heard, that a man may be born again of
the Spirit, and yet want water, but none can be borne again of Water only, if
the Spirit be wanting; therefore the birth of the Spirit is here mentioned,
that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.

The Spirit in Scripture is sometimes put for the soul of a man, but here the
Spirit is not opposed to the Flesh, or body, as Heb. 12.9. where mention is
made of the Father of our bodies, and how we gave them reverence; much more
should we be subject to the Father of Spirits, Prove. 18.19. a wounded Spirit
who can bear, and Eccles. 3.21. Who knows the Spirit of a man that goes
upward but that cannot be meant here. 2. The Spirit is sometimes taken for the
Devil, the evil Spirit, Mark 9.26. then the Spirit cried, and rent him sore,
but neither can that be meant here. 3. That Spirit is put for the holy and
sanctifying Spirit of God, and that is meant in this place, as may appear by
the verse. going before; except a man be born again of Water, and the Spirit,
and Ephesians. 5.18. be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess, but be filled
with the Spirit: the Spirit of God where it is in any special operation, is
accompanied with the graces of it, which are also called the Spirit, and where
the graces of God are, the essence of the Spirit is there also, to cherish and
enrich those graces, as Gal. 3.2. received ye the Spirit by the works of the
Law, etc. and whosoever is born of the Spirit, is said to be born of God (as
you have heard) 1 John 5.1. that is, he is regenerate, and born again by the
virtue and power of the Spirit, upon his heart, mind, and soul; and so far
forth, as he is regenerate, pure, gracious, and spiritually good; so far
forth is be born of the Spirit: for (...) ^^at good Spirit there can be no bad
effects, but whatsoever is born of it, is of a spiritual, and holy nature;
that which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit: see what the Lord says, Ezekiel.
36.25, 26. speaking of the return of his people out of Captivity, and out of
the Countries, into which he had scattered them, then (says he) will I power
clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean; yea, from all your filthiness,
and from all your Idols will I cleanse you: this clean Water is expounded in
the next words after; a new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I
will give you an heart of Flesh; that is, I will take away your hard, and
unregenerate heart from you, that nothing could work on, and I will give you ^
(...)eart softened, with the oil of the graces of my Spirit, and by the (...)
wash away your filthiness, Luke 11.3. If ye which are evil can give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Hea^^^ly Father give the
Holy Ghost unto them that desire him: And so make you truly spiritual, being
born of this Spirit, Quod natum est ex spiritu^ spiritus est; that which is
born of the Spirit, is Spirit.

FINIS.

