Divine MEDITATIONS. WRITTEN By an HONORABLE PERSON.

Whereto is adjoined, a Determination of the Question, whether Men ought to
Kneel at the Receipt of the HOLY COMMUNION.

And an Essay of FRIENDSHIP.

Dat Rosa mel apibus.

LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, for Humphrey Mosley, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

A MEDITATION upon PSALM. 91.
I. Who so dwells under the defense of the most High, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. THe Holy Ghost by the Prophet David, exhibites here
matter of singular comfort to all such as can well understand it, and rightly
apply it to themselves. But we must be careful that we run not too fast
to the Application, lest we deceave our selves, and think we are safe under
the defense of the most High, when perhaps we are in the shadow of Death. All
men naturally believe easily what they desire strongly, Quod nimis miseri
volunt, hoc facile credunt Senes.
and there is no Hypocrisy so dangerous, as when men deceive their own souls,
and think they are safe, when they are in danger. Many run boldly to God with
Lord, Lord, in their mouth, as if they were his Children, who shall receave for
answer, Nescio vos, I know you not, Matthew. 7.22, 23. This is a spiritual
Frenzy, not unlike that of the madman in Athens, who seeing any Ship arrive
ran straight to the Haven and took an Inventory of all the Lading, imagining
it to be his own, when he had no part therein. We must therefore study to
know who are those that dwell under the defense of the most High, before we
can conclude who shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. This Point is
excellently cleared by the same Prophet, who seemed to comment on this Text, in
the fifteenth Psalm. demanding in the first Ver. Lord who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle, or who shall rest on thy Holy Hill? and resolving the question in
the words following to the end of the Psalm: Even he that leads an incorrupt
life, and does the thing that is right, etc. Thus let the true Christian
examine his own heart, and consider whether his life has been or is
incorrupt: whether he does the things See Zechar. 7. ver 9, 10
that are right: whether he speak the truth from his heart; whether he has
used no deceit with his Tongue, nor done evil to his Neighbor, etc. (as it
follows there) and then he may conclude with David in the last words of that
Psalm. that he shall never fall, having done these things, and consequently,
that he dwells under the defense of the most High.

There is likewise another Rule, by which we must examine our selves, and that
is properly ministered to us in the Phrase which the Prophet uses of dwelling
under the defense of the most High: It is an ordinary expression in the
Scripture, that God dwells with his Elect, and they with him: and these are
Relatives which cannot stand one without the other. He then that would know
whether he dwell under the defense of the most High, must see, whether God
dwell with him. Of this, no man can be ignorant; Fruits of the Flesh and
Spirit, evidently discernable, Gal. 5.9.
for where the Spirit of God is, it will evidently appear and make it self
known; Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Galathians, declares what are the
Fruits of the Spirit, viz. Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness and Temperance: and likewise, what are the Fruits
of the Flesh. viz. Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Wantonness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Debate, Emulation, Wrath, Contention, Sedition, Heresies,
Envy, Murder, Drunkenness, Revelling, and such like. He that will sit in
Judgment on himself, and examine which of these Fruits spring out of his
heart, shall soon know, whether God dwell in him, or the Devil. For the eyes
of God cannot behold impurity: He is (all) purity and sanctity, and his Spirit
will not inhabit a polluted Temple. If therefore, thou find thy Heart and
Soul to be corrupt and impure, know that it is a Cage of unclean Birds, and
no fit Tabernacle for God. But if thou have washed away thy filthiness by
Repentance, and the Blood of Christ has cleansed thee from all sin, then
may thou be sure, that God is with thee, and that thou dwell under the
Defense of the most High, and may boldly go on with David, and say:

2. I will say unto the Lord; Thou art my Hope and my strong Hold: my God; in
Him will I trust. If any man would have a Paraphrase upon these words, he may
have recourse to the 18. Psalm, and say with David there; The Lord is my
strong Rock, and my Defense, my Savior, my God, and my Might in whom I will
trust, my Buckler, the Horn also of my salvation, and my Refuge. In the 144.
Psalm ver. 2. the same Prophet calls GOD his hope, and his fortress, his
Castle and deliverer, his Defender, in whom he will trust, Psalm 31. ver. 3.
he styles him his strong Rock, and House of Defense: and verse 4. his strong
Rock, (again) and Castle, Psalm. 62. ver. 2. He verily is my strength and
salvation: he is my defense, so that I shall not greatly fall: which words are
repeated, ver. 6. Through the whole Body of Scripture, there is nothing more
frequent then such like expressions of Gods power to secure his children from
any danger whatsoever: and Exhortations unto them to rely upon him without
Doubting of Gods mercy, or providence, is not believing: Abraham staggered not
at Gods promise by incredulity, but was strong in Faith, glorifying God: Romans
4.20. And Jacob ceased not to wrestle with the ANGEL, though his thigh were
bruised, Genesis 33.26.
Doubting, and to trust in him as a faithful Creator. Is he a Rock? then pray
with the Psalmist, O set me on the Rock that is higher then I, Psalm. 61.3.
Follow our Saviors counsel, Matthew. 7. and Build thy House on the Rock: which
nor storm of wind, nor deluge of Water, shall ever be able to shake. Is he
thy Hope? then may thou be sure, he will not fail thee: for he never did
forsake those, that put their trust in him. Is he thy strong hold? Fear then
no persecution of any enemy whatsoever. For no Battery can make breach in this
Castle, nor any craft of Man or Devil undermine it. This Fortress is God, in
whom only David trusted, who having created the World, and all that is
therein, commands and overrules all his Creatures, so that nothing shall
offend those his Children, whom he has taken into his protection. Yea Satan
himself shall tempt Job no further then God shall permit him. Some put their
trust in Chariots and Horses, but they are brought down and fallen, Psalm 20.
But we that remember the Name of the Lord our God, are risen and stand
upright. Ver. 7, 8. O then trust not in Princes, nor in any child of man, for
there is no help in them, Psalm 146.2. Nothing can be saved by the multitude
of an Host; nor is any Mighty man delivered by much strength, Psalm. 33.15.
Wherefore, blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose
hope is in the Lord his God, which made Heaven and earth, the Sea, and all that
therein is, which keeps his Promise for ever, Psalm. 146. For, they that put
their trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which may not be removed, but
stands fast for ever. Who so can with a true and lively Faith anchor his
hopes on God in this manner, may boldly repose in him, and rest secure in all
Time of Danger, Adversity and Tribulation.

3. For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the Hunter, and from the
noisome Pestilence. 4. He shall defend thee under his Wings; and thou shall
be safe under his Feathers: his Faithfulness and Truth shall be thy shield and
buckler. For, may seem to some to come a little too close after the former
words; I will say to the Lord, Thou art my hope and strong hold, my God, in him
will I trust: For, he shall deliver thee, etc! As if he would not trust in
God, unless he were sure of deliverance. Job seems to speak more resolutely:
shall I receave Good at the hands of God, and not Evil? Job 2.10. shall the
Child of God, thank him and trust in him only for Blessings, and not for
Afflictions also? God forbid. Whatsoever God does unto us, must be accepted
thankfully, because it proceeds from him, be it Blessing, or Visitation. Is
there any evil in the City, that I have not done? says the Lord by the
Prophet: and shall we therefore cease to bless, praise, and magnify him,
because he visits and afflicts us? Not so. This (for) is not conditional, but
illative. The Psalmist here instructs the godly, to whom to have recourse in
dangerous times: and as in the former verses he showed, that their Protector is
the Almighty, that it is God, who is their strong Hold, thereby declaring his
Power: so here he specifies his Willingness and Readiness to defend and
protect his children, and causally exhorts all Gods Children to trust in the
Lord: for, or because, as he is their strong Hold and their God in whom they
trust: so he will and shall deliver them in all Occurrents of danger. Were
that particle (For) conditional (as it is not, but illative) yet were there no
The Reason is, because, though we are to live by says, yet a dram of tried
faith, is better than a pound of untried.
incongruity. For when Jacob went toward Laban, he did in a manner stipulate
with God, saying, If God will be with me and keep me in this way I go, and
will give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, so that I return to my
Fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God, Genesis 28.20, 21. So
may every good Christian being in danger, necessity, and Tribulation, pray to
GOD for deliverance, comfort, and supply of his Wants; and vow, as Jacob did,
that if God will bless him and deliver him, then he shall be his God and
Lord, and that he will fear, honor and serve him, and him only: which vow
has no negative Implication, that if GOD deliver him not, then he shall not
be his God. The Prophet David understood this perfectly; as is evident by his
often thanking God for afflictions, and Visitations, Psalm. 119. he says first;
O Lord thou have dealt graciously with thy servant; for before I was troubled,
I went wrong: but now I have kept thy word. And presently after: It is good for
me that I have been in trouble, that I may learn thy statutes: and in Psalm
16. I will thank thee Lord for giving me warning, ver. 8. After that manner,
throughout the whole book of Psalms, he frequently expresses his thankful
acknowledgement for Afflictions, Visitations, and Persecutions. Here he
instructs the godly in whom to trust, namely in God: assuring them, they may
boldly do it: for, or because, he will or shall deliver them from the Hunters
snare, etc. that is, from all Persecutions of enemies spiritual or temporal.
Our spiritual Adversary is the devil, who may be properly termed a Hunter,
because, beside his own daily wicked suggestions, he does by the Vanities of
the World, and the lusts and concupiscence of the Flesh, lay nets and snares to
entrap us. Trust firmly in God, and he will deliver thee from this formidable
enemy, who goes about like a Roaring Lion, seeking whom to devour. At the
beginning, he got the start of our first Parents, when security made them
forfeit their Innocence, by yielding to his Temptations. But God presently
rose and showed himself, passing sentence ore that seducer, Genesis 3. I will put
Enmity between thee and the woman: and betwixt thy seed, and her seed: he
shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

This enemy is most to be feared, because his snares are most dangerous, he
daily plowing with our own Heifer, and fomenting our Flesh in her Rebellion
against the Spirit, so that if God were not our Hope and strong Hold, it were
impossible for us to escape. But if in him we trust, God will break his
snares, and our Soul shall be delivered as a Bird out of the snare of the
Fowler: Psalm 144. ver. 6. Let Satan seek to winnow us, as he did Saint
Peter: we have Christ to intercede for us, as he did for him, that our Faith
fail not. Trust then in this Advocate, be not wanting to thy self, but put on
the whole Armor of God, as Saint Paul advises, especially the Shield It was
anciently the greatest dishonor of a Soldier to be disarmd of his Shield.
of Faith, which may quench the fiery Darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16. As for
temporal dangers and persecutions, they are less to be feared, for he that
has a care of thy Soul, will preserve thy Body, so that no Enemy shall hurt
nor Danger overwhelme thee Of all Temporal Dangers, those that touch the Body,
and threaten the Life, are most sensible, and most dangerous; as the Devil,
though a Liar from the beginning, said truly, Skin for skin, and all that
a man has, will he give for his Life. Job 2.4. Nothing endangers life, more
than the Plague or Pestilence, against the dread and danger whereof, this
Psalm seems more especially to be dictated. That this very Affliction is the
greatest of all temporal Afflictions, may appear by David, who having his
choice of War, Famine, and Pestilence, out of a true sense and feeling of his
great sin, chose the [Herein the learned Author follows Josephus.]
greatest punishment, and such a one as is unavoidable by greatness, or any
temporal help, the cure whereof, or preservation from it, depending There Is no
specificall Antidote against the Pestilence: (as Physicians confess.) Vid.
Vntzer. de Peste.
immediately on God, whose Angel strikes where he commands, and spares those
whom he would have preserved. It is a swift flying Arrow that lights on us
unawares, and commonly strikes at the heart. Witness, the firstborne of Egypt,
who were all destroyed by it, in one night the Army of Sennacherib, of whom the
Angel of the Lord slew 185000. (by the Pestilence) in another night; and the
mutinous murmuring Israelites who were smitten in a moment. For no sooner had
Moses said, Wrath is gone out from the Lord, but immediately 14700. died of the
Plague, Number. 16. It is noisome, and by consequence, uncomfortable, depriving
men of succor, assistance, or relief; so that he who is visited therewith may
truly say with David; My loins are filled with a sore disease, and there is no
sound part in my Body, Psalm. 38.7. Add hereunto out of the same Psalm: My
lovers and Neighbors did stand looking on my trouble, and my Kinsmen stood a
far off. It is a Terror, and that by night, when small dangers seem great, and
great apprehensions are terrible. But as it walks in Darkness, which is
dreadful, so it flies by Day, and destroies likewise at Nooneday; not only
affrighting, but astonishing, and amazing us with fearful spectacles of
Mortality: as thousands that fall besides us; and ten thousand at our right
hand. It respects no persons, as we see by example of Ezekias, who being a
King, and a good King, was therewith visited. There Is no avoiding it, because it
proceeds immediately from God, from whom thou can not fly. Whither shall I
go from thy Spirit, or from thy presence? If I climb up to Heaven, thou art
there; if I descend to Hell, thou art there also, Psalm. 139. Is there then no
remedy? must we despair of help or comfort, in this time of Mortality? Is
there no Balm in Gilead? yes sure. When Naaman had the Leprosy, a Captive
Maid told her Master: Would God, my Lord were with the Prophet that is in
Samaria: for he would recover him of his Leprosy. 2 Kings 5. Could a Prophet
cure the Leprosy? Then remember there is here a greater then any Prophet. See
what a Physician the Psalmist has provided, what Antidote he ministers against
this deadly Disease. The Physician is God Omnipotent, who will defend thee
under His Wings, so that thou shall be safe under His Feathers. The Antidot
and Preservative, is thy Hope and Affiance in Him. Credere, est extra nos ire,
and in Christum transire.
Repair then to that Physician, take that Antidote, and thou shall not be
afraid for any terror by night, nor for the Arrow that flies by Day? A
thousand shall fall beside thee and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it
shall not come nigh thee. Pray then for Faith and Confidence in God, and
nothing shall dismay thee. God is our Hope and strength, a very present Help
in Trouble: therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be moved, or the
Hills thrown into the midst of the Sea. Psalm 42.1, 2. Does not the Prophet
tell thee in this Psalm, that His Faithfulness and Truth shall be thy Shield
and Buckler? He has commanded thee to invocate Him when thou art in Trouble,
and promised to deliver thee James 5.13. Psalm 50.15. Return to the Lord thy
God, and be obedient to His Voice, He will not forsake nor destroy thee. Deuteronomy.
4.30. Cast thy Burden on the Lord, and He shall nourish thee. Psalm. 55.22 Come
to me (says He) all ye that labor, and are heavyladen, and I will refresh
you. Mat. 11, 28. Consider then, with whom thou have to deal, and be
confident of His Clemency, who is so rich Men often falsify: but God will be as
good as His Word.
in mercy, so bountiful in His promises, and so See Romans 10.12.
faithful and punctual in performance of His Word. If His fidelity and verity
be thy Shield and Buckler, thou have a good and warrantable Ground for thy Hope
and Trust in Him. For God, is not like Man, that he should lie, nor like the
Son of man, that He should repent: but immutable and without variation. His
promises are yea and Amen. He will not suffer His Truth to fail, nor break
His Covenant; nor alter the thing that is gone out of His mouth. Psalm 89.33,
34. He has been ever mindful of His Covenant and Promise, that He made to a
thousand Generations. Psalm 105.8. His word cannot be frustrated Esaias 55.11.
Heaven and Earth shall pass, but My Word shall not pass away, says our
Savior. Matthew. 24.35.

Having therefore in this perilous time of the Plague, such a Physician at
hand, who can and will either cure or preserve us, we may rest secure under His
wings, and safe under His Feathers; if we will. Beware; that we be not like
the Jews, of whom our Savior spoke: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under
her Wings, and ye would not. Matthew. 23.37. If chickens run from under the
wings of the hen, no mervaile, if the Kite seize on them. Since then thou have
in this Danger, the Wings of God for thy defense, and His Feathers for thy
safety, keep thee there, without wandering after vain pleasures, for fear of
being caught.

And since our Physician has prescribed us such Sovereign Antidotes and
Preservatives, it must be our care to use them Cum debito regimine as
Physicians say.
according to His Prescript: The ingredients of this Diacatholicon, are Faith,
Hope, Repentance and Prayer. No Affliction or visitation befalls us, but as a
chastisement or punishment for sin. He therefore that would be freed of the
Pain which he suffers, must endeavor to remove the Cause: whereto he must
put his own helping hand, and apply to himself those salves that are proper
for his Sore. Naaman the Syrian was not cured of his Leprosy, till he had
washed himself seven times in Jordan. Do thou every night wash thy Bed, and
water thy Couch with thy Tears: Psalm 6.6. and then thou shall be clean
likewise. When the murmuring Israelites had provoked God, and pulled down the
Plague upon themselves, Moses perceaving, that wrath was gone out from God,
commanded Aaron to take a Censer and put Incense therein, and quickly Numb.
16.46.
to make an Atonement for the People. When we see Gods hand near us, or over
us, or feel it in our selves, we must presently Zec. 8.21.
seek to make an Atonement, and offer to Him, first the Calves of our lips,
which is, Thanks, for having given us warning; and next, the sacrifice of a
broken and contrite heart which he does never despise. When the firstborne of
Egypt were smitten, the Israelites were commanded to kill a This Lamb was a
type which prefigured Christ.
Lamb, and sprinkle it is Blood on the Lintells of their Doors; that the
ministerial Angel, sent to punish the Egyptians ^eing the Blood of the Lamb
on their Doors, might pass over them and do them no hurt. In this
Visitation, the Angel of God, the executioner of His Justice, is abroad: they
therefore that desire to be spared, must by Faith apprehend the merits of Jesus
Christ, and have their souls sprinkled with His Blood; else how can they hope
or trust in God, or have confidence in His Protection, being not reconciled to
Him by His Son? Nor having by a true and lively Faith apprehended the merits
of His Passion and applied them to themselves? It is true our Savior has
promised to ease those that labor and are heavy laden; but conditionally, if
they come unto Him; which is done, by Faith and Repentance. Wherefore in so
dangerous a Visitation, when the Defense of the most High is so necessary, and
our Trust in Him so comfortable, let us be sure that our Hope be well grounded
on Faith; and pray without ceasing, for Faith, Hope, and Penitence, which are
Graces that we cannot attain of our selves, but are gratis datae, and cannot
be obtained but by fervent Prayer. He then that by Prayer and Repentance often
renewed, has got sensible Increase of the saving Graces of Faith and Hope, may
safely and sincerely trust in God for deliverance from the Plague; either by
taking it away from him, or him from it: Faith with out Repeutance, a mere
mock Faith.
which latter, Saint Paul accounts far better; desiring to depart Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ: Death being to the Godly, a Rest to the body, and
happiness to the soul; which is freed from falling into sin, and admitted
to the blissful Union of her Creator and Redeemer.

Howbeit, in time of Visitation, and Vengeance, when the destroying Angel is
abroad with his Sword drawn, it is no small comfort to a Christian man, when
Thousands fall beside him and ten thousands at his right hand, to be
preserved from Infection. His comfort may well be increased and doubled, in
contemplation of Gods mercy See this excellently expressed ^^^. 30.18.
and goodness to him. Yet, must we take heed of passing rash Judgment on
those that are visited by Gods hand, concluding our selves to be more
righteous then they. Our Savior taught His Disciples another Lesson ( Luke 13)
upon occasion of the Galilaeans, whose Blood Pilate mingled with their
Sacrifices; and of those, on whom the Tower of Siloe fell: telling them, that
they were not greater sinners then other men: and except they repented, they
likewise should perish. Saint Paul's Counsel, is seasonable: Let him that
stands, take heed least he fall: and his example, is worthy our Imitation;
professing himself, to be the Greatest sinner, though he were an elect
Vessel. When therefore we see Gods Judgments powered upon What then ^ are we
better then they ^ No; in no wise. Romans 39.
others, let us not fondly and rashly condemn them, as more ungodly then we
are, but confess, that we have deserved as much as they, and thank him, for
having spared us and given us a longer Time of repentance. Give glory to God
for showing mercy to thee, which thou deservedst not, when his wrath was powered
on others, which perhaps deserved it less than thou. Improve the Time lent
thee, to Humiliation, Contrition, and Amendment of Life. Be frequent and
fervent in prayer. Let the Lord be thy Hope, Joel. 3.16
let thy faith be operative by works of Piety and Charity Gal. Verse 9.10, 11,
12, 13.
5.6. and then shall no evil happen unto thee: for He shall give His Angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: etc. These Angels, being
Spirits, are not to be seen by the eye of Faith, but when by Gods order, they
assume Bodies; and therefore we must look up with an eye of Faith to Him who
rules and commands them, and has made them all, ministering spirits, sent forth
for the behoof of them who are heirs of Salvation. Heb. 1.14. and therefore
when the Angel, executioner of Gods justice, is abroad, we may hope and trust
in God, that His Angels encampe about us that fear and worship Him in
sincerity of heart.

In the eighteenth of Genesis, we read of three Angels that appeared to
Abraham in the shape of men, and from him they went to destroy Sodom and
Gomorrah: yet, in the nineteenth, we find mention but of two Angels that were
entertained by Lot, and did execute the vengeance of God on those sinful
Cities: Some have observed, that God Almighty, who was one of the three that
appeared to Abraham, and ministered occasion to him to pray for Lots
deliverance, did afterward retire, and leave to his Angels, the execution of
His justice: and that throughout the Scripture God Himself is never recorded
to show Himself visibly, but when He glorifies Himself in Mercy, ever
committing the executing of Judgments to His ministers. This Conceit is
strengthened by our Saviors Interpretation of the Parable of the Tears: Mat.
13. where He says that the Officers which are to burn the Tears, are the
Angels: Psalm. 39.41, 42. which in the end of the world He will send forth, to
gather out of His Kingdom all things which offend, and them which do
Iniquity, and to cast them into a Furnace of fire.

When the Devil tempting our Savior, had set Him on the Pinnacle of the
Temple, he perverted part of this Psalm, to persuade Him to show Himself to
be the Son of God by casting Himself down: for (says he) it is written, He
will give his Angels charge over thee, that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone. Matthew. 4. Pope Alexander the third is observed to have followed the
Devil very close, applying to Himself the words following, and abusing them
likewise, when he set his foot on the neck of the Emperor Frederick; saying,
Thou shall go upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shall
thou tread under thy feet. This had no conformity with the Doctrine of our
Savior, nor with the practice of Himself and His Apostles. He paid Tribute to
Caesar, not trod on his neck. But I will not amplify this Exorbitancy.
Transeat inter caeteros errores Canonistarum: and let that Pope pass among
them that detort Scripture to their own Damnation. Let us beware, we stumble
not at the same stone, by misinterpreting See a learned Sermon preached at
Oxford by Master John Hales, the rare Ornament of Eton College
or misapplying Scripture carelessly and negligently, as Satan did subtly and
maliciously. God has given His Angels charge over us, that they bear us in
their hands etc. but they are bound to keep thee, but in all thy ways: (which
words the Devil omitted, because they made not for his purpose.) This point is
clearly demonstrated in the History of the Jews, from their Exit, or coming
out of Egypt, till their Entrance into Canaan. For as long as they were in
their way, and were obedient to the word of the Lord, nothing could hurt them;
as appears by their miraculous Deliverances from dangers and frequent
victories over all their enemies: But when they went out of their way, by
murmuring, disobedience and Idolatry, then were they stung Number. 21.6
with fiery serpents, and sold into the hands of their Enemies, or smitten
with the Plague: none of Gods Angels coming in, to help them, till they
returned into the way again, by Repentance. The Royal Prophet often harpes on
this stringe in the Book of Psalms, which Saint Hilary truly calls The Key
of Scripture. If we peruse the Psalms 44.18.80.106. we shall see the Jews
prospering and flourishing under Gods Protection while they walked in their way;
and dejected and abandoned, when they started aside like a broken Bow. While
Samsons hair was uncut (which was his Vow of a Nazarite) his strength was
unresistable; but when he went out of his way to Timnah ( Iud. 14.1.) and
Delilah had cut his Locks, though he went out against the Philistines (as at
other times) God having left him, they prevailed against him. When Saul sinned,
the Spirit of God departed from him. 1 Samuel 16.14. Josiah, the best King that
ever reigned in Jerusalem, never went out of his way (for ought We read) but
once, when he would needs fight with Pharoah-Necho, King of Egypt, who had no
quarrel to him, and then, as if God had watched him to take him in his first
fault, he miscarried, and was slain. 2 Chro. 35. Let us then take heed how
we go with Jonas to Tharsis, when we are commanded to go to Nineveh, least
we draw a bitter storm on our selves and those that are in our company. The
ways we are to walk in, if we expect the protection of God, and Assistance of
His holy Angels, are traced out unto us in the Decalogue, where we are taught
what to do, and what not to do. The Old and New Testament are Commentaries on
these ten Commandments: and therefore we must study, read, and meditate Gods
word, if we desire to know His Will and to do it. David asks the question:
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? and instantly resolves it: Even
by ruling himself by thy word. This word is a Lantern to our way, and a Light
to our Paths: Psalm. 119: in which Psalm, almost in every Line, there is
mention made of the word, Law, Statutes, and Commandments of God; wherein the
Prophet desires to be instructed, and professes to be singularly delighted.
Since then our way is chalked out in Gods word, let us pray with the Prophet,
Order my steps in thy word, so shall no wickedness have dominion over me.
Psalm. 143. Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes, make me to go in the Paths
of thy Precepts. Psalm. 119. If we can thus pray with a pure heart, God will
answer us; as Psalm. 32.9. I will inform and teach thee, in the way wherein
thou shall go, and I will guide thee with mine Eye. If by prayer and
Repentance we can purchase this Grace from God to be guided and directed in our
ways, and if we look to our steps, and be careful not to go out of the way,
when he has set us in, we may rest assured of His gracious providence, and
angelical protection in our several vocations.

But O Lord, What is man, that thou art mindful of him; and the son of man,
that thou visitest him, Psalm. 8.4. Thou made him lower than the Angels, and
yet thou command thy blessed Angels to attend him, to have charge over him,
and to bear him As Nur^es be are young children in their arms: (So the
Original imports.)
in their hands! What moves thee O Lord to be so gracious and so good to this
poor creature of thine?

14. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore shall I deliver him: I
shall set him up, because he has known my Name. 15. He shall call upon me,
and I will hear him: Yea, I am with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and
being him to honor. 16. With long life will I satisfy him; and show him my
salvation. The causall Particle here (Because) iterated Verse. 14. is not to be
understood as if it implied any Merit in us, or as if God were obliged in
regard of our knowledge of him, to protect us from the Pestilence, or to make
Lions and Dragons subject to us, as he did to David, Daniel, and others of his
children: but has reference simply and purely to his mercy and goodness, who
has a special care of his Elect (whom he covers under his wings in all times
of danger) and to his promise which he has made, to reward freely, and not for
any desert, those that entirely love him, and faithfully invocate him. If we
desire the honor to be called his Sons, are we not bound to love and honor
him whom we call Father? Can we do less than love God the Father, for
creating us after his own Image? God the Son, for redeeming us when we were
lost? God the Holy Ghost, for always comforting and assisting us? And when we
have done our best, Deus magis delectatur affectu, quam effectu. Amb.
are we not unprofitable servants? Herein is love (says Saint John) not that
we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for
our sins, 1 Ioh. 4.10. And indeed, how could we possibly love him, if he had
not given us the grace to know him, and consequently to love him? Ignoti nulla
cupido. Now although we can claim no merit by our loving of God, (because it
is our bounden Duty) yet are we well encouraged thereto, by the Reward which
accompanies it, in virtue of Gods Promise, and of his pure Mercy and Goodness.
In the second Commandment he promises to show mercy to Thousands, in them that
love him, and keep his Commandments: And Psalm. 31. O love the Lord all ye his
Saints, for the Lord preserves them that are faithful, etc. As therefore it is
our duty to express our gratitude (for graces or benefits received) by loving
God who conferres them: so is it an Act of Gods mere goodness, to love us for
loving him, and to make us see and feel the effects of his love, by his
preservation and protection. David, Psalm. 130.4. says, There is mercy with
thee, therefore thou shall be feared: which may seem to have some repugnancy,
with the love formerly spoken of, in that ordinarily men hate those whom they
fear. Oderint, dum metuant. This is true among Barbarians, and those that are
oppressed by Tyrants. But we must distinguish betwixt a servile and filial
fear. The former is proper to the reprobate, the latter to the elect. There is
no child of God that will not fear to offend and displease his heavenly
Father, that has been so indulgent and gracious unto him, as he must needs
acknowledge and confess, if he have any sense of God or godliness, or any
understanding of his stupendous creation, redemption and preservation. Yea the
more graces or benefits he has received of him, the more will he fear to
displease him. Thanks must be Orall and real also.
All that GOD requires, is a cordial Recognition of His Grace and Mercy: My
son, give me thy heart Prove. 23.26. our whole Duty is summarily comprehended
in these words: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and love
him with all thy strength, and with all thy might; and thy neighbor as thy
self. By this, may we know, whether we love God, if we love our neighbor:
For how can he love God whom he has not seen, if he love not his brother
whom he has seen, says Saint John; 1 Ioh. 4.20.
who as he had the Honor to be styled, The disciple whom Jesus loved, so does
he seem to have appropriated to himself, the preaching and teaching this
doctrine (of loving God and our neighbor) above all the other Apostles, as may
be seen by his Divine Epistles.

I will set him up (says the Psalm) because he has known my Name: that is,
because he has called upon me and worshipped me: as may be collected out of
the 76 Psalm 1.2. In Jury is God known, his Name is great in Israel; at Salem
is his Tabernacle: (which was the appointed place of his Worship.) If then we
desire to be delivered and to be set up (out of Gunshot) as here is promised,
we must not only love him, and our Neighbor for his sake, but worship Him also
in such sort as he has prescribed in His most sacred Word. These Religious
duties are necessarily required of all those which expect the Comforts which
this Psalm exhibites. For, all the Assistance and Protection promised (from the
first words throughout the Psalm) have a connection with this present clause:
Because he has set his love upon me: because he has known my Name: That is,
to the utmost of his power: Evangelically, not legally.
and a conditional reference thereto. So that whosoever loves not God See
Zech. 7.12, 13.
perfectly, (2 Cor. 7.1.) nor worships him truly, deceaves himself, if he
think he dwells under the defense of the most High, or that he has any part in
the promises of Deliverance here specified, because they are proper only to the
godly; who being assisted with his holy Spirit, shall call upon him so
effectually, and knock at Heaven gates so powerfully, that he shall hear them
and deliver them: yea and satisfy them with long life (which is more than
Solomon desired, when God gave him Carta vianca) and show them his salvation;
which is as much as any man can wish.

I confess, Sickness, Poverty, and all other temporal Mortifications render
men contemptible and despicable to the Wicked, N. B.
and make them undervalued See James 2.2, to 8.
by ordinary Christians, who pass their judgments of Men, accordingly as they
weigh (after the Worlds opinion) in the balance of Honor, Reputation and
Wealth: But the Child of GOD is promised here not only a Preservative against
all dangers (so far and so long as God shall judge expedient for him) but
also a Restorative, when he has been afflicted and humbled. For if his
enemies have marked him out (as their custom is) in the time of his
Humiliation, for one whom GOD looked not after, nor cared for: he has a
promise here to be advanced to Honor, and (which is the height of all
temporal Blessings) to be satisfied with long life: so that he shall
over-live his enemies and be honored by those that despised him, when the hand
of God was upon him.

Let Ahaziah then send to Baalzebub, the God of Ekron, in the time of his
sickness, to enquire whether he shall live or dye: Is it not because there is
no GOD in Israel? says the LORD: 2 King. 1. Let gowtie Asa trust in his
Physicians, 2 Chronicles 16. Let the superstitious Papaline in his sickness
dishonor the Blessed Virgin by vowing himself to her: Quum nulla amplius in
Medicis spes erat salutis, and non magna (as he blasphemously said) in Deo: Let
them vainly trust to the Oil of the Lamp Dignus morte perit, qui mortua vivus
adorat. An experiment of Papists vain confidence in Relics, against the
Plague.
of Saint Carlo Borromeo, the dispensation whereof I have seen with my eyes,
and my Soul has grieved to see ignorant people abused by more ignorant
Friars. In Iurea, the trusting to that Imposture, cost the lives of the most
part of that City: and Milan, (whence it was brought) has suffered beyond
belief, there having died in that state, near three hundred thousand souls.

Not without cause, said the Prophet, O be thou my help in trouble, for vain
is the help of man, Psalm 60.11. and Psalm 77.1. In time of danger I will
cry unto God, yea to God will I cry, and he shall hearken unto me. I deny not
but Physical Antidotes, and Praecautiens may be used as secundary means: but
they must be used with Prayer to God to bless them: and our immediate Trust
must be wholly in him, and his protection. For, except the Lord build the
house, vain is their labor that build it, etc. Psalm. 127.1.2. and therefore,
Psalm. 130.7.
O Israel, trust in the Lord, for with the Lord is Mercy, and with him is
plenteous Redemption.

Tenor of this Psalm, and the maine scope thereof, there is an Objection not
to be past over in silence. For whereas David here promises great matters to
the godly, assuring them of the protection of God, and his Angels, and further,
that with their eyes they shall see the Reward of the ungodly; Experience daily
shows the contrary; and has so done since the beginning of the world.
Innocent Abel lost his life for serving God truly, and for Gods acceptance of
his service: and our Savior Epitomizing the Scriptures in this point,
threatens the Jews, that upon them shall come all the righteous blood shed on
the earth; from righteous Abel, to Zacharias, etc. Matthew. 23.35. The Church of
GOD here on earth is therefore called Militant, because it never has peace,
but perpetual War, affliction, tribulation, persecution: the enemies thereof
being mighty, viz. Principalities and Powers, etc. Ephesians. 6.12. Our Savior
expressly commands all his Followers to take up his Cross: Wicked most dandled
in the Worlds lap.
and in the Book of Psalms we find David often complaining of the Adversities
of the godly, and prosperity of the wicked: In the 73. Psalm. he was shrewdly
startled at the contemplation of this point. My feet were almost gone: my
steps well nigh slipped: And why? I was grieved at the wicked: I saw the ungodly
in such prosperity: for they are in no peril of death, in no misfortune, nor
plagues as others are; but lusty and strong, etc. Contrarily, of the godly he
says: Thou feedest them with bread of Tears, etc. Psalm. 80.5. and (which is
more) For thy sake are we killed all the day long.

difficulty is soon resolved, by distinguishing in God the qualities of a
Father, and of a Judge: to his Elect an indulgent Father: to the Reprobate a
severe Judge. A loving Father corrects his delinquent Children, yet ceases not
to care for them, but recomforts them when they amend: So deals God with his
people, and is therefore styled the Shepherd of ISRAEL, and described, to have
a Rod and Pastoral staff: a Rod, to beat his wandering sheep, a staff to
keep off the devouring Wolf. Yea, both these are not only useful and
necessary, but comfortable. Thy Rod and Staff comfort me, says the Prophet,
Psalm. 23.4. and again: It is O blessed Rod of God which does so much good.
good for me, that I have been in Trouble, that I may learn thy statutes:
Before I was troubled, I went wrong, but now I have kept thy word: Psalm. 119.
The wicked (I grant) may insult and triumph over the godly, when they see them
afflicted; and having their eyes swollen with fatness, they may blaspheme
wickedly and talk against the most High: Psalm. 73.
But in the same Psalm, we read their doom Psalm 17.18, 19. They are set in
slippery places, cast down and destroyed, yea suddenly consumed, and come to a
fearful end. This Mystery David himself understood not, till he went into
the Sanctuary: Then was he grieved for the vengeance fallen upon them, Ver.
20.21.
and adjudg'd himself for a fool and a Beast, in reflecting so much on their
momentany Prosperity.

Contrariwise, when the godly are chastised, it is done only to humble them:
and the more they deject themselves, the more will God erect them; putting them
into the fire, not like base metal, to be consumed, but like pure Gold to be
purged from the Dross of sin. Many are the troubles of the Righteous, yet (at
last) the Lord delivers them out of all; should they live the age of
Methusalem, and suffer persecution all that while, what were those years of
Eternity, to which they aspire? Let the godly and Religious then boldly rely on
the Comforts of this Psalm: for, if he fear the Plague, it shall not come
nigh him; ( that is, to harm him:) and if any other Affliction beside him, it
shall turn to his Good; in this, or a better life. For, we know, that all
things worktogether for the best, to them that love God; and the sufferings of
this present time (of what nature soever) are not worthy to be balanced with
the glory which shall be revealed in us, To. 8.28, 18. Let us therefore
(according to the exhortation of the Divine Apostle) be steadfast, and
unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as we know, 1
Cor. 15.58
that our labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Laus tibi Domine JESUS.
A MEDITATION on the History of Agag, King of AMALEK.
1 Samuel 15. Ver. 32.33. And Agag came unto him delicately: and Agag said,
Surely the bitterness of death is past. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before
the Lord in Gilgal.


THe comfort which our former Meditation afforded us in the time of our
greatest danger, has need of a little Temper or Corrective, lest presuming too
much on the protection of the Almighty, we let slip our Anchor, and make
shipwreck in the Haven, after we have escaped a storm in the maine Sea. The
Ninivites at Ionah's preaching, repented in sackcloth and Ashes: Which may be a
Document to us, not to put off our sackcloth too soon, lest we relapse into
greater danger then we formerly feared.

Security is a Cradle which rocks men into a spiritual lethargy out of which
they seldom or never awake, till the sound of the last Trumpet call them to
judgment. To prevent this fatal disease, it will be good for us to meditate a
little on the History of Agag, who was nearest Destruction, when he thought
himself most free from danger.

He had some reason to think himself secure, because he was a Prisoner of
War and therefore exempt from Death by the Law of Nations. He was a King, and
therefore the more privileged. He had been spared by Saul, whose prisoner he
was, and who being a King, had potestatem vitae and necis: yet, when he thought
himself safe, it was worse with him then with the rest of the Amalekites, for
they perished only by the sword in the treat of Battle, but he in cool blood
was hewed in pieces. Pejor est morte, mortis modus. This is an excellent
mirror, wherein we may contemplate the frail condition of Mankind, and
consider, that we are set in slippery places, and have no sure footing on any
ground here on earth: being ready to fall, when we seem to our selves to stand
surest.

Our present Meditation shall propose,

1. The Danger of this Lethargike disease of Seouritie. 2. The Symptoms that
indicate it. 3. Remedies to prevent it.
The dangerous estate of sinful Security.
The Danger may be illustrated by Examples, Examples.
demonstrated by Reasons, and convinced by the Authority of Scriptures. Happy
are they which can learn to be wise by others Folly, and avoid those Rocks
which have mind them. A gag is not alone, in saying, The bitterness of death
is past, when the sweetness of the Hope wherewith he solac'd himself, was
turned into Bitterness and Gall. He has company enough of those that thought
as he said, and fared no better than he did. When the men of Laish were secure
(as they supposed) the Danites smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt
their City, Judge. 18.27. Nebuchadnezzar judged himself, Extra fortunae aleam,
to be out of the reach of danger, when walking Majestically, in his Royal
Palace, he said; Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the House of
the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the Honor of my Majesty? But
while the word was in his mouth, he heard a voice from Heaven, saying, Thy
Kingdom is departed from thee, Dan. 4 30, 31. Belshazzar See Dan. 5.22.
his son though he knew all this, yet thought that nothing could shake him,
when being guarded with a thousand o^ his Princes, and carowsing with them in
the sacred Chalices of the Temple, he saw a Hand write on the Wall, which made
his joints to be loosed, and his Knees to smite one against the other: the
loss of life and Kingdom being then denounced to him, Dan. 5. Sisera and
Holofernes slept foundly; when Iael nailed the one to the Ground, and Judith
struck off the others Head.

Nor is this Disease proper to the wicked alone (whom we have hitherto
exemplifi'd) but Epidemik and common to all men: even to the Church Security,
one of Englands national sins.
and Children of GOD. The Jews, Gods ancient People, were seldom deliverd
from any great peril, but soon after they drew on themselves, as great, or
greater, by their supine Security, and presumption of Gods mercy: as is clear
in the 78. Psalm, and the Book of Judges, throughout. Yea David Himself, a
man after GODS own heart, had a spice of this disease, as appears in the 30.
Psalm, In my prosperity, I said, I shall never be removed, thou Lord, of thy
goodness have made my Hill so strong, Ver. 6. but immediately, in the next
ver. he confesses, that the Lord hiding his face, he was troubled, and then he
cried to the Lord, and went to him right humbly, being near death, or in great
fear of it, as appears by the verses subsequent. Thus danger ever treads on
the heels of security, and often trips them up. I will close these examples,
with our Saviors Parable, Luke 12. the Apodosis or Application thereof, being
common to all men, The rich man there, sung a Requiem to his soul, when
immediately it was said, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from
thee, ver. 20.

Reasons.
The Reasons hereof are evident. For, when men fear least, they provide lest
against danger. A City is never more subject to Surprise, then when it is
ungarded. The Trojans defended themselves bravely ten years together, while
the enemy encampt before the City; but when the Greeks discamping, faind a
Retrait, and came upon them unawares, the Town was suddenly taken, that held
out so long. A Poet describing the overthrow of that famous City, the
Metropolis of Asia, says thus:

-- Sic profanatis sacris, Peritura Troja perdidit primum Deos. They lost their
GODS, before they lost their Town. Their Palladium had been stolen from them,
which argued their careless security. In like manner, it is seldom seen, that
men run any great hazard of life, livelihood, or liberty, but they first loose
GOD by carnal security. David in the prementiond Psalm. 30: ver. 7.
Psalm, intimates the cause of his Trouble, Fear, and Danger, saying, Thou
did turn thy face from me: implying, that he had first turned aside from
God, in the time of prosperity, when he had said, I shall never be removed.

A second Reason, may be drawn from the Propension of our corrupt nature to
Lust and Concupiscence, whereto as we incline strongly, so the Devil tempts us
hourly. Now sensuality has never so much power over a man as in prosperity,
which rendering us secure, no marvel if we fall into sensles stupidity, and
never reflect on the bitterness of Death. The Prophet relating hereto, (
Psalm. 32.) compares such to the Horse and Mule, which have no understanding,
whose Affliction fires out corruption.
mouths must be holden with Bit and Bridle: that is, Affliction, and
Tribulation, which restrain men commonly from precipitating themselves into
such gross sins as otherwise they were apt to fall into. Afflictio domat
cupiditates, exerat fidem, coronat patientiam.

The last reason is defect of understanding, Inconsideration, the common error
of the World; and the chief cause of all gross sins and errors. See 2 Chro.
12.14.
and want of sound Judgment in most men, who seldom look further then the
present, and consider not what may fall out hereafter. Demosthenes upbraiding
the Athenians with Improvidence and incircumspection, presented to them an
innocent Fool, who being struck on the one Cheek, laid his hand on the place
where he had received the blow, and being smit on the other did the like: never
using either of his hands to defend himself from further blows. Such is the
case of mankind: Ubi dolor, ibi digitus: We are so possessed with worldly
business, or so besotted with pleasures, that we never think on Gods Judgments
but while they are present; and if we escape, we conclude (with Agag) The
bitterness of death is past: not considering, that so long as we carry sin
about us, we carry Nemesin a tergo, Vengeance still dogs us, and (without
Repentance) will at last overtake us.

Scripture Proofs.
Scripture Authorities to confirm this point, are obvious to any that has
studied the Book of God, there being nothing more frequent, then exhortations
to vigilance, and dehortations from security. Yea the Prophets are therefore
styled Watchmen, because they are appointed to watch over us, that when we
sleep in security (as the Disciples did, at the instant when the Shepherd was
to be smitten and the Sheep to be scatterd) they might sound an Alarm in our
ears, and rouse us to consideration of our danger.

In the Greek Anthology, we read of a Physician, who having two Patients, the
one Lunatike, the other Lethargike, locked them up both in one Room, when he
that was frantic did so beat the Lethargik, that he kept him from sleeping (by
force) and so cured him: and (withal) so wearied himself with beating, that
he fell a sleep, and recovered likewise. If we apply this to our selves, it may
serve to show us, what a perilous disease a Lethargy is, which requires blows
to cure it, the smart whereof we may feel, and bear the Marks, a long while
after. If therefore after some great cross or danger over-past, our carnal
lusts desire to renew their acquaintance with us, the Vanities of the World
allure us, or the Devil would persuade us to think, that the bitterness of
Death is past, yet, as we tender our own souls, let us not give ear to those
charming temp tations, least (with Agag) we be hewne in pieces, when we least
suspect it. Nemo tam Divos habuit faventes, Crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri:
In our best health, we cannot promise to our selves a Day: and therefore, can
never say, the bitterness of death is past; since every Day, is a step to
Death; yea every Hour and Moment. Our bodies are but earthen Vessels, which a
small knock will break: so that they who have escapt a furious plague, may
dye of a small Fever or surfeit. Thus worldly dangers and disasters still hover
over our heads, and compass us round: and therefore none can truly say, that
the bitterness of death is past, but those only that are reconciled to God by
Jesus Christ, who swallowed up Death in Victory, and exempted his children from
its sting and bitterness. The danger of this spiritual Lethargy being so
great and impendent, let us consider, what signs or Symptoms thereof may be
found in our corrupt Natures, that perceaving our own perilous estate, we
may seek to prevent it, by applying such remedies as are proper and
specificall.

Symptoms of security.
is a giddle and vertiginous spirit; which is most visibly seen in Reprobates,
who run madly after their own wild lusts, and pursue their pleasure with
such greediness, as apparently shows, they have no sense nor apprehension of
Death or Judgment. These kind of men the Psalmist paints in their colors,
Psalm. 59.5. they offend of malicious wickedness, verse 6. they run to and
fro, and about the City: Psalm. 10. They care not for God, nor once think of
him. These are entered into a Lethargy, being taken in the head, and having
lost regimen intellectus, whereby they might understand their own danger.
Being thus infatuated, they wilfully run into all kind of wickedness, and so
falling into the Devils snares, are taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy
2.26.

Symptom, indicating an inclination to security; is spiritual drowsinesse,
saintnesse and weariness in Gods service. Spontanea lassitudo indicat morbum.
This is ordinarily seen in the Vulgar sort of Christians, who are mere
Nominals, and profess Christianity only for fashion. Sundry of these, as they
do no hurt, (their exterior conversation being fair and unexceptionable) so
they do no good. They can say prayers, but cannot pray, as wanting the Spirit
See Zech 12, 10
of Grace and Prayer. They honor GOD with their lips, but their hearts Such
learn Religion by Roto, not by Heart: having no regard of their own souls, as
appeared by their lewd lives.
are far from him. They go to Church, to sleep there: and hear Sermons;
but with no attention to the Doctrine, nor intention to do thereafter. These
Carnal Gospellers may see themselves in the ordinary Pictures of Cain, and
Abel: the smoke of Cains sacrifice being painted descending to the earth, but
that of Abels, mounting toward Heaven, intimating, that Cain served God dully,
heavily and perfunctorily: and Abel, with Zeal, Fervor and spiritual
devotion. If we be thus qualified, we may boldly approach the Throne of Grace:
for, with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

Thirdly, we must observe, whether we be completely armd against our
spiritual enemies, and well provided of Antidotes against spiritual Diseases.
For if we have laid by our Arms, it is an argument, that we fear nothing, and
a shrewd sign that security begins to rock us. If we have cast away our
preservatives, it argues a strong presumption of a sound Constitution: wherein,
yet, we may deceave our selves, as the Church of Laodicea did, who thought her
self rich, and to want nothing, when she was poor, blind, and naked, Apoc.
3.17. Physicians say, Athletica constitutio parum distat a morbo; and therefore
let him that thinks himself so strong that he needs no Antidote, know that he
is near falling into some desperate disease. Our Spiritual Arms are the
Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Hope, the Sword of the Spirit (Ephesians. 6.) The
Christians A^mour of proof.
and the Breast plate of Charity, 1 These. 5. ver. 8. which if we lay aside, and
unharnesse our selves, (as he that returns from Warfare) we lie open to our
enemies (who sometime make a Truce with us, but never firm Peace in this
world) and therefore are in danger of a Surprise. Our preservatives, are Prayer
and Repentance: which first, is a Catholicon, an Ingredient that enters into
all spiritual Medicines: if we be slack, therein, and pray not always with
all manner of prayer and supplication of the spirit, it is a sign, this
Lethargik disease is growing upon us.

Synchronisme, or comparison of the Times, in which we have been in Adversity,
and Prosperity, and to observe, how we have been affected therein. In time of
danger, we look up to God, we bemone our selves, confess our sins, profess
our penitence, acknowledge Gods Justice, implore his Mercy, prostrating our
selves before him in fasting and weeping: We (then) are diligent in hearing
Gods word, and meditating therein; frequent in works of Mercy to the poor and
needy, willing to communicate, ready to distribute, as seeming desirous
(thereby) to lay up in store for our selves a good foundation of happy
eternity, 1 Timothy 6.19. Now let us examine our selves, whether in time of
prosperity we have not cooled or relented in any of these spiritual duties, in
which we were formerly so fervent and diligent: whether our Zeal be not
lukewarm, A memento for backsliding Hypocrites.
our Charity frezen, our Devotion faint, our Prayers perfunctory, our service
of God only formal and superficial; and lastly, whether we say not in our
hearts, O that Ismael might live in thy sight! that so we might entertain our
old Concubine Hagar (the lusts of the Flesh) after Isaac the child of Promise
is borne. If we find in our selves any such Alteration, or disinclination from
pious duties, we may assure our selves, that Satan seeks to lull us asleep in
security.

exactly observe, whether after deliverance from danger, we have not omitted
to glorify our Deliverer, in imitation of that thankful Samaritan, Luke
17.15, 16. who being cured of his Leprosy by our Savior, with a loud Compare
Luke 19.37.
voice glorified God, and fell down on his face at Christ's feet, giving him
thanks. When God spared Jerusalem from the Plague, at the instance and
intercession of David, 2 Samuel 24 17, 18.
the Prophet Gad commanded him to erect an Altar in the threshing floor of
Araunah and to sacrifice to the Lord: whence it appears, that when we have
received any blessings or deliverance from God, he expects, yea See Psalm.
50.14, 15.
commands, that we offer to him the Eucharisticall sacrifices of Praise and
Thanks. Which, if with the nine Lepers, (Luke 17.17.) we fail to perform,
it is a sign that the Enemy of our Souls has so stupefied us with security,
that we dare not be so brutish as to put in practice that damnable Italian
Proverb, Fatto il voto, gabbato il santo: and consequently that he intends our
eternal ruin, by persuading us to think, that the bitterness of Death is
past, and that God has but one Arrow in his Quiver, which he has shot over
our heads only to affright us.

Having declared the symptoms of this sinful Lethargy, Remedies against
security.
we shall now prescribe some Remedies thereof. In healing whereof I will pass
over those that have the Grand Vertigo (formerly specified,) and send them all,
to the Hospital of incurable mad men, as being given over to a reprobate
mind: for of such desperate sinners, the Psalms, (10. and 59.) are principally
to be understood: yet the wilful sinner that has a less degree of the
Vertigo, must not be given over pro deplorato, for though he be far gone,
Vertigo est diminuta Epilepsia. Fernel:
and dangerously infected, yet he may be recovered; as the Prodigal, being
well pincht with Hunger, returned home to his Father. They are bad Natures, that
will not return, when they are out of their way, till they smart soundly for
their Errors. Such, must have a Boanerges to thunder into their deaf ears
all the Judgments threatened in the book of God against obstinat sinners.
Tophet must be painted out unto them, flaming with fire and brimston, God must
be represented to them as a revenging Judge and consuming fire. They must not
hear a word of Peace, so long as the whordomes of Iezebel and her sorceries
are so many. They must be threatened with Excommunication and exterminion out
of the Assembly and society of the faithful: and lastly, they must be
recommended in the Prayers of the Church to Almighty God who must be earnestly
entreated to open their eyes, mollisie their hearts, and give them a quick
sense of their sins, and of the danger whereinto they have cast them. These
Remedies appl'd, may (by the assistance of the Holy Spirit) awake them out of
that spiritual slumber, and reduce them to the fold of that good shepherd,
who rejoices more for finding one lost sheep, the^ 99. which went not astray
When they are once reclaimd, salva res est: Mar. 18.13.
For when they feel their burden, they will be induced to cast it off (as too
heavy) and address themselves by invocation and repentance, to our Lord,
Jesus; confessing their sins, aggravating every circumstance of them; and
Imploring Hi^ GRACE and Mercy, till they obtain both, Heb. 4.16. Lastly, they
will set their hearts to seek God, and (with the Spouse in Solomon's song)
never leave seeking their LORD and Savior, till they have happily found him.

The next Symptom (observable in carnal Gospellers) was a dull stupidity and
drowzinesse in Gods service, which though not so dangerous as the Vertigo
praemention'd, yet shows their disposition to a Lethargy. And although their
chief Errand to the Church, be to gaze or sleep, or serve God pro forma,
yet, as many followed Christ, more for Curiosity to see his Miracles, then for
any devotion to His Doctrine, and yet (at last) some of them became His
Disciples: so there may be some hope conceav'd of these Superficialists, that
if one Sermon rowze them not, another Therefore M. Latimer wished such to come
to Church, though they came a napping.
may; and that they may meet with such a Chapter or such a Psalm; as may touch
them to the quick. Thus, one Sermon of Saint Peter's, converted three thousand,
Acts 2.41.
who came about him, to hear only what he would say: (whereas in these
days, three thousand Sermons can scarce convert One.) Thus, Augustine coming
to hear Saint Ambrose at Milan, out of an impression of his Eloquence, was
caught unawares, and of one Heretical Manichee became the greatest light of
Christianity, that the Church enjoyd since the Apostles times. These faint and
formal Christians must remember and consider, that God is a Spirit, and will
be worshipped in Spirit and truth: In truth: that is, in sincerity of heart, and
not hypocritically, for fashions sake: In Spirit: that is, with Zeal and
Fervor: not coldly and drowzily. Awake then thou that sleep supinely, and
dream not Read Zechar. 7.6, 11 12, 13.
that God will protect thee or deliver thee from danger, if thou offer him the
Sacrifice of fools, and demean thy self so profanely Profaners of Gods
Worship, increase their own condemnation, See 1 Cor. 11.29
and irreverentlie in the house of Prayer, Eccles. 5.1. What though Ahab
purchasd a temporal blessing with a formal show and Vizor of Repentance? it
profited not his Soul; and the Vengeance denounced against him, fell heavy on
his Posterity. So may the cold Formalist, and profane Varlet prosper a while
upon Earth; and though He go to the grave in peace, his children may be hewd
in pieces with Calamities, for those sins of his whereof he had no feeling.
Wherefore when thou see the Clouds of Gods Judgments gather, and some black
Disaster threaten thee for thy sins, thou must imitate the Prophet Eliah, who
when the storm approcht, girt up his Loins and ran before Ahab to Iezreel.
1 King. 18.45, 46.
If thou rowze thy self in that sort, to run the way of Gods Commandments,
then may thou safely shelter thy self under his protection. Eliah's
Translation to Heaven in a fiery Chariot, is an Emblem of that inflamed Zeal
which must mount us to Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven (says our Savior)
suffers violence, and the Violent take it. Thus Jacob wrestled with GOD for a
blessing, and prevailed. It Is quoque fac simile. Do thou so likewise, thou dull
drowzie Christian, Such Laodiceans are but half baked, as Hosea's cake was.
Hose. 7.8. They imagine a greater latitude in Religion then there is: so that
they need not to be zealous, nor make such post-hast to Heaven.
that servest God betwixt sleeping and wakeing: and remember what befell
Eutychus, who was taken up dead, for sleeping at Saint Paul's Sermon, Acts 20.9.

The third mark of this spiritual Lethargy, like a Scorpion, carries about
her, both her Poison and Antidote. For when we perceave our sins of
Omission, and the dangerous Sequel thereof; we cannot but know, that the
Reformation must needs be advantageous to us. Seeing therefore that we are in
continual Danger of our sworn and deadly enemies, the Devil and his Angels;
it concerns us to be armd at all points, and still to stand upon our guard,
least being disarmd, we be suddenly surprised. Genesis 14.
Abraham having armd 318. of his own Family, and assisted with Aner, Eshcol and
Mamre overcame 4. Kings, whom he surprised by night, when questionles they were
disarmd', and thought themselves secure. From this victory of Abraham, some
derive the first original of the order of Knighthood, affirming that he
Knighted Aner, Eshcol and Mamre, for their good service in that expedition.
Original of Knighthood,
However, we may thence conclude, that a handful of men may defeat great
Armies, by the like stratagem. And seeing our spiritual enemies are
innumerable of Devils, which are not only exceeding potent, but ever vigilant,
and full of stratagems, it concerns us to put on the whole Panoply, or Armor
of God, and to be sober and vigilant like good Christian Soldiers, resisting
the Devil with the sword of the Spirit, and retorting his fiery Darts with the
shield of Faith. The same reason may induce us likewise to carry about us still
our spiritual Antidotes: for, as long as we live, we shall have need of
Prayer, and Penitence, which are the Cordials of the Soul. We came
soule-sicke into this World, of Original sin, which being daily reenforc'd
with Actual transgressions, will in time grow to a Pestilentiall Disease, and
bring us to utter Perdition, if we take not that Physic, which God the
Physician of our souls has prescribed in his Divine dispensatory, beseeching
him daily on our bended knees to wash and purge us, in the sacred blood of his
only Son and our only Savior.

But thou will say, thou art of a temperate disposition, and find thy self
so well, as that thou have no need of Physic.

Be not deceav'd: Parum distat ab agroto, qui tantum sanus est: He is near
being sick, that is but well. Strength and Vigor are required likewise, which
are often wanting in those that feel not their own Indisposition. Again, there
are many secret diseases of the Soul which thou see not, as Self-love,
spiritual pride, vain thoughts, straggling inordinate-desires, Uncharitable
Charity ever interprets doubtful things favorably.
Conceits and the like, which are so much the more dangerous to be cured,
being so difficultly discerned. Distrust therefore thy own Judgment of thy
self, remembering that, Prudentiae matter est diffidentia, Diffidence is the
mother of Prudence. For if thou examine thy life by the Rule of GODS Law, thou will find thy soul full of a spiritual Leprosy, which nothing can cure, but
the bleeding wounds of the immaculate Lamb of God, which takes away all the
sins of the World.

The 4th note of our inclination to that Lethargik disease, was the want of
selfe-examination, viz. how we stood affected to holy duties in times of
adversity and Prosperity, respectively. If then we feel the Pulse of our
Souls to beat more faintly and weakly in our prosperous and flourishing
estate, then it did when we were in Trouble or Danger, it is high time to look
to our selves, lest we fall into a Lethargy. For as the lest Declination of the
Sun from the Meridian, though insensible at the beginning, ever increases,
till the Sun be set: so the lest relenting in the zealous M. Latimer being
asked, why there was so much preaching, and so little practicing: answered,
Deest ignis: there wants fire, (viz. of Zeal.
practice of Piety and Charity, will in short time prove a Retrogradation;
which will cast us mainly backward, and take quite from us, in the end, the
light and Comfort of the Sun of Righteousness.

There are few men, that after they have sung Te Deum, for any great
Deliverance, will seriously remember or think upon Miserere mei Deus; present
Prosperity making them secure of future Danger, as if they needed not to pray,
Lead us not into Temptation.

They have a Custom in Italy, [A relation of the Italian Revels and
Bacchanals, the week before Lent.]
of putting out the Quaranta hoar, (as they term it) in the principal
Churches, in the last week of Carneval, when Feasting, Dicing, Dancing, and
Masking, with all sorts of licentious revelling, is shamefully priviledg'd
among them. During those forty hours, they which have any Devotion, attend to
the hearing of Sermons, fasting and praying for the Remission of their own
sins and of those that sin in that time of excess and looseness; which
was the best piece of Piety that I observed in the Roman Church. Weakness of
Faith, is (in degree) Want of Faith.
When we find therefore a weakness of Faith, a faintness in our Devotions,
cold affection to God and good men, fewer Tears shed for sin then formerly,
less remorse of Conscience and dread of Gods Judgments, we may well suspect in
our selves a carnal and Carnevall Security, which by all pious means we
must labor to prevent.

Howbeit, in this Synchronisme or Collation of the times of our Adversity and
Prosperity, I require not in all points the same spiritual exercises without
Variation, (as if there were no difference betwixt Christmas Day, and
Good Friday,) but a constant Tenor of serving God, all the days of our life,
without intermission or remission of the essential duties of Religion: that,
as in Affliction we called on him for deliverance, so being deliverd, we forget
not to glorify his Divine Majesty, as he has See Psalm. 50. ver. 15. and 23.
commanded us: having ever a watchful eye to our selves, that our Zeal to his
service relent not, nor our Charity to our neighbor wax Coldness is a Symptom
and degree of death.
cold; and learning of holy Job (chapter 9.) to fear all our works, as knowing,
that we are to work out our salvation, etc. as we are taught, Phil. 2.12.
which is not to be understood, that we are to be so fearful, as to doubt
of the end; [if we continue in our faith,] but to be so careful, and
punctually circumspect, as to omit no means thereto conducent.

The last sign, indicating a propension in our souls to carnal security, was
the Omission of the Spiritual Sacrifices, of Praise and Thanks, after any
blessing, comfort, or deliverance received from God. To remedy this, requires
only an inspection into the Book of GOD, where we shall find innumerable
Precepts and Precedents, seconded with most gracious promises, exciting and
even enforcing us, to that heavenly exercise of glorifying God for all his
Mercies. Moses in Deuteronomy, does preach to the Israelites and mainly press
on their Souls and Consciences, two chief Doctrinall Points: viz. Obedience;
and Thanksgiving. This was the Reverend Patriarchs Practice, who never received
any blessing, The ancient practice of Piety by Geds true servants; worthy our
imitation.
but immediately we read of an Altar by them erected: yea, if they found but
Water for their Cattle, they gave to the Wells they had dug, significant
Names, expressing their Gratitude. The Israelites deliverance at the Red Sea,
produced the Song of Moses. The Victory of Barak, the Song of Debora. The birth
of Samuel, the Song of Hanna. The birth of the Baptist, the Song of Zachary,
and the Annunciation of our Saviors Nativity; the Blessed Virgins Magnificat.
The Prophet David has left us only seven penitential Psalms, but his
Eucharisticall psalms of Thanksgiving, are very numerous: not omitting to
compose an Hymn of praise, for every signal favor that he received at the
hands of God.

Motives and Reasons, impelling yea compelling us to the performance of this
duty, are many.

First, among Ethniks, and mere Moral men, Ingratitude is reputed the
Metropolis of Vices: and ingrate persons branded with the greatest infamy.
Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris. It is a violation of natural Justice.

Partem beneficij reddidit, qui gratias dedit: He has in part requited a
benefit, that returns thanks. The Prophets demand was, Quid retribuam?
arguing, that some kind of retribution was due to God for his blessings, Ex
aequo and bono: the neglect whereof, must needs be adjudg'd a violation of
natural Equity. Gratitude a due debt.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, ye Fools? says Moses. See Deuteronomy. 32.6.


Mercies received, is the next way to purchase more from God: as the servant in
the Parable, that improved the pound left with him by his Master, was made
Ruler over ten Cities, Luke 19, 16.17.

truly thankful to God, will endeavor to express his gratitude by
Obedience, extending it to the whole course of his life, and to all the divine
Commandments: not taking liberty in any one sin, but striving to avoid all:
nor omitting any Duty of Piety or Charity, but conscionably The Law may be
kept sincerely, though not fulfilld exactly.
performing all; like Zachary and Elizabeth, who walked in all the Precepts and
Ordinances of the Lord, unblameably, Luke 1.6. As God never cease to bestow
his blessings on us, so should we incessantly serve, laud and magnify him,
all our days. In which heavenly exercises, if we continue, constant, faithful
to death, we shall receave a Crown of Life, Revel. 2.10.

Fifthly, this holy Duty, is full of comfort and contentment, and a singular
solace to the religious soul. O praise the Lord (says the Prophet) for it is
a good thing to Sing David's Psalms with David's spirit.
sing praises to Our God, yea, a joyful and pleasant thing, to be thankful,
Psalm. 147.1. If we delight in this heavenly Singing of Psalms to Gods glory.
Melody, and soule-ravishing Harmony, it is impossible we should ever forget
God. Therefore it is an Antidote of Sovereign virtue against worldly security.

Dangers and disasters that we have past, ( Psalm. 54.6, 7.) and those sins of
ours likewise that occasioned them. The consideration whereof may deter us
from sinning, and teach us to stand in awe of the Divine Majesty, Psalm. 4.4.
lest by committing new sins, we pull on our Heads new punishments: according
to that terrible Commination of God: Deuteronomy. 32.23. I will heap mischiefs on
them: I will spend mine Arrows upon them: and verse 42. I will make mine
Arrows drunk with the blood of the slain, etc. Let us therefore ( as Moses
there advises, ver. 46.) set our hearts Hardness of heart, the cause of
Inconsideration, Mark. 6.52. compard with, 2 Chr. 12.14
unto all these words, lest after we have escapt the sword of Saul, we be hewed
in pieces by Samuel. All relapses into sin or sickness, are extreme
perilous. Recidiva pejor Radice. Recidivation aggravates the crime, and makes
the latter end worse than the beginning: as Saint Peter testifies: (2 Pet.
2.20.) who resembles such Delinquents to dogs and hogs: ver. 22. Wherefore,
let us not provoke to anger our heavenly Father, our gracious Redeemer, and
sweet comforter. Sin no more (says our Savior, John 5.14.) least a worse
thing befall thee: that is; sin no more wilfully: do what thou can to
avoid it. Shun whatsoever has any tincture of sin. Detest it, as the bane of
thy soul, Numb. 16.38.
and abhor thy self for it. Desire to forbear all sin, and that desire
shall exempt thee from the Guilt or Punishment. Turn Hagar out of doors.
Crucify the Flesh, with the Affections and lusts. Crush the Cockatrice in the
shell. Non nocent peccata praeterita (says Saint Augustine) Si non placent
praesentia. Grace resists and subdues corruption.
Sins past cannot harm us, if sins present do not please us. Be vigilant
therefore, and keep an eye upon thy self, and all thy actions, and designs.
Make a covenant with thine eyes; and set a strict watch on thy lips; that thou
offend not. Let Gods Law Qui diligit legem diligrt Regem.
and Word be a Lantern to thy feet, by which thou may order thy steps: then,
if thou slide, thou shall not fall: and if thou fall by infirmity, Dominus
supponet manum, the Lord Jesus shall raise thee by his Power, and not See
Isaiah 41.10.
permit thee to be attempted above thy strength. He is full of compassion, and
will not deal with us after our sins, nor reward us according to our
Wickedness; for he knows whereof we are made, and remembers, that we are
but Dust.

Est piger ad poenas Iehova, ad praemiavelox;
Quique dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox.
Multa metu poenae, poena qui pauca coercet,
Et jacit invita fulmina rara manu.
Qui cum triste aliquid statuit, flt tristis and ipse:
Cuique fere poenam sumere, poena sua est.
Gods blessings are more rife then is Maledictions:
He frets when he is forced to plague the Times;
Choosing affrightments, rather than Afflictions,
Rarely he thunder-strikes the greatest crimes:
When he resolves to strike, he does condole:
And when he strikes, it grieves his very Soul.
Let us then wholly fix our minds on God, and embrace the divine Counsel of
our blessed LORD and Redeemer: Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
Temptation. Mat. 24.42.46.
Watch, for ye know not in what hour your Lord comes. Blessed is that
faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so doing.
But, if we say in our hearts (with the evil servant, ( Mat. 24.48.) Our Lord
delays his coming, and thereupon abandon our selves to all excess of sinning,
following our unsanctified affections and extravagant lusts in all security,
the Lord will come upon us in a Day when we look not for him, and cut us in
pieces, as Agag, when he lest expected it. Let us remember, there is Dies and
Deus ultionis, a day and a God of Vengeance: that we must shortly appear
before His dreadful Tribunal, who is a Judge, for wisdom, infallible; for
Justice, inflexible. Behold, death is at our doors, and Judgment hovers over
our Heads, we cannot therefore conclude, that the bitterness of death is past.

If therefore we have any 1 Pet. 2.3.
Taste of Grace, any sense of our Mortality, any Impression of Eternity; any
resentment of sin (which reigns every where, to the subversion of States,
and destruction of Souls) let our conversation be honest, modest, sober, pure,
and holy, as becomes the Children of God, that we may so improve to our
selves, (by repentance and amendment of life) this grievous visitation, that
the blessed Angels in Heaven may rejoice at our conversion, and our Merciful
Father be pleased to continue to us His gracious protection. For, the Angel
of the Lord, the volant minister of his Vengeance, being still abroad with his
sword drawn (as appears [This was written in the time of the great plague in
Italy and Savoy.]
by those horrid spectacles of Mortality, every where visible) it concerns us
All to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God. And as in prosperity,
we may not presumptuously say, The bitterness of death is past: much less,
in this time of Pestilitie and tribulation, ought we to sleep in security:
lest we be worthily branded with that stigmaticall Mark which is set upon
Ahaz: (2 Chro. 28.22.) This is that King Ahaz: What had he done, that the
Spirit of the Lord should point at him with his finger, in that sort, above all
the rest of the Kings of Israel and Judah? the reason is there rendered: In the
time of his distress he trespassed yet more against the Lord. This is that
King Ahaz. These things (says Saint Paul) are Examples, for us to reflect on:
and are written for our admonition, 1 Cor. 10.11.
upon whom the ends of the World are come.

AN ESSAY, OF FRIENDSHIP. Written, by a Noble GENTLEMAN, DECEASED. And now,
Revised, and Illustrated.

1 PET. 1.22. and 3, 16. See that ye love one another, with a pure heart,
fervently.

Having a good Conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, they may be ashamed, etc.

Amor Dei, amorem proximi generat.

LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, for H. Mosley, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Princes Arms, in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

AN ESSAY, of Friendship.
IN the workmanship of the World, MAN is the most excellent piece: and there
is no particular Man, but in his Essence and nature is far more excellent then
the Frame of all the rest of the World. But, that man amongst Men is most
excellent, that can add to his own Essence, another of equal worth.

For, as we hold him richer, that has a pound of Gold, then he that has so
much Silver, and if a man did enjoy all Treasures, and the full power over all
the world, so that he might justly call all the World, his own; we should
justly think this Man rich for possessing so many precious things: yet, since
there is somewhat that is of more Excellence then all the World, which is Man,
he that fully injoyes a man, is richer than he that enjoyes all the World.

To enjoy a man, is either to have a Slave or Servant: of which the first gives a
man power over him for Fear: and the second, for Reward. And yet, the power
that a man has over either of these, is not over the man, but over the Body of
the Man. For neither fear of punishment can tie a slave from disobedient
thoughts, nor hope of reward oblige a servant to perfect Obedience in his Heart
and Will: because neither those offenses can be punished, nor those deserts
rewarded which are impossible to be known.

He has only obtaind this perfection of adding to his essence, who enjoyes a
Friend, and has gaind absolute power over the Affections of another man. So
that by the order of Nature and the World, a man is really Siracides: 6.15.
richer and happier that has a firm Friend, then he that enjoyes all things
else that the World can afford him.

But as a Lute must have the Wood well seasond, The chief ground of our Love,
ought to be Gods Image in men, consisting in goodness and godliness: which
divine Loadstone may justly draw our Affection.
and the Frame joynd together, and perfected, before it have strings put to it,
and before it can make the harmony for which it self was made: So a man must
have his Affections seasond, his Passions temperd, and all himself perfected
with Virtue, before he is capable of the fullness of that contentment, which is
received by perfect friendship.

The perfection of friendship, consists in a strong confederation, and an
absolute Union between men's desires and affections: So that whatsoever one
desires and affects, is equally affected and desired by the Other. This Union
can be between none but virtuous men. Novicious person can be a perfect
friend. Yet, the best have very many infirmities (I am. 3.2.) which how they
are to be borne with; See Romans 15 1, 2, 3.
For the General way of virtue is but One, in which al men agree, which
travel out the Journey of their life in this way: But there are infinite ways
of vice, which differ and disagree, as much one from another in particular, as
they do in general, from Virtue.

Friendship is indeed it self a virtue, and the perfectest, or rather the
perfection and combination of all other Virtues: and as it is a virtue, so it
is obtaind by industry. No men are borne friends. Brothers, and those between
whom there is a near consanguinitie, are borne with a greater disposition to
it, then strangers: But that which makes a friendship, is Conversation: where
first, there is a mutual liking of one another persons, because they like
what one another says, or does: and afterward, continuance of conversation,
and mutual kindness, and perpetuity True Amity is operative, and permanent.
of agreement bring things to that pass, that as at first, the men were liked
for what they said or did, so at last, the speeches and Actions shall be liked,
because they are spoken or done by these men.

Out of this, There are 3. degrees in Love, or Amity.

1. Affection to the Beloved.

2. Defire of conjunction, or converse.

3. Complacence, or Contentment: which is ultimus actus amoris


there grows a desire of imitating one another: and a desire of putting those
things in practice themselves, which they did so well like in another, till at
last they become as it were two pieces cut out of one cloth. And as they grow
in likeness of disposition, they must necessarily increase in friendship. For,
that virtue and Discretion which whilst it was a stranger to them, pleased them
so well, must needs much more delight them, when they find, that they are
inwardly acquainted with it, in their own Practice. Friendship, a sacred Bond
and fraternall League; the Violation whereof, is heinous impiety: A wound from
a friend, being a double Wound.
And in Conclusion, the Men will grow to be but One man, and will esteem
themselves so; and each friend will desire and endeavor to bring the same
things to pass, and with the same "Industry, for his friend, as for himself,
and will be equally careful for his Friends Reputation, Estate, Life, and
Contentment, as of his own.

When it comes to this, it is Friendship. All the rest, is but familiar
acquaintance, and Well-wishing, and a good opinion.

I suppose, the General and Positive Rule of all those things which concern
friends, as they stand in mutual Relation one toward another, to be, that in
every Occasion that is offered a friend, to do or say any thing as a friend,
he ought in Reason For, a true friend is to be reputed a second Self
to examine what he ought to do or say, if it were his own case; and just so,
and no otherwise, he ought to do and speak concerning his friend.

Out of this General discourse we may grow to particular conclusions.

First, since a Friend is more precious then all things in the World that a man
can possess besides, a man ought to value more his Friend, then either his
estate or preferment, or any other Hence it follows, that base Lucianists,
complotting by Sycophantike practices, to rob a man of his true friend, are the
most perillou^s and pernicious Thieves in the World. See Solomon's description
of them: Pro. c. 6. v. 16, 19. and Pro. 16.28.
Worldly things that he can pretend to.

Secondly, since one friend is the Essential part of the other, and two
friends are united in one individual essence of frindship, if this essence be
once dissolved by the utter dissolution of their friendship, I hold it in the
course of Nature as possible a thing for a soul to return to a body that it
has forsaken and inform it again; as for a perfect friendship once broken
to be restored to his former Perfection. And if at any time such a thing
happen, I shall esteem it a miracle. The impossibility of recovery of so
precious a Jewel being once lost, is another Argument why a Man that is once
so happy as to enjoy it, should be Friendship, is fine but brittle stuff: and
(in these days a very casual commodity: defeazible, on light occasions, and
sinister suggestions of Viperous Tongues, Mat. 24.12.
careful to preserve it. And since men's affections which before were
different, are united, and made one by friendship, a man ought to consider,
what he would expect from his friend, in such or such cases, and just so he
ought to do to him.

And on the contrary, he ought to consider what he would do to his friend, upon
such and such occasions, and just so he ought to expect from him. They are
dissemblers, that say they love any man better than themselves, and because
they want the Truth of friendship, they guild over the meanest of their
affections with such Protestations, and make them appear more glorious then
true friendship it self. He has attaind the height of friendship who loves
another equally to himself: and friendship is so indivisible a thing, that he
that loves not so, The fordid demeanor of a false friend is thus described by
Siracides: If he have need of thee, he will deceive thee, and smile upon thee,
and put thee in hope: he will speak thee fair, and say, What want thou?
And he will shame thee by his meats, and at last he will laugh thee to scorn,
etc. Eccl. 13.6, 7. Compare Prove. 23.6.7, 8. and Eccl. 18.18. and there will
result the true Character of a cheating Laban, and churlish Nabal. D.L.
is not worthy of the Name of a True Friend.

Since then a man ought to love his friend, in the same degree that he loves
himself, then is required between friends such an Equality of Worth and
Merit, that one Friend must in all congruity of Reason, equally deserve to be
loved as the other; not in that opinion which other men have of them (for that
is without them, and does not concern them) but in the opinion which they have
one of another.

For, the reason, why a man loves his friend as well as himself, is because he
assuredly believes, that his Friends Abilities are both as great, and as much
his own, as those which he has himself; and that he can imagine no Danger or
Inconvenience that he would undergo to purchase his own contentment, that
his friend would not with the same willingness put himself upon, for the same
end. Neither is an Equality of Birth and Nobility to be required. For, (as I
said before) no men are borne friends, neither is Friendship between Men, as
they are either Kings, Lords, or Beggars, but as they are Men. Neither is a
just equality of Age necessary: though it be very convenient that their years
do not much differ, because the bodies of old and young men, do so much
differ, that it is almost impossible their affections should run so requall a
course as is fit for the Sympathy of Desires which is ever between friends.

Their estates must necessarily be equal, that is, their wants. For since no
man's state is so plentiful, but he desires still to add somewhat to it, in
one kind or other, (which in his opinion he yet wants) Men's estates are in
realitie more or less one then another, according as their Wants are fewer,
and less Essential. It is fit therefore that the Estate of Friends should be
in common Of this Community see an illustrious precedent, in the Golden Age of
the Primitive Church: Acts 2.41. to the end.
in every thing, that respects the Conveniences of Life.

But in matters of superfluity, there is no such Necessity: for suppose there
were two friends, of which, one had five hundred per ann: and the other a very
little, yet being a discreet man, and out of those Employments, which require
with the Necessity, as many Abilities to perform them, did so manage his
little, that he made it supply him all the Conveniences of life; there were no
Necessity, that he that had the Great estate, should share it with the other.
But if the one Friend should chance by any misfortune to fall into miserable
want, it is fit, that the other should releeve him, to the uttermost penny of
his estate. For Friends, are Members should have the same care one for another,
1 Cor. 12.25 At dum sibi quisque plus satis addictus est, alios praeteritac
negligit. Hoc vitium (...) superat amor proximi: Vnde autemid, nisi a Deo, qui
particuiam suae bonitatis hominum cordibus instillat; I. C.
Members of equal Dignity, of one and the same Body of Friendship. And as no
man that had one of his hands dangerously wounded, and the other whole; and had
in his Power so much Money as would either cure the hurt hand, or buy a fine
Ring for a Finger of that hand that were sound, would be so indiscreet as to
prefer the vain affectation of having a Gold-Ring for his sound Finger,
before the Essential benefit of recovering the decayed health of a hand: and
yet no man would impose a necessity upon a man that had both his hands sound,
to divide a Ring, that one hand wore with the other: Just so is it with
Friends, who in points of Necessity ought to joyneboth their Forces to the
relieving of him that wants; but in Matters of Superfluity, let every man
enjoy that he has.

To conclude; True Friendship is the Crown of all Moral Virtues; for Moral
Virtue instructs a man to govern all Actions in such a regular Manner, as may
best serve to preserve society and mutual Conversation amongst men.

And as the most excellent and perfectest end of Society, is Friendship: so
doubtless that is the Excellence and perfection of Virtue which directs a man
to the Attainement of this most happy state, and preserves him in it. As it is
the Consummation of Virtue: so I desire, it may be of my life: which I will
endeavor to govern by it. And I shall esteem my self as happy as the World
can make me, if having laid the Foundation of my life in Honesty, and
continued this Fabric through the various Opinions of Men, and Chances of
this World, with a perpetual desire of taking hold of every Opportunity of
doing virtuous and worthy acts, I shall conclude my life, enjoying and being
enjoyed of a constant A perfect friend is no shaking Reed: like Varroes
Metamelos, inconstantiae silius: but like God, who is not variable in his Love,
Iam. 1.17.
Perfect friend, in the Noble entercourses of mutual amity.

Appendix of LOVE and FRIENDS: According to Aristotle's Judgment, delivered in
his second Book of Rhetorik, chap. 4.
TO Love is to wish well to another, for that others, not ones own sake.

A FRIEND is he that Loves, and is beloved.

Friends, are they, that mutually love each other.

A Friend therefore he is,

That rejoices at another good.

That grieves at his hurt.

That wishes the same with us to a third, whether good or hurt.

And that is Enemy or Friend to the same person.

We love them,

That have been beneficial to Us or Ours: especially, if amply, readily, or
seasonably.

That are our Friends friends.

That are our Enemies enemies.

That are Bountiful.

That are Valorous.

That are Just.

And those we would have love Us.

And good Companions.

And such as can abide Jests.

And such as break Jests.

And such as commend us, especially, for somewhat that we doubt of in our
selves.

And such as are neat.

And such as upbraid us not with our Vices, or their own benefits.

And such as quickly forget injuries.

And such as lest observe our errors.

And such as are not of ill language.

And those that are ignorant of our Vices.

And such as cross us not when we are busy or angry.

And such as are officious toward Us.

And such as profess the same Trade or course of life, where they impeach not
each other.

And such as labor for the same thing, when both may be satisfied.

And such as are not ashamed to tell us freely their faults, so it be not in
contempt of Us, and the Faults such, as the whole World rather than their own
Consciences condemns.

And such as are indeed ashamed to tell us their very faults.

And such as we would have honor us, and not any way to envy, but to imitate
us.

And such as We would do good to, except with greater danger or hurt to our
selves.

And such as continue their firm Affection to the Dead.

And such as speak their mind.

And such as are not terrible.

And such as we may rely on.

The several sorts of Friendship, are Society, Familiarity, Consanguinity,
Affinity, etc.

The things that procure love, are the bestowing of benefits Freely,
Voluntarily, Privately.


FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Tho. Wykes. R.P. Episc. Land. Capell: DOMEST.


