His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Thursday
the 16th Day of November, 1699.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Hope you will not think I have Called you out of your Countries too soon, if
you consider that Our common Security requires a farther Provision should be
made for the Safety of the Kingdom by Sea and Land, before We are at the End of
what was Granted for that Purpose the last Session. And when you Enter upon
this Business, I Believe you will think it Necessary to take Care of the
Repairs of the Ships, and of the Fortifications, without which Our Fleet cannot
be Safe, when it is in Harbor.

I cannot Omit to put you in mind of another Matter, in which so great a Number
of My Subjects is concerned, and wherein the Honor of the Kingdom and the
Faith of Parliaments is so far Engaged, that Our future Security seems to
Depend upon it; I Mean, the making good the Deficiencies of the Fonds, and the
Discharging the Debts contracted by reason of the War. And till We may be so
happy to see the Public Debts paid, I shall Hope, that no Session will end
without something done toward Lessening them. While I am speaking to you on
this Head, I think My Self obliged to Mention, with a very particular Concern,
a Debt which is Owing to the Prince of Denmark, the State whereof I have
Ordered to be laid before you.

Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
These things are of such importance, that I must earnestly Recommend them to
your Consideration, and desire you to Provide the Necessary Supplies.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
There is nothing I should more Rejoice in, than that I were not under the
Necessity of so often Asking Aids of My People; but as the Reason of it is
evident, because the Fonds formerly applied to Defray the Public Expense are
now anticipated for Payment of the Debts of the Kingdom; so it is My
Satisfaction that you all see, that nothing of what is Demanded is for any
Personal Use of Mine. And I do faithfully Assure you, that no Part of what is
given shall be diverted from any Purpose for which it is designed.

I believe the Nation is already sensible of the good Effects of Peace, by the
manifest Increase of Trade, which I shall make it My Business to Encourage by
all means in My Power. Probably it might receive an Advantage, if some good
Bill were prepared for the more effectual Preventing and Punishing Unlawful and
Clandestine Trading; which does not only tend to Defraud the Public, but
Prejudices the fair Merchant, and Discourages Our own Manufactures.

The Increase of the Poor is become a Burden to the Kingdom, and their loose
and idle Life does in some measure contribute to that Depravation of Manners,
which is complained of, (I fear with too much Reason) whether the Ground of
this Evil be from Defects in the Laws already made, or in the Execution of
them, deserves your Consideration. As it is an indispensable Duty, that the
Poor, who are not able to help themselves, should be maintained, so I cannot
but think it extremely Desirable, that such as are able and willing should not
want Employment, and such as are obstinate and unwilling should be compelled to
Labor.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I have a full Assurance of the good Affections of My People, which I shall
endeavor to Preserve by a constant Care of their just Rights and Liberties; by
Maintaining the Established Religion; by seeing the Course of Justice kept
steady and equal; the Countenancing Virtue, and Discouraging Vice; and by
Declining no Difficulties or Dangers where their Welfare and Prosperity may be
concerned.

These are my Resolutions, and I am persuaded that you are come together with
Purposes on your Part, suitable to these on Mine. Since then Our Aims are only
for the general Good, let Us Act with Confidence in one another; which will not
fail, by Gods Blessing, to make Me a Happy King, and you a Great and
Flourishing People.

FINIS.

