THE Prince of Orange's Letter TO THE ENGLISH-FLEET, AND THE Form of Prayer
Used in the DUTCH-FLEET.
Translated from the Dutch.
To all the Officers and Seamen of the English-Fleet.
WHEREAS we have fully Empowered our Truly and Well-beloved Admiral Herbert; we
hope that you will give an entire Belief to whatever he shall tell you from us.
We have published a Declaration containing a a full and true Account of our
Intentions in this Expedition; since it is evident that the Papists have
resolved the total Extirpation of the Protestant Religion in Great Britain, and
will infallibly reduce you to the same Condition in which you see France, if
they can once get the upper hand. You are now at last sensible, that you are
made use of only as Instruments to bring this Nation under Popery and Slavery,
by means of the Irish, and other Foreigners, that are assembling for your
Destruction. Therefore we hope that Almighty God will inspire you with such
Thoughts as may facilitate your Deliverance, and preserve You, your Country and
Religion from all these impending Miseries. And whereas (in all probability)
this can never be effected, unless You join with Us (who labor for your
Deliverance,) we do expect your Assistance herein: And shall always remember,
etc.

HVYGENS.

The PRAYER.
ALmighty God, Lord of Hosts, who art the Aid and Refuge of all those who put
their Trust in thee; We most humbly beseech thee, to bless and give a
Prosperous Event to this Enterprise, for the Glory of thy Name, and for the
Advantage of thy People. Let not our Sins provoke thy Wrath so far, as to deny
thy Servant, the Prince, thy Holy Blessing, but cover him with thy Grace as
with a Buckler; direct him in all his Counsels, to the end, that being blessed
with Success in this great Design, he may employ all that groat Power which thy
Blessed Majesty shall entrust him with, to the Honor of thy Great Name, the
Establishment and Advancement of the True Religion, and to the Peace and
Happiness of thy People. Let thy Blessing accompany this Fleet; Give propitious
Success to our Undertakings. Vouchsafe us, O God, the Father of Mercies, thy
Grace, that every one of us in particular, may turn unto thee with our whole
Hearts; that we may sincerely repent to all our Offenses hither to committed
against thy Holy Majesty; and that they may solemnly Vow, as we, who are at
present assembled before thee, do, to use their utmost Endeavor, that our
Practice may be such as becomes the Christian Reformed Name, and that our Zeal
may be answerable to our Holy Religion, and that those Holy Principles may be
the Rule of our Life. Hear us, O Lord, in and for the Sake of thy Son, our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, in whose Words we further call upon thee: Our Father,
etc.


