A DISCOURSE OF THE HOLY EUCHARIST, IN THE TWO GREAT POINTS OF THE Real
Presence AND THE Adoration of the Host. IN ANSWER to the Two DISCOURSES lately
Printed at OXFORD on This SUBJECT.

To which is prefixed A Large HISTORICAL PREFACE relating to the same ARGUMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

THE PREFACE.
THE nature of the Holy Eucharist is a subject that has been both so
frequently insisted upon, and so fully explained in our own and other
Languages, that it may well be thought a very needless undertaking for any one
to trouble the World with any farther Reflections upon it. For not to mention
now those Eminent Men who have heretofore labored in this work, nor to run
beyond the points that are here designed to be examined; What can be said more
evidently to show the impossibility of the pretended substantial change of the
Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ in this Holy Sacrament, than
has been done in the late excellent Discourse against Transubstantiation? It is
but a very little time since the Adoration of the Host has been shown not only
to be a novel invention, contrary to the practice of all Antiquity, but the
danger of it evidently demonstrated, notwithstanding whatever pretenses can be
made of a good intention to excuse them from the charge and danger of Idolatry,
who continue the practice of it. And both these not only still remain
unanswered; but if we may be allowed to judge either by their own strength, or
by our Adversaries silence, are truly and indeed unanswerable.

It is not therefore out of any the least Opinion that any thing more need be
said to confirm our cause, much less that I esteem my self able to undertake it
with the same success that those other Champions of our Faith have done it,
that I venture these Discourses to a public view. But since our Adversaries
still continue, without taking notice of any of these things, to cry up their
Great Diana no less than if she had never at all been shown to be but an Idol,
I thought it might not be amiss to revive our Instances against it: And that we
ought not to appear less sollicitous by a frequent repetition of our Reasons,
to keep men in the Truth, than others are by a continual insisting upon their
so often baffled Sophistry, to lead them into Error.

'Twas an ingenious Apology that Seneca once made, for his often repeating the
same things; That he did but inculcate over and over the same Counsels, to
those that over and over committed the same faults: And I remember an ancient
Father has left it as his Opinion, that it was useful for the same truths to be
vindicated by many, because that one Man's Writings might possibly chance to
come where the others did not; and what was less fully or clearly explained by
one, might be supplied and enlarged by the other. And a greater than either of
these, S. Paul, has at once left us both an example and a warrant for this
solicitude; Phil. 3.1. To write the same things to you, to me (says he) is not
grievous, but for you it is safe.

Indeed I think if there be any need of an excuse for this undertaking, it
ought to be rather to Apologize for a far greater absurdity which we all commit
in writing at all against those Men, who in these Disputes concerning the Holy
Sacrament, have most evidently shown that to be true of Christians, which was
once said of the ancient Philosophers, That there can be nothing so absurd
which some Men will not adventure to maintain.

In most of our other Controversies with those of the Church of Rome, we show
them to be Erroneous; in this they are Extravagant; And as an eminent Pen has
very justly expressed it, Discourse against Transubstantiation, Page 2.
The business of Transubstantiation is not a Controversy of Scripture against
Scripture, or of Reason against Reason, but of downright Impudence against the
plain meaning of Scripture, and all the sense and reason of mankind.

The truth is, as the same Person goes on, Ibid.
It is a most self-evident falsehood: and there is no Doctrine or Proposition in
the World that is of it self more evidently true, than Transubstantiation is
evidently false. And if such things as these must be disputed, and this
Evidence, That what we see and handle, and taste to be Bread is Bread, and not
the Body of a Man; and what we see and taste to be Wine is Wine, and not Blood,
may not pass for sufficient without any farther Proof, I cannot discern why any
Man that has but confidence enough to do so, may not deny any thing to be what
all the World sees it is, or affirm it to be what all the World sees it is not,
and this without all possibility of being further confuted.

But yet since it has pleased God so far to give over some Men to a spirit of
delusion, as not only seriously to believe this themselves, but also rashly to
damn all those that cannot believe it with them, we ought as well for the
security of those who have not yet abandoned their own sense and reason, in
compliance only with others who in this matter profess to have laid aside
theirs; as in charity to such deluded Persons as are unhappily led away with
these Errors, to show them their unreasonableness: To convince them that
Christianity is a wise and rational Religion: that it is a mistaken Piety to
suppose that Men ought to believe Contradictions; or that their Faith is ever
the more perfect, because the Object of it is impossible: That our Senses ought
to be trusted in judging aright of their proper Object; that to deny this is to
overthrow the greatest external Evidence we have for our Religion, which is
founded upon their judgment; or if that will be more considerable, is to take
away all the grounds that even themselves can pretend to, wherefore they should
disbelieve them in favor of Transubstantiation.

And this I persuade my self I have in the following Discourse sufficiently
shown, and I shall not need to repeat it again here. For the words themselves,
which are the grounds of this great Error, I have taken that Method which
seemed to me the most proper to find out the true meaning of them; and, as far
as the nature of the Enquiry would permit, have endeavored to render it plain
and intelligible even to the meanest Capacity. And I have some cause to hope
that the most learned will not be dissatisfied with the design, what ever they
may be with the performance; it being from such that I have taken the greatest
part of my Reflections, and in which I pretend to little of my own besides the
care of putting together here, what I had observed scattered up and down in
parts elsewhere.

It was so much the more fit at this time to insist upon this manner of
arguing, in that a late disturber of the Fathers, the better to show the
Antiquity of his new Religion, has pretended to search no less than into the
secrets of the Jewish Cabala after it, and to have found out Transubstantiation
there amongst the rest of the Rabbinical Follies: Consensus Veterum p. 21, etc.
Now however the very name of Galatinus be sufficient to Learned Men to make
them esteem his Judgment in his Jewish to be much the same as in his Christian
Antiquity which follows after, in those eminent pieces of S. Peter 's and S.
Matthew 's Liturgies, Ibid. p. 27.
S. Andrew 's work of the Passion of our Lord; Dionysius 's Ecclesiast.
Hierarch. etc. yet because such stuff as this may serve to amuse those who are
not acquainted with the emptiness of it, I was so much the rather inclined to
show what the true notions of the Jewish Rites would furnish us with to
overthrow their pretenses; and that the Rabbis Visions are of as little moment
to confirm this conceit as their own Miracles.

But whatever those of the other Communion shall please to judge of my
Arguments, yet at least the Opinions of those eminent Men of their own Church
may certainly deserve to be considered by them, who have freely declared that
there is not in Scripture any evident proof of Transubstantiation; nay some of
whom have thought so little engagement upon them either from that or any other
Authority to believe it, that they have lived and died in their Church without
ever embracing of it.

And of this the late Author of the Traitte d'un Autheur de la Communion
Roman touchant la Transubstantiation. Land. 1686.
Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation, and which is just now set forth in
our own Language, may be an eminent instance, being a Person at this day living
in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and in no little Esteem among all that
know Him. It is not fit to give any more particular character of Him at this
time. They who shall please to peruse his Book, will find enough in it to speak
in his Advantage; and if they have but any tolerable disposition to receive the
truth, will clearly see, that this point of Transubstantiation was the
production of a blind and barbarous Age; unknown in the Church for above one
thousand Years, and never owned by the greatest Men in any Ages since. The
truth is, if we enquire precisely into this business of Transubstantiation, we
shall find the first foundation of it laid in a Cloister by an unwary Monk
about the beginning of the 7th Century: About 636 or 640. See Blondel de
l'Eucharistie. c. 14. p. 36^.
carried on by a Cabal of Men, assembled under the name of a 2. Council. Nic.
General Council to introduce the worship of Images into the Church, Ann. 787.
Blondel. l. c. cap. 18. page 426.
formed into a better shape by another Paschasius Radbertus.
Monk Ann. 818. and He too opposed by almost all the Learned Men of his Age;
and at last confirmed by a See the Treatise of Transubstantiation; Hist. of the
9th Age.
Pope of whom their own Authors have left us but a very indifferent Innocent.
III. Super omnes mortales ambitiosus and superbus, pecuniaeque sititor
i^satiabilis, and ad omnia ^^^lera pro praemiis datis vel promissis cereus and
proclivis. Matt. Paris.
character; and in a Council. Lateran. IV. Can. 3. de Haereticis.
Synod of which I shall observe only this, that it gave the Pope the power of
unmaking Kings, as well as the Priests that of making their God.

But indeed I think we ought not to charge the Council with either of these
Attempts; since, contrary to the manner of proceeding in such Assemblies,
received in all Ages, nothing was either judged or debated by the Synod: His
omnibus congregatis in suo loco praefato, and juxta morem Conciliorum
generalium in suis Ordinibus singulis collocatis, facto. prius ab ipso Papa
exhortationis sermon, recitata sunt in pleno Concilio capitula LXX quae aliis
placabilia, aliis videbantur onerosa. Matt. Paris. ad Ann. 1215. See this
confirmed by Monsieur du Pin. Dissert. VII. Paris. 4o 1686. page 572, 573.
The Pope only himself formed the Articles, digested them into Canons, and so
read them to the Fathers; some of which, their own Historian tells us, approved
them, others did not, but however all were forced to be contented with them.

Such was the first rise of this new Doctrine; 1215 years after Christ. But
still the most learned Men of that and the following Ages doubted not to
dissent from it. See 3. q. 75. Art. 6. Vtrum fact^ consecratione remaneat in
Hoc Sacramento forma substantialis Panis?
Aquinas who wrote about 50 years after this definition, speaks of some, who
thought the substantial form of the Bread still to remain after Consecration:
In. 4 d. 11. q. 9. Quid ergo dicendum de conversione substantiae Panis in
Corpus Christi? Salvo meliori judicio, potest aestimari, quod SI in isto
Sacramento fiat Conversio substantiae Panis in Corpus Christi, quod ipsa fit
per Hoc quod corrupta forma Panis materia eius sit sub forma Corporis Christi
Durandus doubted not to assert the continuance of the Matter of the Elements,
whatever became of the form; and that 'twas Id. in 4. did. 11. q. 4. Art. 14.
rashness to say that Christ's Body could be there no otherwise than by
Transubstantiation: To which Scotus in 4. did. 11. q. 3.
Scotus also subscribed, that the truth of the Eucharist might be saved without
Transubstantiation, Id. 4. sent. d. 11. q. 3.
and that in plain terms ours was the easier, and to all appearance the truer
interpretation of Christ's words; in which Ockam in 4. q. 6.
Ockam and Alliaco in 4. q. 6. art. 2.
d'Alliaco concurred with him. Contr. capt. Bab^l. cap. 10.
Fisher confessed that there was nothing to prove the true presence of Christ's
Body and Blood in their Mass: Ferus in Matt. 26. Cum certum sit ibi esse Corpus
Christi, quid opus est disputare number Panis substantia maneat, vel non?
Ferus would not have it inquired into, How Christ's Body is there; and Lib. 1.
de Eucharistia: See the Treatise of Transubstantiation, 1. part.
Tonstall thought it were better to leave Men to their Liberty of belief in it.
Those who in respect to their Churches definition did accept it, yet freely
declared that Vid. Bellarm. de Euch. l. 3. c. 23. p. 767, 768. Suarez in 3.
part. D. Th. vol. 3. disp. 50. p. 593, 594. Cajetan. in 3. D. Th. q. 75. art.
1. Scotas, l. c. 4. Sent. d. 11. q. 3. Vid. etiam Ockam, Alliac. loc. supr. cit.
before this Council it was no matter of Faith, nor but for its decision would
have been now; That the Ancients did not believe it; that the Scripture does
not express it; in short, that the interpretation which we give is altogether
as agreeable to the words of Christ, and in truth free from infinite
inconveniences with which the other abounds. All which plainly enough shows
that not only the late private Heretical Spirit, whose imperious sentiments,
and private Glosses, and contradictory interpretations (as a late Consensus
Veterum Page 27.
Author has elegantly expressed it) like the victorious Rabble of the Fishermen
of Naples riding in triumph, and trampling under foot Ecclesiastical
Traditions, Decrees, and Constitutions, Ancient Fathers, Ancient Liturgies, the
whole Church of Christ, but especially those words of his, This is my Body, has
opposed this Doctrine; but even those who are to be supposed to have had the
greatest reverence for all these, their own Masters and Doctors, found it
difficult to embrace so Absurd and Contradictory a Belief.

And here then let me beseech those into whose hands these Papers may chance to
fall, seriously to consider this matter, and whether the sole Authority of such
a Pope as Innocent III, whose actions toward one of our own Kings, and in
favor of that very ill Man Dominick and his Inquisition, K. John.
were there nothing else remaining of his Life, might be sufficient to render
him detestable to all good Men, ought to be of so great an Authority with us,
as to engage us to give up our senses and our reason; nay and even Scripture
and Antiquity it self, in obedience to his arbitrary and unwarrantable
Definition.

It is I suppose sufficiently evident from what has been before observed, how
little assurance their own Authors had, for all the definition of the Council
of Lateran, of this Doctrine. I shall not need to say what debates arose among
the Divines of the Council of Trent about it. And though since its
determination there, Men have not dared so openly to speak their Minds
concerning it as before, yet we are not to imagine that they are therefore ever
the more convinced of its Truth.

I will not deny but that very great numbers in the Roman Communion, by a
profound ignorance and a blind obedience, the two great Gospel perfections with
some men, disposed to swallow any thing that the Church shall think fit to
require of them, may sincerely profess the belief of this Doctrine; because
they have either never at all considered it, or it may be are not capable of
comprehending the impossibility of it. Nor shall I be so uncharitable as to
suppose that all, even of the learned amongst them, do wilfully profess and act
in this matter, against what they believe and know to be true. I will rather
persuade my self that some motives or prejudices which I am not able to
comprehend, do really blind their eyes, and make them stumble in the brightness
of a midday light. But yet that all those, who nevertheless continue to live
in the external Communion of the Church of Rome, are not thus sincere in the
belief of it, is what I think I may without uncharitableness affirm; and
because it will be a matter of great importance to make this appear, especially
to those of that Persuasion; I will beg leave to offer such proofs of it as
have come to my knowledge, in some of the most eminent Persons of these last
Ages, and to which I doubt not but others, better acquainted with these secrets
than I can pretend to be, might be able to add many more Examples.

And the first that I shall mention is the famous Petri Picherelli Expositio
Verborum institutionis Caenae Domini. Lugd. Batav. 1629. 12o.
Picherellus, of whom the testimonies prefixed to his Works speak so
advantagiously, that I shall not need say any thing of the esteem which the
learned World had of him. Hoc est Corpus meum, i. e. Hic panis fractus est
Corpus meum. page 10. Hoc est Corpus meum, i. e. Panis quem frangimus est
communio cum Corpore Christi. page 14. -- and page 27. Expounding Gratian.
did. 2. Can. Non Hoc Corpus, Ipsum Corpus invisibiliter, de vero and germano
Corpore in Caelis agente intelligitur: Non ipsum visibiliter de Corpore and
sanguine Sacramentalibus, Pane and Vino; Corporis Christi and sanguinis
symbolis: Quae rei quam significant nomen per supradictam metonymiam mutuantur.
I must transcribe his whole Treatise should I insist on all he has delivered
repugnant to their Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Suffice it to observe that
in his Exposition of the words of Institution, This is my Body, He gives this
plain interpretation of them, This Bread is my Body which is both freely
allowed by the Papists themselves to be inconsistent with their belief as to
this matter; and which he largely shows not only to be his own, but to have
been the constant Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers in this point.

But in this it may be there is not so much ground for our admiration, that one
who was not very fond of any of the Errors of that Church, should openly
dissent from her in this: It will more be wondered that a person so eminent
amongst them as Cardinal du Perron, and that has written so much in defense of
Transubstantiation, should nevertheless all the while Himself believe nothing
of it. And yet this we are assured he freely confessed to some of his Friends
not long before his death: That he thought the Doctrine to be Monstrous; that
He had done his endeavor to color it over the best He could in his Books; but
that in short he had undertaken an ill cause, and which was not to be
maintained. But I will set down the relation as I find it in Monsieur
Drelincourt 's Reponse a la Lettre de Monsig. le Prince (...) Ernest aus cinq
Micistres de Paris, etc. Geneve 1664.
Answer to the Landgrave of Hesse; and who would not have presumed to have
offered a relation so considerable, and to a person of such Quality, had he at
all feared that he could have been disproved in it. Votre Altesse me croira
s'il luy plait. Mais je luy puis dire avectonte sincerite and verite, que si le
defunt Cardinal du Perron luy a persuade la Transubstantiation, il luy a
persuade ce qu'il n'a pu se persuader a formeme, and qu'il n'a nullement cru.
Car je scay par des Gene d' Honneur and dignes de foy, qui l'avoient apris de
temoins oculaires, que des Amiss de cet illustre and scavant Cardinal, qui
l'estoient all visiter lors qu' il estoit languissant en son lit, and malade
de la malady don't il est mort, le prierent de le^r dire franchement ce qu'il
croyeit de la Transubstantiation, and qu'il repondit, qu' il la tenoit pour un
Monstre. Et comme ils luy demanderent, comment done il en avoit ecrit si
amplement and si doctement; il repliqua, qu'il avoit deploye toutes les
Adresses de son Esprit po^ colourer cet abus, and pour le render plausibile;
and qu'il avoit fait comrre ceux qui font tous leurs Efforts pour defendre une
manvaise Cause.
Your Highness (says He) may believe me if you please: But I can assure you
with all sincerity and truth that if the late Cardinal du Perron has convinced
you of the Truth of Transubstantiation, he has convinced you of that of which
he could never convince himself, nor did he ever believe it. For I have been
informed by certain Persons of Honor, and that are in all respects worthy of
belief, and who had it from those that were eye witnesses; That some friends of
that Illustrious and Learned Cardinal who went to see him as he lay languishing
upon his Bed, and ill of that distemper of which he died, desired him to tell
them freely, what he thought of Transubstantiation: To whom he answered, That
'twas a MONSTER. And when they farther asked him, How then he had written so
copiously and learnedly about it? He replied, That he had done the utmost that
his Wit and Parts had enabled him, to COLOR OVER THIS ABUSE and RENDER IT
PLAUSIBLE; But that he had done like those who employ all their force to defend
an ILL CAUSE. And thus far Monsieur Drelincourt. I could to this add some
farther circumstances which I have learnt of this matter, but what is here said
may suffice to show what the real Opinion of this great Cardinal, after all his
Voluminous Writings, as to this Doctrine was; unless some future Obligations
shall perhaps engage me to enter on a more particular account of it.

To these two great instances of another Nation I will beg leave to subjoyn a
third of our own Country: Father Barnes the Benedictine,
Catholico-Romano-Pacificus Oxon. 1680. Page 90. Assertio Transubstantiationis
s^u mutationis substantialis panis, licet sit Opinio communior, non tamen est
fides Ecclesiae. Et Scripturae and Patres docentes (...), sufficienter expo^^
possant de admirand^ and supernaturali mutatione Panis per Praesentiam Corporis
Christi ei accedentem, sine substantialis Panis desitione. Et. P. 95. (...)
illam in Augustissimo Sacramento factam, plerique graves and antiqui
Scriptoresita explicant, ut non fiat per desitionem substantiae panis, sed per
receptionem supernaturalem substantiae Corporis Christi in substantiam Panis.
V. pl.
who in his Pacific Discourse of most of the points in Controversy between us
and the Papists, expressly declares, That the Assertion of Transubstantiation,
or of the substantial change of the Bread, though it be indeed the more common
Opinion, is yet no part of the Churches Faith: And that the Scripture and
Fathers, when they speak of a (...) may be sufficiently Expounded of that
admirable and supernatural change of the Bread, by the presence of Christ's
Body added to it, without the departure of the substance of the Bread it self.

It appears by these words how little this Monk thought Transubstantiation an
Article of Faith. But a greater than he, and who not only did not esteem it
necessary for Others, to receive it, but clearly shows that he did not believe
it himself, Illustriss. atque Reverend P^de Marea Parisiens. Archiep.
Dissertationes Posthumae. De Sanctissimo Eucharistiae Sacramento dissertatio,
in sne.
is the Illustrious Monsieur de Marca, late Archbishop of Paris, and well known
to the World for his great Learning and Eminence. His Treatise of the Eucharist
was published with Authority, by one of his near Relations the Abbe Faget at
Paris 1668. with some other little Tracts which he had received from the
Archbishops own hands. In the close of that Treatise he thus delivers his
Opinion: Species P^nis est Essentia and Natura distincta a Corpore Christi sibi
adjuncto, licet ratio Eucharistiae id exigat, ut substantia Panis interior
conversa suerit in illud Corpus modo quodam qui omnem cogitationem exsuperat.
Caeterum mutatio illa non officit quin Panis, qui videtur, [id est, Accidentia]
suam Naturam, Extantiam and Essentiam [SIVE SUBSTANTIAM] retineat, and naturae
verae Proprietates, inter quas est alendi corporis humani facultas --. Vnde
consequitur recte observatum a Gelasio Sacramenta Corporis and Sanguinis
Christi divinam rem esse, quia Panis and Vinum in divinam transeunt
substantiam, S. spiritu persiciente, nempe in Corpus Christi spiritale: sed ex
alia part non desinere substantiam and naturam Panis and Vini, sed ea
permanere in suae proprietate Naturae. Quoniam scil. postquam Panis in divinam
substantiam transivit, [NON INTERIIT INTEGRA PANIS NATURA QUAM SUBSTANTIAM
QUOQUE VOCAT, NEC DESIVIT: SED] in suae proprietate Naturae permansit ad
alendum Corpus idonea, quod est praecipuum confecti panis munus. Note, That in
the Paris Edition, they have put in those words printed in the Black Letter (id
est, Accidentia) and omitted those that I have caused to be set in Capitals:
But in the Original leaf, which I have left in S. Martin's Library to be seen
by any that pleases, and which was cut out for the sake of this passage, it
stands as I have said: and as it is truly represented in the Holland Edition.
The species of the Bread is in its Essence and Nature distinct from the Body
of Christ adjoined to it, although the reason of the Eucharist requires that
the inward substance of the Bread should be converted into that Body after a
manner that exceeds all Imagination. But yet this change hinders not but that
the BREAD which is seen still RETAINS its own NATURE, BEING, and ESSENCE, or
SUBSTANCE, together with the proprieties of its true Nature, among which one is
the faculty of nourishing our Bodies, etc. Whence it follows that it was
rightly observed by Gelasius, that the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ was a Divine thing, because the Bread and Wine being perfected by the
Holy Spirit pass into the Divine substance, viz. the spiritual Body of Christ;
but on the other side, that the SUBSTANCE and NATURE of the BREAD and WINE do
not cease to be, but continue still in the propriety of their own Nature.

And here I suppose any one who reads this passage alone of this Treatise might
without the help of Baluze 2 Lettre a Monsieur le Presid. Marca. S'il est vray,
ce que j'ay de la peine a croire, que feu Monsigneur ait compose les Traittez
que M. Faget a fait imprimer sous son nom, don't il se vante dans la Preface and
dans la Vie d'avoir les Originaux escrits de la main de l'Auteur, nous ne
scaurions empescher que feu Monsigneur ne pass dans l'Esprit de beaucoup de
Gens pour HERETIC, au sujet de l' Eucharistie.
Monsieur Baluze's Animadversion easily have concluded, That if this be indeed
the work of Monsieur de Marca, 'twill be impossible to hinder him from passing
with many Persons for a HERETIC as to the point of the Eucharist. But before I
quit this Instance, I cannot but observe with reference to this Treatise, what
care the Romanists take to hinder the sentiments of learned Men in this Point
from coming to a public knowledge: And which might give us some cause to
suspect, that their great concern is not so much whether they do indeed believe
Transubstantiation themselves, as not to let the World know that they do not.

This has been heretofore shown in another Treatise with reference to S.
Chrysostom; whose Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
Engl. Appendix, p. 127. n. v.
Epistle to Caesarius some of the Sorbonne Doctors caused most shamefully to be
cut out of Monsieur Bigot 's Edition of Palladius, because it too plainly spoke
the Doctrine of the Protestants as to this point. And the same has almost
happened to this Treatise of Monsieur de Marca here mentioned: See the Preface
to the Reader before the Edition of the same Treatises 12o Anno 1669. and
Monsieur Baluze's Letter to the Bishop of Tulle on this occasion. p. 5.
Before it came to a public sight, the passages that seemed most visibly to
oppose their Doctrine, were either changed or suppressed; The Oiginal leaves
cut out by them having fallen into my Hands, may be seen by those that desire
it in S. Martin's Library.
(of which the passage before cited is one). as appears by the Paris Edition
now extant of them. But See Monsieur Baluze 2. Lettre page 15.
the Providence of God that brought to light the other, has discovered this
cheat too; For before the alarm was given, and that the Chancellor, Mais enfin
le refus que Mrs. de Sorbonne luy ont fait de luy donner leur approbation --
luy ont fait ouvrir les yeux, s'estant laisse entendre, quoyqu'un peu tard,
qu'il a fait une Sottise. ibid.
the Sorbonne Doctors, but especially Monsieur Baluze by his Letters to the
President de Marca, the Archbishop 's Son, upon this occasion, had awakened the
Abbe Faget to consider more nearly what he had done; Et p. 16. Je dis, un peu
tard; parce qu'il avoit de ja fait des presents de son livre, and que le
libraire en avoit aussi debite quelques uns.
several Presents had been made of the entire work as it was in the Authors
MS.; and, if we may credit their own relations, the Printer who was a
Protestant and the same that printed Baluze Lettre a Monsieur l'Evesque de
Tulle, p. 5.
Monsieur Claude's Books against the Perpetuite, had obliged that learned
Person with a Copy; by which means both the genuine sentiments of Monsieur de
Marca in opposition to Transubstantiation are preserved, and their fraudulent
endeavors to suppress his opinion discovered.

To this eminent Person I will beg leave to subjoyn a fifth, and he too no less
known to the World both for his Learning and Reputation, nor less a Heretic in
this point, however not hitherto so openly discovered as the other: and that is
Father Sirmond the Jesuit. In his life of Paschasius Radbertus, he tells us,
Sirmond. Vit. Pasch. Radbert.
That this Monk was the first who explained the genuine sense of the Catholic
Church in this mystery: and indeed if what Eclaircissement de l'Euch. c. 19. p.
431, etc.
Blondel and some others have observed concerning him be true, that it was for
Impanation, not Transubstantiation; the Jesuit perhaps spoke his real judgment
of him, though not in that sense that he is usually understood to have done it.

But however that be, certain it is that this learned Father so little believed
the Doctrine of the present Roman Church as to this point, that he freely
confessed he thought it had herein departed from the ancient Faith; and at the
desire of one of his Friends wrote a short Treatise to confirm his Assertion.
This though it be not yet made public, is neverthess in the hands of several
Persons of undoubted integrity: I will mention only one, whose learning and
worth are sufficiently known to the World, viz. Monsieur Bigot: who discoursing
with Father Raynauld at Lions about this matter, the Jesuit confessed to him
that it was true, that he had himself a copy of his Treatise which he would
communicate to him, and that it was Father Sirmond whom upon this account he
reflected upon in his Book, Ingenia praeclara in rebus difficilibus aliquid
semper de suo comminisountur. Nam praeclara ingenia multa novant circa
scientias. Theoph. Raynaudi S. J. Erotemata de malis ac bonis libris: Lugduni
1653. p. 251.
de bonis and malis Libris, where he observes, That Men of great parts love to
innovate, and invent always somewhat of their own in difficult matters.

When Monsieur Bigot returned to claim the performance of his promise, the
Jesuit excused himself to him that he could not light upon it; which when he
afterward told to Father Chiflet another Jesuit of Dijonois, he again
confirmed to him the truth of the relation, and voluntarily offered him a Copy
of the Treatise, which he told him was transcribed from Father Sirmonds
Original. This Monsieur Bigot has not only acknowledged to some of his Friends
of my acquaintance, but promised to communicate to them the very Treatise; and
I dare appeal to the candor of that worthy Person for the truth of what I have
here related, and whose name I should not have mentioned, but only to remove
all reasonable cause of suspicion in a matter of such importance.

And what I have now said of Father Sirmond, I might as truly affirm of a
fourth Person of as great a name, a Doctor of the Sorbonne, whose Treatise
against Transubstantiation has been seen by several persons, and is still read
in the MS. But because I am not at liberty to make use of their names, I shall
not any further insist upon this example.

My next instance will be more undeniable, and it is of the ingenious Monsieur
de Marolles Abbot of Ville-loyn, well known in France for his excellent
Writings and great Abilities. A little before his death, which happened about
the beginning of the Year 1681. being desirous to free his Conscience as to the
point of the Holy Eucharist, in which he supposed their Church to have many
ways departed from the right Faith, he caused a Paper to be Printed, in which
he declares his thoughts concerning it; and sent it to several of his most
learned Acquaintance, the better to undeceive them in this matter. One of these
Persons, to whom this Present was made, having been pleased to communicate to
me the very Paper which by the Abbot 's order was brought to him, it may not
perhaps be amiss to gratify the Reader 's curiosity, if I here insert it at
its full length.

The Abbot means, that now at his death he hoped he might speak freely what he
durst not in his Lifetime do.
Permission hoped for to speak freely for the Truth.
I Cannot but exceedingly wonder that a certain Preacher, who reads the Holy
Scriptures, and will maintain nothing but by their Authority, should
nevertheless undertake to defend against all Opposers by the Scriptures, the
Real Presence in the Eucharist out of the act of receiving; and think himself
so sure to overcome in this Occasion, as to talk of it as a thing certain, and
in which he knows he cannot be resisted.

It would certainly be more safe not to be too much prepossessed with any
thing. I will not name the Person, because I have no mind to displease him; But
in the mean time, neither Sense, nor Reason, nor the Word of God have suggested
to him one word of it; unless the Apostle was mistaken when he said, ' If ye
are risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ is sat
at the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above and not on things
upon the Earth. Coloss. 3.1, 2. For how could he speak after this manner, if
Jesus Christ be still upon Earth by his real Presence under the species in the
Eucharist?

When he ascended into Heaven, he said not to his Disciples which saw his
wonderful Ascension; I shall be with you always by my Real Presence under the
species of the Eucharist, which shall be publicly exposed to you. In his
Sermon at the Supper which he had just now celebrated, and which immediately
preceded his Passion, Jesus Christ according to S. John says expressly to his
Apostles, that he was about to leave them, that he should not be long absent,
that he would send to them the Comforter; but not one word of his Real Presence
in the Eucharist, which he had so lately instituted under the Bread and Wine,
to be a Mystery of our Faith for the nourishment of the Soul to life Eternal,
as ordinary Bread and Wine are for the nourishment of the Body to a temporal
Life, and that too for ALL the faithful, as is clearly signified by those
Words, Drink ye all of this. Whereupon I have elsewhere remarked the custom of
Libations which were in use time out of mind throughout the whole Roman Empire,
and which custom was established in honor of the gods: As may be seen in the
Version of Athenaeus in 1680; and as I had observed long before upon Virgil and
Horace, though there was but little notice taken of it. Which makes me think it
very probable, that our Savior intended to sanctify this Profane custom, as
he did some others, which I have remarked in the same place.

When Men undertake to prove too much, they very often prove nothing at all: To
maintain that Jesus Christ is entire in the Eucharist with all his Bodily
extension, and all his Dignity, so as he is in Heaven; so that under the
Roundness of the Bread there is nothing that is Round; under the Whiteness
there is nothing White; this is what the Scripture has not said one word of.
They are indeed mere Visions, and which are not so easy to maintain as Men may
think. The Priest who celebrates breaks the Host in three pieces; One of these
he puts into the Cup, of the two others he communicates, in memory as it is
plain of what we read, That Jesus the night in which he was betrayed took
Bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it, and said, Take, Eat, This is
my Body which is broken for you, Do this in Remembrance of Me. 1 Cor. 11.23,
24. In the Mass there is here no more Bread, they are only the appearances of
Bread, that is to say, the Accidents, and which are not tied to any Substance.
And yet so long as there is but one Atom of those Accidents which they call
Eucharistical species in the Consecration that has been made, the true Flesh of
the Lord Jesus is so annexed to them, that it remains there whole and entire,
without the least confusion, and may be so in diverse places at the same time.
I doubt not but those who teach us this Doctrine have thought of it more than
once; but have they well considered it? for there is not one word of it in all
the Sacred Writings.

Is it nothing that Jesus Christ said to his Apostles but a little while before
his Passion, when he was now about to celebrate his Holy Supper with them, You
shall have the Poor always with you, but me ye shall not have always, Matthew.
26.11. His Real Presence in the Eucharist, out of the act of communicating, not
excepted?

They say to the People, Behold your Creator that made Heaven and Earth: And
the People seeing the consecrated Bread in the Ciboire wherein it is carried
abroad, says, Behold the good God going in procession to confound the
Heretics: and according to their natural inclination, they adore with all
their Hearts they know not what, because so they have been instructed; and the
better to maintain their prejudice entire in this matter, they become mad: But
alas! they know not what they do, and we ought to pity their Excess.

On the other side, who can tell whether the Priest has consecrated, or indeed
whether he be capable of consecrating? Is it a point of Faith to believe, that
among so many Priests, not one of them is a Cheat and an Impostor? This
certainly cannot be of Faith; and if this be not, neither is that which exposed
with so much Pomp, to carry the true Body of the Lord through the Streets, of
Faith. Thus the belief is at best but Conjecture; and then whatsoever in such
cases is not of Faith is sin, according to the Apostle, Romans 14.23.

I know not what color can be sufficient to excuse so strong an Objection,
unless Men will absolutely resist the Holy Scripture, and right Reason founded
upon it.

It Is further said, that Jesus Christ is in many places at the same time, in
the Hosts which are carried in very different manners; But neither for this is
there any Text of Scripture. You will say, this may be; I answer, the Question
here is not of the Infinite power of Jesus Christ, but of his Will, and which
we must obey when it is known to us; and of this as to the present point we
read nothing in the Holy Scripture. The shorter way then would be to say, that
the Sacrament of one Parish is not the same with that of another, although both
the one and the other concur in the same design to worship God; as the Paschal
Lamb of one Family, was not the Lamb of another, although both the one and the
other were to accomplish the same Mystery. Thus for instance, on Corpus
Christi-day, the Sacrament of S. Germain d' Auxerrois, where the perpetual
Vicar consecrates the Host, and Monsieur the Dean, the first Cure, carrys it
the Procession under a rich Canopy crowned with Flowers, this Host is not the
same with that of S. Paul's which is carried after another manner, viz. the
Image of that Apostle made of Silver gilt, falling from his Horse at his
Conversion, under the Sacrament of Jesus Christ hung up in rays of Gold, and
carried under the covering of another stately Canopy; and so of all the other
Churches.

As for the stories of several Hosts that have been stabbed with Penknives, and
have bled, they serve only to bring in some superstition contrary to the word
of God, which never pretended that there was material Blood in the consecrated
Bread, because it is the Body of Jesus Christ in a mystery of Faith.

For what is said of an Infant that was seen in the stead of the Host, and of
the figure of Christ sitting upon a Sepulshre instead of the same Host, are
mere Fables suggested by the Father of Lies.

It is further reported of certain Robbers that carrying away the Vessel in
which the Host is kept, they have thrown the Host it self upon the ground, and
trampled it under foot, sometimes have cast it into nasty places, without any
fear that it should avenge it self; This is a most horrible thought, and of
which we ought not to open our mouths, but only to detest so dreadful a
profanation.

The same must be said of those Hosts which have been cast up, as soon as
received, whether by sick persons, or sometimes by debauched Priests,
disordered with the last nights intemperance; both which have sometimes
happened, not to say any thing of those other terrible inconveniences, remarked
in the Cautions concerning the Mass. All which show that Men have carried
things too far, without any warrant from the Word of God.

It is not therefore so easy, as some imagine, to maintain the Doctrine of the
Real Presence out of the Use, against the Opinions of any Opposer.

In the mean time the Truth is terribly obscured, and few give themselves the
trouble to clear it. On the contrary it seems that among the many Writers of
the Age, there are some who make it their whole business to hide it, and to
keep themselves from finding it out, as if they desired never to be wiser than
they are. The vanity of lying flatters them but too much in all the Humane
passions which sway them.

There are nevertheless some faithful Disciples, and Apostolic Souls who are
exempted, to obey God by his Grace, and to give glory to his Name. It was not
long before his departure that David said, Every man is a liar: Psalm. 115.2.
and S. Paul to the Romans 3.4. to show that God only is true, adds immediately
after from Psalm Li. 4.
50.6. Thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou
judge.

Such was the Opinion of Monsieur de Marolles as to this point: I should too
much trespass upon the Reader's patience to insist thus particularly upon
others of lesser note. The Author of the late Historical Treatise of
Transubstantiation, has fully shown not only his own Opinion, but the Tradition
of all the Ages of the Church against it: And though I dare not say the same of
whoever he was that set forth the Il nous suffit que J.C. qui est la Verite
meme nous ait assure que ce Sacrament est veritablement fon Corpse, and qu'il
ait ordonne de manger sa chair and boire son sang: car il faut absolument qu'il
y soit, puis q'il il nous ordonne de l'y manger, sans s'embarasser l'Esprit de
quelle maniere and comment cela se fait 2. Part, p. 102.
Moyens surs and Honnestes, etc. that he did not believe Transubstantiation
himself, yet this is clear, That he did not desire any one should be forced to
believe it; or indeed be encouraged to search too nicely into the manner how
Christ is Present and Eaten in the Holy Sacrament.

Whether Monsieur de Meaux believes this Doctrine or not, his authority is
become of so little importance, that I do not think it worth the while to
examine. Yet the first French Advertissement n. 14. p. 22. Mr. B. -- Speaking
of that Edition, Il n'y avoit en aucun lieu de l'Article, ni le term de
Transubstantiation, ni cette proposition, que le pain and le vin sont changez
au corpse and au sang de J.C. dans la derniere [ Edition] apres ces mots, le
propre Corpse and le prop^e ^ing de J.C. il a ajoute ausquelles le pain and le
vin sont changez; cest ce qu'on appelle Transubstantiation.
Answer to his Exposition observes, that in the suppressed Edition of it he had
not at all mentioned that the Bread and Wine are turned into the Body and Blood
of Christ; those words in the close of that Paragraph which we now read, viz.
that the Bread and the Wine are changed into the proper Body, and proper Blood
of Jesus Christ, and that this is that which is called Transubstantiation,
being put in; Monsieur de Meaux Letter of his alterations; Vind. p. 13. and
117. pour l'ordre, and pour une plus grande nettete du discourse and du style.
for the greater neatness of the Discourse and Style, since.

But now for his Vindicator, it is evident, if he understands his own meaning,
that he is not very well instructed about it. Vindication of the Bishop of
Condom's Expos. Page 83.
It is manifest, says he, that our dispute with Protestants is not about the
manner, How Jesus Christ is Present, but only about the Thing it self, whether
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ be truly, really, and substantially present
after the words of Consecration, under the species or Appearance of Bread and
Wine, the substance of Bread and Wine being not so present.

In which words, if his meaning be to exclude totally the manner, How Jesus
Christ becomes present in the Eucharist, as his expression is, from being a
matter of Faith, it might well have been ranged amongst the rest of their new
Popery 1686. But if he designs not to exclude the manner of Christ's Presence,
but only the mode of the Conversion, as he seems by some other of his words to
insinuate, viz. whether it be by Adduction, etc. from being a matter of Faith,
he ought not then to have denied the manner of Christ's Presence in the
Eucharist, which their Church has absolutely defined to be by that wonderful
and singular Conversion so aptly called Transubstantiation; but more precisely
to have explained his Schoolnicety, and which is altogether as unintelligible,
as the Mystery which it is brought to explain.

I might to the particulars hitherto mentioned, add the whole Sect of their new
Philosophers, who following the Hypothesis of their Master Descartes, that
Accidents are nothing else but the Modes of Matter, must here either renounce
his Doctrine or their Churches Belief. But I shall close these remarks, which
have already run to a greater length than I designed, with one instance more,
from a Prelate of our own Church, but yet whose truly Christian sincerity will
I am persuaded justify him even to those of the Roman Communion: The same is
affirmed by Monsieur du Moulin of several Priests in France: Disp. Sedannens.
de Sacr. Euch. par. 4. p. 846. Nec abs re de intention presbyteri dubitatur,
cum plurimi Sacerdotes canant Missam relactante Conscientia, quales multos
vidimus qui ejurato Papismo fatebantur se diu cecinisse Missam animo a Missa
alienissimo.
and it is the learned Archbishop Usher, who having been so happy as to convert
several Roman Priests from their errors, and inquiring diligently of them, what
they who said Mass every day, and were not obliged to confess Venial Sins,
could have to trouble their Confessors so continually withal; ingenuously
acknowledged to him, that the chiefest part of their constant Confession was
their Infidelity as to the point of Transubstantiation, and for which as was
most fit, they mutually quitted and absolved one another.

And now that is thus clear from so many instances of the greatest Men in the
Roman Church, which this last Age has produced; and from whose discovery we may
reasonably enough infer the like of many others that have not come to our
knowledge, that several Persons who have lived and enjoyed some of the greatest
Honors and Dignities in that Communion, have nevertheless been Heretics in
this point; may I beseech those who are still misled with this great Error, to
stop a while, and seriously examine with me two or three plain considerations,
and in which I suppose they are not a little concerned.

And the first is, Of their own danger: but especially upon their Own
Principles.
It is but a very little while since an ingenious Person now living in the
French Church, the Abbe Petit published a Book which he calls Les Veritez de la
Religion prouvees and defendues contre les auciennes Heresies, par la verite de
l'Eucharistie. 1686.
The truths of the Christian Religion proved and defended against the ancient
Heresies by the Truth of the Eucharist: And what he means by this truth, he
thus declares in his Preface, viz. the change of Que du pain divienne le Corpse
du fills de Dieu, and du Vin son sang. Preface p. 7.
the Bread into the Body of the Son of God, and of the Wine into his Blood. He
there pretends that this Doctrine however combatted by us now, was Quoiqu'il
n'y ait point, presentement de verites plus incontestables que les trois grands
articles de nostre foi, qui sont contenus dans le symbol, c'est a dire, la
dizinite de J. C. la divinite du S. Esprit, and la Resurrection: Cependant j'
ose dire que la presence reelle de J. C. au Saint Sacrament etoit une verite
encore plus indubitable dans les premiers siecles de l'Eglise. Pref. p. 5.
yet more undoubted in the Primitive Church than either the divinity of Christ
and the Holy Ghost, or the certainty of our future Resurrection. And this he
wrote as the Title tells us, Traitte pour confirmer les Noveaux Convertis dans
la foi de l'Eglise Catholic.
To confirm the new Converts in the Faith of the Catholic Church; meaning
according to their usual figure, the Roman. How far this extravagant
undertaking may serve to convince them I cannot tell; this I know, that if we
may credit those who have been that Abbot' s most intimate acquaintance, he
believes but very little of it himself, unless he also be become in this point,
a new Convert.

But now if what has before been said of so many eminent Persons of their
Church be true, as after a due and diligent examination of every particular
there set down, I must beg leave to profess I am fully persuaded that it is;
'twill need no long deduction to show how dangerous an influence their unbelief
must have had, in some of the chiefest instances of their constant Worship.

For 1. It is the Doctrine of the Council. Trid. Sess. vii. Can. 11. siquis
dixerit in ministris dum Sacramenta conficiunt, non requiri intentionem, saltem
saciendi quod facit Ecclesia, Anathema sit.
Council of Trent that to make a Sacrament, the Priest must have, if not an
Actual, yet at least a Virtual Intention of doing that which the Church does:
And in the Vid. de defectibus circa Missam, c. de defectu Intentionis. In
Missali. R.
Rubricks of their Missal, the want of such an Intention in the Priest is one
of the defects there set down as sufficient to hinder a Consecration. Now if
this be true, as every Roman Catholic who acknowledges the Authority of that
Synod must believe it to be; it is then evident that in all those Masses which
any of the Persons I before named have said, there could have been no
Consecration: It being absurd to suppose that they who believed not
Transubstantiation, could have an intention to make any such change of the
Bread into the Body of Christ, which they thought it impossible to do.

Now if there were no Consecration, but that the Bread continued mere Bread as
it was before; then Secondly, All those who attended at their Masses, and
Adored their Hosts, paid the supreme worship of God to a bare Wafer, and no
more. How far the modern plea of their good Intention to Adore Christ in those
sacred Offices, may excuse them from having committed Idolatry, it is not
necessary I should here examine. They who desire a satisfaction in this matter,
may please to recur to a late excellent Treatise written purposely on this
Subject, A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host. Land. 1685.
and where they will find the weakness of this supposal sufficiently exposed.
But since Vid. Catharin. in Cajet. page 133. Ed. Paris. 1535. Where he quotes
S. Thomas and Paludanus for the same Opinion: This Book of his was seen and
approved by the Pope's order by the Divines at Paris: as himself tel's us in
the review of it. Lugdan. 1542.
many of their own greatest Men confess that if any one by mistake should
worship an Unconsecrated Host, taking it to have been Consecrated, he would be
guilty of Idolatry; and that such an Error would not be sufficient to excuse
him; may they please to consider with what Faith they can pay this Divine
Adoration to that which all their Senses tell them is but a bit of Bread; to
the hinderance of whose Conversion so many things may interpose, that were
their Doctrine otherwise as infallible, as we are certain it is false, it would
yet be a hundred to one that there is no Consecration: in a word; how they can
worship that which they can never be secure is changed into Christ's Body, nay
when, as the examples I have before given show, they have all the reason in the
World to fear, whether even the Priest himself who says the Mass does indeed
believe that he has any Power, or by consequence can have any intention, to
turn it into the Flesh of Christ.

And the same consideration will show, Thirdly; How little security their other
Plea of Concomitance, which they so much insist upon, to show the sufficiency
of their Communicating only in one kind, viz. that they receive the Blood in
the Body, can give to the Laity, to satisfy their Consciences that they ever
partake of that Blessed Sacrament as they ought to do. Since whatever is
pretended of Christ's Body, it is certain there can be none of his Blood in a
mere Wafer: And if by reason of the Priest's infidelity, the Host should be
indeed nothing else, of which we have shown they can never be sure; neither can
they ever know whether what they receive be upon their own Principles, an
entire Communion.

And then Lastly, for the main thing of all, The Sacrifice of the Mass; it is
clear that if. Christ's Body be not truly and properly there, it cannot be
truly and properly offered; nor any of those great benefits be derived to them
from a morsel of Bread, which themselves declare can proceed only from the
Flesh and Blood of their Blessed Lord.

It is I know an easy matter for those who can believe Transubstantiation, to
believe also that there is no hazard in all these great and apparent dangers.
But yet in matters of such moment Men ought to desire to be well assured, and
not exposed even to any possible defects. De defectibus cirea Missam: De
defectu panis. Si panis non sit triticeus, vel si triticeus, sit admixtus
granis alterius generis in tanta quantitate, ut non maneat panis triticeus, vel
sit alioqui corruptus: non conficitur Sacramentum. Si sit confectus de aqud
rosacea vel alterius distillationis, dubium est an conficiatur? Et de defect.
vini. Si Vinum sit factum penitus acetum, vel penitus putridum, vel de uvis
acerbis seu non maturis expressiom, vel admixtum tantum aque ut vinum sit
corruptum, non consicitur Sacramentum.
I do not now insist upon the common remarks, which yet are Authorized by their
own Missal, and may give just grounds to their fears; That if the Wafer be not
made of Wheat but of some other Corn, there is then no Consecration: If it be
mixed not with common, but distilled Water, it is doubtful whether it be
Consecrated. If the Wine be sour to such a certain degree, that then it
becomes incapable of being changed into the Blood of Christ; with many more of
the like kind, and which render it always uncertain to them, whether there be
any change made in the blessed Elements or no; Du Moulin, in the place above
cited, mentions one that in his time was burnt at Loudun for Consecrating a
Host in the name of the Devil. These. Sedann. Th. 97. n. 10. p. 846. Vol. 1.
the Relations I have given, are not of counterfeit Jews and Moors, who to
escape the danger of the Inquisition have sometimes become Priests, and
administered all the Sacraments for many years together, without ever having an
intention to Administer truly any one of them, and of which I could give an
eminent instance in a certain Jew now living; who for many Years was not only a
Priest, but a Professor of Divinity in Spain, and all the while in reality a
mere Jew as he is now. The Persons here mentioned were Men of undoubted
reputation, of great learning and singular esteem in their Church; and if these
found the impossibilities of Transubstantiation so much greater than either the
pretended Authority or Infallibility of their Church; certainly they may have
just cause to fear, whether many others of their Priests do not Live in the
same infidelity in which these have Died, and so expose them to all the hazards
now mentioned, and which are undeniably the consequences of such their Unbelief.

But these are not the only dangers I would desire those of that Communion to
reflect on upon this occasion. Another there is, and of greater consequence
than any I have hitherto mentioned, and which may perhaps extend not only to
this Holy Eucharist, but it may be to the invalidating of most of their other
Sacraments. Eugenii IV. decret. in Act. Council. Florent. Ann. 1439. Council
Labb. Tom. 13. p. 535. Council. Trident. Sess. VII. Can. 2.
It is the Doctrine of the Roman Church that to the Validity of every
Sacrament, and therefore of that of Orders as well as the rest three things
must concur, a due matter, a right form, and the Person of the Minister
conferring the Sacrament, with an intention of doing what the Church does.
Where either of these is wanting, the Sacrament is not performed. If therefore
the Bishop in conferring the Holy Order of Priesthood has not an intention of
doing what the Church does, it is plain that the Person to be ordained receives
no Priestly Character of him; nor by consequence has any power of consecrating
the Holy Eucharist, or of being hereafter advanced to a higher degree. Now the
form of conferring the Order of Priesthood they determine to be this; Ibid.
page 5^3. Catech. Council. Trid. de Sacr. Ord. n. xxii. p. 222. Item, n. L. p.
228.
The Bishop delivers the Cup with some Wine, and the Paten with Bread into the
Hands of the person whom he Ordains, saying, Receive the Power of offering a
Sacrifice in the Church for the living and the dead, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. By which Ceremony and words, their
Catechism tells us, He is constituted an Interpreter and Mediator between God
and Man; which is to be esteemed the chiefest Function of a Priest. So that
then the intention necessary to the conferring the Order of Priesthood is this;
to give a Power to consecrate, i. e. to Transubstantiate the Host into Christ's
Body, and so offer it as a Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead.

If therefore any of their Bishops, for instance Cardinal du Perron, or
Monsieur de Marca, did not believe that either the Church or themselves as
Bishops of it, had any Authority to confer any such Power, they could not
certainly have any Intention of doing in this case what the Church intends to
do. Having no such Intention, the Persons whom they pretended to Ordain were no
Priests. Being no Priests they had no Power to Consecrate. All the Hosts
therefore which were either offered or taken, or worshipped in any of the
Masses celebrated by those Priests whom these two Bishops Ordained, were only
mere Bread, and not the Body of Christ; And as many of them, as being
afterward advanced to a higher dignity, were consecrated Bishops, received no
Episcopal Character, because they were destitute of the Priestly before. Thus
the danger still increases: For by this means, the Priests whom they also
Ordain are no Priests; and when any of them shall be promoted to a higher
degree, are incapable of being made Bishops; And so by the Infidelity of these
two Men, there are at this day infinite numbers of Priests and Bishops, who say
Mass, and confer Orders without any manner of power to do either; and in a
little time it may be there shall not be a true Bishop or Priest in the whole
Gallicane Church. But,

II. A second Consideration which I would beg leave to offer from the
foregoing instances is this: What reliance we can make upon the Pretended
Infallibility of their Church; when it is thus plain that so many of the most
learned Men of their own Communion did not only not believe it to be
Infallible, but supposed it to have actually Erred, and that in those very
Doctrines that are at this day esteemed the most considerable Points in
difference between Us.

It is plain from what has been said in the foregoing reflection, that
disbelieving Transubstantiation, they must also have looked upon all the other
Consequences of it, viz. the Adoration of the Host, the Sacrifice of the Mass,
etc. as Erroneous too. Now though it be not yet agreed among them, nor ever
likely to be, where the supposed Infallibility of their Church is seated, yet
since all manner of Authority has conspired to establish these things; Popes
have decreed them, Councils defined them, and both Popes and Councils
anathematized all those that shall presume to doubt of them; it is evident
either these Men did not believe the Church to be Infallible, as is pretended;
or they did not believe the Roman, to be, according to the modern phrase,
indeed the Catholic Church.

III. And upon the same grounds there will arise a third Reflection, which they
may please to make with us; and that is, with what Reason they can press us
with the Authority of their Church in these matters; when such eminent persons
of their own Communion, and who certainly were much more Obliged to it than we
can be thought to be, yet did not esteem it sufficient to enslave their belief.

It is a reproach generally cast upon us, that we set up a private Spirit in
opposition to the Wisdom and Authority of the Church of God: and think our
selves better able to judge in matters of Faith, than the most General Council
that was ever yet assembled. This is usually said, but is indeed a foul
Misrepresentation of our Opinion. All we say is, that every Man ought to act
Rationally in matters of Religion, as well as in other concerns; to employ his
Understanding with the utmost skill and diligence that he is able, to know
God's will, and what it is that he requires of us. We do not set up our own
judgments against the Authority of the Church; but having both the Holy Oracles
of God, and the Definitions of Men before us, we give to each their proper
weight. And therefore if the one at any time contradicts the other, we resolve,
as is most fitting, not that our own, but God's Authority revealed to us in his
Word, is to be preferred. And he who without this examination servilely gives
up himself to follow whatever is required of him; He may be in the right, if
his Church or Guide be so; but according to this method shall never be able to
give a reason of his Faith; nor if he chance to be born in a False Religion,
ever be in a capacity of being better instructed. For if we must be allowed
nothing but to obey only, and not presume to enquire why; He that is a Jew must
continue a Jew still; he that is a Turk, a Turk; a Protestant must always be a
Protestant: In short, in whatsoever profession any one now is, in that he must
continue, whether true or false, if reason and examination must be excluded all
place in matters of Religion.

All this is lately granted by the Catholic Representer. Cap. VI.
And indeed after all their clamours against us on this occasion, yet is this
no more than what themselves require of us when it is in order to their own
advantage. Is a Proselyte to be made, they offer to him their Arguments: They
tell him a long story of their Church; the Succession, Visibility, and other
Notes of it. To what purpose is all this, if we are not to be Judges, to
examine their pretenses whether these are sufficient marks of such a Church as
they suppose; and if they are, whether they do indeed agree to theirs, and then
upon a full conviction submit to them. Now if this be their intention, it is
then clear, let them pretend what they will, that they think us both capable of
judging in these matters, and that we ought to follow that, which all things
considered we find to be most reasonable, which is all that we desire.

And for this we have here the undoubted Examples of those Eminent Persons of
their own Communion before named; who notwithstanding the Authority of their
Church, and the decision of so many Councils esteemed by it as General, have
yet both thought themselves at liberty to examine their Decrees, and even to
pass sentence too upon them, that they were erroneous in the Points here
mentioned. And therefore certainly we may modestly desire the same liberty
which themselves take; at least till we can be convinced, (and that by such
Arguments as we shall be allowed to judge of,) that there is such an infallible
Guide whom we ought in all things to follow without further inquiry, and where
we may find him; and when this is done I will for my part promise as freely to
give up my self to his Conduct, as I am till then, I think reasonably, resolved
to follow what according to the best of my ability in proving all things, I
shall find indeed to be Good.

IV. I might from the same Principles, Fourthly, argue the Reasonableness of
our Reformation, at least in the opinion of those great Men of whom we have
hitherto been speaking: And who thinking it allowed to them to dissent
themselves from the received Doctrine of their Church, which they found to be
erroneous, could not but in their Consciences justify us, who, as a national
Church, no way subjected to their Authority, did the same; and by the right
which every such Church has within it self, reformed those Errors, which like
the Tares were sprung up with the Good Seed. This it is evident they must have
approved; and for one of them, the Abbot of Ville-loyne, I have been assured by
some of his intimate Acquaintance, that he had always a particular respect for
the Church of England, and which others of their Communion at this day esteem
to be neither Heretical nor Schismatical.

V. But I may not insist on these things, and will therefore finish this
Address with this only remonstrance to them; That since it is thus evident,
that for above 1200 years this Doctrine was never established in the Church,
nor till then, in the opinion of their own most learned Men, any matter of
Faith; since the Greatest of their Writers in the past Ages have declared
themselves so freely concerning it as we have seen above, and some of the most
eminent of their Communion in the present have ingenuously acknowledged that
they could not believe it; since it is confessed that the Scripture does not
require it; Sense and Reason undoubtedly oppose it, and the Primitive Ages of
the Church, as one of their own Authors has very lately shown, received it not;
They will at least suffer all these things to dispose them to an indifferent
Examination, wherefore at last it is that they do believe this great Error?
Upon what Authority they have given up their Senses to Delusion; their Reason
to embrace Contradictions; the Holy Scripture and Antiquity, to be submitted to
the dictates of two Assemblies, which many of themselves esteem to have been
rather Cabals than Councils: And all to support a Doctrine, the most injurious
that can be to our Savior 's Honor; destructive in its nature not only of the
certainty of the Christian Religion, but of every thing else in the World;
which if Transubstantiation be true, must be all but Vision: for that cannot be
true unless the Senses of all Mankind are deceived in judging of their proper
Objects, and if this be so, we can then be sure of nothing.

These Considerations, if they shall incline them to an impartial view of the
following Discourses, they may possibly find somewhat in them, to show the
reasonableness of our dissent from them in this matter: However they shall at
least I hope engage those of our own Communion to stand firm in that Faith
which is thus strongly supported with all sorts of Arguments; and convince them
how dangerous it is for Men to give up themselves to such prejudices, as
neither Sense nor Reason, nor the word of God, nox the Authority of the best
and purest Ages of the Church, are able to overcome.

A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters Contained in this TREATISE.
PREFACE.
THE occasion of this Discourse. Page i The method made use of for the
explaining the nature of this Holy Eucharist. Page iv No Proof of
Transubstantiation in Holy Scripture. Page v The rise and establishment of it.
Page vi, vii Several of their greatest Men before the Council of Trent believed
it not. Page vii, viii And many have even since continued to disbelieve it.
Page x So, Picherellus. Page x Cardinal du PERRON. Page xi F. Barnes. Page xii
Monsieur de MARCA. Page xiii F. SIRMOND. Page xv Monsieur L --. Page xvii Mons.
de Marolles. Page ib. Others. Page xxiv, etc.
Consequences drawn from these Examples:
I. Of the danger of the Papists, especially upon their own Principles. Page
xxvii With reference to this Sacrament: and therein to the 1. Consecration.
Page xxvii 2. Adoration. Page ib. 3. Communion in one kind. Page xxix 4. Mass.
Page xxx
With reference to their entire Priesthood. Page xxxi
II. Against the Infallibility of the Roman Church. Page xxxiii III. Against
its Authority. Page xxxiv IV. As to the Reasonableness of our Reformation. Page
xxxvi V. That these things ought to dispose those of that Communion to an
impartial search into the grounds of their belief as to this matter. Page
xxxvii
PART I.
The Introduction.
Of the Nature of this Holy Sacrament in the General. Page 1 Christ's design in
the Institution of it. Page 2 That he established it upon the Ceremonies of the
Jewish Passover. Page 3, 4, 5, 6 The method from hence taken to explain the
nature of it. Page 6, 7
CHAP. I. Of Transubstantiation; or the Real Presence established by the Church
of Rome. Page 8
What is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in this point. ib. -- This shown
upon the Principle before laid down, to be repugnant, 1. To the design and
nature of this Holy Sacrament. Page 12 2. To the expression it self, This is my
Body. Page 14

The Papists themselves sensible of it. Page 18 That the Sixth of S. John does
not at all favor them. Page 20 -- This Doctrine shown further to be repugnant,
I. To the best and purest Tradition of the Church. Page 24 II. To the right
Reason. Page 32 III. To the common Sense of all Mankind. Page 36

Conclusion of this Point, and transition to the next. Page 37
CHAP. II. Of the Real Presence acknowledged by the Church of England. 41
The notion of the Real Presence falsely imputed, by a late Author to our
Church. 42 In answer to this Four things proposed to be considered, I. What is
the true notion of the Real Presence as acknowledged by the Church of England.
Page 43 II. That this Notion has been constantly maintained by our most Learned
and Orthodox Divines. Page 46 -- So those abroad; Calvin. Page 47 -- Beza. Page
49 -- Martyr, etc. Page 51
-- For our own Divines; consider the express words of the twenty ninth
Article, in K. Edw. VI. time. Page 52 -- Archbishop Cranmer. Page 53 -- Bishop
Ridley. Page 55
-- That the same continned to be the Opinion of our Divines after. Page 56
Shown 1. From the History of the Convocations proceeding as to this point in
the beginning of Q. Eliz. Reign. ib. 2. From the Testimonies of our Divines. --
Bp. Jewel. Page 59 -- Mr. Hooker. Page 60 -- Bp. Andrews. Page 62 -- A. B. of
Spalatto. Page 64 -- Bp. Montague ib. -- Bp. Taylour. Page 66 -- Mr. Torndyke.
Page 69

Whose Testimonies are cited at large: Of 1. Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum.
2. Bp. Morton. 3. A. B. Usher. 4. Bp. Cosens. 5. Dr. Jo. White. 6. Dr. Fr.
White. 7. Dr. Jackson. 8. Dr. Hammond.
Whose Authorities are referred to; Page 71, 72

III. That the alterations which have been made in our Rubric, were not upon
the account of our Divines changing their Opinions, as is vainly and falsely
suggested. Page 72 IV. That the Reasons mentioned in our Rubric, concerning
the Impossibility of Christ's Natural Body's existing in several places at the
same time, is no way invalidated by any of this Author's Exceptions against it.
Page 77 1. Not by his First Observation. ib. 2. Nor by his Second. Page 79 3.
Nor by his Third. Page 80 4. Nor by his Fourth. Page 81
The Objection, of this Opinion's, being downright Zuinglianism; Answered. Page
82 And the whole concluded. Page 84
PART II.
CHAP. III Of the Adoration of the Host as prescribed and practiced in the
Church of Rome.
Two things proposed to be considered; I. What the Doctrine of the Church of
England as to this point is. Page 86 Our Authors exceptions against it,
Answered. Page 87 II. What is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; and whether
what this Author has said in favor of it may be sufficient to warrant their
Practice as to this matter. Page 91 Their Doctrine stated. ib. The Defense of
it, unsufficient: shown in Answer, 1. To his Protestant-Concessions. Page 93 2.
To his Catholic Assertions. First. Page 96 Second. Page 99 Third. ib. Fourth.
Page 100 Fifth. Page 102 Sixth. Page 103 Seventh. Page 104 Eighth. ib.
3. To the Grounds he offers of their Belief. Page 105
The Lutherans Practice no Apology for theirs. Page 106 Ground First. Answered.
Page 108 Ground Second. Answered. Page 109 Ground Third. Answered. Page 113
Ground Fourth. Answered. Page 114 Ground Fifth. Answered. Page 115
Some Arguments proposed, upon their own Principles, against this Adoration.
Page 117 Conclusion. Page 125
ERRATA.
PAGE xvii. l. 10. fourth r. sixth. p. xviii. l. 10. in r. on. p. xxii. l. 33.
r. they are. p. xxiv. l. 5. r. That thou. p. 13. marg. Hammond. l. 6. p. 129.
p. 64. marg. Casaubon. ib. l. 19. Body is of Christ. p. 76. l. 24. dele. which.
p. 80. l. 15. then that. p. 91. l. 27. r. this Holy. p. 98. l. 16. for then r.
the. p. 112. l. 18. Catholica. l. 20. asks.

A few lesser Faults there are, which the Reader may please to correct.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Holy Eucharist, With particular Reference To the two GREAT
POINTS OF THE REAL PRESENCE, AND The Adoration of the HOST.
INTRODUCTION. Of the Nature of this HOLY SACRAMENT in the General.
TO understand the true design of our Blessed Savior, in the Institution of
this Holy Sacrament, we cannot, I suppose, take any better course than to
consider first of all, what Account the Sacred Writers have left us of the Time
and Manner of the doing of it.

Now for this St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 11.23. " That the Lord Jesus the same
night in which he was betrayed (having first eaten the Passover according to
the Law, Exodus 12. Matt. xxvi. 20.) took Bread, and when he had given thanks he
brake it, Matt. xxvi.
and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, Eat, This is my Body which is
broken for you, This do in Remembrance of Me. After the same manner also he
took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood: This do ye, as often as ye Drink it in Remembrance of me.

Such is the Account which St. Paul gives us of the Original of this Holy
Sacrament: Nor do the Evangelists dissent from it; only that St. Matthew with
reference to the Cup, adds, Drink ye ALL of it, Matt. xxvi. 27. to which St.
Mark subjoins a particular Observation, and which ought not here to be passed
by, "That they ALL drank of it, Mark xiv. 23.

It is not to be doubted, but that the design of our Blessed Savior in
instituting this Holy Sacrament, was to Abolish the Jewish Passover, and to
establish the Memory of another, and a much greater Deliverance, than that of
the firstborn, now to be wrought for the whole World in his Death. The Bread
which he brake, and the Wine which he poured out, being such clear Types of his
Body to be broken, his Blood to be shed for the Redemption of Mankind, that it
is impossible for us to doubt of the Application.

And as God Almighty under the Law, designed that other Memorial of the Paschal
Lamb, now changed into a so much better and more excellent Remembrance, to
continue as long as the Law its self stood in force: So this Blessed Eucharist,
established by Christ in the room of it, must no doubt have been intended by
Him, to be continued in his Church, as long as the Covenant sealed with that
Blood which it exhibits, stands: And therefore, that since that shall never be
abolished; it is evident that this also will remain our Duty, and be our
perpetual Obligation to the end of the World.

This is the import of our Saviors Addition, Do this in Remembrance of Me; and
is by St. Paul more fully expressed in those Words, which he immediately
subjoyns to the History of the Institution before recited, 1 Cor. xi. 26. For
as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show, i.e. in the
Jewish Phrase, set forth, Commemorate the Lords Death till his coming.

And that this Holy Sacrament now established in the place of the Jewish
Passover, might be both the better understood, and the easier received by them;
it is a thing much to be remarked for the right explaining of it, how exactly
he accommodated all the Notions and Ideas of that Ancient Ceremony to this new
Institution.

I. In that Paschal Supper, the Master of the House took Bread, and presenting
it before them, instead of the usual Benediction of the Bread, He brake it, and
gave it to them, saying, See Dr. Hammond on Mat. xxvi. lit. E. Casaubon in Mat.
xxvi. 26. etc.
This is the Bread of Affliction which our Fathers ate in Egypt. In this Sacred
Feast, our Savior in like manner takes Bread, the very Loaf, which the Jews
were wont to take for the Ceremony before mentioned; breaks it, and gives it to
his Disciples, saying, This is my Body which is broken for you; alluding
thereby, not only to their Ceremony in his Action, but even to their very
manner of Speech in his Expression, to the Passover before them, which in their
Language they constantly called, (...) Vid. Buxtorf. Vindic. contr. Capel. P.
14. Hammond in Mat. xxvi. l. e. etc.
the Body of the Paschal Lamb.

II. In that Ancient Feast, the Master of the House in like manner after Supper
took the Cup, and having given thanks, gave it to them, saying, Allix preparat
a la Saint Cene. cap. 2. page 16.
This is the Fruit of the Vine, and the Blood of the Grape. In this Holy
Sacrament our Blessed Lord in the very same manner takes the Cup, he Blesses
it, and gives it to his Disciples saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood; his Action being again the very same with theirs; and for his
Expression, it is that which Moses used, when he ratified the Ancient Covenant
between God and the Jews; [Exod. xxiv. 8. compared with Hebr. ix 20.] saying,
This is the Blood of the Testament.

III. In that Ancient Feast, after all this was finished, they were wont to
sing a Dr. Lightfoots Heb and Talmud. Observation Mat. xxvi. ver. 26, 27. T. 2.
p. 258, 260.
Hymn, the Psalms yet extant, from the cxiii. to the cxix. thence called by
them, the Great Hallelujah. In this Holy Supper, our Savior and his Disciples
are expressly recorded to have done the like, and very probably in the selfsame
words. [See Matt. xxvi. 30. Mark xiv. 26.] In a word, Lastly,

IV. That ancient Passover the Jews were commanded to keep in memory of their
Deliverance out of Egypt. The bitter Herbs were a (...)
remembrance of the bitter servitude they underwent there, Exodus i. 14. The red
Wine was a (...)
Memorial of the Blood of the Children of Israel slain by Pharaoh: And for this
they were expressly commanded by Moses, Exodus xiii. 8. to (...)
SHOW, i.e. to annunciate or tell forth to their Children what the Lord had
done for them. And so in this Holy Sacrament, Christ expressly institutes it for
the same end, (...).
Do this, says he, in remembrance of me; which St. Paul thus explains, 1 Cor.
xi. 26. " For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do (or
rather, do ye) (...).
SHOW (the very word before used) the Lords death till his coming.

So clear an Allusion does every part of this Sacrament bear to that ancient
Solemnity; and we must be more blind than the Jews themselves, not to see, that
as that other Sacrament of Baptism was instituted by Christ from the Practice
and Custom of the Sea Dr. Hammonds Practical Catechism Lib. 6. page 115. Oper.
fol. Land. 1684.
Jewish Doctors, who received their Proselytes by the like washing; so was this
Holy Eucharist established upon the Analogy which we have seen to the Paschal
Supper, whose place it supplies, and whose Ceremonies it so exactly retains,
that it seems only to have heightened the design, and changed the Application to
a more excellent Remembrance.

I know not how far it may be allowed to confirm this Analogy, That it was one
of the most ancient Traditions among the Vid. Fagium in Annotat. in Exodus xii.
13. where he renders their words thus, "Et in eadem die viz. xv. mensis Nisan,
sc. Martii, redimendus est Israel in diebus Messiae. Vid. Vol. 1. Critic. M. p
498.
Jews of old, that the Messiah should come and work out their deliverance, The
very same night in which God had brought them out of Egypt, the night of the
Paschal Solemnity. But certainly considerable it is, that as God under the Law,
the same night in which he delivered them, instituted the Passover to be a
perpetual Memorial of it throughout their Generations; so here our Savior
instituted his Communion not only in the same Night in which he delivered us,
but immediately after having eaten His last Passover; to show us, that what
that Solemnity had hitherto been to the Jews, this Sacrament should from
henceforth be to us; and that we by this Ceremony should commemorate ours, as
they by that other had been commanded to do their Deliverance.

This the Holy Scriptures themselves direct us to, by so often calling our
Blessed Savior in express terms, " The Lamb of God, Joh. i. 29. St. Peter
speaking of our Redemption wrought by Him, tells us, that it was not obtained
by corruptible things, such as silver and gold, but by the precious Blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. i. 18. And St.
Paul so clearly directs us to this allusion, that no possible doubt can remain
of it; Christ, says he, our Passover is sacrificed for us, theresore let us
keep the Feast, 2 Cor. 1. v. 7.

And now after so many Arguments for this Application, as, being joined
together, I think I might almost call a Demonstration of it; I suppose I may
without scruple lay down this foundation both for the unfolding of the nature
of this Holy Sacrament in the General, and for the Examination of those two
great points I am here to consider in particular, viz. That our Savior in this
Institution addressing himself to Jews, and speaking in the direct form of the
Paschal Phrases; and in a Ceremony which it is thus evident he designed to
introduce in the stead of that Solemnity; The best method we can take for
explaining both the words and intent of this Communion, will be to examine what
such men to whom he spoke must necessarily have conceived to be his meaning,
but especially on an occasion wherein it neither became him to be obscure; and
the Apostles silence, not one of them demanding any explication of his words,
as at other times they were wont to do, clearly showing that he was not
difficult to be understood.

This only Postulate being granted, which I think I have so good reason to
expect; I shall now go on to examine by it, the first great Point proposed to
be considered, viz. Of the Real Presence of Christ in this Holy Sacrament, and
that

1st. As established by the Church of Rome.

2dly. As acknowledged by the Church of England.

PART I.
CHAP. I. Of TRANSUBSTANTIATION, Or the Real Presence Established by the CHURCH
of ROME.
TRansubstantiation is defined by the Council. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 4. and Can.
2.
Council of Trent, to the A WONDERFVL CONVERSION of the whole Substance of the
Bread, in this Holy Sacrament, into the whole substance of the Body of Christ,
and of the whole substance of the Wine into his Blood; the Species or Accidents
only of the Bread and Wine remaining.

For the better understanding of which Wonderful Conversion, because the Church
of Rome, which is not very liberal in any of her Instructions, has taken
Catechismus ad Parochos. Par. II. cap. de Euch. Sacr. n. 39.41, 45.
particular care that this should not be too much explained to the People, as
well knowing it to be a Doctrine so absurd, that even their credulity could
hardly be able to digest it; it may not be amiss if, from the very words of
their own Catechism, we examine a little farther into it.

Now three things there are, which, they tell us, must be considered in it:

I. Catech. ibid. n. xxv. Sect. Primum.
That the true Body of Christ our Lord, the very same that was Born of the
Virgin, and now sits in Heaven at the right hand of the Father, is contained in
this Sacrament.

Now by the true Body, they mean not only his Human Body, and whatsoever
belongs to it, as Bones, Sinews, etc. to be contained in this Sacrament; Ibid.
n. xxxi. Sect. Totus Christus ut Deus and Homo in Eucharistia continetur.
But the entire Christ, God and Man; so that the Eucharistical Elements are
changed into our Savior, as to both his Substances, and the consequences of
both, his Blood, Soul, and Divinity its self, all which are really present in
this Sacrament; Ibid. n. xxxiii. Sect. Per Concomitantiam in Euch. quae sint.
the Body of Christ by the Consecration, the rest by Concomitance with the
Body.

Again: When it is said, Ibid. n. xxxix. Sect. Conversio quae sit in Euchar. etc.
That the whole Substance of the Bread is changed into his whole Body, and the
whole Substance of the Wine into his whole Blood; this is not to be so
understood, as if the Bread did not contain the whole Substance of his Blood,
as well as of his Body, and so the Wine, the whole Substance of his Body, as
well as of his Blood; Ibid. n. xxxv. Sect. Christus totus in qualibet
particula, and n. xlii. etc.
seeing Christ is entire in each part of the Sacrament, nay in every the least
Crumb or Drop, of either part.

II. The Ibid. n. xxv. Sect. Secundum.
second thing to be considered for the understanding of this Mystery, is, That
not any part of the Substance of the Bread and Wine remains; tho nothing may
seem more contrary to the Senses than this; in which they are certainly in the
right.

III. Ibid. n. xxv. Sect. Tertium and n. xliv. Sect. Accid. sine subjecto
constable. in Euch.
That the Accidents of the Bread and Wine, which either our Eyes see (as the
Color, Form, etc.) or our other Senses perceive (as the Taste, Touch, Smell)
all these are in no Subject, but exist by themselves, after a wonderful manner,
and which cannot be explained.

For the rest, the Conversion its self, Ibid. n. xxxvii. Sect. Primo natione.
It is very difficult to be comprehended, How Christ's Body, which before
Consecration, was not in the Sacrament, should now come to be there, since it is
certain that it changes not its place, but is still all the while in Heaven.
Nor is it made present there by Creation, Ibid. n. xxxix. Sect. Conversio quae
sit in Euch. etc.
nor by any other Change; For it is neither increased nor diminished, but
remains whole in its Substance as before. Ibid. n. xliii. Quonam modo Christus
existat in Euchar.
Christ is not in the Sacrament Locally; for he has no Quantity there, is
neither Great nor Little. Ibid. n. xli. Sect. De Transubstant. curiosius non
inquirendum.
In a word, Men ought not to inquire too curiously, how this Change can be
made, for it is not to be comprehended, seeing neither in any natural Changes,
nor indeed in the whole Creation, is there any Example of any thing like it.

Such is the Account which themselves give of this Mystery: From all which we
may in short conclude the State of the Question before us, to be this; That we
do not dispute at all about Christ's Real Presence, which after a Spiritual and
Heavenly manner, we acknowledge in this Holy Eucharist, as we shall hereafter
show; nor by consequence of the Truth of Christ's Words which we undoubtedly
believe: But only about this Manner of his Presence, viz. Whether the Bread and
the Wine be changed into the very natural Body and Blood of Christ, so that the
Bread and Wine themselves do no longer remain; But that under the Appearance of
them is contained that same Body of Christ, which was Born of the Blessed
Virgin, with his Soul and Divinity; which same Body of Christ, tho extended in
all its parts in Heaven, is at the same time in the Sacrament without any
Extension, neither Great nor Small, comes thither neither by Generation, nor by
Creation, nor by any local Motion; forasmuch as it continues still at the right
Hand of God in Heaven, at the very same instant that it exists whole and entire
in every consecrated Host, or Chalice; nay more, is whole and entire, not only
in the whole Host, or the whole Chalice; but in every the least Crumb of the
Host, and every the least Drop of the Chalice, here upon Earth.

And here it might well be thought a very needless, indeed an extravagant
undertaking, to prove that those Elements, which so many of our Senses tell us,
continue after their Consecration the very same, as to what concerns their
natural Substance, that they were before, are in reality the very same: That
what all the World Sees, and Feels, and Smells, and Tastes, to be Bread and
Wine, is not changed into the very natural Flesh and Blood of a Body actually
before existent; had it not entered into the Minds of so great a part of the
Christian Church to join in the maintaining of a Paradox, which has nothing to
defend it, but that fond Presumption they have certainly done well to take up,
That they cannot possibly be in the wrong, and without which it would be very
difficult for them to persuade any sober man that they are here in the right.

To show that those words, which they tell us, work all this Miracle, and are
the only reason that engages them to maintain so many absurdities as are
confessedly the unavoidable Consequences of this Doctrine, have no such force
nor interpretation as they pretend; I must desire it may be remembered what I
before remarked, That this Holy Sacrament was established by our Savior in the
room of the Jewish Passever, and upon the very Words and Ceremonies of it. So
that, if in that all things were Typical; the Feast, the Customs, the
Expressions merely allusive to something that had been done before, and of
which this sacred Ceremony was the memorial; we ought in all reason to
conclude, that both our Savior must have designed, and his Apostles understood
this Holy Sacrament to have been the same too.

Now as to the Nature of the Passover; we have already seen that it was
appointed by God as a Remembrance of his delivery of the Jews out of the Land
of Egypt, when he slew all the firstborn of the Egyptians, Exodus xii. The Lamb
which they ate every year in this Feast, was an Eucharistical Sacrifice and
Type of that first Lamb which was slain in the night of their deliverance, and
whose Blood sprinkled upon the Posts of their Doors had preserved their
Forefathers from the destroying Angel, that he should not do them any
mischief. The Bread of Affliction, which they broke, and of which they said,
perhaps in the very Vid. Cameron Annot. in Matt. xxvi. 26. in illa verba,
(...), inter critic. page 780. l. 24.
same manner that Christ did of the very same Loaf, Take, eat, this is the
Bread of affliction which our Fathers ate in Egypt; they esteemed a Type and
Figure, of that unleavened Bread which their Forefathers so many Ages before
had eaten there; and upon that account called it Allix Sermon. page 503.
" The Memorial of their delivery out of Egypt. Hammond Pract. Catechism. lib
vi. page Ed. fol.
The Cup of Blessing which they blessed, and of which they ALL drank in this
Feast, they did it at once in memory both of the Blood of the Children of
Israel slain by Pharaoh, and of the Blood of the Lamb, which being sprinkled
upon their doors, preserved their own from being shed with that of the
Egyptians.

Now all these Idea's with which the Apostles had so long been acquainted,
could not but presently suggest to them the same design of our Blessed Savior
in the Institution of this Holy Sacrament: That when He, as the Master of the
Feast, took the Loaf, Blessed, and brake it, and gave it to them, and Bid them
in like manner henceforward, Do this in Remembrance of Him; He certainly
designed that by this Ceremony, which hitherto they had used in memory of their
deliverance out of Egypt, they should now continue the memory of their Blessed
Lord, and of that deliverance which he was about to work for them. That as by
calling the Lamb in that Feast "The Body of the Passover, they understood that
it was the remembrance of God's mercy in commanding the destroying Angel to
pass over their Houses when he slew their Enemies; the memorial of the Lamb
which was killed for this purpose in Egypt; so Christ calling the Bread his
Body, nay, his Body broken for them, could certainly mean nothing else but that
it was the Type, the Memorial of his Body, which as yet was not, but was now
just ready to be given for their redemption.

This is so natural a reflection, and in one Part at least of this Holy
Sacrament so necessary too, that it is impossible to explain it otherwise. This
Cup, says our Savior, is the New Testament in my Blood; That is, as See Exodus
xxiv. 8. Heb. ix ^0. And this Allusion is applied by S. Peter, 1 Ep. i 2. Vid.
Hammond. Annot. in loc. lit. a.
Moses had before said of the Old Testament in the very same Phrase, the seal,
the ratification of it. Now if those words be taken literally, then 1st. It Is
the Cup that is Transubstantiated, not the Wine; 2ly, It is changed not into
Christ's Blood (as they pretend) but into the New Testament in his Blood; which
being confessedly absurd and impossible, it must in all reason follow, That the
Apostles understood our Savior alike in both His Expressions; and that by
consequence we ought to interpret those words, This is my Body which is broken
for you, of the Bread's being the Type, or Figure of his Body; as we must that
of the Cup, That it was the New Testament in his Blood, i. e. the sign, or seal
of the New Testament.

So naturally do all these Notions direct us to a figurative interpretation of
his Words; the whole design of this Institution, and all the Parts and
Ceremonies of it being plainly Typical, in Remembrance (as Christ himself has
told us) of Him. But now if we go on more particularly to inquire into the
Expression its self, This is my Body which is broken for you, That will yet
more clearly confirm this interpretation.

It has before been observed, That these words of our Savior in this Holy
Sacrament, were used by him instead of that other Expression of the Master in
the Paschal Feast, when in the very same manner he took the very same Bread
into his Hands, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to those who were at
the Table with Him, saying, This is the Bread of affliction which our Fathers
ate in Egypt. And can any thing in the world be more plain, than that as never
any Jew yet imagined, that the Bread which they thus took every year, was by
that saying of the Master of their Feast changed into the very substance of
that Bread which their forefathers had so many Ages before consumed in Egypt,
in the night of their deliverance; but being thus broken and given to them,
became a Type, a Figure, a Memorial of it: So neither could those to whom our
Savior Christ now spoke, and who as being Jews had so long been used to this
Phrase, ever imagine, that the pieces of that Loaf which He brake, and gave
them, saying, This is my Body which is broken for you, Do this in Remembrance
of me, became thereupon the very Body of that Savior from whose Hands they
received it; and who did not sure with one member of his Body, give away his
whole Body from himself to them; but only designed that by this Ceremony they
should remember Him, and his Body broken for them, as by the same they had
hitherto remembered the Bread of affliction which their Fathers ate in Egypt.

I ought not to omit it, because it very much confirms the force of this
Argument, That what I have here said of this Analogy of the Holy Eucharist, to
the Jewish Passover, was not the original remark of any Protestant, or indeed
of any other Christians differing from the Church of Rome in this point: But
was objected to them long before the Reformation, by the Vid. apud Author.
Fortalitii Fidei, Lib. 4. Consid. 6. Impos. 10. Those who have not this Book,
may find the Quotation at large in the late Edition of Joan. Parisiensis, in
Praefat. page 73, 74.
Jews themselves to show that in their literal Interpretation of these Words,
they had manifestly departed from the intention of our Blessed Savior, and
advanced a notion in which 'twas impossible for his Apostles, or any other
acquainted, as they were, with the Paschal forms, ever to have understood him.
And if Epistol. xxiii. ad Bonifac. Vol. 2. page 29. Oper. Ed. Lugd. 1664.
St. Augustine, who I suppose will not be thought a Heretic by either party,
may be allowed to speak for the Christians; he tells us, we are to look upon
the Phrase, This is my Body, Just, says He, as when in ordinary conversation we
are wont to say, This is Christmas, or Good Friday, or Easter Day; Not that
this is the very day on which Christ was born, or suffered, or rose from the
dead, but the return or remembrance of that day on which Christ was born, or
suffered, or rose again.

It is wonderful to consider with what confidence our new Missionaries produce
these words on all occasions; and thereby show us how fond they would be of the
Holy Scripture, and how willingly they would make it their Guide in
Controversy, did it but ever so little favor their Cause. Can any thing, say
they, be more express? This is my Body; Is it possible for words to be spoken
more clear and positive? And indeed were all the Expressions of Holy Scripture
to be taken in their literal meaning, I will not deny, but that those words
might as evidently prove Bread to be Christ's Body, as those other in St. John,
I am the Bread that came down from Heaven, argue a contrary Transubstantiation
of Christ's Body into Bread, John vi. 48, 51. or those more usual instances, I
am the true Vine; I am the door of the sheep; That Rock was Christ; prove a
great many Transubstantiations more, viz. of our Savior into a Vine, a Door,
and a Rock. But now, if for all this plainness and positiveness in these
expressions, they themselves tell us, That it would be ridiculous to conclude
from hence, that Christ was indeed turned into all these, and many other the
like things; they may please to give us leave to say the same of this before
us, it being neither less impossible, nor less unreasonable to suppose Bread to
be changed into Christ's Body, than for Christ's Body to be changed into Bread,
a Vine, a Door, a Rock, or whatever you please of the like kind.

But I have already shown the ground of this mistake to be their want of
considering the Customs and Phrases of the Jewish Passover, and upon which,
both the Holy Eucharist it self, and these Expressions in it were founded: And
I will only add this farther, in confirmation of it; That in the Style of the
Hebrew Language in general, there is nothing more ordinary, than for things to
be said to Expressions of this kind are very frequent in Holy Scripture. The
seed is the Word of God, Luke viii. 11. The field is the World; the good seed
are the children of the kingdom: The tares are the children of the wicked one,
Matt. xiii. 38. The seven Angels are the Angels of the seven Churches; and the
seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches, Rev. i. 20. With infinite more of
the like kind.
Be that which they Signify or Represent. Thus Joseph interpreting Pharaoh's
Dream, Genesis xli. 26. The seven good Kine, says he, are seven years; and again,
The seven good Ears of Corn are seven years, i. e. as is plain, they signify
seven years. And so in like manner in this place; Christ took Bread, and
blessed, and brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, Take, Eat, this is
my Body which is Broken for you: That is, this Bread thus Taken, and Blessed,
and Broken, and Given to you; This Bread, and this Action, signifies and
represents my Body which shall be Broken for you.

And indeed, after all this seeming assurance, it is nevertheless plain, That
they themselves are not very well satisfied with their own interpretation. See
the Preface.
We have shown before, how little confidence their greatest Schoolmen had of
this Doctrine; those who have stood the most stiffly for it, could never yet See
their Opinions collected by Monsieur Aubertine de Eucharistia, lib. 1. cap.
9.11, 12, 13, 14.
agree how to explain these words, so as to prove it: And Cardinal Bellarmine
alone, who reckons up the most part of their several ways, and argues the
weakness too of every one but his own, may be sufficient to assure us, that
they are never likely to be: And might serve to show what just cause their own
great Tract. 2. de Verbis quibus Conficitur.
Catharinus had so long since to cry out, upon his Enquiry only into the
meaning of the very first word, This: Consider, says he, Reader, into what
difficulties they are thrown, who go about to write upon this matter, when the
word THIS only has had so many, and such contradictory Expositions, that they
are enough to make a man lose his Wits, but barely to consider them all.

'Twas this forced so many of their See their Testimonies cited in the late
Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation; in the Defense of the Exposition of
the Church of England, p. 63, 64, 65. In the Preface above, etc.
greatest and most learned men before Luther, ingenuously to profess, That
there was not in Scripture any evident proof of this Doctrine; and even
Cardinal Cajetan since to own, That had not the Church determined for the
literal sense of those words, This is my Body, they might have passed in the
Metaphorical.

It is the general acknowledgment of their See Bellarmin's words in the Defense
of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, page 56, 57. To
which may be added, Salmer. Tom. 9. Tr. 20. Suarez. Disp. 58. Sect. 7. Vasquez.
Disp. 201. c. 1. etc.
greatest Writers at this day, That if the Pronoun THIS in that Proposition,
This is my Body, be referred to the Bread, which our Savior Christ held in his
Hand, which he blessed, which he brake and gave to his Disciples, and of which
therefore certainly, if of any thing, he said This is my Body, the natural
repugnancy that there is between the two things affirmed of one another, Bread
and Christ's Body, will force them to be taken in a figurative Interpretation:
For as much as it is impossible that Bread should be Christ's Body otherwise
than in a figure. And however, to avoid so dangerous a Consequence, they will
rather apply it to any thing, nay to nothing at all than to the Bread; yet they
would do well to consider, whether they do not thereby fall into as great a
danger on the other side; since if the Relative THIS does not determine those
words to the Bread, it is evident that nothing in that whole Proposition does;
And then how those words shall work so great a change in a Subject to which
they have no manner of Relation, will, I believe, be as difficult to show, as
the change its self is incomprehensible to conceive.

And now after so plain an evidence of the weakness of that foundation which is
by all confessed to be the chief, and has by many of the most Learned of that
Church been thought the only Pillar of this Cause; I might well dispense with
my self from entering on any farther examination of their other pretenses to
establish it. But because they have taken great pains of late to apply the
Council. Trid. Sess. xiii.
sixth Chapter of St. John to the Holy Eucharist, though it might be sufficient
in general to say that no good Argument for a matter of such consequence, can
be built upon a place which so many of the Sea them thus ranged by Albertinus
de Euch. lib 1. cap. 30. page 209. Two Popes; Innocent III. Pius II. Four
Cardinals, Bonaventure, D' Alliaco, Cusan. Cajetane. Two Archbishops, Richardus
Armachannus, and Guererius Granatensis. Five Bishops, Stephanus Eduensis,
Durandus Mimatensis, Gulielmus Altisiodorensis, Lindanus Ruremondensis, and
Jansenius Gandavensis. Doctors and Professors of Divinity in great abundance;
Alexander Alensis, Richardus de media villa, Jo. Gerson, Jo. de Ragufio,
Gabriel Biel, Thomas Waldenfis, Author. tract. contr. perfidiam quorundam
Bohemorum, Jo. Maria Verratus, Tilmannus Segebergensis, Astesanus, Conradus,
Jo. Ferus, Conradus Sasgerus, Jo. Hesselius, Ruardus Tapperus, Palatios, and
Rigaltius. Here are 50. of the Roman Church, who reject this Application of
this Chapter. For the Fathers, see the Learned Paraphrase lately set forth of
this Chapter, in the Preface: All which shows how little strength any Argument
from this Chapter can have to establish Transubstantiation.
most Eminent and Learned of that Communion have judged not to have the least
Relation to this matter; yet I will nevertheless beg leave very briefly to show
the Weakness of this Second Attempt too; and that it is in vain that they rally
these scattered Forces, whilst their main Body continues so entirely defeated.

It is a little surprising in this matter, that they universally tell us, That
neither the beginning nor ending of our Saviors Discourse in that Chapter
belongs to this Matter; that both before and after that passage which they
refer to, it is all Metaphor; only just two or three words for their purpose,
Literal. But that which raises our wonder to the highest pitch, is, that the
very fifty first Verse its self on which they found their Argument, is two
thirds of it Figure, and only otherwise in one Clause to serve their Hypothesis.

I am, says our Savior, the living Bread which came down from Heaven; This is
Figurative: If any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: That is, they
say, by a Spiritual Eating by Faith: And the Bread which I will give, is my
Flesh, which I will give for the life of the World. This only must be
understood of a proper manducation, of a real eating of his Flesh in this Holy
Sacrament.

It must be confessed, that this is an Arbitrary way of explaining indeed, and
becomes the Character of a Church whose dictates are to be received, not
examined; and may therefore pass well enough amongst those, with whom the
supposed Infallibility of their Guides, is thought a sufficient dispensation
for their own private Consideration. But for us, who can see no reason for this
sudden change of our Saviors Discourse; nay think that the connection of that
last Clause with the foregoing, is an evident sign that they all keep the same
Character; and are therefore not a little scandalized at so Capernaitical a
Comment, as indeed " Who can bear it? V. 60. They will please to excuse us, if
we take our Saviors Interpretation to be at least of as good an Authority, as
it is much more reasonable than theirs, V. 62. " Does this, says he, Offend you?
Does my saying that ye must eat my flesh, and drink my Blood scandalize you?
Mistake not my design, I mean not any carnal eating of me; that indeed might
justly move your Horror; It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing; the words that I speak unto you they are spirit, and they are life.

He that desires a fuller account of this Chapter, may please to recur to the
late excellent A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface upon the Sixth Chapter of
Saint John, Land. 1686.
Paraphrase set out on purpose to explain it, and which will be abundantly
sufficient to show the reasonableness of that Interpretation which we give of
it. I shall only add, to close all, that one Remark which De Doctrine.
Christian. Lib. 3. Cap. 16.
Saint Augustine has left us concerning it, and so much the rather in that it
is one of the rules which he lays down for the right Interpreting of Holy
Scripture, and illustrates with this particular Example: If, says he, the
saying be Preceptive, either forbidding a wicked action, or commanding to do
that which is good, it is no Figurative saying: But if it seems to command any
Villainy, or Wickedness, or forbid what is profitable and good, it is
Figurative. This saying, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink
his Blood, you have no Life in you, seems to command a Villainous or Wicked
Thing: It is therefore a FIGVRE, enjoining us to communicate in the Passion of
our Lord, and to lay it up in dear and profitable Remembrance, that his Flesh
was crucified and wounded for our sakes.

And now having thus clearly, I persuade my self, shown the Weakness of those
Grounds, on which this Doctrine of the substantial Change of the Bread and Wine
into the Body and Blood of Christ in this Holy Sacrament is established; I
shall but very little insist on any other Arguments against it: Only in a Word,
to demonstrate, that all manner of Proofs fail them in this great Error, I will
in the close here subjoin two or three short Considerations more, to show this
Doctrine opposite, not only to Holy Scripture, as we have seen, but also, 1. To
the best and purest Tradition of the Church. 2. To the Right Reason, and 3. To
the Common Senses of all Mankind.


I. That this Doctrine is opposite to the best and purest Tradition of the
Church.
Now to show this, I shall not heap together a multitude of Quotations out of
those Fathers, through whose hands this Tradition must have past: He that
desires such an Account, may find it fully done by one of the Roman Communion,
in a little A Treatise of Transubstantiation, by one of the Church of Rome,
etc. Printed for Rich. Chiswell. 1687.
Treatise just now published in our own Language. I will rather take a method
that seems to me less liable to any just Exception, and that is to lay down
some general Remarks of undoubted Truth, and whose consequence will be as
evident, as their certainty is undeniable. And,

I. For the Expressions of the Holy Fathers; It is not denied, Such are (...),
but never (...). And Note, there is hardly any of these Words, which they have
applied to the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, but they have attributed the
same to the Water in Baptism.
but that in their popular Discourses they have spared no words (except that of
Transubstantiation, which not one of them ever used) to set off so great a
Mystery: And I believe that were the Sermons and Devotional Treatises of our
own Divines alone, since the Reformation, searched into, one might find
Expressions among them, as much over-strain'd. See Treatise first, of the
Adoration, etc Printed lately at Oxford; Which would make the World believe
that we hold, I know not what imaginary Real Presence on this account; just as
truly, as the Fathers did Transubstantiation.
And doubtless these would be as strong an Argument to prove Transubstantiation
now the Doctrine of the Church of England, as those to argue it to have been
the Opinion of those Primitive Ages.

But now let us consult these men in their more exact composures, when they
come to teach, not to declaim, and we shall find they will then tell us, That
these Elements are for their It is not necessary to transcribe the Particulars
here that have been so often and fully alleged. Most of these Expressions may
be found in the Treatise of Transubstantiation lately published. The rest may
be seen in Blondel, Eclaircissements Familiers de la Controverse de l'
Eucharistie, Cap. iv, vii, viii. Claude Rep. au 2. Traitte de la Perpetuite, i.
Part. Cap. iv, v. Forbesius Instructiones Historico-Theolog. lib. xi. cap. ix,
x, xi, xii, xiii, xv. Larrogue Histoire de l' Eucharistie, live. 2. cap. ii.
substance what they were before, Bread and Wine: That they retain the true
properties of their nature, to nourish and feed the Body: that they are things
inanimate, and void of sense: That with reference to the Holy Sacrament they
are Images, Figures, Signs, Symbols, Memorials, Types and Antitypes of the
Body and Blood of Christ. That in their Use and Benefit, they are indeed the
very Body and Blood of Christ to every saithful Receiver, but in a Spiritual
and Heavenly manner, as we confess: That, in propriety of speech the Wicked
receive not in this Holy Sacrament the Body and Blood of Christ, although they
do outwardly press with their teeth the Holy Elements; but rather eat and drink
the Sacrament of His Body and Blood to their damnation.

II. Secondly, For our Saviors words which are supposed to work this great
Change, it is evident from the Liturgies of the Eastern Church, that the Greek
Fathers did not believe them to be words of Consecration; This Arcudius himself
is forced to confess of some of the latter Greeks, viz. That they take these
Words only (...), Historically. See his Book de Concord. Lib. 3. Cap. 27. And
indeed all the ancient Liturgies of that Church plainly speak it; However both
He and Goar endeavor to shift it off; in which the Prayer of Consecration is
after the words of Institution, and distinct from it. So in Liturg. S.
Chrysostom. Edition. Goar. page 76. n. 130. 132. are pronounced the Words of
Institution. Then page 77. numb. 139. the Deacon bids the Priest, (...). Who
thereupon thus consecrates it; He first signs it three times with the sign of
the Cross, and then thus prays (...). And so the Cup afterward.
but to be the same in this Holy Eucharist that the Haggadah, or History of the
Passover was in that ancient Feast; That is, were read only as an account of
the Occasion and design of the Institution of this Blessed Sacrament, not to
work any Miracles in the Consecration. And for the The same seems to have been
the custom of the African Church, whose Prayers now used, see in Ludolph.
Histor. l. 3. cap. 5. Where is also the Expression mentioned, n. 56. Hic Panis
est Corpus meum, etc.
African Churches, they at this day expound them in this very Sacrament after
such a manner, as themselves confess to be inconsistent with
Transubstantiation, viz. This Bread is the Body of Christ.

III. Let it be considered, Thirdly, That it was a great debate in the
Primitive Church for above a thousand Years, Whether Christ's Glorified Body had
any Blood in it or no? Now how those Men could possibly have questioned whether
Christ's Glorified Body had any Blood at all in it, See this whole matter
deduced through the first Ages to St. Augustine, whom Consentius consulted
about this very matter, in a particular Treatise written by Monsieur Allix de
Sanguine Christi, 8vo. Paris 1680.
had they then believed the Cup of Eucharist to have been truly and really
changed, into the Blood of his Glorified Body, as is now asserted, is what will
hardly, I believe, be ever told us.

IV. We will add to this, Fourthly, their manner of opposing the Heathenism of
the World. With what confidence could they have rallied them as they did, for
worshipping gods which their own Hands had made? So Justin Martyr. Apol. 2.
Tertul. Apolog. cap. 12. Arnobius, lib. 1. Minutius Felix. p. 26. Octav. Julius
Firmicus, page 37. Edit. Lugdunens. 4to, 1652. Hieron. lib. 12. in Esai. St.
Augustinus in Psalm. 80. and in Psalm. 113. Lactantius Instit. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Chrysostom. Homil. 57. in Genes. etc.
That had neither Voice, nor Life, nor Motion; Exposed to Age, to Corruption,
to Dust, to Worms, to Fire, and other Accidents. That they adored gods which
their Enemies could spoil them of, Thieves and Robbers take from them; which
having no power to defend themselves, were forced to be kept under Locks and
Bolts to secure them.

For is not the Eucharistical Bread and Wine, in a higher degree than any of
their Idols were, exposed to the same raillery? Had their Wafer, if such then
was their Host, any voice, or life, or motion? Did not their own Hands form its
substance, and their Mouths speak it into a God? Could it defend its self, I do
not say from public Enemies, or private Robbers, but even from the very
Vermin, the creeping things of the Earth?

Or should we suppose the Christians to have been so impudent, as
notwithstanding all this, to expose others for the same follies of which
themselves were more notoriously guilty; yet were there no And yet that none
did, the Learned Rigaltius confesses. Not. ad Tertul. l. 2. ad Vxor. c. 5.
Heathens, that had wit enough to recriminate? The other See Tertul. Apol. c.
21. Et de carne Christi, c. 4.5. Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. Arnob. l. 2. Orig.
contr. Cells. l. 1.
Articles of our Faith they sufficiently traduced; That we should worship a
Man, and He too a Malefactor, crucified by Pilate; How would they have
triumphed, could they have added, That they worshipped a bit of Bread too;
which Coster himself thought a more ridiculous Idolatry than any the Heathens
were guilty of? Since this Doctrine has been started, we have heard of the
Reproaches of all sorts of Men, Jews, Heathens, Mahometans, against us on this
account. See du Perron de l' Euchar. l. 3. c. 29. p. 973.
Were there no Apostates that could tell them of this secret before? Not any
Julian that had malice enough to publish their Confusion? Certainly had the
Ancients been the Men they are now endeavored to be represented, we had long
ere this seen the whole World filled with the Writings that had proclaimed
their shame, in one of the greatest instances of Impudence and Inconsideration,
to attacque their Enemies for that very Crime, of which themselves were more
notoriously guilty.

V. Nor does their manner of Disputing against the Heretical Christians any
less speak their Opinion in this Point, See this fully handled in a late
treatise called, The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared
etc. 1687.
than their way of Opposing the Idolatry of the Heathens. It was a great
argument amongst them to expose the frenzy of Eutyches, who imagined some such
kind of Transubstantiation of the humane nature of Christ into the Divine, to
produce the Example of the Eucharist; That as there the Bread and the Wine,
says P. Gelasius, Being perfected by the Holy Spirit, pass into the Divine
Substance, yet so as still to remain in the property of their own Nature, or
substance of Bread and Wine; This Argument is managed by St. Chrysostom Epist.
ad Caesarium Monachum. By Theodoret Dial. 2. page 85 Ed G. L. Paris, 1642. Tom.
4. Gelasius in Opere contra Eutychen and Nestorium. He thus states the
Eutychian Here^^e, ' Dicunt unam esse naturam. i.e. Divinam. Against this he
thus disputes, Certe Sacramenta quae sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christ's
divina res est. -- Et tamen non definit substantia vel Natura Panis and Vini.
-- Satis ergo nobis Evidentur Ostenditur, hoc nobis de ipso Christo Domino
sentiendum quod in ejus imagine profitemur. -- Vt sicut in hanc sc. in divinam
transeant S. Spiritu perficiente substantiam, permanentes tamen in suae
proprietate naturae, sic, etc.
So here the Humane Nature of Christ still remains, though assumed by, and
conjoined to the Divine. Which words, as their Editor has done well to set a
Caute upon in the Margent to signify their danger, so this is clear from them,
that Gelasius, and so the other Writers that have made use of the same
Argument, as St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, etc. must have thought the Bread and
the Wine in the Eucharist no more to have been really changed into the very
Body and Blood of Christ, than they did believe his Humane Nature to have been
truly turned into the Divine; For that otherwise the parallel would have stood
them in no stead, nay would have afforded a defense of that Heresy which they
undertook to oppose by it.

VI. Yet more: Had the Primitive Christians believed this great Change; how
comes it to pass, that we find none of those Marks nor Signs of it, that the
World has since abounded with? See the contrary proved, that the Fathers did
not believe this, by Blondel, de l'Euch. c. 8. Claude Rep. au 2. Traitte de la
Perpetuite. part. 1. c. 4.
No talk of Accidents existing without Subjects, of the Senses being liable to
be deceived in judging of their proper Objects; in short, no Philosophy
corrupted to maintain this Paradox. No Adorations, Processions, Vows paid to
it, as to Christ himself. It is but a very little time since the Under Greg.
ix. Ann. 1240. vid. Nauclerum ad Ann. cit.
Bell came in play, to give the People notice that they should fall down and
Worship this new God. The Instituted by Urban iv. Ann. 1264.
Feast in honor of it, is an Invention of Yesterday; the Adoring of it in the
Streets no Indeed, in all Probability, a hundred years later.
older: Had not those first Christians respect sufficient for our Blessed
Savior? Or, did they perhaps do all this? Let them show it us if they can; But
till then, we must beg leave to conclude, That since we find not the least
Footsteps of any of these necessary Appendages of this Doctrine among the
Primitive Christians, it is not to be imagined that we should find the Opinion
neither.

VII. But this is not all: We do not only not find any such Proofs as these of
this Doctrine, but we find other Instances directly contrary to this belief. In
some Churches they So in that of Jerusalem. See Hesych. in Levitic. l. 2. c. 8.
burnt what remained of the Consecrated Elements; So in that of Constantinople.
Evag. Hist. l. 4. c. 35.
In others, they gave it to little Children to Eat: Vid. apud. Author. Vit.
Basilii, c. 8. in Vit. Pat. l. 1. This Custom was condemned in a Council at
Carthage, Anno 419. Vid. Codic. Eccl. Afric. Justel. c. 18.
In some, they buried it with their Dead; In all, they permitted the
Communicants to carry home some Remnants of them; they sent it abroad by Sea,
by Land, from one Church and Village to another, without any Provision of Bell
or Taper, Canopy or Incense, or any other mark of Adoration; they sometimes
made Vid. St. August. Oper. imp. contr. Julian. lib. 3. c. 164.
Poultices of the Bread; they mixed the Sea an instance of this in Baronius,
Ann. 648. Sect. 15. The 8th General Council did the same. In Act. Syn.
Wine with their Ink; all which we can never imagine such holy Men would have
presumed to do, had they indeed believed them to be the very Body and Blood of
our Blessed Lord.

VIII. Lastly: Since the prevalence of this Doctrine in the Church, what
Opposition has it met with? What Schisms has it caused? What infinite Debates
have there risen about it? I shall not need to speak of the Troubles of
Berenger in the Eleventh: Of the Waldenses, Albigenses, and others in the
Twelfth Century. Of Wickliff, Hus, etc. who continued the Opposition; and
finally, of the great Reformation in the beginning of the last Age; by all
which this Heresy has been opposed ever since it came to any Knowledge in the
Church. Now is it possible to be believed, that so many Centuries should pass,
so many Heresies should arise, and a Doctrine so full of Contradictions remain
uncontested in the Church for almost a Thousand years? That Berenger should be
one of the first that should begin to Credit his Senses, to Consult his Reason,
or even to Defend his Creed?

These are Improbabilities that will need very convincing Arguments indeed to
remove them. But for the little late French trick of proving this Doctrine
necessary to have been received in the Primitive Church, This is the Foundation
of the Authors of the Treatises, De la Perpetuite: Answered by Mons. Claude.
because it is so in the Present, and if you will believe them, it is impossible
a Change should have been made; I suppose, we need only turn the terms of the
Argument to show the Weakness of the Proof, viz. That from all these, and many
other Observations, that might be offered of the like kind, it is Evident that
this Doctrine at the beginning, was not believed in the Church, and let them
from thence see, if they can conclude that neither is it believed now.

Thus contrary is this Doctrine to the Best and Purest Tradition of the Church:
Nor is it less, Secondly,

II. To Right Reason too.
It were endless to heap together all the Contradictions that might be offered
to prove this; That there should be Length, and nothing Long; See Mr.
Chillingworth against Knot, c. iv. n. 46.
Breadth, and nothing Broad; Thickness, and nothing Thick; Whiteness, and
nothing White; Roundness, and nothing Round; Weight, and nothing Heavy;
Sweetness, and nothing Sweet; Moisture, and nothing Moist; Fluidness, and
nothing Flowing; many Actions and no Agent; many Passions, and no Patient; i.e.
That there should be a Long, Broad, Thick, White, Round, Heavy, Sweet, Moist,
Flowing, Active, Passive NOTHING. That Bread should be turned into the
Substance of Christ, and yet not any thing of the Bread become any thing of
Christ; neither the Matter, nor the Form, nor the Accidents of the Bread, be
made either the Matter, or the Form, or the Accidents of Christ; that Bread
should be turned into Nothing, and at the same Time with the same Action turned
into Christ, and yet Christ should not be Nothing; that the same Thing at the
same Time should have its just Dimensions, and just Distance of its Parts one
from another, and at the same time not have it, but all its Parts together in
one and the self-same Point; That the same Thing at the same time should be
wholly Above its self, and wholly Below its self, Within its self, and Without
its self, on the Right Hand, and on the Left Hand, and Round-about its self:
That the same thing at the same time should move to and from its self, and yet
lie still; or that it should be carried from one place to another through the
middle space, and yet not move. That there should be no Certainty in our
Senses, and yet that we should know something Certainly, and yet know nothing
but by our Senses; That that which Is and Was long ago, should now begin to be;
That that is now to be made of Nothing, which is not Nothing, but Something;
That the same thing should be Before and After its self. These and many other
of the like nature are the unavoidable, and most of them the avowed
Consequences of Transubstantiation, and I need not say all of them
Contradictions to Right Reason.

But I shall insist rather upon such Instances as the Primitive Fathers have
judged to be absurd and impossible; and which will at once show both the
Falseness and Novelty of this monstrous Doctrine; and such are these; See
Examples of every one of these collected by Blondel, Eclaircissements familiers
de la controverse de l' Eucharistie, cap. 8. p. 253.
That a thing already existing should be produced anew: That a finite thing
should be in many places at the same time; That a Body should be in a place,
and yet take up no room in it; That a Body should penetrate the dimensions of
another Body; That a Body should exist after the manner of a Spirit; That a
real body should be invisible and impassible: That the same thing should be its
self, and the figure of its self: That the same thing should be contained in,
and participate of its self; Monsieur Claude Rep. au. 2. Traitte de la
Perpetuite, part. 1. c. 4. n. 11. p. 73. Ed. 4to. Paris 1668.
That an Accident should exist by its self without a Subject, after the manner
of a Substance. All these things the primitive Fathers have declared to be in
their Opinions gross Absurdities and Contradictions, without making any
exception of the Divine Power for the sake of the Eucharist, as some do now.

And indeed it were well if the impossibilities stopped here: but alas! the
Repugnancies extend to the very Creed its self, and destroy the chiefest
Articles of our Faith, the Fundamentals of Christianity. How can that man
profess that he believes our Savior Christ to have been born xvi. Ages since,
of the Virgin Mary, whose very Body he sees the Priest about to make now before
his Eyes? That he believes him to have Ascended into Heaven, and behold he is
yet with us upon Earth? There to Sit at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty, till in the end of the World He shall come again with Glory to judge
both the Quick and the Dead? And behold he is here carried through the Streets;
locked up in a Box; Adored first, and then Eaten by his own Creatures; carried
up and down in several manners, and to several places, and sometimes Lost out
of a Priests Pocket.

These are no far-fetched Considerations; they are the obvious Consequences of
this Belief; and if these things are impossible, as doubtless, if there be any
such thing as Reason in the World, they are; I suppose it may be very much the
concern of every one that professes this Faith, to reflect a little upon them,
and think what account must one day be given of their persisting obstinately in
a point so evidently erroneous, that the least degree of an impartial judgment,
would presently have shown them the falseness of it.

But God has not left himself without farther witness in this matter; but has
given us, Thirdly,

III. The Conviction of our Senses against it.
An Argument this, which since it cannot be Answered, they seem resolved to run
it down; as the Stoic in Lucian, who began to call names, when he had nothing
else to say for himself.

But if the Senses are such ill Informers, that they may not be trusted in
matters of this moment, would these Disputers please to tell us, What Authority
they have for the truth of the Christian Religion? Was not Christianity first
founded upon the Miracles of our Blessed Savior and his Apostles? Or were not
the Senses judges of those Miracles? Are not the Incarnation, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord, the most Fundamental Articles of our
Faith? Have we any other Argument to warrant our belief of these, but what
comes to us by the ministry of our Senses? John xx. 27, 29.
Did not Christ himself appeal to them for the proof of his own Rising?

The Romanist himself believes Transubstantiation because he reads in the
Scripture, or rather (to speak more agreeably to the method of their Church)
because he has been told there are such Words there, as, He est Corpus Meum:
Now not to enquire how far those words will serve to warrant this Doctrine, is
it not evident that he cannot be sure there are any such words there, if he may
not trust his Senses: And if he may, is it not as plain, That he must seek for
some other meaning than what they give of them?

Let us suppose the change they speak of to be Supernatural; Be it as much a
Miracle as they desire: The very Character of a Miracle is to be known by the
Senses. Nor God, nor Christ, nor any Prophet or Apostle, ever pretended to any
other. And I shall leave it to any one to judge what progress Christianity
would have made in the World, if it had had no other Miracles but such as
Transubstanation to confirm it: i. e. Great Wonders confidently asserted, but
such as every ones sense and reason would tell him were both falsely asserted,
and impossible to be performed.

But now whilst we thus oppose the Errors of some by asserting the continuance
of the Natural Substance of the Elements of Bread and Wine in this Holy
Eucharist; let not any one think that we would therefore set up the mistakes of
others; as if this Holy Sacrament were nothing more than a mere Rite and
Ceremony, a bare Commemoration only of Christ's Death and Passion.

Our Church indeed teaches us to believe, That the Bread and Wine continue
still in their True and Natural Substance; but it teaches us also that it is the
Body and Blood of Christ, See the Church Catechism, and Article Twenty eighth.
The Communion-Office, etc.
which every faithful Soul receives in that Holy Supper: Spiritually indeed,
and after a Heavenly manner, but yet most truly and really too.

The Primitive Fathers, of whom we have before spoken, sufficiently assure us,
that they were strangers to that Corporeal change that is now pretended; but
for this Divine and Mystical, they have openly enough declared for it.

Nor are we therefore afraid to confess a change, and that a very great one too
made in this Holy Sacrament. The Bread and the Wine which we here Consecrate,
ought not to be given or received by any one in this Mystery, as common
ordinary food. Those Holy Elements which the Prayers of the Church have
sanctified, and the Divine Words of our Blessed Savior applied to them, though
not Transubstantiated, yet certainly separated to a Holy use and signification,
ought to be regarded with a very just Honor by us: And whilst we Worship Him
whose Death we herein Commemorate, and of whose Grace we expect to be made
partakers by it, we ought certainly to pay no little regard to the Types and
Figures, by which he has chosen to represent the one, and convey to us the
other.

Thus therefore we think we shall best divide our Piety, if we Adore our
Redeemer in Heaven, yet omit nothing that may testify our just esteem of his
Holy Sacrament on Earth: Nor suffer the most Zealous Votary for this new
Opinion, to exceed us in our Care and Reverence of Approaching to his Holy
Table.

We acknowledge him to be no less Really Present, tho after another manner than
they; nor do we less expect to Communicate of his Body and Blood with our
Souls, than they who think they take Him carnally into their Mouths.

Let our Office of Communion be examined; let the Reverence and Devotion, with
which we Celebrate this Sacred Feast, be considered; all these will show how
far the Church of England is from a light esteem of this great Mystery; indeed,
that it is impossible for any to set a higher Value and Reverence upon it.

I shall close this with the Declaration of One, who after many Years spent in
great Reputation in their Communion, was so happy as to finish his Days in our
Church; upon his first receiving the Blessed Communion among us: Andr. Sallii
Votum pro pace, c. 23. p. 90. Ed. Oxon. 1678.
Tantam magnorum Praesulum demissionem, tam eximiam Principum and Populi
Reverentiam, in Sacra Eucharistia administranda and recipienda, nusquam ego
vidi apud Romanenses, qui tamen se unos Sacramenti istius cultores jactant.
That He never saw in the Church of Rome, so great a Reverence both in
Administering and Receiving this Holy Eucharist, as he found among us; insomuch,
that he supposed it would hardly be believed among them, what from his own
Experience, he recounted concerning it.

Porro haec quae narravi and trita nimis ac vulgo nota Videbuntur fratribus
nostris Reformatae Ecclesiae: Vid. ibid. page 90. cap. xxiv. n. 7.
Nova omnino and forte incredebilia Apparebunt Romanae Congregationis Alumnis;
quorum scilicet auribus perpetuo suggeritur per suos Instructores, nullam apud
Protestants existere fidem praesentiae Christi realis in Eucharistiae
Sacramento, nullam Devotionem aut Reverentiam in eo Sumendo.

And this may suffice for the first thing proposed; Of the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or of the Real Presence professed and established in the
Church of Rome. Our next Business will be to inquire:

II. What that Real Presence of Christ in this Holy Eucharist is, which is
acknowledged by the Church of England.

CHAP. II. Of the Real Presence acknowledged by the Church of England.
IT may sufficiently appear from what has been said in the foregoing Chapter,
what just reason we have to reject that kind of Presence which the Church of
Rome supposes of Christ in this Holy Eucharist. But now in Answer to our
Reflections upon them on this Occasion, Two Discourses concerning the Adoration
of our B. Savior in the Eucharist. Oxford. 1687.
a late Author has thought fit to make the World believe, that we our selves,
in our Opinion of the Real Presence, are altogether as absurd as they are; and
that the same Exceptions lie against our own Church, which we urge against
theirs: All which, if it were true, would but little mend the matter, unless it
may be thought sufficient for a man to prove, that he is not mad himself,
because most of his Neighbors are in the same condition. Indeed herein he must
be allowed to have reason on his side, that if the Case be so as he affirms,
we, of all men living, ought not to press them with such Contradictions, Tract.
I. page 15, 16.
as our own Opinion stands equally involved in.

It Is true, he confesses for what concerns the Church of England, as it stood
in the latter Tract. I.. 26.
end of King Edward the 6th's time, and as it may perhaps be thought to stand
now, since the Ibid.. 4.
reviving of the Old Rubric against the Adoration of the Sacrament at the end
of our Communion-Office; it seems not to lie open to such a Recrimination: But
taking our Opinion of the Real Presence from the Expressions of our own
Divines, and of those abroad, such as Calvin, etc. whose Doctrine, amongst all
the rest, the Church of England seems rather to have embraced and agreed with,
especially since the beginning of the Reformation by Q. Elizabeth; it plainly
implies, That the very Substance of Christ's Body; That his Natural Body, that
very Body that was born of the Blessed Virgin, and crucified on the Cross, is
present as in Heaven, so here in this Holy Sacrament, either to the worthy
Receiver, or to the Symbols: which not only contradicts the present Declaration
of our Church; viz. That the Natural Body of Christ is not in in this blessed
Sacrament; but will also lay a necessity upon us to quit our Reason too that we
give for it; viz. That it is against the Truth of a Natural Body to be in more
places than One at One time; and on which we seem to found our Faith in this
matter.

This is, I think, the design of the former of those Discourses lately Printed
at Oxford, as to what concerns the Real Presence; and in Answer to which, that
I may proceed as distinctly as possible, I shall reduce my Reflections to these
Four Generals: 1. What is the true Notion of the Real Presence, as acknowledged
by the Church of England. 2. That this has been the Notion constantly
maintained by the Generality of our Divines. 3. That the Alteration of the
Rubric, as to this matter, was not upon any such difference in their Opinions,
as this Author seems to surmise. 4. That the Reason alleged by it, concerning
the Impossibility of Christ's Natural Body's existing in several places at the
same time, is no way invalidated by any of his Exceptions against it.


But before I enter on these Reflections, I cannot but observe the
unreasonableness of our Adversaries, in repeating continually the same
Arguments against us without either adding of any the least new force to them,
or even taking notice of those Replies that have more than once been made
against them. The Publisher of this Treatise has not been so indiligent an
Observer of what has past under his Eyes, with reference to these kind of
Controversies, as not to know, that this very Objection, which is the
Foundation of his First Discourse, was made by his Old Friend T. G. above Nine
Years since; and fully answered by his Reverend and Learned Adversary not long
after. And therefore that he certainly ought either quietly to have let alone
this Argument already baffled, and not have put the World in Mind where that
Debate stopped; or, at least, he should have added some new strength to it. But
to send it again into the World in the same forlorn State it was before; to
take no notice either from whose Storehouse he borrowed it, or what had been
returned to it; This is in effect to confess, that they have no more to say for
themselves: And it is a sad Cause indeed that has nothing to keep it up, but
what they know very well we can answer, and that they themselves are unable to
defend.

But to return to the Points proposed to be considered: And, First, To state
the Notion of the Real Presence, as acknowledged by the Church of England.

I must observe, 1st. That our Church utterly denies our Savior's Body to be
so Really Present in the Blessed Sacrament, as either to leave Heaven, or to
exist in several places at the same time. We confess, with this Author, 1.
Tract. p. 19.. 27.
that it would be no less a Contradiction for Christ's Natural Body, to be in
several places at the same time by any other Mode whatsoever, than by that
which the Church of Rome has stated; the repugnancy being in the thing its
self, and not in the manner of it. 2dly, That we deny that in the Sacred
Elements which we receive, there is any other Substance than that of Bread and
Wine, distributed to the Communicants; which alone they take into their Mouths,
and press with their Teeth. Answer to T. G's Dialogues. Land. 1679. page 66.
In short, All which the Doctrine of our Church implies by this Phrase, is only
a Real Presence of Christ's Invisible Power and Grace, so in and with the
Elements, as by the faithful receiving of them, to convey spiritual and real
Effects to the Souls of Men. As the Bodies assumed by Angels, might be called
their Bodies, while they assumed them; or rather, as the Church is the Body of
Christ, because of his Spirit quickening and enlivening the Souls of Believers,
so the Bread and Wine, after Consecration, are the Real, but the Spiritual and
Mystical Body of Christ.

Thus has that learned Man, to whom T. G. first made this Objection, stated the
Notion of the Real Presence professed by us; and that this is indeed the true
Doctrine of the Church of England in this matter, is evident not only from the
plain words of our xxviii. Article, and of our Church Catechism; but also from
the whole Tenor of that Office which we use in the celebration of it. In our
Exhortation to it, this Blessed Eucharist is expressly called The Communion of
the Body and Blood of our Savior Christ: We are told, that if with a true
Penitent Heart and lively Faith we receive this Holy Sacrament; then we
Spiritually eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood. When the Priest
delivers the consecrated Bread, he bids the Communicant Take and eat this in
Remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on him in thy Heart by Faith
with Thanksgiving. In our Prayer after the Receiving, We thank God, for that he
do^^ vouchsafe to feed us who have duly received these Holy Mysteries, with the
Spiritual food of the most precious Body and Blood of his Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, and does assure us thereby of his favor and goodness toward us, and
that we are very Members, incorporate in the Mystical Body of his Son. All
which, and many other the like Expressions, clearly show, that the Real
Presence which we confess in this Holy Eucharist is no other than in St. Paul's
Phrase, a Real Communion of Christ's Body and Blood; or as our Church expresses
it Article xxviii. That to such as rightly and worthily, and with Faith receive
the same, the Bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of Christ, and
likewise the Cup of Blessing is a partaking of the Blood of Christ.

Hence it was that in the Prayer of Consecration in King Edward vi. time, the
Church of England after the Example of the ancient Liturgies of the Greek
Church used that Form, which our Author observes to have been since left out.
Tract. I. 2.
And with thy Holy Spirit vouchsafe to Bless and Sanctify these thy Gifts and
Creatures of Bread and Wine, that they may be unto us the Body and Blood of thy
most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ -- i. e. as the Sense plainly implies, may
Communicate to our Souls all the Blessings and Graces which Christ's Body and
Blood has purchased for us; which is in Effect the very same we now pray for in
the same Address -- Hear us, O Merciful Father we most humbly beseech thee, and
grant that we receiving these thy Creatures of Bread and Wine, according to thy
Son our Savior Jesus Christ's Holy Institution, in remembrance of his Death and
Passion, may be partakers of his most Blessed Body and Blood. Between which two
Petitions there is so near an Affinity, that had not (...) Author been very
desirous to find out Mysteries where there are indeed none; He would hardly
have suffered his Puritan Friend to have lead him to make so heavy a complaint,
Page 3.
about so small a Variation.

I will not deny but that some Men may possibly have advanced their private
Notions beyond what is here said: But this is I am sure all that our Church
warrants, or that we are therefore concerned to defend. And if there be indeed
any, who as our Author here expresses it, do believe Christ's natural Body to be
as in Heaven, so in the Holy Sacrament; they may please to consider how this
can be reconciled with the Rubric of our Church, That the natural Body and
Blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven and not here, it being against the
truth of Christ's natural Body, to be at one time in more places than one.

In the mean time I pass on to the next thing I proposs'd, Secondly, To show in
Opposition to the Pretenses of our Adversary, that this has been the Notion of
the Real Presence constantly maintained by our most Learned and Orthodox
Divines.

And here, because our Author has thought fit to appeal not only to our own,
but to the foreign Divines for this new Faith which he is pleased to impose
upon us, viz. Tract. 1.. 7.
That the very Substance of Christ's Body, that his natural Body, that that very
Body that was born of the Blessed Virgin, and crucified on the Cross, etc. is
present, as in Heaven, so Here in this Holy Sacrament; i. e. in both at the
same time: I must be content to follow his Steps, and enquire into the Doctrine
first of Mr. Calvin and his followers; next of our own Countrymen in this
Particular.

And first for Mr. Calvin, and his followers, I cannot but observe what
different charges are brought against them in this matter. On the one hand we
are told by Becanus the Jesuit, that, Calvinistae negant corpus and sanguinem
Christi, vere, realiter, and substantialiter praesentem esse in Eucharistia.
Becani manuale. l. 3. c. 9. p. 501. Ed. Luxembergi. 1625.
The Calvinists, says he, deny the Body and Blood of Christ to be truly,
really, and substantially present in the Eucharist: On the other, Here is one
will prove, that they believe his very Body, his natural Body, now in Heaven,
to be nevertheless at the same time in the Holy Sacrament. It were to be wished
that they would let us once know what it is they will stick to, and not by such
contradictory charges show to all the World, that both their Accusations may be
false, but that it is utterly impossible they should both be true.

And indeed in this very instance they are both false; CALVIN.
The Calvinists hold neither the one or other of these Extremes. In the Edition
of his Institutions printed at Basil 1536. Mr. Calvin thus delivers his
Opinion, of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Holy Eucharist. We say, Dicimus
vere and Efficaciter exhiberi non autem naturaliter. Quo scil. significamus non
substantiam ipsam corporis, seu verum and natural Christi corpus illic dari,
sed omnia quae in suo corpore no^is Beneficia Christus praestitit. EA est
corporis PRAESENTIA quam Sacramenti ratio postulat. Edit. Basil. 8o. 1536.
that they are truly and Efficaciously exhibited to us, but not naturally: By
which we signify, not that the very Substance of his Body, or that the true
and natural Body of Christ are given there, but all the Benefits which Christ
did for us in his Body. THIS is that PRESENCE of his Body, which the nature of
the Sacrament requires.

But because I do not find these words in the Editions of that Book since,
least any one should thereupon conclude that he had also changed his Opinion;
we may observe the very same delivered by him in Dilucida explicacio etc.
Contra Westphalvir. Edit. Anno 1561.
another of his Books, and which will be so much the more considerable, in that
it was written purposely for the clearing of this matter. Now in this he
affirms, Christi corpus non modo semel fuisse datum in salutem nostram, dum ad
explanda peccata immolatum in cruce fuit, sed quotidie nobis in alimentum
porrigi, ut dum ipse habitat in nobis, bonorum etiam eius omnium societate
fruamur. -- Apud Hospin. Hist. Sacram. Part 2da Ann. 1561. p. 477.
That Christ's Body was not only once given for our Salvation, but is also every
day reached out to us for our Sustenance, that so, whilst he dwells in us, we
may also enjoy the Fellowship of all his goods. -- Then he explains How Christ
is our food, viz. Rursum alimentum a nobis vocatur hoc sensu, quia
incomprehensibili spiritus Virtute nobis vitam suam inspirat ut fit nobis
communis, non secus atque a radice arboris vitalis succus in ramos se
diffundit, vel a capite in singula membra manat Vigor. Ibid. -- Imprimis
obstaculum de corporis immensitate submovere necesse est. Nisi enim conster
finitum esse caeloque comprehendi nulla erit dissidii conciliandi Ratio -- p.
478. Christus sicuti in gloriam coelestem semel est receptus, ita lecorum
intervallo quoad carnem, est a nobis dissitus; Divina autem Essenti^^ and
virtute, gratia etiam spirituali caelum and terram implere. -- Idem ergo Corpus
quod semel filius Dei Patri in sacrificium obtulit, quotidie nobis in Coena
offert, ut sit in Spirituale Alimentum. Tantum de modo tenendum est, non opus
esse descendere carnis Essentiam e coelo ut ea pascamur, sed ad penetranda
impedimenta and superandam locorum distantiam sufficere Spiritus virtutem. --
Commenta procul facessant; qualia sunt de Corporis ubiquitate, vel de occulta
sub panis symbolo inclusi^ne, vel de substantiali ejus in terris praesentia.
H^spin. p. 478. Haec omnia refert ex illo Calvini loco.
because by the incomprehensible Virtue of the Holy Spirit, he inspires his
Life into us, that he may communicate it to us, no less than the vital juice is
diffused from the Root into all the Branches of the Tree, or than Vigor flows
from the Head into all the members. -- He declares Christ's Body to be finite,
and enclosed in Heaven; and therefore as to his Flesh to be distant in place
from us. -- That it is not necessary that the Essence of his Flesh should
descend from Heaven, that we may be fed with it, but that to remove all such
impediments, and overcome the distance of places, the Virtue of the Spirit is
sufficient -- In short, that all inventions contrary to this are to be
rejected, such as, The Vbiquity of Christ's Body, the enclosing of it under the
Symbol of Bread, and his Substantial presence upon Earth. BEZA.


By all which it sufficiently appears, that Mr. Calvin was no friend to our
Authors Fancy; but evidently explained the Real Presence after that Spiritual
manner we have before laid down.

For Beza, and the rest as he calls them, of the same Sect; we cannot better
learn their Opinion than from the Acts of the Colloquy of Poissy, and which
chiefly lay upon this Point. At this conference the most eminent Men of the
Calvinian Party were assembled; the first of them which spoke, was Beza: In
that part of his Discourse which referred to the Holy Eucharist, his words were
much like those which our Author has quoted out of him. And by his own
Exposition of them, we shall be better able to judge of his meaning, than by his
Adversaries Gloss. See Hospin. Hist. Sacram. Part. 2. ad Ann. 1561. p. 515.
Edit. Genev. 1681. Comment. de statu Relig. and reipub. in Gallia ad Ann. 1561.
p. 112. Et postea page 138. ita se exprimit in eundem plane sensum "affirmamus
J. C. adesse in usu Coenae, in qua nobis offert, dat and vere exhibet Corpus
suum and sanguinem suum operatione Spiritus Sti. nos vero recipimus, edimus and
bibimus spiritualiter and per fidem illud ipsum corpus quod pro nobis mortuum
est, eumque illum sanguinem pro nobis effusum. Edit. Ann. 15^7. 8o. Beze. Hist.
Eccles. page 595 596.

For all this see Beza's own History ad Ann. 1561. p. 524. And when in the
Conference D' Espense pressed them with departing from Calvin; Beza declared,
that they were not at all contrary to him: That for the word Substance, which
he sometimes used in expressing Christ's Real Presence, it was only to signify,
that they did not seign any irraginary Body of Christ, or fantastic reception
or communion of His Body in this Holy Supper; But that for the rest, they all
believed, that no one could participate of him otherwise than Spiritually and
by Faith, not in taking Him into the Mouth, or earing him with the Teeth. See
page 599. Ibid.


We do not say that in the Eucharist there is only a commemoration of the death
of our Lord Jesus Christ; nor do we say, that in it we are made partakers only
of the fruits of his death and passion; but we join the ground with the fruits,
affirming with St. Paul, that the Bread which by Gods appointment we break, is
the participation of the Body of Christ crucified for us; the Cup which we
drink, the Communion of the true Blood that was shed for us; and that in the
very same Substance which he received in the Womb of the Virgin, and which he
carried up with him into the Heavens -- Then descending to the Popish Doctrine
of Transubstantiation: It overthrows, says he, the truth of Christ's Humane
nature and of his Ascension -- So little did he suppose, that Christ's natural
Body could be at the same time both in Heaven and in the Sacrament. Hereupon he
explains himself yet farther; -- But now if any one should ask of us, whether
we make Christ absent from the Holy Supper? We answer, By no means. But yet if
we respect the distance of place (as when we speak of his Corporal presence,
and of his Humanity, we must) we affirm, says he, that Christ's Body is as far
distant from the Bread and Wine, as Heaven is from Earth -- If any one shall
from thence conclude, that we make Christ absent from the Holy Supper, he will
conclude amiss: For this Honor we allow to God, that though the Body of Jesus
Christ be now in Heaven and not elsewhere, and we on Earth and not elsewhere,
yet are we made partakers of his Body and Blood after a spiritual manner, and
by the means of Faith.

Thus does Beza in like manner expound their Doctrine of the Real Presence, by
a real communion of Christ's Body and Blood, and flatly condemns our Authors
invention, PETER MARTYR.
of his natural Body's being either in the Symbols, or any where else upon
Earth. The same is the account which Respond^o pro mea part, Corpus Christi
non else Vere et substantialiter alibi quam in Calo. Non tamen inficior Christi
corpus verum, and sanguinem illius Verum quae pro salute humana cradita sunt in
Cruce, fide spiritualiter percipi in Sacra Coena. Histoire Eccles. de Beze.
live. 4. p. 606. Anno 1561.
Peter Martyr in the same conference gave of it; and of whom Vid. Hist. de Beze
ib. p. 599. Comment. de stat. rel. p. 140. ad Ann 1561. Hospin. page 518.
Espensius, one of the Popish delegates, confessed That no Divine of that time
had spoken so clearly and distinctly concerning this Sacrament, as he did. And
however See Hospin. of this whole matter page 520.
Genebrard fasely pretends that the other Protestants dissented from him, yet
it is certain they were so far from it, that they all Subscribed the very same
Paper out of which he read his Declaration. But I will close this with the same
words with which these Protestants did their final resolution in the Colloquy
as to this matter; Affirmamus nullam locorum distantiam impedire posse
communicationem quam habemus cum Christi corpore and sanguine, quoniam Coena
Domini est res coelestis; et quamvis in terra recipiamus ore panem and vinum,
vera scil. Corporis and sanguinis signa; tamen fide and spiritus sancti
operatione mentes nostrae (quarum hic est praecipue cibus) in caelum elatae
perfruuntur corpore and sanguine praesente. Et hoc respectu dicimus, Corpus
vere se pani conjungere, and sanguinem vino; non aliter tamen quam sacramentali
ratione, neque locali neque naturali mode, sed quoniam Efficaciter significant
Deum illa dare fideliter communicantibus, illosque side vere and certo
percipere. Hospin. l c. Comm. ibid. p. 142. Vbi sublicitur "Haec est perspicua
de Corporis and sanguinis J C. Praesentia in Sacramento Caenae Ecclesiarum
Beformatarum sentenria -- Beze Hist. Eccles. page 615. where he adds, that they
reject not only Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation, but also toute
maniere de presence par laquelle le corpse de Christ n'est colloque maintenant
reellem^nt ailleurs qu'au ciel. And then adds, why they thus use the word
substance in this matter, and what they mean by it. See page 615. ad Ann 1561.
We affirm that no distance of place can hinder the Communion which we have
with Christ's Body and Blood; because the Supper of the Lord is a Heavenly
thing, and though upon Earth we receive with our mouths Bread and Wine, viz.
the true Symbols of his Body and Blood; yet by Faith, and through the Operation
of the Holy Spirit, our Souls (of which this is the chief food) being carried
up into Heaven, enjoy the Body and Blood present. And in this respect we say
that the Body does truly join its self to the Bread, and the Blood to the Wine,
but yet no otherwise than Sacramentally, neither after a local or natural
manner. But because they do effectually signify, that God gives them to the
Faithful Communicants, and that they do by Faith truly and certainly receive
them.

And thus far I have considered the foreign Divines produced by our Author,
and in which we find the very same Explication which our Church gives of the
Real presence. For our own Authors, I shall insist the rather upon them, both
to take off any impression which the scraps here put together by those whose
business it is to represent their own Sense, not their Authors, might otherwise
be apt to make upon some Men; and also to show the exact concord there has been
ever since the Reformation amongst us as to this matter.

Now for what concerns our Divines in King Edward viths. time, we have our
Authors own confession, that toward the latter end of the Reign of that
excellent Prince, they seem to have denied any such Real and Essential presence
as he would fasten upon those of Queen Elizabeth's after. For as the first days
of this Prince, 1 Treatise. xxvi. page 19.
says he, seem to have been more addicted to Lutheranism, so the latter days to
Zwinglianism; as appears in several expressions of Bishop Ridley and Peter
Martyr. And indeed the Articles agreed upon in the Convocation at London 1562.
plainly show it; in the xxixth. of which we find this express Clause; Since the
very being of humane Nature does require that the Body of one and the same man
cannot be at one and the same time in many places, but of necessity must be in
some certain and determinate place; Therefore the Body of Christ cannot be
present in many different places at the same time. And since, as the Holy
Scriptures testify, Christ has been taken up into Heaven, and there is to
abide till the end of the World, it becomes not any of the faithful to believe
or profess, that there is a Real or Corporal Presence, as they phrase it, of
the Body and Blood of Christ in the Holy Eucharist. I shall therefore produce
only a Witness or two of this King's Reign; and so pass on to those that follow.

And 1st, A. B. A.B. CRANMER.
Cranmer in his Answer to Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, objecting to him,
That he denied the Presence of Christ in this Holy Eucharist, replies, That it
was a thing he never said nor thought. -- My book in diverse places says clean
contrary, Answer to Gardi^er, Bishop of Winchester. Fol. London, 1551.
That Christ is with us spiritually present; is eaten and drunken of us, and
dwells within us, although Corporally he be departed out of this World, and
gone into Heaven, page 5. Page 5.
-- As he gives Bread to be eaten with our Mouths, so gives he his very Body
to be eaten with our Faith. And therefore I say, that Christ gives himself
truly to be eaten, chawed and digested; but all is spiritually with Faith, not
with Mouth, page 9. Page 9.
-- As the washing outwardly in Water is not a vain Token, but teaches such a
washing as God works inwardly in them that duly receive the same; so likewise
is not the Bread a vain Token, but shows and preaches to the godly Receiver,
what God works in him by his Almighty Power secretly and invisibly. And
therefore as the Bread is outwardly eaten indeed in the Lord's Supper, so is
the very Body of Christ inwardly by Faith eaten indeed of all them that come
thereto in such sort as they ought to do; which eating nourishes them unto
Everlasting Life. And in his Treatise of the Holy Sacrament, Assertio verae and
Catholicae Doctrinae de Sacramento Corporis and Sanguinis, J. ^hristi
Serva^^ris nostri. Li^^ae, 8 vo. 1601.
Lib. 3. where he sets himself particularly to state this very Question, How
Christ is present in this Holy Sacrament, He declares, Cap. 2. That whereas the
Papists suppose Christ to be under the Species of Bread and Wine; we believe
him to be in those who worthily receive these Holy Elements. They think him to
be received by the Mouth, and to enter with the Bread and Wine; We assert, that
he is received only by the Soul, and enters there by Faith. That Christ is
present only sacramentally and spiritually in this sacred Mystery, p. 116. That
since his Ascension into Heaven, he is there, and not on Earth, p. 118. and
that he cannot be in both together, 128. -- In short, he gives us this Rule for
interpreting the Expressions of the Fathers, where it is said, That we eat the
flesh, and drink the blood of Christ; That we receive in the Holy Sacrament,
the very body that hung on the Cross, etc. cap. 14. p. 180. These, says he, and
other Expressions of the like kind (which speak Christ to be upon Earth, and to
be received of Christians by eating or drinking), are either to be understood
of his Divine Nature (which is every where); or else must be taken figuratively
or spiritually. For he is figuratively only in the Bread and Wine; and
spiritually in those that receive this Bread and Wine worthily. But truly, and
as to his Body and Flesh, he is in Heaven only; from whence he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead.

Thus did this Learned and Holy Martyr understand our Doctrine of the Real
Presence; Bp. RIDLEY.
and the same was the Idea which his Companion both in Doctrine and Suffering,
Bishop Ridley, has left us of it. In his Discourse of the Lord's Supper, page
33. he tells us, Ridlei de Caena Dominica Assertio; Genevae apud Jo. Crispinum.
1556.
That the Substance of the Bread continues as the Matter of this Sacrament; but
so, that by reason of its change, as to Use, Office and Dignity, it is turned
Sacramentally into the Body of Christ; as in Baptism, the Water is turned into
the Laver of Regeneration -- That the Humane Nature of Christ is in Heaven, and
cannot in any manner lie hid under the form of Bread, p. 34. -- Then he
enquires, whether therefore we take away the Presence of Christ's Body from the
Sacrament? p. 35. And utterly denies, that this is either said or thought by
him. The Substance of the true Body and Blood of Christ, says he, is always in
Heaven, nor shall it depart thence before the end of the World. Now this
Substance of his Body and Blood being conjoined to his Divine Nature, has not
only Life in it self, but can, and is wont to bestow it upon all those who
partake of it, and believe in his Name. -- Nor is it any hindrance to this,
that Christ still remains in Heaven, and that we are upon Earth. For by Grace,
that is, Life (as S. John interprets it, c. 6) and the Properties of it, as far
as may be profitable to us in this our Pilgrimage here below, he is with us to
the end of the World. As the Sun, who though he never leaves his Orb, yet by
his Life, Heat, and Influence, is present to us: page 36, 37.

Hitherto then there can be no doubt, but that both the Church and the Divines
knew no other Real Presence than what has been before acknowledged to be still
our Doctrine. We must now go on to the times of trial, the days of Q.
Elizabeth, and her Successors, I. Tract.. IV. page 4.
when our Author supposes, that Men of different Judgments had the Power. Now
for proof of this, besides the Expressions of particular Men, which we shall
presently consider, we have Two General Presumptions offered to us; One, That
Dr. Heyli^^, and others, have observed, he says, of this Queen, that she was a
zealous propugner of the Real Presence; which may be very true, and yet but
little to the purpose, if she propugned it in the same sense that her Brother
King Edward the 6th, and the Church of England had done before, and not in the
new Notion imposed upon her by this Author, but without any manner of proof to
warrant his suggestion. The other, That upon the Re-view made by her Divines of
the Common Prayer and Articles, I. Treatise. page 2.. I. and again, p. 22..
XXXI.
they struck out of the One the Rubric against the Adoration of the Sacrament,
and the Passage before mentioned (being of the same temper as the Declaration
in the Liturgy), out of the xxixth Article; and which has accordingly been
omitted ever since.

And here I cannot but again take notice of the disingenuousness of this
Author, in dissembling the true Account that has so largely been given by our
late accurate Compiler of the History of our Reformation of this whole matter,
only for the advancing so pitiful an Insinuation of what I dare appeal to his
own Conscience whether he did not know to be otherwise. I will beg leave to
transcribe the whole Passage; and shall then leave it to the indifferent Reader
to judge whether a man so well acquainted with Books, and so interested in this
matter, could have lived so long in the world without hearing of so eminent a
matter in our Church History as this.

The Author is treating about the difference between the Article established in
King Edward the six's time, Dr. Burnet's Hist. of the Refomation, Vol 2. Page
405. Ann. 1559. Edit. 2. 1683.
and those in Q. Elizabeth's.

In the Article of the Lord's Supper there is a great deal left out; For
instead of that large Refutation of the Corporal Presence, from the
Impossibility of a Bodies being in more places at once; from whence it follows,
That since Christ's Body is in Heaven, the Faithful ought not to believe or
profess a Real or Corporal Presence of it in the Sacrament. In the new Article
it is said, [That the Body of Christ is given and received after a spiritual
manner; M S S. C. Cor. Christ. Cant.
and the means by which it is received, is Faith.] But in the Original Copy of
these Articles, which I have seen subscribed by the Hands of All that sat in
either House of Convocation, there is a further Addition made. The Articles
were subscribed with that precaution which was requisite in a matter of such
consequence: For before the Subscriptions there is set down the Number of the
Pages, and of the Lines in every Page of the Book to which they set their
Hands.

In that Article of the Eucharist these words are added; An Explanation of
Christ's Presence in the Sacrament.
Christ when he ascended into Heaven made his Body Immortal, but took not from
it the Nature of a Body: For still it retains, according to the Scriptures, the
Verity of a Humane Body; which must be always in One definite place, and cannot
be spread into many, or all places at Once. Since then Christ being carried up
to Heaven, is to remain there to the end of the World, and is to come from
thence, and from no place else (as says S. Austin) to judge the Quick and the
Dead: None of the Faithful ought to believe or profess the Real, or (as they
call it) the Corporal Presence of his Flesh and Blood in the Eucharist.

But this in the Original is dash't over with minium; yet so that it is still
legible. The Secret of it was this; The Queen and her Council studied (as has
been already shown) to unite all into the Communion of the Church: And it was
alleged, that such an express Definition against a Real Presence, might drive
from the Church many who were still of that Persuasion; and therefore it was
thought to be enough to condemn Transubstantiation, and to say, that Christ was
present after a spiritual manner, and received by Faith. To say more, as it was
judged superflous, so it might occasion division. Upon this these words were by
common consent left out. And in the next Convocation the Articles were
subscribed without them; of which I have also seen the Original.

This shows, that the Doctrine of the Church subscribed by the whole
Convocation, was at that time contrary to the belief of a Real or Corporal
Presence in the Sacrament; only it was not thought necessary or expedient to
publish it. Though from this silence, which flowed not from their Opinion, but
the Wisdom of that time, in leaving a Liberty for different Speculations, as to
the manner of the Presence; SOME have since inferred, that the chief Pastors of
this Church did then disapprove of the definition made in King Edwards time;
and that they were for a Real Presence.

Thus that Learned Historian. And here let our Adversary consider what he
thinks of this Account; and whether after so evident a Confutation from plain
matter of Fact of his Objection before it appeared, we may not reasonably
complain both of his Weakness and In-sincerity; neither to take any notice of
such a plain History of this whole Transaction, or to imagine that so vain a
Surmise of Q. Elizabeth's being a great propugner of the Real Presence, would
be sufficient to obviate so clear and particular an Account of this matter.

But though this might suffice to show the continuance of the same Doctrine of
the Real Presence in this Queen's, that was before professed in her Brother's
Reign; yet it may not be amiss to discover a little further the truth of this
matter, and how falsely this Author has alleged those great Names he has
produced. I will therefore beg leave to continue my Proof, with an Induction of
the most Eminent of our Divines that I have at this time the Opportunity to
consult, to our own days.

And first for Bishop Jewel; Bp. JEWEL.
though the part he had in the Convocation before mentioned, may sufficiently
assure us of his Opinion; yet it may not be improper to repeat the very words
of a Person of his Learning and Eminence in our Church. In his Reply to Harding
thus he expresses the Doctrine of the Church of England, as to the Real
Presence: Vth Article of the Real Presence against Harding, page 237. Land.
1611. See also his Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, page 219,
etc.
Whereas Mr. Harding thus unjustly reports of us, that we maintain a naked
Figure, and a bare Sign or Token only, and nothing else -- He knows well, we
feed not the People of God with bare Signs and Figures, but teach them, that
the Sacraments of Christ be Holy Mysteries; and that in the Ministration
thereof Christ is set before us even as he was crucified upon the Cross. -- We
teach the People, not that a naked Sign or Token, but that Christ's Body and
Blood indeed and verily is given unto us; that we verily eat it; that we verily
drink it; that we verily be relieved and live by it: that we are Bones of his
Bones, and Flesh of his Flesh; that Christ dwells in us, and we in him: --
Yet we say not, either that the Substance of the Bread and Wine is done away,
or that Christ's Body is let down from Heaven, or made Really or Fleshly
present in the Sacrament. We are taught according to the Doctrine of the Old
Fathers, to lift up our Hearts to Heaven, and there to feed upon the Lamb of
God -- Thus spiritually and with the Mouth of our Faith we eat the Body of
Christ, and drink his Blood; even as verily as his Body was verily broken, and
his Blood verily shed upon the Cross -- Indeed the Bread that we receive with
our Bodily Mouths, is an earthly thing; and therefore a Figure; as the Water in
Baptism is likewise also a Figure. But the Body of Christ that thereby is
represented, and there is offered unto our Faith, is the thing it self, and not
Figure. To conclude, Three things herein we must consider: 1st, That we put a
difference between the Sign and the thing it self that is signified: 2. That we
seek Christ above in Heaven, and imagine not him to be present Bodily upon the
Earth: 3. That the Body of Christ is to be eaten by Faith only, and none
otherwise.

I shall not trouble the Reader with any more of our Divines who lived in the
beginning of this Queen's Reign, Mr. HOOKER.
and subscribed the Article before-recited; but pass on directly to him whom
our Author first mentions, Tr. I. cap. 2.. 10. Page 6.
the Venerable Mr. Hooker, and whose Judgment having been so deservedly
esteemed by all sorts of men, ought not to be lightly accounted of by us.

And here I must observe, that this. Learned Person is drawn in only by a
Consequence, and that no very clear one neither, to favor his Opinion.
Difference between the Protestant and Socinian Methods, in answer to the
Protestants Plea for a Socinian, page 54.
The truth is, he has dealt with Mr. Hooker just as himself, or one of his
Friends has been observed to have done on the like occasion with the
incomparable Chillingworth; has picked up a Passage or two that seemed for his
purpose; but dissembled whole Pages in the same place that were evidently
against him. For thus Mr. Hooker in the Chapter cited by him, interprets the
words of Institution: If we doubt, says he, what those admirable words may
import, let him be our Teacher for the meaning of Christ, to whom Christ was
himself a Schoolmaster. Let our Lord's Apostle be his Interpreter; content we
our selves with his Explication; My Body, the Communion of my Body; My Blood,
the Communion of my Blood. Is there any thing more expedite, clear and easy,
than that as Christ is termed our Life, because through him we obtain Life: So
the parts of this Sacrament are his Body and Blood, because they are Causes
instrumental, upon the receipt whereof the participation of his Body and Blood
ensues? -- The Real Presence of Christ's most blessed Body and Blood is not
therefore to be sought for in the Sacrament, but in the worthy Receiver of the
Sacrament -- And again, p. 310. he thus interprets the same words; This
Hallowed Food through the concurrence of Divine Power, is in verity and truth
unto faithful Receivers instrumentally a Cause of that mystical participation,
whereby as I make my self wholly theirs, so I give them in hand an actual
possession of all such saving Grace as my sacrificed Body can yield, and as
their Souls do presently need. This is to them and in them my Body.

And this may suffice in Vindication of Mr. Hooker. Those who desire a fuller
Account, may find several Pages to the same purpose in the Chapter which I have
quoted. Bishop ANDREWS. 1 Tract. page 7.. xi. n. 1.
The next our Author mentions, is the Learned Bishop Andrews, in that much
noted passage, as he calls it, in the Answer to Bellarmine.

And indeed we need desire no other Passage to judge of his Opinion in this
matter; in which 1st. He utterly excludes all defining any thing as to the
manner of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist. 2. He professes that a Presence we
believe, and that no less a True one than the Papists. 3. He plainly insinuates
that the presence of Christ in the Eucharist, was much the same as in Baptism;
the very allusion which the Holy Habemus Christum praesentem ad Baptismatis
Sacramentum, habemus eum praesentem ad Altaris Cibum and Potum. Augustine.
Stola, quae est Ecclesia Christi, lavatur in ipsius sanguine vivo i. e. in
lavacro regenerationis. Origin. Statim baptizatus in sanguine agni Vir meruit
appellari. Hieron. Christi sanguine lavaris, quando in ejus mortem Baptizaris.
Leo. P. etc.
Fathers were wont to make, to express his Presence by in this Holy Sacrament;
which since our Adversaries can neither deny, nor yet say is so real, as to be
Essential or Corporeal; they must of necessity allow that there may be a true
Presence (which is all the Bishop affirms) without such a Substantial one as
this Author here contends for.

But to show that whatever this Bishop understood by the Real presence, it
could not be that Christ's glorified Body is now actually present in this Sacred
Mystery, will appear demonstratively from this, that he declares it is not this
Body which we either Represent or partake of there; insomuch that he doubts not
to say, that could there be a Transubstantiation, such as the Church of Rome
supposes, it would not serve our turn, nor answer the design of this Sacrament.
It Is in his Sermon on 1 Cor. See Sermon vii. on the Resurect. page 454. Sermon.
L^nd. 1641.
v. 7, 8. We will mark, says he, something more: That Epulemur does here refer
to Immolatus: To Christ not every way considered, but As when he was Offered.
Christ's Body that now is, true; But not Christ's Body as now it is, but as then
it was, when it was offered, rent, and slain, and sacrificed for us. Not as now
he is glorified; for so he is not, he cannot be Immolatus; For as he is, he is
immortal and impassible; But as then he was when he suffered death, that is
passible and mortal. Then in his passible State, he did institute this of outs,
to be a memorial of his Passible and Passion both. And we are in this Action
not only carried up to Christ (sursum Corda) [so that Christ it seems is not
brought down to us] but we are also carried back to Christ, as he was at the
very instant, and in the very Act of his offering. So, and no otherwise, does
this Text teach; So, and no otherwise do we Represent him. By the
incomprehensible power of his Eternal Spirit, not He alone, but He as at the
very act of his offering is made present to us, and we incorporate into his
death, and invested in the Benefits of it. If an Host could be turned into him
now glorified as he is, it would not serve; Christ offered is it. Thither must
we look; to the Serpent lift up: thither we must repair; even ad Cadaver: We
must Hoc facere, do that is then done. So and no otherwise is this Epulare to
be conceived. And so I think none will say they do or can turn him.

Whatsoever Real presence then this Bishop believed, it must be of his
crucified Body, and as in the State of his death; and that I think cannot be
otherwise present than in one of those two ways mentioned above by Archbishop
Cranmer, and both of which we willingly acknowledge; either Figuratively, in
the Elements; or Spiritually, in the Souls of those who worthily receive them.

And from this Account of Bishop Andrews Opinion, we may conclude what it was
that Casaubon and King James understood by the Real Presence, ASAVBON, KING
JAMES, A. Bishop of Spalato.
who insist upon that Bishops words to express their own Notion and meaning of
it. Nor can we make any other judgment of the Arch Bishop of Spalato; See the
1. Tra.
who in the next xi. note 2. page 7.
Vol. 3. de Rep. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 11. page 200. 201.
to that cited by our Adversary is very earnest against those who receive
unworthily this Holy Sacrament, and by consequence ties not Christ's natural
Body to the Bread; and declares it to be after a Spiritual imperceptible and
miraculous manner. As for the term Corporaliter, which he there uses, and which
Melancthon and some others had used before him, that may be well enough
understood in the same Sense, Celess ii. 9, 17.
as vere or realiter; and is often so used both in Scripture and in the Holy
Fathers. As when St. Paul says of Christ, that in " Him dwells the fullness of
the Godhead Bodily; that is really, in opposition to the Shechinah or Presence
of God in the Tabernacle. And again, The Body of Christ; that is the substance,
See Hammend in Coloss 1. Annot. d.
the reality, opposed to the types and sigures of the Law. And so in the Hebrew
Exposition (...) is often used for Essence as well as Body, Archbishop LAWD.
and applied to Spiritual as well as Corporal things.

Nor can I see any more reason to understand Archbishop Lawd in any other
Sense. He asserts the true and real Presence of Christ in this Sacred Feast; 1
Tract.. xiv. page 8.
but he does not say, that Christ's natural Body which is now in Heaven, is
also in this Holy Sacrament, or in the worthy receiver; nor have we any reason
to believe that he understood it so to be. MONT^GVE Origeres Eccles. Tom.
prior. par, postor. p. 247, 249, 250. etc. Panis in Sanaxi fit corpus Christi;
-- Sed et Corpus Christi CREDENIES nunt. Ad eundem utrumque moduin and
mensuram; sed non Naturaliter; -- Itaque nee Panis ITA est Corpus Christi;
Mystice tantum, non P^^sice. vid. plur.
And the same must be said of Bishop HALL.
Bishop Hall, Bishop Montague, and Bishop Bilson; MONTAGVE BILSON.
in whose expressions as they are quoted by our Author, I find nothing that
proves the Sense he would impose upon them; and whose works had I now by me, I
might possibly be able to give some better account of them. Though after all,
should one of these in his violence against his Adversaries, or the others in
their pacifick design of reconciling all Parties as to this Point, have said
more than they ought to do, I do not see but that it ought to have been imputed
to the circumstances they were in and the designs they pursued, rather than be
set up for the measure either of their own, or our Churches Opinion.

And now I am mentioning these things, Bishop FORBES.
I ought not pass over one other eminent instance of such a charitable
undertaking, and which has given occasion to our Author of a Quotation he might
otherwise have wanted, in that excellent Bishop of St. Andrews Bishop Forbes;
concerning whose Authority in this matter I shall offer only the censure of
one, than whom none could have given a more worthy Character of a person, who
so well deserved it as that good Bishop did; I do not deny, Author of the Life
of Bishop BEDEL; in the Preface.
but his earnest desire of a general Peace and Union among all Christians, has
made him too favorable to many of the Corruptions in the Church of Rome: But
though a Charity that is not well balanced, may carry one to very in iscreet
things; yet the principle from whence thdy flowed in him, was so truly good,
that the Errors to which it carried him, ought to be either excused, or at lest
to be very gently censured.

There remain now but two of all the Divines he has produced to prove his new
fancy, which he would set up for the Doctrine of the Church of England; and
those as little for his purpose as any he has hitherto mentioned; Bishop TAILOR.
Bishop Tailor and Mr. Thorndyke. For Bishop Tailor, I cannot acquit our Author
of a wilful prevarication; since it is evident that he has so plainly opposed
his Notion, and that in the very Book he quotes, and which he wrote on purpose
to show our meaning of the Real Presence, Polemical discourses. p. 182. London.
1674.
that he could not but have known that he misrepresented him. I shall set down
the state of the Question as it is in the beginning of that Treatise. The
Doctrine of the Church of England, and generally of the Protestants in this
Article is; That after the Minister of the Holy Mysteries has rightly prayed
and blessed or consecrated the Bread and the Wine; the Symbols become changed
into the Body and Blood of Christ after a Sacramental, i.e. in a Spiritual Real
manner. So that all that worthily communicate, do by Faith receive Christ
Really, Effectually, to all the purposes of his Passion -- It is Bread and it
is Christ's Body: It is Bread in in Substance, Christ in the Sacrament; and
Christ is as really given to all that are truly disposed, as the Symbols are p.
183. -- It is here as in the other Sacrament; for as there natural Water
becomes the laver of Regeneration; so here Bread and Wine become the Body and
Blood of Christ: but there and here too the first Substance is changed by
Grace, but remains the same in nature -- We say that Christ's Body is in the
Sacrament really, but Spiritually. They (the Papists) say it is there really,
but Spiritually. For so Bellarmin is bold to say that the word may be allowed
in this Question. Where now is the difference? Here; By Spiritually they mean
present after the manner of a Spirit; by Spiritually we mean present to our
Spirits only; that is, so as Christ is not present to any other Sense but that
of faith or spiritual susception -- They say that Christ's Body is truly present
there, as it was upon the Cross, but not after the manner of all, or any Body
-- But we by the real Spiritual Presence of Christ, do understand Christ to be
present, as the Spirit of God is present in the Hearts of the faithful, by
Blessing and Grace; and this is ALL we mean besides the tropical and figurative
presence.

Such is the Account which that Excellent Bishop here gives not only of his
own, but, as he expressly terms, it of the Church of England's, and the
Generality of the Protestants Belief in this Matter. Our Author's dissimulation
of it is so much the more inexcusable, Treatise 1st. p. 20th.
by how much the more zealous an Advocate he makes him of his Cause, when all
this that I have transcribed, was in the very same Section, and almost in the
same Page with what he has cited. For his little Remark upon the Title of the
Bishops Book, where he calls it of the Real Presence and Spiritual, whence he
would infer a difference between the two Terms, and find something Real that is
not Spiritual in this Sacrament; it is evident that the Design of that
Distinction was this: There be several sorts of Real Presences; the Papists,
the Lutherans, the Church of England, all allow a Real Presence in the
Sacrament, but after different Manners; it was therefore necessary to add
somewhat more, to show what kind of Real Presence he undertook to maintain, and
he knew no word more proper to express it by than Spiritual, which does not
therefore imply a Distinction from, but Limitation of the other Term Real. And
thus he explains it, N. 6. and 7. of that Section, Page 183.
where he shows that the Spiritual is also a Real Presence, and indeed more
properly so than any other. In short, thus he concludes the State of the
Question, Page 186.
in the same Section, between us and the Church of Rome, so that now, says he,
The Question is not, Whether the Symbols be changed into Christ's Body and
Blood or no? For it is granted on all sides: But whether this Conversion be
Sacramental and Figurative? Or whether it be Natural and Bodily? Nor is it
whether Christ be taken Really, but whether he be taken in a Spiritual or in a
Natural Manner? We say the Conversion is Figurative, Mysterious, and
Sacramental; they say, it is Proper, Natural, and Corporal. We affirm that
Christ is really taken by Faith, by the Spirit, to all real Effects of his
Passion (this is an Explication a little different from our Authors) They say
he is taken by the Mouth, and that the Spiritual and the Virtual taking him in
Virtue or Effect, is not sufficient, though done also in the Sacrament. Hic
Rhodus, hic Saltus.

If this does not yet satisfy him that he has injured this Learned Man in the
Representation of his Opinion, directly contrary to his Sense, I will offer him
yet one Passage more, taken from another part of his Works, and which, I hope,
will thoroughly convince him. It is in the 5th. Letter, to a Gentleman that was
tempted to the Communion of the Church of Rome. He had proposed to the Bishop
this Question. Whether, without all danger of Superstition or Idolatry, we may
not render Divine Worship to our Blessed Savior, as present in the Blessed
Sacrament or Host, according to his Humane Nature, in that Host? The Question
is certainly every way pertinent to our present Purpose; let us see what the
Answer is that he makes to it. See P^l^mi^. (...) ^ag. 6^.70.
We may not render Divine Worship to him as present in the Blessed Sacrament
according to his Humane Nature, without danger of Idolatry, because he is not
there according to his Humane Nature, and therefore you give Divine Worship to
a Non Ens, which must needs be Idolatry. Well, Treat. 1st. Page 10.
but still it may be the Bishop does not intend to exclude the Corpus Domini,
but only the Corporal or Natural Manner of that Body: Let us therefore hear how
he goes on. For Idolum nihil est in mundo, Says St. Paul, and Christ as
Present by his Humane Nature in the Sacrament is a Non^ens. For it is not true;
there is no suchthing. What, not as Christ there, no way as to his Humane
nature? -- No, he is says the Bishop, present there by his Divine power, and
his Divine Blessing, and the Fruits of his Body, the real effective Consequents
of his Passion; but for any other Presence, it is Idolum; it is nothing in the
World. Adore Christ in Heaven; for the Heaven must contain him till the time of
restitution of all things. This then is Bishop Taylor's Notion of the Real
Presence: and now I am confident our Author himself will remit him to the
Company of those Old Zuinglian Bishops, Cranmer, Ridley, and the rest, who
lived before that Q. Elizabeth had propugned the Real Presence of his new Model
into the Heads of the Governors of the Church of England.

And now I am afraid his Cause will be desperate unless Mr. Thorndyke can
support it. Mr. THORNDYKE.
And how unlikely he is to do it, he might have learnt from what has been
answered to T. G. on the same Occasion. T. G. Vialogue 1st. Page 21.
T. G. Had in his first Dialogue quoted the same place which our Author has
done since, to prove his belief of the Real Presence: His Answer to T. G's.
Dial. Page 92.
Adversary confesses this, but produces another that explains his meaning;
THORNDYKE Laws of the Church. Chapter 4. Page 30.
if it can any way be showed, says he, that the Church did ever pray that the
Flesh and Blood might be substituted instead of the Elements under the
Accidents of them, then I am content that this be accounted henceforth the
Sacramental presence of them in the Eucharist. But if the Church only prays
that the Spirit of God coming down upon the Elements -- may make them the Body
and Blood of Christ, so that they which receive them may be filled with the
Grace of his Spirit; then is it not the Sense of the Catholic Church that can
oblige any man to believe the abolishing of the Elements in their bodily
substance, because supposing that they remain, they may nevertheless come to be
the instruments of Gods Spirit to convey the operation thereof to them that are
disposed to receive it, no otherwise than his Flesh and Blood conveyed the
Efficacy thereof upon Earth. And that I suppose is reason enough to call it the
Body and Blood of Christ Sacramentally, that is to say, as in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist.

Thus Mr. Thorndyke expresses himself as to the Real Presence: But yet after
all, I will not deny but that this Learned Person seems to have had a
particular Notion in this matter, and which is far enough from what our Author
would six upon him. He thought that the Elements by Consecration were united to
the Godhead of Christ, much after the same manner as his Natural Body was by
Incarnation; and that so the very Elements became after a sort his Body. See
his Just Weights and Measures, 4to. Land. 1662. -- Page 94.
The Church from the beginning did not pretend to consecrate by these bare
words, This is my Body, this is my Blood, as operatory inchanging the Elements
into the Body and Blood of Christ; but by that Word of God whereby he has
declared the Institution of this Sacrament, and commanded the use of it; and by
the Execution of this Command. Now it is executed, and has always been
executed by the Act of the Church upon God's Word of Institution, praying that
the Holy Ghost coming down upon the present Elements, may make them the Body
and Blood of Christ. Not by changing them into the Nature of Flesh and Blood;
as the Bread and Wine that nourished our Lord Christ on Earth, became the Flesh
and Blood of the Son of God, by becoming the Flesh and Blood of his Manhood,
Hypostatically united to his Godhead, says Gregory Nyssene. But immediately
and ipso facto, by being united to the Spirit of Christ; i. e. his Godhead. For
the Flesh and Blood of Christ by Incarnation, the Elements by Consecration
being united to the Spirit; i. e. the Godhead of Christ, become both one
Sacramentally, by being both one with the Spirit or Godhead of Christ, to the
conveying of God's Spirit to a Christian.

And thus have I considered the several Divines produced for this new Conceit
concerning the Real Presence; and shown the greatest part of his Authors to be
evidently against it; some not to have spoken so clearly that we can determine
any thing concerning them; but not one that favors what they were alleged
for; viz. to show that they believed Christ's Natural Body to be both in Heaven
and in the Sacrament; only after another manner than the Papists. It were an
easy matter to show how constant our Church has been to the Doctrine of the
true, real, spiritual Presence which it still asserts, and which it derived
from its first Reformers, whose words have been before set down by a cloud of
other Witnesses; as may be seen by the short Specimen I have put together in
the Reformatio legum Eccles. ex Authorit. Henr. 8. and Edw. 6. Land. 1641. Tit.
de Sacram. cap. 4. page 29. -- Morton de Euch. part. 2. Class. 4. cap. 1.. 2.
page 224. Lat. 1640. 4to. -- Fr. White against Fisher, page 407. Land. 1624.
Fol. -- A. B Vster's Answer to a Challenge, c of the Real Presence, p. 44, 45.
Land. 1625. -- Id. Sermon before the House of Commons, page 16, 1^, etc -- Dr.
Hownand Pract. Catech. part. ult. Answer to this Question; the Importance of
these w^^^^, (...) the B^d^; and (...) of Christ are verily and indeed taken
and receiv^^, p. 132. (...) Land Fol. 1634. -- Dr. Jachson's Works, Tom. 3.
page 300, 302. Land. 1673 Dr. Jo. W^^^^^'s Way to the True Church. Land. 1624..
51. N. 1^ page 2^9. Cosens Hist. Transubst. p. 3, 4, 12, etc. Edit. London,
1675, 8vo.
Margent. But I have insisted too long already on this matter; and shall
therefore pass on to the Third thing I proposed to consider; viz. Thirdly, That
the Alterations which have been made in our Rubric, were not upon the account
of our Divines changing their Opinions, as is vainly and fasly suggested.

To give a rational Account of this Affair, we must carefully consider the
Circumstances of the Times, the Tempers and Dispositions of the Persons that
lived in them; and what the Designs of the Governing Parties were with
reference to them; and then we shall presently see both a great deal of Wisdom
and Piety in the making of these Alterations; allowing the Opinions of those
who did it, to have continued, as we have seen, in all of them the same.

When first this Rubric was put into King Edward's Liturgy, the Church of
England was but just rising up out of the Errors and Superstitions with which
it had been overrun by the prevalency of Popery upon it. It had the happiness
to be reformed, not as most others were, by private persons, and in many places
contrary to the desires of the Civil Power; but by a Unanimous Concurrence of
the Highest Authority both Civil and Ecclesiastical, of Church and State. Hence
it came to pass, that Convocations being assembled, Deliberations had of the
greatest and wisest Persons for the proceeding in it, nothing was done out of a
Spirit of Peevisnness or Opposition; the Holy Scriptures and Antiquity were
carefully consulted; and all things examined according to the exactest measures
that could be taken from them; and a diligent distinction made of what was
Popery, and what true and Catholic Christianity, that so the One only might be
rejected, the other duly retained.

Now by this means it was that the Ancient Government of the Church became
preserved amongst us; a just and wise Liturgy collected out of the Public
Rituals: Whatever Ceremonies were requisite for Order or Decency, were
retained; and among the rest, that of receiving the Communion kneeling for One,
which has accordingly ever since been the manner established amongst us. But
that no Occasion of Scandal might hereby be given, whether to our
Neighbour-Churches abroad, or to any particular Members of our own at home:
That those who were yet weak in the Faith, might not either continue or fall
back into Error, and by our retaining the same Ceremony in the Communion that
they had been used to in the Mass, fancy that they were to adore the Bread as
they did before: For all these great Ends this Caution was inserted; that the
true Intent of this Ceremony was only for Decency and Order; not that any
Adoration was thereby intended, or ought to be done unto any Real or Essential
Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood, which were not there, but in
Heaven, it being against the Truth of Christ's Natural Body to be at One time
in more places than One.

And this is sufficiently intimated in the words of the Rubric to have been
the first Cause and Design of it. Thus it continued the remainder of King
Edward's time: But now Queen Elizabeth being come to the Crown, there were
other Circumstances to be considered. Those of the Reformed Religion abroad
were sufficiently satisfied, both by this public Declaration, which had stood
so many years in the Liturgy of our Church; and by the Conversation and
Acquaintance of our Divines, forced by the dispersion in the foregoing Reign,
to seek forrefuge among their Brethren in other Countries, of our Orthodox
Faith, as to this Point. Our own Members at home had heard too much of this
matter in the public Writings and Disputations, and in the constant Sufferings
of their Martyrs, not to know that the Popish Real Presence was a mere Figment,
an Idolum, as Bishop Tailor justly styles it; and their Mass to be abhorred
rather than adored. There was then no longer need of this Rubric upon any of
those Accounts for which it was first established; and there was a very just
reason now to lay it aside. That great Queen desired, if possible, to compose
the Minds of her Subjects, and make up those Divisions which the differences of
Religion, and the late unhappy Consequences of them had occasioned. For this,
she made it her business to render the public Acts of the Church of England as
agreeable to all Parties as Truth would permit. The Clause of the Real Presence
inserted in the Articles of her first Convocation, and subscribed by all the
Members of it (to show that their belief was still the same it had ever been as
to this matter) was nevertheless, as we have seen, struck out for this end
their next Session. The Title of Head of the Church, which her Father had first
taken, her Brother continued, and was from both derived to her, so qualified
and explained, as might prevent any Occasion of quarrelling at it by the most
captious persons. That Petition in the Litany inserted by King Henry viii. From
the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable Enormities, Good
Lord, etc. struck out: And in conformity to what was done in the Articles as to
this Point, this Rubric also was omitted, lest it should give Offense to those
who were still zealous for their mistaken Principles and Worship. This was the
Wise and Christian Design of that Excellent Princess; and how happy an Effect
this Moderation might have had, if the Bishop of Rome had not by his Artifice
and Authority with some of her Subjects, prevented it, the first Years of her
Reign sufficiently show.

Thus was the Occasion and Reason of its omission in Q. Elizabeth's time, as
great as the necessity of its first Insertion in King Edward's. And in this
state it continued all the Reign of that Queen, and of her two Successors, King
James and King Charles. 1st, I shall not need to say by what means it was, that
new Occasion was given for the reviving of it. We have all of us heard, and
many of us seen too much of it. How Order became Superstitious, and Decency
termed Idolatry: The Church of England traduced as but another Name for Popery;
and this Custom of kneeling at the Communion, one of the strongest Arguments
offered for the Proof of it. And now when Panick Fears had found such
prevalence over the Minds of Men, as to destroy a King, and embroil a Kingdom
into a Civil War, of almost Twenty Years continuance; and tho by the good hand
of God our King and our Peace were again restored, yet the minds of the People
were still unsettled, and in danger of being again blown up upon the least
Occasion; what could be more advisable to justify our selves from all
suspicion of Popery in this matter, and induce them to a Conformity with us in
a Ceremony they had entertained such a dread of, than to revive that ancient
Rubric; and so quiet the Minds of the People now, by the same means by which
they had been settled and secured before?

This I am persuaded is so rational an Account, as will both justify the
proceedings of our Governors in these Changes, and show the dis-ingenuity of
those, who not only knowing, but having been told these things, will still
rather impute it to an imaginary wavering, or uncertainty of Opinion, than to a
necessary and Christian Accommodation to the Times. For the change in the
Prayer of Consecration, I have already said, that it is in the Words, not the
Sense: And if our Governors thought the present Expressions (...) liable to
exception than the former, they had certainly reason for the Alteration. For
the other Exceptions there is very little in them, whether the Minister lay his
Hand on the Sacred Elements, when he repeats the words of Institution, as at
this time, or only consecrates them by the Prayers of the Church, and the Words
of Christ, without any other Ceremony, as heretofore: Whether with the Church
of Rome we use only the words of Christ in the distribution; or with most of
the Reformed Churches, the other Expression, Take and eat this, etc. or (as we
choose rather) join them both together: Whether we sing the Gloria in Excelsis
Deo -- before or after the receiving; but because the chiefest Mystery he
thinks lies in this, That whereas in King Edward's days the Rubric called it
an Essential Presence, which we have now turned into Corporeal; I must confess
I will not undertake to say what the Occasion of it was; if they thought this
latter manner more free from giving Offense than the other would have been, I
think they did well to prefer it. Let every one entertain what Notion he
pleases of these things; this I have shown is the Doctrine of the Church which
we all subscribe, That the Natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are in
Heaven, and not here; i. e. in the Sacrament; and if there can be any other
Real Presence than such as I have shown to have been the constant belief of our
Divines consistent with this Rubric, I shall no more desire to debar any one
the belief of it, than I shall be willing to be obliged to believe it with him.

And now after so clear an Account as I have here given of the several changes
that have been made in our Rubric, were I minded to recriminate, and tell the
World what Alterations have been made in their Mass, and those in Points
infinitely more material than any thing that can be alleged against us, I much
question whether they would be able to give us so good an account of it. And so
mething of this I may perhaps offer as a Specimen of the wisdom of this Author
in the choice of his Accusation before we part; In the mean time I go on to the
last thing proposed to be here considered.

4thly. that the Reason mentioned in our Rubric concerning the Impossibility
of Christ's natural Body's existing in several places at the same time, is no
way invalidated by any of this Authors exceptions against it. Now these being
most of them founded upon the former mistaken Notion of the Real presence
falsely imputed to us, will admit of a very short and plain consideration.

1st. He observes That Protestants, Treatise 1st.. xx. n. 1. page 13.
but especially our English Divines generally confess the presence of our
Savior in the Eucharist to be an ineffable Mystery. Well, be it so; what will
he hence infer? Why this he conceives is said to be so in respect of something
in it opposite and contradictory to, and therefore incomprehensible and
ineffable by Humane Reason. But supposing they should not think it so from
being Opposite and Contradictory to, but because the manner how Christ herein
communicates himself to us is hid from, and above our Humane Reason; might not
this be sufficient to make it still be called an ineffable, and
incomprehensible Mystery? Whereas the other would make it rather plain and
comprehensible Nonsense. It Is a strange Affection that some Men have got of
late for Contradictions; they are so in love with them, that they have almost
brought it to be the definition of a Mystery, to be the Revelation of something
to be believed in Opposition to Sense and Reason. And what by their Notions and
Parallels, have advanced no very commendable Character of Christianity; as if
it were a Religion full of Absurdities; Bishop TAYLOVRS Polem. Disco. of the
Real prefence. Sect. ii. page 231.
and as Fisher the Jesuit once told King James 1st. with reference to this very
Subject, the rather to be believed because it is contrary to Reason. But if
this be indeed our Authors Notion of Mysteries (and the truth is
Transubstantiation can be no other Mystery) we desire he will be pleased to
confine it to his own Church, and not send it abroad into the World as ours
too. We are persuaded, not only that our Worship must be a reasonable Service,
but our Faith a Reasonable Assent. He who opposes the Authority of Holy
Scriptures, Ibid.
says Bishop Tailor, against manifest and certain Reason, does neither
understand himself nor them. Reason is the voice of God as well as Revelation,
and what is opposite to the one, can no more be agreeable to the other, than
God can be contrary to himself. And though, if the Revelation be clear and
evident, we submit to it, because we are then sure it cannot be contrary to
Reason, whatever it may appear to us; yet when the contradiction is manifest,
as that a natural Body should be in more places than one at the same time, we
are sure that interpretation of Holy Scripture can never be the right which
would infer this, but especially when there is another, and much more
reasonable, that does not. And in this we are after all justified by one whose
Authority I hope our Author will not question, even his own self; If, says he,
Treatise 1st.. 29. page 21.
we are certain there is a contradiction, then we are certain there neither is
nor can be a contrary Revelation; and when any Revelation, though never so plain,
is brought; we are bound to interpret it so, as not to affirm a certainly known
impossibility. And let him that sticks to this rule, interpret Christ's words
for Transubstantiation if he can.

But do not our own Authors sometimes say, that notwithstanding all the
difficulties brought against Transubstantiation, yet if it can be shown that
God has revealed it, they are ready to believe it? Perhaps some may have said
this, because for that very Reason that there are so many contradictions in it,
they are sure it cannot be shown that God has revealed it. But if he means, as
he seems to insinuate, that notwithstanding such plain contradictions as they
charge it with, they thought it possible nevertheless, that God might have
revealed it, and upon that supposition, they were ready to believe it; I answer
from his own words, that their supposal then was Absurd and impossible; since
he himself assure us, Treatise 1st.. xx. n. 3. page 14.
that None can believe a thing true, upon what motive soever, which he first
knows to be certainly false, or which is all one, certainly to contradict. For
these we say are not verifyable by a divine Power; and Ergo, here I may say,
should a divine power declare a truth, it would transcend its self. Which last
words if they signify any thing and do not transcend Sense, must suppose it
impossible for such a thing as implies a certain Contradiction, to be revealed.

II. Observation, But our Author goes on, I conceive that any one thing that
seems to us to include a Perfect Contradiction, can no more be effected by
divine Power than another, or than many others the like may. Seeing then we
admit that some seeming Contradictions to Reason may be verified by the Divine
power in this Sacrament, there is no reason to deny but that this may be also
as well as any other.

Now not to contend with him about words; whoever told our Author, that we
allowed that there was any thing in this Sacrament, as received by us, that
seemed to us to include a Perfect Contradiction? Perfect Contradictions we
confess are all of them equally verifyable by a divine Power, that is, are all
of them impossible. And for this we have his own word before. Now if there be
any such things as perfect contradictions to be known by us, that which seems
to us to be a perfect contradiction, must really be a perfect contradiction;
unless contradictions are to be discovered some other way than by seeming to
our Reason to be so. And such it not only seems, but undoubtedly is, for the
same One, natural, finite Body, to be in more places than one at the same time;
if to be and not to be, be still the measure of Contradictions. He that says of
such a Body, that it is in Heaven and on Earth, at London and Rome, at the same
time, says in Effect that it is one and not one; finite and not finite; in one
place and not in one place, etc. All which are such seemingly perfect
contradictions, that I fear 'twill be a hard matter to find out any Power by
which they can be verified.

III. Observation, Treatise 1st.. xxii. p. 15.
He observes Thirdly; That those who affirm a Real and Substantial presence of
the very Body of Christ to the worthy communicant, contradistinct to any such
other Real presence of Christ's Body, as implies only a presence or it in
Virtue, and Spiritual Effects, etc. must hold this particular seeming
Contradiction to be True, or some other equivalent to it.

If by the Real Presence of the very Body of Christ, he means, as he before
explains it, That Christ's Natural Body, that very Body which is now in Heaven,
should be also at the same time here upon Earth; it is, I think, necessary for
those who will affirm this, to hold some such kind of Contradiction, as he
says: And it is for that very Reason, I am persuaded, he will find but few such
Persons in the Church of England; which so expressly declares, that Christ's
Natural Body is in Heaven, and not here, upon this very account, That it is
contrary to the truth of a Natural Body to be in more places than one at the
same time. However, if any such there be, as they herein depart from the
Doctrine of their Church, so it is not our concern to answer for their
Contradictions.

IV. He observes, lastly: It seems to me that some of the more judicious
amongst them (the Divines he means of the Church of England) have not laid so
great a weight on this Philosophical Position, Tract. 1.. xxviii. p. 20.
as wholly to support and regulate their Faith in this matter by it; as it
stands in opposition not only to Nature's, but the Divine Power: because they
pretend not any such certainty thereof, but that if any Divine Revelation of
the contrary can be showed, they profess a readiness to believe it.

I shall not now trouble my self with what some of our Divines may seem to him
to have done in this matter; it is evident our Church has laid stress enough
upon this Contradiction. Indeed where so many gross Repugnancies both to Sense
and Reason are crowded together, as we have seen before there are in this
Point, it ought not to be wondered if our Divines have not supported and
regulated their Faith wholly upon this one alone. We do not any of Us think it
either safe or pious to be too nice in determining what God can, or cannot do;
we leave that to the bold Inquisitiveness of their Schools. But this we think
we may say, that if there are any unalterable Laws of Nature, by which we are
to judge of these things; then God can no more make one Body to exist in ten
thousand places at the same time, than he can make one, continuing one, to be
ten thousand, than he can divide the same thing from its self, and yet continue
it still undivided. And if any of our Divines have said, that they cannot admit
that one Body can be in several places at once, till the Papists can
demonstrate the possibility thereof by Testimony of Holy Scripture, or the
ancient Tradition of the Primitive Church, or by apparent Reason. We need not
suppose that they said this, doubting whether it implied a Contradiction, but
because the certainty of the Contradiction secured them against the possibility
of any such Proof. This is evident in B. Tailor, who thought that God could not
do this, because it implied a Contradiction: Real Presence,. xi. n. 1. p. 230.
and Ibid. n. 27. He says it is utterly impossible. So also Dr. White professes,
that according to the Order which God has fixed by his Word and Will, this
cannot be done: Confer. page 446, 447. and before, page 181. to this Objection,
That tho in Nature it be impossible, for one and the same Body to be in many
places at once, yet because God is Omnipotent, he is able to effect it: We
answer, says he, It implies a Contradiction, that God should destroy the
nature of a thing, the nature of the same thing remaining safe: See (...), p.
180, 181. White 's Works, Land. 1624.


And now I know but one Objection more that is, or can be offered against what
I have said, and which having answered, I shall close this Point: For if this
be all the Church of England understands, when it speaks of a Real Presence,
viz. A Real Sacramental Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Holy Signs,
and a real Spiritual Presence in the inward Communion of them to the Soul of
every worthy Receiver; will not this precipitate us into downright See 1.
Treatise, page 23.. xxxii. p. 24.. xxxii. p. 25.. xxxvi, xxxvii, etc.
Zuinglianism, and render us after all our pretenses as very Sacramentaries as
they? Indeed, I am not able directly to say whether it will or no, because I
find the Opinion of Zuinglius very variously represented as to this matter. But
yet, First, If by Zuinglianism he means that which is more properly Smalcius de
Coen. Dom. p. 347. Id Disp. 9. de Hypocr. p. 289. Volkelius lib. iv. cap. 12.
p. 304, 319, etc. Socinus in Paraenesi, c. iv. Sclichtingius disp. de Coeu.
Dom. p. 701.
Socinianism, viz. a mere Commemoration of Christ's Death, and a Thanksgiving
to God for it; it is evident it does not, forasmuch as we positively confess,
that in this Holy Sacrament, there is a Real and Spiritual Grace communicated
to us, even all the benefits of that Death and Passion which we there set
forth. And this, or somewhat very like it, I find sometimes to have been
maintained by Zuingl. See de Provid. Dei, cap. 6, etc.
Zuinglius. But now, Secondly, If by Zuinglianism he understands such a Real
Prefence, as denies only the Coexistence of Christ's Natural Body now in
Heaven, at the same time in this Holy Sacrament, but denies nothing of that
Real and Spiritual And this our Author seems to insinuate: See the places above
cited: And indeed others have alleged this as the true Opinion of Zuinglius:
See Calvin. Tract. de Coen. Dom. Defens. Sacram. Admonit. ad Westphal. and
Passim. alibi. Vid. insuper libr. de Orthod. Consens. c. 7: And especially
Hospin. p. 42, 55, 177, etc. Hist. Sacr. pa^^ 2.
Communion, of it we have be fore mentioned; this is indeed our Doctrine, nor
shall we be ashamed to own it for any ill Names he is able to put upon it. But
yet I wonder why he should call this Zuinglianism; since if the common name of
Catholic, or Christian Doctrine, be not sufficient, he might have found out a
more ancient Abettor of this Real Presence, than Zuinglius, and the truth is,
one of the most dangerous Opposers both of their Head and their Faith that ever
was; I mean St. Paul, who has not only clearly expressed himself against them,
as to this Point of the Eucharist, 1 Cor. x. 16. but in most of their other
Errors left such pernicious Sayings to the World; as all their Authority and
Infallibility, let me add, nor all their Anathema's neither, will not be able
to overcome.

I shall close up this Discourse of the Real Presence acknowledged by us in
this Holy Sacrament, with a plain familiar Example, and which may serve at once
both to illustrate, and confirm the Propriety of it. A Father makes his last
Will, and by it bequeaths his Estate and all the Profits of it to his Child.
Vid. Cosens Hist. Transubstantionis, cap. v.. 5. p. 57.
He delivers it into the Hands of his Son, and bids him take there his House
and Lands, which by this his last Will he delivers to him. The Son in this case
receives nothing but a Roll of Parchment, with a Seal tied to it from his
Father; but yet by virtue of this Parchment he is entitled to his Estate,
performing the Conditions of his Will, and to all the Benefits and Advantages
of it: And in that Deed he truly and effectually received the very House and
Lands that were thereby conveyed to him. Our Savior Christ in like manner,
being now about to leave the World, gives this Holy Sacrament, as his final
Bequest to us; in it he conveys to us a right to his Body and Blood, and to all
the Spiritual Blessings and Graces that proceed from them. So that as often as
we receive this Holy Eucharist, as we ought to do, we receive indeed nothing
but a little Bread and Wine into our Hands; but by the Blessing and Promise of
Christ, we by that Bread and Wine, as really and truly become Partakers of
Christ's Body and Blood, as the Son by the Will of his Father was made
Inheritor of his Estate: Nor is it any more necessary for this, that Christ's
Body should come down from Heaven, or the outward Elements which we receive, be
substantially turned into it, than it is necessary in that other case, that the
very Houses and Lands should be given into the Hands of the Son to make a real
delivery or conveyance of them; or the Will of the Father be truly and properly
changed into the very Nature and Substance of them.

PART II.
CHAPTER III. Of the Adoration of the Host, as prescribed and practiced in the
Church of Rome.
WE are now arrived at the last Part of this Discourse; in which I must thus
far change the Method I pursued in the Other Subject, as to consider, First,
What the Doctrine of the Church of England as to this Point is; and what our
Adversaries Exceptions against it are. Secondly, What is the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome; and whether what this Author has said in favor of it, may be
sufficient to warrant their Practice as to this Matter.


For the former of these, The Doctrine of the Church of England, we shall need
go no farther than the Rubric we have beforementioned; wherein it is expressly
declared, with reference to this Holy Sacrament, Rubr. at the end of the
Communion.
That no Adoration is intended, or ought to be done, either to the Sacramental
Bread and Wine there bodily received, or to any Corporal Presence of Christ's
Body and Blood: For that the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their
very Natural Substances, and therefore may not be adored, (for that were
Idolatry to be abhorred of all Faithful Christians) and the natural Body and
Blood of our Savior Christ, are in Heaven and not here; it being against the
truth of Christ's natural Body, to be at One time in more places than One.

This then being sufficiently cleared, let us see what this Author has to
observe against it.

1. He supposes that we will grant, Treatise 1. Chapter 4.. 39. p. 27.
that if there were a Corporal Presence of Christ's Natural Body in this Holy
Sacrament, then Kneeling and Adoration would be here also due upon such an
Account. He means, that were Christ himself here in his Body actually present,
He ought to be adored; and this he need not doubt of our readiness to grant.

2. Tho the Corporeal Presence of Christ's Body, Ib.. xl.
i.e. of its being there ad modum Corporis, or clothed with the ordinary
Properties of a Body, be denied; as it is, not only by the English Divines, but
by the Lutheran and Roman: Yet let there be any other manner of Presence (known
from Divine Revelation) of the very same Body and Blood; and this as Real and
Essential, as if Corporeal; and then I do not see but that Adoration will be no
less due to it thus, than so, Present.

Now to this I shall at present only say, That the Supposition being absurd,
does not admit of a rational Consideration. Those who deny a bodily Presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist, and ask whether Adoration may not be paid to
his Body, which is confessed not to be bodily present there, supposing it to be
there some other way; ought to have no other satisfaction than this, that they
suppose an Impossibility, a thing which cannot be; and therefore concerning
which no reasonable Answer can be given. Some I know have been more free, and
allowing for the unreasonableness of the Supposal, have resolved contrary to
our Author: But I think it very needless to dispute of the Affections of a
Chimera; and wrangle about Notions that have neither Use nor Existence.

3. Treatise 1. p. 28.. xli.
He observes, lastly, That the Church of England has believed and affirmed
such a Presence ( he means of Christ's Body in the Eucharist) to which they
thought Adoration due. I presume it was then in the Times of Popery; for since
the Reformation, I have shown before, that she has always held the contrary.
But our Author will prove it, and that since the Reformation; Ibid.
For, he says, he has in his time met with no less than five of our Writers,
and those of no mean Account neither, that have been of this Opinion. This
indeed is a very notable way of proving the Doctrine of our Church: But what
now if I should bring him fifteen Others that have denied it; then I hope the
Doctrine of the Church of England may be as fair for the contrary. But we will
examine his Evidence.

First; Treatise 1.. xlii. p. 28.
Bishop Andrews, he says, declares, that tho we adore not the Sacrament, yet we
adore Christ in and with the Sacrament, besides and without the Sacrament: and
assures the World, that K. James looked upon Christ to be truly present, and
truly to be adored in it. How this Bishop thought Christ truly present in the
Sacrament we have seen before; and may from thence easily conclude how he
supposed he might be adored there: viz. As in all other Holy Offices, in which
we confess Him by his Divine Power to be present with us, but especially in
this Sacred Mystery. And thus we all adore him, both in and with, and without
the Sacrament; we confess him to be truly present, and therefore truly to be
adored by us. But now for Christ's Natural Body, (of which, and not of Christ
himself, our Dispute is) if that be any otherwise truly present than as we
before showed, let it be remembered, that according to this Bishop, it must not
be his Glorified Body, See above.
his Body as it now is; but his Body Crucified, his Body as offered for us, and
in the State of his Death; so He expressly affirms; and this I believe our
Author himself will confess in his sense to be impossible.

His next Witness is Bishop Tailor: We worship, Treatise 1.. xliii. p. 28.
He means, says this Author, the Body, or the Flesh of Christ [in the
Eucharist]. But is he sure the Bishop meant so? If he be, I am sure the Bishop
thought we all of us committed Idolatry in so doing. For being consulted, as we
have seen above, whether without all danger of Idolatry we may not render
Divine Worship to our Blessed Savior as present in the Blessed Sacrament or
Host, See Polemical Discourses 5. Letter, at the end, p.
according to his Humane Nature in that Host? He expressly declares, We may not
render Divine Worship to Him as present in the Blessed Sacrament, according to
his Humane Nature, without danger of Idolatry, because he is not there
according to his Humane Nature; and therefore you give Divine Worship to a Non
Ens, which must needs be Idotry. And indeed this our Author knew very well was
his Opinion, who himself in his next Treatise, cites the xiiith Section of his
Real Presence, Treatise 2. p.9.. vi. n. 2.
which was written on purpose to prove the unlawfulness of worshipping Christ's
Body in this Sacrament. But dissimulation of other Men's Opinions in matter of
Religion, is perhaps as lawful on some Occasions, as if it were their own: And
why may not an Author prevaricate the Doctrine of his Adversary in defense of
the Catholic Faith, since I have read of a The Story was published in the
Memoirs of Monsieur D'eageant, printed with permission at Grenoble, 1668. page
246 I will set it down in his own words. Il'y avoit deja quelque tems que
D'eageant avoit gagne l'un des Ministres de la Province de Languedoc, qui etoit
des plus employez aux Affairs and menees de ceux de la R. P. R. and en
l'Estime particuliere de Monsieur de Lesdiguiers. Il avoit meme secrettement
moyenne sa Conversion; and obtenu un Bref de Rome, portant qu' en core qu' il
eut ete receu au giron de l'Eglise, il luy etoit permis de continuer son
Ministere durant 3 Ans, pourveu qu'en ses preches il ne dit rien de contraire a
la creance de la vraye Eglise, and qu' il ne celebrat ponit la cene. Le Bref
fut obtenu, afinque le Ministre put estre continue dans les Emplois qu'il
avoit, and decouvrir les menees qui se faisoient dans le Royaume.
Protestant Minister, who in the Troubles of France being brought over to the
King's Interest, was secretly reconciled to the Church of Rome, and permitted
so far to dissemble his own Opinion, as not only to continue in the outward
profession of the Protestant Religion, but even to exercise the Functions of
his Ministry as before; and that by the express leave of his Holiness, for
three whole Years, the better to carry on the Catholic Cause in betraying the
Secrets, and managing the Debates of his Brethren.

As for Bishop Forbes, and the Archbishop of Spalatto, it is not to be wondered
if Men that had entertained the Design of reconciling all Parties, were forced
to strain sometimes a little farther than was fit for the doing of it. And for
Mr. Thorndyke, we have seen that his Notion of the Real Presence was
particular, and widely different both from theirs and ours; and therefore that
we are not to answer for the Consequences of it. But however, to quit these
just Exceptions against them: Will he himself allow every thing to be the
Doctrine or not of the Church of Rome, which I shall bring him three of their
Authors to affirm or deny? If he will, then Transubstantiation is not their
Doctrine, for I have already quoted above twice three of their most Learned Men
against it. To adore an Unconsecrated Host by mistake, is Idolatry; for so S.
Thomas, Paludanus, Catharine, and others, assure us: To worship the Host,
supposing their Doctrine of Transubstantiation false, a worser Idolatry than
any Heathens were ever guilty of; so several of their Writers confess. But now
if our Author will not allow this to be good arguing against them, with what
reason does he go about to urge it against us?

Secondly; We must in the next place consider what the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome as to this Point is; and whether what this Author has advanced in
favor of it, may be sufficient to warrant their practice of this Adoration.
For the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, I find it thus clearly set down by the
Council of Trent: Council. Trid. Sess. xiii. cap. 5. p. 57. Nullus itaque
dubitandi locus relinquitur, quin omnes Christi fideles pro more in Catholica
Ecclefia semper recepto Latriae cultum, qui Vero deo Debetur, huic Sanctissimo
Sacramento in veneratione exhibeant. Neque enim ideo minus est Adorandum quod
fuerit a Christo D. ut sumatur institutum: Nam illum eundem Deum praesentem IN
EO adess^ Credimus, quem Pater aternus introducens in Orbem Terrarum, dicit; Et
adorent eum omnes Angeli D^i. Hebr. I.
There can be no doubt, but that all the Faithful of Christ, after the manner
that has ever been received in the Catholic Church, ought to give that Supreme
Worship which is due to the true God, to his Holy Sacrament. For it is
nevertheless to be adored, because it was instituted by our Lord Christ that it
might be received; Forasmuch as we believe the same God to be present in it, of
whom the Eternal Father when he brought him into the World, said, And let all
the Angels of God worship him. That therefore, according to this Council is to
be worshipped, which Christ instituted to be received; and in which they
believe Christ to be present: But it is no other than the Holy Sacrament, as
these Trent-Fathers here expressly and properly style it; which we all confess
Christ instituted to be received, and in which they suppose Christ to be
present: And therefore it is the Sacrament which is to be adored. Card.
Pallavicino Istoria del Concilio di Trento: part seconda, l. 12. c. 7. page
298. Ora e notissimo, che, accioche un Tutto s'adori con adorazione di Latria,
basta che una part di quel rutto meriti questo culto. -- Come dunque non
douremo parimente adorare questo Sacramento, il quale e un Tutto che contiene
come part principale il Corpo di Christo.
Which reasoning I find Card. Pallavicini thus improving in his History of this
Council: It is well known, says he, that to make a Whole Adorable with the
Supreme Adoration, it is sufficient that One part of that Whole merits such a
Worship. This he illustrates in the Example of Christ's Humanity; and thence
concludes, How then ought we not in like manner to adore this Sacrament which
is a Whole, that contains as its principal part the Body of Christ?

It is therefore, as I conceive, the undoubted Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, for the Reason here given, is to be
adored, with that Supreme Adoration that is due to the true God.

Now to warrant their Practice in this Matter, our Author thus proceeds in
proof of it:

I. He premises some Propositions, which he calls, Answer to his second
Discourse.
Protestant Concessions. II. Some others, which he styles, Catholic
Assertions. And then, III. Goes on to show what warrant they have for that
Belief on which this Adoration is founded.
I shall distinctly follow him in every one of these.

In his first Part, which he calls, I. Part, Protestant Concessions.
Protestant Concessions, I will go on with him thus far:

1st.. I. page 1.
That Supreme and Divine Adoration is due to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

2dly, Ibid.. II.
That wherever the Body of our Lord now is, there must also his whole Person
be.

And therefore, 3dly, Ibid.. III.
That wherever Christ's Body is truly and really present, there his Divine
Person is supremely adorable.

But now for his next Assertion;. V. n. 1. p. 2.
That it is affirmed by many Protestants, especially those of the Church of
England, that this Body and Blood of our Lord is really present, not only in
Virtue, but in Substance in the Encharist. See Treatise 1. p. 5.. 7.
If he means, as in his former Treatise he explained himself, that the very
natural Body of Christ, that Body that was born of the Virgin, and crucified on
the Cross, and is now in Heaven, is also as to its Substance truly and really
present on Earth in the Holy Eucharist, or to the worthy Receiver: I have in
the foregoing Chapter fully shown this new Fancy to be neither the Doctrine of
the Church of England, nor the Opinion of those very Writers whom he produces
for proof of it. And as to the Disc. 2. p. 8.. vi. n. 1.
adoration of it upon any such account, I have just now declared his Mistake of
them in that Point too. And I shall not follow our Author's ill Example in
repeating it all over again.

For his. vii. p. 10.
fifth Remark, That the Lutherans affirm that Christ's Body and Blood are
present, not only to the worthy Communicants, but to the Consecrated Symbols,
and whilst so present, which is during the Action of the Lord's Supper ( i. e.
says he, as I conceive them from the Consecration, till the end of the
Communion) are to be Adored. I answer; First, As to the former part, it is
confessed that the Lutherans do indeed suppose Christ to be present, not only
to the worthy Communicants, but also to the Consecrated Symbols. But now,
secondly, for the other part, that during the Action of the Lord's Supper, He
is to be Adored there; this is not so certain. For, 1. I do not find any thing
established amongst them as to this matter, neither in the Confession of
Auxpourg, nor in any other public Acts of their Church. 2. I find several of
their Divines utterly denying, that Christ's Body is to be Adored in the Holy
Sacrament; and our See below, Disc. 2. p. 16.
Author himself confesses it. Tho now, 3. Conrad. Schlusselburgius, Catal.
Haeret. l. 3. arg. 45. p. 205. Item Arg. 103. p. 280. It. arg. 174. p. 327.
Francof. 1605. And Hospinian quotes it of Luther himself, that it was his
Opinion, Concord. discor. p. 358. n. 16. Genev. 1678.
I will not deny but that some others of them do allow, if not that Christ's
Body, yet that Christ himself is to be Adored after a peculiar manner in the
Action of the Lord's Supper; and as far as I conceive, do by the Action mean,
as our Author here represents it, from the Consecration to the end of the
Communion. So that then, with this Limitation, his Proposition I presume may be
admitted; That the Lutherans do acknowledge, that Christ is present during the
Action of the Lord's Supper; and therefore it is by several of them supposed,
that he ought to be adored in it.

As to the sixth and last Concession,. vi. p. 10, 11.
which he draws from Monsieur Daille's Apologi^^. That tho we do not our selves
belive the Real Presence of Christ' s Body in the Signs, yet neither do we
esteem the belief of it so criminal, as to oblige us to break off Communion
with all those that hold it; and therefore, that had the Roman Church no other
Error but this, that it would not have given us any sufficient cause of
separation from it; we are ready to admit it; always supposing that the belief
of it had not been pressed upon us neither, as a necessary Article of
Communion; nor any Anathema pronounced against us for not receiving it. And for
the other part of it which he subjoyns, Ibid. page 11.
That a Disciple giving Divine Honor, upon mistake, to another Person, much
resembling our Savior Christ, would have been no Idolater; from whence he
would infer, That therefore allowing a Consecrated Host to be truly Adorable, a
Person that should by mistake adore an unconsecrated One, would not be guilty
of Idolatry. We are content to allow it; tho what use he can make of it in this
Controversy, unless against his own Brethren, S. Thomas, Paludanus, and others,
I do not understand; since he knows we utterly deny any Host, consecrated or
not, to be fit to be worshipped. And this may serve for his first Foundation of
Protestant Concessions,; which were they every one as certain as his first is,
that Christ is to be adored, I cannot see what his Cause would gain by it; and
he has not by any Application of them in this Treatise, given us the least
reason to think that they are of any moment in it. But some Men have a peculiar
faculty of amusing the World with nothing: and I remember, I once heard a
judicious and modest Man give this Character of an Author much resembling ours,
with reference to his Guide in Controversy, that for a Book which carried a
great appearance of Reasoning, it had the least in it of any he ever met with.
But I go on,

II. 2. Part. Catholic Assertions.
To his Catholic Assertions.

And first: Catholics (as he calls them) affirm in the Eucharist after the
Consecration, Page 13.. ix.
a Sign, or Symbol to remain still distinct, and having a diverse Existence from
that of the thing signified, or from Christ's Body contained in or under it.
This it is true the Papists, or if you please, the Catholics do affirm; because
that otherwise they could not call it a Sacrament. But now, if we enquire what
that which they call a Sign, or a Symbol in this Holy Sacrament is, we shall
find it to be neither such as our Blessed Savior established, nor indeed any
thing that can in propriety of Speech be so termed.

For our Savior Christ, it is evident that the Symbols instituted by him, were
Bread and Wine: They were these that he took and blessed, and gave to his
Disciples; and commanded them also in like manner to take, and bless, and give
to others in remembrance of him; and as the Symbols of his Body and Blood in
this Holy Eucharist. But now for the Papists; they destroy the Bread and the
Wine; they leave only a few aerie, empty Species, that is, appearances of
something, but which are really nothing, have no substance to support them.

The Symbols established by Christ were Festival Symbols, a matter apt for our
Corporal Nourishment; so signify to us, that as by them, viz. by Bread and
Wine, our Bodies are nourished to a Corporal Life; so by the Body and Blood of
Christ, which they both represent and communicate to us, our Souls are fed to
Life Everlasting. But for that which has no Substance, i. e. nothing which can
be converted into our Bodily Nourishment; how that can be a Symbol of this
Spiritual Food, I do not very well understand. Indeed our Author tells us, Page
14.. x.
That tho after Consecration, the Substance of the Bread and Wine is denied to
remain, yet is Substance here taken in such a sense, as that neither the
hardness, nor the softness, nor the frangibility, nor the savor, nor the
odor, nor the nutritive virtue of the Bread, nor nothing visible or tangible,
or otherwise perceptible by any Sense, is involved in it: That is to say, that
the Symbol or external Sign then in this Eucharist, is according to them, a
hard, soft, frangible, gustible, odoriferous, nutritive, visible, tangible,
perceptible nothing. Verily a fit external Species indeed to contain, a one,
manifold; visible, invisible; extended, unextended; local, illocal; absent,
present; natural, supernatural; corporal, spiritual Body.

Secondly; Concerning the Adoration of the Sacrament, he tells us, That this
word Sacrament, Page 14.. xi.
is not to be taken always in the same sense; but sometimes to be used to
signify only the external Sign, or Symbols; sometimes only the Res Sacramenti,
or the thing contained under them, which is the more principal part thereof.
This indeed is a sort of new Divinity. I always thought hitherto, that when we
talked of a Sacrament, properly so called, we had meant an outward and visible
Sign of an inward and spiritual Grace: and that this particular Sacrament had
been a whole composed of the External Species, (whatever they are) as the Sign;
and the Body and Blood of Christ as the inward part, or thing signified. Thus I
am sure the Catechism of the Council of Trent instructs us. First, for the
name; it tells us, Catech. ad Parach. part 2. de Sacram. n. iii. and v. p. 92.
that The Latin Doctors have thought that certain Signs, subjected to the
Senses, which declare, and as it were set before the Eyes, the Grace which they
effect, may fitly be called Sacraments. And for the nature of them, thus it
defines a Sacrament from S. Austin, It is the sign of a holy thing; or more
fully, as I before said; a visible sign of an invisible Grace, instituted for
our Justification. So that neither then Symbols alone, nor the invisible part,
or Grace alone, can with any manner of propriety be called a Sacrament; but the
Sign referred to the Grace; and as it is the Symbol instituted by Christ for
the conferring of it.

This therefore can with no good reason be called a Catholic Assertion; being
neither general nor true: But however, since he seems content to allow it to be
an impropriety of Speech, and that, I confess, the Catec. Conc. Trid. part 2.
de Euch.. viii. nota p. 144.
Catechism of the Council of Trent does lead him into it; let us see what use
he can make of it. Page 15.. xi.
And as Protestants much press, so Catholics (Roman Catholics) willingly
acknowledge a great difference between these two, The worshipping of the
Sacrament, as this word is taken for the Symbols; and the worshipping of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament. There is, no doubt, a great difference between
these two: but then they who tell us, the Sacrament is to be Adored, if they
will speak rationally, must mean neither the one nor other of these, but the
Host; that is, as Card. Pallavicini expounds it, The whole, of which Christ's
Body is a part; in the language of the Council of Trent; the Sacrament IN WHICH
they believe Christ to be present, and for that Cause adore it; as the Cardinal
again argues; See above, page 91, 92.
that, To make a Whole Adorable, it is sufficient that one part be so; and
therefore since the Body of Christ is adorable, the Sacrament for its sake is
to be worshipped. It is therefore a mere shift to tell us that the Sacrament is
to be adored; i. e. Christ's Body in the Sacrament. Nor will the remark of our
Author help us out, that tho the Chapter indeed calls it the Sacrament IN WHICH
is Christ's Body, Page 16. xiii.
yet the Canon speaks more precisely, and calls it Christ in the Sacrament;
unless he supposes the Council to have been infallible in the Canons only, and
not in the Chapters; as some have thought, that they may be out in their
Proofs, but cannot be in their Conclusions. But however, since he so much
desires it, for my part I shall be content to allow them this too; for I should
be glad by any means to see them sensible of their Errors. But yet so as that
it be esteemed only a private Opinion this, not a Catholic Assertion.

Thirdly; Catholics, he means the Papists still, P. 21.. xvii.
ground their Adoration, not upon Transubstantiation; as if Transubstantiation
defeated, Adoration is so too; but on a Real Presence with the Symbols, which
in general is agreed on by the Lutherans together with them. By which
Assertion, if he means only to make this Discovery, That Christ's Real
Presence, together with the Substance of the Bread and Wine, is in his Opinion
as good a ground for Adoration, as if he were there only with the Species of
the Bread, the Substance being changed into his Body; I have no more to say to
it. But if he would hereby make us believe, that it is all one whether Christ be
adored, as supposed here by the Lutherans in this Holy Eucharist, and as
imagined there by the Papists; I must then deny his Assertion; and desire him
to keep home to his own manner of Real Presence, and which I shall presently
convince him, will leave them in a much worse condition than their Neighbors,
whom he would draw into the same Snare with them. And therefore, whereas he
concludes,

Fourthly; P. 22.. xviii.
That supposing Transubstantiation to be an Error, yet if the Tenent of
Corporal or Real Presence (as held by the Lutherans, or others) be true;
Catholics (he would say Papists) plead their Adoration, is no way frustrated,
but still warrantable: I must tell him, that the Adoration of those among the
Lutherans, who worship Christ in this Sacrament upon the account of his Real
Presence in, or with the Bread, tho it be an Error, yet is infinitely more
excusable than theirs, who suppose the Bread to be turned into Christ's Body;
and because it may not be thought that I speak this out of any prejudice
against them, I will here offer my Reasons for it.

1st, They that adore Christ as really present, together with the Bread, do no
violence to their Senses: They confess, that what they see, and taste, and
feel, and smell, is really Bread and Wine. Whilst the Papist in denying the
Bread and Wine to remain; or that what he sees, and feels, and smells, and
tastes, is what all the World perceives and knows it is, contradicts his
Senses, and in them the Law of Nature, that Means which God has given us to
direct and lead us into the search of Truth; and by Consequence errs against
infinitely greater Means of Conviction, and so is more inexcusable than the
Other.

2dly; They who worship Christ, as supposing Him to be together with the Bread
in this Holy Eucharist, are erroneous indeed in this, that they take Christ's
Body to be where really it is not; but yet their Object is undoubtedly right,
and in that they are not mistaken. But now for the Papist; he adores, it is
confessed, what he thinks to be Christ's Body; and would not otherwise adore
it: But yet still it is the Host that he adores, the Substance that is under
those Species which he sees; and which if it be not Christ, but mere Substance
of Bread, the Case is vastly altered between the Lutheran and Him. The former
adores Christ, only as in a place where he is not; the latter not only does
this, but moreover adores a Substance for Christ which is not his Body and
Blood, but a mere Creature of Bread and Wine.

Monsieur Daille therefore might rightly enough say of a Lutheran, that his
Adoration is mistaken, P. 23.. xix.
not in this -- that it addresseth it self to an Object not adorable, but only
that by Error it seeks and thinks to enjoy it in a place where it is not; and
so becomes only vain and unprofitable: And yet our Author has no manner of
Reason from thence to pretend, that a Papist who terminates his Adoration upon
a Substance which really is not Christ's Body, but only mistaken by him to be
so, shall be in the same Condition: there being an apparently vast difference
between worshipping Christ in a place where he is not, and worshipping that for
Christ which really is not Christ, but only a created Substance.

And this in truth our Author seems to have been sensible of, and therefore
thinks to evade it, by saying, That they do not worship the Substance that is
in that place, Ibid p. 23.
under such Accidents whatever it be, (which if Bread should happen to be
there, he confesses would make them Bread-worshippers) but they worship it only
upon supposition that it is Christ's Body, and not Bread.

Well, be this so: But what now if they are mistaken in their Supposition: They
worship, he confesses, the Substance that is under those Accidents, supposing
it to be Christ's Body; but still, mistaken or not, that Substance which is
under those Species, whatever it be, they do worship: And if they have, as he
thinks, a rational ground for this Supposition, which we shall see by and by,
yet this will only excuse them from being formal Idolaters; but will not hinder
but that their Worship is still directed to an undue Object, if that which is
under the Species be indeed but Bread, and not Christ's Body as they imagine.
And this then may serve to argue the falseness of what he lays down as his

Fifth, P. 22.. xix.
Catholic Assertion: That supposing both the Lutherans and Papists mistaken in
their Opinion, yet there can be no pretense why the One should not be as
excusable as the others. Since as I have said; 1st, They err more grossly in
abandoning the conviction of their Senses, which the Lutherans do not; 2dly,
They worship a Substance for Christ, which really is not: To which if this be
not enough, I will add yet two other Reasons: 3dly, That they make the
Consecration, without which Christ is not present upon their own Principles, to
depend on such uncertainties (as I shall more fully show anon) that they can
never be sure that Christ is there, which the Lutherans are free from: And
lastly; They Anathematize those who dissent from them as to this Point, and so
make a Schism in dividing the Unity of the Church, which the Lutherans are so
far from doing, that they neither establish any Doctrine of Adoration at all,
nay many of them do not believe it; and upon occasion, freely communicate with
those who dissent from them in their belief, both of their way of the Real
Presence, and of the Adoration. And for the same reason I cannot totally assent
to his

Sixth Assertion: P. 25.. xxi.
That supposing there be no such Real Presence as either of them believes, yet
that their adoration of Christ, who is a true Object of Supreme Adoration, and
only by them mistaken to be in some place where He is not, cannot be termed any
such Idolatry, as is the worshipping of an Object not at all adorable.

This as to what concerns those of the Lutherans who adore Christ in the
Sacrament, is true: But for the Papist it is not. He intends, I allow it, to
worship Christ, but he mistakes an Object for Christ, which is only a piece of
Bread. He worships his Host, supposing it to be our Savior's Body, but his
Error is gross, and he not only mistakes Christ to be in a place where he is
not, but he mistakes that to be Christ which indeed is not, but only a simple
Wafer. His Worship therefore is not like the Manichees worshipping of Christ in
the Sun; but rather as if the Manichee should, from some mistaken grounds, have
fancied the Sun it self to be turned into Christ's Body; and then in defiance
of all Scripture, Sense, and Reason, should have fallen down before it; but
with a good Intention not to adore the Sun, but the Body of our Blessed Lord
under the Species or Accidents of the Sun. This is the true Parallel; only that
herein still the Manichee would have been the more excusable of the two, by how
much the Sun is a more likely Object to be mistaken for Christ's glorified Body
than a Morsel of Bread; and less capable of being discovered by our Senses and
Examination not to be so.

It remains then, that these Lutherans only adore Christ where he is not; the
Papists not only do this, but more-over they adore that for Christ which really
is not, but a mere created Substance. Both the One and the Other are Erroneous;
but the Papist's Mistake, renders him at the least guilty of material Idolatry,
whereas the Lutherans is only an undue Application of his Worship as to the
Place, but right as to the Person. Let us see,

Seventhly; How far their Mistake will excuse them, P. 26.. xxii.
in answer to his seventh Assertion: That however a Manichaean may be guilty of
Idolatry for worshipping Christ in the Sun; and an Israelite for worshipping
God as specially resident in the Calves of Dan and Bethel, because it is
adoring a Fancy of their own, without any rational Ground or Pretense thereof;
and however merely a good Intention, grounded upon a culpable Ignorance, can
excuse none from Idolatry, or any other Fault; yet if Catholics, ( i.e. the
pretended Roman Catholics) can produce a rational Ground of their apprehending
Christ present in the Eucharist, tho possibly mistaken in it, they are to be
excused from Idolatry. Which Proposal is so just, that I am very willing to
allow it; and shall be heartily glad that the Grounds of their Mistake may in
the End prove to have been so reasonable as to excuse them. But then it must be
remembered too, that he confesses if these Grounds be not reasonable, but as he
says of the Manichees, their adoring of the Host be indeed an adoring a Fancy
of their own without any rational Ground; So that their ignorance in this
Matter is culpable, then by their own allowance they are Idolaters.

This therefore brings me to the last Thing to be enquired into.

III. What Grounds they have for this Adoration? and whether they be such as,
should they be mistaken in it, will be sufficient to excuse them?

And thus after a great deal of Preamble, but very little to the purpose, we
are at last come to the main Question. I have already so largely shown our
Reasons against Transubstantiation, or that Real Presence on which this
Adoration is built, that I shall not need to insist here. Yet because the
stress of this Controversy depends principally on this last Part, I will, 1st,
Examine the strength of those Grounds which this Author has offered, to warrant
their Adoration. 2dly, I will propose an Argument or two upon their own allowed
Principles against it.


But before we proceed to these Points, we must yet have one touch more upon
the old String: Page 26.. xxiii.
For the Lutherans, he says, being allowed to have such a plausible Ground or
Motive for their Adoration, whereby they become Absolved by other Protestants
from Idolatry, in adoring our Lord as present there, I see not why the Grounds
of Roman Catholics should be any whit less valued than theirs.

In Answer to which, the Reader may please to remember, that I have before
said, that we do not excuse those Lutherans who do this so much upon this
Principle, that they have a more plausible Ground or Motive for their
Adoration; but for this rather, that confessing the Substance of the Bread to
remain, they do not mistake their Object, but pay their Adoration indeed to
Christ, only supposing him to be there where in Truth he is not. But, 2dly,
this Author is very much mistaken if he thinks the Lutherans have no better a
Foundation for their Real Presence than the Papists. See Ibid.
Indeed, were the difference no greater than between a Con and a Trans, it
would, I confess, be hardly worth the while to contend about it. But when we
come to the Point it self, we may observe these four Advantages, among many
others of the Lutherans side. 1. They confess for the outward Elements, that
they are really what they appear to be, Bread and Wine; and so they do no
Violence to their Senses; which, as I have said, is a great aggravation against
the Papists. 2. By this means they are at no defiance with all those Texts of
Scripture where they are so often called Bread and Wine after Consecration: All
which the Papist contradicts, but the Lutheran does not. 3. From the words of
Christ, This is my Body; we all of us confess may be inferred, that Christ's
Body is in this Holy Sacrament: But whence does the Papist infer the
destruction of the Substance of the Bread; so that what is taken, and blessed,
and given, is not Bread, but Christ's Body under the appearance of Bread? This
is an Error which I am sure the Text gives no manner of color to; and
therefore our Author cannot with any reason pretend, as he does, whether we
consult the Text of Holy Scripture, or our own Senses, that they have as good
grounds for their Real Presence, as the Lutherans have for theirs. To all which
let me add, 4thly, that by Transubstantiation they destroy the very Nature of a
Sacrament, by leaving no true external Sign or Symbol, and which is another
unanswerable Argument against them, whilst the Lutherans acknowledging the
Substance of the Bread to remain, do not destroy at all the Nature of this
Sacrament, but retain the same Sign which our Blessed Lord established, and so
have no Objection on this side neither to convict them.

But yet notwithstanding all this, Page 26, 27.
Do not some of our Writers confess, that the Papists Interpretation is more
rational than the Lutherans? I Answer; What certain Protestants may have said
in Zeal for their own Opinions, and in particular Hospinian upon the account of
his Master Zuinglius, I cannot tell: But sure I am, we are not bound to answer
for all that any Protestant Author has said. And if these Reasons I have here
given for the contrary are valid, they ought to be more regarded, than the
ungrounded Assertions of a Sacramentary Historian.

Well, Page 27.
but still the Papist does not ground his Adoration upon Transubstantiation,
but on Corporal Presence; and so they must both be excused, or neither.

This is a fetch to very little purpose: For let me ask this Author; He
confesses he founds his Adoration upon the Corporal Presence: Does he believe
the Corporal Presence in the way of Transubstantiation exclusive to all others,
or no? If he does, then it is evident that the Corporal Presence and
Transubstantiation, must with him stand or fall together; and so if he adores
on the account of the Corporal Presence, he does it upon the account of
Transubstantiation. If he does not believe this, it is plain he is no Papist,
nor submits to the Authority of the Church of Rome, which has defined the
Corporal Presence to be after this particular manner, exclusive to all Others,
and Anathematized all that dare to deny it.

Laying aside therefore this Comparison, and which in truth will do them but
very little kindness: Page 27.. xxiv.
Let us view more particularly what rational Grounds they have to exhibit for
this their belief of their Corporal Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, and of
the Adoration of him upon that account.

I. Ibid.
Ground: And the first is Divine Revelation: For which our Author offers the
two usual Instances, of the words of Institution, and the 6th Chapter of S.
John; both which therefore I have at large discoursed on above, and I believe
sufficiently shown how false a Foundation these are of this belief.

But yet since our Author reminds us; Page 27, 28.
That against these no Argument taken from our Senses or Reason is valid: I
will beg leave to remind him of his own Assertion too, See Treatise 1. p. 14.
That none can believe a thing true upon what Motive soever, that he knows
certainly to be false, or which is all one, certainly to contradict -- So that
if our Reason then makes us certain of such a contradiction, P. 21. Treat. 1.
we may be certain that there neither is nor can be a contrary Revelation; and
when any Revelation, tho NEVER SO PLAIN, is brought, we are bound to interpret
it so, as not to affirm a certainly known impossibility.

From which Principle it seems to me to follow, that were Hoc est Corpus meum,
as evident a proof of Transubstantiation, as their own Authors confess it is
not; yet if our Sense and Reason tell us that there are certain Contradictions
against the common Principles of Nature, and the universal Sentiments of all
Mankind, no otherwise to be avoided but by taking those words in the sense in
which we do; we are then BOUND to interpret them so, as to avoid these
Impossibilities. And this I am confident I have at large shown above to be the
Case, and thither I refer the Reader.

II. Ground. P. 28.. xxv.
Their second Ground is founded upon the Authority of those Councils that have
determined this Matter; The Declaration, as he calls it, of the most Supreme
and Universal Church Authority that has been assembled in former Times for the
decision of this Controversy, long before the birth of Protestantism.

These are great Words indeed; but I wonder who ever heard before that a few
miserable These are his Synods; at Rome, Vercelles, Tours; Rome again, An.
1059. and again, An. 1078.
Synods of particular Prelates, such as are all those to which he refers us,
assembled against Berengarius, were the most supreme and universal
Church Authority. For his little Reflection, that they were assembled long
before the birth of Protestantism, I must tell him, I doubt he is mistaken. The
Religion of Protestants, like that of Papists, is composs'd of two great parts;
Catholic Christianity, common in some measure to us all; and Protestations
against Popery. Now it is true, for what concerns the latter of these, we allow
Popery to have the advantage of us, as to the Point of Antiquity, nor are we
ashamed to own it: It being necessary that they should have fallen into Errors,
before we could protest against them; but as to the present matter, our Author
in his Disc. 1. p. 55.. lvii.
Guide, to which he refers us, confesses that Berengarius, against whom these
little Synods were called, proceeded upon Protestant Grounds, i. e. in effect
was a Protestant as to this Point: And therefore it is false in him now to say,
that these Councils were assembled long before the birth of Protestantism.

But I return to his Church Authority; and answer; 1. If this Doctrine be
certainly contrary to Sense and Reason, as was before said, then he has told us
before, that no Motive whatever, no Revelation, tho never so plain, can be
sufficient to engage us to believe it. 2. For his Councils, the eldest of them
was above a thousand Years after Christ, when by our own Confession, the Error,
tho not of Transubstantiation, yet of the Corporal Presence, was creeping into
the Church. 3. These Councils were themselves a Party against Berengarius, and
therefore no wonder if they condemned him. 4. They were neither universal of
the whole Church, or even of the Western Patriachate in which they assembled;
and therefore we can have no security that they did not err, tho we should
grant this Privilege to a truly General Council that it could not. 5. It Is
evident that some of them did err; forasmuch as the very In the first Formulary
prescribed him by P. Nicholas 2. in the Siynod of Rome, 1059. He thus declares,
Panem and Vinum quae in altari ponuntur post consecrationem non solum
Sacramentum sed etiam verum Corpus and Sanguinem, D. N. J. Christi esse; and
sensualiter non solum SACRAMENTO, sed in Veritate manibus Sacerdotum, tractari,
frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri. The former Part of which Confession is
Lutheran; the latter utterly denied by the C. of R. at this day. In the second
Formulary prescribed him by Gregory viith, 1078. Confiteor Panem and Vinum --
converti in veram ac propriam Carnem and Sanguinem J. C. D. N. Et post
consecrationem esse verum Corpus Christi -- non tantum per signum and virtutem
Sacramenti, sed in proprietate naturae, and veritate substantiae. This speaks
of a Conversion, but of what kind it says not; and Lombard and the other
Schoolmen, to the very time of the Council of Lateran, were not agreed about
it: and P. Gregory himself in his MS. Work upon St. Man. knew not what to think
of it.
Formularies of Recantation prescribed to Berengarius, do not agree the one
with the other; and one of them was such, that their own Jo. Semeca ad Can. Ego
Berengar. not. ad Jus Canon. Nisi sane intelligas verba Berengarii in majorem
incides Haeresim quam ipse habuit; and ideo onmia referas ad species ipsas; nam
de Christi Corpore parts non facimus. So Hervaeus in 4. did. qu. 1. art. 1.
says, that to speak the more expressly against the Heretics, be declined a
little too much to the opposite side. So Ricardus de Media Villa in 4. did.
princip. 1. qu. 1. Berengarius suerat infamatus quod non credebat-Corpus
Christi realiter contineri sub pane, ideo ad sui purgationem, per verba
excessiva contrarium Asseruit.
Authors tell us it must be very favorably interpreted, or it will lead us
into a worser Error than that which it condemned. 6. Were they never so
infallible, yet they none of them defined Transubstantiation, but only a
Corporal Presence; and so whatever Authority they have, it is for the
Lutherans, not the Papists. 7. And this their own Writers seem to own;
forasmuch as none of them pretend to any definition of Transubstantiation
before the Council of Lateran; and till which time they freely confess it was
no Article of Faith.

Such is the Church Authority which this Discourser would put upon us. But now
that I have mentioned the Council of Lateran, as I have before observed, Page
28.
that it was the same Council which established this Error, that also gave
power to the Pope to depose Princes, and absolve their Subjects from their
Obedience; so I cannot but remak further in this place, the Zeal of our Author
in the defense of its Authority. It is but a very little while since another of
their Church, Land. 1616. Page 362, etc.
Father Walsh, in his Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln, did not think that the
Mr. Dodwel Consid. of present Concernment,. 31.
Learned Person of our Church, to whom he refers us, had so clearly proved
these Canons to have been the genuine Monsieur du Pin utterly denies these
Canons to have been the Decrees of the Council. Dissert. vii. c. iii.. 4.
Acts either of the Council, or even of the Papist himself, but that a Man
might still have reason to doubt of both: But indeed, tho that Father be of
another mould, yet there are still some in the World, and I believe of this
Author's acquaintance, who like this Council, never the worse for such a
decision; but think the third Canon as necessary to keep Princes in a due
Obedience to the Church, as the first, de Fide Catholia, to help out the
obscurity of the Text in favor of Transubstantiation.

But he goes on; Page 28, 29.. xxv.
and upon these Premises, Ask us, What more reasonable or secure course in
matters of Religion can a private and truly humble Christian take, than where
the sense of a Divine Revelation is disputed, to submit to that Interpretation
thereof, which the Supreamest Authority in the Church, that has heretofore
been convened about such matters has so often, and always in the same manner
decided to him, and so to act according to its Injunction?

Now, not to say any more as to his Expression of the Supremest Church
Authority, which it may be he will interpret not absolutely, but with this
Reserve, that has been convened about such matters; I answer from himself, 1.
It is a more reasonable and secure course to follow that Interpretation which
is agreeable to the common Sense and Reason of Mankind, and against which he
tells us, not only the Authority of a Synod, but even a Divine Revelation is
not sufficient to secure us. 2. These Synods, as I have showed, besides that
they were particular, were moreover Parties in the case. And then, 3. It is
false to say that they always decided the same, or, that that which they
decided is the same which the Church of Rome now holds in this matter. All
which our Particularly Elondel, to whom this Author refers us, Eclairciss. de
l'Euch. c. 20, etc. Albertinus de Euch. lib. 3. p. 947.
Authors have fully proved, and this Discourser therefore ought to have
answered.

III. Ground. But now, he says, P. 29.. xxvi.
if these Councils be declined, as not being so ancient as some may expect; i.
e. not held before some Controversy happened in the Church touching the Point
they decided: They have yet another very rational Ground of their belief, and
that is, the evident Testimony of the more Primitive Times. It would have been
more to the purpose, if he could honestly have said of the most Primitive
Times. But however his Modesty is the greater now, tho his Argument be not so
strong. As to the Point of Antiquity, Treatise of Transubstantiation, by an
Author of the C. of R.
I have already fully discussed it above; and we are but very lately assured by
one of their own Authors, that Antiquity is of our side in this Point. For the
six or seven Fathers he has mentioned, S. Ambrose de Sacramentis. Eusebius.
Emyssen. de Paschate.
some of them are spurious; others have been Cyril Hierosol. in the Relat. of
the Conference at my Lady T. 1676. in the Paper sent my Lady T. p. 50, 51, 52.
And for S. Ambrose de Sacr. allowing the Book, yet see the Explication of what
is there said, given by himself, l. 5. c. 4. See a late Treatise of the Doct.
of the Trinity and Transubst. compared, Part 1. p. 46, 47.
expressly answered by us; and all of them at large by Monsieur Aubertine,
Larrogue, and others. If this does not satisfy him, he may shortly expect a
fuller account in our own Language; Transubstantiation no Doctrine of the
Primitive Fathers. Cyrill 's Authority examined, p. 13, 14. Ambrose's, p. 18,
19. Chrysostom's, p. 40. Greg. Nyssen's, p. 48.
a Specimen of which has already been given to the World in Earnest of what is
suddenly to follow.

IV. Ground. His next Ground is taken from the universal Doctrine and Practice
of the later both Eastern and Western Churches till Luther's Time, and at
present also excepting his Followers. To which I answer; That this Ground is
not certainly true, and if it were, yet certainly it is nothing to the purpose.
1. It is not certainly true: Indeed, that the latter Ages of the Western
Churches before Luther, that is, from the time of the Council of Laterane, did
profess the belief of Transubstantiation is confessed: And that a great part of
the Greek Church at this day does the same, since their new College at Rome,
and their Money and Missionaries sent among them have corrupted their Faith, I
do not deny: But that this was so before Luther is not so certain; and
whosoever shall impartially read over the long debate between the late Monsieur
Claude, and Monsieur Arnaud concerning this matter, will, I believe, confess
that this can be no rational Ground for their belief. Hist Ethiop. l. 3. c. 5.
n. 48.
Ludolphus tells us of the Ethiopian Church, that at this day, it neither
believes Transubstantiation, Ibid.
nor Adores the Host: and Tellezius confesses it, because they consecrate with
these words, " This Bread is my Body: For the De Eccles. Graec. Stat. Hodiern.
D. Smith, p. 116. Land. 1678. Claude Reponse au 2. Traitte; live. 3. c. 8. p.
434, etc. Charenton. 1668. Id. ult. resp. a Quevilly 1670. lib. 5. c. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. Histoire Critique de la creance and des Coutumes, des Nations, du
Levant. -- Voyage du Mont Liban. Hemarques, p. 302, 303, etc. Larrogue Hist. de
l'Eucharistie, live. 2. c. 19. page 781. Edit. Amst. 12o. Albertinus de
Eucharistia, p. 988, 989. fol. Daventriae 1654.
Greeks, the Muscovites, the Armenians, the Nestorians, Maronites, etc. those
who please to interest their Curiosity in a matter of so little moment as to
their Faith, may satisfy themselves in the Authors, to which I refer them. Tho
now, 2. To allow the matter of Fact to be true, I pray, what force is there at
last in this Argument, The Church both Eastern and Western, in these last Ages
have believed Transubstantiation; therefore the Papists have a rational Ground
to believe it. That is to say, you Protestants charge us for believing
Transubstantiation, as Men that act contrary to the design of Christ in this
Holy Eucharist, that have forsaken the Tradition of the Primitive Ages of the
Church; that destroy the nature of this Holy Sacrament, and do violence to the
common Sense and Reason of Mankind: Be it so; yet at least we have this
rational Ground for our belief, tho it should be false, viz. That we did all of
us peaceably and quietly believe it, till you came with your Scripture, and
Antiquity, and Sense, and Reason, to raise Doubts and Difficulties about it;
nay more, we all of us still do believe it, except those that you have
persuaded not to do so.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis Amici? V. Ground. P. 31.. xxviii.
Of no greater strength is his last Ground for their belief, viz, That since
Luther's Time no small number of Protestants, even all the Genuine Sons of the
Church of England, have proceeded thus far, as to confess a Real Presence of
our Lord's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, and Adoration of it, as present
there. For, 1. If we did acknowledge this, yet it seems we are mistaken in it;
and then what grounds can it be for a Papist to believe Transubstantiation,
that we Heretics by a Mistake do not believe it, but only a real spiritual
Presence, and as such are Anathematized by them for our Error? 2. I have before
shown, that were this a rational Ground, yet it fails them too; for neither do
the Genuine Sons of the Church of England, nor any other that I know of, either
believe Christ's natural Body to be substantially present in the Holy
Eucharist, or to be adored there: I am sure if there be any such, they cannot
be the Genuine Sons of the Church of England in this Matter, who believe so
expressly contrary to her formal Declaration, as this Author has himself
observed.

And then for the Lutherans, Ibid. Page 32.
to whom he again returns; it is hard to conceive what rational ground of
Security they can derive from their practice; that because they commit no
Idolatry in worshipping what they know certainly to be Christ, the Papist
commits none for worshipping what he does not know certainly is Christ; in
truth what, if he pleased, he might know certainly is not Christ.

And now after a serious and impartial Consideration of the Grounds produced in
Vindication of this Worship; tho I could have wished I might have found them as
rational as our Author pretends them to be, and shall be glad, as they are,
that they may hereafter prove sufficient to excuse them from the Guilt of
formal Idolatry in this Adoration; yet I must needs say, I do in my Conscience
think it is more an excess of Charity, P. 33.. xxx.
than any necessity of Argument, if our Writers do sometimes, either not at
all, or but faintly, charge them with Idolatry. And the Testimonies he
produces, argue rather the candor of our Affections toward them, even such as
to hope, almost against Hope for their sakes; than give any security to them in
their Errors. And because I would willingly, if possible, convince them of it,
I will very briefly subjoin a Reason or two.

2dly; Why even upon their own Principles I am not satisfied that they have
such a rational Ground for this Adoration, as may be sufficient to excuse them.
For, 1st, It is granted by this Author, P. 26.. xxii.
That a merely good Intention grounded upon a culpable Ignorance, cannot excuse
them from Idolatry. So that if their ignorance then be really culpable, their
good Intention will not be sufficient to excuse them. Now the ignorance upon
which this practice is founded, is their mistaken interpretation of those
words, This is my Body; and whether that be a rational or culpable Mistake, we
shall best be able to judge by two or three Observations.

1. It is confessed by the greatest Men of their Church, that there is no
necessity to interpret those words in that manner that they do; so that had not
the Authority of their Church interposed, they might have been equally verified
in our Interpretation. And this must be allowed, unless we shall say, that all
places of Holy Scripture must be understood in a literal sense, whatever the
Consequence be of so doing.

2. Our Author himself confesses, that if the taking of them in the literal
sense does involve a certain Contradiction, then it cannot be right; but we are
bound to seek out some other Exposition to avoid a certain Contradiction.

3. It is undeniable, that their Interpretation of these words destroys the
certainty of Sense, and in that of the Truth of the Christian Religion, which
was confirmed by Miracles, known only by the evidence of Sense; and by
Consequence of this particular Point, that Transubstantiation is revealed to us
by God, or can be relied upon as coming from him.

Now from these Principles I thus argue: If that sense of these words, This is
my Body, upon which they ground their Adoration, does necessarily imply many
plain and certain Contradictions, then by their own Confession that cannot be
the right sense of them. But that it does so, and that without gross and
culpable Ignorance they cannot doubt of but know it, I thus show. He that
believes these words in the sense of Transubstantiation, must believe the same
natural Body, at the same time, to be in tenthousand several places upon Earth,
and yet still to be but one Body, and that all the while in Heaven: He must
believe that the same natural Body is at the same time extended in all its
Parts, and yet continuing still the same Body without any change, to be
unextended, and have no distinct Parts, nor be capable of being divided into
any: He must believe the same Body at the same time, to move, and to lie still:
to be the Object of our Senses, and yet not to be perceptible by any: With
infinite others of the like kind See above, Chapter 2. of Transubstantiation. Page
32, 33.
as I have more fully shown before. But now all these are gross Contradictions,
contrary to the Nature of a Body, and to the common Principles of Reason in all
Mankind; and no Man can, without culpable Ignorance pretend not to know them to
be so: And therefore, notwithstanding any such supposed Divine Revelation as
may be pretended from those words, This is my Body, they cannot, by our
Author's own Rule, without culpable Ignorance, not know that they are mistaken
in this Matter.

Again: No Papist can have any reason to believe Transubstantiation to be true,
but because he reads those words of Holy Scripture, This is my Body. That these
words are in Scripture, he can know only by his Senses: If his Senses therefore
are not to be trusted, he is not sure there are any such words in Scripture. If
they are to be trusted, he is then sure that the Interpretation which he puts
upon them must be false.

Since then it is confessed, that there is no necessity to understand those
words in a literal sense; and that both upon the account of the Contradictions
that such an Exposition involves to the common Principles of Reason, and to the
certain Evidence of the Senses of all Mankind, it is necessary to take them in
some other meaning, it remains that without gross and culpable Ignorance they
cannot pretend not to know, that this could never have been the intention of
our Blessed Savior in those words; and that such Ignorance will not excuse
them, our Author himself has freely confessed.

But, 2dly, let us quit this Reflection, and for once suppose the possibility
of Transubstantiation. Yet still it is confessed by them: 1. That there is no
Command nor Example in holy Scripture for adoring Christ in the Eucharist. 2.
That infinite Defects may happen to hinder him from being there; and then what
they worship is only a piece of Bread. 3. That they can never be sure that some
of these Defects have not happened; and by consequence, that what they suppose
to be Christ's Body, is indeed any more than a mere Wafer.

From whence I argue;

He that without any Command or Warrant of God, pays a Divine Adoration to that
which he can never be sure is more than a mere Creature, can never be sure that
he does not commit Idolatry: But whosoever worships the Host, worships that
which he can never be sure is more than a mere Creature; and therefore he can
never be sure that in so doing he does not commit Idolatry.

Now concerning the former of these, how dangerous it is for any one to give
Divine Worship to what he can never be sure is any more than a mere Creature,
be it considered, what jealousy God has at all times expressed of his Honor as
to this Matter; how strict he has been in the peculiar vindication of his
Supreme Prerogative in such Cases. How therefore he that will come to him, must
be very well assured that it is God to whom he approaches; and therefore if he
has but the least reason to doubt of it, ought not to worship with a doubting
Mind; because he ought not to do that the omitting whereof can be no fault, but
the doing of which may, for ought he knows, be a very great Sin.

And for the second; Whether every Roman Catholic, who adores the Host, has
not even upon his own Principles, very great cause to doubt, whether he adores
Christ's Body, or only a bit of Bread, will appear from those infinite Defects
which they themselves allow as sufficient to hinder a Consecration; and which
make it great odds, were their Doctrine otherwise never so true, whether yet
one Host in twenty, it may be in five hundred, be consecrated.

1. With reference to the Holy Elements to be consecrated: If the Bread be not
all, or at least the greater part, of Wheat Flour; See all this in the
beginning of the Missal, de defectibus circa Missam.
if it be not mixed with pure Water; if the Bread be corrupted, or the Wine
sour; if the Grapes of which the Wine was made were not ripe; if any thing be
mingled with the Wine but Water; or if there be so much Water mixed with it,
that that becomes the prevailing Ingredient; in all these Cases, and many
others which I omit, there is no Consecration. And of all this, he who adores
either the Bread or Wine, can have no security. But,

2. Be the Elements right, yet if the Priest, being either ignorant, or in
haste, or unmindful of what he is about, should by mistake, or otherwise, err
in pronouncing of the words of Consecration; whether by Addition, or by
Diminution, or by any other Alteration, there is no Consecration: The Bread and
Wine continue what they were; and of this too he that worships them can never
be certain.

3. Let the words be never so rightly pronounced, yet if the Priest had no
intention to consecrate; if he be a secret Atheist, or Jew, or Moor: If he be a
careless negligent Man; it may be does not believe he has any Power to make
such a Change, (as I have shown that several of their greatest Men in this very
Age have doubted of it): If he consecrate a number of Wafers for a Communion,
and in his telling Mistakes, intending to consecrate but twenty, and there are
one and twenty before him; in all these Cases, for want of a due intention in
the Priest, there it no Consecration; but that which is adored, is only a
little Bread and Wine.

4. Let the Priest have a good Intention, See above in the Preface.
yet if he be no Priest; if he were not rightly Baptized, or Ordained; if he
were a Simoniac, or Irregular, or a Bastard, etc. Or if there were no defect in
his Ordination, yet if there was any in his who ordained him; or in the Bishops
that ordained that Bishop that ordained him; and so back to the very Time of
the Apostles, if in the whole Succession of Priests to this day, there has been
but any one Invalidity, whether by Error or Wilfulness, or for want of a due
Intention, or by Ignorance, or by any other means; then he that consecrates is
no true Priest, and by consequence has no Power to consecrate; and so all is
spoiled, and whosoever worships in any of his Masses, adores only a piece of
Bread instead of our Savior's Body.

When therefore so many Defects may interpose upon their own Principles to
hinder this Conversion, that it is exceeding probable, nay it is really great
odds, that not one Host in twenty is consecrated; it must certainly be very
hazardous to worship that for God, which upon their own Principles they can
never be sure is so; nay, which it is twenty to one is not God, but a mere
inanimate Creature of Bread and Wine.

It Is this has forced their most Learned Men to confess, See Bellarm. de
Justif. c. 8.
that they can never be sure of a Consecration; Page 23.
and our Author himself to declare, That they do not worship the Substance that
is under the Accidents of Bread and Wine, WHATEVER IT BE, but UPON SVPPOSITION
that it is CHRIST'S BODY; Adr. VI. quodlibet. Sect. 10. Suppos. 2.
Which is what Pope Adrian 6th, following herein the Authority of the Council
of Constance, prescribed; that they ought always to adore the Host with such a
reserve: See Gerson, Tract. de Exam. doctr. consid. 6.
The Council of Constance, says he, excuses those who in their simplicity adore
an unconsecrated Host, because this condition is tacitly implied, if it be
rightly consecrated: And therefore he advises, let them so adore the Host, I
ADORE THEE IF THOU ART CHRIST. But now if, as the Apostle tells us in another
case, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; and, He that doubts, is damned if he
eats: I shall leave it to any sober Christian to say what security there can be
in such a Worship, which is neither advised, encouraged, or commanded in Holy
Scripture; and which they themselves confess they can never be certain is
addressed to a right Object; and therefore are forced to such Shifts and
Reserves, as were they once admitted, might make any other Creature in the
World as warrantably adorable as their Host.

How much better were it for them to adore their Blessed Savior in Heaven,
where his glorified Body most certainly is: Where there can therefore be no
danger to lift up our Hearts unto him. Were his Sacred Body indeed
substantially present in this Blessed Sacrament, yet still it would be in a
manner to us imperceptible, in the state of his Death, and by consequence of
his Humiliation; and we might therefore have some cause to doubt whether, since
we have received no Command concerning it, it were our Savior's Pleasure that
his Body should be adored by us in that State: So that there could be no Sin in
the not doing of it. But now amidst so many Doubts, not only upon Ours, but
even upon their own Principles, that they dare not themselves worship at a
venture, that which yet they do worship; tho I shall leave them to their own
Master to stand or fall at the Great Day, yet I must needs profess I think
there is very much hazard in it. A great Sincerity, and great Ignorance, may
excuse a poor untaught, and therefore blindly obedient Multitude: but for their
Guides, who lead them into Error, for those to whom God has given Capacities
and Opportunities (as to those now among us he has done, of being better
informed) I can only say, Lord, lay not this Sin to their Charge!

And this may suffice to have been said to the third Thing proposed, of their
Rational Grounds for this Worship. Page 37.. xxxiii.
For what our Author finally adds; That to adore that which the Adorer believes
not to be our Lord, but Bread, would be unlawful to be done by any, so long as
the Person continues so persuaded -- But then if we suppose the Church justly
requiring such Adoration upon such a true Presence of our Lord, neither will
the same Person be free from sinning greatly in his following such his
Conscience, and in his not adoring.

I Answer: It will then be time enough to consider this, when either the Church
to which we owe an Obedience, shall require it of us, or they be able to prove
that in such a Case the Church would not sin in Commanding, and not we in
refusing to obey her. But, blessed be God, there is no great danger of either
of these: Our Church is too well persuaded of the unlawfulness of such a
Worship, ever to require it of us. And for that Church which has so
uncharitably undertaken to Anathematize all those who will not own her
Authority, and receive her Errors, tho never so gross, as Articles of Faith: We
are so fully convinced of the unreasonableness of her Pretenses, and of our own
Liberty, that we shall hardly be brought to submit our selves to the Conduct of
such a blind Guide, lest we sall into the same Ditch, into which she her self
is tumbled. And it would certainly much better become our Author, and his
Brethren, to consider how they can justify their Disobedience to their own
Mother, than to endeavor at this rate to lead us into the same Apostasy, both
to our Religion and our Church with them.

The Conclusion.
AND thus by the Blessing of God, and the Advantage of a good Cause, have I
very briefly passed through this Author's Reflections, and I am persuaded
sufficiently shown the weakness and falsity of the most of them. If any one
shall think that I ought to have insisted more largely upon some Points, he may
please to know, that since by the importunate Provocations of those of the
other Communion, we have been forced too often to interrupt those Duties of our
Ministry, in which we could rather have wished to have employed our Time, for
these kind of Controversies which serve so very little to any purposes, either
of true Piety, or true Charity among us: We have resolved thus far at least to
gratify both our selves and others, as to make our Disputes as short as is
possible; and loose no more time in them, than the necessary Defense of our
selves and the Truth do require.

I have indeed passed by much of our Author's Discourses, because they are
almost entirely made up of tedious and endless Repetitions of the same things,
and very often in the same words. But for any thing that is Argumentative, or
otherwise material to the main Cause, I do not know that I have either let the
Observation of it slip, or dissembled at all the Force of it.

It was once in my thoughts to have made some Reflections in the Close upon the
Changes of their Rituals, in requital for our Author's Observations on the
Alterations of our Liturgy; but I have insisted longer than I designed
already, and shall therefore content my my self to have given the Hint of what
might have been done, and shall still be done, if our Author, or any in his
behalf desire it of me.

In the mean time I cannot but observe the unreasonableness of that Method
which is here taken; from the Expressions of some of our Divines, and the
Concessions of others, whose professed Business it was to reconcile, if
possible, all Parties, and therefore were forced sometimes to condescend more
than was fit for the doing it; and even these too miserably mangled and
misrepresented, to pretend to prove the Doctrine of our Church contrary to the
express Declarations of the Public Acts and Records of it. This has been the
endeavor of several of our late Writers, but of this Discourser above any. Had
those worthy Persons, whose Memory they thus abuse, been yet living, they might
have had an ample Confutation from their own Pens; as, in the very Instance
before us, has been given them for the like ill use made by some among them, of
the pious Meditations of a most Excellent and Learned Father of our Church; and
who might otherwise in the next Age have been improved into a new Witness
against us. I do not think that Bp Taylour ever thought he should have been set
up as a favourer of Popery, who had written so expressly and warmly against it.
Yet I cannot but observe a kind of Prophetic Expression in his Book of the
Real Presence, which being so often quoted by these Men, I somewhat wonder it
should have slipped their Remark: Where speaking of their Shifts to make any
One they please of their side, Real Presence,. xii. n. 28. page 261.
he has these words; And -- I know no reason, says he, but it may be possible,
but a WITTY MAN may pretend, when I am dead, that in this Discourse I have
pleaded for the Doctrine of the Roman Church.

We have now lived to see some of those WITTY MEN that have done but little
less than this; tho how Honest they are in the mean time, I will not determine.
But I hope this Design too shall be from henceforth in good measure frustrated:
And therefore, since neither their New Religion, nor their New Advocates will
do their Business; since it is in vain that they either misrepresent their own
Doctrine, or our Authors in favor of it; may they once please either honestly
to avow and defend their Faith, or honestly to confess that they cannot do it.
Such shuffling as this, does but more convince us of the weakness of their
Cause; and instead of defending their Religion by these Practices, they only
increase in us our ill Opinion of that, and lessen that good One which we
willingly would, but shall not always be able to conserve of those, who by such
indirect means as these, endeavor to support it.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church: more
particularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sees. By
WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning the Rule
of Faith: With some other Discourses. By WILLIAM FALKNER, D.D. 4o.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in Answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.
By GILBERT BVRNET, D. D. Octavo.

An Abridgment of the History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By
GILB. BVRNET, D. D. Octavo.

The APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Salisbury: Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop:
Collected and written by the same Hand. Octavo.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D. Bishop of ^ilmore in Ireland. Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition of Sevil) in Matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience. Octavo.

The Decree made at ROME the Second of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits, and other Casuists. Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Quarto. First and Second Parts.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Quarto.

A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented]. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church]. Quarto.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against
the Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator.
4o.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. 8o.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented, being an Answer to the First,
Second, Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented
and Represented]; and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, truly
representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome. Quarto.

The Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 24o.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Answer to THREE PAPERS concerning the Unity and Authority
of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England. Quarto.


