His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Monday the
Twelfth day of November, 1694.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1694.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am Glad to Meet you here, when I can say, Our Affairs are in a better
Posture both by Sea and Land, than when We parted last.

The Enemy has not been in a Condition to Oppose Our Fleet in these Seas, and
Our sending so great a Force into the Mediterranean, has Disappointed their
Designs, and leaves us a Prospect of further Success.

With Respect to the War by Land, I think I may say, That this Year a Stop has
been put to the Progress of the French Arms.

Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
I have had so much Experience of your good Affection to Me, and of your Zeal
for the Public, that I cannot Doubt of your Assistance at this time I do
therefore earnestly Recommend to you, to Provide such Supplies as may Enable Me
to Prosecute the War with Vigor; which is the only means to Procure Peace to
Christendom, with the Safety and Honor of England.

I must likewise put you in mind that the Act of Tunnage and poundage Expires
at Christmas; and I hope you will think fit to Continue that Revenue to the
Crown, which is the more Necessary at this time, in regard the several Branches
of the Revenue are under great Anticipations, for Extraordinary Expenses of the
War, and Subject to many Demands upon other Accounts.

I cannot but Mention to you again, the Debt for the Transport Ships employed
in the Reducing of Ireland, which is a Case of Compassion, and deserves Relief.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I should be Glad you would take into your Consideration the Preparing some
good Bill for the Encouragement of Our Seamen: You cannot but be Sensible, how
much a Law of this Nature would tend to the Advancement of Trade, and of the
Naval Strength of the Kingdom, which is Our Great Interest, and ought to be Our
Principal Care.

FINIS.

