THE DECLARATION OF His Highness the Prince of Orange, FOR The better
Collecting the Public REVENUE.
WHEREAS since the Fifth day of November last, diverse Persons have intermeddled
with, and received the Public Money, arising by the Revenues of Customs,
Excise, Hearths, and other ways; some by Commissions and Authorities from Us,
and others by Commissions from diverse Peers; and others who took up Arms and
Declared for Us, for the Support of those that had taken Arms under them, and
for other public Uses: By means whereof many Persons who Acted by Authority of
the Commissioners of Customs, Excise, Hearth-Money, and otherwise, have been in
many Parts of the Kingdom displaced; and the Officers appointed by the said
Commissioners have deserted their Duties and Employments: And by reason of the
Justices of the Peace in most Parts forbearing to Act, the Duty of the Customs
have not been well answered; the Brewers and Retailers of Excisable Liquors
have neglected to make due Entries and Payments of their Duties, and have
refused to permit the Gaugers and other Officers, thereto appointed, to Survey
and take Account of their Brewings, contrary to the Laws establised. And many
Inhabitants and Persons chargable with the Payment of the Duty of Customs,
Hearth-Money, and other Duties, refuse to pay; and the Constables refuse to
assist the said Officers in the Levying hereof, as by Law they are required; by
means whereof the Payment of all public Money is generally stopped.

And forsmuch as We, at the Request of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Knight, Citizens, and Burgesses, heretofore Members of the Commons House of
Parliament, during the Reign of King CHARLES the Second, residing in and about
the City of London; and the Aldermen and Members of the Common Council of the
said City, assembled in this extraordinary Conjuncture, have taken upon Us the
Administration of the public Affairs, both Civil and Military, and the
Disposal of the public Revenues of the Kingdom, for the Uses the present
Affairs require: To which End it is necessary that all the public Revenues
should run in their proper Channel. We do therefore hereby revoke and make void
all Commissions and Authorities, given by Us, or by any others, as aforesaid.
And We do hereby prohibit and forbid all and every Person and Persons, under
pretense of the said Commissions or any of them, to intermeddle in any of the
public Revenues, or receive any Money arising thereby. And we do hereby
require and command all Collectors, Receivers and Officers (not being Papists)
authorized and employed by the said Commissioners of the Customs, Excise,
Hearth-Money, or any other the Branches of the public Revenue, that they
proceed in the Managing, Receiving, and Levying the said Revenues as formerly.
And we likewise require all Justices of the Peace to proceed in the Hearing and
Determining all Matters relating to the said Revenues, and every of them: And
that they and all other public Officers and Magistrates, Sheriffs, Mayors,
Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and other Officers of the Peace, be Aiding
and Assisting to all Officers employed and authorized by the said Commissioners
in the Collecting, Receiving, and Levying the Duties arising by the said
Revenues, and every of them, as by Law they are required and directed. And all
Persons concerned in the payment of Customs, new Imposts, Excise and
Hearth-Money, are hereby required to pay the same as formerly according to Law.

Given at St. James 's the Second Day of January, 1688/9. W.H. Prince of Orange.

LONDON, Printed by J. Starkey, and A. and W. Churchill, MDCLXXXIX.


