AN APPEAL To all the True Members OF THE Church of England, In behalf of the
King's Ecclesiastical Supremacy; AS By Law Established; by our Convocations
Approved; and by our most Eminent Bishops, and Clergymen, Stated, and
Defended; against both the Popish, and Fanatical, Opposers of it.

By WILLIAM WAKE, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Sare at Grays-Inn-gate in Holborn, MDCXCVIII.



TO The most Reverend Father in GOD THOMAS, By Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan.
My LORD;
THIS Appeal which Addresses it self to Others for their Judgment, Sues, with
all Humility, to Your Grace for Your Protection; and that such, as, I conceive,
is neither Unfit for me to Ask, nor for Your Grace to Afford. You will here see
what that true Agreement is between the Priesthood and the Empire, which our
Laws have Established; our Convocations approved of; and our Greatest
Clergymen hitherto defended; without the Censure of Any, but the professed
Enemies of our Church and Constitution. But now a New Sort of Disciplinarians
are risen up from within our selves, who seem to comply with the Government of
the Church, much upon the same account that Others do with that of the State;
not out of Conscience to their Duty, or any Love they have for it; but because
it is the Established Church, and they cannot keep their Preferments without
it. They hate our Constitution, and Revile all such as stand up in Good Earnest
for it: but, for all that, they resolve to hold fast to it; and go on still to
Subscribe, and Rail.

IN Opposition either to the Errors or Designs of these Men, the Present Appeal
bespeaks Your Grace's Protection, not so much for its self, as for the Articles
and Canons of our Church; and for those Excellent Worthies who, in their
several Successions, have appeared in Defense of the King's Supremacy over the
State Ecclesiastical, as by Law declared, and Established. That you will
vouchsafe still to Continue to Own a Cause, in which not only the Church of
England, but the Church Catholic, ever since the Civil Powers have become
Christian, is concerned together with her: The Authority we plead for in behalf
of our Kings, being no Other than what the most famous Bishops and Councils of
the Church have given to their Empeperors; and who, by consequence, must All be
involved in the same Censure with our Parliaments and Convocations. And they
who now Revile the One, would as freely Condemn the Other, but that they are
sensible that many who are well content with the Reproach of King Henry VIII.
and his Clergy, would not endure to hear the like Charges made against
Constantine and Theodosius; and those Bishops and Councils which all
Christians, in all Ages, have been wont to pay so Great a Regard to.

THIS, My LORD, is the Cause which I here bring before Your Grace: In the
Defense whereof I have Once already been engaged, and shall, with God's
Assistance, again appear; when those who now talk with such Confidence against
my former Allegations, shall give me Occasion to show how just they were, and
how little, in Reality, there is to be excepted against them. In the mean time,
I was willing, for the better Discovery of these New-Reformers; by this short,
preliminany Treatise, to draw aside the Curtain, and let the World see whose
Offspring they are, and from whom they derive both their Principles, and their
Animosities, against Us. I cannot but hope, that by this I shall awaken all the
Sincere Members of our Church to beware of them; and not give Countenance to
such Attempts, as under a show of bettering Our Constitution, do in Reality
tend to the Utter Subversion of it. To Your Grace I submit both the Design and
the Performance; and with all possible Duty and Respect Remain,

My LORD, Your Grace's Most Humble and Obedient Servant, WILLIAM WAKE.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN I entered upon the Defense of the Kings Supremacy, in Answer to the Letter
to a Convocation Man, I was not so little acquainted with the Tempers and
Designs, of a certain Party among us, as not to know that my Undertaking would
be likely to displease Those, who think any the least Authority that is given
to his present Majesty, to be an Encroachment either upon their Civil or
Ecclesiastical Rights. Nor was I unsensible what might possibly be replied to
the Arguments which I brought in Proof of it: The knowledge I had of what the
Papists were wont to return to the like Allegations of our Writers against
them, having, in some measure, informed me what, upon this Occasion, might
probably be said in Answer to Me. But to find my self charged, as if in
defending the Authority of the Prince, I had betrayed the Rights of the Church,
Municip. Eccles. Pref.
and appeared in such a Cause as neither became my Function, nor had any of our
Clergy ever before concerned themselves withal; this, I confess, was a perfect
Surprise to me, and abundantly Convinces me that some Men's Resentments are as
much beyond Modesty, as they are without Reason.

It cannot be unknown to any, who is not an utter stranger to the History of
our Reformation, upon what Principles it was undertaken, and at last happily
settled among us. How the Prince's Authority was both the Means by which it was
carried on, and the Ground on which we justified our selves in the doing of it.
And, indeed, at the first, none but the Papists, (that is to say those who had
engrossed this Power into their own Hands, and could neither endure to part
with it, nor to submit to the Use which they saw we intended to make of it;)
complained of what we did, in restoring the Prince to his ancient, and
undoubted Right; or pretended to enter any Process against us, upon the Account
of it. It is true, some time after, another Party, (how opposite soever to the
Papists in other Matters, yet in this too nearly Approaching to Them) began to
set up themselves; and to claim the same Power in behalf of their Kirk, that
the Romanists had pretended to in Right of their Pope and Church. But against
Both these our Bishops and Clergy continued firm and costant; and were, by all
impartial Judges, allowed to be as much Superior to them Both in their
Arguments, as they were in the Justice of the Cause which they maintained.

Thus stood this Controversy till our Own times: Insomuch that I hardly know
any Author, professing himself a Member of the Church of England, who has
either cast any Aspersion upon our first Reformers, for restoring the Crown to
its Ancient Jurisdiction; or pretended that the Divine Rights of the Church,
were in any wise violated, or infringed by it.

But it seems the Case is very much altered now: And it is, of a sudden,
become an Encroachment, not to be endured by our New-Church-Patriots, for the
King to pretend to lay any Restraint upon their Assemblies; and an Enterprise
unbecoming a Minister of the Gospel, Ib. Preface.
though by more than one Obligation engaged so to do, to appear in defense of the
Royal Supremacy.

It is indeed very strange to consider after what manner a certain Writer has
of late delivered his Sense as to both these; Municip. Eccles. Pref. page 2.
and such as will hardly be Credited, except I repeat it in his own Words.
'Twas Natural (says He) to expect the Insurrection of Infidels and Heretics,
against the Proposals and Power of a Convocation. -- But who would have dreamed
that any Clergy Man -- of the Church, should lift up his Heel against Her. --
When the great Luminaries of the Church shall sign the Theta upon Her Rights,
Liberties and Authorities, Divine and Humane; and this Voluntarily, and without
any Bribe offered, or Menace denounced, the Concession is taken for Sincere,
and for that Cause, Just.

King Henry the VIII of famous Memory, Ib. page 3.
notwithstanding all his Claims at Common Law, and his Interest in his
Parliament, through Power, and the Rewards by Abbey and Churchlands, could not
have made himself so absolute in Eccesiasticals. had he not procured before the
Submission of the Clergy. Nor could he have compassed That, Page 4.
but by the Terror of a Praemunire under which they had fallen, and upon which
he was resolved to follow his Blow, and so to bend, or break them. And yet this
Act of a Popish, Vnreform'd, and will nigh Outlawed Convocation, Extorted for
fear of Ruin, and through Ignorance, and Non-suspicion of the Acts consequent
upon it, prejudges more against our Liberties, than all Secular Constitutions
could possibly have done without it. And must we Now consecrate all these
Procedures, the Results of which we feel in the total Ruin of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and Christian Piety, by Our voluntary Pleas, and Acclamations: And
to gratify the Civil Powers to an Arbitrary Utmost, violate the most Important
Truths of Principles and Histories; treat the Synods of the Church with Spite
and Contumely; and Recommend the greatest Slavery of her to the Appetite of
Civil Powers.

This is a severe Charge, and a Man had need have a very Good Cause, or a very
Impregnable Face, who treats Kings and Parliaments, Convocations and Clergymen
after such a Rate. For, when all is done, it cannot be denied but that what
that Convocation did, and that King and Parliament Enacted, was, after two
intermediate Reigns, again Repeated in the First of Queen Elizabeth; is at this
day Approved of by the Canons of King James the First; and allowed of in the
Nine and thirty Articles of Religion; to which this Author himself has more
than once Subscribed. And methinks the consideration of that, if nothing else,
might have induced him to have been more temperate in his Charge against me;
who have defended no Other Authority in the Prince, than what both He, and I,
and every Other Clergyman of the Church of England, have solemnly declared our
Assent to, 39th. Can.
and are obliged to our Power to maintain. First Can.


But our Author does not intend to leave this Point so easily; his Zeal carries
him yet farther in Opposition to the King's Supremacy. To say nothing of his
fresh Invectives against that King, Ibid. p. 107.
and that Convocation, which first began to assert the Royal Authority, against
the Invasions which had so notoriously been made upon it: Page 110. He affirms
the Authority of the Church in the Convention, Freedom, and Acts of Synods, to
be of Divine Right. This he again insists upon, page 115. and in the next Page
calls them Divine Privileges, given by God, and granted to Priests, for the
Conduct and Conservation of the Church. And in the same Page, speaking of the
Prince's breaking in upon these supposed Rights, he says; Not only the Romish
Church, but all Other Sectaries, and the Scotch Kirk illustriously scorn to
admit any Servitude, notwithstanding not only National Protection, but
Promotion: being sensible that a Liberty of Religion, Government, and
Church Discipline, is more valuable than all worldly Wealth, or Interest; and
without which they cannot apprehend any Protection to Religion, or the
Societies that Profess it. From which last Words I suppose I shall not injure
his Sense if I infer; that then, according to his Notion, the Church of England
is really at present in a Persecuted State, and has been so ever since the
Reformation: And cannot be looked upon so much as a Protected Church, till this
Act of the Submission of the Clergy shall be Repealed. A strange Reflection
certainly! and very Unbecoming those manifold Blessings our Church has enjoyed
under its Reformed Princes; and does at this time Enjoy under her Glorious
Preserver: Whose greatest Crime I am afraid it is, in some Men's Opinion, that
he has delivered us from that Slavery into which we were running, though such as
our new Disciplinarians seem to think the only way to a Canonical Liberty.

I must transcribe a great part of his Book, should I here Repeat all that this
Author has said, in the most spiteful manner that he knew how to Express it,
against all that plead for, or speak well of, this part of the King's
Supremacy. See how he Harangues his Brethren of the Clergy upon this Occasion,
Comp. p. 155.
P. 119. We, we only, says he, are the Poor, Tame, Dis-spirited, Drowsy Body;
that are in love with our Own Fetters: And this is the only Scandalous Part of
our Passive Obedience; to be not only Silent, but Content, with an Oc -- n of
our P -- rs, which are not forfeited, nor forfeitable to any Worldly Powers
whatsoever.

It might perhaps be here no Improper Question, to ask, what this Gentleman
means by so Warm an Application to the Whole Body of the Clergy? Whether he
would have them take Heart upon the Matter, and having so Redoubted a Champion
to lead them on, like true Missionaries, see what they can do to raise up a
Croisade against these wicked Magistrates, who so unwarrantably Usurp upon the
Churches neither, forfeited nor forfeitable, Powers? At least thus far, it is
plain, he has gone toward it, that as he has before shown the Church to be out
of the Protection of the Prince, so he will by and by declare the Prince to be
out of the Bosom of the Church; and by Both, authentically qualified for a Holy
War to be made upon Him. For thus he goes on; p. 122. Can a Claim of an
Oppressive Supremacy be deemed a Glorious Jewel in a Christian Crown, which if
exercised, must of necessity forfeit the King's Salvation? And is it not a
dangerous complaisance in Priests, to fan such an Ambition, as must End in the
Ruin of the Church, the Priesthood, and the Soul of the Prince, which the
Liberties, and Powers Hierarchical, were designed to Convert, Direct, and
Preserve?

But still it may be doubted how far he accounts the King's Supremacy to be
Oppressive? That the whole Act of the Submission of the Clergy to King Henry
the VIIIth falls under this Censure, we have already seen. In short, all that
he thinks fit to be allowed to the Christian Prince, Page 123, 124.
is this: That the Church be obliged to acquaint him with her Desires, Reasons,
Places, Seasons, and Necessaries of Convening: To petition his Leave and
Favor; his Inspection, Assistance, and Succor to the Piety of her Designs: To
secure him of her Fidelity to all his Proper Honors and Interests: That they
will keep within Ecclesiastical Concerns; and do all things Openly, to the
Glory of God, and the Good of Souls, in the Unity, Order, and Purity of the
Church, preserved by the Rules of Catholic, and Canonical Communion; and this
under the Guard and Watch of Temporal Powers.

Well, but what if the Prince shall not approve of the Reasons that are offered
to Him, for their Assembling; nor think either the Time Convenient, or the
Place Proper; and shall thereupon refuse Them the Leave they Petition for? What
if He shall think their Designs not to be so Pious as they pretend, but rather
to have a great Allay of Humane Passion and Prejudice in them? What if He shall
differ with them in His Notion of what is his Proper Honor and Interest? May
he in such a Case forbid them to Meet? May he Assign them some Other Time or
Place? Or Command them not to meddle with such Causes, or Persons, as he shall
judge his Honor, or Interest, to be Concerned in?

What if what they call Ecclesiastical Concerns should chance to have an
Influence upon Civil Affairs? And that instead of Preserving, they shall Act so
as to divide the Unity of the Church? May he, by the Temporal Power which is
still left to Him, put a stop to their Proceedings; or Annul their Acts; or
Receive and Appeal from their Sentences? On the contrary, He flatly tells us,
Page 109.
That all the Power of Calling; Moderating at, and Dissolving Synods; of
Confirming their Acts, or Suspending their Sentences; is Negative of those
Liberties and Authorities of the Church, which she once claimed as of Divine
Right; and of which He before affirmed, that they were neither forfeited, nor
forfeitable.

And here then we have a plain Account of the Judgment of this Author in the
Case before Us. I was willing, the rather, to put it together in this Place,
that so by comparing it with what is said in the following Collection, the
Reader may be the better enabled to judge, who has acted more sincerely upon
the Church of England's Principles; I, in Asserting the King's Supremacy, as by
Law Established; or He, in his violent, and impetuous Opposing of it. Or, if
this shall not be thought enough to convince those, who have been dissatisfied
with my Undertaking, how close I have kept to our Churches Doctrine; let me
then, for a final Proof, desire this Author, in his next Attempt, to satisfy
the World in these (3) Points. 1st. Let him show wherein I have ascribed any
more, or Greater Power, to the Prince, than our Laws have given Him; and our
Convocations, and Clergy, have either expressly, or by a plain Consequence,
approved of, and declared to be his Right? 2dly. Let him tell us, Wherein the
Opinion, here advanced by Him, differs from that of our Missionary Papists and
Jesuits, who have written against the Supremacy; and against whom our Divines
have so Learnedly maintained the King's Prerogative? 3dly. Let him inform Us,
Whether any Writers of the Church of England, since the passing of this
Convocation Act, have ever made any such Exceptions, as he has here done,
against it; and charged it as Destructive of the Divine Rights and Powers of
the Church: And who those Writers are? and in what Books they have done it?

This being done, if it shall appear that in any thing I have run into an undue
Extreme, and, by that means, derogated from the Churches Authority; I shall
then be ready to comply with the Advice he has given Me, and not only humble my
self before God for the Wrongs I have done the Church, Page 177.
but publicly make a Reparation of them. But if, upon the Enquiry, it shall
appear, that I have affirmed nothing but what the Law Establishes; our
Convocations have Agreed to; and our most Eminent Clergy Men have constantly
defended; I must then be excused if I look upon my self to have done no more
than in Duty I was bound to do; and, by Opposing whereof, I take this Gentleman
not only to have acted contrary to the Laws of the Land, and the Articles and
Canons of the Church; By the 1, 2, and 12. Can.
but to have actually incurred an Excommunication for such his Offense.

Having said thus much with respect to the Subject of my late Treatise, I shall
add but little more concerning the Design which is here laid for the Answering
of it. As this Author has ordered the matter, it is become absolutely Necessary
for Him to Go on with it. For having charged me with Violating the most
important Truths of Principles and Histories; Preface.
having told the World that I have treated the Synods of the Church with Spite
and Contumely; and Recommended the Greatest Slavery of Her to the Appetite of
the Civil Powers; (and every part of which Charge does, I conceive, Accuse Me
of no small Crime) the Weight of this Accusation must fall very Heavy either
upon Him or Me; and I look upon my self as concerned to tell him, that I do
expect he should make it Good, or Honestly own that he cannot do it.

Only for his own sake as well as mine, and which is yet more, for the
Satisfaction of Those who shall think fit to Interest themselves in this
Controversy; some few things there are which I would here Recommend to him; and
they are such, as, in my Apprehension, ought not to be thought at all
Unreasonable by Him.

And 1st. Since this Debate, however managed, must be likely to Run out into a
considerable Length, I would desire him not to Increase the necessary Bulk of
it, by alleging Passages out of the Ancient Fathers, to prove that which
Neither of Us make any doubt of. Thus p. 160. He produces the Authority of
Athanasius to prove that the Nicene Fathers were not constrained, by any force
that was laid upon them, to condemn Arius, but did it freely, and of their Own
Accord. Now this I allow to be very true; but cannot help thinking it to be, in
our present Case, very little to the Purpose. And p. 162. He cites a much
larger Proof out of Gregory Nazianzen, the Appositeness of which to our Debate
I cannot yet imagine; unless it be that He thinks all Greek to be equally
Pertinent to most Readers; in which he is certainly in the Right.

2dly. I would entreat him not to insist upon any Testimonies of Antiquity,
which have been already alleged again and again, by Harding and Stapleton; by
Saunders and Dorman, and the Rest of our Popish Fugitives, in their Treatises
against the Oath of Supremacy, and as often answered by Our Writers; unless he
shall think fit, at the same time, to take Notice of their Replys to them, and
show that they do not destroy the force of His Allegations.

To what purpose, for example, P. 160.
does he bring the Sayings of Athanasius against the Synod of Tire; of Osius
against Constantius; of St. Ambrose against Valentinian the Younger; to us who
know what has long since been Returned to them by our learned Def. of the
Apolog. p. 590. 605. etc.
Jewel and Bilson. p. 174 179. 182. 184. 186. 200.
Bilson; Whitgift. fol. 700
Whitgift and Tort. Torti. 169. 170.
Andrews; and the rest of our Writers upon this Subject. This may pass with
those, who are Ignorant of these Matters, for a show of Reading; and they may,
for a while, look with Wonder on the Unknown Character; and applaud the
learning of the Text, and Margin. But when the Common place shall be laid
open, and they shall begin to discover out of whose Magazine these Authorities
are Transcribed; and shall be convinced how often they have already been both
Alleged and Answered; the most Charitable Reader will be apt to shake his
Head, and think the worse both of the Cause, and the Defenders of it.

And this I desire with relation to other Men's Writings: As for my own Book,

3dly, I would request him, when he cites my Words, but especially when he does
it with a Design of Reflecting upon them, that he would take them as they lie;
and not leave out, or insert, any that may have an Influence upon the Sense of
what He quotes. Of the former of these I take my self to have some reason to
complain, in his References of p. 100. and 101. of his Book. But of the latter
yet more, p. 109. where He says, that I give the Prince Power to suspend not
only the Sentences of Synods, but their Canons too; And of which I do assure
the Reader he will not find the least mention in the Passages to which he is
Referred.

But 4thly, And to go yet farther; Would his design, or prejudices, give him
leave, I could wish he would take care to distinguish a little better between
what I Relate as matter of History, and what I deliver as my own Sense. It
being easy to imagine that in a Work of such a Nature as that is which he has
undertaken to Examine, many things may be Recited from Others, which a Man is
not bound himself to approve of. Had he used this Precaution, he would not have
told his Reader, as he does, p. 160. that I charge the Synod of Ariminum with
the Sin of Disobedience, for dissolving themselves without the Emperors leave:
Whereas, in Truth, I only give a sincere Account of the Matter of Fact, and
show (from my Author) what those Fathers did, and what Resentments the Emperor
had of it? What reasons those Holy Bishops had for returning to their Churches,
after a tedious Absence, though not Licensed by Constantius so to do, it cannot
be thought we at this Distance should be so well able to judge, as They, at
that time were. And if they were Satisfied, that they had Reason so to do; far
be it from me to Condemn them for preferring their Duty to their Flocks, before
the Satisfaction of a Violent, and Heretical Prince.

Let me to this add, 5thly, As not very different from what I have now
mentioned, such other Mistakes, as either want of Care, or the Heat of
Contention, has sometimes led him into; and by reason of which, he charges me
with several things which I am by no means concerned to admit of. Thus, for
Example; It is not less than four several times that he Speaks of my Definition
of a Synod: Page 6. 8. 49. 55.
And in one Place censures me for the Vn-accuracy of it, p. 49. And indeed a
very loose Definition of a Synod it is, though fit enough to keep Company with
that which Himself gives of it, in the same Place. But then it is a great
Mistake, to say that I had any thoughts of Defining a Synod in the Place to
which he refers. On the contrary I acknowledge the very Meeting, of which I
there Speak, not to be what we properly mean by a Synod. Only I show both from
the Persons of which it consisted, and from the Business which it met about;
that if the Prince has Authority over such an Assembly as that was, there is no
Reason why he should not have an equal Authority over Synods; which both
consist of the same kind of Persons, and meet about the like Affairs.

But 6thly, And to have done: There is yet one Thing more which I cannot but
think to be worthy his Regard, and it is this; That before he draws up any more
Charges of Absurdities and Contradictions against me, He would take some
tolerable Care to examine Matters thoroughly; and to advise with some clearer
Heads; and not charge That upon my Words, which is really the Misfortune of his
own Understanding.

What a strange Confusion, for Example, is it, p. 166. because I prove from the
Matters of Fact in the first Ages after the Empire became Christian; and from
what was orderly and regularly done in those times too, the Princes Supremacy;
to fancy that I had overthrown my own Foundation, by saying that in the Dreggs
of Popery, and when Princes had lost their Ancient and just Authority, many
things were done by the Clergy in their Synods very irregularly; and their bare
doing of which is by no means sufficient to prove that they had a Right to do
it.

Again, p. 167. Because I cite Eusebius for an Expression of Constantine's,
that he was Bishop in things without the Church; what strange Logic is it from
thence to conclude that Princes have nothing to do in the Affairs of Synods?
See Eusebius. Vit. Constable. l. 1. p. 352. Comp. p. 405.
Whereas it is Notorious that those, above any thing, were the very Matters of
which he Spoke.

So, p. 168. I quote Socrates for saying, that the Greatest Synods were called
by the Emperors: Ergo, says he, it is plain that the lesser Ones were not?

Again, p. 169. I affirm that in peaceable Times, and under Princes who take
Care of the Church, Synods ought not to meet but by the Command or Allowance of
the Civil Magistrate. To this, he conceives it is a Contradiction to say, as
yet I do, that in Cases of extreme Necessity, when Princes shall so far abuse
their Power, as to render it absolutely needful for the Clergy, by some
extraordinary Methods, to provide for the Churches Welfare; that Necessity will
warrant their taking of them. -- And again; Because I assert that in quiet
Times, and under a Pious, Christian Prince, the Prince is to judge, when it is
proper for Synods to meet: to this he fancys it to be a Contradiction to allow,
that when the Danger is apparent, and the Necessities of the Church will not
bear the farther delay of Them, if the Prince does refuse to let them meet,
they must rather venture his Displeasure, and do it of themselves, than be
wanting, in such Circumstances, to the Churches Safety and Preservation.

These are some of those Absurdities which this Ingenious Writer has been
pleased to lay to my Charge. Many more there are of the like kind; and by which
whether he has more exposed my Weakness, Page 177.
or his Own, I am very well Content to leave it to any impartial Reader to
judge.

It is one of the ill Effects that commonly attend Controversial Writings, that
it is very Difficult to manage them either with that Temper and Ingenuity that
becomes Scholars, or with that Charity that good Christians ought to do. And
it is this has given me almost as great a Disgust at them, as ever Gregory
Nazianzen professed himself to have against Synods, and that almost upon the
same Account. Pride and Ill Nature commonly Domineer in them; and sometimes it
so falls out that an Opponent must be freely dealt with, or a good Cause must
suffer in the Opinion of a great Many, who conclude that a Man therefore only
spares his Adversary, because he could not get an Advantage against him.

How far I have fallen under this Censure, in the Management of the present
Controversy, I must submit it to others to judge; but do hope I have not so far
Transgressed, as this late Author charges me to have done. Page 177.
As for the Logic, Law, and History, of the Person I had to deal with, What it
really is, I pretend not to say; What it appeared to me to be, my Book has
shown: And if I have any where failed in my Allegations against him, this
Gentleman, no doubt, will take care to call me to Account for it. But Honesty
is a tender Point; and I do not remember I have any where touched upon it. It Is
true I have shown, what was indeed too plain to be denied, that whosoever he
were that Wrote that Pamphlet, he could be no Friend to our present
Establishment. And this I am sure was to my Purpose to observe, how little so
ever it was to his, to have it so plainly Discovered. However, if in any thing
I have been Mistaken in my Judgment either of his Affections, of his Abilities,
I am heartily sorry for it; and shall be ready to submit to whatsoever Penance
his most Upright, Logical, Historical Second, shall, from his better skill in
Antiquity, and the Laws of our Church, think fit to lay upon me for it.

THE CONTENTS.
INtroduction,. 1. The Design of the following Treatise, viz. To show what has
been the Sense of the Church of England, ever since the Reformation, as to the
Authority of Christian Princes over the Ecclesiastical Synods of their Realms,.
2. The Substance of the 25 H. 8. c. 19. to this Purpose,. 3. Of its Repeal by
Q. Mary, and Revival by Q. Elizabeth,. 4. That the Authority, therein given to
the King, is no Other than what did always, of Right, belong to the Crown,. 5.
That it was to secure this Authority, the Oath of Supremacy was framed,. 6. --
The present Obligation of which is enquired into; Ibid. That the same Authority
is agreed to in the 37th Article,. 7. -- The Sense of which is shown, Ib. And
the Nature of that Subscription we make to those Articles considered,. 8. And
is yet more fully enjoined by the Canons of 1603.. 9. -- Which ipso facto
Excommunicate all those who Impugn this Supremacy,. 10.
II.
This Supremacy Confirmed from the Sense of our Divines and Others, ever since
the Reformation,. 11. Of the Times of K. H. 8. -- K. Edw. 6. -- and Q. Mary 1..
12.
Queen ELIZABETH.
The Judgment, of her Self, and her Parliament,. 13. Of all her first Bishops,.
14. Of Archbishop Whitgift,. 15. Archbishop Bancroft,. 16. Bishop Jewel,. 17.
Bishop Bilson,. 18. Dr. (...),. 19. Mr. Hooker. 20.
King JAMES 1.
Of the Revival of the Dispute, concerning the Supremacy, under this King,. 21.
The Judgment of the King himself, Ib. And -- Of B. Andrews,. 22. Against the
Papists.
Of the Controversy which the King had on this Subject, with the Scotch
Ministers,. 23. Upon this Occasion B. Andrews Judgment more fully declared,.
24. Which was also the Sense of the Rest of the Clergy at that time,. 25.
Particularly of our Learned Mason,. 26.
King CHARLES I.
The Judgment of these Times, more particularly shown,. 27. From the Sense of
the King himself, 28. Of his Bishops, especially A. B. Laud,. 29. And of the
whole Convocation, 1640,. 30. The Judgment of A. B. Bramhall,. 31. Bishop
Davenant,. 32. and Dr. Heylin,. 33.
King CHARLES II.
The State of the Parliament and Convocation, in 1660 considered: How far this
shows the same Sense to have continued of the Supremacy, that had all along
obtained before?. 34. This farther shown from the Opinion of; Bishop Tailor,.
35. B. S. Parker,. 36. Dr. Falkner,. 37. Dr. Barrow,. 38.
III.
Upon this Foundation, an Appeal is here made, to all the True Members of our
Church, against those who now Oppose this Authority,. 39.
And it is farther shown,
That I have not been mistaken in Point of Law,. 39. That the Cause was not
unbecoming a Clergy Man to appear in,. 40. That the time was not improper for
the handling of it,. 41. That it is not probable, the Church will Suffer by
what I have done; but may, by their Fury, who oppose me in this Point,. 42. The
Close,. 43.
AN APPEAL To all the True Members OF THE Church of England, etc.
AFTER an Age and half's Dispute with those of the Church of Rome,. 1.
in Defense of the King's Supremacy, and of the Laws that have been made for
the Establishment of it; it cannot but seem a little strange to Us, to be Now
called upon to begin the Controversy again, with some among our selves, who
would be thought the Best, if not the only True Members, of the Church of
England.

But that which seems yet more amazing is, that though our Laws subsist in the
same State which they have been in ever since the Reformation; Our Articles and
Canons made in pursuance of those Laws continue firm, and unrepealed: Though the
Books that have been written by our Bishops, and Clergy, in defense of Both,
are not only not Censured, but are Read, Approved, and Received on all hands,
as delivering the undoubted Sense of our Church and Convocations, as well as of
our Princes and Parliaments, with relation to this matter; it should now,
nevertheless, be thought a Crime to assert the Supremacy of the Christian
Magistrate; and a Scandal for a Clergyman, more especially, to appear in
behalf of that Cause, by defending whereof so much Honor has been gained, by
the greatest Writers of that Order, heretofore.

Had we now to do with the same Adversaries that those Learned Men were engaged
with; Were the Persons who, in Our days, set up against the Rights of the
Prince, either open Romanists on the one hand, or avowed Members of the Kirk
and Consistory on the Other; we should the less wonder either at the Principles
which they Advance, or the Zeal with which they appear in Favor of them. But
to be Summoned by Members of our Own Communion to defend the Doctrine of our
Own Canons and Articles; to be railed at as little better than Apostates from
the Church Catholic, for pretending to Vindicate the Constitution of the
Church of England, as by Law Established; this is a Novelty which we know not
what to make of, a Prodigy becoming a Time, and Place, of Wonders.

To lay open the Design of this New-Attempt, 2.
and which may otherwise, in time, improve into Another Schism, and produce us
a Third Church of England, composed only of such Persons as will disclaim all
Authority of the Civil-Magistrate, from having any thing to do in Matters of
Religion; it may possibly be of some Use to represent to such, as have not yet
laid aside all Regard to Her, the plain Sense of our Reformed Church, in the
Points under Debate; and show them from whom I received the Doctrine which I
have asserted, in Vindication of the Kings Supremacy. And having done this, I
cannot but hope that some of them will consider; what is the true Design of
those who are so forward to pull down, what our Wise and Pious Ancestors, took
so much care to Build: And whether the Methods we are now running so blindly
into, must not end either in downright Popery, or Fanaticism, at the last.

When the Foundation was first laid for a regular Reformation of Religion among
Us; 3.
One of the first things which those, The Act of 25 H. VIII c. 19.
who carried on that great Work, saw it needful to do, was, to restore the
Crown to that Authority, which the Prevalence of the Papal Power had so
notoriously deprived it of. In order hereunto, the Convocation having agreed to
submit themselves to the King, an Act of Parliament was framed upon that
Submission, 26. H. VIII. c. 19.
in which, among Others, these four things were Established. 1st. That the
Convocation should from thenceforth be Assembled only by the Kings Writ. 2dly.
That it should make no Canons, or Constitutions, but by Virtue of the Kings
License, first given them, so to do. 3dly. That having agreed on any Canons or
Constitutions, they should yet neither Publish nor Execute them, without the
Kings Confirmation of them: Nor, 4thly; By his Authority, Execute any, but with
these Limitations; That they be neither against the Kings Prerogative; nor
against any Common, or Statute Law; nor, finally, in any other respect,
contrary to the Customs of the Realm.

This Act being thus passed, 4.
continued in force all the time of King Henry the VIII. and his Son King
Edward the VI. Queen 1 and 2 Ph. and M. c. 8.
Mary succeeding, and rescinding whatsoever her Father, or Brother had done, in
prejudice of the Romish Church, abolished, among Others, this Act also. But her
Reign ending within a few Years after; One of the first things done, by her
Sister Queen Elizabeth, was to Revive such Laws, made by those two Kings, as
were thought Necessary for the Reformation of the Church; and so this Statute
was brought again in Force. 1 Eliz. c. 1.


The Title of the Act by which this Statute was revived, 5.
and the other Authorities therein expressed were again Annexed to the Crown, 1
Eliz. c. 1.
is this; An Act restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the
Estate Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, etc. And that taken from the Words of the
Act its self; wherein the design of this Statute is declared to be, for the
Restoring of the Rights, Ib Sect. 1. and 2.
Jurisdictions, and Preheminencies, appertaining to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm: Which I observe in answer to the Peevish cavils of a late Author against
me on this Account: Municip. Eccles. p. 108. 176. See below.. 39.
And in another place; To the Imperial Crown of this Realm, of Right belonging
and appertaining. And from which it is, I suppose, obvious to conclude, that in
the Opinion of that Parliament, such an Authority over our Convocations, as is
before shown to have been Establis'd by the 25 H. VIII. c. 19. and was hereby
again vested in the Crown; was not either by that, or this, Statute, first
given to our Kings, but only Restored to them, as a part of their Royal
Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical; and which did always, of right,
belong and appertain to them.

The Rights of the Crown being thus once more, 6
by Law, Restored to it; to secure them the better against any New
Encroachments for the time to come, The Oath of Supremacy.
it seemed good to this Parliament (after the Example of those of King Henry
the VIII.) 28. H. VIII. c. 10. and 35. H. VIII. c. 1.
that an Oath should be framed, in Recognition of the Supremacy here declared
to belong to our Royal Sovereigns; and be enjoined to be taken by all Officers
and Ministers Ecclesiastical and Temporal; as in the Act may more fully be
seen. In this Oath, we solemnly testify and declare in our Conscience, that the
King's Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other
his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical things, or Causes, as Temporal. -- And we do promise, that, to
our Power, we will assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences, and Authorities, granted, or belonging, to the Kings and Queens
of this Kingdom; or United, and Annexed, to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.
Now this Oath being designed, as both the Subject of it shows, and 1 Eliz c. 1,
Sect. 7.
the Words of the Act it self, expressly declare, to be for the better
Observation and Maintenance of that Statute; it must follow, that the Supremacy
which we there Testify in our Conscience to belong to our Princes, must be
Interpreted by what that Act has United and Annexed to the Crown; and so
comprehend All that Authority of the King over his Convocation, which in the
25th. H. VIII was expressly Restored to our Princes; and which being again, by
the Repeal of that Act, recovered from them, was by this present Statute, once
more, Re-setled in the Crown, as it had been before.

How those, who now appear so Zealous in Opposition to this Authority, and have
probably more than Once, Which all Persons in H. Orders, are, at their
Ordination, obliged to do.
solemnly taken this Oath, will acquit themselves either before God, or the
World, of a manifest Violation of it, by their present Behavior, is past my
skill to Comprehend: Unless, because some part of that Oath is now laid aside,
they should chance to think, that therefore the whole Obligation of it is
ceased, even to those who have taken it in its former Integrity. But indeed
should we allow that there were some weight in this; yet since the Laws made in
Defense of the Kings Supremacy, are still the same they ever were; our
Recognition of it must be looked upon to be the same too: And in renouncing all
Foreign Jurisdiction in Causes Ecclesiastical, See 1 of W. and M. c. 8.
which We still do; we must be accounted as Effectually to acknowledge the
Kings Supremacy, according to the legal Notion of it, as when we the most fully
declared our Assent to it; though it should be granted, that we do not now so
expressly Oblige our selves to the Defense of it, as we were heretofore wont to
do.

And this I say with particular Respect to the present State of this Oath; for
otherwise, as to what concerns Us of the Clergy, it cannot be doubted but that
Our Obligation, as to the Substance of it, is still the same it ever was: The
Declaratory part of this Oath being what we in Terms subscribe to, in the first
Article, of the 39th Canon; and the Promissory, no other than what is tied upon
Us in the 1st Canon, by an Authority which Our Adversaries, I conceive. will
not presume to except against. But not to insist upon the present Obligation of
this Oath; thus much, at least, must be confessed, (and that is enough for my
Purpose) that All those who heretofore took the Oath of Supremacy, as it was
first drawn up in the Statute of Queen Elizabeth, 1. Eliz. c. 1.
did thereby, without Question, both declare their Approbation of the Kings
Supremacy, as by that Act Established, and promise to their Power, to Assist
and Defend it. But now this All our Clergy, and almost all Others who were
admitted to any Employ, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical did do: And therefore
it must be allowed that till within these last ten Years, the Authority by me
ascribed to the King, was not only agreeable to the Sense of the Laity, but to
that of the Clergy too; since every Clergy Man in the Realm, till then, did
upon his Oath, both declare his Approbation of it, and Engage himself, to his
Power, to Defend it. And how that Authority which was so Universally received
and acknowledged by us, -- From the 1st of Eliz to the 1st of W. and M. above
130 Years.
for so long a time, should now become so Detestable in it self, and so
Destructive of the Rights and Liberties of the Church, I would desire these
Gentlemen, if they can, to Inform Me.

It was about four Years after the Session of this Parliament,. 7.
and the Passing of this Act, The Nine and Thirty Articles.
that the Nine and Thirty Articles of Religion were agreed upon in Convocation,
and Published by the Queen's Authority. Of these the 37th relates to the Civil
Magistrate; and is drawn up so exactly according to the Words, as well as
Sense, of the Oath of Supremacy, that we cannot doubt but that the Convocation
had a particular Respect thereunto, in the Framing of it. The Queen's Majesty
has the In the Latin Article it is Supreme.
Chief Power in this Realm of England, and Other her Dominions; unto whom the *
Chief Government of All Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical,
or Civil, in All Causes, does appertain. So this Article determines: And what
we are to Undestand by Supreme Power, and Supreme Government, of all Estates,
and in all Causes, Our Laws tell us; and from which we may be sure, neither the
Queen, nor the Convocation, had any Intention to depart.

But the Article goes on. Where we attribute to the Queen's Majesty the Chief
Government, by which Title We understand the Minds of some dangerous Folks to
be Offended; We give not our Princes the Ministering either of God's Word, or of
the Sacraments; the which thing the Injunctions also, set forth by Elizabeth
our Queen do most plainly testify: But that only Prerogative, which we see to
have been given, always, to all Godly Princes, in Holy Scripture, by God
himself; that they should Rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their
Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal. --

And if you would know what Ruling of the Ecclesiastical Estate is hereby
intended, the Injunctions to which the Article Referrs us will fully clear it;
Where having first denied, as the Article also does, that by the Words of the
Oath of Supremacy beforementioned, the Kings or Queens of this Realm,
possessors of the Crown, may challenge Authority and Power of Ministry of
Divine Service in the Church; they declare, That Her Majesty neither does, nor
ever will challenge any Authority than what was challenged, and lately used, by
the noble Kings of famous Memory, King Henry the VIII. and King Edward the VI.
which is, and was of Ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; that
is, under God, to have the Sovereignty and Rule over all manner of Persons born
within these her Realms, Dominions and Countries, of what Estate, either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, soever they be.

These are the Words of the Queens Injunction, and agreeably whereunto, it is
manifest, the Convocation designed to frame this part of their Article, as they
took the Oath of Supremacy for their Pattern in the foregoing. And in
consequence whereof, as well as in conformity to the Laws of the Realm, then
Established, we must conclude, That this Power of calling and directing the
Convocation being one main part of that Jurisdiction which was declared by Act
of Parliament to belong to the Crown, and was accordingly Restored and Annexed
to it thereby; And having, as such, been challenged and used both by King Henry
the VIII. and King Edward the VI. is also a part of that Supremacy which the
Convocation here intended to attribute to the Queen; as we are sure the Queen
must have understood it to have been hereby ascribed to her.

And of this I shall give a more particular Proof when I come to consider the
Notions which this Queen,. 8.
and her Clergy, had of her Authority as to this Matter. In the mean time I
cannot but desire this Late Writer, and All Others, of the same Judgment with
him, who have in like manner Subscribed these Articles, seriously to bethink
themselves with what Conscience they did it; if they had in Good earnest so ill
an Opinion, as they now pretend, of that Power which those Articles, most
certainly, allow of, and profess to be due to the Civil Magistrate. See p. 10.


That the Author of the late Treatise, Municip. Eccles. page 119.
not so much againt my Book, as against our Laws, and Government, must have
Especially if Graduated in the University too.
several times Subscribed these Articles, the Character of a Minister, which he
takes to himself, sufficiently assures Us. No Man can be Ordained a Deacon, See
Can. 36.
or Priest, without doing of it: Nor being in Orders, can be admitted to any
Cure of Souls, or to any Other Ecclesiastical Administration whatsoever, but he
must again Repeat it.

The Method taken for performing of this Subscription is full, Ibid.
and positive. For first, the Substance of what we are to Subscribe to, is
drawn up into three Articles; whereof the first, and third, are these. 1. That
the King's Majesty, under God, is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and
of all other his Highness's Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical Things, or Causes, as Temporal, etc. -- Which being the very
Words of the Oath of Supremacy, must be taken in the same Sense, that I have
before shown, that Oath was to be Understood in. -- And, 3. That we allow the
Book of Articles of Religion -- and acknowledge All and Every the Articles
therein contained -- to be agreeable to the Word of God. And then, to these
Articles we subscribe in these very Words; I, S. H. do willingly, and ex animo,
subscribe to these three Articles above mentioned, and to All things contained
in them. He therefore who does this, either must subscribe to them against his
Conscience; or he must, thereby, be concluded to profess this belief; That the
Authority given to the King by Our Laws, and approved of in these Articles, is
agreeable to the Word of God.

The Danger of Impugning any of these Articles, is Great, and Unavoidable. To
affirm them, in any part, to be Superstitious, or Erroneous (whether he who
does it be found out or no) is by the Canons of our Church, Can. v.
Excommunication ipso facto. And if the Offender be discovered, and fortunes to
be a Clergyman, he is by the Statute Law of the Realm to be convented before
his Bishop for it; 13 Eliz. c. 12.
and if he does not presently Revoke his Error, is, in the First Instance, to
be Deprived of All his Ecclesiastical Promotions; and, in the Second, loses
them without more ado.

This is the Law both of the Church, and of the State, in the present Case: And
with what Conscience any Clergyman, beneficed in such a Church, can excuse
himself for flying with so much Virulence in the Face both of these Laws, and
of these Canons; I shall leave it to any One, who has any Conscience himself,
though never so much prejudiced against the King's Supremacy, to consider.

To the Articles of Religion,. 9.
set forth by Queen Elizabeth, Of the Canons of King James the First.
let us add the next authentic Evidence of our Church's Sense, in this
particular, the Canons and Constitutions, made by the Convocation in the first
Year of King James I. Of these the very first is designed to assert the Supreme
Authority of the King's Majesty over the Church of England. In order whereunto
it ordains, That All Persons Ecclesiastical, shall faithfully keep and observe,
and, as much as in them lies, shall cause to be observed, and kept of Others,
All, and Singular Laws and Statutes, made for Restoring to the Crown of this
Kingdom, the ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical. Which last
words being the very Title of the Act of the First of Queen Elizabeth, we must
conclude the meaning of the Canon to be this; That they shall faithfully
Observe the Laws referred to in that Statute, and do what in them lies, to
cause All Others to Observe the same. Seeing then that Act of the 25 H. 8. c.
19. is One of those which is there expressly Revived, it will follow, that it
expressly comes within the Words of this Canon; and that the Powers therein
annexed to the Crown over the Convocation, are hereby approved and allowed of,
as part of that Ancient Jurisdiction which always, of Right, belonged to our
Kings over the Estate Ecclesiastical.

But the next Canon is more express, and will come more fully up to our present
purpose. Its design is to Restrain the Impugners of the King's Supremacy over
the Church of England: And thus it runs, in our English Version of it. Comp.
Munic. Eccles. page 165.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that the King's Majesty has not the same
Authority, in Causes Ecclesiastical, that the Godly Kings had amongst the Jews,
and Christian Emperors in the Primitive Church; Or impeach any part of the
Regal Supremacy in the said Causes, Restored to the Crown, and by the Laws of
this Realm therein Established, let him be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not
Restored but only by the Archbishop, after his Repentance, and Public
Revocation of those his Wicked Errors.

It is plain by comparing of these two Canons together, that the design of the
Convocation was, in the First, to Declare, and Assert the King's Supremacy, and
to oblige the Clergy to a strict, and diligent Observance of it: By the Second,
to Restrain all sorts of Persons, from denying, or otherwise endeavoring to
hurt, or extenuate, the Legal Notion of it. And two things there are which will
deserve to be taken notice of in this Second Canon; First, What that Supremacy
is which our Convocation was so careful to Assert, and Defend? And Secondly,
What it is to Impugn this Supremacy, within the meaning of this Canon?

First, As for the former of these, the Supremacy here meant; two Rules there
are delivered by this Canon, whereby we may come to a Right Understanding of
it. First, It is that Authority over the Estate Ecclesiastical, which by the
Statutes of King Henry the Eighth, and King Edward the Sixth, was Restored, and
by the Act of Queen Elizabeth Confirmed, as of Right belonging, to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. And, Secondly: It is such a Power, in matters of Religion,
as the Godly Kings had amongst the Jews, and Christian Emperors in the
Primitive Church. And from which, by the way, it may be Observed, what good
Reason I had to enquire into the Authority of the Christian Emperors in these
Cases; Municip. Eccles. chap. x. p. 126.
and to argue from thence in behalf of that Power which our Church ascribes to
our Own Princes, on the like Occasions; How much soever some Men may slight
such Proofs, as being sensible that they are not to be Answered.

Secondly, To impugn this Supremacy, within the meaning of this Canon; is
either, first, to deny Altogether, this Authority; and affirm, that the King
either has not, or ought not to have, any such Power: Or it is, secondly, By
any other means to Impeach (or, as the Latin Canon has it more plainly) to
Extenuate, or Hurt this Supremacy: Which, I conceive, is then done when Men
Write and Argue against it; when they Censure the Laws for Establishing of it;
and Damn the Prince, Page 122, 155, 176.
so long as he shall continue to Exercise it, according to those Laws.

But these are not the only Canons which justify what I have written in Defense
of the King's Supremacy, and Condemn those who appear against it. The Twelfth
is yet more express to my particular Case, and will show what the Sense of our
Church is, concerning those who Abet the, now so much magnified, Opinion, on
the other side. Whosoever shall affirm that it is lawful [Cuivis Ministrorum
aut Laicorum Ordini, vel Eorum alterutris simul Congregatis;] for any Sort,
[Rank, or Degree] of Ministers, or Laics, or for either of them Gathered
together; to make Canons, Decrees, or Constitutions concerning Ecclesiastical
things, without the King's Authority; and shall submit themselves to be Ruled
and Governed by them, let them be Excommunicated ipso facto; and not be
Restored until they Repent, and publicly Revoke those their Wicked and
Anabaptistical Errors.

For if, in the Opinion of our Church, it be necessary for the Clergy to have
Authority from the King to meet on such Occasions; If to say that any Persons,
of what Order soever they be, may without his License make any Canons, Decrees
or Constitutions Ecclesiastical; nay or but even submit themselves to be
governed by such as shall be so made, be a Wicked, Anabaptistical, Error; and
for which a Man deserves to be cast out of the Communion of our Church; then it
must without all Question be allowed, that according to the Doctrine
Established among Us, the Clergy can neither Meet nor Act, but with the King's
Permission: Nor ought we to account those Constitutions of any Authority, which
any Persons shall make without his leave; or, as such submit to them; how much
soever they may please to cry up their Divine Powers, and Vnalienable Rights,
to justify their Irregular, and Anabaptistical Proceedings.

The Sentence of both these last Canons is, 10.
That they who Offend against them are to be, Excommunication Ipso facto.
ipso facto Excommunicated: And concerning which I shall only observe thus
much; first, that in such a Case there is no need of any Admonition, Cap. 26.
Ext. de Appellat.
as where the Judge is to give Sentence; but every One is to take notice of the
Law at his Peril, and see that he be not overtaken by it. And, Secondly; That
there is no need of any Sentence to be pronounced, Which the Canon it self has
passed; and which is by that Means already Promulged upon every One, as soon as
he comes within the Obligation of it. In other Cases, a Man may do things
worthy of Censure, and yet behave himself so warily in Them, as to escape the
Punishment of the Church, for want of a legal Evidence to convict him. But,
Excommunicatio Canonis, Ligat etiam Occulta delicta: Where the Canon gives
Sentence, there is no escaping; but the Conscience of every Man becomes Obliged
by it, as soon as ever he is Sensible that he has done that which was forbidden
under the Pain of such an Excommunication.

To these Canons relating to the Kings Supremacy, I might add those which speak
of the Authority of our Synods, and there again Expressly provide for the
Princes Rights.

Thus Can. 139. the Church affirms the Assembling of Synods, to be by the Kings
Authority. In the 140th, she acknowledges the Necessity of his License, both
for the Making and Ratifying of her Decrees, in Causes Ecclesiastical. And Can.
141. Censures such as shall, upon this Account, undervalue the Acts of our
Synods, in these Words: Whosoever shall affirm that their Proceedings in making
of Canons and Constitutions, in Causes Ecclesiastical, by the Kings Authority,
as aforesaid, ought to be Despised and Contemned; the same being Ratified and
Enjoined, by the said regal Power, Supremacy and Authority; let them be
Excommunicated, and not Restored until they Repent, and publicly Revoke that
their wicked Error.

But in a Case so plain I shall not need to insist on any more Proofs; and
therefore shall content my self to observe, that the Title given by public
Authority to these Canons, is this: Constitutions or Canons Ecclesiastical; by
the Bishop of London, President of the Synod for the Province of Canterbury,
and the rest of the Bishops and Clergy of the same Province, by the Kings
Authority, Treated and Concluded upon: In their Synod, etc. -- Afterward, by
the same Royal Majesty, Approved, Ratified and Confirmed; and by the Authority
of the same, under the Great Seal of England, Promulged, to be diligently
observed through both Provinces, as well of Canterbury, as York. This is the true
Title given to these Canons: And was fit to be thus particularly taken notice
of, because in our English Book of Canons, which is of most common Use, this
Inscription (as well as many of the Canons themselves) is very imperfectly
rendered, and may be apt to lead Men into some mistakes concerning these, as
well as other Matters. It were easy to make several Observations, to our
present Purpose, upon the several Parts of this truly Accurate, and Legal,
Title: But I shall choose rather to express the process of this Convocation, in
the Words of an Author, who may perhaps be less liable to Exception; Heylin Ref
justified. p. 19. 20.
and whose account of it is this: That the Clergy being met in their
Convocation, according to the Tenor and Effect of his Majesty's Writ, his
Majesty was pleased, by Virtue of his Prerogative Royal, and Supreme Authority
in Causes Ecclesiastical, to give and grant unto Them, by his Letters Patents,
dated April 12. and June 25. full, free, and lawful Liberty, License, Power and
Authority, to Convene, Treat, Debate, Consider, Consult and Agree upon such
Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, as they should think necessary,
fit, and convenient, for the Honor and Service of Alimighty God, the good and
quiet of the Church, and the better Government thereof from time to time etc.
-- Which being Agreed on by the Clergy, and by them presented to the King,
humbly requiring him to give his Royal Assent unto them, according to the
Statute made in the 25 of King Henry VIII. and by his Majesty's Prerogative and
Supreme Authority, in Ecclesiastical Causes, to Ratify and Confirm the same;
His Majesty was graciously pleased to Confirm and Ratify them by his Letters
Patents -- straightly commanding, and requiring, all his loving Subjects,
diligently to observe, execute and keep the same, etc. --

And here I shall put an end to my first kind of Proofs, in Defense of that
Authority which I have ascribed to our Kings, over the Convocations of the
Clergy of the Church, and Realm, of England. I proceed in the next place more
fully to confirm this Authority to be agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church;
from the Testimony's of our most learned Divines, who have written upon this
Subject, from the beginning of the Reformation, to our Own times.

II.
It has been the Endeavor of some of late who would be thought still to retain
a good Affection to the Reformed Religion, 11.
nevertheless to cast the worst Aspersions they are able, The Testimony of our
Clergy in defense of this Supremacy.
upon those who were the chief Instruments of God's Providence in the
Reformation of it. What their design in this their Procedure is, or how, upon
the Principles now set on Foot, to justify what was heretofore done among us
as to this Matter; or indeed, without a Miracle, ever to have had any thing at
all done in it, I cannot tell. It being certain that such a Convocation,
Municip. Eccles. page 55.
as they now seem alone to allow of as Canonical, would never have departed
from the Way that they were in; or have endured any Proposals tending to such a
Change, as was otherwise happily made among Us. But however since such is their
Prejudice, both against the Opinions, and Actions, of our first Reformers, I
will so far comply with their unreasonable Humors, as to pass lightly over
those Times of Church Servitude, Ib. p. 121. 122.
as well as Church Reformation; and come to such Authorities, as, I suppose,
they will not have the Confidence to except against. 12.


To pass by then the Opinion of the Convocation, Of K. H. 8. and Q. Mary.
which, about 3 Years after the Submission made to King Henry the VIII. set out
the first Doctrinal Treatise that led the Way to the Discovery, Institution of
a Christian Man: Anno. 1537. See the Convocations Address to the King;
subscribed by both Houses.
and Renuntiation, of the Popish Errors. What shall we say to the Public
Declaration made by King Henry himself against the Council of Mantua; and in
which He cannot be supposed to have Spoken any thing but what, he thought,
carried its Own Evidence along with it? Regis* senatus, populique Angliae
sententia de Concilio etc. Witebergae, Anno 1537. A. 5.
In times past, says He, All Councils were appointed by the Authority, Consent
and Commandment, of the Emperors, Kings and Princes. Why now takes the Bishop
of Rome this upon him? Ib. B. 5.
Wherefore we think it best that every Prince call a Council Provincial, and
every Prince to Redress his Own Realm.

And this he Spoke not of his own Head, Bishop Burnet. Hist. Ref. Vol. 1. App.
p. 155. 156.
but with the Advice of his Bishops and Clergy; of the former of which, all but
two, subscribed to the Instrument which was presented to him upon this
Occasion. And when notwithstanding this, he was again Solicited by the
Emperor, and some other Princes, the Year after, either himself to come, or to
send his Ambassadors to it; Regis Angl. Epistola de Synod. Vincentina.
Vitebergae Anno. 1539.
He again renewed his former Protestation, and made again the same Exceptions
against it.

Nor in this did he do any more, than some even of his Popish Bishops had
before approved; and that on such Occasions, wherein it cannot be pretended
that any Force was laid upon them. Munucip. Eccles. Pref.
I shall in proof of this, allege only the Letter of Tonstal and Stokesly to
Cardinal Poole; Fox M^rt. 2 Vol. 347.
in which the Authority of the Christian Prince, over the Convocations of his
Clergy, is fully asserted; and proved from the like Instances of the Ancient
Kings and Emperors, that I have made use of to the same purpose. And though
Queen Mary in her Zeal to the Papal Interest, repealed whatever Acts had been
passed by her Father and Brother against it, and this of the Submission of the
Clergy among the Rest; yet she did not therefore give up the Power over her
Synods; but still continued it, according to the Substance of that Statute: As
is evident from her Calling and Dissolving, Fox Ibid. 3 Vol. p. 19. 29.
not only the first Convocation of her Reign, but of that which was held two
Years after; and to Assemble which Cardinal Pool himself had her License;
Strype. Hist. of A. B. Cranmer. p. 368.
as he also had to make such Canons, as should be thought needful, in it.

QVEEN ELIZABETH.
But I will not tarry any longer in these Times, 13.
but pass forward to that of the next Reign; in which the Reformation was both
more regularly carried on, and at last brought to the State in which it
continues at this Day.

Queen Mary having, The Parliament.
as I observed, abolished whatever Laws had been made in the two preceding
Reigns in Derogation to the Papal Usurpations; the first Thing done by Queen
Elizabeth was, to set the Crown again upon its ancient Foundation; and to
Restore it to that Jurisdiction over the Estate Ecclesiastical, which of right
belonged to it. This was the Work of the very first Act that passed in her
Reign; and by Virtue whereof the Statute made 25th Henry the VIII. c. 19. to
Ratify the Submission of the Clergy, was brought again in Force.

I have before observed what care was taken by this Parliament to secure these
Rights of the Crown, The Queen
by an Oath then Established, under the Title of the Oath of Supremacy. I must
now add, that the more to oblige the Clergy to a due Observance of them, the
Queen her self, this same Year, set out her Injunctions; and in the very first
Place took care, of her Supremacy in them. For thus the Injunctions begin:
Sparrow's Collect. p. 67.
That all Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, and all other Ecclesiastical
Persons, shall faithfully keep and observe; and, as far as in Them may lie,
shall cause to be observed and kept of Other, all and singular Laws and
Statutes made for the Restoring of the Crown, the Ancient Jurisdiction over the
State Ecclesiastical. And that this Power over the Convocation was one Branch
of it, the Revival of the Law of King Henry the VIII. relating to it, which was
made the same Year, and in that very Act whose Title the Injunction
transcribes, 1. Eliz. c. 1.
is a Proof not to be gainsaid.

It is evident then that this Queen, 14.
as well as her Parliament, looked upon this Power to be not only no Usurpation
upon the Churches Privileges, but to be a part of that Jurisdiction which had
always of Right belonged to the Crown; and was Usurped from it in the Times of
Popery. All the Bishops together.
And so, in the next place, did her Bishops too. For however being not yet
assembled in Convocation, Bishop Burnet Hist of the Reform. 2 Vol. Append. p.
365. 366.
they could not so Authoritatively settle the Articles of Religion as shortly
after they did; yet being met together, they agreed upon certain Articles to be
sent to their Clergy, and by them published to the People, in the mean time,
till a Convocation should be called, to consider farther of this Matter. In the
7th of these their Articles they treat of the Power of the Civil Magistrate:
And therein require their Clergy to acknowledge the Queens Majesty's
Prerogative, and Superiority of Government, of all Estates, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temperal, -- to be Agreeable to God's Word; and of Right to
appertain to her Highness, in such sort as in the late Act of Parliament is
expressed; 1 Eliz. c. 1.
and Sithence by her Majesty's Injunctions, Declared and Expounded.

It would be needless to observe that the Act of Parliament here referred to is
that of the same Year, made for the Restoring the Crown to its Jurisdiction
over the Estate Ecclesiastical; and by which the so often mentioned Act of King
Henry the VIII. was expressly Revived. As for the Queen's Injunctions, I have
already shown that where they Treat of this Matter the most Favorably, they
nevertheless assert the same Power to the Queen that King Henry the VIII.
Sparrows Collect. page 83.
and King Edward the VI. challenged, and used: And what that was, in the
particular under Debate, is not doubted of, or denied by those, See Municip.
Eccles. p. 107.
who the most oppose Us in the present Vindication of it.

So that here then we have in our first Entry upon this Reign; the Queen, the
Parliament, and the Bishops, All approving of, and confirming this Authority.
And so they continued, all her Time, to do: There being hardly any Controversy
either more largely Debated, or more accurately Handled, than this of the Royal
Supremacy; against which our Adversaries, on both sides, appeared with all
their Skill, and were as effectually Answered, by the Greatest, and most
Learned, of our Church.

Among these, 15.
as there was no one higher in Dignity, A. B. Whitgift.
so neither was there any more Eminent both for his Abilities, and good
Affections to the Church of England, than Archbishop Whitgift: And whose
Controversy with the Puritans, is one of the most learned, and judicious Works,
Defense of the Answer to the Admonition, etc.
of those Days. In this, the xx th Tract, is wholly spent in the defense of the
Princes Right in Ecclesiastical Matters: Wherein having charged his Adversaries
with holding the Popish Opinions, and even using their very Arguments; He tells
them, Page 698, 699. That the continual Practice of the Christian Churches, (
in the time of Christian Magistrates) before the Usurpation of the Bishop of
Rome, was, to give Christian Princes Supreme Authority in making Ecclesiastical
Orders, and Laws; yea, and which is more, in Deciding of Matters of Religion,
even in the Chief and Principle Points. This he proves by several Instances;
and then concludes in these very Words, whereby it appears, that the chief
Authority in -- Councils, was given to the Emperor, and that He was esteemed
as the chief Judge.

In his next Division he shows, Ib. p. 700.
that the learned and ancient Fathers, have committed the Matters of
Controversy to Emperors. And then adds, The Practice therefore of the
Authority of Princes in Ecclesiastical Matters, even in Determining and Judging
Controversies in Religion, you might have learnt by these Examples in Ambrose
time. Whose Authority the Municip. Eccles. also, brings against it; p. 163, 164.


Against this T. C. then objected, Ib. page 701.
as some others (from their Pattern) do now, the disability of Princes to
Decree of what pertains to the Church. See Municip. Eccles. p. 173. very
Foolishlyly, as well as Disrespectful, as to this Matter.
The Archbishop replies: That the Deb^ting, and Deciding of Matters in Religion
by Bishops, does not derogate from the Prince's Authority. No Godly Princes,
having Godly Bishops, and Ministers of the Church, will alter, or change,
determine, or appoint, any thing in Matters of Religion, without their Advice
and Counsel. But how if there be Dissension among them? Shall not the Prince
determine the Controversy, as Constantinus, Theodosius, and other Godly
Emperors did?

In short; Page 702.
to T. C. 's Endeavor to clear the Puritans from running in with the Papists
in this Particular, the Archbishop thus replies. Concerning the Determination
of Matters in Religion, I know not wherein you differ from them. For though the
Prince mislikes your Determination, yet can he not Himself conclude any thing;
only he may compel you to go to it again, and take better Rold: But if it shall
please you to Go forward in your Determination, or if you cannot Agree among
your selves, I see not what Authority you have given the Civil Magistrate to
Determine the matter; but for ought I can espy, if you and your Seniors be
disposed to be peevish, either must the Prince have no Religion, or such as you
shall appoint unto Him. For potestatem Facti you have given Him, that is, you
make him your Executioner; but Potestatem Juris you do as fully Remove from him
as the Papists do: For he has not, as you say, any Authority to make Orders,
or Laws, in Ecclesiastical Matters.

Thus this great Assertor both of the Prince's,. 16.
and of the Church's Power. Archbishop Bancroft.
To him let me add, his Successor, both in the Sea of Canterbury, and in this
Controversy, Archbishop Bancroft: Who, in his Survey of the Pretended Holy
Discipline, thus marks out those Parts of it, which he looked upon to be
prejudicial to the Regal Authority. See the Survey, etc. chap. xxii, xxiii.
No Civil Magistrate has Pre-eminence (by Ordinary Authority) to determine
Church Causes. No Chief Magistrate, in Councils, or Assemblies for Church
Matters, can either be Chief Moderator, Over-Ruler, Judge, or Determiner. No
Civil Magistrate has such Authority, that without his Consent it should not be
Lawful for Ecclesiastical Persons, to make any Church Order, or Ceremony. The
Judgment of Church Matters pertains to God: The Principality, or Direction of
the Judgment of them, is, by God's Ordinance, pertaining to the Ministers of
the Church. As they meddle not with the making of Civil Laws, and Laws for the
Commonwealth, so the Civil Magistrate has not to Ordain Ceremonies pertaining
to the Church.

These he calls Puritane-Popish Assertions; and says, that they do much
derogate from the Lawful Authority of Christian Princes. Page 259.
There is but this only Difference betwixt them, and the Rankest Jesuits in
Europe; that what the One sort ascribe to the Pope and his Shavelings; the
Others challenge to Themselves, and their Aldermen.

For the better clearing of which, he compares their Principles together: Page
267.
And thus He sets down the Puritan Hypothesis, from their Own Stating of it.
The Prince may call a Council of the Ministry, and appoint both the Time, and
Hours, for the same -- He may be assistant there, and have his Voice, but he
may not be either Moderator, Determiner, or Judge. Neither may the Orders, or
Decrees there made, be said to have been done by the Prince's Authority. --
They are to Defend Councils, being Assembled. If any One behave themselves
there Tumultuously, or otherwise Disorderly, the Prince may Punish him. Lastly,
He not only may, but Ought to, Confirm the Decrees of such Councils, and see
them Executed, and punish the Contemners of them.

Thus far Mr. Cartwright: And in the next Page, the Archbishop shows that the
Papists say the very same things; and of both He affirms in his following
Chapter, P. 269.
that Hereby they Exclude Christian Princes from their Lawful Authority in
Causes Ecclesiastical.

Having thus seen what these Masters of the Consistory allow to Christian
Princes in Ecclesiastical Matters, it might not perhaps be improper for me to
ask of our New Disciplinarians, wherein they differ from them in the Point
before us. But, indeed, it is clear, that if there be any Difference at all
between them, Municip. Eccle. p. 123, 124.
it consists in this, That those Men, as bad as they were, yet really allowed
more Authority to the Civil Magistrate over their Church Assemblies, than our
Modern Disputers are willing to afford him over Our Convocations. And then I
shall leave it to any one to judge, what those Great Prelates would have said
of these, who Wrote so severely, as we have seen, against Those.

From these Archbishops of the Sea of Canterbury,. 17.
let us descend to two of their Suffragan Bishops; and engaged against Another
Party, though still in Defense of the same Authority; viz. Jewel, Bishop of
Salisbury, and Bilson Bishop of Winchester.

As for the former of these, Bishop Jewel.
our Learned Jewel, he thus declares to us the Right of the Prince, Jewel
Def. of the Apolog. p. 582.
in the Defense of his Apology, against Harding. Page 582. The Christian
Emperors in the Old time appointed the Councils of Bishops. -- Continually for
the space of 500 Tears, Ibid. p. 592.
the Emperor alone appointed the Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and called the
Councils of the Bishops together.

As for Right of Place, Page 558.
and Voice in Council, it pertains no less to the Prince, Ibid. p. 600.
than to the Pope. -- The Emperor Theodosius, as says Socrates, did not only
Sit among the Bishops, but also ordered the whole Arguing of the Cause; and
tare in pieces the Heretics Books, and allowed for Good the Judgment of the
Catholics.

But ye say, Page 597.
they Sat as Assessors only, not as Judges: That is to say, they Sat by the
Bishops, and held their Peace, and told the Clock, and said nothing.

The Lay Prince has had Authority in Council, Ibid. p. 604.
not only to Consent, and Agree unto Others, but also to define and determine;
and that in Cases of Religion; as by many Evident Examples it may appear.

In all Cases, Page 602.
as well Ecclesiastical, as Temporal, the Emperor was Judge over All.
Whatsoever the Council had determined, without the Emperors Consent, Ibid. p.
558.
it had no force. -- Theodosius, at the desire of the Bishops, Confirmed the
Council of Ephesus.

So high an Erastian was this Good Old Bishop;. 18.
and so freely has he Sacrificed all the Rights of the Church to the Will of
the Prince. Municip. Eccles. Pref. and page 7.
Nor has Bishop Bilson Bishop Bilson.
come at all behind him: The Second Part of whose Book, Entitled, The true
Difference between Christian Subjection, and Unchristian Rebellion. 4o. Oxford,
1585. is but One continued Discourse in Defense of the Supremacy, and of which
it shall suffice to point out some Brief Heads on this Occasion.

1. That the Emperors heretofore called Councils: This he proves; page 134,
153, 159, 227, etc.

2. That they appointed the Time, and Place of them; p. 154, 155. Nay, and even
the Persons that should come to them; p. 207. And have Voices in them; p. 208.

3. That they directed what should be handled in them; p. 135. Managed their
Debates; p. 134. And forbad them to call in Question the Faith, that had by
former Synods been Established; p. 155, 208.

4. That they judged of their Proceedings; p. 135. And that in Matters of
Doctrine; p. 261. By the Common Rule of All Christians, the Word of God; p.
264, 266, 276.

5. That they Confirmed the Councils Decrees; See p. 242. And this not at all
adventures; but chose such of their Canons as they approved, and passed them
into Laws; p. 139.

6. That as to their Sentences; they Received Appeals from Councils; p. 135,
151, 152. Suspended; p. 154. And if they thought them too severe, Released the
Rigor of their Censures, and Determinations; p. 136.

These are some of the Points which this Learned Man not only allows of, Page
192, to 198. -- Ibid. p. 200, 249.
but defends from the Examples of the Jewish Princes, and Christian Emperors.
And I will be bold to say, either his Treatise is altogether False and
Scandalous; contrary to the Rights of the Church, and the Sense of the Ancient
Fathers; or my Discourse, after all that has been said against it, must be
Confessed to be True and Orthodox, and agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church
of England.

But because Bishops may be looked upon as Suspicious Men,. 19.
let us see what those of an Inferior Order, have written in this Case: And for
these I will take but One of a Kind; Dean Nowell, for the Dignitaries; and the
Venerable Mr. Hooker, for the Rest of the Lower House.

As for Mr. Hooker, the latter of these, Dean Nowell.
He was much too Young to have had any part in that Convocation, in which our
Articles of Religion were settled. But Dr. Nowell, was not only one of the most
considerable Members of the Lower House at that time, by his Own Dignity; but
chosen, by the Clergy, for their Prolocutor, and so had the Chief Management of
All that was done in it.

It was but Three Years after this, Dean Nowell's Reproof of Mr. Dorman's Book,
Entitled, A Proof, etc. 4o. Land. 1565. Part Second.
that Mr. Dorman, one of our Fugitive English Papists, attacking the Queen's
Supremacy, as by Law Established, and then newly approved of by the
Convocation; this Learned Dean thought himself concerned to undertake the
Defense of it. And indeed he has so well discharged his Part in it, that, I
believe, it will be very hard for our Modern Transcribers of their Arguments
and Authorities, to allege any thing, upon this Occasion, that will not be
found to have been fully answered, beforehand, in that Book. Against T. C.
before:. 15.
His Treatise is expressly Referred to, and approved of by Archbishop Whitgift,
in his Discourse upon this Subject; and so may be looked upon to deliver the
Sense of that Great Archbishop, as well as the Dean's. Nor can it be reasonably
doubted by Any, but that it does deliver the Sense of the Whole Convocation,
and Clergy of the Church of England, in this particular.

Let us see then, how he States the Point, between Us, and his Adversary, as to
this matter; and, by what kind of Proofs he undertakes to Vindicate the One,
against the Other.

The matter in debate, he thus accurately determines; For. 23. We expressly
divide the Offices of Christian and Godly Princes, from the Offices of Bishops,
and Other Ministers of the Church under Them, as distinct, and diverse Offices.
And we do teach, that the Offices of Preaching of God's Word; of the
Pronouncing of Public Prayer in the Church of Christ; the Power of the Keys,
or of Binding and Loosing, and of Ministering the Holy Sacraments, are, by the
Word of God, appointed to be the Peculiar Offices of Bishops, and of other
Ecclesiastical Ministers. -- And we Teach, and Preach, even in Presence of
Princes; that neither Princes, nor Any Other Persons, saving only Bishops, and
other Ecclesiastical Ministers under them, may intermeddle with the said
Offices, and Ministries Ecclesiastical, so peculiarly, and only appertaining to
the said Bishops, and Other Ministers of the Church. -- P. 24. When we do speak
of Causes Ecclesiastical, wherein Christian Princes are the Chief Governors; we
mean not that Princes should Execute these Peculiar Offices of Priests, as is
also in the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions -- notified to all the Subjects of
the Realm, that will be disposed to understand the Truth, without Cavillation.

But now touching the Authority of Princes, to Oversee that the Bishops, and
Clergy, do these their Offices -- diligently, and truly, according to the Rule
of God's Word; to Command them to do their Duty; to Admonish them, being
therein slack; to Reprehend them Offending; Depose, or Deprive them, being
Incorrigible; -- This we say is the Office of a Chief Governor over the the
said Persons Ecclesiastical, which does appertain to Christian Princes, every
One in their own Dominions.

Further; Comp. page 51, 68, 257, 263.
besides the Office of Preaching, and Ministering the Sacraments -- there are
many other Orders, Matters, and Causes Ecclesiastical, touching Ceremonies, and
the outward Regiment of the Church, (which may be termed the Ecclesiastical
Policy) -- Page 25. There is also the Authority to Receive Appellations, and
finally to Determine Controversies arising amongst Persons Ecclesiastical: To
Summon and Call Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, as Men exercised in
the Study of the Scriptures, to Synods, Convocations, and Councils in Necessary
Cases; -- To Order, Govern, and Protect, the said Bishops, and Clergy, being so
called together; and to Approve, and Authorize things for the Outward Order
Ecclesiastical, and Policy, determined in such Synods. These be those Causes
Ecclesiastical that we do speak of, which do not pertain to Bishops and Priests
only. In these Cases, and Causes, Ecclesiastical, the Authority of a Christian
Prince is not only not excluded from intermedling, with the Bishops and Clergy,
but the Prince's Authority is Chief therein: Which Authority the Christian
Prince exercising, does not Intermeddle with any Office, belonging to Bishops
and Priests only (as the Adversaries of the Truth do falsely bear Men in hand)
but with their Own Offices, by the Examples, and Practice, of all Ancient Godly
Princes, as well in the Old Law, as in Christian Religion, proved of Right to
them to Appertain -- And to Our Prince also, by the Ancient Laws and Statutes
of the Realm, (as to the Learned in the said Laws is not Unknown) of Right
appertaining.

This is the Account which he gives of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
concerning the Authority of Christian Princes in Matters of Religion. The
Proofs he alleges are full, and conclusive: From the Examples of Constantine,
p. 208, to 223. Theodosius, p. 227, to 238. The Council of Chalcedons, p. 239,
to 246. The Third Council of Constantinople, p. 250, to 253. Justinian the
Emperor, p. 276, etc. To Omit many other Particulars, in the Vindication of
which I am not so immediately concerned. And I will be bold to say, there is
nothing by me advanced in this Argument, which has not been both more highly
carried, and more particularly explained, in behalf of the Prince, by this
Great Champion of our Church, in his accurate, and solid Treatise upon the same
Subject.

Such was the Opinion of Dean Nowell;. 20.
nor does Mr. Hooker come at all behind him. Mr. Hooker.
The Ancient Imperial Law, says he, forbids such Assemblies as the Emperor's
Authority did not cause to be made. Eccles. Polit. p. 457.
Before Emperors became Christians, the Church had never any General Synod;
their greatest Meetings consisting of Bishops, and Others the gravest in Each
Province. As for the Civil Governor's Authority, it suffered them only as
things not Regarded, or not accounted of, at such times as it did suffer them.
So that what Right a Christian King has, as touching Assemblies of that kind,
we are not Able to judge till we come to later Times, when Religion had won the
Hearts of the Higher Powers. Constantine was not only the First that ever did
Call any General Council together, but even the first that devised the Calling
of them, for Consultation about the Business of God. After He had Once given
the Example, his Successors, a long time, followed the same.

Touching that Supremacy of Power, Page 459.
which our Kings have in the Case of making Laws, it rests principally in the
Strength of a Negative Voice, which not to give them, were to deny them that
Without which they were Kings only by a mere Title, and not in Exercise of
Dominion.

If it be demanded by what Right, from Constantine downwards, the Christian
Emperors did so far intermeddle in the Church's Affairs; either we must herein
condemn them, as being over-presumptuously bold; or else Judge that by a Law
which is termed Regia, that is to say, Royal, the People having derived unto
their Emperors their whole Power for making Laws, what matter soever they did
concern; As Imperial Dignity endowed them with competent Authority and Power,
to make Laws for Religion; so they were thought by Christianity to Use their
Power, being Christians, unto the Benefit of the Church of Christ. Was there
any Christian Bishop in the World which did then judge this Repugnant unto that
Dutiful Subjection which Christians owe to the Pastors of their Souls?

Wherefore of them which in this Point attribute most to the Clergy, Page 468.
I would demand, What Evidence there is whereby it may clearly be showed, that
in Ancient Kingdoms Christian, any Canon, devised by the Clergy alone in their
Synods, whether Provincial, National, or General, has, by mere force of their
Agreement, taken place as a Law; making all Men constrainable to be Obedient
thereunto, without any Other Approbation from the King, before, or afterward,
Required in that behalf.

And this shall suffice for the Reign of this Great, and Wise Queen. I shall
make no Apology for taking these last Quotations out of that part of Mr.
Hooker's Works, which are not of Equal Authority with the Books published by
himself in his Life time: There being so much of Mr. Hooker's Style, and Reason
in them, as makes me undoubtedly conclude, that, as they are, they proceeded
from Him. And those who are supposed to have interpolated these Books, were
never charged with turning things to the Advantage of Sovereign Authority. So
that if any Changes, or Omissions, should have happened in this Place, it must
have been to the Disadvantage, not to the Interest, of the Cause before Us. But
I shall be content to take his Opinion as it still is left to Us; and is
sufficiently contrary to that wild Notion of Chruch Power, which is now again
set on foot, though by another sort of Men, in Pretense at least, among us.

KING JAMES I.
We have before seen how the Oath of Supremacy,. 21.
framed in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, set the Pens of those
of that Age, on Work, in discussing the Authority of the Christian Prince, in
Causes, and over Persons, Ecclesiastical. It was not very long after the coming
of King James into England, before another Oath, again Revived the same
Controversy; and set the most Learned Men of the Church of Rome, upon a fresh
Opposition of the Royal Authority.

Among those who, King James.
on our side, appeared in Defense of it, as no one began sooner, so is there
none that ought to be rather taken notice of by Us, than the King himself; who
with Good Learning, as well as with a Style becoming a Prince, solemnly
asserted his own Royal Rights, and Jurisdiction.

And, first, In his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, we have his Opinion
plainly delivered, in several Points relating to our present Disquisition.
Answerably to the Fathers, The King 's Works, p. 255.
spoke the Councils in their Decrees: As the Council of Arles, submitting the
whole Council to the Emperor in these Words: These things we have Decreed to
be presented to our Lord the Emperor; beseeching his Clemency, that if we have
done less than we ought, it may be supplied by his Wisdom; if any thing
otherwise than Reason requires, it may be Corrected by his Judgment; if any
thing be found Fault with by Us, with Reason, it may be Perfected, by his Aid,
with Gods favorable Assistance.

But why should I speak of Charles the Great, to whom not One Council, but Six
several Councils, Frankford, Arles, Tours, Chalons, Mentz and Rhemes, did
wholly Submit themselves: And not rather speak of all the General Councils,
that of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Calcedon, and the four others commonly
so Reputed, which did submit themselves to the Emperors Wisdom and Piety in
all things? Insomuch as that of Ephesus repeated it four several times, That
they were Summoned by the Emperor 's Oracle, beck, charge, and command; and
betook themselves to his Godliness, beseeching him that the Decrees made
against Nestorius, and his Followers, might, by his Power, have their full
Force and Validity.

And in his Defense of the Right of Kings, Ib p. 427.
He thus confirms the same Principles. It is willingly granted that Emperors
never challenged, never arrogated, to be Sovereign Judges in Controversies of
Doctrine and Faith. Nevertheless it is clearer than the Suns light at high
Noon, that for Moderation at Synods, for Determinations and Orders established
in Councils; and for the Discipline of the Church, they have made a good, and
full Use of their Imperial Authority. The first Council held at Constantinople,
bears this Title, or Inscription; The Dedication of the Holy Synod to the most
Religious Emperor Theodsius the Great, to whose Will and Pleasure, they have
Submitted these Canons, by them addressed, and established in Council: And
there also they beseech the Emperor to Confirm and Approve, the said Canons.
The like has been done by the Council of Trullo, by whom the Canons of the
fifth and sixth Councils, were put forth and Published. This was not done
because Emperors took upon them to be Infallible Judges of Doctrine, but only
that Emperors might see and judge whether Bishops (who feel the Prick of
Ambition, as other Men do) did propound nothing in their Convocations and
Consultations, but most of all in their Determinations, to undermine the
Emperors Authority; to disturb the Tranquillity of the Commonwealth; and to
cross the Determinations of Precedent Councils. Now to take the Cognizance of
such Matters out of the Kings Hand, or Power, what is it but even to Transform
the King into a Standing Image: -- yea, to bring him down to this Basest
Condition, to become only an Executioner, and (which I scorn to Speak) the
unhappy Hangman of the Clergies Will?

The King having thus asserted the Authority of Christian Princes, 22.
in this particular; Bp. Andrews.
was soon Assaulted by those of the other Party. Cardinal Bellarmine, at that
time accounted one of the most Learned Controvertists of the Church of Rome,
first, under the Name of Tortus, fell with great Bitterness upon him. To him
his Majesty scoring to reply, Bishop Andrews, took the Cause upon himself; and
with Great Spirit, and Judgment, replied to him. So that here then, in these
two, we may expect to see what is to be said, on either side, upon this
Subject. As for the Cardinals Opinion, I am not concerned to take any Notice of
it: But that which the Bishop asserts, and with great Force of Reason, and
Evidence of Antiquity, defends, is to this Effect: Tort. Torti. p. 177.
That Kings have Power both to call Synods, and to Confirm them; and to do all
Other things which the Emperors heretofore diligently did do; Comp. Municip.
Eccles. p. 14. 15.
and which the Bishops of those Times willingly acknowledged of Right to belong
to them.

And 1st. See also. p. 174.
That to Christian Princes belongs the Sole Right of calling Synods, he proves
from the History of the General Councils that were assembled under them, p.
165. And from the Examples of those which were afterward held under Charles
the Emperor; p. 164.

2dly. That having Assembled them they have a Right of Inspecting and
Examining; of Approving or Rejecting their Acts; He likewise shows p. 162, 164.
You know, says the Bishop, how Constantine wrote to the Synod of Tire: All you,
as many as made up the Synod of Tire, hasten without delay to come to Us, and
show us truly how sincerely and rightly ye have Judged: p. 173.

He adds, 3dly. That they may come to, and make a part of the Synod: This he
proves, p. 174. And then, p. 176. thus Sums up the Royal Authority: Put this,
says he, together: The King assembles the Synod; the Synod presumes to do
nothing without his Knowledge. The King commits the whole Affair to their
Power: They, by virtue of his Princely Command, proceed to do what was needful
to be done.

I might easily Confirm this same Opinion both of the King and Bishop, with the
Concurrent Authority of Burhil, Tooker, and some Others, who, were afterward,
engaged in the same Controversy. But I must not enlarge upon this Subject,
having so much more yet to observe both of this King, and this Bishop, upon
another Occasion, as to the Points under Debate.

The King being Dissatisfied with the Proceedings of the Presbyterian Ministers
in Scotland,. 23.
for holding a Generally Assembly at Aberdeen, See Spotswood, lib. vii. p. 486.
contrary to his Command; sent for a certain Number of the most Eminent of them
to come up to him, to London, and satisfy him in some Things, in which he
thought he had just reason of Complaint against them.

To these Ministers, after other things Transacted with them; he delivered
three Quaeres relating to his Authority in Ecclesiastical Matters, and demanded
their several Answers to them. The Second of these Questions, and from which we
may sufficiently conclude what Opinion his Majesty had of his own Royal
Supremacy, Calderwood Hist. p. 543.
was this: Let the Author of the Municip. Eccles. Answer this Question better,
if he can.
Whether they acknowledge his Majesty, by the Authority of his Prerogative
Royal, as a Christian King, to have lawful and full Power, to Convocate,
Prorogate, and cause desert, upon just and necessare Causes known to him, the
Assemblies of the Kirk, within his Majesty's Dominions? How they trifled with
his Majesty in their Answer to these Questions, as well as in all the other
Affairs about which they had been sent for, is neither material to my Purpose
to show, and may at large be seen in the Histories here Referred to by me. That
which I have further to observe is, that during the Course of this Transaction,
the King caused four of his English Bishops, on certain Days appointed to them,
to Preach before him at Hampton Court, and Commanded the Scotch Ministers to be
present at their Sermons.

The third of these turns fell upon our learned Andrews,. 24.
at that time Bishop of Chichester; whose Subject, assigned him by the King,
was, to prove the Power of Princes, in Convocating Synods and Councils. In
order whereunto he first laid down these two Points: Sermons. page 105.
1. That when the Prince calls, the Clergy are to meet: And 2. That they are
not to meet, of Themselves, unless he call them.

The Proof of these Points he thus pursues: 1st. From the Law of God, p. 104.
105. confirmed by the Law of Nature, and Nations, p. 106. And 2dly. From Matter
of Fact: Before Christ; From Moses, to the Macchabee's, in the Jewish Church.
p. 106, 107. After Christ; From Constantine, till a Thousand Years after
Christ; (1) By General Councils; (2) By National, and Provincial Councils,
assembled. (3) Under Emperors, and (4) Kings, by the space of many Hundred
Years, p. 108.

This is the Substance of his Sermon; and from which I shall proceed to extract
some part of what he says, in the Prosecution of most of the Heads, before laid
down.

1st. In Speaking of the Law of Nations he has this Remark: Page 106. Comp.
Municip. Eccles. p. 100. 101.
The Law of Nations in this Point might easily appear, if time would suffer,
both in their General Order for Convocations so to be called, and in their
General Opposing all Conventicles called Otherwise. Verily the Heathen Laws
made all such Assemblies Unlawful, which the highest Authority did not cause to
meet; yea, though they were -- Sub praetextu Religionis, say the Roman Laws.
Neither did the Christian Emperors think fit to abate any thing of that Right;
nay they took more straight Order.

2dly. Concluding his Account of the Jewish State, Page 107. Comp. Municip.
Eccles. p. 131, 132, etc.
he has these Words: Thus from Moses to the Maccabees, we see in whose Hands
this Power was. And what should I say more? There was in all God 's People no
One Religious King, but this Power he Practiced: And there was of all God 's
Prophets no One, that ever interposed any Prohibition against it.

What shall we say then? Were all these wrong? Shall we condemn them all? --
Yet to this we are come now, that either we must condemn them All, the One
after Another; the Kings as Usurpers for taking on them to use more Power than
ever orderly they Received; the Prophets for soothers of them in that their
unjust Claim; Or else confess that they did no more than they might, and
exceeded not therein the Bounds of their Calling. And indeed that we must
Confess, for that is the Truth.

3dly. In treating of General Councils, Page 108. Comp. Municip. Eccles p. 126,
135, etc.
he thus Speaks of that of Nice. At Nice there were together 318 Bishops, the
Lights of the whole World, the chiefest and choicest Men for Holiness,
Learning, Virtue, and Valor, that the Christian Religion ever had, before or
since. -- Did any of them refuse to come being called by Him, ( Constantine) as
not called aright? Or coming, was there any One of them that did Protest
against it; Page 109.
or pleaded the Churches Interest to meet of Themselves? -- Verily the Council
of Nice, (which is, and ever has been so much admired by All Christians)
cannot be excused before God or Men, if they thus conspired (All) to betray the
Churches Right; and suffered it, contrary to all Equity, to be carried away;
leaving a dangerous Precedent therein, for all Councils, ever after, to the
Worlds End. -- There is no Man of Reason but will think it reasonable, if this
were the Churches own peculiar, if Appropriate unto it, (and so known to them
to be) there ought to have been plain dealing now, at the very first Council of
All, that if Constantine would embrace Religion, he must forbear to meddle with
their Assemblies.

4thly. But it may be General Councils have a Fashion by Themselves: Page 110.
Comp. Municip. Eccles. p. 6.
Those Congregations may be called thus; but National or Provincial, such as
Ours, How? Even so too, Ib. p. 159.
and no otherwise -- Yea, I add this, which is a Point to be considered, that
even then when the Emperors were professed Arians, even then did the Bishops
acknowledge their Power to call Councils; Come to them being called, Sued to
them that they might be called; -- And sometimes They sped -- and sometimes
not. And yet when they sped not they held themselves Quiet, and never presumed
to Draw together, of their Own Heads.

But it may be this was some Imperial Power, Ib. p. 110.
and that the Emperors had, in this Point, more Jurisdiction than Kings? Not
that neither: For about 500 Years after Christ, when the Empire fell in Pieces,
and these Western Parts came into the Hands of Kings, those Kings had, held,
and enjoyed, and practiced the same Power.

If it be excepted that there are of these ( Provincial and National) Councils,
Ib p. 111. Comp. Municip Eccles. p. 168.
which carry in their Acts no mention how they were called; For them we are to
understand, that after the Decrees of the first Nicene Council were by
Constantine's Edict confirmed, wherein, as likewise in the Council of
Chalcedon, it was ordered, that each Province should Yearly hold their Synods
twice -- We are to conceive the Emperor's Authority was in All afterward;
habitually at least. --

5thly. But what say you to the 300 Years, Comp. Municip. Eccles. Chapt. vi.
and vii.
before Constantine? How went Assemblies then? -- Truly even as the Jews did
before in Egypt. They were then a Church under Persecution, till Moses was
raised up by God, a lawful Magistrate over them. -- No Magistrate did Assemble
them in Egypt: And, good Reason, They had none then to do it.

True it is therefore, Ib. p. 112.
that before Constantine's Time they met together as they durst; and took such
Order as they could. -- But when Constantine came in Moses Place, it was lawful
for him to do as Moses did. And so he did: And they never said to him -- Look
how we have done hitherto, we will do so even still; Meet no otherwise now,
than in former Times we have, by Our Own Agreement; -- No, but they went to
him, as to Moses, for their Meetings; At his Hands they sought them; Without
his Leave, or Liking, they would not Attempt them: Yea (I dare say) they
blessed God from their Hearts that they had lived to see the Day, that they
might now Assemble by the Sound of the Trumphet.

To conclude this Point then; These two Times, or Estates of the Church, are
not to be Confounded: There is a plain difference between them, and a diverse
Respect to be had of Each. If the Succession of Magistrates be interrupted, in
such Case, of Necessity, the Church, of her self, makes supply, because then
God's Order Cease. But God granting a Constantine to them again, God's
former, Positive Order, returns, and the Case is to proceed, Ib. p. 113.
and go on, as before. -- In a Word, None can seek to have the Congregation so
called (as before Constantine) but they must secretly, and by Implication,
confess, See Municip. Eccles. p. 115.
they are a Persecuted Church, as that then was; without a Moses, without a
Constantine.

6thly. Hitherto we have seen the Opinion of this Learned Prelate in the Case
before us; let us now see what Application he made of what he had offered on
this Subject. Ib. p. 113.
You may please to Remember, says he, there was not long since a Clergy in
place that was wholly ad Oppositum, and would never have yielded to Reform
ought. Nothing they would do; and (in Eye of the Law) without them Nothing
could be done. They had encroached the Power of Assembling into their Own
Hands. How then? How shall we do for an Assembly? Then -- the Prince had this
Power, and to him, of Right, it belonged. This was then God Divinity: And what
Writer is there extant, of those Times, but it may be turned to in him? And was
it Good Divinity then, and is it now no longer so? Was the King but Licensed,
for a while to hold this Power till another Clergy were in, and must he then be
deprived of it again? Was it then Usurped from Princes; and are, now, Princes
Usurpers of it Themselves? -- Nay I trust we will be better Advised, and not
thus go against our selves, and let Truth be no longer Truth, than it will
serve our turns.

I shall conclude all I have to draw out of this Discourse, with the same
Words, that the Learned Preacher concludes his Sermon; It remains that as
God, by his Law, has taken this Order, and his People, in former Ages, have
kept this Order, that we do so too: That we say, as God says, -- This Power
pertains unto Moses: And that neither with Core we say We will not come; Nor
with Demetrius run together of our selves, and think to carry it away with
crying Great is Diana. But as we see the Power is of God, so truly to
acknowledge it, and dutifully to yield to it: That so they, whose it is, may
quietly hold it, and laudably use it, to his Glory that gave it, and to their
Good, for whom it was given.

It will not, 25.
I hope, be thought much of, that I have so long insisted upon the Judgment of
this Great Prelate, in the present Case. No Man there was in that Time, or
perhaps in any Other Age of the Church, that was either fitter to deliver the
Sense of our Clergy, or better qualified to maintain it. I might add that this
Discourse, being Preached first, and then Published, by the express Command of
the King, carries with it somewhat more than a Private Authority And when it
shall be considered how little a while it was, before this, that that
Convocation met, Anno 1603.
which took such care both to explain its Sense of the Royal Supremacy, and to
give the utmost Cononical Enforcement, that could be given to it; we may well
conclude this to have been the Universal Judgment of our Church Divines in that
Reign; as we are sure it was of those, of the Reign foregoing.

I have already alleged the Authorities of those two Eminent Archbishops,
Whitgift, and Bancroft: To these I have added those of Bilson, and Hooker; and
I thought it but Reasonable to give them a place in the same Period in which
their Books were published. But yet I must observe, that the most of These, not
only continued to the present time; but attained to their highest Promotions
under this Government The Synod of 1603, was held under the Presidence of
Bancroft, then Bishop of London: Bishop Bilson, was a Member of it; and, no
doubt, concurred heartily to the passing of those Canons, which relate to the
King's Supremacy in it. I shall therefore, here, add only the Judgment of One
Learned Man more (who must never be mentioned but with a particular Respect by
Us;) Mr. Mason; and that out of a Work which he wrote expressly in Vindication
of the Reformed Church, and Ministry of England.

Champanaeus,. 26.
his Adversary, had thus far allowed of the Authority of the Christian Prince
in Matters of Religion; Mr. Mason.
That He might make Laws in Defense of the true Religion (which he was to learn
from the Clergy) and might, De Ministerio Anglic. lib. 3. c. 3. page 271.
nay was bound, to see them Put in Execution. But that Princes should have a
Power of Judging, or Defining, in Ecclesiastical Matters, as the Proper Judges,
and Hearers of them, this, he says, is a Paradox never heard of in the
Christian World, before the time of Henry VIII.

To this Mr. Mason Replies, Page 272.
That it is indeed the Business of Pastors to Explain the Doubtful things of
the Law: But that it belongs to the Prince to Promulge the Truth, when known,
Ibid. p. 273.
and to command his Subjects to Obey it. -- That he must judge Whether the
Priests do Go according to the Law of God. -- And to that End, must Search the
Scriptures; Pray to God; Advise with Learned Men; and not be led away with the
fair Titles, or Characters of Any, nor have so much Regard to the Number of
Votes, as to Truth.

Upon this Foundation he proceeds, at large, to assert these following Points.
1. That it is the Prince 's business to Call Councils, Page 291, 292, -- 294.
298.
and to appoint the Time, Comp. Munic. Eccles. page 108, 109.
and Place of their Assembling -- 2. That he has the Power to propose to the
Bishops and Clergy, what shall be treated on in their Synod. 3. To prescribe
the Rule, and Measure of Judging. 4. To Restrain them from calling in question
the Faith already Orthodoxly settled, in former Synods. Ibid. 292, 300.
5. To Rescind the Pernicious Decrees of Councils, and to Confirm and Ratify,
such as are Pious, and Wholesome, by his Authority. [Lib. iii. c. iv. p. 298.]

To which Points, thus put together by Himself, let me add from the other parts
of his Discourse; Ib. p. 292, 298.
6. The Power to Preside in Synods, and to Govern their Acts. -- 295.
7. To Appoint Judges in Ecclesiastical Matters, and over Ecclesiastical
Persons. -- 297.
8. To Judge between the Bishops, if they shall happen to differ, even in
Matters of Faith. -- 289.
And, lastly, To suspend the Acts of Councils, though in relation to Points of
Doctrine, so that during such Suspension, they shall not take Effect.

This is that Authority which this Renowned Defender of our Ministry and
Reformation, looked upon as due, of Right, to the Christian Prince. Of what
Esteem this Work in those days was, may be Gathered not only from the Great
Care, and Accuracy with which it was Composed; but from that Concern which the
Archbishop of Canterbury showed for the Publication of it. Twice it was
solemnly dedicated to King James: And being first published in our Own
Language, it was thought considerable enough to Carry both the Doctrine, and
Defense, of our Church to those Abroad, in a Latin Translation. And I have
never yet heard that any of its Adversaries could charge it with any false
Representation of our Church's Sense, how little soever they pretended to be
satisfied with His Vindication of it.

KING CHARLES I.
But I shall not tarry any longer in this Reign;. 27.
but proceed to pursue the History of the Supremacy, in the Sense of our most
Eminent Bishops, and Divines, during the Unfortunate Reign of that Excellent
Prince, and true Friend of our Church, King Charles the First.

And here, one would have thought, that the Account I took care, on purpose, to
give, with a more than ordinary particularity, of the Convocation of 1640,
might have sufficiently convinced all Unprejudiced Persons, what the Judgment
of those Times was, in the present Case. But since it is insinuated by some,
who cannot deny but that that Prince did, Municip. Eccles. p. 117.
in Fact, both Claim, and Exercise, all that Power over the Convocation, for
which I am pleading; as if All this were done merely in compliance with the
Iniquity of our Laws, and not as what Either the King, or his Archbishop, in
their Own Consciences, approved of; I will proceed to clear this matter, a
little farther; and show, that we have all the Reason in the World to believe,
that in the Management of that Convocation, they, Both of them, acted not more
agreeably to the Laws of the Realm, than to the Real Sense of their Own
Judgment.

It was but about Twelve Years before the Meeting of that Synod,. 28.
that upon the breaking out of some Disturbances, King Charles I.
upon the Account of the Arminian Tenets, the King was induced to publish anew
the Articles of Religion, and to prefix his Royal Declaration to them, suitable
to that Occasion.

The Words of this Declaration are these: Book of Articles, Printed Anno 1628.
Being, by God's Ordinance, according to our just Title, Defender of the Faith,
and Supreme Governor of the Church within these our Dominions; We hold it most
agreeable to this our Kingly Office, and our Own Religious Zeal, to Conserve,
and Maintain the Church, committed to our Charge, in Unity of true Religion,
and in the Bond of Peace; and not to suffer unnecessary Disputations,
Altercations, or Questions, to be Raised, which may nourish Faction both in the
Church and Commonweal. We have therefore, upon Mature Deliberation, and with
the Advice of so many of our Bishops, as might conveniently be called together,
thought fit to make this Declaration following: That the Articles of the Church
of England (which have been allowed, and authorized heretofore, and which our
Clergy, generally, have subscribed unto) do contain the true Doctrine of the
Church of England, agreeable to God's Word: Which we do, therefore, Ratify, and
Confirm, Requiring all our Loving Subjects to continue in the Uniform
Profession thereof, and prohibiting the least difference from the said
Articles; which, to that End, we command to be New-printed, and this Our
Declaration to be published therewith.

Such is the beginning of this Declaration; and in which we may already
observe, several notable Instances of that Supremacy we are enquiring into.
For, 1st. It is plain this King thought himself Authorized, as Supreme
Governor of the Church within his Dominions, to take care of the Unity of it;
and to put an End to those Disputes, which Some had raised, to the manifest
endangering of it. 2dly. Upon his Own mature Deliberation, and with the Advice
of such of his Bishops as he thought fit to call to his Assistance; he judges
anew of the Doctrine of the Church, contained in the XXXIX Articles, and
confirmed by so many Synods of the Clergy, as had met, since the first
Establishment of them. And, 3dly, Upon that Judgment, he again Ratifies and
Confirms them; and Requires all his Subjects to continue in the Uniform
Profession of them.

But we will go on with the Declaration, which the King farther makes: That We
are Supreme Governor of the Church of England; and that if any difference arise
about the External Policy, concerning the Injunctions, Canons, or Other
Constitutions, whatsoever, thereto belonging; the Clergy, in their Convocation,
is to Order and Settle them, having first Obtained Leave under Our Broad Seal
so to do; and We approving their said Ordinances and Constitutions; provided
that none be made Contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land.

This is the next Paragraph; and it gives us a clear account of the
Ecclesiastical Constitution of the Synods of this Realm. To them it belongs to
deliberate of what concerns the Policy of the Church; and to make Canons, etc.
for the Ordering of it. But before they can do this, they must have the King's
Leave, not only to Sit; but to Go about any such Work, being Sat: And having
done it, the King is to have the last Review; He is to Confirm, Rolls Rep.
Hill. 14. Jac. in Came. Scacc. Colt verse. Glover. p. 454, etc.
or Reject, what they do; And even that too within the Bounds that the Laws
have set both to Him and Them.

But we will Go yet farther. In the next place then the King thus declares;
That out of our Princely Care, that the Churchmen may do the Work which is
Proper unto them, the Bishops, and Clergy, from time to time, in Convocation,
upon their humble Desire, shall have License under our Broad Seal, to
deliberate of, and to do all such things, as being made plain by them, and
assented unto by Us, shall concern the settled Continuance of the Doctrine, and
Discipline, of the Church of England now Established, from which we will not
endure any Varying, or Departing, in the least Degree.

And here we have not only our former Reflections, again confirmed, but with an
Addition of some farther Instances of the Prince's Authority in these Cases.
The Clergy in Convocation, are humbly to move the King for his License, to do,
what they shall Judge to be necessary, for the better Establishment of either
the Doctrine, or Discipline, of the Church of England. To this the King is
pleased to promise them, at all times, a favorable Answer: That they shall
have Leave to do, what they desire, and he shall judge needful, to be done by
them. But still he declares it shall be with this Restraint, that what they
desire to do, be consistent with the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church,
already Established: For from that, the King Resolved that the Clergy, even in
Convocation assembled, should not be at Liberty to Vary, or Depart in the least
degree. All which being supposed, yet still they are only to deliberate, and
make plain to the King, what they think to be of Use, even within these
Restrictions. But the King is to Allow, or not Allow of it; and upon his
Rejecting, or Ratifying their Resolutions, the whole Authority, and even
Subsistence of them is to depend.

Such was the Opinion which this Prince had of his Own Royal Authority over the
Convocations of his Bishops and Clergy.. 29.
Wherein the Power here claimed by him, comes short of what our Laws have
assigned the King, and I, in my late Treatise on this Argument, have contended
for; it will, I believe, be very difficult to show. I shall only add, that this
Declaration was made by Him, with the Advice of so many of the Bishops, as
might conveniently be Called together. Who those Bishops were, with whom the
King consulted upon this Occasion, we are not told. But that Archbishop Laud
was One of them, we have all the Reason in the World to believe. He was, at
that time, a Privy-Counsellor; Dean of the Chapel; and One of the
Commissioners for the Administering of the Archbishopric, upon the
Sequestration of Archbishop Abbot; And especially advised with by the King, in
all Matters of Importance, relating to the Affairs of the Church. And upon all
which accounts we may venture almost confidently to say, that this Declaration
was, without Controversy, published by his Advice, above any Others; and speaks
his Sense, in these Matters, no less than the King's.

It is indeed a thing justly to be wondered at, Archbishop Laud.
after what I have formerly published, that any One who pretends to have any
Veneration for the Memory of that Great Prelate, should be able to make any
doubt of his Judgment in this particular. The Integrity which he showed in all
his Actions, sufficiently assures us, that what he Swore to, in the Oath of
Supremacy; Subscribed in the Articles of Religion; Approved of in the Canons of
the Church; Advised in this last Declaration; and Acted under at the Head of
the Convocation, Anno 1640, was undoubtedly agreeable to the Inward Sense of
his Own Mind. And I would desire those who, upon such slender Grounds, now
insinuate the Contrary, Municip. Eccles. page 117.
to consider, What a mean Spirit they must take a Person of his High Character
to have been acted by; who can suppose, that in a Matter of such vast
Concernment to the Church, and upon which the Divine Rights, and Authority of
it, in their Opinion, so much depend; He should nevertheless, against his Own
Conscience, run in with the Iniquity of the Times, and thereby give so
dangerous a Countenance, to those Enslaving Principles, to which he submitted.

However, since such is the Rashness of some Men, that they care not what
Injury they do the Greatest Personages, so they may but seem thereby to justify
their Own Errors; I will now give such an Evidence, not only of that
Archbishop's, but with his of all the Other Bishops, and the whole Convocations
Sense, in this Case, as will, I think, admit of no Exception.

In the Canons of 1640;. 30.
(and whose Authority, though I pretend not to assert, yet I conceive I may,
without Offense, produce them as a private Evidence of the Judgment of Those
who Composed Them;) the very first is Concerning the Regal Power. Sparrow's
Collect. P. 345.
In this they not only Approve of the Acts made for the Acknowledgment of the
King's Authority over the State Ecclesiastical; but enjoin them All to be
carefully Observed, by all Persons whom they may Concern.

They add: That a Supreme Power is given, by God himself, to Kings, to Rule and
Command all Persons, of what Rank soever, whether Ecclesiastical, or Civil.

The Care of God's Church, say they, is so committed to Kings in Scripture,
that they are Commended when the Church keeps the Right way, and Taxed when it
runs Amiss: And therefore Her Government belongs, in Chief, unto Kings. For
otherwise, One Man would be Commended for Another Care, and Taxed for Another
Negligence, which is not God's way.

The Power to Call, and Dissolve, Councils, both National, and Provincial, is
the true Right of Therefore not of ours only; nor by the Stat. of H. 8. Municip
Eccles.
all Christian Kings, within their Own Realms and Territories. And when, in the
first Times of Christ's Church, Prelates used this Power, 'twas therefore only,
Therefore not by a Divine, Unalienable Right which they had so to do.
because in those days they had no Christian Kings.

And again, in the VIIIth Canon, they oblige all Preachers positively, and
plainly, to Preach, and Instruct the People, in their Public Sermons, twice in
the Year, at least; -- That they ought Willingly to Submit themselves, unto the
Authority, and Government of the Church, as it is now Established under the
King's Majesty.

It is therefore as plain, as any thing can well be; that this Convocation
undoubtedly approved of ALL the Laws (even this of the Submission of the
Clergy:) made for the Security of the King's Authority over the State
Ecclesiastical; that they looked upon the Government of the Church to belong,
in Chief, unto Kings: That they accounted the Power of Calling and Dissolving
Synods, to be the true Right of All Christian Princes; and that the Bishops
have only then a Power to do this, when the Church is in a State of
Persecution, and the Necessities of it enforce them thereunto. And, by
Consequence, that they themselves not only met and acted under the Powers, From
the Writs and Commission of King Chapter 1.
I have formerly shown, because they were forced so to do, but Approved of the
Use which the King made of them; and were satisfied, that in Meeting, and
Acting, according thereunto, they behaved themselves so as became Christian
Bishops, and Clergymen to do, under the Favor and Authority of a Christian
King.

I shall observe only this one thing farther, to prevent any new Cavils in this
particular; that we are assured by Him, who best knew it, Hist. of A B. Laud,
p. 80, 81, 154, 155, 282.
Archbishop Laud himself; that these Canons were passed with the greatest
Freedom, and Unanimity, that ever any Canons were: So that upon that account
also, we may the more undoubtedly look upon them, as delivering the Real Sense
of the Church of England in those days.

To the Judgment of this Archbishop,. 31.
and the Convocation held by him, Archbishop Bramhall.
let me subjoin that of an Eminent Bishop in our Neighbor Country, the Learned
Bramhall, afterward Archbishop of Ardmagh, and Primate of All Ireland. In his
Survey of the Scotch Discipline, See his W^rks, Page 496.
among other Exceptions which he takes at it, we have these, to our purpose,
particularly insisted upon by him: That they Affirm, 1st, That Ecclesiastical
Persons have the sole Power of Convening, and Convocating Synods. 2dly, That no
Persons, Magistrates, or Others, have Power to Vote in their Synods, but only
Ecclesiastical. 3dly, That Synods have the Judgment of True and False Religion,
of Doctrine, Heresy, etc. That they have Legis-lative Power, to make Rules and
Constitutions, for keeping Good Order in the Kirk, -- And all this without any
Reclamation, or Appellation, to any Judge, Civil or Ecclesiastical. 4thly, That
they have these Privileges not from the Magistrate, or People, or Particular
Laws of the Country, -- but Immediately from God, etc. Lastly; That they have
all this Power, not only without the Magistrate, but against him; that is, though
he Dissents, etc.

So different a Notion had this great Writer of these Powers of the Kirk,
Municip. Eccles. p. 116.
for which our Late Author so highly Applauds them; and sets up their
Discipline above our Own, slavish Constitution. But the Archbishop proceeds;
and against these Usurpations of the Kirk, lays down, Chap. ii. these Orthodox,
Church of England Principles.

That All Princes and States, invested with Sovereign Power, do justly
challenge to themselves the Right of Convocating National Synods of their own
Subjects; and of Ratifying their Constitutions. -- And that he is a Magistate
of Straw, Page 494.
that will suffer the Church to Convene, Whenever, or Wheresoever, they list:
-- To Convocate before them Whomsoever they please: -- To change the
Ecclesiastical Policy of a Commonwealth; To alter the Doctrine and Religion
Established; and all this of their Own Heads, by a Pretended Power given them
from Heaven.

Synods ought to be Called by the Supreme Magistrate, if he be a Christian --
And either by Himself, or by such as he shall please to choose for that purpose,
he ought to Preside over them -- This Power the Emperors of Old did challenge
over General Councils: Christian Monarchs, in the Blindness of Popery, over
National Synods: The Kings of England over their Great Councils of Old, and
their Convocations of latter Times.

But, P. 497, 498.
say they, we give the Magistrate a Political Power to Convocate Synods; to
Preside in Synods; to Ratify the Acts of Synods; to Reform the Church -- Here
are Good Words, but they signify Nothing.

For, Comp. Municip. Eccles. p. 123, 124.
in plain English, what is this Political Power to call Synods, etc. -- It is a
Duty which the Magistrate Owes to the Kirk, when they think Necessary to have a
Synod Convocated, to strengthen their Summons by a Civil Sanction; To secure
them in Coming to the Synod, and Returning from the Synod: -- To compel
obstinate Persons, by Civil Laws and Punishments, to submit to their Censures
and Decrees. What Gets the Magistrate by All this? -- For they declare
expressly, that neither All the Power, nor any Part of the Power, which Synods
have to Deliberate of, or to define Ecclesiastical things, does flow from the
Magistrate.

-- But can the Magistrate call the Synod to Account for any thing they do? Can
he Remedy the Errors of a Synod, either in Doctrine, or Discipline? No: --

This is one main branch of Popery, and a Gross Encroachment upon the Right of
the Magistrate.

And accordingly we find him charging the Papists with it, in his Writings
against them. See his Works Tom. 1. page 88.
He maintains, that All Ecclesiastical Coercive Jurisdiction, did Originally
flow from the Civil Magistrate. He bids them Weigh all the Parts of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and consider what One there is which Christian
Emperors of Old did not either Exercise by themselves, or by their Delegates;
Or did not Regulate by their Laws, or Both. And then, particularly Instances in
the Points of, Calling Councils; Presiding in Councils; Dissolving of Councils,
and Confirming Councils.

And Page 93. He insists upon it as One just Ground of our Separation from the
Court of Rome; Comp p. 233. Ib.
that they endeavored to Rob the King of the fairest Flowers of his Crown;
namely of his Right to Convocate Synods, and to Confirm Synods within his Own
Dominions; of his Legis-lative, and judiciary Power, in Ecclesiastical Causes,
etc.

To the Opinion of this learned Prelate, were conformable the Sentiments, of
all the Other Bishops, and Clergy of these Kingdoms, 32.
as to these Matters.

Christian Emperors, Bishop Davenant.
says Bishop Davenant, heretofore Called Councils. -- As in Civil Causes,
Determine. qu. xix. p. 95.
Princes advise with their Learned in the Law, so in Theological Matters, they
ought to Consult with their Divines. -- Yet are they not so tied up to the
Opinions of their Clergy, but that if They go contrary to the Law of God,
Princes are Obliged by their Duty, as Kings, to set forth the True Religion to
their Subjects, though the Clergy should never so much, or so generally, Oppose
them in it.

And in Another of his Books, De doub. controv. par. i. p. 73.
he proves the last Judgment, in Matters of Religion, to belong to Princes, by
this Argument. He to whom the Holy Bishops remit their Decrees to be Examined;
from whom they desire the Confirmation of them; Whom alone they Acknowledge to
have the Power to prescribe to the People the True Religion, by a Judiciary,
Coactive Power; Him they constitute Supreme Judge in the Business of Religion.
But all this is ascribed to Pious Emperors and Kings; As both from Councils
and Fathers, may evidently be made Appear.

I add, Ib. p. 76.
that the Clergy cannot, by Virtue of their Function, compel the King to
receive for the True Religion, whatsoever they shall resolve, by their Votes,
so to be: -- But they must direct him by God's Word, and always leave it to Him
to Confirm that by his Authority, which shall to Him, upon Examination of their
Reasons, appear to be agreeable to God's Word.

Kings Sin when they throw off all Care of Religion; Ib. p. 93.
and leave it to their Bishops alone: Confirming by their Authority, and
Defending with their Sword, whatsoever Faith, They shall think fit to
prescribe. It is true indeed, that as Other Christians, so Princes themselves
are to be directed in Matters of Religion, by the Fathers of the Church: But
they are to be directed by the Light of God's Word; and not to be drawn at the
Pleasure of Bishops, to the Defense of any Error whatsoever.

The Church of England did not Innovate, 33.
says Dr. Heylin, Dr. Heylin.
in settling the Supremacy in the Royal Crown. -- The like Authority was
exercised, Historic and Misc. tracts fol. Land. 1681. Page 24.
and enjoyed by the Christian Emperors, not only in their Calling Councils,
and many times Assistiug at them, or Presiding in them; by themselves, or their
Deputies, or Commissioners; but also in Confirming the Acts thereof.

The like he shows to have been done by our Own Kings heretofore; and then
concludes thus; Comp. Municip. Eccles. Pref. and. p. 107, 108, 136, etc.
so that when the Supremacy was recognized by the Clergy, in their Convocation,
to King Henry the VIII. it was only the Restoring of him to his Proper, and
Original* Power.

If you conceive that by ascribing to the King the Supreme Authority, Ib. numb.
vi.
taking Him for their Supreme Head, and by the Act of Submission which ensued
upon it, the Clergy did unwittingly ensnare Themselves, and draw a Vassallage
on those of the Times Succeeding, inconsistent with their Native Rights, and
contrary to the Usage of the Primitive Church, I hope it will be no hard matter
to remove that Scruple. -- Its true, the Clergy of this Realm can neither Meet
in Convocation, nor Conclude any thing therein; nor put in Execution any thing
which they have Concluded, but as they are Enabled by the King's Authority. But
then it is as true, that this is neither inconsistent with their Native Rights,
nor contrary to the Usage of the Primitive Times. --

I grant, indeed, that when the Church was under the Command of the Heathen
Emperors, the Clergy did Assemble in their National, and Provincial Synods, of
their Own Authority. Which Councils being Summoned by the Metropolitans, and
Subscribed by the Clergy, were of sufficient Power to bind all good Christians,
who lived within the Verge of their Authority. But it was Otherwise when the
Church came under the Protection of Christian Princes.

As for the Vassallage, which the Clergy are supposed to have drawn upon
Themselves, by this Submission; I see no fear, or danger of it. -- That which
is most insisted on for the Proof hereof, is the Delegating of this Power by
King Henry the VIII. to Sir Thomas Cromwell, -- by the Name of his Vicar
General in Ecclesiastical Matters; Who by that Name Presided in the
Convocation, Anno 1536. And this is looked upon both by Saunders, and some
Protestant Doctors, not only as a great debasing of the English Clergy, but as
a kind of Monstrosity in Nature. But certainly these Men forget -- that in the
Council of Chalcedon, the Emperor appointed certain Noblemen to sit as
Judges, whose Names Occur in the first Action of that Council. See the same
tract: p. 7, 23, 24, 39, 40* 41, etc. more to the same Effect.
The like we find Exemplified in the Ephesine Council; in which, by the
Appointment of Theodosius and Valentinian, the Roman Emperors, Candidianus, a
Count Imperial, sat as Judge, or President.

It is not Possible to imagine any thing more express to our present Concern,
than what this Learned, and Zealous Defender of our Church has here advanced.
If any One should be so Uncharitable as to imagine, that this great Man had any
Bias of private Interest upon him, when he wrote this; He may please to know,
that this Book was set forth by him in the time of Oliver Cromwell, when our
Church was in its worst Estate; and there seemed but little hopes Remaining of
its ever Recovering its self to a New Establishment. But indeed this was his
real Judgment; and the General Sense of our Clergy in those Days. Nor had our
greatest Churchmen then learnt either to think Otherwise of the Princes Right;
Or to run down the Learning, and Piety, of those Holy Men, by whose Courage and
Conduct the Reformation was carried on; and many of whom sealed the Sincerity
of their Opinions, with their Own Blood.

KING CHARLES II.
I have now but one Period more to pass over, 34.
and that a very short One too; wherein I am to enquire, How this Doctrine
continued to be Received after the Restoration of King Charles the II. and
upon that last Reveiw, that was then made of our Constitution.

That, at that time, both the King, and his Parliament, were not only well
Affected to the Interests of our Church, but ready to concur with whatever the
Convocation could reasonably have proposed to Them, for the better Settlement
of it, is not to be doubted. But what then did they do, as to this Matter? Was
this enslaving Act, made by our Municip. Eccles. p. 107.
Saint Henry the VIII. and continued by all his Ib. p. 114* 122. etc.
Oppressing Successors of the Reformed Religion; repealed by this Zealous,
Church-Parliament? Or, because that cannot be pretended; Did that Reverend
Synod, which altered so many Other things, ever once touch upon this, and were
stopped in it? Neither can that be Affirmed.

Was there, Ib. p. 119.
in that large Body, Any One, (but One) Generous, Freeborn Spirit, who being
Scandalized at the Restraints under which the Divine Rights of the Church had
so long lain, moved the Convocation to protest against the King's Supremacy, if
they could not yet be so Happy as totally to shake it off? Neither does any
thing of this Occurr, in the Diary, which I have seen, of that Convocations
Proceedings.

Now that which makes me the rather to Remark this, is, that both that
Parliament, and that Convocation, had this very Business of the King's
Supremacy, 13 Car. 2. cap. xii. An Act for Explanation of the 17 Car. 1. c. xi.
Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a Branch of a Statute 1 Eliz. c. i. concerning
Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical.
and the Churches Power, under their Consideration: And an Act was made for the
better Execution of the One, but still so as not to Prejudice the Other. Here
therefore was a just Opportunity given to the Convocation to have declared its
self; and for the Parliament to have provided for the Liberties of the Church.
They were actually Repealing One Branch of that very Statute, of the First of
Eliz. c. 1. And two Lines more had done the Business. But alas! they were both
Negligent in this Particular: Or rather, (for that is the Truth,) they Neither
of them thought the Church was at all Oppressed, by this just Jurisdiction of
the Prince over it.

But we know Acts of Parliament are Obstinate things, and will no longer bend,
as they were wont to do, to the Ecclesiastical Canon. Did the Synod therefore,
at least, make bold with its Own Constitutions; and Rescind those base, and
flattering Canons, which stamped upon this Act the Churches Approbation; Ibid.
Pref. and p. 122.
And, by so doing, signed the Theta upon her Rights, Liberties, and
Authorities? On the contrary, they continue still in force; and have (as far as
One of King Henry's Convocations has power to do it;) ipso facto Excommunicated
some among Us, who, while they make a Noise in the World, as if they only were
the true Sons of the Church of England, are Really cut off from all Communion
with Her.

In a word; When upon the Review of the Liturgy, several other Alterations
were made in the Forms of Ordaining of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; did they
slip aside the Oath of Supremacy, that Bond of Iniquity, Ibid. Pref. p. 1, 2.
contrived by the Atheists, and Erastians, of the Parliament in the First of Q.
Elizabeth, on purpose to run down the Rights of the Clergy; and set up an
Oppressive Supremacy over them? But, they still stand as they did before; and
may move some to consider, who have been Ordained by these Forms, Ibid. p. 119.
How to Reconcile the Solemn Recognition of that Oath, in behalf of the King's
Authority, with what they have since Written, with so much Bitterness, against
it.

But though the Convocation therefore did nothing to Recover the Church out of
that slavish Estate, * 35.
into which former Convocations, and Parliaments, had brought her; it may be
some Others of the Clergy, at least, in their Writings on this Subject, may
have Remonstrated against it. That any have done so, till this present
Controversy began, is what I never Heard: This I know, that several have
Asserted, and, which is more, defended too, the Supremacy, on its present Legal
Bottom, beyond the possibility of a Reasonable Reply.

Among these I know not whom more properly to mention, Bp. Taylour.
in the very first place, than our Pious, and Learned Bishop Taylour. It was
but a very little while before the Restoration of King Charles, that he
published his Excellent Book of Cases of Conscience; and which has never, I
conceive, fallen under any Censure, though often Reprinted, since. In these
having first, in General, shown, that the Prince has Authority in Matters of
Religion; Book iii. chapter 3. Rule 4.
and Asserted it so highly, as to say, Ib.. 7, 8, 9.
That without it, he is but the Shadow of a King, and the Servant of his
Priests: He proceeds, more particularly, to lay down this, as his next Rule of
Conscience; That Kings have a Legislative Power, in the Affairs of Religion,
and the Church. Which having also shown; his next Conclusion to our purpose is
this;. 9. The Supreme Civil Power, has a Power of External Judgment, in Causes
of Faith: That is, as he Explains himself, a Power to determine what Doctrines
are to be taught to the People, and what not.

And to prevent mistake, he thus declares himself, more particularly, as to
this matter.. 16. I do not intend by this, that whatsoever Article is by
Princes allowed, is therefore to be accounted a part of True Religion: For that
is more than we can justify of a Definition made by a Synod of Bishops. But
that They are to take care that True Doctrine be Established; That they that
are bound to do so, must be supposed Competent Judges what is true Doctrine;
Else They Guide their Subjects, and some Body Else Rules them: And then Who is
the Prince?

The Prince then is to Judge what is true Doctrine; Ib. Rule 8.
yet this He must do, by the Assistance, and Ministries of Ecclesiastical
Persons. -- Kings are the Supreme Judges of Law: -- Yet in Cases where there is
Doubt, the Supreme Civil Power speaks by them whose Profession it is to
Understand the Laws. And so it is in Religion: The King is to study the Law of
God; not that He should wholly depend, in Religion, upon the Sentences of
Others; but be able, of Himself, to Judge.

-- But the Prince's Office of providing for Religion, and his Manner of doing
it, in Cases of Difficulty, are rarely well discoursed by Theodosius the
Younger, in a Letter of his to St. Cyrill: The Doctrine of Godliness shall be
discussed in the Sacred Council; and it shall prevail, or pass into a Law, so
far as shall be judged Agreeable to Truth and Reason. Where the Emperor gives
the Examination of it to the Bishops, to whose Office, and Calling, it does
belong: But the Judgment of it, and the Sanction, are the Right of the Emperor;
who would see the Decrees should be Established, if they were True and
Reasonable.

Ib.. 5. This I observe in Opposition to those bold Pretenses of the Court of
Rome, and of the Presbytery; that Esteem Princes bound to Execute their
Decrees, and account them but Great Ministers, and Servants, of their Sentences
-- And a little lower he says; If He ( the Prince) be not bound to Confirm
All, then, I suppose, He may choose which he will, and which he will not. --

. 6. He shows that Princes are not bound to Govern their Churches, by the
Consent, and Advice of their Bishops; but only that it is Reasonable they
should. For (says he) Bishops and Priests, are the most Knowing in Spiritual
Affairs; and therefore most fit to be Counselors to the Prince in them.

In his Fifth Rule,. 1. he Affirms, That Kings have Power of Making Laws. --
And therefore, as Secular Princes did use to Indict, or Permit the Indiction of
Synods of Bishops; so when they saw Cause, they Confirmed the Sentences of
Bishops, and passed them into Laws. Before Princes were Christian, the Church
was Governed by their Spiritual Guides; who had Authority from God, in All that
was Necessary, and of Great Convenience, next to Necessity: And in Other things
they had it from the People.

For the ( better) providing for These, God raised up Princes to the Church. --
And then Ecclesiastical Laws were Advised by Bishops, and Commanded by Kings.
They were but Rules, and Canons, in the hands of the Spiritual Order; but made
Laws by the Secular Power. -- These Canons, before the Princes were Christian,
were no Laws farther than the People did Consent; but now even the Wicked must
Obey.

This was the Judgment of that Great Bishop, as to the Princes Supremacy in
Matters Ecclesiastical. And this Judgment he delivered in his full Years; in
One of his last Works, and that purposely designed to Guide the Consciences of
such as should make Use of it. I shall from him descend but to One more, Whom I
fitly place the last of his Order; And to whose Judgment, though I pay no more
than it deserves, yet I cannot but think it may have some weight with those,
whom I am now concerned especially to Convince.

In his Discourse of Ecclesiastical Polity,. 36.
Chap. 1. he affirms, Bp Parker.
The Affairs of Religion to be Subject to the Supreme Civil Power, and to no
Other. p. 2. That as, in the first Ages of the World, the Kingly Power, and
Priestly Function, were always Vested in the same Persons; -- So when they were
separated, in the Jewish State, the Supremacy was annexed to the Civil Power,
and so continued until, and after, our Savior's Death: Ibid.

This he more largely delivers, p. 32. Though in the Jewish Commonwealth, the
Priestly Office was -- separated by a divine, positive Command, from the Kingly
Power; yet the Power, and Jurisdiction of the Priest remained still subject to
the Sovereign Prince: Their King always Exercising a Supremacy Over All
Persons, and in All Causes Ecclesiastical.

The Power wherewith Christ invested the Governors of his Church, Ibid. p. 43.
in the Apostolical Age, was purely Spiritual: They had no Authority to inflict
Temporal Punishments, or to force Men to submit to their Canons, Laws, and
Paenalties. They only declared the Laws of God, and denounced the Threatenings
annexed to Them.

But when Christianity was become the Imperial Religion, Ib. p. 48.
then began its Government to Re-settle where Nature had placed it; and the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was annexed to the Civil Power. -- So that though the
Exercise of the Ministerial Function, Ib. p. 49.
still continued in the Persons that were thereunto Originally Commissioned by
Our Savior; the Exercise of its Authority, and Jurisdiction, was Restored to
the Imperial Diadem.

Constantine was no sooner settled in his Imperial Throne, Ib. p. 50, 51.
but he took the Settlement of All Ecclesiastical Matters into his Own
Cognizance. He Called Synods and Councils, in Order to the Peace and Government
of the Church: He Ratified their Canons into Laws, etc. In the Exercise of
which Jurisdiction, he was carefully followed by all his Successors.

Nay he doubts not to affirm, Ib. p. 53.
That had it not been for the Care of Christian Princes, Christianity had, in
all humane Probability, been utterly destroyed by its Own Tumults and
Seditions.

He adds, Ib. p. 56.
That this Supremacy of the Civil Power, in Religious Matters, is expressly
Asserted by Our Church; which is not content barely to Affirm it, but denounces
the Sentence of Excommunication against All that deny it.

Thus stood this Author' s Judgment in this Case, about the Year 1669: It is
true, that being engaged against another sort of Adversaries, and which led him
to somewhat different Reflections; we find him a little gone off from this
Hypothesis; The Case of the Church of England stated.
in the Year 1681. Yet even there he is much more for the Supremacy, than those
we have now to do with. He affirms indeed, p. 105. That from the Precedent of
the Apostles, in the First Council of Jerusalem, the Governors of the Church,
in all Ages, enjoyed a Power of making Canons and Constitutions, for
Discipline, and Good Order. But withal he adds, that By the Example of the
Primitive Church, our Bishops submitted the Exercise thereof to the King's
Sovereign Authority, as we see in that famous Act called, The Submission of the
Clergy. Whereby ( says he, p. 106.) they do not pass away their Power of making
Ecclesiastical Canons; but only give Security to the Government, that, under
that Pretense, they would not attempt any thing tending to the Disturbance of
the Kingdom, or Injurious to the Prerogative of the Crown. Which, in truth, is
such a Submission, as all the Clergy in the World ought, in duty, to make to
their Sovereign, at least in Gratitude, for his Protection; and that without
any Abatement, or Diminution of their Own Authority; viz. The standing Laws of
Christianity being secured, to submit All Other Matters to his Sovereign Will
and Pleasure.

And p. 108. He approves King James Reply to Cardinal Perron, where he lets him
know, That though Christian Kings and Emperors, never arrogated to themselves a
Power of being Sovereign Judges in Matters and Controversies of Faith; yet for
Moderation of Synods; for Determinations, and Orders, Established in Councils;
and for the Discipline of the Church; they have made a full, and Good Use of
their Imperial Authority.

Such was the last Sense, if I mistake not, of this Writer; and that when he
was in his highest Exaltation of the Churches Authority. And all the Difference
I can find between his Own last, and first Opinion, is but this; that what He
before gave the Christian Prince as his Own due, He now grants him by the
Concession of the Clergy; yet so, as to declare the Clergy bound to yield it to
Him, and to affirm the Churches Rights to be in no wise injured, or impeached
by it.

But I shall not insist any longer on this Authority; but pass on to consider
the Judgment of an Author, or Two, of a Lower Rank; but whose Learning, and
Steddiness, will much more recommend Them to all Sober, and Indifferent Persons.

Of these the first I shall mention, 37.
shall be our Excellent Dr. Falkner; Dr. Falkner.
who in his Discourse of Christian Loyalty, Christian Loyalty. p. 42.
fully examines, and determines the Case before Us.

Concerning the Christian Doctrine, and Profession, ( says he) though no
Authority has any Right to Oppose any part of the Christian Truth; yet Princes
may, and ought to, take Care of the True Profession thereof in their Dominions;
and to Suppress such dangerous Errors, as are manifestly contrary thereunto.
-- But in Cases of Difficulty, for the deciding, or ending of Controversies,
about Matters of Faith; the Disquisition, and Resolution of the Spiritual
Guides, ought to take Place, and be Embraced. -- In such Cases, the Catholic
Christian Emperors, did, by their Authority, Establish the Decisions of the
Ecumenical Councils. But in Matters of Truth which are plain, Ib. page 44.
and manifest from the Holy Scriptures themselves, or the Declarations of
approved Councils agreeing therewith; the Saecular Governor, so far as is
Necessary, may proceed upon the Evidence thereof to his Own Understanding.

In establishing Rules and Constitutions for Order, Decency, and Peace, it
belongs to the Ecclesiastical Officers to consult, advise, and take Care
thereof. -- But yet this with such Dependence upon the Royal Power, as King
Charles has declared -- [that is; That they first obtain the Kings leave to do
it; and execute nothing but with his Approbation. See above. 28.] In such an
extraordinary Case, as that in the Primitive Times was, when the Civil Power
will not own the Church; the Ecclesiastical Governors, by their Own Authority,
may establish necessary Rules of Order, as was then done. But since the
External Sanction of such things, does flow from the general Nature of Power
and Authority; wheresoever the Temporal Power will take that Care of the
Church, which it ought, it has a Right to give its Establishment to such
Constitutions; and the Ecclesiastical Officers, as Subjects, are bound to apply
Themselves thereto, for the Obtaining of it.

The calling of Councils, Ib. page 46.
so far as is needful for the Preservation of the Peace and Order of the
Church, may be performed, as the former, by Ecclesiastical Officers, where the
Civil disowneth the Church. But this being no particular Exercise of the Power
of the Keys, but only of a general Authority, does peculiarly belong to the
Prince, or Supreme Governor, if he will make use thereof. -- The ancient
Right, and Exercise of the Authority of Kings, in Summoning Provincial, or
National Councils, is sufficiently observed, and asserted, by P. de Marca.

But indeed he himself in his 5th Chapter, abundantly Demonstrates both that,
and all the rest that is Contended for, in the present Dispute. And the Heads
of which are such as these: That the ancient Emperors had Power to Call
Councils: p. 156, 158, 159, 161, 165, 170: To be present at Them: p. 157, 160.
And by Themselves, or their Deputies, to Preside in Them: p. 162, 167, 170. To
direct them what they should Consult about: p. 157, 163, 170. To appoint the
Time, and Place, of their Meeting: p. 166, 170. To keep the Bishops from
leaving the Council, till all should be Finished for which it was Called: p.
163. To Confirm what they do aright: p. 157, 160, 161, 164, 169, 170. To
Rescind what they do amiss: p. 163. To Suspend their Acts from taking Effect,
till they should give way to it: p. 165. These are the Instances which may be
observed, in that Chapter, of the Jurisdiction and Authority, which the ancient
Emperors Exercised over their Synods heretofore: And by which we are to
Expound, Can. 2.
as our Church has taught Us, the Supremacy of our Own Princes in the like
Cases. I shall conclude what I have to observe from this Learned Writer, with a
Remark, which I wish some Men would be persuaded a little more seriously to
Consider: Comp. Munic. Eccles. Pref.
p. 204. Some things which, at first Sight, may seem an Abatement of the
Authority of the Church, is rather such a way of Regulating the Exercise of its
Power, as, under Religious Princes, is for the Churches Advantage. Of this
Nature I conceive that Constitution [of the 25 H. VIII.] that No new Canons
shall be Enacted, Promulged, or Executed, without the Royal Assent, and
License, to Enact, Promulge, and Execute the same. For hereby the Cergy give
such Security to the King, against all jealousies of Renewed Ecclesiastical
Usurpations, that thereupon the Church may, under the Kings Favor, and with
the Assurance of greater Safety and Protection, practice upon its Established
Constitutions; which are so Good, that we have great Reason to bless God for
them. And hereupon it may also be hoped, that what shall be farther needful,
may be Super-added, by the Royal License; and become more Effectual to its End,
by the Confirmation of that Authority.

There is yet One Author more, who must not be passed by; 38.
Our Learned, and Accurate Dr. Barrow: Dr. Barrow.
And a better than whom I could not have desired, to close up this Collection
withal.

In his Treatise of the Unity of the Church; (a Discourse which would some Men
more diligently Read, and more judiciously Consider, they would not talk so
loosely as they do, on that Subject:) He gives Us this Account of the State of
the Church, in the times Immediately after Christ.

Each Church did, See his Works, 1st Vol. p. 311.
Seperately, Order its Own Affairs; without Recourse to Others, except for
Charitable Advice, or Relief, in Cases of extraordinary Difficulty, or urgent
Need.

Each Church was Endowed with a perfect Liberty, Ib. Comp. p. 211. 216.
and a full Authority, without Dependence, or Subordination to Others; to
govern its Own Members; to manage its Own Affiairs; to Decide Controversies and
Causes Incident among themselves; without allowing Appeals, or rendering
Accounts, to Others.

It is true that the Bishops of several Adjacent Churches, did use to meet upon
Emergencies, -- to consult, and conclude upon Expedients, for attaining such
Ends ( as they met for.) If the Author of the Municip. Eccles. thinks this
Account, of the Original of Synods, clearer than Mine, he may take it, as an
Explanation of my Meaning; and which I see no Cause yet to Retract. Municip.
Chap. 1.
This probably they did at first in a Free Way, without Rule, according to
Occasion, as Prudence Suggested: But afterward by Confederation, and Consent,
these Conventions were formed into Method, and Regulated by certain Orders,
established by Consent; whence did arise an Ecclesiastical Unity of Government,
within certain Precincts.

Hence every Bishop, Ib. p. 312.
or Pastor was conceived to have a double Relation, or Capacity; One toward
his Own Flock, another toward the Whole Flock.

Of Councils, he thus delivers his Opinion.

General Councils, Ib, p. 320.
are Extraordinary, Arbitrary, Prudential Means, of restoring Truth, Peace,
Order, Discipline. -- During a long time the Church wanted Them; Afterward had
them but Rarely; and since the Breach between the Oriental, and Western
Churches, for many Centuries, there has been none.

The first General Councils, Ib. p 321. Comp. p. 185.
(indeed All) were Congregated by Emperors; -- their Congregation depends on
the Permission, and Pleasure, of Secular Powers; and, in all Equity, should do
so.

And in his most Elaborate Treatise of the Popes Supremacy: Ib p. 185.
The most Just and Pious Emperors, who did bear greatest Love to the Clergy,
-- did call them without Scruple: It was deemed their Right to do it; none did
Remonstrate against their Practice.

The same he shows of National and Provincial Councils, p. 186, etc.

To these they Summoned the Bishops in a Peremptory Manner, Ib. p. 188, 189.
and directed both the Time, and Place of their Meeting. The Popes petitioned
them to Call [Councils] and sometimes they Prevailed, Ib.
and sometimes they did not.

This Power, Ib. p. 191. Comp. 192.
upon many just Accounts, peculiarly does belong to Princes. It suiteth to the
Dignity of their State; It appertains to their Duty; They are most Able to
Discharge it. -- They alone can, well, cause the Expenses needful for holding
Synods, to be Exacted and Defrayed: They alone can Protect Them; can maintain
Order, and Peace, in Them; can procure Observance to their Determinations. They
alone have a Sword to Restrain, Resty and Refractory Persons: -- To oblige them
to Convene; to Conferr Peaceably, to Agree, to Observe what is Settled.

It inseperably does belong to Sovereigns, Ib. p. 193.
in the General Assemblies of their States, to Preside and Moderate Affairs;
proposing what they Judge fit to be Consulted, or Debated; stopping what
seems unfit to be moved; keeping Proceedings within Order and Rule; and
steering them to a Good Issue: Checking Disorders and Irregularities, which the
Distemper, or Indiscretion, of any Persons, Ib. p. 194. 206.
may create in Deliberations or Disputes. -- This therefore he shows the
Emperors to have done, in all the first Synods.

The Word Presidency has an Ambiguity: -- It may be taken for a Privilege of
Praecedence, Ib. p. 204, 205.
or for Authority to Govern things. This latter kind of Presidency, was
disposed of by the Emperor, as he saw Reason.

The Power of Enacting, Ib. p. 24.
and Dispensing with, Ecclesiastical Laws, touching Exterior Discipline, did
of Old belong to the Emperor: And it was Reasonable that it should.

By many Laws, Ib p 251.
and Instances it appears, that Appellations have been made to the Emperors
in the Greatest Causes. -- So the Donatists did Appeal to Constantine:
Athanasius, and the Egyptian Bishops, to the same; Priscillianus to Maximus:
Idacius to Gratian. --

III.
And here I shall put an End to these Collections. 39.
It would have been a very easy Matter to have added many more Horn against
Fecknam: Bridges against Sanders: Burhill and Tooker mentioned. 22. Sarravia:
Sutcliffe: Whitaker: Abbot Bp. of Salisbury: Reynolds against Heart: Morton Bp.
of Durham against Bellarmine: Carleton Bp. of Chichester: Dr. Fern. etc.
Authors, than I have here Alleged, and to have much Enlarged upon those which
I have Produced. But what is already done may Suffice; till those who now
Advance the Contrary Opinion, shall be able, at least, to make some Tolerable
Proof, that they do not forsake the Received Doctrine of our Church, in
Opposing an Authority, Municip. Eccles. p. 107, 136. 176.
by Law, confessedly, Established: And, I think, no less Confirmed by our
Articles, and Canons, too.

It remains now, that I take the Liberty freely to APPEAL to every Sincere
Member of Our Communion, to Judge in this Case, between Me, and Those, who so
warmly Oppose me, and so highly Charge me, upon this Occasion: And to consider,
what I have done, with Relation to the Rights, and Liberties, Municip. Eccles.
p. 177.
of the Church of England, for which I ought to Humble my self before God, and
to make a Satisfaction to Her.

Is it that I have Asserted the King's Authority, over the Ecclesiastical
Synods of this Church, and Realm? But so the Laws speak, as well as I: And to
these, both the Articles, and Canons of the Church, require me to Conform. Nay,
they do more; they Require me not only to Conform my self, but to do, what in
me lies, Can. 1.
to move All Others to the Observance of them. And if for this I must be
Censured; these Laws, and Canons, must run the same Fate with Me. And I shall
always account it an Honor, to Suffer, for Asserting the Laws of the Realm;
and for maintaining the Doctrine, and Constitutions of the Church of England.

Or is it that I have gone beyond the Bounds of the Law, and given a Greater,
and more General Authority, to the Christian Prince, than either the Submission
of the Clergy, or the Act of King Henry the VIIIth founded thereupon, have
declared to belong to Him? This, for ought I know, I may have done, and yet not
be Guilty of any Fault neither, in the doing of it. I have before said, and do
here again Repeat it, with the same Assurance I at first delivered it; That I
do not found the Right of our Kings to this Jurisdiction, either upon that, or
upon any Other Act, that has been made in pursuance of it. I fix it upon the
Right of See Mr. Hooker's Judgment,. 20 Bishop Andrews, 34. Convoc. of 1640,.
30. A. B. Bramhall, Sect. 31, etc.
Sovereignty in General; and upon that Ancient Jurisdiction, in Causes
Ecclesiastical, which the very Statute of Queen Elizabeth speaks of; and allows
to have been always, of Right, belonging to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.
To this our 1 Eliz. c. 1. Sect. 1.
Laws themselves agree: They speak still of Restoring to the Crown its Ancient
Rights; and our Coke v. Rep. Cawdries Case -- Id. 4. Inst. p. 325, 326. More's
Rep. p. 755. 2. Crook Rep. p. 73. Heylin. Ref. Just. p. 7, 23. -- See the
Queen's Injunctions; above Sect. 7. Canons of K. James,. 9.
Lawyers have accordingly constantly Affirmed, that these Acts; and
particularly that which we are here especially concerned in, the 1 Eliz. c. 1.
was not Introductory of a New Law, but Declaratory of the Old. And therefore,
before I can justly be condemned upon this account, my Proofs must be Answered;
and it must be shown, that what I ascribe to the King, is not a parcel of that
Jurisdiction, which was once enjoyed by the Kings, and Princes, of this Realm;
and did Always, of Right, belong to them. And that, I believe, it will be no
easy Matter to do.

1st. I affirm that it is the Right of every Christian King, to Call his Clergy
together in Convocation; and that without his Call, they cannot Regularly
Assemble, to any such purpose, of themselves. But so our Law expressly declares;
that the Convocation shall Evermore be Called by the King's Writ: And it is
Notorious to Every One, who has any Knowledge in these Matters, how dangerous
it would be for the Clergy to presume to come together without it.

2dly. I Assert that the very Persons who meet in Our Convocations, are
Determined, and Empowered, by the King's Writ; and that none have a Right to
Assemble, but such as he Calls by it. Let the Writs of Summons be Examined, and
let it there be seen whether the Case be not so, as I pretend it to be. Let
this Author tell me, if he can, why such and such Dignitaries are required,
personally, to come to the Convocation; Others to send such a certain Number of
Delegates to Represent them; but that the Writ of Summons so Directs, so
Authorizes them to do? And though I do not suppose it to be now in the King's
Power to alter this Form, yet the Sovereign Legislative Authority, may, without
Controversy, do it; and appoint any Other Method of Framing the Lower House of
Convocation, that should appear to them to be more Proper and Expedient.

3dly. I declare, that by Our Law, the Convocation can deliberate on No Canons,
or Constitutions, without first Obtaining the King's License so to do. It is
the express Resolution of the Act of Submission: And our Convocations do
accordingly, notoriously, Govern their Proceedings by it.

4thly, I add, That heretofore, the Christian Emperors prescribed to their
Synods, the very Method they should observe, in handling the Matters which lay
before them. This indeed I affirm; and, I think, I have proved it too. And, if
to this End, Our King should think fit, either Himself to Come; or to Appoint
any Other to Preside in his Stead, and Direct the Debates of our Synods, as he
should Command them to do; I do not see that he would therein do any more, than
what some of the best Christian Princes have done before him.

5thly, I pretend, that to the Civil Magistrate it belongs to Confirm, or
Annihilate, such of the Acts of their Synods as they think fit. Our Laws agree
to it; Our Kings claim it; Our Convocations submit to, and approve, of it. And
let those who scruple this, consider, how low they sink the Authority of a
Prince; if they leave him not the Power, which every ordinary Person claims, of
Judging for Himself; but would oblige him, at a venture, to Confirm whatsoever
the Lords of the Consistory shall please to Define.

6thly. That the Prince may Alter their Constitutions, I no otherwise affirm,
than as I say it is in his Power to make Laws in Matters Ecclesiastical: And
that for the doing of this, He may Advise with his Clergy, and follow their
Counsel, so far as he approves of it. Thus Charles the Emperor made up his
Capitular: And thus any Other Sovereign Prince, may take the Canons of the
Church, and form them in such Wise into an Ecclesiastical Law, as he thinks
will be most for the Honor of God, and the Good of his People.

7thly. In Cases of Appeals, I show what Power the Ancient Emperors both
Claimed, and Exercised: And I modestly Vindicate to our Own Sovereign the same
Authority, which the Fathers of the Church, without all Scruple, allowed to
their Princes. And except it be in such Cases where the King is a Party, 4
Inst. page 340.
and the Appeal therefore is to stop at the Upper House of Convocation; I see
no Reason why this Authority should not be reserved to the King, and I conceive
the Law of our Realm does allow of it.

8thly. As for the Dissolving of the Convocation, that is so evidently a part
of the Royal Jurisdiction, and has been so fully adjudged to belong to the
King; that I do not see what Exceptions can be taken at it. However the
Constant Practice of our Convocations, in this matter, is on my Side: And I
have herein ascribed no Authority to the Prince, but what our Clergy, for above
these Hundred and Fifty Years last past, have constantly submitted to; and, by
that Submission alone, have sufficiently Vested in Him.

But if I am not mistaken in Point of Law,. 40.
what is it that deserves so Tragical an Outcry, as this late Author has made
against me? Is it, that being a Clergyman my self, I appeared in Defense of
the King's Authority over the Clergy; and which, in some Men's Notion, is the
same thing as to say, against the Rights of the Church? So indeed the
Convocation seemed to think, in the Case of Dr. Standish, Municip. Eccles. Pref.
heretofore; and so Some seem to account it now. But, God be thanked, the
Reformed Church of England, never yet thought it any Offense in her Clergy to
stand up for the just Rights of the Prince; nor have I any Apprehension that I
shall ever be Condemned, upon this account, by any True Members of Her
Communion. And for Others, give me leave to ask, only; Am I the First, of Our
Order, that have appeared on this Occasion? Or do I stand Alone in this Cause?

But what then shall we say of all those Learned Bishops, and Clergymen, whose
Books I have here Quoted to the same Purpose? Nay rather, what shall we say of
those whole Convocations, who compiled our Articles, and Canons? And have
Obliged us thereby, not only Occasionally to Defend the Kings Supremacy; 1. Can.
but to the best of our Wit, Learning, and Knowledge, publicly to Declare, and
Confirm it to our Congregations, four times every Year. If this be that for
which I ought to be Censured; I am afraid so great a part of our Order will go
along with me, as may make it even Scandalous to stay behind: And be numbered
among that Little, Noisy, Turbulent Party, that now set themselves up as Judges
over Us.

But if both the Law be on my side; 41.
and it be no improper Enterprise for a Clergyman to appear in; What shall we
say, more? Was the Time improper? Did I take an Unseasonable Opportunity of
Asserting this Authority?

Nay but this They should have considered, who by appearing so Eagerly against
the Princes Power over the Convocation, made it absolutely Necessary for some
or Other of our Church, to do her Right; and let the World know, that she never
Commissioned any of her Members, to broach any such Principles, on her Behalf.
That she is content to Act under the Royal Supremacy; and is sensible that it
is her Duty so to do. That if some Hot Men, (for ought she knows her Enemies,)
will under pretense of asserting such a Power to her, as she has always
disclaimed, endeavor to raise any Jealousies in the Mind of her Defender
against her; it is what she cannot help: And she hopes, she shall not be the
worse Accounted of, for such Attempts, as she neither approves of, nor knows
how to Prevent.

And now,. 42.
there is but One thing more, that can, I think, be Objected against my
Undertaking: And I shall lay it down in the Words in which it is Charged upon
me. Municip. Eccles Pref. p. 5. Comp. p. 3.
For what if the Public from such a Work (inscribed to the Metropolitan)
should be tempted to proceed to further Resolves against the Powers
Hierarchicall? This I confess would be such a use of it, as I should be
heartily sorry for; though even, in such a Case, I cannot tell whether I should
ever the more deserve to be Censured for what I had done. There can nothing be
either so well Designed, or so carefully Performed, of which an ill Use may not
be made. And if that should be Sufficient to cry down any Undertaking, I do not
see how we shall be able to Satisfy our Consciences, in anything we have to do.

But, in Reason, I am sure the Church might have expected to suffer much more
by the Letter to the Convocation Man, than by the Answer which I made to it.
When Churchmen set up their Divine Rights, in opposition to the Laws of their
Country; and upon Visionary Notions, endeavor to lead Men into Discontents
against their Governors; it is Natural, not to say Necesiary, for Princes to
look to themselves, and consider how to stop those Attempts at the Beginning,
which, Experience has shown them, may Otherwise, in time, grow too strong for
Them. It was the Intolerable Insolence, and Usurpations, of the Roman Church,
that made her first Feared, then Hated; and, at last, crushed the Hierarchic in
many Places, to pieces. And whatever Party shall think fit to pursue the same
Methods, ought, in all Reason, to expect the same Treatment. If Clergymen will
enjoy the Protection of Princes, it is but Reasonable that they should be
Content to acknowledge their Authority. To contend for more Power, than either
Christ has left us; or our Calling requires, or the Bishops, and Councils,
under the first Christian Emperors, pretended to, or desired; is neither
Prudent, nor Justifyable: It is to render the Church suspected by the State;
and to set those Powers in Opposition to, which ought mutually to Help, and
Support, One-Another.

I have before shown what Opinion a very Learned Man, See above. 37.
upon this Ground, had of the Act of Submission, now so much railed at, in
these Days. He looked upon it as a Law of great Benefit to the Church, even for
this Reason alone, that it freed the Civil Powers from entertaining any more
Fears, and Jealousies, of the Clergy. This was a Remark founded upon Good
Reason, as well as upon the Experience of those former Miscarriages, which the
Clergy had run into, for want of such a Restraint. And I cannot but every Day
more and more acknowledge the Goodness of God toward our Church, in that very
thing, for which some Men so Tragically lament the Oppression, and Slavery, of
it: Being fully Persuaded that nothing, at this Day, preserves us from Ruin,
and Desolation; but that we have not Power, of our selves, to do the Church a
Mischief; and the Prince, who sees but too much of our Tempers, is too Gracious
to Us, and has too Great a Concern for the Churches Good, to suffer Us to do it.

These are the Advantages which I look upon the Church to derive to her self
from this Act. It prevents all Jealousies, which either the Odd Principles, the
Violent Tempers, Or the Wicked Designs, of some Men, might justly raise in the
Minds of our Governors against us: And frees them from all. Temptation, as
well as from all Need, of laying any farther Restraints upon Us. It encourages
the Civil Powers to be willing to allow us both Liberty to come Together, and
leave to Deliberate, of what may be Profitable to the Church; when ever they
shall Judge it to be, in any wise, Needful, or but Proper so to do. And, in the
mean while, it hinders us from throwing all into Confusion, in such Times of
Faction, and Discontent* of Heats and Animosities, as we are at present in; to
the certain Scandal, and Division, of the Church; it may be, to a New Confusion
of All things in the State too.

And thus have I delivered the Real Sense of my Own Conscience,. 43.
in the Matter before me. I have shown what my Principles, as to the Kings
Supremacy, are; and from Whom I have Learnt them. That the Laws, the Articles,
and Canons of our Church, are my Instructors: And all these, as explained to
me, by the Greatest, and most Eminent of our Profession, both for Character,
and Ability, that Our Church has produced ever since the Reformation. All that
I desire, in Return, is, That those who now appear so vehemently against me, in
this Point, would as freely declare their Sense; and as plainly show from whom
they have Received it. If they can make as fair a Plea to our Church's
Patronage, as I have here done, I must then ingenuously Own, I have been
Greatly Mistaken. If they cannot, I shall then leave them under this Character;
that whatever they may pretend, they must, in Reality, be either of the
Conclave, or of the Consistory; and manage this Cause, for the Pope, or for the
Kirk. Whether of these Parties they will fly unto, to me it is indifferent.
This I am sure of, that if they are resolved to hold to our Church, in Defiance
of Her Doctrine; they must, at least, be confessed to be in a very low Degree
of Communion with Her: She having solemnly, by her Canons, excluded them from
her Sacraments; and left them no Regular method of returning to the
participation of them, but by the Archbishop's, Absolution; and that upon
Sincere Repentance for what they have done, and after a Public Revocation of
their present Wicked Errors.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge vii. Margin, for 39 Can. read 36. p. 9. f. 39. Can. r. 36: p. 68. l. 20.
f. Attained to, r. Enjoyed. The literal Errors the Reader will please to
Correct.

IN my other Book of the Authority of Christian Princes: p. 382. Blot out line
5. 6, 7, 8. In which I find my self to have been mistaken.

Books Printed for R. Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate.
THE Authority of Christian Princes over their Ecclesiastical Synods Asserted;
With particular Respect to their Convocations of the Clergy of the Realm, and
Church of England. Occasioned by a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Letter to a
Convocation-Man, etc. 8o Price 5 S.

A Practical Discourse concerning Swearing 8o. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Also several Sermons upon particular Occasions. All by W. Wake, D. D.


