THE Prince of Orange HIS DECLARATION: SHOWING THE REASONS Why he Invades
ENGLAND. WITH A Short PREFACE, AND SOME MODEST REMARKS on It.

LONDON: Published by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, MDCLXXXVIII.

The Prince of Orange's Declaration, showing the Reasons, why He invades
England, with a short Preface, and some modest Remarks on it.
THERE having been various* Discourses about the Reasonableness and Justice of
the Dutch Invasion, the Prince's great Love and special Care of the Protestant
Religion, and English Protestants, set forth in the most Charming manner, and
the Desperateness of the Protestant State and Condition painted in the blackest
and most frightful Colors; Our Natural Liege Lord, notwithstanding his
Unparalled Grace to all, represented as designing the greatest Cruelty
against his own Subjects:: strange Stories of ill things whispered, and nothing
less than a Secret L^^gue between* His Majesty of Great Britain, and the French
King, to Extirpate all Protestants entered into: These Reports are with so much
Art and Cunning spread, as to startle the most Considering Protestants of all
Persuasions, whence nothing could be more eagerly desired, than a Sight of the
Prince of Orange's Declaration; For the Expectations of most Men are, That some
Extraordinary Secrets, some hidden Works of Darkness should be revealed, and
brought to Light; as generally those, who yet never saw the Prince's
Declaration, do still believe; But there not being one word of any such Treaty,
we cannot see why it is that the Prince comes Over; and if others impartially
Peruse the Declaration, we doubt not but 'twill Convince them, that they give
no Reason powerful enough to Justify so Bloody an Enterprise, as this, in the
Issue must needs be.

We will therefore give you a true Copy of the Prince's Declaration, word for
word, as it runs in the West.

THE DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS William Henry, By the Grace of GOD, PRINCE of
ORANGE, etc.
Of the REASONS inducing Him, To appear in Arms in the Kingdom of England,
for Preserving of the Protestant Religion, and for Restoring the Laws and
Liberties of England, Scotland and Ireland.
IT is both certain, and Evident to all men, that the Public Peace and
Happiness of any State or Kingdom, can not be preserved, where the Laws,
Liberties, and Customs established, by the Lawful authority in it, are openly
Transgressed and Annulled: More especially where the alteration of Religion is
endeavored, and that a Religion which is contrary to Law is endeavored to be
introduced: Upon which those who are most Immediately Concerned in it, are
Indispensably bound, to endeavor to Preserve and maintain the established
Laws, Liberties and Customs: and above all the Religion and Worship of God,
that is Established among them: And to take such an effectual care, that the
Inhabitants of the said State or Kingdom, may neither be deprived of their
Religion* nor of their Civil Rights. Which is so much the more Necessary
because the Greatness and Security both of Kings, Royal families, and of all
such as are in Authority, as well as the Happiness of their Subjects and People,
depend, in a most especial manner, upon the exact observation, and maintenance
of these their Laws, Liberties, and Customs.

Upon these grounds it is, that we cannot any longer forbear, to Declare that
to our great regret, we see that those Councillors, who have now the chieffe
credit with the King, have overturned the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of
those Realms: and subjected them in all things relating to their Consciences,
Liberties, and Properties, to Arbitrary Government: and that not only by secret
and Indirect ways, but in an open and undisguised manner.

Those Evil Councillors for the advancing and coloring this, with some
plausible pretexts, did Invent and set on foot, the Kings Dispencing power, by
virtue of which, they pretend that according to Law, he can Suspend and
Dispense with the Execution of the Laws, that have been enacted by the
Authority, of the King and Parliament, for the security and happiness of the
Subject, and so have rendered those Laws of no effect: Tho there is nothing
more certain, then that as no Laws can be made; but by the joint concurrence
of King and Parliament, so likewise laws so enacted, which secure the Public
peace, and safety of the Nation, and the lives and liberties of every subject
in it, can not be repealed or suspended but by the same authority.

For tho the King may pardon the punishment, that a Transgressour has incurred,
and to which he is condemned, as in the cases of Treason* or Felony; yet it can
not be with any color of reason, Inferred from thence, that the King can
entirely suspend the execution of those Laws, relating to Treason or Felony:
Unless it is pretended, that he is clothed with a Despotick and Arbitrary
power, and that the Lives, Liberties, Honors and Estates of the Subjects,
depend wholly on his good will and Pleasure, and are entirely subject to him;
which must infallibly follow, on the Kings having a power to suspend the
execution of the Laws, and to dispense with them.

Those Evil Councillors, in order to the giving some credit to this strange
and execrable Maxim, have so conducted the matter, that they have obtained a
Sentence from the Judges, declaring that this Dispencing power, is a Right
belonging to the Crown; as if it were in the power of the twelve Judges, to
offer up the Laws, Rights, and Liberties, of the whole Nation, to the King, to
be disposed of by him Arbitrarily and at his Pleasure, and expressly contrary
to Laws enacted, for the security of the Subjects. In order to the obtaining
this Judgment, those Evil Councillors did before hand, examine secretly, the
Opinion of the Judges, and procured such of them, as could not in Conscience
concur in so pernicious a Sentence, to be turned out, and others to be
substituted in their Rooms till by the chances which were made, in the Courts
of Judicature, they at last obtained that Judgment. And they have raised some
to those Trusts, who make open Profession of the Popish Religion, though those
are by Law Rendered Incapable of all such Employments.

It is also Manifest and Notorious, that as his Majesty was, upon his coming
to the Crown, received and acknowledged by all the subjects of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, as their King without the least opposition, tho he made
then open profession, of the Popish Religion; so he did then Promise, and
Solemnly Swear, at his Coronation, that he would maintain his subjects, in the
free enjoyment of their Laws, and Liberties, and in particular, that he would
maintain the Church of England as it was established by Law: It is likewise
certain, that there have been at diverse and sundry times, several Laws
enacted for the preservation of those Rights, and Liberties, and of the
Protestant Religion: and among other Securities, it has been enacted that all
Persons whatsoever, that are advanced to any Eccles^astical Dignity, or to bear
Office in either University, as likewise all other, that should be put in any
Employment, Civil or Military, should declare that they were not Papists, but
were of the Protestant Religion, and that, by their taking of the Oaths of
Allegance, and Suprermacy and the Test, yet these ^vill Councillors have in
effect annulled and abolished all those Laws, both with relation to
Ecclesiastical and Civil Employments.

In order to Ecclesiastical Dignities and Offices. they have not only without
any color of Law, but against most express Laws to the contrary, set up a
Commission, of a certain Number of persons, to whom they have committed the
cognizance and direction of all Ecclesiastical matters: in the which
Commission there has been and still is, one of His Majesty's Ministers of
State, who makes now public profession of the Popish Religion, and who at the
time of his first professing it, declared that for a great while before, he had
believed that to be the only true Religion. By all this, the deplorable State
to which the Protestant Religion is reduced is Apparent, since the Affairs of
the Church of England, are now put into the hands of Persons, who have accepted
of a Commission that is manifestly Illegal; and who have executed it contrary
to all Law; and that now one of their chieffe Members has abjured the
Protestant Religion and declared himself a Papist; by which he is become
Incapable of holding any Public Employment: The said Commissioners have
hitherto given such proof, of their submission to the directions given them,
that there is no reason to doubt, but they will still continue to promote all
such designs as will be most aggreable to them. And those Evil Councillors
take care, to raise none to any Ecclesiastical dignities; but persons that
have no zeal for the Protestant Religion, and that now hide their
unconcernedness for it, under the specious pretense of Moderation. The said
Commissioners have suspended the Bishop of London, only because he refused to
obey an order, that was sent him to suspend a Worthy Divine, without so much as
citing him before him, to make his own Defense, or observing the common forms
of Process. They have turned out a President, chosen by the fellows of
Magdalen College, and afterward all the Fellows of that College, without so
much asciting them before any Court that could take legal cognissance of that
affair; or obtaining any Sentence against them by a Competent Judge. And the
only reason, that was given, for turning them out, was their refusing to choose
for their President; a Person that was recommended to them, by the Instigation
of those Evil Councillors. Tho the right of a free Election belonged
undoubtedly to them. But they were turned out of their freeholds, contrary to
Law, and to that express provision in the Magna Charta; that no man shall l^se
life or Goods, but by the Law of the land. And now these Evil Councillors
have put the said College wholly into the hands of Popists, tho as is
abovesaid, they are Incapable, of all such Employments, both by the Law of the
Land, and the statutes of the College. These Commissioners have also cited
before them all the Chancellours and Archdeacons of England, requiring them to
certify to them the names, of all such Clergymen, as have read the Kings
declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and of such as have not read it: without
considering that the reading of it, was not enjoined the Clergy, by the
Bishops, who are their Ordinaries. The Illegality and Incompetency of the said
Court of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, was so notoriously known, and it
did so Evidently appear, that it tended to the Subversion of the Protestant
Religion, that the Most Revernd Father in God, William Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, seeing that it was raised
for no other end, but to oppress such persons as were of Eminent Virtue,
Learning, and Piety, refused to sit or to concur in it.

And tho there are many express Laws against all Churches or Chapells, for
the exercise of the Popish Religion, and also against all Monasteries and
Convents, and more particularly against the order of the Jesuits, yet those
Evil Councillors have Procured orders for the building of several Churches
and Chapels, for the Exercise of that Religion: They have also procured
diverse Monasteries to be Erected, and in contempt of the Law they have not
only set up several Colleges of Jesuits, in diverse places, for the
corrupting of the youth, but have raised up one of the Order, to be a Privy
Counselor and a Minister of State. By all which they do evidently show, that
they are restrained by no rules of Law whatsoever; but that they have subjected
the Honors and Estates of the subjects, and the Established Religion, to a
Despotick power and to Arbitrary Government: In all which they are served and
seconded by those Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

They have also followed the same methods with Relation to Civil affairs: For
they have procured Orders, to examine all Lords Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and all others that were in any
Public Employment, if they would concur with The King in the Repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws: and all such, whose Consciences did not suffer them, to
comply with their designs, were turned out; and others were put in their
places, who they believed would be more Compliant to them; in their Designs of
defeating the Intent and Execution of those Laws; which had been made with so
much care and caution, for the Security of the Protestant Religion. And in many
of these places they have put professed Papists, though the Law has disabled
them, and warranted the subjects not to have any regard to their Orders.

They have also invaded the Privileges, and seized on the Charters of most of
those Towns that have a right to be represented by their Burgesses in
Parliament: and have procured surrenders to be made of them, by which the
Magistrates in them have delivered up all their Rights, and Privileges, to be
disposed of, at the pleasure of those Evil Councillors: who have thereupon,
placed new Magistrates in those Towns, such as they can most entirely confide
in: and in many of them, they have put Popish Magistrates, notwithstanding the
Incapacities under which the Law has put them.

And whereas no Nation whatsoever can subsist without the administration of
good and impartial Justice, upon which men's Lives, Liberties, Honors, and
Estates, do depend; those Evil Councillors have subjected these to an
Arbitrary and Despotick power: In the most important affairs, they have studied
to discover before hand, the Opinions of the Judges; and have turned out such,
as they found would not conform themselves to their intentions: and have put
others in their places, of whom they were more assured, without having any
regard to their abilities. And they have not stuck to raise even professed
Papists, to the Courts of Judicature, notwithstanding their Incapacity by Law,
and that no Regard is due to any Sentences flowing from them. They have carried
this so far, as to deprive such Judges, who in the common administration of
Justice, showed that they were governed by their Consciences, and not by the
directions, which the others gave them. By which it is apparent that they
design to render themselves the absolute Masters of the Lives, Honors and
Estates of the subjects, of what rank or dignity soever they may be: and that
without having any regard either to the equity of the cause, or to the
Consciences of the Judges, whom they will have to submit in all things, to
their own will, and pleasure: hoping by such ways, to Intimidate those who are
yet in Employment, as also such others, as they shall think fit, to put in the
Rooms of those whom they have turned out; and to make them see, what they must
look for, if they should at any time act in the least contrary to their good
liking: and that no failings of that kind, are pardoned, in any persons
whatsoever. A great deal of blood has been shed in many places of the Kingdom,
by Judges governed by those Evil Councillors, against all the rules and forms
of Law; without so much as suffering the persons that were accused, to Plead in
their own Defense.

They have also, by putting the administration of Justice, in the hands of
Papists, brought all the matters of Civil Justice into great uncertainties:
with how much exactness and Justice soever that these Sentences may have been
given. For since the Laws of the Land do not only exclude Papists from all
places of Judicature, but have put them under an Incapacity, none are bound to
acknowledge or to obey their Judgments, and all Sentences given by them, are
null and void of themselves: so that all persons who have been cast, in Trials
before such Popish Judges, may justly look on their Pretended Sentences, as
having no more force, then the Sentences of any private and unauthorised person
whatsoever. So deplorable is the case of the Subjects, who are obliged to
answer to such Judges, that must in all things sti^^ to the Rules,, which are
set them by those Evil Councillors, who as they raised them up to those
Employments, so can turn them out of them at pleasure; and who can never be
esteemed Lawful Judges; so that all their Sentences are in the Construction of
the Law, of no Force and Efficacy. They have likewise disposed of all Military
Employments, in the same manner: For tho the Laws have not only Excluded
Papists, from all such Employments, but have in particular, Provided that they
should be Disarmed; yet they in Contempt of these Laws, have not only armed the
Papists, but have likewise raised them up to the greatest Military Trusts, both
by Sea and Land, and that Strangers as well as Natives, and Irish as well as
English, that so by those means, having rendered themselves Masters both of the
affairs of the Church, of the Government of the Nation, and of the course of
Justice, and subjected them all to a Despotick and Arbitrary power, they might
be in a Capacity to maintain and Execute their wicked designs, by the
assistance of the Army, and thereby to enslave the Nation.

The dismal effects of this subversion of the established Religion, Laws and
Liberties in England appear more evidently to us, by what we see done in
Ireland: where the whole Government is put in the hands of Papists, and where
all the Protestant Inhabitants are under the daily fears of what may be justly
apprehended, from the Arbitrary Power which is set up there: which has made
great numbers of them, leave that Kingdom, and abandon their Estates in it,
remembering well that Cruel and Bloody Massacre, which fell out in that Island
in the year 1641.

Those Evil Councillors have also prevailed with the King to declare in
Scotland that he is clothed with Absolute Power, and that all the Subjects are
bound to obey him without Reserve: upon which he has assumed an Arbitrary Power
both over the Religion and Laws of that Kingdom, from all which it is apparent,
what is to be looked for in England, as soon as matters are du^ly prepared for
it.

Those great and insufferable Oppressions, and the open Contempt of all Law,
together with the apprehensions of the sad Consequences that must certainly
follow upon it, have put the subjects under great and just fears; and have made
them look after such lawful Remedies as are allowed of in all Nations: yet all
has been without effect. And those Evil Counselors have endeavored to make
all Men apprehend, the loss of their Lives, Libertys, Honors, and Estates, if
they should go about to preserve themselves from this Oppression, by Petitions,
Representations, or other means authorized by Law. Thus did they proceed with
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Bishops, who having offered a most
humble petition to the King, in terms full of Respect, and not exceeding the
number limited by Law, in which they set forth in short, the Reasons, for which
they could not obey that order, which by the Instigation of those Evil
Counselors, was sent them, requiring them to appoint their Clergy to read in
their Churches the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; were sent to prison
and afterward brought to a Trial, as if they had been guilty of some enormous
Crime. They were not only obliged, to defend themselves in that pursuit, but to
appear before Professed Papists, who had not taken the Test and by Consequence
were men whose Interest led them to condemn them: and the Judges that gave
their opinion in their favors were thereupon turned out.

And yet it can not be pretended, that any Kings; how great soever their power
has been, and how Arbitrary and Despotick soever, they have been in the
exercise of it, have ever reckoned it a crime for their Subjects to come, in
all Submission and Respect, and in a due number, not exceeding the limits of
the Law, and represent to them the Reasons that made it impossible for them to
obey their orders. Those Evil Councillors have also treated a Peer of the
Realm as a Criminal, only because he said that the subjects were not bound to
obey the orders of a Popish Justice of Peace: tho it is Evident, that they
being by Law rendered incapable of all such trusts, no regard is due to their
orders. This being the security which the people have by the Law for their
Lives, Liberties, Honors and Estates, that they are not to be subjected to the
Arbitrary procedings of Papists, that are contrary to Law, put into any
employments Civil or Military.

Both We our selves, and our Dearest and most Entirely Beloved Consort, the
Princess, have endeavored to signify in terms full of respect, to the King,
the just and deep Regret which all these Proceedings have given us; and in
Compliance with his Majesty's desires signified to us, We Declared both by
word of Mouth, to his Envoy, and in writing; what our Thoughts were touching
the Repealing of the Test and Penal Laws; which we did in such a manner, that
we hoped we had proposed an Expedient, by which the Peace of those Kingdoms,
and a happy agreement among the Subjects of all Persuasions, might have been
settled: but those Evil Councillors, have put such ill Constructions on these
our good Intentions, that they have endeavored to alienate the King more and
more from us: as if We had designed, to disturb the quiet and Happiness of the
Kingdom.

The last and great Remedy for all those Evils, is the Calling of a Parliament,
for securing the Nation, against the evil practices of those wicked
Councillors: but this could not be yet compassed, nor can it be easily brought
about. For those Men apprehending, that a lawful Parliament, being once
assembled, they would be brought to an account, for all their open violations
of Law, and for their Plots and Conspiracies against the Protestant Religion,
and the Lives and Liberties of the Subjects, they have endeavored under the
specious Pretense of Liberty of Conscience; first to Sow divisions among
Protestants, between those of the Church of England and the Dissenters: The
design being laid to engage Protestants, that are all equally concerned, to
preserve themselves from Popish Oppression; into mutual quarrellings; that so
by these, some advantages might be given to them to bring about their Designs;
and that both in the Election of the Members of Parliament, and afterward in
the Parliament it self. For they see well that if all Protestants, could enter
into a mutual good Understanding, one with another, and Concur together, in
the preserving of their Religion, it would not be possible for them to compass
their wicked ends. They have also required all Persons in the several Counties
of England, that either were in any Employment, or were in any Considerable
Esteem, to declare before hand, that they would concur in the Repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws; and that they would give their voices in the Elections to
Parliament, only for such as would concur in it: Such as would not thus
Preingage themselves were turned out of all Employments: And others who entered
into those engagements, were put in their places, many of them being Papists:
and contrary to the Charters and Privileges of those Buroughs, that have a
Right to send Burgesses to Parliament, they have ordered such Regulations to be
made, as they thought fit and necessary, for assuring themselves of all the
Members, that are to be chosen by those Corporations: and by this means they
hope to avoid that Punishment which they have Deserved: tho it is apparent,
that all Acts made by Popish Magistrates are null, and Void of themselves; So
that no Parliament can be Lawful, for which the Elections and Returns are made
by Popish Sheriffs and Majors of Touns; and Therefore as long as the Authority
and Magistracy is in such hands, it is not possible to have any Lawful
Parliament. And tho according to the Constitution of the English Government,
and Immemorial Custom, all Elections of Parliament men ought to be made with
an Entire Liberty, without any sort of force, or the requiring the Electors to
choose such Persons as shall be named to them, and the Persons thus freely
Elected, ought to give their Opinions freely, upon all Matters that are brought
before them, having the good of the Nation ever before their Eyes, and
following in all things the dictates of their Conscience, yet now the People of
England can not expect a Remedy from a free Parliament, Legally Called and
Chosen. But they may perhaps see one Called, in which all Elections will be
carried by Fraud or Force, and which will be composed of such Persons, of whom
those Evil Councillors hold themselves well assured, in which all things will
be carried on according to their Direction and Interest, without any regard to
the Good or Happiness the Nation. Which may appear Evidently from this, that
the same Persons tried the Members of the last Parliament, to gain them to
Consent to the Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws, and procured that Parliament
to be dissolved, when they found that they could not, neither by Promises nor
Threatenings, prevail with the Members to Comply with their wicked Designs.

But to Crown all, there are Great and Violent Presumptions, inducing us to
Believe, that those Evil Councillors, in order to the carrying on of their ill
Designs, and to the Gaining to themselves the more time for the Effecting of
them, for the encouraging of their Accomplices, and for the discouraging of all
Good Subjects, have published that the Queen has brought forth a Son: tho
there have appeared both during the Queens pretended Bigness, and in the manner
in which the Birth was managed, so many just and Visible grounds of suspicion,
that not only we our selves, but all the good Subjects of those Kingdoms, do
Vehemently suspect, that the pretended Prince of Wales was not born by the
Queen. And it is notoriously known to all the world, that many both doubted of
the Queens Bigness, and of the Birth of the Child, and yet there was not any
one thing done to Satisfy them, or to put an end to their Doubts.

And since our Dearest and most Entirely Beloved Consort, the Princess, and
likewise we Our Selves, have so great an Interest in this Matter, and such a
Right, as all the world knows, to the Succession to the Crown, Since also the
English did in the year 1672. when the States General of the United Provinces
were invaded, in a most unjust war, use their utmost Endeavors to put an end
to that War, and that in opposition to those who were then in the Government:
and by their so doing, they run the hazard, of losing both the favor of the
Court, and their Employments; And since the English Nation has ever testified a
most particular Affection and Esteem, both to our Dearest Consort the
Princess, and to Our selves, We cannot excuse our selves from espousing their
Interests, in a matter of such high Consequence, and from Contributing all that
lies in us, for the Maintaining both of the Protestant Religion, and of the
Laws and Liberties of those Kingdoms, and for the Securing to them, the
Continual Enjoyment of all their just Rights. To the doing of which, we are
most Earnestly Solicited by a Great many Lords, both Spiritual and Temporal,
and by many Gentlemen and other subjects of all Ranks.

THEREFORE it is, that we have thought fit, to go over to England, and to
Carry over with us a force, sufficient by the blessing of God, to defend us
from the Violence of those Evil Councillors. AND, WE being desirous that our
Intentions in this, may be Rightly Understood, have for this end prepared this
Declaration, in which as we have hitherto given a True Account of the Reasons
Inducing us to it, So we now think fit to DECLARE that this our Expedition, is
intended for no other Design, but to have a free and lawful Parliament
assembled, as soon as is possible: and that in order to this, all the late
Charters by which the Elections of Burgesses are limited contrary to the
Ancient custom, shall be considered as null and of no force: and likewise all
Magistrates who have been Injustly turned out, shall forthwith resume their
former Employments, as well as all the Borroughs of England shall return again
to their Ancient Prescriptions and Charters: And more particularly that the
Ancient Charter of the Great and Famous City of London, shall again be in
Force: and that the Writts for the Members of Parliament shall be addressed to
the Proper Officers, according to Law and Custom. That also none be suffered
to choose or to be chosen Members of Parliament but such as are qualified by
Law: And that the Members of Parliament being thus lawfully chosen they shall
meet and sit in Full Freedom; That so the Two Houses may concur in the
preparing of such Laws, as they upon full and free debate, shall Judge
necessary and convenient, both for the confirming and executing the Law
concerning the Test and such other Laws as are necessary for the Security and
Maintenance of the Protestant Religion; as likewise for making such Laws as
may establish a good aggrement between the Church of England, and all
Protestant Dissenters, as also for the covering and securing of all such, who
will live Peaceably under the Government as becomes g^od Subjects, from all
Persecution upon the account of their Religion, even Papists themselves not
excepted, and for the doing of all other things, which the Two Houses of
Parliament shall find necessary for the Peace, Honor, and Safety of the
Nation, so that there may be no more danger of the Nations salling at any time
hereafter, under Arbitrary Government. To this Parliament we will also refer
the Enquiry into the birth of the Pretended Prince of Wales, and of all things
relating to it and to the Right of Succession.

And We for our part will concur in every thing, that may procure the Peace
and Happiness of the Nation, which a Free and Lawful Parliament shall
determine; Since we have nothing before our eyes in this our undertaking, but
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Covering of all men from
Persecution for their Consciences, and the Securing to the whole Nation the
free enjoyment of all their Laws, Rights and Liberties, under a Just and
Legal Government.

This is the design, that we have Proposed to our selves, in appearing upon
this occasion in Arms: In the Conduct of which, We will keep the Forces under
our Command, under all the Strictnes of Martial Discipline: and take a
special Care, that the People of the Countries through which we must march,
shall not suffer by their means: and as soon as the State of the Nation will
admit of it, We promise that we will send back all those Foreign Forces,
that we have brought along with us.

We do therefore hope that all People will judge rightly of us, and approve
of these our Proceedings: But we chiefly rely on the blessing of God, for the
success of this our undertaking, in which We place our whole and only
Confidence.

We do in the last place invite and require all Persons whatsoever, All the
Peers of the Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal, all Lords Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, and all Gentlemen, Citisens and other Commons of all ranks,
to come and assist us, in order to the Executing of this our Design; against
all such as shall Endeavor to Oppose us; that so we may prevent all those
Miseries, which must needs follow upon the Nations being (...) under Arbitrary
Government and Slavery: And that all the Viole^ces and disorders, which have
overturned the whole Constitution of the English Government, may be fully
redressed, in a FREE AND LEGAL PARLIAMENT.

And We do likewise resolve that as soon as the Nations are brought to a state
of Quiet We will take care that a Parliament shall be called in Scotland, for
the restoring the Ancient Constitution of that Kingdom, and for bringing the
Matters of Religion to such a Settlement, that the People may live easy and
happy, and for putting an end to all the Injust Violences, that have been in a
course of so many years Committed there.

We will also study to bring the Kingdom of Ireland to such a State, that the
Settlement there may be Religiously observed: and that the Protestant and
British Interest there, may be secured. And we will endeavor by all possible
means, to procure such an establishment in all the Three Kingdoms that they may
all live in a happy Union and Correspondence together; and that the Protestant
Religion, and the Peace, Honor, and Happiness of those Nations, may be
established upon lasting Foundations.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court in the Hague, the Tenth day of
October in the year of our Lord 1688. WILLIAM HENRY, PRINCE OF ORANGE* By his
Highnesses special Command. C: HUYGENS.

THus you have an exact and full Account of the Prince of Orange's Declaration:
And can you find one word of a Treaty with France, to extirpate all
Protestants? Or can you imagine that if they had the least reason for such a
Talk, they who aggravate every little thing, would let this Declaration pass
without the least mentioning of what is so momentous and important? And is
there any thing more than a Violent Presumption suggested about the Prince of
Wales? And is the very Noise of such a Presumption reason enough to justify a
real War? As for the other things urged, are they not Redressable by a
Parliament, and so far as it is possible without one already Redressed? It Is a
Parliament then that is the main thing to be insisted on, which, though Chosen
as the last was, would be too feeble an Argument to clear the present Invasion
from the charge of being Injust and Unrighteous.

The Great Men of this Kingdom ever thought a Parliament Irregularly chosen
more eligible than either a War, or a rash Enquiry into the manner of the
choice. Did Queen Elizabeth's Parliament admit of a Words being spoken to bring
Queen Mary's Parliament into doubt? Did they not look on it as most dangerous
to do so? And although by the Triennial Bill the long Parliament in the late
Kings Reign, was actually dissolved Nine Months before it thought on the Repeal
thereof, yet even after 'twas destroyed by it, the Dissolved Parliament sat
and repealed the Dissolving Bill, and made the Conventicle-Act, the Test-Laws,
repealed the Writ De Haeretico Comburendo, and passed the Habeas Corpus Bill
into a Law. But was the Assembly that Acted thus Irregularly, ever called to an
Account for it, or any of their Laws declared Void and Null? Or was it ever
esteemed a Good Reason for a War? And yet this is much more than has been ever
done by His Present Majesty. Besides, 'twas the late King that took away the
Charters, and those, who were entering on Violent Courses for their
Restoration, were proclaimed Traitors, and several executed for it, whilst all
the Pulpits throughout England sounded of the Horridness, Blackness, Vileness,
Devilishness of that Conspiracy; And is what was Black and Horrid then, become
Noble, Great, Generous, and Glorious now?

Thus much was also a part of the late Duke of Monmouth's Declaration, and yet
a Parliament chosen by the Garbled Corporations proclaimed him a Traitor, and
Attainted him; But does the Blood of Monmouth as well as of the forementioned
Conspirators, and of all those in the West lie on the Judges, Iuries, Nobility,
and other Gentry of the Church of England, that had a hand in condemning such
as by violent Methods would have restored the Charters. If these things could
not vindicate the Presbyterian Plotters in the late King's Reign, or Monmouth's
Rebellion, it cannot excuse the present Undertaking, for this does infinitely
exceed these, and the late Civil War too, for neither of them brought in a
Foreign Power upon us as now is done.

But it must be observed, that how great soever our Grievances have been, yet
now, all that Relief can reasonably be desired is granted us. The
Ecclesiastical Commission actually broken up, the Bishop of London, the Master
and Fellows of Magdalen College, and the Ancient Charters of Cities and
Buroughs actually restored, all things on the ancient Bottom, for the Calling
a Free Parliament, which His Majesty would have done before this time, had not
the Prince of Orange hindered him, and as soon as the Prince of Orange departs
the King will call one, whereby all the Prince's Pretensions are taken away,
and nothing more remains for him to do, but to return home, or contend for the
Crown.

Yet the Prince would have us believe, that though he is not satisfied with
this, yet he intends no such thing as the Crown, or a Conquest of us, as
appears by his Highnesses Additional Declaration.

His Highnesses Additional Declaration.
AFter we had prepared and printed this our Declaration, we have understood,
that the subverters of the Religion and Laws of those Kingdoms, hearing of
our preparations, to assist the People against them, have begun to retract some
of the Arbitrary and Despotick powers, that they had assumed, and to vacate
some of their Injust Judgments and Decrees. The sense of their Guilt, and the
distrust of their force, have induced them to offer to the City of London some
seeming relief from their Great Oppressions: hoping thereby to quiet the
People, and to divert them from demanding a Reestablishment of their Religion
and Laws under the shelter of our Arms: They do also give out, that we do
intend to Conquer and Enslave the Nation, And therefore it is that we have
thought fit to add a few words to our Declaration.

We are Confident, that no persons can have such hard thoughts of us, as to
imagine that we have any other Design in this Undertaking, then to procure a
settlement of the Religion and of the Liberties and Properties of the subjects
upon so sure a Foundation, that there may be no danger of the Nations relapsing
into the like miseries at any time hereafter. And as the forces that we have
brought along with us, are utterly disproportioned to that wicked Design of
Conquering the Nation, if we were capable of Intending it, so the Great
Numbers of the Principal Nobility and Gentry, that are Men of Eminent Quality
and Estates, and persons of known Integrity and Zeal both for the Religion and
Government of England, many of them being also distinguished by their Constant
fidelity to the Crown, who do both accompany us in this Expedition, and have
earnestly solicited us to it, will cover us from all such Malicious
Insinuations: For it is not to be imagined, that either those who have Invited
us, or those that are already come to assist us, can join in a wicked attempt
of Conquest, to make void their own lawful Titles to their Honors, Estates and
Interests: We are also Confident that all men see how little weight there is
to be laid, on all Promises and Engagements that can be now made: since there
has been so little regard had in time past, to the most solemn Promises. And
as that Imperfeit redress that is now offered, is a plain Confession of those
Violations of the Government, that we have set forth, so the Defectiveness of
it is no less Apparent: for they lay down nothing which they may not take up
at Pleasure: and they reserve entire and not so much as mentioned, their
claims and pretenses to an Arbitrary and Despotick power; which has been the
root of all their Oppression, and of the total subversion of the Government.
And it is plain, that there can be no redress nor Remedy offered but in
Parliament: by a Declaration of the Rights of the Subjects that have been
invaded: and not by any Pretended Acts of Grace, to which the extremity of
their affairs has driven them. Therefore it is that we have thought fit to
declare, that we will refer all to a Free Assembly of the Nation, in a Lawful
Parliament.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court in the Hague, the 24. day of
October in the year of our Lord 1688. WILLIAM HENRY, PRINCE OF ORANGE* By his
Highnesses special Command. C: HUYGENS.

THis Addition does very fully unfold the Design, the Prince will abide amongst
us with a Foreign Power, and make the Choice of a Parliament impracticable, and
therefore the Call of one a weak and foolish thing, and yet oblige us to
distrust every Promise the King makes us, lesning what is done, and insinuating
that all things shall be soon undone. And why all these Insinuations, but to
help us to Unravel the whole Intreague, which, if it be not for the Crown, must
be thus. The Dutch knowing how the Prince has ravished from them their
Liberties and Privileges, and what danger they are in of being utterly undone,
if Liberty of Conscience be settled amongst us in England, Precipitate the
Prince on this Hazardous Undertaking, not doubting but they shall be either
delivered from the Princes Exercise of a Despotick Power over them, or spoil
our Liberty, to the Continuance and Advance of their own Trade; which may be
the Reason why in the Entrance into the Declaration, what relates to Religion
is so worded as to gain the Bishops over to them, the more e^sily to effect
their Design, for says the Declaration, the Alteration of Religion is
endeavored, and that a Religion which is contrary to Law is endeavored to be
introduced; it is not said, that the Popish Religion, but a Religion contrary
to the Law, and, it is well known, that the Laws are against the Religion of the
Dissenters, and the Prince's Endeavor shall be to preserve and maintain above
all the Religion and Worship of God, that is Established amongst us, which
cannot be understood of the Worship the Dissenters use, but of the Hierarchical
way, that is as contrary to the Prince's own Religion, as it is to that of the
Dissenters in England. And to persuade the Church men to close with him, he
Declares, That he was most earnestly solicited to come over by the Lords
Spiritual, not doubting, but that, if the Belief thereof prevail amongst the
Mobile, they will be all of an Opinion that the Prince's Grounds are most Just
and Reasonable, so that though it cannot be made out by any thing particularly
known, yet this general carrying a thousand unheard of Arguments in its Bowels
cannot fail of success.

But what if this prove not True? May we afterward venture to believe his
Highness in any thing, which under a violent Temptation, he may be, as now,
moved to declare? The Prince insists on it, That many of the Lords Spiritual
did most earnestly solicit him to Invade us, and yet the Lords Spiritual do
not only declare, That they look on this Invasion to be sinful, but, that they
never solicited his coming; And, it must be acknowledged, That they could do
no such thing without acting most contrary to their Avowed Principles, and
contrary to most solemn Oaths, and Declarations; and Men should take heed, how
they receive this Report against the Right Reverend Bishops; the Design in
which they are said to Embarque being founded on that very Principle, in
pursuance of which the Head of Charles the Blessed Martyr was brought to the
Block; and Embarque they cannot, but by joining with a Foreign Army, the chief
part of which is made up of those who though they would willingly enough
ensnare our Bishops, cannot be reasonably supposed to be true in the promises
they make about supporting their Hierarchical Grandeur; the utmost they must
expect in the long-run can be no more than a turning their Lands into Money,
that, to the end their dependence on the Government may be the more effectually
secured, in stead of their present Lands, Leases, etc. they may have an Yearly
Salary answerable to their worth and desert, which as 'twill be uncertain, so
it cannot be hoped that its utmost height shall arise to the State and Degree
of a Baron, for Baronies go with their Lands. By this you may see, how unlikely
any sort of Englishmen should by this Invasion gain any thing but Misery.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS The PRINCE of ORANGE.
THE Great Preparations for War in Holland, were long talked of here as very
unconcerning News. Besides the perpetual assurances of their Ambassador, that
they were not designed this way, every body knew the Influence which his
Highness the Prince of Orange has upon that Country; and it could not sink into
their Heads, that He, who was Born of one Daughter of England, and Married to
another, would ever suffer the Peace of a Country to be disturbed, for which
Nature Solicited a Feeling Tenderness. Even they who reflected, that Politics
sometimes sway more than Nature, as possible as they thought it that he might
be moved to suffer it to be done by some body, in whom it would show less
Shocking, thought it absolutely impossible he should ever be moved to bring
Fire and Sword into England himself, and Personally Fight against his
Father-in-Law, and Uncle. When we found our incredulity had deceived us, we
cast about to discover what unsufferable Provocations he had received, what
Injuries beyond Satisfaction, what Affronts to be Revenged with no less than
the Ruin of a Nation; in fine, what just cause of War there could be. And we
impatiently waited for the Declaration of his Highness, in which we expected to
find all this. Now it is come, we are more at a loss than before. War must shed
a great deal of Blood; make numberless Widows and Orphans, whose Tears will go
up to Heaven, and Cries be heard; Desolate the Nation; change our Plenty into
Beggary; and bring a Thousand Calamities. This Blood, and these Miseries will
one Day be required from the Authors. And we perceive nothing in the World to
justify all this, but the very Stories which we hear from those who make it
their business to Slander the Government, and Incense the People, of whom there
are too many in every Nation, and to whom we little thought his Highness would
have afforded the Countenance of his Name. Since he has thought fit to do it, I
shall, in respect, forbear to Contest it with his Highness, as much as I
perceive he is Misinformed, farther than is just necessary for our own
Resolutions and Actions. His Declaration Sollicits us to join with his Arms,
and I conceive we ought to be very well assured the Reasons offered will
justify us to God and Man, before we break our Natural and Sworn Allegiance,
and forfeit our Honor in this World, and Interest in the next, by Deserting,
or Fighting against our King, and Gods Anointed, before we tear out the Bowels
of Our Mother Country with our own Hands, and do things for which his Highness
himself shall always think us, and if he prevail, one day Treat us as Traitors
and Rebels. For a Traitor is sure to be hated, even by him who loves the
Treason.

The Declaration begins with telling us, That the Public Peace cannot be
preserved, where the Laws are openly Transgressed, and a Religion contrary to
Law endeavored to be intr^du^ed. And that th^se who are most immediately
concerned, are indispensably bound to preserve them. This may be as true as it
will for any concern which England or his Highness has in it. England, whatever
be, is not the Country in which these things are done. The ^xecution indeed of
some Laws is Suspended, Laws it seems not necessary to the Public Peace, since
the Declaration inform us, his Highness intends they should be taken away^; And
this Suspension, by those who should know, is thought to be warranted, not
forbidden by Law, and his Highness, I fancy, would be of their Opinion himself,
if the case were his own. Happy we, if nothing would subvert our Peace, and
transgress our Laws more than this Suspension.

But to make these things the Ground of an Invasion, which must entirely
subvert our Peace, and, if it prevail, our Laws, and leave us none, but at the
Mercy of an Arbitrary Sword; which cannot begin without notoriously
transgressing the Laws of God and Nations; nor be abetted without undisguisable
transgressing the Laws of the Land; has palpably some other aim, than the care
of our Peace and Laws.

What endeavors to introduce Popery his Highness means, I cannot tell. The
King, to my thinking, has bounded his Favor to that Religion, with the single
desire of seeing his Papist Subjects in the same condition with the rest, and
is pleased to bate even of that. Had he designed to introduce their Religion,
he would certainly never have made it impossible to be introduc't. For an
Universal Liberty unites the interest of every Religion, against the prevailing
of any one, and Excludes Popery from all hopes of ever Domineering in England.
But let the designs of Papists be never so Irreligious, booted Missionaries, I
take it, are no Ministers of the Gospel in the Reformed Religion, nor bare
endeavors to do b^d Actions, a Warrant actually to do bad Actions, and the
worst of them.

After all, were our Case as bad as the Declaration represents it, How comes
his Highness to be concerned in it? It is in his own words, certain and evident
to all Men, that Sovereign States, whether Monarchies, or Commonwealths, are
independent, and have no Right to interpose, otherwise than by friendly
Offices, in one another Affairs, but violate the Laws of Nations as often as
they do. Every Government holds within itself, all those who are concerned in
the Redress of Abuses, when they happen, and the Laws inform us who they are.
Nor is any thing more inconsistent with Government, than the interposition of
Foreign Powers, nor more deeply resented by the Laws of all Nations, than
abetting of it. Turn the Tables, and let all these dismal Stories, as some
perhaps are, be told of Holland, and be never ^o true; I refer it to all
Mankind, to Holland, to his Highness himself, whether the King of England would
not pass for a very bad Neighbor, and a very bad Man, if he should take the
cognizance from the States, and himself compose their Disorders by War: The
immediate Concern insinuated, relates, I suppose, to the prospect of
Succession, to which, if the calamities of War, be the proofs of his tender
Affection to our Nation, it will soon wish the Right of his Highness were
farther removed, than it is; tho it has now pleased God, the Right should not
be immediate, even in his Royal Consort. But the most immediate Right to
Succeed, is no Right to intermeddle before the Succession falls. I am Successor
to my Father, but cannot therefore dispose of his Estate, choose his Tenants for
him, and appoint what Covenants he shall make in his Leases, any more than a
stranger to his Blood.

And yet it follows, that upon these Ground; his Highness can no longer forbear
to Declare, that Counselors, in chief Credit with the King, have openly
overturned Religion and the Laws, and subjected them in all things relating to
Conscience, Liberty and Property, to Arbitrary Government, If these were the
true Grounds of his Highness, he could as little forbear to Declare against
many, perhaps all Nations, in which there are more rational, and more real
causes of complaint to be found, by one who would look after them. But put it
to Mankind, and all Mankind must Declare, that these Grounds are no Grounds,
and which no party will allow to justify another which disturbs them. Put it to
the Nation, and all the Nation must Declare, that every Man enjoys his
Conscience, his Liberty, and his Property, even to the Envy of their less happy
Neighbors, and that there has been no proceeding against a single Man, but for
his single Misdemeanor, and this not by Arbitrary, but Legal, Power. And then
to asperse His Majesty with overturning all Laws, under the name of Evil
Counselors! Why? let His Counselors be never so bad, they are worse, whose
Service his Highness has used in Penning this Declaration. Men, whose Brains
reach no farther, than to Copy from their Rebellious Ancestors of 41, by whose
example it is too sadly known, whom they meant by Evil Counselors, and what
they intended to do with Him. And yet his Highness leads his Name to such Men,
and giving Credit to such Counselors himself, talks of Evil Counselors in
Credit with the King.

To these general Premises, the Declaration adds a List of particulars; whereof
the first is, the Dispensing Power. And this his Highness takes the pains to
moot, and tell us how far it goes, and where it must stop, and that a Sentence
has been obtained for it from the Judges. Those Judges should in reason
understand the Matter better, than those, on whose Information his Highness has
thought fit to rely. As I take it for a Parliamentary Business, I leave it
untoucht, to the Wisdom of a Parliament, believing, all I can say, will be said
and considered there, and resolving to acquiesce in their determination. In the
mean time, How does this justify Foreign Arms? Here is the Case. Kings are not
bred at the Inns of Court, but must trust Lawyers for Law, as well as
Physicians for Physic. The oppression of Conscience-Laws, deafens His
Majesty's Ears with perpetual Complaints, and His tenderness of His Subjects
prompts Him to relieve them. He advises with those of the Profession, and they
inform Him, He may, by His Dispensing Power, relieve them Legally, and he does
it. Every body is not content, and he refers the whole to a public Legal
Trial. Pray what better, or other Advice could his Highness have given? What
could he do more himself, if it had been his own Case? And if I may be so bold,
Does he always do so much? Unfortunate Majesty! and Unfortunate Mankind! If
every Nation must be justly liable to the calamities of War, in which a King
happens to have a Counselor, who in point of a Law of his own Country, differs
in Opinion from a Prince of another.

Upon this Point it is further Declared, that these Evil Counselors secretly
examined the Opinions of the Judges, and procured such to be turned out, as
could not in Conscience concur in their pernicious Sentence. Why? then those
bad Counselors were not bad enough to desire Men should Act against their
Conscience, and the pernicious Sentence was given according to Conscience. But
this again is His Highnesses Case. He has the nomination of Men to Employments,
as well as the King: And I humbly refer it to his Conscience, whether before he
nominate, he do not satisfy himself that his Nomine be a Man on whom he may
rely, for the Service which he expects from him. Is it justice to fall out with
the King for doing what he does Himself, and all Princes in the World, and all
private Men, who have Employments at their disposal?

After minding us that we have a Crowned King, and have had Laws enacted in
England for preservatiou of our Rights, Liberties and Religion: The Declaration
repeats again, that Evil Counselors have in effect annulled all those Laws,
contrary to the Kings Promise and Oath. Strange descant upon this short plain
Song, The King has Dispensed with one Law, and that in the interval of
Parliament, from which he promises Himself, it will be taken away, and which
the Parliament designed by his Highness, as free as it shall be, we find by the
Declaration, must take away, and this upon Information which he had reason to
trust, that he might, according to Law. Will the Rhetoric of his Highnesses
Penmen, make this pass for a breach of Promise and Oath, for annulling and
abolishing all Laws, when we see with our Eyes, the established Religion
actually maintained, and assist every day at the Divine Service of it; when we
see the Judges Sit, and Suitors obtain effectual Decrees and Sentences from
them, and effectual execution elsewhere; when we see no Dispensation, nor
Inclination to it in any thing, save in relief of an Oppression, which the
whole Nation, as far as I perceive, consents should not be continued? We Humbly
pray his Highness, in stead of the Liberty held forth by his Invasion, to
afford us the liberty of believing our own Eyes, before the repetitions of his
Historical Penmen, and to think we actually enjoy our Religion, and our Laws
as much as they would persuade us, there is no such thing in England,

But tho our Case were as deplorable, as their frightful Idea would make it,
what Remedy can we hope from the Declaration? All Human Affairs are subject to
the miscarriages inseparable from Human Nature. When they happen among us, the
Wisdom of our Nation has always thought the best way of Redress is by
Parliament. But we could never think knocking out Men's Brains a proper remedy
for miscariages about Religion, nor plundring and burning apt to set right the
swayed Law. And we again pray his Highness, rather to let us alone in our
Misery, than make us happy this way. For as we are made, the Happiness would be
incomparably the more unsupportable Misery.

After all, what would his Highness have done in the Case? and what can be done
more, than to leave none of those things in being, of which he complained? And
so much his Highness owns was done before he set Sail from Holland. The
Ecclesiastical Commission was broken; the Suspension of the Bishop of London
taken off; Magdelene College restored; Chancellors and Archdeacons discharged
of their attendance; Lord-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and the rest
replaced; and Charters returned. As it is palpable, that his Highness comes not
to redress things, which he knew were redressed already, it is palpable that we
have Reasons of his coming alleged which are not his Reasons, and too much
ground to argue from one to all, and, conclude, we have not one true Reason
offered, but are amused with pretenses apt to work upon us, but which no way
move his Highness.

There is mention besides of Popish Chapels, and Schools, and Commissions, all
three consequences of Liberty of Conscience. People cannot exercise their
Religion, without places in which to exercise it, neither is there any
complaint of the Meeting places of their fellow Dissenters, nor can I
understand why his Highness excepts against their Chapels, who Declares, he
will not except them from the Liberty of Conscience. Again, Parents always
breed up their Children in their own way: And if Papists be not allowed Schools
at home, they will be sent abroad, to spend there, what it were more for the
benefit of the Nation should be laid out here, and besides, be trained up to
Foreign Customs, and perhaps, Foreign Principles, not so grateful to the
Nation, whereas here they might be watched. But cannot the King and Parliament
compose this matter without Bloodshed? Is the Question, whether a Boy shall go
to School in England or Flanders, so very material, and so very intricate, that
nothing but Arms can decide it? As for their Commissions, it stands not with
Nature, that a King should not choose some of his own way to trust with
Commissions, when he is persuaded he lawfully may. With all my Heart I wish,
that the greater readiness, and greater fidelity of others in the defense of
their Prince and Country, may convince him, and all the World, that he has made
an ill choice.

But to see whither Exaggeration will go! All Matters of Civil Justice,
according to the Declaration, are brought to great Uncertainties: Evil
Counselors ^^ndered Masters of the Affairs of the Church, the Government of
the Nation, and the Course of Justice, and all by these Commissions to Papists:
And yet all this signifies barely three or four Judges at most, some Justices
of Peace, and some Officers in the Army. Can a few, and those puny Judges, (for
there are no other) master the Courts of Justice* Can a few Officers, most
Subalterns, with Soldiers, not one to fifty of their Religion, master the
Affairs of the Church* and enslave a Nation? In which, if all the Papists were
armed, and the rest naked* their Pikes and Muskets could not defend them
against a Volley of Stones. Can Matters of Civil Justice be brought to great
Uncertainties by the incapacity of Papists, who have no incapacity upon them?
The Law indeed forbids them to be employed, but if they be, there is no
invalidity laid upon their Acts. And for Military Incapacity, if the Law had
put it, his Highness has dispensed with it; for an Invasion capacitates every
body to save his Country, as Fire breaking out, to save his House. But it is
incomprehensible, that the Irish should be mentioned, and the danger in which
the Nation is of Slavery from them, who, if his Highness had not brought them
in, had never been here to fright us. At worst, the King's Subjects sure may be
as safely here, as absolute Foreigners; and if Strangers, though Subjects, be
inconsistent with our Freedom, it is certain, that whatever be the business of
his Highnesses Army, our Freedom is not.

And this appears the more, the farther we go. All His Majesty's Dominions are
taken presently after into the care of his Highness, and it is represented as a
dismal Matter, that Papists are employed in Ireland, and that the King's Power
is in Scotland declared Absolute, and Subjects to obey without Reserve. Now
these are the very words of a Law enacted in Scotland, by a very free
Parliament, held under a Commissioner, upon whom, there never sell any
imputation of Popery. His Highness is sparing in this Point. It is said farther
by the Parliament, That the Blessings of Scotland^ are, next to God, owing to
the uninterrupted Line of the Kings, and to that solid absolute Authority, and
that their Kings are invested with it by* the first and fundamental Laws of
their Monarchy. But Parliaments, it seems, must exercise no freedom, but
according to the pleasure of a supervising Foreign Sword, though I should think
it something early to declare it. In Ireland, the Laws exclude not Papists from
Employments; and it is again referred to the Conscience of his Highness, Whether
he would think it reasonable, his Neighbors should exclaim and inflame the
People against him, for disposing Employments as the Law allows, and themselves
resolve the Matter to be so heinously unjust, that any of them has right to
revenge it upon his Country with the Miseries of War? Who shall hope to please
his Highness, when he thinks fit, at once, to dislike breaking Laws in England,
making them in Scotland, and keeping them in Ireland?

But these unsufferable Oppressions, have put the Subjects under just Fears,
and made them look after such lawful Remedies, as are allowed of in all
Nations. I hope, his Highness does not mean, rising in Arms against their King,
and calling in Foreign Enemies, by lawful Remedies. Whatever other Nations do,
ours allows this for nothing but Treason, and Rebellion, nor, I much suspect,
any Nation in the World besides: And yet those lawful Remedies must sure be
Remedies not authorized by Law; for the Declaration makes such means barred by
evil Counselors: The Instance is in the Bishops Petition. Now as
unquestionably legal as a Petition is, there may be an illegal Petition;
whether this were so, or no, the King desired should be legally tried: And a
Trial there was, in which, the direct Point (as I am informed) came not to
Issue, but Not guilty found upon no proof of matter of Fact* A Peer too is
mentioned to be treated as a Criminal, for saying the Orders of a Popish
Justice were not to be obeyed. And all his Criminal treatment was to refer him
to the ordinary course of Law, where he likewise waved the direct Point by
collateral Exceptions; Where may the Oppression be, and where the frightful
Apprehensions of loss of Life, Liberty, Honor, and Estate, in all this? Are
Judicicial Proceedings already threatened, and barred? And must we have an Army
to revenge the wrongs of the Bishops, and a Peer, who, I believe, themselves
complain of none done them? Nor can, without complaining that the Law has
wronged them, even when it acquitted them.

What significations have been made, and what Expedients proposed by their
Highnesses to his Majesty, is not come to my knowledge. But if the same
Advisers were used in their suggestions, which have been in this Declaration,
it is very likely the King might be sensible, they were too ill informed of the
Affairs of England, to take their Advice. If Evil Counselors have endeavored
to persuade the King, that his Highness designed to disturb the Quiet and
Happiness of the Kingdom, I am infinitely sorry he would be at all this pains
to justify them. For it is impossible to believe he actually came hither,
without design to come, or that the War he brings with him will not disturb our
Peace, and the Miseries of it our Happiness.

What follows is past my understanding. The last and great Remedy for all our
Evils is the Calling of a Parliament. So indeed all Englishmen think, and so
His Majesty thought, who called One. Happy we, if his Highness had been of the
same Opinion! but to our Misery, he is not, who when One was called would not
let it sit, but instead of it brought in Evils past the Remedy even of a
Parliament. For Votes are not Cannon proof. But a Parliament could not yet
compassed, nor can it be easily brought about. Too sadly true: For it is
neither easy, nor possible, to bring about a Parliament, when defenseless
People must break through a Foreign Army to meet and elect. Before, it was so
possible to compass, that it was compast; Writs were actually gone out, and
Elections begun, which were not stopped by Evil Counselors. But these Evil
Counselors apprehended, they should be brought to an account, for their Plots
and Conspiracies against the Protestant Religion, and have endeavored, under
the specious pretense of Liberty of Conscience, to sow Divisions among them,
between the Church of England, and Dissenters, that, by their natural
Quarrellings, They might bring about their Designs, both in the Election of
Members, and in the Parliament it self. Why then they designed a Parliament
should sit, as evil as they were, and as much as they feared to be called to
account. But if Liberty of Conscience be a Plot against Protestants, his
Highness must needs be of it himself, who declared for it. Must we believe the
same thing, practiced by His Majesty, will divide Protestants, and by his
Highness establish a good Agreement? Then the asking People their Opinion
beforehand, the Charters, Popish Sheriffs and Mayors, are brought in again,
only to conclude at last, that no Parliament can be lawful, for which the
Elections and Returns are made by Papists; and therefore, as long as the
Authority and Magistracy are in such hands, it is not p^ssible to have any
lawful Parliament. How ill do they understand the Law of England, who penned
this Declaration? Every body knows, that Elections are made by Freeholders and
Freemen, not by Sheriffs and Mayors, and that a Papist may elect as legally as
any body, and make a Return, if he be in Office, as valid. Had his Highness
suffered the Elections to go on, we should have thought the Parliament very
lawful; but shall not think so of a Parliament made by the Law of Arms, where
we are chosen, and sit with the Sword at our Throats, we think, there is
neither legality nor freedom; and that, when for a Remedy of the impossibility
of a lawful Parliament, there is prescribed an impossibility that it should be
lawful, very ill State-Doctors have been called to Council.

The Declaration crowns all with the Birth of the Prince of Wales, of which, it
says, That great and violent Presumptions induce his Highness to believe, that
these evil Counselors have published, the Queen has brought forth a Son, in
order to their ill Designs; and that not only his Highness himself, but all the
good Subjects of these Kingdoms, do vehemently suspect, that the pretended
Prince of Wales was not born by the Queen. Such things to come abroad, with the
Name of the Prince of Orange to them! And yet it is but too true, that there is
a great deal of violence and vehemence in these Presumptions and Suspicions; so
true, that there is in reality nothing else, neither Presumption, nor
Suspicion, indeed. And this violence, and this vehemence, must needs be
infinitely great; which can pretend Suspicions, not only utterly void of all
Reason, but so palpably against it, that, quite contrary to what the
Declaration avers, there is neither a good Subject, nor a sensible Man, who
harbors any Doubt in the case. And this Consideration, I suppose, has so long
delayed doing any thing for public Satisfaction. As it was not indeed very
proper for the King to regard idle Fictions, invented and spread by purely
obstinate Malice: But now he has caused the business to be scanned, if we
should take toy, and suspect without Reason. I believe, it would trouble his
Highness, to clear his own or the Princesses Birth, as the Birth of the Prince
of Wales is cleared: And guess, they would entertain the slightest suspicion
with an impatient Scorn, and not allow the greatest vehemence in the World to
suspect them into the Children of other Mothers, than the Princess of Orange,
and Duchess of York. But, as much to seek as we were, for a Reason in all
alleged before, this questioning the Birth of the immediate Successor, speaks
plain. We know now, what brought his Highness hither* and can give a shrewd
guess at what will follow on his success: For if they be the only good
Subjects, who believe not we have a Prince of Wales, they are like to be in a
bad condition, who have either sense enough to perceive plain Truths, or
Conscience enough to boggle at Perjury, or Memory enough to remember, they have
sworn Fidelity to the King, and his lawful Successors.

Beginning now to wind up, his Highness minds us of the great interest which
the Princess Royal and himself have in this matter, and of their Right to the
Succession, such as all the World knows: Of the Endeavors we used for the
United Provinces, when they were invaded, in a most unjust War in 1672: Of the
particular Esteem and Affection, which the English Nation has ever testified to
both their Highnesses: And therefore cannot excuse himself from espousing our
Interests; to the doing of which, he is earnestly solicited by a great many
Lords, both Spiritual and Temporal, by many Gentlemen, and Subjects of all
Ranks. In all which, the only thing we can understand, is, the Succession, to
which, their Highnesses do severally stand i^ that degree, which all the World
knows. But there is not a Man in the World, who can understand, how those, who
espouse the interest of another, because they have an interest of their own,
espouse any interest but their own; nor could his Highness have told us more
plainly, that he comes for himself, not us; that all alleged besides, is only
for fashion-sake; and that we might sink or swim, for any care of his, if he
had not been concerned himself. Again, because we did what we could for the
Dutch, when they were unjustly invaded, no body can understand, how Gratitude
obliges them to invade us unjustly themselves; nor how the particular Affection
and Esteem, which we have ever testified to their Highnesses, should deserve,
that he should become our Enemy, and ruin us for our pains. As much Esteem and
Affection, as the great Qualities of his Highness are like to meet every where,
he will please to be informed, that the strongest Band of ours, is his Alliance
to the Royal Blood; and must pardon the English, if they love not a Man who
hates our King, the very King, whose Sister and Daughter tied our Affections to
him: Then, who can understand, how making War upon us is espousing our
Interest, our Religion, our Laws, our Liberties and Properties; our Interest,
and we, beseech his Highness to have a little Mercy on us, and not oblige us to
believe, he espouses our Interest, by subjecting all we have to the mercy of a
lawless Sword. He must likewise pardon us, if we believe not on his Word, that
many Lords, many of the Gentry, and of all Ranks, are Traitors, which, if it
were true, he rewards them betimes, and by exposing them to be punished by
others, till it be seasonable to do it himself, informs them what they must
expect at last. But the Spiritual Lords and their Principles are well known,
and his Highness has experience what they are, in the first Bishop near whom he
approached. He is like to meet the Temporal Lords, whom Age keeps not at home,
or the King's Service employs not elsewhere, with the Gentry, and all Ranks, in
the Field, and be better informed from themselves, that the English are no
Traitors, and will take care to wipe off this Aspersion from the Nation. Alas!
how little does his Highness know us! Many an unwary, and many a heated Man,
speaks Treason here, who is, for all that, honest at Heart, and will make it
well appear he is, when there is occasion.

But, Therefore it is that his Highness has thought fit to go over to England,
and carry with him a Force sufficient by the Blessing of God to defend him from
the Violence of Evil Counselors. Unintelligible Language of Declarations of
War! To Invade us is called Defending Himself, and this where there is no fear
of an Assault, or any danger, save from that very Force which he must needs
bring to defend him. For without it, his single Name, not guarded so much as by
a Footman, had found security, and veneration all England over.

After this true account ^f inducing Reasons, (Reasons, if it please his
Penmen, For nothing looks like a Reason but one. viz. Interest) his Highness
thinks sit to declare his Intentions. As if there needed a Declaration to
inform us what Pikes and Muskets intend. An Army intends nothing but to Master
where it comes, the very same which the Saxons and Normans, and all Invaders
from the beginning of the World to this day, intended. But his Design is a free
and lawful Parliament: And for a Preparative, the annulling of new, and
returning of old Charters, particularly that of the City of London: Restoring
of former Magistrates; addressing Writs a proper Officers; And suffering note
to choose, or be chosen, but such as are qualified by Law. A Man no wiser than
I, would think, that if his Highness* designed nothing but this, he might very
well have staid at home. For all these Preparatives were, and he knew were,
made, before he went aboard. And a free and lawful Parliament had now been
sitting, or ready of sit, if he would have let it. Without more ado, it is
palpably impossible his Highness should come only to do over again, what he
knew was done to his hand; only to get us a Parliament, which he will not
suffer us to have, and this pretense must of necessity cover some Design
thought less taking with Englishmen.

This Parliament his Highness declares shall meet and sit in full freedom, but
perhaps not act so. For the two Houses must, it seems, prepare Laws to confirm
and execute the Test; for the security and maintenance of the Protestant
Religion; and for a good Agreement between the Church of England and all
Protestant Dissenters; and covering such from Persecution as will live
peaceably, not excepting Papists. But how will his Highness keep his Word, if a
Parliament should happen to think the Test needs no Confirmation, nor Religion
more Laws than are already, nor that any Laws can make the Church of England
and Dissenters agree? However it be, they love to have it in their power to
confirm, or alter, or abrogate, or let the Laws alone as they are, according as
the good of the Nation shall require, without having their Task prescribed.
They take themselves for Master-Workmen, and who can cut out their Work
themselves* not for bare Journeymen, to make up Work cut out by others. But I
would gladly know, what Protestant Religion means in the Mouth of his Highness.
In the Language of the Country where he was Born and Bred, right Protestancy
signifies Presbytery, and he is said to be surrounded by Men who so understand
it, whereof some perhaps might have a hand in this Declaration. As the
Religion, or Church Established by Law, had been easily said, if it had been
meant; to my thinking the suspicion is vehement, that this free Parliament,
with a Holland Trumpet in the Speakers Chair, is to set up Presbytery; at
least, I am very sure it must, if that Trumpet sound it; and there is but too
much reason to expect it will sound here as it does at home, especially when
there is not the least intimation to the contrary. The pretended Invitation of
the Spiritual Lords will be well rewarded with a good agreement with their
Dissenting Masters, and being covered from Persecution, provided they hold
themselves content, and live peaceably. But the comfort is, nothing can better
show their Invitation is but pretended.

To this fully free Parliament his Highness will refer the inquiry into the
Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales, to Vote him, I suppose, a Prince
Prettyman, the Son of Nobody. For we know what the References of Conquerors
signify, and what the freedom of their Arbitrators. But it is time to leave
talking, when such things are said, and think of other Weapons than Pens. Would
his Highness be content to refer his own Birth? For though there be nothing of
suspicion in it, yet the nothing on his side is nearer to something than on the
side of the Prince of Wales. For one may suspect that he who talks at this
rate, was not born of an English Mother.

But after all, there wants something still. His Highness designs new Laws; but
Acts, barely prepared, have not the perfection of Laws, Suppose the King should
prove resty somewhere, and advise upon it? Why, his Highness has found an
Expedient. He will himself concur in every thing that may procure the Peace
(witness his War) and Happiness of the Nation, that is, just what he pleases.
He will take care that a Parliament shall be called in Scotland. He will study
to bring Ireland into a state that the settlement be observed, and the
Protestant and British Interest secured. And as soon as the state of the Nation
will admit, he promises to send back his Foreign Forces; and, in the mean time
invites and requires all Peers, and all Persons whatsoever to come and assist
him, against all such as shall endeavor to ^ppose him. That is in short, He
will be King of England. For none pass Bills into Acts by their Concurrence,
but Kings. To take care for calling Parliaments; and for the settlement and
security of the Kings Dominions, belongs to none but the King; And he who means
to send his Forces away, certainly means to stay himself. And that we may not
be ignorant in what condition he means to stay, he takes the King upon him by
way of Anticipation. For no body can require the assistance of all his Subjects
of all sorts, but the King. So many Stories in the Declaration of a Prince,
which are the Entertainment of our Coffee-Houses, and which we now perceive
from whence they came; so many dismal Idea's of our Misery, who live a great
deal more at ease th^n they do in Holland; so much Trouble and so much Charge
purely in Ch^^y to our Neighbors, for no other design than to have a free
Parliament Ass^mbled, sounded untowardly, and we could not forbear to suspect
some de^ign ^t bottom, though we had not found it owned. But, if he had not
told us ^o himself, we should hardly have suspected, that Interest could have
drawn the Prince of Orange to dethrone the King, unprince his Son, and seize
the Crown for himself. But now we understand his Highness we will ende^vour his
Highness shall understand us, and our Protestant (...) better than he does. We
love our Princes, for all we can be angry, and talk more freely than they dare
in other Countries, and will sooner dye at their Feet, than Strangers shall
injure, much less dethrone, them. We love our Country, and we love our Honor,
and before England shall become the Prey of Holland, will take order they shall
find nothing in it, but Grass and Trees, no Men for them to use as they did at
Amboina. We profess a Protestant Religion, which teaches us, not to rise in
Arms against our King, by whomsoever we are required, but true Loyalty and
Fidelity to him and his lawful Successors, and to defend him against all
attempts whatsoever against his Crown, Person, or Dignity, and the World shall
see we are no bad Scholars of so good a Mistress. In a word, we know and we
Honor William Henry Prince of Orange, but we know not William Henry King of
England otherwise than for an Enemy.

Animadversions upon the Additional Declarations of his Highness.
THE Premises are so very plain, that his Highness thought it necessary to take
notice of them himself. Against the Apprehensions of a Conquest, he alleges
the disproportion of his Forces, and the joining of English with him. That
disproportion is not his Fault, and would have been, tho he had brought Holland
it self in his Fleet, and all the Men in it. But can he not design a Conquest
for all that? We were Conquered by the Normans, and bare Twelve Thousand Suedes
bid fair for the Conquest of Germany, as little proportion as Normandy had to
England, or Sweden to Germany. We can Conquer our selves, tho Holland cannot;
which if we do, we Conquer for him under whom we Fight. For the General wins
the Battle, who ever Fight it. And this of necessity his Highness must design,
unless he design to be beaten. For Victory and Conquest are but two Names for
one thing. Neither is he a Man to be at all this ado to make a Conquest, and
not make the most of it when he was done; neither can he do otherwise tho he
would. For as he has no Right to Act here by Law, he must of necessity Act by
Right of Conquest. And we humbly beseech him not to declare us out of common
Sense, and into a belief that he is not capable of intending what we see he is
actually doing.

But Enemies to their Country, of all Men in the World, one would least expect
should be magnified for Integrity, and Zeal, and constant Fidelity, and who
cannot join in a wicked attempt of Conquest, to make void their own lawful
Titles to their Honors, Estates, and Interests. Must we believe again they
cannot join in an Attempt in which his Highness himself tells us they do join?
Nor void their Titles, when they actually did void them the very moment of the
first Overt Act, which made it known they thought of that wicked Attempt? And
then the Fidelity, the Integrity, and Zeal of Treason, is unintelligible
Language in England. But I have already observed, that his Highness speaks in
the Language of a Protestant Religion which is not Established here, and in
likelihood never will by a Parliament truly free.

The Kings Concessions are treated as a seeming Relief; pretended Acts of
Grace; an imperfect Redress, upon which no weight is to be laid, because Solemn
Promises have been broken; a plain Confession of the Violation set forth in the
Declaration, and defective because they may again be taken up. His Highness
takes care that nothing shall be replied upon breach of Promise, by giving no
instance where it was broken. But to my grief here is greater Work in hand. It
had been shorter, and not much plainer said, I am resolved at any rate to come,
and be King. For as the pretense of the Declaration was, that the King had
taken up some things, and the pretense of the Addition, that he has laid them
down, it is palpable that the Expedition was unalterably resolved, without any
care, or thought of the good of England, or its Concerns, save only to borrow a
pretense which might contribute to the success of the Expedition, and to which
do, or undo was all a case; and that nothing shall satisfy him but laying down
the Crown, nor that neither, because it may happen to be taken up again.

And yet his Highness declares again, that he will refer all to a free lawful
Parliament. Happy we, if he would. If an English Parliament were to judge,
whether Foreign Force be lawful? Whether it be Integrity, Zeal, and Fidelity to
abet it? Whether it can be without a design of Conquest, and Conquest without
enslaving this Nation to the Arbitrary Pleasure of the Conqueror? And twenty
such things, which must needs enter into the number of the referred All. But to
talk of referring all to a Parliament, and at the same time refer all to the
Sword; To talk of the freedom of a Parliament, which cannot Vote nor Debate,
nor so much as make a Motion, but in danger of their Lives, is purely Talk, and
not like to ingratiate his Quarrel to a Nation not altogether senseless, as
much as his Highness seems to think it is, when we see the King did call a free
Parliament, that is, actually did refer all to it, (for calling one is
referring all to it, which it thinks fit to take into Consideration) and that
his Highness would not let it sit, we need no Declarations to inform us which
of the two is truly willing to refer all to a Parliament.

Two Letters, said to be annexed to the Declaration in Holland, and addressed to
the Seamen and Land Soldiers carry likewise the Name of his Highness. In which
they are first Cajolled with the Title of Friend; as if they were Men to be
Cajolled into a Friendship, with the Enemies of their Prince and Country, and
then endeavored to be debaucht into his Service, by motives the most
unsuitable to English Natures that were ever found out, Danger from Papists,
Duty to God, and Fear of falling into his Hands. I perceived we were taken for
Fools before, must we be taken for Cowards too, Men to be frighted even with
the Sound of Danger* His Highness is like to be informed one day, that the
English Fear not his Arms, much less the Papists, who tho they were all
embodied, are not near so many Soldiers; no tho it were less by as many Papists
as are in it. And yet there are more Holland than English Papists in the Field.
Moreover, that they know their Duty to God obliges them to be true to their
Prince, and that there is no Honor in Treason. Lastly, that his Men may fear
to fall into their Hands, they fear not to fall into his.

It is said besides, that Papists have Sworn the Ruin of the Protestant
Religion, a piece of News which his Highness would much oblige the whole Nation
to Verify. Let the wicked Men be but Named, and Convicted, and the next
Gallows or Tree would save the trouble of Parliaments and References* Lastly,
the Soldiers* that they may not be Instruments to defend their Prince, and save
their Country and themselves from Slavery, are desired to believe they are the
Instruments to introduce Popery. When they are, They will pray His Majesty to
Dispense with their Service. But they find (...) Popery in Fighting for the
King, their Country, and the Laws, against a Man who Usurps the Crown first,
and then would cajole them to fix it. For besides, what has been observed
already, he writes in the Style of a King, Trusty and Well Beloved, and joins
the Supporters of England to his Arms, in a manner not allowable in Heraldry,
even tho the Princess Royal were Queen. But where we cannot find good Reasons,
we must take up with bad Pretenses.

FINIS.

