W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King,
A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas We have been Informed, That a False, Scandalous, and Seditious Libel,
and Destructive to the Freedom and Liberties of Parliament, Entitled, An
Account of the Proceedings of the House of Commons in Relation to the Recoining
the Clipped Money, and Falling the Price of Guineas, has been Printed and
Dispersed; And whereas the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament
Assembled, have humbly besought Us to Issue Our Royal Proclamation, for
Discovery of the Author of the said Libel: We therefore (with the Advice of Our
Privy Council) have thought fit to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby
Requiring and Commanding all Our Loving Subjects whatsoever, to Discover the
Author of the said Libel, to the end he may be Dealt withal, and Proceeded
against according to Law. And We do hereby Promise and Declare that whosoever
shall Discover the Author of the said Libel, shall Have and Receive as a
Reward, for such Discovery, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds; which said Sum of
Five hundred Pounds the Commissioners of Our Treasury are hereby Required and
Directed to Pay accordingly. And We do also further Promise and Declare, That
if any Person (other than the Author himself) who was any ways privy to, or
instrumental in, the Printing or Dispersing the said Libel, shall Discover the
Author thereof, the Person making such Discovery, shall not only have the said
Sum of Five hundred Pounds, as aforesaid, but also Our gracious Pardon for his
Offense. And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects
(as they will answer the contrary at their Perils) that they do not any ways
Conceal, but Discover the Author of the said Libel, to the end he may be
Proceeded against with the utmost Severity, according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Fifth Day of November, 1696. In the
Eighth Year of Our Reign. God save the King.
LONDON Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.


