A Brief HISTORY Of the several PLOTS Contrived, AND REBELLIONS Raised by the
Papists, Against the Lives and Dignities of Sovereign Princes, since the
REFORMATION.

Taken from Faithful Historians.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wild at the Map of the World in^ St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1692.

TO THE READER.
IT is strange, that of all men Papists should calumniate Protestants with
Treason and Rebellions; were Modesty an Essential in the Complexion of a
Jesuit, surely they would forbear, or Charity they so much talk of, and so
little practice, to be found among them. Are horrid Massacres, villainous
Assassinations, or Poisonings, the Effect of Charity? Or, Is Malice inveterate,
Traducing or Lying the Fruit thereof? Yet nothing is more obvious in the whole
course of History than those diabolical Machinations and hellish Conspiracies
of Priests and Jesuits, especially within this last hundred and fifty years;
and, generally speaking, Princes, and crowned Heads, have been most the objects
of their Fury, and lest the palliation of Villainy should pass on the weaker
sort, and this Objection any way obtain, That forsooth most of these
Contrivances were against Heretical Princes, excommunicated by the Pope and
Church, and by consequence delivered over to Satan, and that the killing of
them really was no Murder, no more than of Wolves or Bears.

To this I answer, That Princes of the same Communion, as Henry the Third of
France, could not escape their fatal Stab, who never made profession of any
other; and though Henry the Fourth was first a Protestant, and by them
constrained to change, nay, and highly indulging them in his latter years, and
as Mathieus says in his Life, to all appearance was devout, I mean in their
way; yet from Ravilliac's Hand all this could not defend him. We need not long
here six, but look on former times, where for five or six hundred years nothing
(...) been more common, or more lamentable, than the story of several Princes,
struck with the Lightening of the Court of Rome, and others wholly ruined by
the Vatican Thunder, the consequences being either their own Tragical Ends, or,
at the most favorable, strong and lasting Rebellions, which all conversant in
History may plainly see; and so dextrous were they in translating to the other
World, that in the very Host it self was Poison given to one of the German
Emperors, so that Silence to none is a more necessary Virtue, especially in
this Case, than to regular Monks and Friars, who for several Ages have been the
very Pest and Bane of Secular Princes, acting not only their Villainies in the
Time of the Holy War, but in the time of their Antipopes also. But to return to
our own Nation: What Barbarities have they not committed? What Impieties have
they not been guilty of? What Cruelties have they left unattempted? and yet
with a brazen Front daily bespatter Protestants, accusing them of what
themselves were Authors of; imitating herein the very Skum of Mankind; for
none shall sooner call another Rogue than he that really is one; In whose mouth
is Whore and Bitch more frequent, than hers that is a common Prostitute? And to
proceed: What Disorder did they not cause, to plague and pester Harry the
Eighth? What Commotions did they not raise all the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
besides the Attempts upon her Person? What Divisions did they not nourish all
the time of Edward the Sixth, and in his death had no small share? How horridly
desperate they were in King James's time, appears by their inhumane
Powder Treason; how intriguing they were in his Cabinet Councils is but too sad
a Truth to relate; fomenting his humor in the Spanish Match, a blemish
inglorious to his Memory, leaving the Pallsgrave (though his Son in Law) a
Victim to the House of Austria; and after by the Match with France, how did he
embroil his Son! they managing underhand the Queen, and she by her powerful
Influence did the King; so that all the mischievous Evils of Charles the First
they, like a Mole, wrought under ground, spotting his Life with that business
of Rochell, and the Attempt of the Isle of Rhee, from whence the Protestants
generally date the ruin of their Church in France, and by the rising of the
French Monarchs since that time has endangered the ruin of the whole
Protestant Interest all over Europe, as of late years has been manifestly
evident; and lastly they drew a Civil War upon him, though the Effects proved
fatal, as well to themselves as others, (Priests generally being no reaching
Politicians;) the consequence of which all men here do know: But that which
most surprises is their Villainy in conclusion; for when his farther Life could
yield them no advantage, they then conspired his Death; and to that end was a
Correspondence kept with Ireton and some others, not doubting, he being gone,
to have the bringing up of the Children, the Queen being wholly theirs, and
managed to their Devotion; and how fatal this has been I need not farther
speak; and if any are desirous of farther satisfaction, let them read Dr.
Moulin's Answer to Philanax Anglicus, written by an Apostate Protestant, who
found not his Account by turning Papist, as indeed few of them have done; a man
I must needs say of very good natural parts, though in several things but ill
applied them; and his Convers^tion spoke him a Gentleman, but withal of a
violent and impetuous Temper to whatever he took, and unfortunate in most
things he projected. I am the longer on this Character, because most of our
whiffling Priests and noisie Jesuits have raked for their Clamours against
Protestants about the business of Rebellion, for many years last past, out of
the Dunghill of that Book, written not long after the King's coming in; so that
it is plain, that by their legerdemain Tricks in the Parliament Army they made
them mutinous against their Lords and Masters; and in the time of the
Agitatour's being rampant, meeting, as they say, in Putney Church, they were
very brisk in Masquerade among them, several Priests, some as Troupers, others
private Soldiers then listed, and though these Agitatours were first set up by
Ireton, yet in process of time they became so unruly, and so beyond measure
insolent, that they were by force necessitated to suppress them, and they were
the occasion of breaking up that separate Party of Cromwell and Ireton in the
name of the Army which they had entered into with the King, and by reason of
them the King was frighted from Hampton Court, making his Escape to the Isle of
Wight, which did not long precede his death. Now after a lapse of some years
his Son Charles the Second, with the rest of the Royal Family, were restored,
and let us take a short view of their Transactions under him, where no sooner
he was settled, but there came in whole Shoals of Priests from several parts
beyond Seas, and Ireland, who for several years before had scarce any, and
those that were skulking and lying close, was in a little time almost
overstocked; and Father Walsh, who was a kind of a Trimmer among them, and, to
speak truth, an honester sort of a man than most of them were, and willing to
introduce the King's Authority as well as that of the Popes, to that End went
over with the Duke of Ormond; and being countenanced by him, summoned an
Assembly in Dublin to be held, of the most principal of them, where what a stir
he had, and how strangely bigoted those Irish Understandings were to the Sea
of Rome, is by himself at large set forth in his loyal Formulary: But one thing
which himself notes is not unworthy the recital, The General among them were so
strongly possessed with some strange Catastrophe that was to arrive (eminently no
doubt) to their Advantage, in the year approaching of Sixty six, that they
generally expressed themselves so averse from complying with the King in those
matters, a violent presumption that the firing of London had been for some
years in contriving; and the mention that is made of a Plot in the April
Gazette, -- 63. was put into the Heads (by some Rascally Priests) of those poor
little Rogues that were hangued, one of the main things charged upon them being
the Firing of the City of London, and what influence their Councils had in that
Prince's Reign, is obnoxious to all considering Men, by the breaking the triple
League by that close Alliance between France and England for the Extirpation of
Protestancy out of Heretical Holland, and no doubt, had it succeeded, out of
England also, and the reason why it was not effected, was the Parliament's and
People's Aukwardness to the War; but notwithstanding they were so not
discouraged, but they resolved to go on with their Designs still in England,
keeping, by the means of Coleman and Father le Chaise, a constant
Correspondence with the Court of France, and so strong was their Ascendent with
Charles the Second, that he publishes a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
by which, as Coleman in his Letters says, he doubted not the bringing in of
their Religion; but this so allarmed the Parliament, that they were strangely
uneasy and restless with him, resolving to give him no more Money until he
had recalled it, which at last with regret he did. This strangely nettled our
Roguish Catholics, who by this thought their Game cock sure; but being
frustrated, used him in their Discourses as if he had been a Cobbler, as
pitiful, irresolute, nothing of Honor, his Word no ways to be relied on, and
not worthy of a Crown; and from that day forward plotted his removal, to make
way, as they supposed, for a Man of Honor and Resolution, and who would not be
balked with any thing of a Parliament; which at the last, as a great many
suppose, they effectually did. And now James the Second ascended the Throne,
and how the Scepter by him was swayed, needs no long characterising; for Father
Petre, with his Ghostly Associates, managed most things under him, who with
that Priestly Violence so hurried on things, that on him at last the Tower of
Siloam fell, and so weak and ridiculous were their Politics, that they are not
worth blurring Paper. Now to sum up all, it is plain by what precedes, That the
several Popes and Court of Rome, in places where they power had, have been most
Imperious and domineering, and nothing so bloody, base, or cruel, but by their
Priests has acted been, not in other Countries only but in this our Nation too,
for since the twelfth year, or thereabouts, Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Popery we
may compare to an Imposthume breeding in the very Trunk of this Political Body,
and broke in the year forty two into a Civil War, discharging only part, not
all the corrupt matter; and since regathering head, and filling up, about four
years ago broke the second time, casting forth Filth and Corruption in quantity
abounding, the Stench thereof offending almost all Men in the Nation, but I do
not doubt but our State Physicians will use such detersive or cleansing
Medicines, as well as sanative, as shall not effect a Palliative but a real and
thorough Cure, and that the Country may be restored to its sound habit of
Body. Now therefore as to the ensuing Treatise, it was occasioned by that Hero
of English Jesuitism, Mr. Pulton, who being strangely nettled at those stinging
Truths contained in the Missionaries Arts, challenges the Author to make good
his Assertion in page 76. viz That the Romanists Treasons owned by their Popes,
and by their great Men approved of since the Reformation, do far outnumber all
the Plots and Insurrections that the Papists, or Malice itself can lay to the
charge of Protestants; all which notwithstanding have been wholly condemned by
the Body of our famous Divines: To satisfy therefore this Savoy Champion, and
vindicate the Assertion aforesaid, the Author of this Account with no little
pains has endeavored to give entire satisfaction: But such has the Misfortune
been of Writers Protestant, that in dealing in Controversies they have to do
with a sort of Men, that when they have, yet will seemingly take no Answer; and
their last refuge is generally Banter and Whiffle, if downright Railing will
not do the feat. The Subject of this Treatise is most matter of Fact, and the
Citations, though from their own selves no way unfairly used; for if otherwise
they appear, let them openly be exposed, that all that are impartial may see
and judge, whether any thing of Passion, Envy, or Malice, has Prepossed the
Author, I know it is natural for Men, when they have a bad Cause to manage, to
be froward and testy, and where they are galled to kick and wince, and instead
of arguing closely to the purpose, to seek Evasions that may seem plausible, at
least to the less refined Understandings, which has been the great Masterpiece
of Romish Priests and Jesuits for many years together; for by their little
Witticisms and Jokes upon Names, they keep up among their Party a kind of
Reputation, not unlike Jack Pudding's on a Stage, they please (though at the
same time delude) the foolish and gazing People; and if it happens that one
slip falls from a Protestant Pen, or a Citation carelessly passed, that has not
proved true, what a Clutter have they not made about it, though the main of the
Subject still remains good. This, as a demonstration, plainly proves the
Weakness of their Cause; and had Mr. Pulton but heartily read the History of
the last Hundred Years, he must have acknowledged that this his great Challenge
was a vain and frivolous Motion, and never needed to have given the Author
this Trouble; which being done, it is hoped will be to his firm conviction, and
not only his, but any other who have been imposed on by false Notions. The
truth is, this Treatise has been written above this year, but such was the
Iniquity of the Times, that they would not bear, much less permit its then
Publication; however its hoped it is not too late the World in this point to
satisfy, the only Scope, Design, and End of this Discourse.

A Brief Account of the several Plots Contrived, and Rebellions Raised by the
Papists against the Lives and Dignities of Sovereign Princes, since the
Reformation.
IN the year Fowl. p. 287.
1520. Luther began to preach, was that almost universal Rebellion in Spain,
against the Emperor Charles the Fifth, which lasted four years. Three years
after, Desmond entered into a Fowl. p. 301. 302.
Conspiracy against our King Henry the Eighth, and had procured a promise of
assistance from King Francis the First of France; the Articles of which
Agreement are yet extant; whereby it appears that the Design was, to make the
Duke of Suffolk (then in France) King; but King Francis being taken Prisoner at
the Battle of Pavia the year following, Suffolk slain, the Design fell.

The next year the Irish rebelled, English Inhabitants.

But Fowl. p. 315. See the Bull at the end of Brutu(...) Fulmen. Land. 16. 4to.
Ten years after, Henry, though he did not publish it till 1538. Rome on a day
appointed; threatening them with the greater Excommunication, in case of
Nonappearance; and declaring Him and his Posterity incapable of any Honors,
Possessions, or even of being Witnesses; absolves all his Subjects from their
Oaths of Fidelity, and commands them upon pain of Excommunication, not to obey
him or his Officers; enjoining all Christians to have no Commerce with him, all
Ecclesiastics to leave the Land, and all Dukes, Marquesses, etc. under the
same penalty, to drive him out of his Kingdom; declares all Leagues made with
him by any Princes void, exhorting them to endeavor his Ruin with their whole
power; bestowing all the Goods of his Adherents upon such as would seize them;
commanding all Bishops to declare the King and his Followers Excommunicate, and
denouncing the same Censures against whosoever should hinder the publication of
this Bull.

This piece of prodigious Impudence and Vanity would not satisfy the Pope, but
he immediately set his Instruments to work to prosecute the design of his
thundering Bull; so that the beginning of the next year this Letter was written
from Paris to one Friar Forest.

Hunting of the Romish Fox. p. 3, 4, 5.
Brother,
WE behold how the King is changed from a Christian to an Heretic; and how he
has robbed Christ's Vicar of his Rights and Privileges, by placing himself in
his Holiness's Seat there, as Supreme over the Catholic Church within the
Realm. It was the late damned Assembly of Lords and Commons furthered his
Pride, otherwise he could not nor durst not assume it to himself: We have
thought of these passages, and do agree, That there is no way to break this
Tyrant's Neck but one; Puff him up in his Pride, and let our Friends say unto
him, That it is beneath so mighty a Monarch as he, to advise with Parliaments,
but to act all in Person; and that it behooveth his Majesty to be chief Actor
himself. If he assumes this, it will take off great Blemishes from the Nation,
which the Church holds them guilty of, and do our Business: For then the
People (it being contrary to their Laws) will fall from him; also the Catholic
Party of his Council will be too strong for the Heretics, and then the Common
sort will be the abler to declare his Tyranny. This is to be contrived with the
Church's Members, and cautiously, because it is observed that the Parliaments
of England have hindered the Church in most of the Kings Reigns, otherwise She
had held her Party better than She does now. You have our Convent's hearty
Prayers for your Guide.

From St. Francis at Paris prim^. Id. Jan. 1536. Thomas Powell.


This Letter was found two years after among Father Forrest's Papers, together
with an account of vast Sums which he had expended for the Church of Rome and
her Designs.

Fowlis Hist. of Romish Treas. p. 316.
But this Design not being sufficient, the Pope offered England to James the
Fifth, King of Scots, and presented him with a Cap and consecrated Sword.

When that Offer of what was none of his succeeded not according to his
Desires, the same Pope Paul the 3d. by his Bull of the Foxes and Firebrands,
part. 2. p. 34. Dublin, 1682. Mr. Mason Minister of Finglas, in the year 1566.
copied the substance of the Bull out of the Records at Paris.
year following, absolved in general, Peter; all Men from the tie of their
Heretical Wives; Wives from their Heretical Husbands, etc. which was
accompanied with a Fowlis's Hist. p. 316. Surii Commentar. p. 314. Speed's
Chron. p. 1033.
Rebellion in Lincolnshire, under the Conduct of one Mackarel, a Monk, to the
number of Twenty thousand; against whom the King prepared to march in Person:
but their first Fury being over, they embraced the King's Pardon, and returned
home. But this Commotion was succeeded by Surii Comment. brevis. p. 314.
Fowlis's Hist. p. 316. Speed's Chron. p. 1034.
another more dangerous, led by the Lord Lumley, several Knights and Gentlemen,
with most of the Clergy: this Army in the North consisted of 40000 Men, well
Armed, who called themselves the Holy Pilgrimage, and the Pilgrimage of Grace;
they had the Five Wounds of our Lord, the Chalice, and the Host, painted in
their Standard, and the Name of Jesus upon their Sleeves; their whole pretense
was for Religion: in their March they took Pontefract Castle, but were at
length appeased. But Speed's Chr. p. 1041, 1042.
soon after the same Persons raised another Insurrection, in which several
Monks came armed into the Field as Soldiers, who were taken, and with the
Ringleaders of the Rebellion Executed.

Speed's Chr. p. 1044.
Two years after (if not the next year to the last Rebellion, Exceter, the Lord
Montacute, and his Brother, Sir Edward Nevill, and others, entered into a
Conspiracy to depose the King, and advance Reynold Pool, then Dean of Exceter,
and afterward Cardinal to the Throne; for which, the Marquess, Lord Montacute,
and Sir Edward Nevill, were Beheaded upon Tower Hill.

In the year 1546. Bulla Quarta Pauli Tertii. Jesuitis concessa apud Hospin.
Histor. Jesuit. p. 104, 105, 106. this Bull is called by the Jesuits, Mare
magnum.
Pope Paul the Third, not content with his showing his pretended Authority over
Kings in the two Bulls mentioned before, published another in favor of the
Jesuits, whereby he exempts them and their Goods from the Power of any but
himself; and commands all Princes to swear not to molest the Society, or invade
their Privileges; and pronounces an Anathema against all who will not obey the
Bull.

Speed's Chronicle. p. 1110, to 1114.
Two years after this, Edward the Sixth being settled in the Throne, one Body,
a Commissioner, pulling down Images by the King's Order, was stabbed by a
Priest, and a Rebellion was raised in Cornwall, Humphrey Arundell, Governor of
the Mount, with other Gentlemen, gathering together Ten thousand Men, besieged
Exceter, and reduced it to very great Extremity; declaring they would have
Popery and the Six Articles restored: They fought four several Battles with the
King's Forces, but at last were entirely Routed, and their Leaders Executed.
Speed's Chronicle. p. 1114, 1115, 1116.
Norfolk they Rebelled again, and when the King sent them his Pardon they
refused it (...) after which, they took the City of Norwich, and fired it, beat
the Marquess of Northampton, and were very near Defeating the Earl of Warwick,
whose Cannon they took, and refused the King's Pardon a second time, but were
at length Defeated; and so were Speed's Chron. p. 1116, 1117.
another Party, who took Arms upon the same Account, that year in Yorkshire.
There were other Insurrections in this King's time, which I will not at present
mention, only observe what is confessed by a late noted Author of the Romish
Church, Fifth part of Church Government. p. 139. Oxford. 1637.
That these Risings of the Laity in such numbers, for their former way of
Religion, would not have been, had not their Clergy justified it unto them.

Hist. of the Council of Trent. p. 262, 263. London. 1684. 8vo.
After this, Paul the Fourth, following the steps of his thundering Namesake,
when the Diet of the Germans at Ausburgh made an Edict for full Liberty of
Conscience, whereby the Protestants were maintained in the Possession of their
Church Revenues, fell into a furious rage, publicly threatening the Emperor
and King of the Romans, That he would make them repent it; protesting, that if
he did not recall the Edict, he would proceed against them with as severe
Censures as he intended to use against the Protestants; telling all the
Ambassadors in his Court, That he was above all Princes, that he expected not
that they should treat with him as with their Equal, that he could alter and
take away Kingdoms as he thought good: And one day at Dinner, in the presence
of many Persons of the highest Quality, he affirmed, That he would subject all
Princes under his Foot. No wonder then that the same Spirit of Opposition to
Princes actuate the Members of the Church, which possessed their Head in such a
degree, that upon the Resignation of the Emperor Fowl. Hist. of Romish
Treasons. p. 287.
Charles the Fifth, Ferdinand his Brother was rejected by the Pope; who
affirmed, That none had power to Resign but into his hands; and so it belonged
to him to nominate a Successor, not to the Electors: but he kept the Imperial
Crown, though the Pope would never acknowledge him for Emperor. With the same
Haughtiness did he demean himself toward Idem. p. 329.
Sir Edward Karn, the English Agent at Rome; who acquainting him, by order from
her Majesty, of Queen Elizabeth's Accession to the Crown, the Pope answered,
That the Kingdom of England was held in Fee of the Apostolic See, that she
being Illegitimate could not succeed, and therefore it was great boldness in
her to assume the Government without his leave; yet if she would renounce her
Title, and refer all to him, he would act as became his Honor. But the Queen
took no care to satisfy this blustering Gentleman, who soon after dyed.

^xes and Firebrands. part. 2. p. 20.
But the Pope who succeeded him, Pius the Fourth, issued out a strict Bull,
commanding all the Learned of that Church to find out Arguments to persuade
Subjects to break their Oaths of Allegiance, in favor of the Apostolic See;
in order to which, he granted several Dispensations to preach among the
Protestants of England, and to marry, if need were. And the same year his good
Sons in Ireland, by their example, showed their Obedience to it; Fowlis's Hist.
p. 302.
for Shan O Neale, Earl of Tyrone, rebelled, but finding himself too weak,
submitted and had his Pardon, though not till two years after. In the mean
while, viz. Idem. p. 329.
the next year, the Pope's Nuncio in Ireland joined himself to the Rebels,
publicly assisting them; and by his Authority pronounced the Queen deprived of
that Kingdom. But the year following, Irish submitted, yet Idem. p. 330.
Arthur Pool and others, contrived to join themselves with the Duke of Guise,
land an Army in Wales, and Proclaim the Queen of Scots: to which, the Gabut.
Vit. Pii Quinti. l. 3. c. 9. apud. Fowl. ubi supra and Thuanus. lib. 44. ibid.
following Pope afterward added his endeavors to get our Queen Murdered, as
the Writer of his Life informs us.

But in the mean time, Fowl. Hist. p. 367.
he published a Monitory against the Queen of Navarre, declaring, That if she
did not turn Romanist within six Months, he would deprive her of her Dominions,
and give them to any that would conquer them; but the King of France promising
to stand by her, his terrible Threat served only to show how ready he was to
Depose all Princes that offended him, if his Power had been equal to his Will.

Council. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 20. December. 4. 1563.
And in this year it was that the Council of Trent made that excellent Decree,
whereby they confirmed all the Canons of Popes and Councils; which set the Pope
above Princes, gave him Power over them, and exempted the Clergy from being
subject to them; thereby endeavoring to Depose all Princes, who knew
themselves and their Rights too well to truckle under the usurped Power of
their Supreme Head.

Fowlis's Hist. p. 366.
But though the Pope could not send any Sovereign Prince of his Errand to
destroy the House of Navarre, Lorrain, and the rest of the House of Guise, that
they resolved its Ruin. To which End they sent Captain Dimanche into Spain, to
get Assistance, there, designing to fall upon Bearn, seize the Queen of
Navarre, the young King, and his Sister, and send them to the Inquisition in
Spain, to be proceeded against as Heretics: but this Design was discovered,
and so came to nothing. But in the same year we are informed by one of the
English Spies at Rome, That the Pope granted Indulgences and Pardons to any
Person that should assault Queen Elizabeth, Edward Dennum, See his Letter to
the Lord Cecil of April. 13. 1564. in Foxes and Firebrands, p. 51, to 56. --
out of the Memorials of the Lord Cecil.
either in private or public; or to any Cook, Baker, Vintner, Physician,
Brewer, Grocer, Surgeon, or any other Calling, that should make her away;
together with an absolute Remission of Sins to such Person's Heirs, and an
Annuity for ever, and to be one of the Privy Council, successively, whosoever
Reigned.

Speed's Chr. p. 1162.
To the Endeavors of the Pope, O Neale likewise added his, by rebelling again,
and murdering the English; Fowlis Hist. p. 302.
committing the most barbarous Cruelties imaginable; Alexander Oge, whose
Brother he had slain before.

But though the Rebels had such ill success, Fowlis's Hist. p. 130, 131.
Rodolpho, a rich Florentine Gentleman, into England, to stir up the People
against the Queen: To him the King of Spain joins the Marquess of Cetona, who,
Import. C^^s^d p. 57.
under the pretense of an Embassy, was sent over to countenance the Rebellion,
and command the Forces which the Duke of Alva should send from the Low
Countries; in order to which La Motte, Governor of Dunkirk, had come
privately, in the Habit of a Sailer, to sound the Ports. Rodolpho was furnished
with plenty of Money from the Pope, which he distributed to make a Party; into
which they drew the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, with others, who,
perceiving their Plot discovered, submitted, and begged Pardon. This Design the
Pope was so zealous for, that he assured the Spaniards he would go along with
them himself, if need were, and engage all his Goods and Treasure in the
Service. Nor was this the only Design of the Pope Id. p. 368.
at this time; for in pursuit of his Predecessour's Bull against her, he
advised the Queen Mother of France to seize on the Dominions of the Queen of
Navarre, because she was an Heretic; offering (if she approved of it) by his
Papal Authority to appoint one of the House of Valois to be King of those
Territories; which if she did not like, he was resolved to give them to the
King of Spain; but that Prince, knowing they must be won by the Sword, declined
accepting the Pope's Bounty.

Sir Ed. Coke at the Trial of the Gunp. Trait. Hist. of the Gunp. Tr. p. 109.
Hitherto the Members of the Church of Rome made no scruple to resort to the
Protestant Churches, Pius Quintus published his Bull against the Queen, upon
which they all withdrew from any such Communion with us. See the Bull in Fowlis
Hist. p. 331. and Speed's Chron. p. 1171.
In this Bull the Pope calls the Queen the pretended Queen of England, a
Servant of Wickedness; affirms that her Council consisted of obscure, heretical
Fellows, declares her an Heretic, and cut off from the Unity of Christ's Body;
that she is deprived of her Title to her Kingdoms, and of all Dominion,
Dignity, and Privilege whatsoever, and her Subjects absolved from all manner of
Duty and Obedience to her; and that by the Authority of this Bull he does
absolve Them, and depose Her; and forbidding all her Subjects, under pain of
Anathema, to obey her: With this Bull he sends Surii Comment. p. 770.
Morton, a Priest, into England, to spread this Censure, and persuade the
People to back it with an Insurrection; upon which, as Il.
Surius tells us out of Sanders, many Persons of Quality resolved to execute
it: Accordingly the Speed's Chr. p. 1169, 1170. Fowl. Hist. p. 335.
Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, who were pardoned but the year
before, took Arms in the North, trampled under feet the English Bible and
Service Book, bearing in their Standard the Cross and five Wounds of our
Savior, and being betwixt five and six thousand men, they grew so insolent,
that they would give the Queen no better Title, than the Pretended Queen; but
the Pope being too slow in sending the hundred thousand Crowns he promised
them, and they at length finding their numbers too small to cope with the
Queens. Army, dispersed, and every one shifted for himself. Execut. of Justice
for Treason. Pr. Land. 1583. 4to.
The Earl of Westmorland escaped into Flanders, where he dyed miserably; but
Northumberland being taken, was beheaded at York; who was nevertheless looked
upon by the Romanists as a glorious Martyr, and the drops of his blood kept by
them as holy Relics. That this Rebellion had no better success, Sanders, and
from him Surii Comment. p. 770. Non illos habuere successus, conatus illorum
nobilium, quos peraverant, ^^rtassis quod Catholicis omnibus ea denuntiatio,
necdum innotuisset.
Surius, give this Reason, Because the Catholics had not timely notice of the
Pope's Bull: And the same Idem. p. 771. Noluerunt Elizabetham legitimam Reginam
confiteri.
Person informs us, That those that were executed for this Treason, refused to
the very last to acknowledge the Queens Authority. Among which Sanders mentions
Plumtree, and others, as well as the two Earls, who are termed glorious Martyrs
of the Catholics by Bristow in his Motives, and several others.

To correspond with the Pope's Intentions in his Bull, Fowl. Hist. p. 302, 303.
Ireland puts in for a share this year, where Jame Fitz-Morice, of the House of
Desmond, and two of the Botelers, raised a Rebellion; but the latter being
drawn to a submission by the loyal Earl of Ormond, Fitz-Morice, after many
shifts, followed their Example, and was pardoned.

But though the two Earls and their Accomplices had sped so ill, yet Speed's
Chr. p. 1170.
Leonard Dacres renewed the Rebellion in the North, Scotland. And now, that the
Catholics might no longer remain in ignorance of the Queens being deprived of
the Kingdoms by the Pope, Fowlis's Hist. p. 335. Speed's Chron. p. 1174.
one Felton this year had the hardiness to fix the Bull at the Bishop of
London's Gates; for which being apprehended, he confessed the Fact, and gloried
in it, at his death affirming the Queen had no right to the Throne, being
deposed by the Sentence of the Pope: Yet does Surii Com. p. 786, 787, 788.
Surius affirm, that he dyed a Martyr for the Catholic Faith, justifying the
Action as done out of Zeal for the Church, and in Obedience to the lawful
Commands of the Pope: The fame is affirmed by Resp. ad Edict. Regin. Angl.
Parsons, Ad An. 15^0. Sect. 4.
Spondanus, and See F^wlis ubi supra.
Hilarion de Cost, who styles him the valiant Soldier of Jesus Christ,
commends his invincible Courage and Zeal for the Faith; and affirms, that his
Martyrdom is one of England's most glorious Trophies; though the same Person
can afford the Queen no better a Title than the Impious and wicked Queen the
true Jezebel of our days: And that all the World may see what they thought of
him at Rome, no sooner could Thuanus affirm that it was a very rash Action, but
the Index Expurgatorius commands that passage to be blotted out; so jealous are
they of the Honor of this grand Traitor.

With as great Encomiums do we find the Memory of Dr. Story celebrated by the
Writers of that Church: Surii Comment. P. 794, 795, 796.
This man was one of the most violent Persecutours in Queen Mary's days,
Elizabeth's Reign, he answered, that he knew no Fault he was guilty of, but
only that he busied himself in cutting off the Branches, while he neglected to
pull up the Root it self; which if he had done, Heresy had not got up again:
For this being imprisoned, he found means to escape into Flanders; but being
apprehended and brought into England this year, he rejoiced that he should
suffer Martyrdom: Upon his Trial he declined the Jurisdiction of the Court,
affirming that he was a Subject to the King of Spain, and acknowledged no
lawful Judge in England; for which he gave this Reason, That seeing the Pope
had declared the Queen deprived of her Right, he durst not acknowledge her
Authority, left he should fall under the Censures of that Bull: And at the
moment of his Execution, being asked by an Earl whether the Queen was his
Sovereign, he replied, She was not; yet is he reckoned among the Martyrs for
the Romish Faith.

The next Year was that bloody Massacre of Paris, France) above 100000
Protestants were butchered in cold blood; ^owlis's Hist. p. 368.
the Duke of Guise and his Party did all they could to have the King of
Navarre, and Prince of Conde, slaughtered with the rest; but they being
preserved by the King, the chief Design of the Papalins in that bloody Action
was prevented.

But four years after was that desperate Confederacy entered into by that Duke
and his Adherents in France, Fowl. Hist. p. 371.
which had all the parts of a most desperate Rebellion; and continued for so
many years, to the Destruction of one Prince, and infinite vexation of another:
It was first begun at See the Instrument of that Confederacy in Maimbourg's
Hist* of the League. p. 42. Land. 1684. 8vo.
Peronne, and afterward formed into a more See the Instrument in Fowlis. p.
372, 373, 374.
strict Union, by which, under a show of maintaining the King, they took from
him all his Authority, to confer it upon the Head of their Conspiracy: Nay, the
zeal for this rebellious Association was so great, that they subscribed it with
their Blood; and in order to the prosecution of what they had there promised,
they sent Nicolas David, an Advocate of the Parliament of Paris, to Rome; but
he being slain by the way on his return, Cardinal de Pellive afterward managed
their business with the Pope.

But among the Memoirs of that Advocate there was found an Account of the
Transaction between the Pope and the Duke of Guise, See the Account of this
Transaction in the Appendix to the Vindication of the sincerity of the Prot.
Relig.
wherein the Design laid down is to pull down the House of Valois, then
reigning, from the Throne, and set up the Duke of Guise: In this Transaction
the Liberties of the Gallican Church are called a damnable Error, nothing else
but the shift of the Waldenses, Lutheranes, and Calvinists; and it is affirmed
that France shall never prosper as long as the Crown continues in that line.
The whole Platform of the Design is there laid down, and the Pope is to advance
that Duke to the Crown of France, as the Successor of Charlemagne; in
consideration whereof the Duke is bound to cause the Sea of Rome to be plainly
acknowledge by the States of the Kingdom, without Restriction, or Modification,
abolishing the Privileges and Liberties of the Gallican Church. Thus do we find
the Pope promoting the most rebellious Designs, to advance his own usurped
Greatness.

And his Missionaries not desiring a better example than that of their holy
Father, Cuthbert Main came into England, Speed's Chr. p. 1176.
dispersing Libells to maintain the Pope's Authority over the Queen; and he
confessed under his own Hand, that he brought with him several holy grains to
distribute among the Catholics, which they should keep as so many
Preservatives, by the producing of which they should be safe, when the
Protestants were to be destroyed. In the same business several Nelson, Hance,
Lacies, Briant, etc.
others were employed, and one Hemford sent over with a Dispensation of the
Pope's Bull, whereby the Romanists had liberty to yield outward Obedience till
an opportunity offered itself for the execution of that deposing Sentence. And
one Haydock was employed to prepare things against such a time, and to note the
fittest places for landing an Army, as himself wrote to Allen the Jesuit.
Besides these one Pain, a Priest, and fifty others, were furnished at the
Pope's Charge, who undertook to kill the Queen as she went to take the Air. And
yet these are the men whom See his Letter in Speed, ib.
Sanders, in his Letter to the aforenamed Jesuit, terms chosen Vessels.

But our Country was not the only Nation afflicted with these Plots and
traitorous Contrivances; for about the same time was Hist. Jesuit. p. 244, 245.
Sebastian, King of Portugal, betrayed by the Jesuits to the loss both of his
Life and Kingdom, which they had before engaged to transfer to the Spanish
King, in which they were as good as their word; (though near fifty years since
it is returned to the Obedience of its lawful Heir;) during which War,
attempting to deliver one of the Isles of the Azores to the Spaniards, they
were discoved, and treated as their Wickedness deserved; but of this more
hereafter.

The Pope's Designs upon the Queen's Life being by the good Providence of God
frustrated, Gregory the 13th. carried on the projects of his Predecessor, Anat
of Popish Tyr. in the Ep. Dedic, Land. 1603 4to.
(who had willingly lent an Ear to the advice of Thomas Stukely, an English
Fugitive,) and in hopes of getting the Kingdom of Ireland for his own Son, the
Marquess of Vineola, (where we find, Fowlis's Hist. p. 303, 304.
though Popes do not marry, yet they can get Children,) created Stukely
Marquess of Leinster, adding several other Titles, and assisting him with
Forces and a plenary Indulgence, dispatched him away for Ireland; but by the way
being persuaded by the King of Portugal to join with him against the Moors, he
was slain in the Battle together with that King.

But though Ireland was delivered from this Danger, yet soon after Fowlis ubi
su^pra.
James Fitz-Morice, who was pardoned in the Year 1569. went over into France,
where he desired Assistance to beat the English out of Ireland, and reduce that
Nation to the French Obedience, but King Henry the Third then reigning, having
sufficient Employment for his Forces at home; Fitz-Morice addressed himself to
the Pope and the King of Spain; the former embraced this opportunity, and sent
Sanders with him as his Nuncio, with a consecrated Banner; and the latter
assisted them with Men and Money; the Pope in the mean while raising Soldiers
in his Country for their Assistance and Relief.

Fitz-Morice and Sanders, Fowl. p. 305.
with the Spaniards, landed in Kerry in Ireland, of Outrages, in one of which
Fitz-Morice was killed by the Sons of William a Burgh, soon after made Baron of
Castleconnel; in his place succeeded his Brother John E. of Desmond, to whom
the Pope sent an Indulgence, dated May 13. 1580. wherein he highly magnifies
the Piety of James, See the Bull at large in Fowlis, p. 306.
laments his Death, and exhorts all the Nobility, Clergy, and People of the
Land, to follow this John, in fighting against the Heretics for the Catholic
Cause; and to encourage them in that good work, he grants a Eandem plenariam
Peccatorum vestrorum indulgentiam and Remissionem, quam adversus Turcas, pro
recuperanda terra Sancta bellantes consequuntur, tribuimus, etc.
Plenary Indulgence and Remission of all their sins, in the same extent as was
granted to those who were engaged in the Holy War. And when the Spaniards were
required by the Lord Gray, then Deputy of Ireland, to express their Intention
in thus invading her Majesty's Dominions, they returned Answer, That they were
sent from the Pope and King of Spain, to whom his Holiness had given Ireland;
for that Elizabeth had justly forfeited her Title to the Kingdom by Heresy,
that they would keep what they had got, and get more if they could: But in a
small time after they were glad to surrender upon Mercy, the Earl of Desmond
having been routed before, and Allen, the Priest, who came with the Legate
Sanders, slain. This ill success put a stop to the Recruits the Pope was
preparing to send after them. Sanders dyed of hunger in the Woods, and the Earl
of Desmond was slain two years after by a common Soldier.

And to encourage these Rebels, and to excite to more such Attempts, this Pope
Gregory the Thirteenth, the same year, renewed the Bull of Pius Quintus against
the Queen: There were five hundred Copies of it printed at Rome, and the Bull
it self dispersed over all Italy, Spain, and part of Germany, as is attested by
one who was then in the English College at Rome John Nichols in his Declaration
of his Recantation, apud Fowlis, p. 336. and Reniger de Pii Quinti, and Greg.
13. Furoribus, c. 8. Lon. 1582. 8vo.
who likewise assures us, that one of their Readers in Divinity, before above
two hundred Scholars, affirmed, That it was lawful for any man of Worship in
England to give Authority to the vilest wretch that is, to endeavor the
Queen's death; but that this Pope did excommunicate the Queen we find in our
excellent Cambd. Eliz. l. 3. ad an. 1588.
Annalist, and is acknowledged by the Important Considerations, p. 62.
Romish Priests in their See them reprinted in the Collect. of Trea. concerning
the Penal Laws. Land. 1675. this passage is p. 76.
Important Considerations, printed the last year of that Queen's Reign.

But though he pronounced that terrible Sentence against her, yet (as is
observed by Auth. Tyrrell in his Recantation, p. 29.
one who had been a great stickler for the Romish Church,) he dealt a great
deal more subtly, and more dangerously than his Predecessor; for finding the
danger the Romanists were daily exposed to, by their endeavoring the
Destruction of the Queen, whom they durst not obey, or cease to hurt, for fear
of the Curses denounced in the Bull; he qualified it in such a manner, that the
Jesuit Heart (as the Lord Burleigh tells us) acknowledged, They are his own
words, see Execution of Justice, etc. p. ^6.
The Bull of Pius Quintus, for so much as it is against the Queen, is holden by
the English Catholics for a lawful Sentence, and a sufficient Discharge of
her Subjects Fidelity, and so remains in force; but in some points touching the
Subject, it is altered by the present Pope: For where in that Bull all her
Subjects are commanded not to obey her, and she being excommunicated and
deposed, all that do obey her are likewise accursed, which point is perilous to
the Catholics; for if they obey her, they are in the Pope's Curse, and if they
disobey her, they are in the Queen's Danger: Therefore the present Pope, to
relieve them, has altered that part of the Bull, and dispensed with them to
obey and serve her, without peril of Excommunication: which dispensation is to
endure but till it please the Pope otherwise to determine.

Here we have a plain Confession of that learned Gentleman, (who is by them
termed a See Reynolds Confer. with Heart, Pref. to the Engl. Seminaries, p. 2.
Land 1609. 4to.
Noble Champion of Christ, and Holy Priest, one that had taken deep root in the
Foundations of the Faith, and of sound Learning,) that the Loyalty of the
Romanists depends upon the Will of man, (except they will affirm their Pope to
be more than man;) which is a point they have been put in mind of from Rome
itself, since His Majesty's Restoration, as we shall observe anon.

This Qualification of the Bull was granted to Parsons and Campion, two
Jesuits, upon their coming into England, Petatur a summo Domino nostro,
explicatio Bullae quam Catholici cupiunt intelligi hoc modo, us obliget semper
illam and Hereticos, Catholicos vero nullo modo obliget, rebus sic stantibus,
sed tum demum quando publica ejusdem Bullae Executio fieri poterit. Execut. for
Trea. p. 15, 16.
when among other things they desired of the Pope, That the Bull should always
oblige Elizabeth, and the Heretics, but by no means the Romanists, as Affairs
now stand, but hereafter, when the public Execution of the Bull may be had or
made.

Furnished with this and other Faculties, those two Gentlemen Important
Considerations, p. 62, 63.
repaired into England, setting themselves to contrive a way how to set Her
Majesty's Crown upon another head: Hunting of the Romish Fox, p. 137, 138. out
of Cecil's Memoirs.
at first they came in the Habits of Soldiers, afterward they went about in the
Garb of Gentlemen, and in the North they altered their Habits into the
Vestments of our Ministers, preaching there, and being secretly entertained by
the Popish Gentry and Nobility, courageously executed their Commission; in
discharge of which Parsons exhorted the Roman Catholics of those parts to
deprive Her Majesty of the Crown; and the way being thus broken, many flocked
after them for the same purpose.

At this time Import. Con. p. 66. and Fowl. Hist. p. 54.
Mr. Sherwin being apprehended, and asked whether the Queen were his lawful
Sovereign, notwithstanding any Sentence of the Pope's, he desired no such
questions might be demanded of him, and would give no other Answer: But the
Pope well knowing that this Generation of sturdy blades would in time be all
gone, for the breeding up of more to succeed them, assisted Allen in setting up
the Seminary at Doway for English Romanists, allowing an annual Pension for
their maintenance, purposely for to plot and contrive ways to expulse the
Queen, and demolish the Church of England, in obedience to the Pope's Bulls,
Hunting of the Romans Fox, p. 129, 130, 131, 132. out of Cecil's Memoirs.
for which end every Scholar among them, at his Education, took this Oath:

I A. B. do acknowledge the Ecclesiastical and Political Power of His Holiness,
and the Mother Church of Rome, as the chief Head and Matron, above all
pretended Churches throughout the whole Earth; and that my Zeal shall be for
Saint Peter and his Successors, as the Founder of the True and Ancient
Catholic Faith, against all Heretical Kings, Princes, States, or Powers,
repugnant unto the same. And although I may pretend, in case of Persecution or
otherwise, to be Heretically disposed, yet in Soul and Conscience I shall help
aid, and succor the Mother Church of Rome, as the True, Ancient, Apostolical
Church. I farther do declare not to act or contrive any manner of thing
prejudicial unto her or her sacred Orders, Doctrines, Tenants, or Commands,
without the leave of her supreme Power, or the Authority under her appointed,
or to be appointed; and when so permitted, then to act or further her Interest
more than my own earthly Gain and Pleasure, as she and her Head, His Holiness
and his Successors, have, or ought to have, the Supremacy over all Kings,
Princes, Estates, or Powers whatsoever, either to deprive them of their Crowns,
Sceptres, Powers, Privileges, Realms, Countries or Governments, or to set up
others in lieu thereof, they dissenting from the Mother Church, and her
Commands, etc.

Thus by all imaginable ways did this Pope provide for the Death or Deposition
of that Virgin Queen; That the Priests which were apprehended and executed for
Treason, Declaration of the favorable Dealings of Her Majest. Commissioners,
p. 4. 1583. 4to.
always restrained their confession of Allegiance only to the permissive form
of the Pope's Toleration; as for Example: if they were asked whether they did
acknowledge themselves to be the Queen's Subjects, and would obey her, they
would say Yes, for so they had leave for a time to do; but being asked if they
would so acknowledge and obey her any longer than the Pope would so permit them,
or notwithstanding such Commandment as the Pope would or might give to the
contrary, then they either refused to obey, or denied to answer, or said they
could not answer to those Questions without danger: And at their very
Arraignment, when they labored to leave in the minds of the People and
standers by, an opinion that they were to dye, not for Treason, but for matter
of Faith and Doctrine, they cried out that they were true Subjects, and did and
would obey Her Majesty. Immediately to prove whether that speech extended to a
perpetuity of their Obedience, or so long time as the Pope so permitted, they
were openly in the place of Judgment asked by the Q's learned Counsel, whether
they would so obey, and be true Subjects, if the Pope commanded the contrary;
they plainly disclosed themselves in Answer, saying by the mouth of Campion,
This place (meaning the Court of Her Majesty's Bench) has no Power to enquire
or judge of the Holy Fathers Authority; and other Answer they would not make.

The very same Account, with some other particulars, is given us by the
Important Consid. p. 68.
Secular Priests themselves, of the Behavior of Mr. Campion, and the rest;
some of whom being asked which part they would take, if the Pope, or any other
by his appointment, should invade the Realm, or which part ought a good Subject
to take, answered, when that case happened, they would then consider what they
had best do; others, that they were not yet resolved what to do; and others
positively, that if such a Deprivation, or Invasion should be made for any
Matter of Faith, they were then bound to take part with the Pope.

Nay, so zealous was Mr. Campion in defense of that rebellious Doctrine, that
being visited in Prison by some Gentlemen of Hunting of the Romish Fox. p. 146,
147.
Oxford, one of them asked him whether he thought the Queen lawful Heir or no;
to this he made no Answer; but when the question was put, whether if the Pope
invaded the Land, he would take part with him or the Queen, he openly replied,
he would join with the Pope, and very earnestly demanded Pen, Ink, and Paper,
with which he signed his Resolution; which Principle he was so rooted in, that
he affirmed in the Tower to several Fowlis, p. 54*
Persons of Quality, who demanded whether he did acknowledge the Queen to be a
lawful Queen, or did believe her deprived of her Right, that this Question
depends much on the Fact of Pope Pius the Fifth, whereof he is no Judge, and
therefore refused to answer farther.

The same loyal Doctrines were vented by several other Priests the ensuing
year, Fowlis, p. 55, 56, 57, 58.
who has Authority to discharge Subjects of their Allegiance; which all of
them, viz. Kerby, Cottom, Richardson, Ford, Shert, Johnson, Heart, and Filbee,
agreed in, two of them only sheltring themselves with this General Assertion,
That they held as the Catholic Church held. Johnson particulary affirming,
That if the Pope invaded her Majesty upon a civil Account, he would take part
with Her, but if upon a Matter of Faith, it was his Duty to assist the Pope.

In which diligence to poison the Members of their Church, these zealous
Priests did but follow the Example of their Holy Father, who this very year,
(as Mr* Gage, Hunting of the Romish Fox, p. 184.
Agent for the Spanish Match at Rome, informs us, out of the Records of the
Dominican Convent there,) laid out one hundred fifty two thousand pounds, and
some odd money, for maintaining his Designs here; of which Sixty thousand was
allotted to foment Disturbances in Scotland and Ireland; so very desirous was
the Pope to regain his usurped Power over these Nations.

And it was not long before the end of all that Labor and Charge was found to
be the Murder of that excellent Princess, which one Speed's Chr. p. 1175.
Sommerville of Elstow in Warwickshire undertook to effect, at the instigation
of Hall, a Priest, who finding this desperate young man to waver, Execut. for
Trea p. 27.
and that his Resolution was much shaken with the horridness and danger of the
attempt, Anat. Popish Tyr. p. 84.
promising his prayers for good success; but the design being discovered,
Sommerville strangled himself, after condemnation.

But this was not the only Plot which the Enemies of England had laid for its
destruction; Speed's Chron. p* 1176, 1177.
for Throgmorton, Fox^s and Firebrands, part. 2. p. 59.
one of Sommerville's accomplices, was the same year discovered, having been
employed to sound the Havens, and procure a list of such Gentlemen in the
several Counties as were disposed to join the Spanish Forces, who were to land
under the conduct of the Duke of Guise; all which was confessed by Throgmorton,
before his death.

Thus we find how vast sums were expended by the Pope; Fowlis's Hist. p. 307.
which had the same influence in Ireland, where Desmond continued so
desperately in rebellion, that he swore he would rather forsake God than
forsake his Men; but neither the Pope's blessing nor purse could protect him
from that deserved death which after long wandering in a miserable condition he
suffered the latter end of this year.

But though the Pope could not preserve his rebellious instruments from the
just punishment of their Treasons, yet he would (for the encouragement of
others) do honor to their memories: Anat of Popish Tyranny, p. 97.
thus the Rector of the English College of Jesuits at Rome, in presence of all
the Students, sung a Collect of Martyrs in honor of Campion, of whose Treasons
we gave an account before; and his relics, with Sherwin's and others executed
for Treason, were kept and worshipped by our English Papists.

And because those positions which were found so useful for the propagating
Sedition, forgotten, and neither believed nor obeyed; the Romish Factors
considering that Litera scripta manet, to provide against the ill consequences
which the fearfulness of the Priests, or diligence of the State might produce,
by hindering the preaching of the former, caused Gregory Martin's Treatise of
Schism to be reprinted this year, in which he exhorted the Ladies of the Court
to deal with the Queen as Judith did with Holofernes; Fowlis Hist. p. 338.
for the Printing of which, Carter, the Romish Printer, was executed, and is
reckoned among their Martyrs.

At the same time there was one Harper in Norwich, (a great Friend of
Throgmorton's who was executed the year before,) who though pretending to be a
zealous Puritan, preaching with great diligence and fervor, kept a constant
correspondence with that Traitor, among whose Papers was found a Letter, in
which he desired Throgmorton to let him know how their Friends in Spain and
London did correspond, Foxes and Firebrands. part. 2. p. 59, 60.
and whether that King continued in his purpose, that the Engagers might be
satisfied, and have notice; upon this Discovery a Pursuvant was sent to
apprehend him, but he escaped just as the Officer arrived at Norwich.

And now was discovered a Design, in which the Pope was particularly engaged,
if we may believe Parrie's own Confession, who in his Travels falling into
acquaintance with Palmio, Fowlis's Hist. p. 338.
a Jesuit, told him that he had a great desire to do something for the Romish
Cause in England, by whom he was encouraged, his Zeal commended, and the
Lawfulness of Assassinating Her Majesty was maintained; but being somewhat
dissatisfied, the Jesuit recommended him to Campeggio, his Holiness's Nuncio
at Venice; by this means he wrote to Pope Gregory, informing him of his Design,
and desiring a Passport Idem. p. 339.
that he might confer of it with his Holiness at Rome; in the mean while he
went to Paris, where he was animated by Thomas Morgan, who solicited the Queen
of Scots Affairs, when receiving such a Passport as he desired, he resolved to
kill the Queen, if it were warranted by some learned Divines, and he could
procure a full Pardon for it from the Pope.

That the first might not be wanting, Cedretto, a noted Jesuit, and Provincial
of Guyenne, approved his Resolution, and Ragazzani, the Nuncio, recommended him
to the Pope, promising that his Prayers should not be wanting for the success
of the Attempt: with which encouragement he came to London, where he received a
Letter from Cardinal Como, See the Letter in Fowlis, p. 339, and Speed 1178,
1179.
wherein the Cardinal informs him, That His Holiness did exhort him to
persevere, and bring that to effect which he had promised; and that he might be
the better assisted by that good Spirit which moved him thereto, His Holiness
granted him his Blessing, a plenary Indulgence and Remission of all his sins,
assuring him that he should merit highly by the Action, which he terms holy and
honorable; to which the Cardinal added his Prayers and Wishes for its success.

This he confessed confirmed his Resolution to kill his Sovereign, Idem. p. 34^.
and made it clear to his Conscience, that it was lawful and meritorious;
which redounding so highly to the Dishonor of that bloody Church, the whole
Relation is by the Index Expurgatorius commanded to be left out of Thuanus's
History: And well they might; for as it showed the Pope's Inclination to Blood
and Treason, so it was one of the greatest instances of Ingratitude imaginable,
Parry owing his life to the Mercy of this Princess, Idem. p. 338.
who had four years before, pardoned him, when he was tried and condemned for
Burglary.

But though the Divine Goodness was so conspicuous in the many wonderful
preservations of that great Queen, yet it pleased the all-wise Providence to
permit the devilish Designs of the Jesuits to be attended with success in
Holland, where the renowned Prince, William of Nassaw, was this year murdered
by Histor. Jesuit. p. 366. Sp^ed's Chr. p. 1193. Jes. Cat. p. 134, 135.
Balthazar Gerard, a Burgundian, who confessed that a Jesuit, Regent of the
College of Trers, told him, that he had conferred with three of his Brethren,
who took the Design to be from God, assuring him, that if he dyed in that
quarrel, he should be enrolled in the Calendar of Martyrs.

This Method of satisfying their Consciences with their Confessour's Authority,
was so generally taken by the zealous Assassins of those times, that the
Leaguers in France kept several Priests in pay, Fowl. Hist. p. 377.
who daily preached and asserted, That Princes ought to be deposed who do not
sufficiently perform their Duty; and a Bachelour in Divinity of the Sorbonne
maintained in a public Disputation, That it was lawful for any private man to
depose or kill any Prince, who is a wicked man, or an Heretic: which opinion
had so entirely possessed the Id. p. 376.
Cardinal of Bourbon, that because the King of Navarre was an Heretic, he had
the Confidence to tell King Henry the Third, that if his Majesty should dye,
the Crown would belong to him, and he was resolved not to lose his Right: But
because these Doctrines without force to practice them would prove but empty
speculations, Id. p. 378.
the Duke of Guise had the latter end of this year a Conference with the King
of Spain's Commissioners, whereby he associated himself with the Spaniards
against his Sovereign, obliging his party to maintain War against the Kings as
long as the King of Spain pleased.

To promote which Design Cardinal Pellevee solicited the Pope for his
approbation of it; Nevers, Fowl. Hist. p. 379.
declared his Resolutions to have nothing to do with them, unless he had the
Opinion both of Eminent Divines, and the Pope too, in favor of the
Undertaking; his Confessor, and Monsieur Faber, told him, that he ought to
take up Arms with the Leaguers, by which he would be so far from sinning, Id.
p. 380.
that he would merit highly, and perform an Action very acceptable to God; and
the aforesaid Cardinal, with other Divines, assured him that the Pope approved
of it, declaring it lawful to fight against Heretics, and such as favor or
adhere to them, though it were the King himself; he indeed advised them not to
attempt his Life, but to seize his Person, and force him to promote their Ends;
In obedience to which the Cardinal of Bourbon published a Declaration, Id. p.
381.
dated March 31. 1585. justifying his Arms, but professing great Respect to the
Royal Person.

This Pope dying, his Successor, Sixtus the Fifth, was more open in avowing
the Leaguers Cause, and therefore published his Bull against the King of
Navarre, Sep. 9. 1585.
declaring him an Heretic, depriving him and his Posterity of all their
Rights, absolving his Subjects from their Allegiance, and excommunicating all
such as should obey him.

While this Pope was making Trial of his Thunderbolts in France, Speed's
Chron. p. 1180.
he had his Agents privily endeavoring to execute the Commands of his
Predecessor in this Nation, Anat. of Pop. Tyr. Epist. Dedicat*
for which Henry Piercy, Earl of Northumberland, being apprehended, shot
himself through the heart during his Imprisonment; he had been pardoned for a
former Rebellion, and being found a prosecutour of Throgmorton's Design, became
this year his own Executioner.

But a more formidable, Cambd. Annal ad an. 1586.
Design was managed by some English Seminaries at Rhemes, who thought it
meritorious to destroy the Queen; where one Savage was so wrought upon by the
Persuasions of Dr. Gifford, the Rectour, and two other Priests, that he vowed
to murder her; to whom Ballard, another Priest, Fowlis's Hist. p. 343, 344.
joining, treated with Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassador in France, about an
Invasion; after which he drew in Mr. Babington, a rich and well accomplished
Gentleman, who desired that five more might be joined to Savage, to make sure
work; Speed's Chronicle. p. 1180.
Babington affirmed, that several Counties in England were ready; and being
assured of Assistance from Spain, they resolved that the Usurper (so they
termed the Queen) should be sent to the other World, Anat. of Pop. Tyr. p. 85.
as soon as the Invaders landed; Speed's Chr. p. 1181.
but Ballard being taken, Babington resolved to effect her death immediately,
though Divine Providence prevented it by his apprehension, who, with the rest
of his Companions, freely confessed the Fact, for which Fowlis's Hist. p. 344.
sixteen of them suffered death.

Yet did not this deter Mr. William Stafford, at the Solicitation of the
French Ambassador, from engaging in an Enterprise of the same horrid nature;
which though he refused to act himself, Fowl. Hist. p. 346, 347.
yet he directed them to one Moody, who willingly embraced the motion upon
Promise of Preferment from the Duke of Guise; but while he was contriving a way
to effect it, Stafford discovered all, and justified it to the Ambassadour's
Face, who at first denied any knowledge of it.

With the same diligence were the Romanists in France driving on their
treasonable Designs; Id. p. 387, 388.
for at a Council, held by the chief Conspiratours at the Jesuits College near
St. Paul's in Paris, they resolved to surprise Boloign, there to receive the
Spaniards who should land to their Assistance: A Plot was laid to secure the
King, as he returned from hunting, and another to seize the Bastile, assault
the Louvre, and put the King into a Convent; during which Action their word was
to be, Let the Mass flourish; and the King of Navarre was to be cut off by the
Spaniards; but these Designs being discovered, as also another Plot to seize
the King in the Abbey of St. Germains, their hopes were disappointed; in which
Conspiracies Cardinal Pellevee, a French man, then at Rome, was so deeply
concerned, that the King ordered his Revenues to be seized and distributed to
the Poor.

But His Majesty going from Paris, Fowlis, p. 388.
the Duke of Guise designing to secure the King in the Country; and for the
exciting those rebellious Spirits to some Action, the Preachers at Paris
generally vented nothing but Sedition, affirming that the King was a Tyrant,
and an enemy to the Church and People; and when the King sent to apprehend one
of these furious Leaguers, he retired into the house of one Hatte, Id. p. 389.
a Notary, where Bussy, and his men, fought in his defense against the King's
Officers, headed by the Lieutenant Civil: And the Sorbonne Doctors made a
Decree, That Princes might be deposed from their Government, if they did not
what became them, as the charge taken away from a negligent Guardian. And that
there might want no Encouragement, the Pope presented the Duke of Guise, the
Head of the Rebels, with a rich Sword, thereby declaring his approbation of his
Proceedings.

The same year Speed's Chr. p. 1195. Anat. Popish Tyr. p. 85.
Sir. William Stanley being made Governor of Deventer, Rowland York of
Zutphen, for the Queen, they betrayed both these places to the Spaniard, upon
which the former beginning to sink in his Reputation, lest the sense of his
Treasons should put him upon thoughts of returning to his Loyalty, Fowl. p. 62.
Dr. Allan, afterward Cardinal, wrote to him and his traitorous Accomplices,
telling them that the Queen being deposed by the Pope, Coll. of Trea. Conc. the
Penal Laws, p. 71, 72. Def. of Eng, Cath. p. 114, 115* cited hy Fowl. p. 62.
could make no just War, and all her Subjects were bound not to serve or obey
her in any thing: And in another of his Books he affirms, That God had not
sufficiently provided for our Salvation, or the Preservation of his Church, if
there were no way to restrain or deprive Apostate Kings: Therefore (says he)
let no man marvel, that in case of Heresy the Sovereign loses his Superiority
and Right over his People and Kingdom.

And now we are come to the Year Eighty eight, Lisbon, Fowl. p. 350.
and the Assistance given by the fiery Pope, who published his Crusado as
against the Turks, Speed's Chr. d. 1199.
and promised to contribute a Million of Gold; to which he added the
Apostolical Benediction, covenanting that the Crown of England should be held
as feudatary to the Sea of Rome; and for encouragement to those who should
assist his Cause, he Fowl. p. 350.
gave plenary Indulgences to them all; neither did he stop here, but having
provided for the Invaders, by securing them of Money and Heaven, he thundered
out his Speed's Chr. p. 1197. Fowlis, p. 350, 351.
Bull against the Queen, whereby he deprived her again of her Dominions,
confirming the Censures of Pope Pius, and Gregory, his Predecessors;
commanding all, under penalty of God's Wrath, to render her no obedience, or
assistance, and enjoining them to aid the Spaniards against her; concluding all
with declaring it both lawful and commendable to lay hands on her, and granting
a full Pardon to all Undertakers. To second which Bull Cardinal Allen (advanced
to that Dignity the year before) published a Book at Antwerp, wherein he
enlarges upon the Bull, Id. p. 350. Speed's Chron. p. 1197.
and tells the World, that it was at the vehement desire of some English men,
that the Pope engaged the Spaniard, and appeared in the Cause himself. This
Book is said to be written by one Parsons, Import. Consid. p. 73.
though it was owned by the Cardinal; and therein it is affirmed, Id. p. 75.
That the Roman Catholics in England were destitute of Courage, and erroneous
in Conscience, or else they had never suffered Her Majesty to reign so long
over them.

The way thus prepared, the Spanish Armado put to Sea, while the Prince of
Parma was preparing a great Army in Flanders, where the Fowlis, p. 351. Speed,
p. 1199.
Earl of Westmorland, and the Lord Pagit, and Sir William Stanley, lay with
seven hundred English, ready to be transported; and the hopes of the Romanists
came nothing short of what was to be expected in men elevated by such great
Preparations; insomuch that the Fowlis Hist. p. 352.
Jesuits at Rome had appropriated several Palaces in London to themselves, and
were so sure of Success, that they would have had Te Deum sung in the College
Church for joy, upon the news of the Spaniards being arrived in the narrow
Seas; and the secular Priests acknowledge the like Disposition in the Party
here Important Consid. p. 63.
We had (some of us greatly approved the said Rebellion, many of our Affections
were knit to the Spaniard. -- In all these Plots none were more forward than
many of us that were Priests.

With the same zeal toward the Action were the foreign Clergy actuated, Fowl.
p. 353
among whom Johannes Osorius, the Jesuit, preached two Sermons in Defense of
the Attempt, and in Commendation of the Spaniards for thus fighting against
Heretics; in one of which his Confidence of the Success transported him so far
as to give Thanks for the Victory; but he and his Party trusted too much in the
Arm of Flesh, they thought themselves so powerful, that they forgot one that
was above them, who made that terrible Fleet the scorn of the world, and so
protected the just Cause of the Queen, and assisted her Navy, that most of that
Armado perished in the Sea, or were taken, or burnt; so vain a thing it is to
forget and fight against the Almighty, who blessed where the Pope cursed, and
turned the Harangues of the Thanksgiving-Jesuite into three Sermons of
Humil^ation, for so great a Disappointment of the Papal Designs, and the entire
Destruction of its strongest Forces.

In the beginning of the year several Missionaries were sent into Scotland,
Fowlis's Hist. p. 287, 288.
to get the Assistance of the Papists there: The Lord Maxwell actually took the
Field with a small Party, who were defeated: The Lord Bothwell secretly listed
Soldiers; and Collone Sempill arriving at Leith, in order to the Design, was
seized, but soon rescued by the Earl of Huntley.

Yet could not these wonderful Disappointments work any remorse in the
Papists, who still labored, by means of the Jesuit Fowlis.'s Hist. p. 353.
Holt, and others, to persuade the King of Spain to another Invasion; which Id.
p. 288.
Parma comforted the Romanists in Scotland with promises of effecting, and sent
them ten thousand Crowns to prepare matters against the next Spring.

As busy were the Leaguers in France, prosecuting their intended Rebellion
with all diligence, Fowl. p. 389.
the Duke of Guise and his Council resolved to put the King in a Monastery; in
order to which, when he went his usual Processions in the time of Lent, they
designed to seize him; but being prevented by a Discovery, Id. p. 391.
another Resolution was agreed on, to secure his Person at his return from Bois
de Vincennes, slenderly accompanied; but failing in this also, the Duke of
Guise came to Paris, contrary to the King's express Order, where he was
received with great joy, and soon after, his Party being numbered, and found
considerable, he openly rebelled, Id. p. 392, 393, 394.
barricadoing the Streets, and forcing the King to fly, who made his Escape
with very few Attendants: Soon after the King of Spain sent six hundred
thousand Crowns to the Rebels, and the Pope by solemn Letters applauded the
Duke's Zeal, compared him to the Maccabean Heroes, and exhorted him to go on as
he had begun; but here the insignificancy of the Pope's Blessing again
appeared, the Duke of Guise being soon after slain at Blois, and so receiving
the just Reward of his continued Rebellions.

Thus were the Designs of wicked men, who prostituted the holy Name of Religion
to serve their Lusts, baffled and defeated, both in their Attempts against the
incomparable Queen Elizabeth, and the French King, as also in Id. p. 390.
a Plot against the K. of Navarre, which by the same Divine Providence, was
this year discovered.

But the Scotch Papists were so possessed with Spanish Promises, the
persuasions of Fowlis's Hist. p. 288.
Holt, Creighton, and other Jesuits, that several Noblemen conspired to seize
the King (afterward King James the First of England) at his Palace in
Edinburg, where Huntley coming before the others, was upon Suspicion
apprehended, which terrified the rest; but being set at liberty, joined himself
to the Earl of Crawford, and others, in open Rebellion, entered Aberdeen, but
were so terrified by the approach of the Royal Army, that they retreated, were
taken, and after Trial imprisoned.

And here I find such an Account of the Conversions made by the Jesuits in
Scotland, Vide Praef.
as fully confirms the Observation made before of their Design, in their
diligent Endeavors to make Proselytes; For Mr. Bruce, the chief Agent for the
Spaniards, in his Id. p. 291.
Letter to the D. of Parma, commending the Zeal of the Missionaries in
Scotland, tells him that they had converted the Earls of Arroll and Crawford
who were very desirous to advance the Catholic Faith, and Spanish Interest in
this Island, and resolved to follow entirely the Directions of the Fathers
Jesuits; whence it appears their main design is to enlarge their Empire, for
as the same Gentleman affirms, Ibid.
no sooner any person of Quality is converted by them, but they forthwith
incline and dispose their affections to the Service of the King of Spain, as a
thing inseparably conjoined with the advancement of true Religion in this
Country; so that by the Confession of this great Man, Popery and Treason were
inseparable at that time; the Romanists being so in love with it, that they
made their Address Mr. Bruce in the same Letter. ibid.
to the broken Fleet of the Spaniards the last year, to land what Forces they
had, several great Persons being ready to receive them. And the two new Noble
Converts wrote to the Duke of Parma, testifying their entire devotednes to the
Spanish Interest. Fowlis, p. 294, 295.


Nor was Scotland alone thus infected; for in England the Speed's Chronicle. p.
1180. Fowlis Hist. p. 351. Import. Consid. p. 76.
Earl of Arundell was this year tried, and dyed in the Tower, who rejoiced at
the Spaniards coming, prayed for their Success, and exceedingly grieved at
their Overthrow: And the Jesuit Parsons prevailed to have a Seminary, wherein
to instruct Youth in such treasonable Principles as his own, founded at
Valedolyd.

But though this Island was sufficiently pestered this year by the Papal Agents
and Factours for Rebellion, yet were we favorably dealt with, in comparison of
the Treasons and Insurrections in France against Henry the Third, a Prince of
their own Communion, who, after the Death of the Duke of Guise, was opposed by
an almost universal Rebellion, Fowlis Hist. p. 397.
the Priests calling on their Auditors to swear to revenge the Duke's Death,
and railing with all manner of virulency against the King; insomuch that Father
Lincestre affirmed, that if he were at the Altar, and the Eucharist in his
hand, he would not scruple in that very place to kill him. The Rebels styled
him Tyrant, and Heretic; Id. p. 401.
and to have his Picture, or to call him King, was crime enough to deserve
death; they threw down his Arms and Statues, and practiced all sort of Magic,
Incantations, and Charms, to hasten his death. Id. p. 399. 400. where see the
Letter.
The Parisians wrote to the Pope, desiring to be absolved from their
Allegiance, with several other requests of the same nature; and in their Id. p.
402, 403, 405.
Letters to the Cardinals styled their Sovereign, The late King of France, and
sent Agents to Rome, giving them, among other Instructions, Orders to desire
the Pope not to entertain or hear the King's Ambassadors, and Messages, and to
excommunicate all that join with him, and having chosen the Duke of Mayenne for
their General, would have had him take the Title of King, but he refused it;
yet they broke the King's great Seal, and made a new one.

To these the City of Lions joined, affirming that Kings ought to be resisted,
Fowlis's Hist. p. 403, 404.
and they will resist the King in conjunction with the Holy Union, to whom the
Parisians sent a Letter, exhorting them to defend their Religion, etc. against
that prodigal, perjured, cruel, and murdering Prince; the Duke of Mayenne
refusing to have any Peace, or admit so much as of a Truce, and prosecuting the
War with the utmost vigor.

To these Attempts and Perseverance in them they were encouraged by the Sorbon
Doctors, who in a Decree made Jan. 7. 1589. Conclusum est, nemine refragante,
Primum, Quod Populus hujus Regni solutus est and liberatus a Sacramento
Fidelitatis and Obedientiae, etc. Deinde, Quod idem Populus licite, tuta
Conscientia, armari, uniri, and Pecunias colligere and contribuere potest, ad
defensionem and conservationem Religionis Apostolicae, Catholicae, and Romanae,
adversus nefaria Consilia and Conatus praedicti Regis, etc. See the whole
Decree in Fowlis, p. 398, 399.
resolved, That the People were freed from their Oaths of Allegiance and
Fidelity, and that they may legally, and with a safe Conscience, take Arms for
the Defense of the Roman Religion, against the wicked Counsels and Practices of
the King. Which Decree they ordered to be sent to the Pope for his
Confirmation; and this they affirm was concluded on and resolved by an entire
consent of the whole Faculty, not one dissenting. And with the same Zeal, and
no more Loyalty, they licensed Id. p. 403.
a Book, which asserted that the King ought to be assassined; affirming, that
there was nothing in it contrary to the Roman Church: To promote which they
concluded that the King ought to be no longer prayed for, declaring all such of
the Body as should not agree to this, to be guilty of Excommunication, and
deprived of the Prayers and Privileges of the Faculty.

And that there might remain no badg of Royalty to put them in mind of their
Duty, Fowlis, p. 410.
the Cordeliers struck off the Head of the King's Picture which was in their
Church, and the Jacobins defaced those in their Cloisters: But this was done
after the Pope had once more publicly owned the Rebels and their Cause, See
the Bull at large in Fowlis, p. 408.
who by his Bull asserted his Power of Rule over all Kingdoms and Princes of
the Earth, proceeded to admonish the King, to release the Cardinal of Bourbon,
and Archbishop of Lions, in thirty days, and within sixty days to make his
Submission to His Holiness for the death of the Cardinal of Guise, or he would
proceed to absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance; which so pleased the
Leaguers, that they reported Stories of Ibid. p. 409.
God's immediate Judgment against the opposers of this Thundering Bull.

But the King's Army pressing the Parisians, and having reduced them to the
last Extremity, they found an instrument for their purpose; Ib. p. 410, 411,
412.
who was so wrought upon by the fiery Preachers, that he resolved to kill the
King: That he was set on by the Jesuits, see Hospin. Histor. Jesuit. p. 180,
247.
He was a Jacobin Friar, and confessing it to Father Bourgoin, Prior of the
Convent, he encouraged him in it, telling him he should be a Saint in Heaven,
and accounted an holy Martyr by the Church; which so emboldened him, that with
a Knife, given him by that Father, he stabbed the King into the Belly, and was
himself slain upon the place.

This Jaques Clement was accordingly honored by the Clergy of the League, Fow.
p. 411.
as they had promised, his Picture was made, and showed publicly, and they
were about setting up his Statue in the Churches instead of the King's, Hist.
Jesuit. p. 169, 248* 255.
and pared off the very ground where he was slain to preserve as Relics; and
several Divines preached and wrote in his Praise, compared him to Ehud, and
affirmed he had done a greater work than Judith. The Cardinal de Montalto
rejoiced at it, and the Pope made a long Oration in its Praise, See it at large
in Fowlis Hist. p. 413.
and decreed that no Funerals should be celebrated for the King.

Immediately upon this Murder the Leaguers at Paris would have made the Duke
of Mayenne King, Ib. p. 422, 423.
but he declining it, they proclaimed the Cardinal of Bourbon by the name of
Charles the Tenth; and the Parliament of Toulouse commanded all the Bishops
within their Churches to give Thanks to God for this Deliverance; and that the
first day of August (on which the King was slain) should be kept for ever in
remembrance of that Action; and that their Rancour against the King of Navarre
might the better appear, they forbad any to accept him for their King.

And not the Leaguers only, who had been in open Rebellion against Henry the
Third, Ib. p. 422.
but the Roman Catholics of his Army, refused to obey him any longer, unless
he would become a Romanist; nay, there were many of that Party found, who
absolutely renounced him, and joined with the Rebels, some few only remaining
loyal; by which defection of the greatest part of his Army, he was forced to
raise the Siege for his own Security.

Things standing in this posture, the Pope, fearful lest any Rebellion should
be prosecuted without his assistance, Ib. p. 423.
sent a Legate into France, with great Sums of Money for the Leaguers, who
was accompanied with Bellarmine, afterward Cardinal, and a famous Defender of
the Deposing Power.

To encourage them farther, Spain by his Declaration exhorted all to join with
him against the Heretics of France, Ibid.
protesting he designed nothing but the advancement of the Catholic Religion,
and Extirpation of Heresy: And the Parisians were so poisoned in their
Principles, that the City being straitened by the King's Forces, Fowl. p. 427.
and Provisions failing, they threw several into the River, for murmuring at
the hardships they endured.

About this time the Cardinal of Bourbon, Ibid.
their pretended King, dyed; upon which the States were summoned to meet for
the Election of another; and for the encouragement of the People the Legate
ordered a Procession of all the Religious Orders, who, to show their Zeal,
marched in order, armed like Soldiers, the Bishop of Senlis leading them, and
their Relics carried before them; at which the Cardinal Legate was present in
his Coach; and the Parliament forbad any, upon pain of Death, to talk of any
agreement with the King; in which madness the Parliament of Roan had led the
way, Id. p. 424.
who decreed, That whoever joined with the King should be guilty of High
Treason, and put several Prisoners to death, only because they were the King's
Servants.

Nor could all the prodigious straits to which Paris was reduced, incline that
headstrong People to Obedience; Idem. p. 428.
the Famine was so great as no Age can show the like; all eatable things were
devoured, and but one little Dog to be found in all the City, which the
Duchess of Montpensier kept for her self, and refused two thousand Crowns only
for its Brains; yet was the Rebels Obstinacy as great as ever, accounting those
who dyed of Famine Martyrs, and continuing as intent upon the War as in their
plenty; but finding force not successful, they again employed Assassins, of
whom two Franciscan Friars and a Priest were seized by the King at St. Denis in
a Secular Habit, who confessed there were three and twenty more, besides
themselves, who had sworn the King's Death; at length the City was relieved by
the Duke of Parma's Army, and the King raising the Siege retired.

But as we have not hitherto found a Plot without a Priest in it, so they
contributed all they could to the vigorous resistance which the Leagues made;
Fowl. p. 423, 424.
For the Doctors of the Sorbon finding some Propositions spread about the
City, importing, that Henry of Bourbon ought to be King, and that the Pope has
no Power of Dominion over Sovereign Princes, presently condemned them; which
Decree was confirmed by the Legate, and sworn to by the Bishops and Curates.
But not content with this, the same Faculty, on May 7. this year, decreed by an
unanimous Vote, Jure divino prohibentur Catholici haereticum hominem, aut
fautorem Haerese^s, ad regnum admittere. Quod si ejusmodi absolutionem a
criminibus impetraverit, and tamen subsit manifestum simulationis, is
nihilominus eodem jure excludi debet. Quicunque autem satagat, ut is ad Regnum
perveniat, -- est Religioni atque Ecclesiae perniciosus, contra quem eo nomine
agi potest and debet, cujuscunque gradus and eminentiae sit. -- Cum igitur
Henricus Borbonius Haereticus sit, and si forte absolutionem in foro exteriore
impetraret, manifestum appareat simulationis -- eum Christianissimi Regni
aditu, etiam absolutione obtenta, -- Franci prohibere, and a Pace cum eo
facienda abhorrere tenentur. -- Qui dicto Henrico ad Regnum aspiranti favere,
suppetidsve, quovis modo ferunt, Religionis desertores sunt, and in continuo
Peccato mortali manent;, -- Qui se illi opponunt quocunque modo, zelo
Religionis, plurimum apud Deum and homines merentur; -- si ad Sanguinem usque
resistant, eos aeternum in Proemium, and ut fidei Propugnatores Martyrii
Palmam, consecuturos, judicare fas est. Conclusum, nemine repugnante, in tertia
Congregatione Generali, etc. septimo die Maii, 1590. Fow. p. 425, etc.
That all Catholics by divine Law are forbid to admit any Prince that is an
Heretic, or a favourer of Heretics; That if he should procure an Absolution
for his Heresy, yet if there be evident danger of his Hypocrisy, he is by
divine Law to be rejected: That whosoever endeavors that he should be King
ought to be opposed: And then they apply all to Henry of Bourbon, affirming,
That there is evident danger of Hypocrisy, and therefore though he should
obtain Sentence of Absolution, yet the French are obliged to keep him from the
Crown, and abhor the thoughts of making peace with him: That those who favor
him are deserters of Religion, and remain in continual mortal Sin; but such as
oppose him every way they can invent, do merit very both of God and Man; and
they who are slain in the Cause, are to be reputed Champions for the Faith, and
shall obtain an everlasting Crown of Martyrdom. And soon after they Fowl. p.
427.
renewed this and their former Decrees; and when the City was so very much
straitened, they wrote a Letter to the Pope, complaining that his Legate had
not proceeded with severity enough against the King, commending Bourgogn, and
other Rebels, who were executed, Fowl. Hist. p. 429, etc.
calling them Maintainers and Defenders of the Truth; and earnestly
supplicating for assistance from his Holiness, who, besides what Power he
exerted by his Legate, sent them Id. p. 427.
fifty thousand Crowns for a Supply.

Thus they went on with an excessive Spleen against the King in France, but the
Jesuits attempting to do the same things in Ob hanc causam etiam publico
ordinam decreto extra Provincia ejecti sunt, an. 1590. sub mensis Januarii
initium. Histor. Jesuit. p. 332. Fowlis, p 295. Jesuits Catec. p. 173.
Transylvania, were expelled the Country; yet in Scotland their Designs went
on, from whence William Creighton, the Jesuit, went into Spain, into whose
King he so insinuated himself, that he resolved to be guided by his Advice,
both for the invading England, and the alteration of Religion in Scotland;
which was the Account himself gave of his Negotiation by a Message to the Earl
of Huntley, desiring as many blanks and Procurations as could be had of the
Scottish Noblemen, for the greater Credit of his Agitations.

In the mean time the Duke of Mayenne solicited the Pope and Spaniard for aid,
Lorrain, Fowl. Hist. p. 434, etc.
and others, not to admit any to the Crown except he were of their Family; but
if they failed in that, to exclude all, who were not of the Roman Catholic
Religion: But the Leaguers drew up a Letter, and sent it to the King of Spain,
affirming that it was the desire of all the Catholics to see his Catholic
Majesty sway the Scepter of that Kingdom, and reign over them; or that he would
appoint some of his Posterity, offering the Crown to the Infanta Isabella, that
King's Daughter, in particular: And to make all sure within themselves, they
contrived a new Oath, whereby not only the King, but all the Blood Royal were
excluded from the Crown; and set up a Court of Justice to proceed against the
Royalists.

In which rebellious Actions they were encouraged by the Pope, Fow. p. 433.
Greg. 14. who sent a Nuncio into France with two Bulls, one interdicting the
Clergy, if within 15 days they forsook not the obedience and Part of the King;
and depriving them of all their Benefices, if they left him not within thirty
days; the other threatening the Nobility, and all others, with the Papal Curse,
if they assisted that Heretic, Persecutour, Excommunicated Person, who was
justly deprived of his Dominions; which were the mild Expressions with which
this meek Servant of Servants treated that great Prince: And farther, to show
his Fatherly care of the Rebels, he sent an Army to their relief, under the
Command of his Nephew, and allowed them fifteen thousand Crowns a month; whose
steps were followed by his Successor, Id. p. 438.
Innocent the 9th, who remitted them fifteen thousand Ducats every month of his
Popedom, which was but short; for he sat not much above eight weeks in that
Chair.

Yet were not these Designs of the Leaguers, and Mayenne, Id. p. 433, 438.
sufficient to content the Pope, but the young Cardinal of Bourbon hoped for
the Crown, and so formed another Party of seditious Persons, called Thirdlings,
among whom was Perron, afterward Cardinal; and this Faction also had the
countenance of the last Pope, who, to advance this Cardinal, exhorted the
States to choose a Roman Catholic for their King.

And his Example was so far approved of by Clement the Eighth, Fowlis's Hist.
p. 438, 439.
that he continued the same allowance to the Leaguers, renewed the same
Exhortations, and declared any other but a Romanist incapable of the Crown. The
Parliament of Roan published a severe Edict against all who adhered to the
King; and Discourses were spread abroad, maintaining, That it was unlawful to
desire his Conversion, and that such as proposed or endeavored it were
excommunicated, and ought to be driven away, lest they should infect the rest;
and the Parliament of Paris enjoined Obedience to the Pope, and his Legate,
declaring that the Convention of Estates designed to choose a Popish King: And
by this time those few Romanists who had continued with the King, became
rebellious too, requiring him to change his Religion within a time which they
prescribed, otherwise protesting they would elect another of their own
Persuasion.

Thus Rebellion and the Roman Catholic Cause went on prosperously in France;
but not having the same strength and opportunities in England, the more secret
Methods were made use of; Important Consid. p. 81.
the Spaniard was importuned to make another Invasion, which he prepared for;
but the Romanists, unwilling to trust to that alone, took a shorter course, and
by Ibid. Anat. of Popish Tyranny. p. 22.
Mr Hesket's means attempted to persuade the Lord Strange, Fowlis's Hist. p.
354.
afterward Earl of Derby, to take upon him the Crown, which they pretended he
had a Title to; and soon after Father Holt, and others, employed Patrick
Cullen, Important Consid. and Anat. of Pop. Tyr. p. 22. Speed's Chron. p. 1181.
an Irish Fencer, to murder the Queen, which he readily undertook, and for a
very small reward; but his barbarous Intention was discovered, and he, upon
apprehension confessing the Design, and who set him on, was executed.

Two years before this the Jesuit Creighton, upon his going into Spain, had
desired blanks, to be filled up with Credentials and Procurations, from the
Noblemen of the Popish Party in Scotland; Fowlis's Hist. p. 296.
and this year he received them; the Persons who sent them farther engaging,
that all the Romanists in Scotland should assist them, upon the arrival of the
Army, which the King of Spain promised should be with them by the End of the
Spring, to the number of thirty thousand, whereof some were to remain in
Scotland, and the rest march directly into England: These Blanks were sent by a
Servant of the King's, with Letters from several Jesuits, but he was
apprehended, and some of the Conspiratours imprisoned and executed; Fowlis, p.
297, 298.
The Jesuits complained in their Letters, that the Spaniards were too slow,
and therefore desired the Invasion with great earnestness.

Upon this Discovery, Idem. p. 299.
the Earls of Angus, Huntley, and Arrol, rebelled, but the King's Army marching
against them before they had formed any considerable Body, they fled into the
Mountains, submitted, and were imprisoned in Order to a Trial.

At the same time, Tir Oen in Ireland, after having persuaded, Idem. p. 307.
and underhand maintained several Insurrections, openly declared himself for
the Rebels, taking on him the Title of O Neal; which by an Act of Parliament
was declared Treason for any to assume.

Nor was England long free from open Rebellion, yet cleared of a Treasonable
Generation, who were daily employed in new Conspiracies against the Queens
Life; for Speed's Chr. p. 1181. Anat. Popish Tyr. p. 22. Fowl. Hist. p. 354,
etc. Import. Consid. p. 81. Fowlis's Hist. p. 356. Speed's Chr. p. 1182.
Lopez, one of the Queens Physicians, undertook to Poison her, for which he was
to have Fifty thousand Crowns; but being discovered, confessed all, and with
two of his Accomplices was Executed.

But being unwilling to depend wholly on this Doctor, the Jesuit, Holt, Dr.
Worthington, and others, employed Edmond York, Nephew to him who six years
before had betrayed Zutphen to the Spaniards, and Richard William, with others,
to Kill the Queen; who upon their Apprehension confessed, That after several
Consultations among the Priests and Jesuits in Flanders; Holt threatened, That
if this Plot failed, they would take this honorable Work out of the Hands of
the English, and employ Strangers for the future; that they had vowed to
Murder the Queen; and that one Young, Tipping, Garret, with two others, had
undertaken the same Design.

While God was thus confounding the Designs of these bloody Men in this Nation,
the Leaguers in France seemed to have forgotten, that an all-seeing Eye beheld
their Actions, Fowl. p. 439. etc.
where the Duke of Mayenne put forth a Declaration, affirming, That Henry of
Bourbon could not be lawful King, because he was an Heretic; and therefore
they cannot be blamed for opposing him in obedience to the Pope's Bulls, and
Admonitions: to which, his Holiness's Legate added another, assuring the
Romanists that the Pope would never consent to the admission of an Heretic,
that such who assisted the King were in a desperate Condition, and exhorting
all to be obedient to the Pope; and when the Estates were met, he proposed that
all should take an Oath, never to acknowledge the King, though he should be
converted to their Church; nay, so great was his Fury, that when the Romanists
with the King sent to the States some Propositions for a Treaty, he declared
the very Proposals to be Heretical, and by his influence the Doctors of Sorbon
asserted the same, as intimating a declared Heretic might be King; but the
Proposition was accepted, and a Conference agreed on, but with this Clause in
the Answer to the Proposal, That to fight against an Heretical King is not
Treason; yet the Legate entered his Protestation against the meeting, and the
Parisians attempted to make the young Duke of Guise King: Nor were things
better in the Royal Army, where the Romanists, whom the King most trusted, were
falling from him; upon which resolving to change his Religion, his Intensions
were no sooner published, than the Legate forbad all Bishops to absolve him,
pronouncing all that should be assisting to his reception into the Roman Church
excommunicated, and deprived, and all their Actions in that Affair null and
void.

But hour the King was reconciled, and sent his Ambassadors to Rome; Fowl. p.
441, 442.
but the Pope, who had formerly refused to admit any Message from him,
prohibited their Entrance, neither would he receive the Prelates that absolved
him.

In the mean while the Leaguers stormed at the King's reconciliation, and set
themselves to destroy him by private Treason, now Force could do no good; for
which purpose one Barriere, or Le Bar, was employed, Id. p. 443.
who confessed that the Curate of St. Andrews of Arts in Paris commended the
Design, Jes. Catech. l. 3. c. 6.
telling him he would merit Heaven and Glory by the Act, and recommended him to
Varade, Rectour of the Jesuits College, Histor. Jesuit. p. 251.
who affirmed that the Enterprise was most holy, exhorting him with good
constancy and courage to confess himself, and receive the B. Sacrament, and
then leading him to his Chamber, gave him his Blessing: He mentioned also
another Preacher of Paris, who counted it meritorious. Thus encouraged, he
bought a knife seven Inches long, and went to St. Denis where the King then
was, but being discovered was executed, affirming at his death, that there were
two black Friars that went from Lions upon the same Account.

It is probable the Preacher at Paris, mentioned in his Confessions, was Father
Jes. Cat. l. 3. c. 6. Histor. Jesuit. p. 251. Sumptum est de Barrierio
supplicium, 31. Aug. die vero 29. qui erat dominicus, Pater Commoletus, Jesuita
Parisiensis, in Epilogo Concionis suae monuerat and adhortatus fuerat
Auditores, ne paululum adhuc obdurarent, and quietis essent animis, siquidem
brevi miraculum a Deo magnum ipsos esse percepturos, atque oculis suis visuros.
Commolet, the Jesuit, who two days before this Barriere's Execution at St.
Denis, in a Sermon at Paris (which yet continued obstinate against the King)
exhorted his Auditors to have Patience, for they should see in a few days a
wonderful Miracle of God.

But the next Year Paris was reduced to its obedience, Histor. Jesuit. p. 148,
etc.
accusing them of all manner of Injustice, of the ruin of Families, and many
other Crimes, but insisting particularly on their Treasons, charging them with
being abettors to the Spaniard, Fomenters of Civil Wars, and always ready to
assassinate the French King, whom they omitted to pray for, while they extolled
the Spaniard; that they taught and asserted the Pope's deposing Power; that
they refused to give Absolution to several Persons of Quality, because they
would not renounce the King; that they had been the cause of the Death of
Twenty-eight Barons, Fifty Noblemen of France, and above Five hundred Monks
and Friars in the Tercera Islands, and had refused to renounce the League.

Which Spirit of Rebellion was so strong amongst the Leaguers, Fowlis Hist. p.
443, etc.
that a little before the Seduction of Paris, the Pope's Legate published a
Declaration, exhorting all Catholics to oppose the King; assuring them that
the Pope would never grant him Absolution; and upon the Rendition of Aix to his
Majesty, the famous Genebrard was so vexed at the Loyalty of the Place, that he
left it, resolving not to live among the Royalists; nay, when the King entered
Paris the Cardinal Pellivee, lying upon his Deathbed, very angrily told those
about him, That he hoped the Arms of the Spaniards, and good Catholics would
yet drive the Huguonots out of Paris: And Hay, Hist. Jes. p. 258.
a Scotch Jesuit, affirmed, That if the King passed by their College, Jes.
Cat. l. 3. c. 20.
he would leap from the top of it upon him, Fowlis, p. 447.
and did not doubt to go directly to Heaven.

But to return to the Jesuits, who finding their Banishment out of the Kingdom
thus zealously endeavored, and fearing lest the King, to whom they had been
such bitter Enemies, should consent to it, resolved to dispatch him; Fowlis
Hist. p. 445. Hist. Jesuit. p. 259. Fowl. p. 445. Jesu. Cat. l. 3. c. 18.
Histor. Jes. p. 154, 155, 252.
* Francis Jacob one of their Scholars at Bourges had boasted that he would do
it; but John Chastel who was bred under them at Paris, went farther, and with a
knife struck the King in the Mouth, and beat out one of his Teeth, he was
immediately apprehended, and on Examination, confessed, Id. p. 252. Ratus id
Religioni conducere.
That he esteemed it an Act highly conducing to promote Religion; and that
Father Gueret, his Master in the Jesuits School, had taught him those
Doctrines; upon which Sentence of Death was passed upon him, by which also the
Constituit insuper ut omnes Sacerdotes Collegii Clermontii, and omnes alii
praedictae Societati addicti, tanquam Corruptores Juventutis, Perturbatores
publicae Tranquillitatis, -- toto Regno exeant. Illorum autem mobilia and
immobilia bona vertentur, etc. -- secundum arbitrium and decretum Curiae. Hist.
Jes. p. 253.
Jesuits were banished as Corrupters of Youth, Disturbers of the public
Peace, Enemies to the King and Kingdom; and enjoined to depart the Realm within
fifteen days; and all their Goods confiscated, to be disposed of as the Court
should see fit.

This Sentence was published after the search made in the Jesuits College,
Histor. Jesuit. p. 256, 257. Where you may see the sum of his Book, and the
arrest of Parliament against him. See also Fowlis, p. 446. etc.
wherein was found a Book of T. Guignard's, which he confessed to be his own
writing, lamenting that the King was spared in the Parisian Massacre,
applauding the Murder of King Henry the Third, affirming, that if the King
were shut up in a Monastery, he would be treated more gently than he deserved;
and concluding, that if he could not be deposed without force of Arms, they
ought to be taken up against him; for which, and his other Treasons, he was
executed; but Of him see Hist. Jesuit. ubi supra.
Gueret, Chastell's Master, of the same Order, was only banished with the rest;
in memory of which Fact, and to the perpetual Ignominy of that Order,
Chastell's House was demolished, and a Pillar erected in the place; on one side
of which was engraven the Decree of the Court, Speaking of Chastell, there are
these lines, Malis magistris usus and schola impia, Sotericum e^ete nomen
usurpantibus. Expressing by whose Instigation he undertook the Murder.
on another a Copy of Verses expressing the Crime, and discovering to the World
that it was attempted by the Persuasions of the Jesuits; on the third another
Inscription to the same purpose; and on the fourth a summary Account of their
banishment, and the reasons of it, Pulso tota Gallia hominum genere novae and
maleficae superstitionis qui Rempublicam turbarunt, quorum instinctu
particularis adolescens dirum facinus instituerat. Hist. Jes. p. 156.
wherein the Jesuits are termed, A mischievous and novell sort of
superstitious Men, and Disturbers of the Nation, by whom that young man was
encouraged and persuaded to that horrid Fact.

This Pillar, as appears by the date of the Inscriptions, was not erected till
the following year; however, having such a relation to their banishment, which
was decreed the 29th. of December, 1594. I thought it most proper to give an
account of it in this place.

One would think that if any Fact would render men ashamed, this murtherous
Attempt was so horrid as to make those concerned in it blush; but so far were
they from that, that Francis Veron, Sand. Hist. of K. James, p. 156.
a Jesuit, wrote an Apology for the Murderer, calling the Enterprise C'st un
act tres saint, tres human, tres digne, tres louable, and tres
recommendable. -- conformement a Dieu, aux Loix, au Decrets, and a l'Eglise.
Apolog. pour. J. Chastel, p. 147. 156. See also Hist. Jes. p. 255.
a most holy, most humane, most laudable and worthy Act; that it is acceptable
to God, and conformable to all Laws and Decrees of the Church; and in the same
Book he extolls Clement, that stabbed the former King.

Thus Fruitful were the French Romanists in their Contrivances of Rebellion
and Murder, and as willing were their Brethren in these Nations to promote
Enterprises of the same nature; for Fowl. p. 307. Speed's Chron. p. 1191.
Tir-Oen in Ireland, continued in the Rebellion which he began the year before,
but distrusting his own power, submitted himself to the Lord Deputy; yet the
very same Month he rebelled again; several Provinces revolting to him; by which
accession of Forces he grew very powerful: Fowlis's Hist. p. 299, 300.
And in Scotland the Noblemen who were imprisoned and condemned for their
Insurrection the last year, having been pardoned by the King, took Arms again,
being assisted with Money from the Spaniards, and defeated the King's Forces
under the Earl of Argyle, though much superior in number to them, but were at
length reduced so low, that they begged leave to depart the Land, which was
granted them; so promising to enterprise no more against the King, they left
the Kingdom: Bothwell, the chief of them went to Naples, where he lived
miserably; the rest about three years after got their Pardons, and returned
home.

Yet were not these all the Popish Enterprises upon the Estates and Persons of
Princes which were discovered this year; Hist. Jesuit. p. 336.
for I find that about this time they employed Le Four, and others, to murder
Prince Maurice of Nassaw, General of the Forces of the United Provinces.

But the indefatigable Romanists, Fowl. p. 358.
would once more apply themselves to the Spaniard, to favor their cause in
England; who to correspond with their Desires and satisfy his own Ambition,
sent Diego Brocher, upon the English Coast, who with four Galleys put into
Mounts Bay in Cornwall, fired St. Paul's Church, and Mousehole, Meulin, and
Pensans.
three small Fish Towns; and this was all the King of Spain made of his vast
expenses and preparations against England.

Tyr-Oen having the two last years strengthened himself, Spain, Fowl. p. 307.
desiring him not to give ear to those who affirmed, that he designed any
Accommodation with the English; assuring him, that he was resolved never to
submit to, or have any Treaty with them.

About the same time the Jesuits at London had laid a Plot to seize the Tower,
A. P. Reply to a notorious Libell, p. 81, 82. cited by Fowl. p. 358.
and keep it till the Spaniards arrived to their Assistance; in one of their
Letters from their Correspondents in Spain, dated June the 20th. 1596. they are
put in hopes that the Spanish Armada should be with them about the August
following; cautioning them to advise all the Romanists of the Design
beforehand, and Proclamations were ready Printed in Spain, to be dispersed at
their Arrival here; Fowl. p. 300.
and the better to secure the Spaniards landing in Scotland, the Conspiratours
fortified the Isle of Elsay in the Western Seas, for their Reception; but were
surprised before they had proceeded far, so the Enterprise miscarried.

And now we are come to the last Conspiracy that has been discovered against
the Life of Queen Elizabeth, Speed. p. 1183.
which was the attempt of Edward Squire, Fowl. p 357.
a Servant in her Stables, Import. Consid. p. 81.
to whom Walpoole, Anat. of Pop. Tyran. p. 26.
Squire undertook to press out upon the Pommel of her Saddle; but before he
could bring himself to undertake so horrid an Action, he had several conflicts
in his own mind; which the Jesuit perceiving, told him, Speed, p. 1183.
That the Sin of Backsliding did seldom obtain pardon, and if he did but once
doubt of the lawfulness, or merit, of the Act, it was enough to cast him down
to Hell; exhorting him to go through with it; Jes. Cat. l. 3. c. 4.
for if he failed, he would commit an unpardonable Sin before God; and at
parting, after having blessed him, he used these words, My Son, God bless thee,
and make thee strong; be of good courage; I pawn my Soul for thine; and being
either dead or alive, assure thy self thou shall have part of my Prayers.

Thus satisfied with the Jesuits, he, upon the first opportunity, poisoned the
Pommel of the Queens Saddle, but it pleased God the Poison had not the expected
effect; upon which the Jesuits not hearing of her Death in some time,
suspected Squire of Unfaithfulness, and got him underhand accused of some
Design against the Queen; upon which being apprehended he confessed all, and
was executed.

But Tyrone created more trouble to the Queen in Ireland, where daily he
increased his strength, Speed, p. 1121, 1122.
took fortified Places from the English, and in several Skirmishes got the
better of the Queens Forces.

And continuing his Rebellion, Henry Bagnall, Id. p. 1123.
and routed the English under his Command, took the Fort of Black-water, and in
it great store of Ammunition and Arms, and created James Fitz-Thomas Earl of
Desmond, and got several Advantages over the Forces of the Kingdom.

In England Anthony Rolston was employed by the Jesuit Creswell to prepare
things for an Invasion, Cambd. Annal. ad an. 1598.
which the Spaniard intended to make very suddenly; in order to which a Fleet
was prepared, and a Proclamation drawn up by the Admiral, justifying the
Action, and declaring his Intention to be, to reduce these Kingdoms to the
Obedience of the Catholic Roman Church.

This year also was apprehended in Holland one Peter Pan, a Cooper of Ipres,
who confessed, That his Design was to murder Prince Maurice of Nassaw, Jes.
Catec. l. 3. c. 1. Hist. Jes. p. 336.
that the Jesuits of Daway, for his encouragement, promised to make his Son a
Prebend, and the Provincial gave him his Blessing in these Words, Friend, go
thy ways in peace, for thou go as an Angel under God's safeguard and
protection.

But almost innumerable were the Conspiracies against King Henry of France,
Fowl. p. 449, 450.
against whom (after Mayenne and all others had submitted) the Dukes of Aumale,
and Mercent continued obstinate, refusing to acknowledge him; and the Pope's
Agent at Brussels, first employed Ridicove, a Dominican of Ghent, to murder
the King; assuring him, That the Pope and Cardinals approved of the Action; but
he, after two Journeys into France about it, was apprehended, and executed;
confessing, That the daily Sermons he had heard in praise of Clement, who
stabbed the former King, and was esteemed a Martyr among them, had so enflamed
him, that he resolved to follow his steps. Besides this Man, one Arger, of the
same Order, undertook the same Exploit; to whom the Pope's Agent added Clement
Odin, another Son of St. Dominick; but God defeated all their Designs, and
preserved that great King's Life some years longer.

In the mean while Tir Oen continued his Rebellion in Ireland, Fow. p 308.
Speed. p. 1225.
and a Plume of Phoenix Feathers from the Pope; and the new Earl of Desmond
wrote two See them at large in Fowlis, p. 308. 309.
Letters to the King of Spain, begging his Assistance to drive the English out
of Ireland, and to advance the Catholic Cause, which he was resolved to
maintain. What effect these and other Addresses had, we shall see presently.

But Tir Oen not resting wholly on the Spaniard, wrote a very earnest Letter to
the Pope, subscribed by himself, Desmond, and others; Desideramus ut
quemadmodum faelicis recordationis Pius V. P. M. contra Reginam Angliae --
Bullam excommunicationis ediderat, necnon Greg. 13. eandem continuaverat --
Similem quoque sententiam ad hoc bellum promovendum, and ad felicem exitum
deducendum sanctitas vestra emittere dignetur. Fowl. p. 478.
Desiring his Holiness to issue out a Bull against the Queen, as Pius the
Fifth, and Gregory the Thirteenth had done; which they press him to do,
because the Kingdom belonged to his Holiness, and next under God depended
solely on him.

In the mean while, the Rebellion went on, and daily conflicts happened; but
lest the tediousness, or danger of the War should discourage them, Pope Clement
the Eighth sent a Letter, directed to all the Prelates, Noblemen, and People of
Ireland, wherein Cum vos Romans Pontificum praedecessorum nostrorum, and nostris
and Apostolicae sedis cohortationibus adductis -- Hugoni O Neale -- conjunctis
animis and viribus praesto fueritis. See the Letter at large in Fowlis, p. 479,
480.
he owns, That they had taken up Arms by his advice, for recovering their
Liberty, and opposing the Heretics, commends the Fitz-Geralds who headed
former Insurrections, highly extolls Tyrone, and grants a full remission of all
Sins to him and his Assistants.

Yet could not this Concurrence, Speed, p. 1125. 1126.
and Benediction of the Pope preserve their strength from being broken by the
Lord Mountjoy, who this year arrived Lord Deputy in Ireland; insomuch that
several of the chief Rebels submitted, Fowlis p. 480.
but at the same time sent to Rome to crave Pardon for their outward
compliance: This year Col. Sempill betrayed Liar in Flanders to the Spaniards.
Wadsw. Engl. Span. Pilgr. p. 61. Land. 1630. -- 4to.
but Tyrone continued obstinate, which forced the Lord-Deputy to proclaim him
Traitor, setting a Reward of Two thousand Marks upon his Head; however the
Spaniard sent a Ship to his Relief, laden with Arms and Moneys, as an earnest
of more Supplies.

It is certain from the Confession of the Traitors themselves, Delr. Disquis.
Magi. l. 6. c. 1. Lov. 1600. 4to.
that the foundation of the Gun-power Treason was laid the following year; but
it is very probable that there was a rough draught of it made in this, as
appears by the Case resolved by Delrio the Jesuit; whether if one discover in
Confession, that he has laid Gunpowder under an House, by which the House is
to be blown up, and the Prince destroyed, the Priest ought to reveal it? upon
which he concludes, that he ought not; it was a Case that had never happened
before and so not likely to have been thought of by a Person not cautious of
such a Design; Account of the Proceedings against the Gunp. Trait. p. 215.
Land. 1679. 8to.
and this Resolution Garnet after served himself of, alleging, That all the
Knowledge he had of the Treason was communicated to him in Confession, which he
was bound not to disclose, upon any Account whatsoever.

Soon after his last Letter in Tyrone's behalf, Breves into England, Foxes and
Firebrands, pt. 2. p. 62.
commanding all the Roman Catholics not to admit, after the Queen's death,
Fowl. p. 499. Acct. of the Proceedings against the Gunpowder Trait. p. 159.
any Prince whatsoever, unless he would bind himself by Oath to promote the
Roman Catholic Religion to his utmost Power: In prosecution of which, knowing
that King James, the next Successor, was a firm Protestant, several Designs
were formed against his Life; Foxes and Firebrands, ubi supra.
Hay and Hamilton, two Papists, were sent into Scotland, to stir up the
Jesuits there, who were received and cherished, notwithstanding the King had
by his Proclamation forbidden any to harbor them, affirming that if any did,
he would look upon them as Designers against his Life.

But while these Jesuits, and others of the same stamp, were endeavoring to
prepare matters for a Rebellion, one Fowlis's Hist. p. 498.
Mowbray, Son to a Scotch Nobleman; undertook to destroy the King, but was
apprehended at London, and sent Prisoner into Scotland by the Queen; and about
the same time the Walton's Life of Sir Henry Wotton, p. 104, etc.
Duke of Tuseany, by some Letters he had intercepted, discovered another Design
against his Life, which was to be effected by Poison, an Account of which he
sent immediately to the King by Sir Henry Wotton, then in his Court, with
several Antidotes against the Poison, if it should be given him,
notwithstanding all his diligence to prevent it.

During these Designs in Scotland the Pope sent a Letter to Tyrone, calling his
Rebellion an Sacrum foedus quod tu and Principes, etc.
Holy League, Magnam ex his voluptatem in Domino cepimus -- Laudamus egregiam
pietatem and fortitudinem tuam. -- Conservate filii hanc Mentem, conservate
Vnionem, -- and Deus erit vobiscum, and pugnabit pro vobis. Vbi opus perit,
scribemus efficaciter ad Roges and Principes Catholicos, -- ut vobis and Causae
vestrae omni open suffragentur. Cogitamus etiam propediem mittere ad vos
peculiarem nuncium nostrum. Tibi and caeteris qui tibi unanimes pro fidei
catholicae Propugnatione adhaerent, nostram and Apostolicam benedictionem
benign impertimur. Fowl. p. 482.
assuring him that he was exceedingly pleased at their Courage and Zeal,
extolling his Piety, exhorting him to go on as he had begun, and praying that
God would fight for him; promising to write to all Catholic Princes to assist
him, and to send a Nuncio to reside with him; and giving his Blessing to him
and all his Followers, who should hazard themselves for the Catholic Cause.

Besides which he sent a Walsh's Hist. of the Irish Rem. Pref. p. 11.
Breve to the whole Body of the Irish Nation, requiring them to join with
Tyr-Oen against the Queen; and if we may believe See his Declaration in Fowlis
Hist. p 484, etc.
Don Juan de Aquila, General of the War in Ireland for defense of the Faith, he
went farther than this, and excommunicated, and (as far as in him lay) deposed
Her Majesty.

This Spanish Commander arrived at Kings all with a great Fleet, and began to
fortify the Town; and published a Declaration, affirming, That the War made
against Queen Elizabeth by his Master, in Conjunction with Tyr-Oen, was just,
She having been excommunicated, and her Subjects absolved from their Fidelity
by several Popes; exhorting them, Speed's Chr. p. 1226.
that now Christ's Vicar commanded them, they would in obedience to him take
Arms; protesting, that if any continued in obedience to the English, they
should be prosecuted as Heretics, and hateful Enemies of the Church.

Soon after Don Alonso del Campo landed with a Supply of Soldiers, Fowlis's
Hist. p. 486.
but suddenly after his arrival was taken Prisoner, Speed's Chr. p. 1226.
the Army of the Spaniards and Rebels in conjunction routed, and the former
glad to be permitted to return home.

Yet were the English Papists as diligent as ever to introduce the Spaniards,
and therefore dispatched away Hist of the Gunpow. Tr. p. 2, 3.
Thomas Winter, to try what could be done for their assistance, who were ready
to sacrifice their Lives for the Catholic Cause; and to assure the King of
Spain, that if he would send over an Army, they would have in a readiness
Fifteen hundred or two thousand Horses for the Service; being introduced by the
means of the Jesuit Creswell, the Duke of Lerma assured him of Assistance, and
the Count de Miranda told him, that his Master would bestow two hundred
thousand Crowns for that use, and would have an Army in England by the next
Spring.

With this grateful Account of the posture of Affairs he returned, Hist. Gunp.
Tr. p. 3.
yet was Mr. Wright sent into Spain, and Guy Faux after him; but the King
refused to meddle, having sent his Ambassador to conclude a Peace with King
James; upon which disappointment the entertained new Designs, which we shall
have account of in a little time.

While these Matters were transacting in Spain and England, Tyr-Oen and
Osulevan continued their Insurrection in Ireland, the latter keeping the Castle
of Dunboy for the King of Spain, Fowl. Hist. p. 486, etc.
to whom he sent to desire him to accept it, which he did, and sent Osulevan
twelve thousand pounds, with a supply of Arms and Ammunition; and the rest of
the Rebels received Encouragement from their Correspondents in Spain, who
assured them, his Catholic Majesty would not omit the winning of Ireland, if
it cost him the most part of Spain; and that an Army of fourteen thousand men,
with a Nuncio from the Pope, were set Sail for their Relief, which News
rendered them so obstinate, that they endured all Extremities; but the taking
of Dunboy by the Lord Deputy put a stop to those succors, there being no place
for to receive them at their landing; yet did Mac Eggan, the Apostolical Vicar,
revive the fury of the Rebels, but he was slain the latter end of this year,
fighting at the head of his Men, with a Sword drawn in one hand, and his
Breviary and Beads in the other.

We have seen the Pope approving this Rebellion, so that the Divines of his
Church could do no less than follow the Dictates of their Supreme Head, which
the Jesuits of Salamanca did this year by a Declaration of theirs; in which
they resolve, Tanquam certum est accipiendum, posse Romans Pontif. fidei
desertores, armis compellere ac coercere; -- posse quoscunque Catholicos Hugoni
O Neal in praed. bello favere, idque magno cum merito, and spe maxima
retributionis aeternae; cum enim bellum gerit authoritate summi Pontificis. --
Eos omnes Catholicos peccare* mortaliter, qui Anglorum castra -- sequuntur; nec
posse illos aeternam salutem consequi, nec ullo Sacerdote a suis peccatis
absolvi, nisi prius resipiscant, ac Castra Anglorum deserant. Idemque de illis
censendum est qui illis tribuunt, praeterea Tributa consueta quae ex Summi
Pont. Indulgentiae and Permissione eis licet Anglis Regibus -- solvere --
Surreptio intervenire non potest, nulla narratur Petitio eorum in quorum
favorem expeditur; at Summus Pont. aperte in illis literis docet se and
Antecessores suos sponte exhortatos fuisse ad illud bellum gerendum Hibernos.
-- Permissum est etiam Catholicis Haereticae Reginae id genus obsequii
praestare quod Catholicam Religionem non oppugnet. -- Datum Salamanticae, 7.
Martii. 1602.
That we must hold for certain that the Pope has power to bridle and suppress
those who forsake the Faith: And having farther stated the Question, they
proceed to affirm, That it is lawful for any Catholic to assist Tyr-Oen, and
that with great Merit, and good Hope of eternal Reward, because it is by the
Pope's Authority, that all such Romanists as take part with the English sin
mortally, and cannot be saved, or receive Absolution, till they forsake the
English Army; and those are in the same condition who give the English any
Tribute, except such as the Pope has given them leave to pay, (so that they
are to be Subjects no longer than the Pope pleases.) And then they proceed to
show, That the Bull in favor of the Rebels was not procured by surreption,
but proceeded from the Pope's own Inclination to them, and that the permission
given to the Roman Catholics to obey her, extended only to such Obedience as
does not oppugn the Catholic Religion, which the assisting Her against Tyrone
does. And this Declaration is dated the seventh of March. 1602.

And it could be nothing less than such an extraordinary encouragement, that
could render the Irish so audacious as they were upon the Queen's Death; Fowl.
p 495.
in Limrick they seized the Churches, and set up Mass in them; the same they
did at Waterford, in the Cathedral, and at the Sessions House they pulled down
the Seats of Justice; in Cork they refused to proclaim the King, and by Force
opposed the Commissioners; they went in a solemn Procession, took the Sacrament
to spend their Lives in defense of the Roman Catholic Religion; wrote to
several Cities to assist them, seized upon the King's stores, and assaulted his
Forces, alleging that he could not be lawful King, because he was not
appointed by the Pope.

And for their farther satisfaction the University of Salamanca, Fowl. p. 494.
Hist. of the Irish Remon. Pref. p. 11.
and the Divines of Valedolid did the same.

About this time the Jesuits labored to get the Sentence of their Banishment
out of France reversed, the Pope interposing his Mediation in their Favors,
upon which the Parliament of Paris attempted to dissuade the King from
consenting to it by a long See it at large in Hist. Jesuit. p. 160. Pro regula
indubitata habent quod ille excommunicandorum Regum potestatem habeat, quod Rex
excommunicatus nihil sit aliud quam Tyrannus, cui Populus rebellare possit; --
quod omnes Regnicolae qui minimum in Ecclesia ordinem habeant, si quodcunque
crimen committant, illud pro laesae Majestatis crimine haberi non possit,
propterea quod Regum subditi non sint, nec ad eorum jurisdictionem pertineant.
Oration; alleging, That it was their avowed Doctrine, That the Pope has a
Power of Excommunicating Kings; that a King so Excommunicated by his Holiness,
is no other than a Tyrant, whom the People may oppose; that Clergymen are
exempt from the Prince's Power, are none of his Subjects, and cannot be
punished by him for any Crimes: And having enumerated several of their
Treasons, they affirm, Oportet igitur ut illi qui tenent, and in regno vestro
manner volunt, eas public in suis Collegiis abjurent.
That it is absolutely necessary for them to renounce these Doctrines, or else
France cannot with safety admit them to return.

But though they were very desirous of Admission, they would not renounce those
Positions for it; however by importunity, and the solicitation of the Pope, and
others, they were at length received, but upon Conditions, Hist. Jes. p. 494.
Ne ulla Collegiae -- sine expressa Regis permissione instituant. -- Vt semper
aliquem habeant, natione Gallum, qui Regi a Sacris concionibus esset, and de
omnibus negotiis rationem totius Societatis nomine ipsi reddere possit.
Two of which were, That they should build no Colleges without express
Permission from the King; and that one of their number should be always near
the King, to be accountable for the Actions of the Society.

Thus were they admitted, but marks of Distrust set upon them; though they
have, by their Address, turned the latter of these Conditions, which was at
first designed for their Disgrace, into a mark of Honor, the King's Confessor
being ever since a Jesuit.

Though the Gunpowder Plot was not ripe for Execution till two years after,
Account of the Proceed. p. 164.
yet they were consulting about it at this time; when after a long complaint of
their Grievances, Mr. Percy told Mr. Catesby, that there was no way but to kill
the King, and he was resolved to do it: But that Gentleman desired him not to
be so rash, for he had laid a surer Design, which would certainly effect it,
without any danger to themselves; and then imparted to him the Contrivance of
blowing up the King and Parliament.

Which Design in May, Hist. of the Gunpowder Plot. p. 5.
the following year, Acct. of the Proceedings, p. 67.
Catesby justifying the Action by the Breves which the Pope had sent to exclude
King James; it being as lawful to cast him out as to oppose his Entrance; and
Bates, another of the Conspiratours, was assured by the Jesuit Greenwell, that
the Cause and Action were good, and therefore it was his Duty to conceal it.

Upon the approaching of the Parliament they began to work, Ibid.
endeavoring to make a Mine under the Parliament House; but soon after Percy
hired a Cellar, in which they stowed the Gunpowder, with Billets heaped upon
it, to hide it in case of search.

The May before the Plot was to be executed there was an Insurrection of the
Romanists in Wales, Fowl. Hist. p. 513.
but it was soon suppressed; An Account of the Proceed. p. 168.
when about a week before the Parliament was to sit, the Design was discovered,
and so prevented; upon which the Conspiratours flew into Ib. p. 58. 59. Hist.
of the Gunpowder Treason. p. 17. Wilson's Hist. of K. J. p. 31.
Rebellion, but were all either killed or taken by the Sheriff of Worcestershire

The Account of the Proceed. p. 6.
King in his Speech to the Parliament soon after, told them that Faux confessed
that they had no other cause moving them to the Design, but merely and only
Religion; which was acknowledged by Sir Everard Digby at his Trial, to be the
chief Motive which enduced him to make one among them, and which he resolved to
hazard his Life, See his Papers at the end of the Account, p. 241, etc.
his Estate, and all, to introduce; protesting, that if he had thought there
had been the least sin in the Plot, he would not have been of it for all the
World; and the Reason why he kept it secret, was because those who were best
able to judge of the Lawfulness of it, had been acquainted with it, and given
way unto it; and therefore afterward he calls it the best Cause.

The Persons, Account of the Proceedings, p. 105, 172.
upon whose Authority he so much relied, were the Jesuits, who asserted the
holiness of the Action; for Garnet, their Superior, had affirmed that it was
lawful, and Father Hammond absolved them all after the Discovery, when they
were in open Rebellion; and Greenwell, the Jesuit, rode about the Country to
excite as many as he could to join with them; nay, Causab. Ep. ad Front.
Ducaeum, p. 99. Land. 1611. 4to.
Garnet confessed that Catesby in his name did satisfy the rest of the
Lawfulness of the Fact. Account of the Proceed. p. 175.
Parsons had kept a Correspondency with that Jesuit to promote it, and at the
same time (not willing to discover it to them, and yet desirous of their
Prayers,) Fow. p. 509.
ordered the Students of his College at Rome to pray for the Intention of their
Father Rectour: And after the Discovery, Account of the Proceed. p. 172.
Father Hall, encouraged some of the Traitors, who began to doubt that the
Action was unlawful, seeing God had defeated it in so providential a manner,
telling them, that we must not judge of the Cause by the Event; that this was
no more than what happened to the Eleven Tribes when they went up at first to
fight against Benjamin, and that the Christians were often defeated by the
Turks; nay, so highly was it approved by that Order, that, not to mention here
the Honors done to the Conspiratours, since their Deaths, several Jesuits
gloried in, and bragged of it; for a little before the Discovery, Robins. Anat.
of the English Nunnery at Lisbon, p. 8. Land. 1630. 4to.
Father Flood caused the Jesuits at Lisbon to spend a great deal of Money in
Powder, on a Festival day, to try the force of it, and persuaded one John How,
a Merchant, and other Catholics, to go over into England, and expect their
Redemption there: Fowl. p. 510.
And Father Thompson was wont afterward to boast to his Scholars at Rome, how
often his Shirt was wetted with digging under the Parliament House.

And that the Pope himself was concerned in the Design is more than probable,
Fowlis, p. 509.
for it is confessed by a Jesuit that there were three Bulls granted by him,
which should have been published if the Conspiracy had succeeded; In his Papers
ubi supr. p. 250.
and Sir Everard Digby has left it under his hand, that it was not the Pope's
mind that any Stirs should be hindered which were undertaken for the Catholic
Cause.

The Pope's carriage after the Discovery is another shrewd Argument that he was
privy to the Plot, for he not only made no Declaration either by Word or
Writing in abhorrence of it, but when Copley's Reasons, p. 22.
Greenway, one of the Conspirators, escaped to Rome, he advanced him to the
Dignity of Penitentiary, and Gerard, Vindication of the History of Gunp. Tr. p.
74.
another, was a Confessor at St. Peter's in the same City.

This execrable Conspiracy appeared so horrid and unworthy, not only of
religious Men, but contrary to humane Nature, that Fowl. p. 509.
sixteen of the Students under the Jesuits at Rome, forsook the College, and
some of them renounced the Roman Church; and Copley's Reas. p. 21.
Mr. Copley, who had been a Priest some years, (as appears by his Reasons, one
of sound Learning and judgment,) assures us, that it was one of the Causes of
his Conversion.

Yet were there many found among the Romanists who justified the Design, Ib. p.
23.
hardly any condemning it: Thus the same Gentleman professes, that though some
termed it an inconsiderate Act, yet he could never meet with any one Jesuit
who blamed it. The K. James Premon p 291. of his works.
Conspiratours justified themselves, and even at their deaths would acknowledge
no fault: And when Account of Proceedings, p. 126.
Faux and Winter were admitted to discourse together in the Tower, they
affirmed, they were sorry that no body set forth a Defense or Apology for the
Action; but yet they would maintain the Cause at their Deaths; nay there was
one who had the hardiness to attempt See Key for Cathol. p. 434.
to justify the Design from the imputation of Cruelty, because both Seeds and
Root of an evil Herb must be destroyed; And when some of the Plotters escaped
to Callis, Hist. of the Gunpowder Treas. p. 29.
the Governor assured them of the King's Favor, and that though they lost
their Country they should be received there; they replied, That the loss of
their Country was the least part of their Grief; but their sorrow was that they
could not bring so brave a Design to perfection.

And notwithstanding Garnet was so deep in the Conspiracy, yet Copley's
Reasons, p. 22.
Mr. Wilson placed him among the Martyrs, in his English Martyrology; and it is
affirmed by Robins. Anat. p. 3.
one who lived among them, that he and Campion are beatified by the Pope, which
is the next degree to Canonization, and that every one of them is painted in
the Jesuits Churches, with the Title of Blessed Father; Primarius quidem Baro
Scotus, idemque spectatissimae in Religione constantiae, cum Romam venisset, in
Templo illio Jesuitarum, inter alios sodalitatis illius Martyrs, Henrici
Garnetti effigiem vidit. Bernard. Giral. Patavi. pro Repub. Ven. Apolog. p. 107.
and we are assured that Garnet's Picture was set up in their Church at Rome,
among their Martyrs, several years after; and St. Amour's Journal. p. 58. Land.
1664. Fol. -- Pater Henricus Garnettus Anglus, Londini pro Fide Catholica
suspensus, and sectus. 3. Maii. 1606.
St. Amor, a Doctor of Sorbon, found his Pictures commonly sold at Rome, in
the year 1651. with this Inscription, Father Henry Garnet, hanged and quartered
at London, for the Catholic Faith; by which they show themselves either
Approvers of the Design, to that degree as to count it a point of their Faith,
or else they must appear Deceivers of the People, and Slanderers of the English
Nation, in affirming, that he dyed for his Religion, when he justly suffered
for the most hellish Conspiracy that was ever laid; yet Delrio, and Gordon, two
Jesuits, went farther; the first in Prosecution of his Determination in the
point which we mentioned before, Fowl. p. 520.
compares him to Dionysius, the Areopagite; the latter placing him in Heaven,
desires him to intercede there for the conversion of England, and it was once
publicly prayed in Louvain, O holy Henry! Intercede for us.

But they had designs elsewhere at the same time that this their holy Martyr
was promoting their Cause in England; King Henry of France his Life was so
burdensome to the Jesuits, that they were impatient, so that Father Coton,
the King's Confessor, or rather Hostage for his Society, Vindic. of the
Sincer. of the Prot. Relig. p. 132. out of Thuanus ad an. 1604.
to be satisfied in the point, wrote down several questions which he had
propounded to a Maid said to be possessed, one of which was how long the King
should live; which is a capital Crime in itself; Tertul. Apol. c. 35. Cui autem
opus est scrutari super Caesaris salute, nisi a quo adversus illum aliquid
cogitatur, aut post illam speratur and sustinetur. --
For (as Tertullian long since argued) who has any business to make such an
Enquiry, except he has designs against his Prince, or has some hopes of
advancement by his death.

And as busy was the Pope Paul the Fifth for the advancement of the Roman
Cause, he fell out with the Duke of Fowl. p. 455.
Savoy this Year, for presenting an Abbey to Cardinal Pio; and to show his
Authority over Princes and States, (which is a kind of deposing them, and clear
Evidence of Popish Principles,) when the Commonwealth of Luca made an Edict
against the Protestants, though he liked the thing, yet he pretended they had
no power in those matters, Idem. p. 456.
and therefore commanded them to raze the Edict out of their Records, and he
would publish one for the same purpose by his own Authority; and when the State
of Genoa prohibited some seditious Meetings of Ecclesiastics, he threatened
them with Excommunication, and forced them to recall their Order.

But the Venetians would not be frighted by his Thunders, Fowl. Hist. 456, etc.
Histor. Jes. p. 306.
though he threatened them with the same Censure, if they did not speedily
revoke their Decrees concerning the building of Churches, and giving Lands to
the Church, (which they had prohibited any to do without the Senate's Order,)
and required them to deliver two Clergymen, whom they had imprisoned for many
horrid Crimes; concluding his Breve with an Assertion of his Power to deprive
Kings, and that he had Legions of Angels for this Assistance.

But when the Senate would not gratify him in thus yielding their Rights to an
Usurper, the Pope told their Ambassador, Fowl. p 458.
that the Exemption of Clergymen from the Jurisdiction of the Magistrate was
Jure divino, that his Cause was the Cause of God, and he would be obeyed; and
therefore in a Consistory of one and forty Cardinals he published a Bull of
Excommunication against that State, wherein he declares, Authoritate
omnipotentis Dei, ac B. Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus, ac nostra, nisi Dux
and Senatus intra viginti quatuor dies a die publicationis praesentium --
computandos praedicta Decreta omnia, etc. revocaverint etc -- xcommunicamus,
and excommunicatos nunciamus and declaramus. Et si dicti Dux and Senatus per
tres dies post lapsum dictorum viginti quatuor dierum, excommunicationis
sententiam animo sustinuerint indurato, -- universum temporale Dominium dict.
Reip. ecclesiastico Interdicto supponimus, -- iliasque etiam Poenos contra
ispos -- juxta sacrorum Canonum dispositionem -- leclarandi faecultatem
reservamus, -- Dat. Apr. 18. Anno 1606.
That by the Authority of Almighty God, and the Apostles Peter and Paul, the
Duke and Senate of Venice, if within four and twenty days after the publication
of the Bull they do not revoke their Decrees, are excommunicated; and if they
continue obstinate three days more, he lays an Interdict upon the whole State,
forbidding the Clergy to perform Divine Offices in any part of their Dominions,
and threatens farther Punishments, according to the sacred Canons.

This Bull he expected would gain his point, by causing the Ecclesiastics to
withdraw themselves, and that the People, seeing themselves deprived of
Church-Offices, would run into Sedition; but the Event answered not his
Expectation, for the People joined unanimously with the Senate; but the
Jesuits, and others, refused to celebrate Mass, upon which they were banished
the Dominions of Venice; after Fowlis Hist. p. 4 3, etc.
which they did all they could to stir up the Common People: But not succeeding
in this, the Pope published a Jubilee, granting Indulgence to all but those of
Interdicted places; this he expected would make the People murmur, but he was
deceived in that point too; so that he declared in a full Consistory that he
would have War with the State of Venice, and called the Spaniards to his aid;
but finding the Senate resolute in Defense of their Rights, he was glad to
recall his Bull, and make a Peace with them, and though he earnestly pressed
for the Restoration of the Jesuits, yet he could not obtain it.

About this time the Oath of Allegiance being established by Law, Ib p. 526,
527.
the Romanists sent to Rome to know what they should do in this Case, where it
was consulted by seven or eight of their learnedest Divines, who all agreed,
that the Pope's Power of chastizing Princes is a Point of Faith, and
consequently cannot be denied without denying of the Faith; and the Pope told
Father Parsons, and Fitzherbert, he could not hold those for Catholics who
took the Oath; which he soon after declared by his Breve, addressed to the
Romanists of England, September. 22. 1606. wherein he affirms, Non potestis
absque evidentissima gravissimaque divini honoris injuria obligare vos
juramento, -- cum multa contineat quae fidei and saluti aperte aversantur.
That they cannot, without most evident and grievous wronging of God's Honor,
bind themselves by the Oath, seeing it contains many things contrary to Faith
and Salvation.

But when some Romanists who had taken it began to question the Breve, Aug. 23.
1607.
another to undeceive them, wherein he blames them for entertaining such
thoughts, and assures them, Decrevimus vobis significare Literas illas post
longam and gravem de omnibus quae in illis continentur deliberationem ^dhibitam
fuisse scriptas; and ob id teneri-vos-illas omnino observare,
omni-interpretatione secus suadente rejecta.
That it was written upon mature deliberation, and therefore they are bound
fully to observe it, rejecting all interpretation to the contrary; upon which
several who were willing before refused it, some of whom were imprisoned.

It is an hard thing for men accustomed to do evil to learn to do well, which
Truth Tyr-Oen is a great Example of, for notwithstanding after his frequent
Rebellions he was pardoned by King James, Fowlis's Hist. p. 495.
and received into favor, yet returning into Ireland he began new
Contrivances, and fearing he was discovered, fled this year into Flanders,
which caused the King to publish a severe Proclamation against him; from thence
he went to Rome, where he was maintained at the Pope's charge this his death.

This same Year Parsons published his Treatise tending to Mitigation, Treatise
of Mitigation, p. 176.
wherein he labors to take off the imputation of rebellious Principles from
the Romanists, and yet he tells us in the same Book, That this is Catholic
Doctrine, that in public Perils of the Church, and Commonwealth, Christ our
Savior has not left us wholly remediless, but besides the natural Right which
each Kingdom has to defend themselves, in certain cases, he left also supreme
Power in his High Priest, and immediate Substitute, to direct and moderate that
Power, and to add also of his own when extraordinary Need requires, though
with great deliberation. Where we have a plain justification of the Pope and
People's Power to depose and resist their Princes, a most excellent Argument to
clear the Papists of Disloyalty.

Though we find no Plots discovered this year in England, Hist. Jesuit. p. 332.
yet in Transylvania the Jesuits were employed in poisoning Stephen Potscay
the Prince: Hist. Jes. p. 261.
And in France Father Cotton recommended a Spaniard to the King, Vindicat. of
Prot. Relig. p. 1133.
who had not been in the Court many hours, when the King had Intelligence of
his coming from Barcellona purposely to poison him; upon this he sent for
Father Coton, who desired his Majesty not to give any Credit to the advice; and
when the King ordered him to produce the Spaniard, he pretended to seek him,
but at his return told his Majesty that he was escaped, and he could not find
him.

This year the Pope sent another Breve into England, Fowl. p. 529* 530, 531.
directed to the Archpriest, Si intra tempus hoc facere distulerint, eos
facultitibus and privilegiis omnibus -- prives.
and commanding him to deprive all Priests of their Faculties who took it,
except they immediately renounced it; prohibiting likewise the resort of any to
the Protestant Churches.

At the same time Divines of Italy, Germany, and France, wrote against it, all
grounding their Exceptions upon this, that it takes away the Pope's Power of
Deposing Kings.

So rebellious had the Writings and Practices of the Jesuits been, Histor.
Jesuit. p. 297.
that the Bohemians petitioned the Emperor against them; Valesian Magistrates
refused to admit them, Idem, p. 226, 227, 228.
because wherever they came they disturbed the public Peace, and were under
such a tie of blind Obedience, Anno
that if their Superior enjoined them a treasonable Attempt they must obey.

They had made it their Business, Transylvania, Hist. Jesuit. p. 332, 333.
Vindic. of the Sincer. of the Plot. Relig* p. 135.
but when all their Importunity could not prevail, they engaged several of the
Nobility in a Design against the Prince's Life, which proceeded so far that one
of the Conspiratours attempted to run him through, but was prevented, and
several of his Companions taken, the rest escaped.

And now King Henry the Great of France having amassed a very considerable
Treasure, prepared for some great Design, which the Romanists grew so jealous
of, that they secretly caused several to subscribe their Obedience to the Pope,
Fow. p 47^.
in a Book which was kept on purpose; it was half written through, and some
names subscribed in blood; several Designs were formed against his Life, Ib. p.
470, etc.
four Piedmontiers, a Lorrainer, and three others, conspired his Death; advice
was given of several other Plots from many other places, and Reports were
spread in foreign parts that he was killed: Father Hardy, in his Sermon at St.
Severius in Paris, reflecting upon the King's Treasure, said, That Kings heaped
up Treasures to make themselves feared, Hist. Jesuit. p. 261. Hic quidem mos
est Regum, ut ingentes Thesauros ad sui amplitudinem and aliorum terrorem
colligant, at rusticulum unum ad Regem supprimendum sufficere.
but there needed but a blow to kill a King. All these were but Forerunners of
that horrid Murder which was committed in a few Weeks after by Ravilliac, once
a Monk, who stabbed him to the Heart with a poisoned Knife, Histor. Jesuit. p.
260, 261. Fowlis's Hist. p. 471, 472.
as he was going to the Arsenal in his Coach, so that he expired in an instant;
upon his Examination he confessed that he resolved to murder the King, who he
supposed had a Design to make War upon the Pope, because making War against his
Holiness is the same as to make War against God, seeing the Pope was God, and
God was the Pope; and that he had revealed his Design to the Jesuit d' Aubigny
in Confession, and showed him the Knife, and that he had heard several of that
Order maintain the Lawfulness of it in their Sermons.

No sooner was the King dead, Histor. Jesuit. p. 219, etc.
which acquest the Parliament took into consideration, and required that they
should first declare, That it is unlawful for any Person to conspire the death
of the King; that no Ecclesiastic has any Power over the Temporal Rights of
Princes; and that all are to render the same Obedience to their Governors,
which Christ gave to Caesar. These Positions were proposed to them to
subscribe, but they refused to do it without leave from their General; upon
which they were prohibited by a Decree of Parliament to teach, and threatened
with a farther Deprivation if they would not obey.

The Romanists had tried all manner of ways to deprive King James of his Life
or Crown, Fowl. p. 348.
they had the Impudence to publish a Book this year, affirming, that His
Majejesty was a counterfeit, and not the Son of Queen Mary of Scotland.

The Year following Cardinal Perron, Bourbon's Party against King Henry the
Fourth, in the Assembly of Estates in France, asserted not only that Subjects
may be absolved from their Allegiance, and Princes deposed in case of Heresy,
See his Speech at large in his Diverses Oeuvres, Paris, 1633. fol.
but that they who hold the contrary are Schismatics and Heretics. This
Speech was made to divert the Estates from imposing an Oath like our Oath of
Allegiance; which Design so disturbed the Fow. p. 52.
Pope, that he affirmed the Voters of it were Enemies to the common Good, and
mortal Adversaries to the Chair of Rome.

And about the same time Suarez printed his Book at Colen, His Defens. Fidei
Catholicae. -- See Brutum Fulmen, p. 205, etc.
wherein he teaches, that Kings may be put to Death by their own Subjects;
which Treatise came into the World with the Approbation of the Bishop of
Conimbria, of Silvis, and Lamego, and the University of Alcalum, with several
others.

In Scotland one Father Ogelby, a Jesuit, was taken, who being asked whether
the Pope be Judge in Spirituals over His Majesty, refused to answer, except the
question were put to him by the Pope's Authority; Frankl. Annal. p. 6, 7.
but affirmed that the Pope might excommunicate the King; at his Trial he
protested against the Judges, that he could not own them, for the K. had no
Authority but what was derivative from his Predecessors, who acknowledged the
Pope's jurisdiction; adding, If the King will be to me as they were to mine, he
shall be my King, otherwise I value him not: And as for that Question, Whether
the K. deposed by the Pope, may be lawfully killed, Doctors of the Church hold
the affirmative not improbably, and I will not say it is unlawful to save my
Life.

In France several of the Princes raised Commotions, Nani's History of Venice,
p. 33, 34.
which were appeased with conferring places of Trust and Honor upon the chief
among them, who were headed by the Prince of Conde; Fruits (as the Historian
observes) accustomed to be reaped in France, from that which in other places is
punished by the Executioner.

Not satisfied with their Honors, Ib. p. 58, 59.
and passed the Loire; but the Prince of Conde falling sick, Matters were
composed by the Endeavors of the English Ambassador, and some others.

In Savoy Conspiracies were formed against that Duke's Life, Nani's History of
Venice, p. 65, 99.
his Son,

The next Year the Jesuits were banished Bohemia, Moravia, Hist. Jesuit. p.
297, 299.
for coining Money, and sowing Dissentions between the Magistrates and People,
and a Plot was discovered at Nani, p. 121, 122.
Venice, against the Senators, whom the Conspiratours designed to murder, by
a sudden Insurrection, (assisted by the Marquess of Bedmar, Ambassador from
Spain, and the Duke of Ossuna, Viceroy of Naples,) and make an utter subversion
of the State; Consp. of the Span. agt. the State of Venice, p. 15, 16. Lon.
1675. 8vo.
this was carried on, in conjunction with the Spaniards, by those Citizens, and
others, who were the Pope's Partisans, and a number of Factious Persons,
discontented with the Actions of the Senate, who longed for a change, and would
stick at nothing to effect it. And in France the Nani p. 124.
Queen Mother being imprisoned, the Duke D' Espernon, with a strong Party,
rebelled in her Defense; but before the King's Army was come up against him, he
procured his Pardon, and the Liberty of the Queen.

Soon after this the Jesuits were driven out of Hist. Jesuit. p. 300, 301.
Hungary, Silesia, for their seditious Practices; and Nani, p. 151.
another Rebellion broke out in France, Id. p. 159.
In the Valteline the Revolt was universal, the Governors of Provinces, and
the Heads of Families, were all murdered, and under pretense of defending the
Roman Catholic Religion, all manner of outrages were committed, and a new form
of Government erected; these Broils continued some time, and the bitterness of
the Papists was such, that they would make no accommodation, if the Protestants
were tolerated there; Burnet's Trav. p. 81.
so that if a Protestant Bailiff be sent among them, he cannot publicly
exercise his Religion.

At this time the Match between Prince Charles and the Infanta was prosecuted,
Wilson's Hist. of Great Brit. p. 203.
the Pope urged very earnestly that they might be exempt from His Majesty's
jurisdiction, so very diligent he was in catching at any shadow which might
seem to favor the Exemption of the Clergy.

Three Years after this Sanctarellus his Book was printed at Rome, Coto,
Fowlis, p. 476.
and two other Jesuits, were required to answer it, Mister* Pre^* 60, 61.
yet no reply appeared; the former affirming before the Parliament, that though
he disapproved the Doctrine in France, Sen. Quid si essetis Romae? P. Coto.
Mutaeretur nobiscum coelo animus, sentiremus ut Romae.
yet he would assent to it if he were at Rome.

The Oath of Allegiance being vigorously pressed in England, See Baiting of the
Pope's Bull, in init. -- ad haereat lingua vestrae faucibus vestris, priusquam
authoritatem B. Petri ea jurisjurandi formula imminutam detis.
and let their Tongue rather cleave to the Roof of their Mouth then permit the
Authority of St. Peter, to be diminished by that Oath; and commanding them
strictly to observe the Breves of Pope Paul the Fifth; and Jesuits Reasons
unreasonable, p. 116.
Father Fisher justified Suarez, and the Doctrine of his Book, asking, what
could be found prejudicial in it to Princely Authority; and affirming that if
it contained any such thing it would not be permitted in Catholic Kindoms.

We have mentioned that the exemption of the Clergy was desired by the Pope in
the Treaty for the Spanish Match; and now his Emissaries in this Nation
affirmed that the King could have nothing to do with her Majesty's Chaplains,
Rushworth's Collect. part. 1. p. 427.
because he was an Heretic; and his Holiness threatened to declare those to be
Apostates who should seek their Establishment in the Queens Family from the
King.

But though these were plain Indications of what they desired, Nani's History
of Venice* p. 283.
but there was a Conspiracy detected at Genoa, which, if it had not been
prevented, would have ended in the Murder of the Nobility, and Alteration of
the Government.

And the next Year a Plot was detected in Mantua against the Life of the
Prince, Idem. p. 3* 2.
who would have betrayed Viadana to the Governor of Millan.

In Ireland the Papists assaulted the Archbishop of Dublin, Foxes and
Firebrarnds, pt. 2. p. 72, 73.
wounded several of his Followers, and forced him to fly for his Life;
following him in a tumultuous manner along the streets; and that they had
several seditious Designs in hand at the same time, Hunting of the Romans Fox, p.
216, 217.
Mac-Enerry, a Dominican, who for this very reason left the Church of Rome,
because of her rebellious Doctrines, and the many Conspiracies he had taken an
Oath of Secrecy to conceal, which he observed inviolably; and though he
informed the Bishop of Limrick, that there were many Plots then contriving
against his Majesty's Government, yet for his Oaths sake he would not name any
Persons who were concerned in them.

The Duke of Orleance had retired in disgust from Court some years since,
Nani's History of Venice, p. 310, etc.
and was received by the Duke of Lorrain; Brussells, from whence, aided by the
Spaniards, Anno
he marched at the head of an Army into France, but was defeated, and several
of his Adherents executed.

While France was thus almost continually pestered with Rebellions, Ireland,;
Bp. Bed^ll.
they had erected Friaries, in the Country instead of those which were
dissolved in the Dublin; and even in that City they had a College of Students,
Long's History of Plots. p. 100.
whereof Father Paul Harris was Dean, and at a Synodical meeting of their
Clergy, they decreed, that it was not lawful to take the Oath of Allegiance.

If it were not that all the Designs of that Party from the Year 1630. to 1640.
Ireland, and the execrable Civil Wars of England, I should wonder how they came
to be so still, and that no more Conspiracies were discovered, besides that
great one which Andreas ab Habernsfield was informed of in Holland, and of
which he sent the King an Account, under the hand of the Discoverer, who
affirms, that one Maxfield was sent into Scotland, See whole Account published
under this Title, The Designs of the Papists, Land. 1678. 4to.
to stir up a Rebellion there, and that the King was to be poisoned; for which
end they kept a strong Poison in an Indian Nut, which he had often seen: They
had likewise another Design, if they could prevail upon the Scots, or
discontented English, to rebel, that thereby the King should be straitened,
and forced to depend on the Papists for assistance, and then they would make
their own Terms, and secure to themselves a public Liberty, which if he
refused to consent to, they would not only desert him, but dispatch him with
the Indian Nut, which they reserved on purpose.

He gives also an Account of the Persons concerned in the Plot, among whom were
several Ladies of Quality, for whose Encouragement the Pope sent a Breve to Sir
Toby Mathews, one of the principal Conspiratours, See it in Frankland's Annals,
p. 865, 866.
wherein he exhorts him, and the Women engaged with him, to proceed with
diligence in the Design; assuring them, That he did not despair to see the
Authority of the Holy See (which was subverted in England by a Woman) again
restored in a very little time, Non diffidimus, -- quia sicut occasion unius
Foeminae Authoritas Sedis Apostolicae in Regno Angliae suppressa fuit, sic nunc
per tot Heroicas Foeminas, -- brevi modo restituenda sit. --
by the Endeavors of those Heroic Ladies.

This Breve is an unanswerable Evidence that the succeeding Troubles derived
their original from the insatiate Lust of Rule which possessed the Pope,

But he appeared more publicly an Abbettor of the Irish Massacre and
Rebellion, See the History of the Irish Rebellion, fol.
wherein so many thousand Protestants were murdered in cold blood, sending his
Nuncio to assist, and affording them all the aid that he was able to give; a
Design laid with so much secrecy, and executed with so much cruelty, that
nothing but the very Spirit of Popery could be barbarous enough to engage in
it; in prosecution of which they did all they could totally to beat the English
out of the Kingdom.

The same year the Marquess de Villa Real, the Duke de Camina, Nani's Hist. p.
493.
and the Marquess d' Armamar, who by the Instigation of the Archbishop of
Braga, had undertaken to kill the King of Portugal, Father to Her Majesty the
Queen Dowager of England, and to fire the Ships and the City in several places,
that they might have the better opportunity to promote the Interest of the
Spaniards, were put to death.

Nor did France yet enjoy any more quiet, where the Count de Soissons, Nani's
Hist. p. 495, etc.
and the Duke of Guise, and others, raised a Rebellion, and routed the King's
Army, but the Count being slain with his own Pistol, the Confederacy was soon
broken.

Yet the very next Year the Duke of Orleance combined with the Spaniards, Id.
p. 535.


The Pope had involved Ireland in Blood the former year, and in this the Wars
began in England, where several Long's Hist. of Plots, p. 64.
Priests were found among the dead at Edghill Battle; but the Endeavors of his
Holiness to increase those miserable Confusions, were managed with all
imaginable Secrecy, while the Irish were openly commended by him, and Nos
divinam Clementiam indesinenter orantes, ut adversariorum conatus in nihilum
redigat, etc. See it at large in the Append. to the Hist. of the Irish Rebel.
p. 59.
assured of his Prayers for their success in his Breve to Owen O Neal, dated
October. 8. 1642. and so willing was he to lay hold on all occasions for the
exercising his Deposing Power, that because the Nani's Hist. p. 515.
Prince of Parma offended him, he declared him to have incurred the greater
Excommunication, and deprived him of all his Dominions and Dignities.

But not content with sending the forementioned Breve to O Neal, his Holiness
granted a Bull of plenary Indulgence, Hist. of the Irish Remon. Pres. p.
May 25. 1643. to all the Catholics in Ireland, who joined in the Rebellion;
which was prosecuted as fiercely as the Pope could desire, and a defense of it
set forth by an Disputatio Apolog. de jure Reg. Hibern. pro Cath. Hibern.
advers. Heret. Anglos, p 65. cited by Walsh in the History of the Irish
Remonstrance, p. 736, 737. in these words: Ordines Regni optimo jure poterant
ac debebant omni dominio Hiberniae privare tales Reges, postquam facti sunt
Haeretici atque Tyranni -- Hoc enim jus and potestas in omni Regno and
Republica est. -- Jam si consensui Regni in hac re accederet Authoritas
Apostolica, quis nisi Haereticus, vel Stultus audebit negare quod hic
affirmamus, and Doctores Theologi, and Juris utriusque periti passim docent,
rations probant, exempla suadent.
Irish Jesuit in Portugal, (though the Title Page mentions Franckfort,) who
asserts, That the English Kings have no Title or Right to Ireland; that if they
had, yet it is the Duty of the Irish to deprive them of their Rights, seeing
they are declared Heretics,

And so far did the Pope approve of the Contents of this Book, that when, soon
after its publication, the Irish had submitted to the King, and promised to
assist him in his Wars, Ld. Clarendon against Cressy, p. 246.
His Holiness by his Nuncio took upon him to be their General, absolved them
from their Oaths, and imprisoned and threatened the Lives of those who had
promoted the peace, and desired to return to the King's Subjection, which
renewed the Rebellion again, and brought infinite Miseries on that bigoted
Nation.

At the same time above Bp. Bramhall's Letters to A. P. Usher, ap. Usher's Life
and Letters, p 611.
an hundred of the Romish Clergy were sent into England by Order from Rome, who
the better to promote the Divisions there, were instructed in several Trades,
both handicraft and others; these, upon their arrival, were ordered to disperse
themselves, and give Intelligence every month to their Superiors abroad;
accordingly they listed themselves in the Parliament Army, and kept a constant
correspondence with their Brethren,

The next year many of these Missioners were in consultation with those in the
King's Army, Id. p. 612.
to whom they showed their Bulls, and Licenses, for taking part with the
Parliament about the best methods to advance their Cause; Paris, to consult the
Faculty of Sorbonne about it, who returned this Answer, That it is lawful for
Roman Catholics to work Changes in Governments for the Mother Church's
advancement, and chiefly in an Heretical Kingdom, and so they might lawfully
make away the King; Vindic. of the sincerity of the Prot. Relig. p. 59.
which Sentence was confirmed to the same Persons by the Pope, and his Council,
upon their going to Rome to have his Holiness's Resolution in the Point.

And now those of them who had before followed the King after his flight from
Oxford, Mutatus Polemo. p. 4, 5.
agreed to desert the Royal Cause; and, as one of them inform us, to ingratiate
themselves with the Enemy, by acting some notorious piece of Treachery; and
Father Carr, who went by the name of Quartermaster Laurence, declared, that he
could with a safer Conscience join with and fight for the Roundheads than the
Cavaliers; in prosecution of which Resolve they dispersed themselves into all
the Garrisons of the King's Party, Id. p. 6. 18. 26. 32.
to endeavor the Revolt of the Soldiers to the Parliament; in which they
succeeded as they had projected, my Author being one of those who seduced the
Wallingford Horse from their Obedience; and in Scotland the Lord Sinclare, a
pretended Presbyterian, but a real Papist, commanded a Regiment of his own
Religion, and it being a Maxim received among them, That the surest way to
promote the Catholic Cause was to weaken the Royal Party, and advance the
other, they bent all their Endeavors to expedite and accelerate the King's
Death; Vindic. of the sincer. of the Prot. Relig. p. 65.
and His Majesty having in the Treaty of the Isle of Wight consented to pass
five strict Bills against Popery, the Jesuits in France, at a general meeting
there, presently resolved to take off his Head; and this His Majesty had notice
of by an Express from thence, but two days before his removal from the Isle of
Wight.

This Year Mr. Cressey published the Reasons of his leaving the Church of
England, Cressy 's Exomolog. p. 72. Paris, 1647. 8vo.
and turning Romanist, wherein obviating the Objection so often made against
the Romanists about their rebellious Principles and Practices, he sets down a
Declaration, which he affirms that they were all ready to subscribe, and which
differs but little from our Oath of Allegiance: But here we may see what Credit
can be given to the representations of their Doctrines, which their Writers
study to make as favorable as possible: For though Mr. Cressy thought himself
a good Representer in this point, yet his Superiors were of another mind; and
therefore that Edition was soon bought up, and in the next the Profession of
Obedience quite left out; Ld. Clarendon against Cressey. p. 76, 77.
and that this was not an omission of the Printer, but the action of his
Superiors, we are assured by an honorable Person from Mr. Cressy's own mouth,
and we shall find in a little time, that the same form has been condembed by
the Pope himself.

But the ensuing year, Europe; in France the Parisians rose in Arms, Priorato's
Hist. of France, p. 11, etc. Land. 1676. fol.
shot at the Lord Chancellor Sequier, and wounded his Daughter, barricadoed
the Streets, and forced the King to set the Counselor Broussell, and other
factious Persons, at Liberty.

And at the Treaty at Osnebrugh, when by several Articles of the Peace the
possession of Church Lands were assured to the Protestant Princes; the Pope
displeased with it, took upon him to make void the Peace by a Declaratio SS.
Dom. nostri Innoc. divina Providentia Papae 10. nullitatis articulorum nuperae
pacis Germaniae, Religioni Catholicae, Sedi Apostolicae, and quomodo libet
praejudicialium, -- See it in Hoornbeck Disputat. ad Bull. Inn. 10.
special Bull, declaring all those Articles unjust, and of no Force, and
commanding the Princes concerned to observe his Bull, in which he renews his
Claim to the superiority over Princes, and particularly the Emperor, not only
by the Bull in general, but by asserting, Numerus septem Electorum Imperii --
Apostolica Authoritate praefinitus. --
that the Electours of the Empire were established by the Authority of the
Bishop of Rome.

But to come to their Contrivances in England; where, when several Papists had
subscribed to some Propositions, Hist of the Irish Remon. p. 523, 524.
importing the unlawfulness of murdering Princes, and breaking Faith with
Heretics; and that the Pope has no power to absolve Subjects from their
Allegiance; the very same with the Declaration published the year before by Mr.
Cressy, this Action was condemned at Rome, where by a Congregation it was
decreed unlawful.

And now in prosecution of the Pope and Sorbon's Sentence the last year, that
excellent Prince, King Charles the Martyr, was by their contrivances brought to
the Block; which though they were willing to disown now, yet at that time they
were very sollicitous to let the World know that they were the promoters of it;
Vindic. of the Sincer. of the Prot. Relig. p. 66, 67.
the Friars of Dunkirk expressed great resentment that the Jesuits would
engross to themselves the Glory of that Work, whereas they had labored as
diligently and succesfully as any, and in several other places the Friars were
very jealous, lest that Order should rob them of their part of the Honor: And
the Benedictines were not a little careful to secure their Land in England
from the Jesuits, for they thought their return sure upon the King's Death; so
that the Nuns contended vigorously among themselves who should be Abbesses in
their own Country.

At the time of His Majesty's Execution Mr. Henry Spotswood, Foxes and
Firebrands, part 2. p. 86.
riding casually that way, saw a Priest on Horseback in the Habit of a Trouper,
with whom he was well acquainted, flourishing his Sword over his Head in
triumph as others did; he told Mr. Spotswood, that there were at least forty
Priests and Jesuits present in the same equipage, among whom was Preston, who
afterward commanded a Troup of Horse under Cromwell.

Father Sibthorp, in a Letter to Father Metcalfe, owns that the Jesuits were
contrivers of this murder, Vindication of the Prot. Rel. p. 65.
and that Sarabras was present, rejoicing at it; one of the Priests flourishing
his Sword, cried, Now our greatest Enemy is cut off.

When the News of this Tragedy came to Roan, they affirmed, Id. p. 58*, 66.
that they had often warned his Majesty, that if he did not establish the
Romish Religion in England, they should be forced to take such courses as would
tend to his Destruction; and now they had kept their words with him: And in
Paris a Lady having been perverted from the Reformed Church by a Jesuit, upon
hearing her Ghostly Father affirm, that now the Catholics were rid of their
greatest Enemy, by whose Death their Cause was much advanced, and therefore she
had no reason to lament, left that bloody and rebellious Church, and continues
a Protestant ever since.

But though, as Secretary Morris affirms, there are almost convincing
evidences, In his Letter to Dr. du Moulin, Aug. 9. 1673.
that the Papists Irreligion was chiefly guilty of the murder of that
excellent Prince; yet we are beholden to the guilty Consciences of those
Gentlemen, Idem. p. 64.
that the World has not been long since more fully satisfied, as to every
particular; for Dr. Du Moulin in the first Edition of his Book Ann. 1662. had
challenged them to call him to an Account for affirming, that the Rebellion was
raised and promoted, and the King murdered by the Arts of the Court of Rome;
the Book came to a fourth Edition, in all which he renewed the Challenge, and
in the last in these words: I have defied them now seventeen years to call me
in question before our Judges, Ib. p. 61, etc.
and so I do still; affirming that certain Evidence of what he asserted should
be produced whenever Authority shall require it.

I remember once a Jesuit attempted to prove the truth of the Nag's-Head
Ordination, because that Charge had been laid to our Church some years before
any offered to confute it, or to produce the Lambeth Record, which he affirmed
was an evident sign that the thing was true, or else having such means to
confute it they would not have been so long silent; what then may we think of
those Gentlemen who had so heavy a crime charged on them, and yet for near
twenty years together never called the Accuser to account? Id. p. 60.


The Doctor always refused to produce his Evidences, till required by
Authority; only he gives us this Account, That the Papers of Resolution in
favor of the Murder, when it was found to be generally detested, were by the
Pope's Order gathered up and burnt; but a Roman Catholic in Paris refused to
deliver one in his possession, but showed it to a Protestant Friend, and
related to him the whole carriage of the Negotiation. And I am sure if the
Protestants had been under such an Imputation, the Papists would make good use
of their silence to prove their Guilt.

But farther to show their aversion to the Royal party, no sooner had the
Rebels of Ireland, in consideration of the straits they were in, made a
cessation for some time with the Lord Inchequin, but the Nuncio excommunicated
all who observed it; See the Excommunication in the Appendix to the Hist. of
the Irish Rem. p. 34.
and upon the conclusion of a second Peace with the Duke of Ormond, His
Majesty's Lieutenant, the Assembly of the Bishops and Clergy at James-Town
renounced it, and as much as in them lay, restored the former confederacy anew;
Walsh's Letters in the Pref.
but of this we shall have a farther account in its due place.

In the mean while Reilly, Dublin, Hist of the Irish Remon. p. 609.
betrayed the Royal Camp of Rathmines to Coll. Jones, Governor of Dublin for
the Parliament, which service he afterward pleaded for himself to the safety
of his Life, which was in danger for his cruel Actions in the Rebellion, and he
well deserved more than bare safety from those men, that defeat being the total
ruin of His Majesty's Affairs in Ireland.

At the same time the Rebels in France increased both in Insolence and Power
daily, Priorate's Hist. of France, p. 49, etc.
the Coadjutour of Paris going to St. Germains, in obedience to the Queens
Commands, was tumultuously stopped by the People, who hindered the Nobility from
following the King, and broke their Coaches; the Parliament forbad all places
to receive any Garrisons from the King, listed men, and resolved upon a War; the
Duke D'Elbease, Duke of Lonqueirlle, Prince Marsilliack, afterward D. of
Rochfecault, the Prince of Conty, and many other persons of the greatest
Quality joining with them. Soon after Normandy and Poictou declared for the
Parsians, who sent Deputies to call in the Spaniards to assist them; but these
Troubles being in a little time appeased, new ones began in Provence, and
Guienne, the Parliaments of those Provinces, prosecuting the War with great
fury, declared they would have no pardon from the King; and one Gage, a Priest,
endeavored to persuade them to take the Sovereign Power on themselves, which
they declined; but to maintain the War they treated with the Spaniards for
Assistance, both of Men and Moneys.

This Year the Prince of Conde joined himself to the Troudeurs, Id. p. 117, etc.
but finding that they intended the advancement of Chasteau Neuf, his mortal
Enemy, he left them in disgust; however the Parisians made several
Insurrections; and upon the Imprisonment of that Prince an open Rebellion broke
out in Berry, whose Example was followed by Normandy, and Burgundy, to support
which the Spaniards agreed to contribute 2000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, besides
great Sums of Money; and soon after the Parliament of Bourdeaux declared for
the Rebels.

During these Transactions the Popish Bishops of Ireland met at James-Town, See
it at large, and the Duke's Answer to it, Hist. of the Irish Remonst. Ap. p. 65.
published a Declaration against all that should adhere to the D. of Ormond,
His Majesty's Lord Lieutenant in that Kingdom; upon which my Hist. of the Irish
Rebel. p. 261.
Author makes this remark, that if the Archbishops, etc. in Ireland will take
upon them to declare against the King's Authority where His Majesty has placed
it, they assume an Authority to themselves that no other Clergy ever pretended
to, and declare sufficiently to the King, how far they are from being Subjects,
or intend to pay him any Obedience longer than they are governed in such
manner, and by such Persons as they think fit to be pleased with.

But not satisfied with refusing Obedience to the King's Commissioner, Id. p.
276.
the Confederates agreed, that if compounding with the Parliament should be
best for the People they should do it: And presently after the Marquess of
Clauricard had at their request taken the Government upon him in his Majesty's
Name, it was proposed in their Assembly, that they might send to the Enemy to
treat with them upon surrendering all that was left into their hands.

Thus did they choose rather to submit to the Parliament, than obey the King,
for they were not forced to that Submission; the army of the Enemy having made
no progress at that time, neither had it been flusht with any new Success.

As forward was Father Bret to persuade the Gentlemen who had defended the
Castle of Jersey for the King, Vindic. of the Prot. Relig. p. 69.
and Kingly Government, by taking the Engagement; affirming, that they were not
to acknowledge any Supreme but the prevailing Power.

All this while the Rebellion in France increased, the Parisians took Arms,
Priorato's Hist. of France, p. 245, 285, 308, 333.
designing to seize the King; and the Prince of Conde fortified several places,
and confederated with the Spaniards, whom, under the Conduct of the Duke of
Nemours, he called into France to his Assistance, with which he maintained the
War all this Year, to whom the Duke of Orleance joined himself, and with all
his Interest increased the Party.

The next year Mr. Tho. White published his Book of the Grounds of Obedience
and Government, Lone's Hist. of Plots, p. 15, 16.
wherein he asserts, That if a Prince governs ill he becomes a Robber, and the
People may expel him, in which case they are not bound by any Promise made to
him; Vindic. of the Prot. Relig. p. 67, etc.
and that they have no Obligation to endeavor the Restoration of a Prince so
dispossessed of his Dominions, but rather to hinder it; nay, though he were
wrongfully driven out; and such a Prince is absolutely obliged to renounce all
Right and Claim to the Government; and if he does not, he is worse than an
Infidel. Thus after their Designs had effected the death of that good King, and
expulsion of his late and present Majesty, they contributed their Endeavors to
hinder their return, and debauch those who might attempt it; yet had some the
confidence to commend this Gentleman to his late Majesty, though the King knew
him too well to take any notice of him.

That they designed to hinder the Restoration of the King, Jesuits Reasons
unreasonable, p. 103, 104.
by an absolute compliance with the usurping Power, is affirmed by one of their
Communion, who tells them that they were refractory to the Queen's Desires at
Rome for His Majesty's Assistance, and that Colonel Hutchinson could discover
strange Secrets about their treating with Cromwell.

And it is certain that in Ireland there were several Precepts granted by the
Archbishop of Armagh, and others, to pray for the success of that Usurper's
Forces; Hist. of Irish Rebellion, p. 241.
while Dominick Decupsy, a Dominican, esteemed a Person of great Holiness, and
Long, the Jesuit, asserted, that the King being out of the Roman Church, it
was not lawful to pray for him particularly, or publicly on any other day
except Good Friday, as comprehended among the Infidels and Heretics; and then
only for the spiritual Welfare of his Soul, not for his temporal prosperity.

The Civil Wars continuing still in France, Priorato's Hist. of France, p. 358,
etc.
our present Sovereign, then Duke of York, went into the King's Army; and the
Princes being straitened, called in the Duke of Lorrain, who with his Army
marched to their Succor, so that they kept the Field all this and the ensuing
Year.

Anno 1654. Benoist de Treglies, St. Amour's Annals, p. 448.
Collateral of the Council, or Regent of the Chancery of Naples, in which this
Proposition was maintained, That when a Pope intends to exercise any
Jurisdiction in a Country, he ought to let his Writs be examined by the
temporal Prince, that so it may be known whether the Causes and Persons
contained therein be of his Jurisdiction: Which Proposition having been
examined by the Inquisition at Rome, at the express command of the Pope, that
Congregation declared it to be Heretical and Schismatical, prohibiting the
Book, and threatening the severest censures against the Author.

The following year affords us a farther evidence of the hopes the Romanists
had conceived of the restoration of their Religion here; for Dr. Baily,
Baily's Life of Fisher, p. 260, 261. London, 1655. 8vo.
at the end of the Life of Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, speaking of the Lord
Cromwell, and the great influence he had upon the proceedings in the beginning
of the Reformation, expresses their hopes of his Party from the Usurper, and
his Counsels, in these words: Who knows but that the Church may be healed of
her Wounds by the same Name, sit hence the Almighty has communicated so great
a Secret unto Mortals as that there should be such a Salve made known to them,
whereby the same Weapon that made the Wound should work the Cure. Oliva vera is
not so hard to be construed Oliverus, as that it may not be believed that a
Prophet, rather than a Herald, gave the common Father of Christendom, the now
Pope of Rome, (Innocent X.) such Ensigns of his Nobility, (viz. a Dove holding
an Olive Branch in her mouth,) since it falls short in nothing of being a
Prophecy, and fulfilled, but only his Highness running into her Arms, whose
Emblem of Innocence bears him already in her mouth.

Three years after this Popish Loyal Flattery, Ferrall, Hist. of the Irish
Remonst. p. 740.
a Capuchin, presented a Treatise to the Cardinals of the Congregation, de
Propaganda Fide, proposing some Methods to revive the Rebellion in Ireland, and
drive out not only the English, but also all the Irish who were descended from
the old English Conquerours, as not fit to be trusted in so holy a League; and
about the same time Father The same who had betrayed Rathmines to Jones.
Reiley, the Popish Primate, coming through Brussels, refused to kiss the
King's Hand, though some offered to introduce him: And to obtain favor with
Richard Cromwell, Hist. of the Irish Remon. p. 610.
and his Family; and therefore were fit to be trusted by the Protector; and
upon his Arrival in Ireland, he made it his business to gain a party there to
hinder the King's Restoration, promising them great assistance; upon which the
King gave notice of those Contrivances to Don Stephano de Gamarro, the Spanish
Ambassador, in Holland, so that he was recalled to Rome, to avoid the danger
of the Law.

And (which is a farther Evidence of the Enmity of that party to the Royal
Family) when General Monk was at London, in prosecution of that great and good
Design which he afterward completed, and had by his prudent Conduct gained the
Affections of the People Monsieur de Bourdeaux, the French Ambassador, told
Mr. Clergis, Long's Hist. of Plots, p. 87, 88.
That Cardinal Mazarine would be glad to have the Honor of his Friendship, and
would assist him faithfully in all his Enterprises; and that the General might
be more confident of the Cardinal, he assured him that Oliver Cromwell kept so
strict a League with him, that he did not assume the Government without his
Privity, and was directed step by step by him, in the progress of that Action;
and therefore if he resolved on that course, he should not only have the
Cardinal's Friendship and Counsel in the Attempt, but a safe Retreat, and
honorable Support in France, if he failed in it.

Soon after His Majesty's Restoration, Honor, pleading to be included within
a favorable Vote which had been made with reference to all other Romanists; in
which they acknowledge, that no party in their Church think the Deposing
Doctrine sinful, Jesuits Reasons unreasonable, p. 112, etc,
but themselves, who are by Order of their General forbidden to meddle with it:
But, as their Answerer observes, this makes them but the more guilty, seeing
their Loyalty depends upon the Will of their General, which is all they pretend
to be influenced by in this matter: But this is not all, for they impose upon
the World in that Assertion, there being no such Decree which respects any
other Country but France; and whereas (if we should grant them that) they
pretend to be bound by it under pain of Damnation, this likewise is false; for
none of their Constitutions oblige them under so much as a Venial Sin.

Therefore the same person advised them to join in a Subscription of Abhorrence
of those Deposing Doctrines, Id. p. 127.
which had been too often maintained by them; but this was a piece of Loyalty
to which they could never arrive.

The former year some of the Irish Clergy and Gentry, to make some amends for
their Rebellion, had subscribed that Declaration which Mr. Cressy published in
the year 1647. which has since been called the Irish Remonstrance, and made a
great noise in the World for some years; for no sooner was an Account of this
Loyal Action transmitted to Rome, Hist of the Irish Remon. p. 16, 17, 18.
but the Internuncio De Vecchiis, then Resident at Brussels, by the Pope's
Order declared, that his Holiness had condemned it; Where see the Letters, and
p. 513, 514.
and Cardinal Barberini, in a Letter to the Noblemen of Ireland, affirmed, that
such as subscribe it do, to show their Fidelity to the King, destroy their
Faith; and therefore exhorted all to beware of those Seducers who promoted the
Subscriptions to it, Id. p. 43.
and Father Macedo, a Portugueze, who had formerly made a Latin Panegyric
upon Cromwell, was employed to write against it. The p. 52.
Dominicans refused absolution to some of their Order, because they would not
retract their Approbations; and the Provincial box'd another for the same
cause; p. 54.
The Augustinians absolutely refused to sign it; so did the p. 49.
Franciscans, and p. 60.
the Jesuits. p. 91.
Anthony Mac Gheoghegan, Popish Bishop of Mead, and several others, sent
Father John Brady to Rome, to get a direct Censure published against it: And
the Theological Faculty at p. 102.
Lovain, declared that it contained many things contrary to the Catholic
Faith, and ought not to be signed by any; But Father Shelton, and several other
Priests, were more particular, who told Father Wash, the Procurator for the
Irish Clergy in this Affair, p. 84.
that they would not subscribe that form, nor any other, denying a power in the
Pope to depose the King, or absolve Subjects from their Allegiance, because
this is a matter of right, controverted between two great Princes.

Two years after p. 116.
de Riddere,

And the Nuncio de Vecchiis, Caron, p. 531.
calls the Remonstrance a Rock of Offense; but the Bishop of p. 617, etc.
Ferns he declared himself more positively for the Deposing Power in his Letter
to Dr. James Cusack, Jun. 18. 1662. and therefore in his Letter to the p. 620,
629.
D. of Ormond, Sep. 22. this year, he justifies all that was done at James-Town
by the Romish Bishops, Anno
who broke the Peace of 1648. 1666
and two years after they excommunicated the Duke, then His Majesty's
Lieutenant there, refusing to obey him any longer.

And the same Bp, in two p. 624, etc.
Letters to Father Walsh the next year, seriously professed that he durst not
renounce the Pope's Deposing Power, which was maintained by 7 Saints, (St.
Thomas one,) 7 Cardinals, 1 Patriarch, 3 A. Bps. 10 Bps. and 31 Classical
Authors, with other eminent Divines; and chose rather to continue a banished
man, than declare against them.

And when His Majesty had granted liberty to the R. Clergy of that Nation to
hold a national Synod that year, to try if they would give any assurance of
their Loyalty, p. 633.
Card* Barberini wrote to them not to subscribe that Protestation; and the p.
634.
Internuncio Rospigliosi affirmed, that to sign the Remonstrance rendered the
Subscribers Instruments of the Damnation of others. Ld. Clarend. against
Cr^ss^y, p. 247, 248.
The Cardinal minded them that the Kingdom remained under Excommunication, and
therefore advised them to consider what they did.

At length the Assembly met, and the Card* sent Letters dissuading them to give
any such assurance of their Loyalty, Hist. of the Irish Remonst. p. 647, etc.
as being prejudicial to the Cath. Faith, which was seconded by another from
the Internuncio, and the Bp. of Ipres, directed to some of the Synod, who were
very obedient to these Admonitions; for when Father Walsh endeavored to prove
that several great Divines had opposed the Deposing Doctrine, p. 657.
Father Nettervile interrupted him, affirming that none had asserted the
contrary, but a Schismatical Historian, and a Poet, meaning Sigibertus
Gemblacensis, and Dantes Aligherius; p. 666.
soon after which they resolved not only not to sign the Remonstrance, but not
to suffer it to be read in the House: And when the Procuratour desired them to
beg his Majesty's Pardon for the late execrable Rebellion, Id. Pref. p. 3, 4.
they not only refused to ask pardon but so much as to acknowledge there was
any need of it; affirming publicly that they knew none at all guilty of any
Crime for any thing done in the War. And when the Lord Lieutenant desired them
to give his Majesty some assurance of their future Obedience, in case of any
Deposition or Excommunication from the Pope, they refused even this without so
much as putting it to the Question.

They offered indeed several Forms instead of the Remonstrance, Idem. p. 763.
but in none of them renounced the Deposing Power; in that the Assembly signed
at their breaking up, they disowned the Doctrine, but would not declare that
Doctrine which abetts it unsound and sinful; wherein they have been imitated
by some late Writers, who though called upon to affirm it such, never did it.

Once indeed they seemed to come something near what was expected, when their
p. 675.
Chairman told Father Walsh, That it was not out of any prejudice against the
Remonstrance they would not sign it, but because they thought it more becoming
their Dignity and Liberty to word their own sense; for the rest, they were far
from condemning that Remonstrance or the Subscribers thereof: Yet would they
not own this when desired under their Hands, but refused; so that no good being
expected, they were dissolved, leaving an undeniable Evidence of their aversion
to Loyalty, and approbation of the treasonable Doctrine of the Chapter of Rome.

Soon after the Dissolution of this Synod the E. of Sandwich, p. 746.
Ambassador in Spain, informed His Majesty that Primate Reilly was emplyed to
stir up his Contrymen to rebel, upon which a Gurd was set upon him, and in
a little time was sent into France.

The Bp. Ferns still justified the Rebellion, Walsh's Letters p. 54.
defending the Actions of the Clergy for laudable, virtuous, meritorious Deeds,
Anno
and becoming good Men; And this is the last Account I find of him, for he soon
after dyed.

And now the Controversy about the Regale growing hot between the King of
France and the present Pope, His Holiness had so much of the Spirit of his
Predecessors, who were for asserting their Power over all the Kingdoms of the
World, as to threaten the King with Excommunication, and that speedily, if he
would not renounce his Claim, News from France, p. 37.
the Pope sent a Bull of Excommunication to his Nuncio, requiring him to
publish it in the Assembly; Land. 1682. 4to.
but by the diligence of the Cardinal d'Estree, the Assembly was adjourned
before the Arrival of the Bull.

At the same time Szlepeche, my Primate of Hungary, Walsh's Letters in the Pref.
with his Clergy, maintained the Deposing Power, by a Censure of the Contrary
Opinion; and the next year the Spanish Inquisition at Toledo did the same;
Theses, Clermont in Auvergne, wherein it was defended; and even among our
selves the Author of Popery Anatomised defends the Decree of the Council of
Laterane, Popery Anat. p. 14. Land. 1686. 4to.
in that the Kings and Princes of Europe by their Ambassadors consented to it,
affirming that the Christian World apprehended no injury, but rather security
in that Decree.

FINIS.
Advertisement of two other Books writ by the Author of this Book.
1. THE Missionaries Arts discovered: or, an Account of their Ways of
Insinuation, their Artifices, and several Methods of which they serve
themselves in making Converts to the Church of Rome. With a Letter to A Pulton.

2. A Plain Defense of the Protestant Religion, fitted to the meanest Capacity,
being a full Answer to the Popish Net for the Fishers of Men, that was writ by
two Converts; wherein is evidently made appear, that their Departure from the
Protestant Religion was without Cause or Reason. Fit to be read by all
Protestants.


