His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Tuesday
the Twentieth Day of October, 1696.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Have Called you together as soon as was possible and I Think it a great
Happiness that this Year has passed without any Disadvantage Abroad, or
Disorder at Home, Considering Our great Disappointment in the Foods Given at
your last Meeting, and the Difficulties which have arisen upon the Recoining of
the Money.

This is so convincing a Proof of the good Disposition of My Army, and of the
^^^^dy Affections of My People, that I cannot but take No^ (...) it with great
Satisfaction.

Our Enemies have not been without Hopes, that such a Con^ (...) might have
proved Fatal to Us; but as they have failed (...) Expectations, so I am fully
persuaded, that your Unani^ proceedings in this Session, will make them for
ever Despair (...) Advantage from any Disagreement among Our Selves.

It must be confessed, that the Business which you have before you will be very
Great, because of the Necessity of Supplying former Defi^, as well as making
Provisions for the next Years Service.

And upon this Occasion, it is fit for Me to Acquaint you, that some Overtures
have been made, in order to the Entering upon Negotiation for a General Peace:
But I am sure We shall all agree in Opinion, That the only way of Treating with
France is with Our Swords in Our Hands; and that We can have no Reason to
expect a Safe and Honorable Peace, but showing Our Selves prepared to made
(...) Vigorous and Effectual War. In Order to which, I do very earnestly
recommend to you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons. That you would consider of
Raising the Necessary Supplies, as well for Maintaining the Honor of
Parliaments, in making good the Fonds already Granted, as for Carrying on The
War the next year; which I think ought not to be less than what was intended to
be Raised for that purpose the last Session.

I must also put you in mind of the Civil List, which cannot be Supported
without your Help; and the Miserable Condition of the French Protestants does
oblige Me to mention them to you again.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
It may deserve your Consideration, whether there do not still remain some
Inconveniences relating to the Coin, which ought to be Remedied. And I hope
you will find out the best Expedients for the Recovery of Credit, which is
absolutely Necessary, not only with Respect to the War, but for Carrying on of
Trade.

I am of Opinion, that there is not one good English Man, who is not entirely
convinced, how much does depend upon this Session: and therefore I cannot but
hope for your Unanimity and Dispatch in your Resolutions; which at this time
are more necessary than ever, for the Safety and Honor of England.

FINIS.

