His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Thursday
the Second of October, 1690.

monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1690.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
SInce I last met you, I have used My best Endeavors to Reduce Ireland into
such a Condition this Year, as that it might be no longer a Charge to England.
And it has pleased God to bless My Endeavors with such Success, that I doubt
not, but I should have been fully possessed of that Kingdom by this time, had I
been Enabled to have gone into the Field as soon as I should have done, and as
is more especially Necessary in Ireland, where the Rains are so great, and
begin so early.

I think My Self obliged to take Notice, how well the Army there have behaved
themselves on all Occasions, and born great Hardships with little Pay, and with
so much Patience and Willingness, as could not proceed but from an Affectionate
Duty to My Service, and a Zeal for the Protestant Religion.

I have already made it evident, how much I have preferred the Satisfaction of
My Subjects before the most solid Advantages of the Crown, by parting with so
considerable a Branch of its Inheritance; And it is no less apparent, that I
have asked no Revenue for My Self, but what I have readily subjected to be
Charged to the Uses of the War.

I did at My Departure give Order for all the Public Accounts to be made ready
for Me against My Return, and I have Commanded them to be laid before the House
of Commons; by which they will see, that the real Want of what was necessary
beyond the Fonds given, and the not getting in due time that for which Fonds
were Assigned, have been the principal Causes why the Army is in so much Arrear
of their Pay, and the Stores both for the Navy and the Ordnance not supplied as
they ought to be.

Now, as I have neither spared My Person, nor My Pains, to do you all the Good
I could; so I doubt not, but, if you will as cheerfully do your Parts, it is in
your Power to make both Me and your selves Happy, and the Nation Great: And on
the other hand, it is too plain, by what the French have let you see so lately,
that if the present War be not prosecuted with Vigor, no Nation in the World
is exposed to greater Danger.

I hope therefore, there will need no more upon that Subject, than to Lay
before you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, the State of what will be
Necessary for the Support of the Fleet and Armies; which cannot possibly admit
of being Lessened in the Year ensuing; and to Recommend to your Care the
Clearing of My Revenue, so as to Enable Me to Subsist, and to Maintain the
Charge of the Civil List; the Revenue being so Engaged, that it must be wholly
Applied, after the First of November next, to Pay off the Debts already Charged
upon it: And therefore a present Consideration must be had of the Arrears of
the Army, which shall likewise be laid before you, and for all which I must
desire a sufficient and timely Supply.

It is farther Necessary to inform you, That the whole Support of the
Confederacy abroad, will absolutely depend upon the Speed and Vigor of your
Proceedings in this Session.

And here I must take Notice, with great Satisfaction, of the Readiness which
My Subjects of all Degrees have shown both in this City, and in their several
Countries, by giving their Assistances so cheerfully as they did in My Absence,
while the French Fleet was upon Our Coasts. And besides this so convincing Mark
of the good Inclinations of My People, I have found through all the Countries
where I passed, both at My Going into Ireland, and in my Return from thence,
such Demonstrations of their Affection, that I have not the least Doubt, but I
shall find the same from their Representatives in Parliament.

I cannot conclude, without taking Notice also, how much the Honor of the
Nation has been exposed by the ill Conduct of My Fleet, in the last Summers
Engagement against the French; And I think My Self so much concerned to see it
Vindicated, that I cannot rest satisfied, till an Example has been made of such
as shall be found faulty upon their Examination and Trial, which was not
practicable while the whole Fleet was abroad, but is now put into the proper
Way of being done as soon as may be.

My Lords and Gentlemen, That whoever goes about to obstruct or divert your
Applications to these Matters, preferably to all others, can neither be My
Friend nor the Kingdoms.

FINIS.

