Imprimatur,

Liber cui Titulus, [ A Continuation of the Present State of the Controversy
between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome.]

Junii 7. 1688. H. Maurice RR. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.

A CONTINUATION OF THE Present State OF THE CONTROVERSY, BETWEEN THE CHURCH of
ENGLAND, AND THE CHURCH OF ROME.

BEING A Full ACCOUNT of the BOOKS that have been of late Written on Both Sides.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

TO THE VERY REVEREND and WORTHY THE AUTHORS OF THE DISCOURSES here Collected,
IN Defense of the Church of ENGLAND.
GENTLEMEN,
AFter so much Pains as you have taken, and so much Good as by the Blessing of
God on your Endeavors you have done to that Church of which I esteem it my
happiness that I am a Member, may it be permitted to a private and obscure hand
to return you this small Tribute, in acknowledgment of that Sense which not my
self alone, but I dare say every single person of our Communion has of what we
all owe to your Learning and your Integrity.

I present you here with a short view of your own Labors; or rather, I offer
to the World a small Collection of those Discourses you have written in Defense
of our Religion. And how unsuitable soever it may appear to usher a few Titles
of Books into the World under the protection of so many great Names, yet I am
confident the Consequence of this Undertaking cannot but be as Honorable to
you all, as I heartily wish it may, and as I am sure it ought to be: When it
shall be considered how vast a Number, and of what acurate and learned
Discourses is here comprised, and for almost all which we are in the compass of
about Three Years indebted to you.

It is indeed a matter of just wonder to all those who are acquainted with your
method of living here, how persons engaged not only in a laborious attendance
on their Parochial Cures, and a constant return of painful and acurate
Preaching; but almost utterly distracted with that multitude of other Business
which in these last Years has taken up the greatest part of your time, should
yet find leisure to discharge all these, and at the same time to adorn the
Press with so many Books as might alone have seemed more than enough to have
employed your whole Industry.

But blessed be God, who has raised you up against such a time as this, and
given us so great an Earnest of his Favor to us, that as we had never more
need of Able, and Honest, and Firm Guides, than at this day; so I may venture
to challenge any Age of the Church, to show such a Number of truly Learned, and
Pious, and constant Pastors, as the Church of England, and especially this
City, does now abound with.

May your Labors and your Examples always find such a success as they deserve,
and as they have of late met with amongst us. And since we cannot now have any
excuse for our Apostasy should we renounce our Holy Prosession, after so much
as you have done to convince even the most ignorant Persons amongst us of the
Truth and Purity of it; may we ever firmly adhere both to you and it: That when
we shall appear before the Great Bishop and Pastor of our Souls, we may all of
us give up our Accounts with joy.

This, as it is my hearty Wish, so I am persuaded it is the sincere Resolution
of every one of those whom God has committed to your Care. And that in this
Firmness we may be all of us established more and more, shall be the continual
Prayer of him who in all thankful Duty will ever remain,

GENTLEMEN, Your Most Humble, and Obedient Servant

TO THE READER.
AS for those who shall please to peruse this Treatise, I have but very little
to premise to them. They will here see an Exact Collection, as far as I was
able to make it, of the Controversy on both sides between our Divines, and
those of the Church of Rome. And in that, the Victory of Truth over Error.
Never certainly was any Cause more entirely baffled than the Popish is at this
time. Never was a Controversy more fully handled, and that in such a manner as
to instruct even the meanest Capacities, than This has been in these last
years. Insomuch that now there is scarce a person amongst us so ignorant, that
is not able to make a Stand against the rudest Attacques of our Adversaries.
Nay, our very Footmen esteem themselves, (and I think have satisfied the World
that they are not mistaken) an equal match for Jesuits, i. e. for those who
would at least be thought the most able Men of their Party, and dropped down from
Heaven on purpose to oppose the Growth of Protestant Heresy.

What others may judge of this, I cannot tell: But, for my part, I cannot but
from thence conclude, That certainly the Hand of God is with us for Good. And
that He who has given us this Opportunity to understand the Weaknesses and
Deceits of our Enemies; and endu'd us with so great and general a Resolution,
never upon any Account whatsoever, to depart from our most Holy Religion, will
also crown all our future Endeavors with such a Success, that the Generations
to come shall rise up and call us Blessed; When they shall see our Firmness and
our Labors in the Lord, and receive from our hands that pure and uncorrupted
Truth, which I am persuaded those excellent Treatises I here mention, shall
deliver down even to the very End of the World.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Occasion and Design of this Continuation. Page 1 The Whole Divided into
II. Generals. Page 2
FIRST PART. Of the Cases against Popery, begun in the late King's Time. ib.
The Catalogue of them reduced to the following Heads. 1. Preliminary
Discourses. Page 2, 3 2. Of the Church. Page 4 3. Of the Rule of Faith. Page 5
4. Of Particular Points. ib.
An Account of the Disputes that have arisen, on the Occasion of the Discourse
against Transubstantiation. Page 8

SECOND PART. Of the Discourses that have been published in Defense of the
Church of England, since the Time of His Present Majesty: With an Account of
the Popish Treatises that occasioned them. Page 9 These reduted to the several
following Heads.

SECT. I. Of the REPRESENTING Controversy. The Papist Represented and
Misrepresented. Page 10 The Bishop of Condom's Exposition. Page 12 Good Advice
to the Pulpits. Page 16 And the Disputes occasioned by these Treatises.

SECT. II. Of the pretended Agreement between the Church of England, and the
Church of Rome. Page 17
SECT. III. Of the Disputes concerning the Holy EUCHARIST. 1. Real Presence.
Page 19. 2. Communion in One kind. Page 20 3. Transubstantiation. Page 22

SECT. IV. Of the Disputes concerning the CHURCH. Page 25 1. Of the Notes of
the Church. Page 26 2. Of the Unity and Authority of the Church. Page 27 3. Of
the Infallibility of the Church. Page 29

SECT. V. Of the Prerogatives of St. Peter, and the Popes as his Successors.
Page 31 SECT. VI. Of the Reformation of the Church of England, and the
Imputations of Schism and Heresy laid against us on the account of it. Page 34
SECT. VII. Of the Disputes concerning the Rule of Faith: And in particular, 1.
Of the Holy Scripture. Page 38 2. Of Tradition. Page 39

SECT. VIII. Of the Disputes concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome.
Page 49 1. In General. Page 50 2. In Particular. Worship of Images. Page 51
Invocation of Saints. Page 52

SECT. IX. Of the Disputes concerning the Validity of Orders, In the Church of
England. Page 54 In the Church of Rome. Page 55
That the Papists are upon their own Principles, uncertain whether they have
any true Priests in their Church. ib.

SECT. X. Of other Particular Points in Dispute betwixt us. Popish Treatises.
Page 56 Discourses of the Church of England. Page 57
A full Account of what passed on the occasion of the Conference between Dr.
Tenison, and Father Pulton the Jesuit. Page 60

SECT. XI. In which the several Treatises before mentioned are reduced to their
distinct Arguments, for the direction of those who would fully satisfy
themselves in any Particular Point in Dispute betwixt Us, and those of the
Church of Rome, viz. Page 63 1. General Discourses. Page 65 2. Of Religious
Worship. Page 66 3. Of Prayer in an Unknown Tongue. Page 66 4. Of the
Invocation of Saints. Page 66 Particularly of the B. Virgin. 5. Of Images and
Relics. Page 67 6. Of Idolatry. Page 68 7. Of Merits, Satisfactions,
Purgatory and Indulgences. Page 68 8. Of the Sacraments. Page 68 9. Of
Confession and Penance. Page 69 10. Of Extreme Unction. Page 69 11. Of Orders.
Page 69 12. Of the Real Presence. Page 70 13. Of Transubstantiation. Page 70
14. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass. Page 71 15. Of the Adoration of the Host.
Page 71 16. Of Communion in Both Kinds. Page 71 17. Of the Rule etc. of Faith.
Page 72 18. Of the Holy Scripture. Page 72 19. Of Tradition. Page 73 20. Of the
Church. Page 73 21. Of St. Peter and the Pope. Page 74 22. Of the Reformation.
Page 74 23. Of Schism and Heresy. Page 74 24. Of the Celibacy of the Clergy.
Page 75.

SECT. XII. In which the whole is closed, with an Account of the Present
Undertaking, to examine the Texts of Scripture alleged in favor of the Popish
Errors. Page 75
A CONTINUATION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF THE Controversy.
IT is now some time since it has been very much desired, That a Full Account
might be given to the World, of the several Tracts that have these late Years
been published on the Points in Controversy between the Church of England, and
the Church of Rome. The Present State of the Controversy, set forth about two
years since, being become very Imperfect; and serving rather to raise Men's
expectations of some further Account to be given of this matter, than to
satisfy their desires with what is there offered.

I will not pretend to have been so diligent an Observer of these Things, as
not to have let many Discourses slip, in such a number as have appeared on both
sides: And must, therefore, humbly entreat the Representer's favor to me, if
He find some defects in my present Undertaking; and that he will not impute
that to a spirit of Misrepresentation in me, which really proceeds only from my
Ignorance or Inadvertency. What Discourses have come to my Hands, I will
faithfully give an account of; and if He, or any other for Him, will put forth
an Appendix of what is wanting here, it will be much more to the satisfaction
of the World, than to run over once more, The Cases against Popery.
his Common Place against me, as a New and Vpstart sort of Misrepresenter, and
fancy that the Eyes of all the World are set upon him, to chastise me for my
Unsincerity.

The present State of the Controversy gives an Account how the Divines of our
Church, at the time of the late King's death, were engaged in a Design of
publishing some Discourses on the several Points in Controversy between Us and
the Papists; correspondent to what they had done, not long before, with
reference to our Disputes with our Brethren the Dissenters. And how the
favorable Reception their former Attempt had met with from these, encouraged
them to hope their Labors would not be altogether unacceptable to those. But
the Catalogue of what they have done in pursuance of this design, is imperfect;
and it may not be amiss, before I proceed any farther, to give a more complete
one here.

A Full Account of the Cases that have been published on the Points disputed
between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome.

I. PRELIMINARY DISCOURSES.
1. A Preservative to an Ingenuous Trial of Opinions in Religion.

2. The difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the
Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.

3. A Preservative against Popery: Being some plain Directions to unlearned
Protestants how to dispute with Romish Priests. In Two Parts. By the Reverend
Dr. Sherlock, Master of the Temple.

I place this Discourse here, because I do not see to what other Class it could
more properly have been reduced, thought it is but just now published, and
perhaps, was never designed by its learned Author, to add to the number of this
kind of Treatises: But that which is more pertinent for me here to observe, is,
That the former part of this Undertaking soon met with such an Answer as is now
commonly given to our Books, when any at all is given, viz. one single Sheet
from Father Sabran the Jesuit, and who is now well known by his late little
Encounters of this Nature. It was called,

4. An Answer to Dr. Sherlock's Preservative against Popery, etc.

To this an exact and solid Answer was returned by a Protestant Footman, one W.
Giles; and who may justly be offered to the World as an Instance of what use
our late Discourses have, or might have been, for the Instruction even of the
meanest Persons in the matters in Controversy between Us, and the Church of
Rome. The knowledge which this ingenious and diligent Man obtained, being
entirely due to them; and yet how considerable it is, I shall leave it to any
one to judge, that will but have the Curiosity to examine his Performance. It
is called,

5. A Defense of Dr. Sherlock's Preservative against Popery, in Reply to a
Jesuit 's Answer: By W. Giles, a Protestant Footman, living with Madam H. in
Mark-lane.

This Defense, and the Preface of the Publisher of it, did put the Jesuit quite
out of all Patience, and Decency; and made him forget himself so far, as once
more to provoke the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, by publishing an Answer to both
Parts of the Preservative against Popery, and to the Footman's Defense of the
first, under this Title:

6. Dr. Sherlock's Preservative considered, First Part, with its Defense, etc.
By Lewis Sabran of the Society of Jesus.

This Answer was writ in such a violence of Passion, and does charge the
Reverend Master of the Temple at such a rate with Ignorance, Calumny, and God
knows what, that he has at last condefcended to chastise this ignorant Jesuit
himself; and the World will very speedily see, that never Man set Pen to Paper
with such a stock of Ignorance and Considence together, as this Father Sabran.
After which, if he shall still continue to write in spite both of good
Learning, and of good Manners, it is to be hoped, that at least we shall be
excused by all those who have any share of either, if we do not give either our
selves or them the trouble of any farther Replies to him.

A Vindication of both Parts of the Preservative against Popery: In Answer to
the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. By William Sherlock, D.D. Master of the
Temple.

II. Of the CHURCH.
1. A Discourse of the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the Church
of England. 2. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church
of England, made by the Papists, asking of us the Question, Where was our
Religion before LUTHER? 3. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, being an Answer
to three Questions: 1. How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church
for the true Sense of Scripture? 2. Whether a Visible Succession from Christ to
this day, makes a Church which has this Visible Succession, an Infallible
Interpreter of Scripture? 3. Whether the Church of England can make out such a
Visible Succession?
4. Two Discourses concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and corruptions of the Church of Rome.
There was a Third Part intended by the Reverend and Learned Author of these
two Discourses, which we have hopes that it will be published ere long under
the same Title.

III. Of the Rule of Faith.
1. A Discourse about Tradition; showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be received, and what is to be rejected. 2. A Discourse
concerning a Guide in matters of Faith, with respect especially to the Romish
pretense of such a one as is Infalliable.
IV. Of Particular Points.
1. A Discourse concerning the Object of Religious Worship; or a
Scripture Proof of the unlawfulness of giving any Religious Worship to any
other Being besides the Supreme God.

2. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome, especially as
compared with those of the Church of England: In which it is shown, that
whatsoever the Romanists pretend, there is not so true Devotion among them, nor
such rational provision for it, nor Encouragement to it, as in the Church
Established by Law amongst us.

3. A Discourse concerning the Invocation of Saints.

4. Of Prayer in an Unknown Tongue.

5. Of Auricular Confession as it is prescribed by the Council of Trent.

6. A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

7. Of the Adoration of the Host.

These are the several Discourses mentioned in the former Present State, page
5, 6, 7, 8.
Catalogue; to these I must add several others that have since been published.

8. Two Discourses of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

To which I may subjoyn a Discourse just now published, viz.

9. Purgatory proved by Miracles, etc.

10. A Discourse concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass.

11. Of Extreme Unction.

And here it may not be improper to observe, that the Author of this Accurate
Discourse, thought fit to premise to it an Address to the Vindicator of the
Bishop of Condom, upon the occasion of some things just then published by him
in his Reply to our Expositor, relating to this Argument; but especially
concerning Cardinal Cajetan's confessing that their only Text for this
pretended Sacrament, that of St. James, made nothing for it. To this the
Vindicator gave a half-shee Reply, called,

A Letter from the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom, to the Author of a late
Discourse concerning the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.

And this produced another Letter in Reply to it, Entitled,

A Second Letter from the Author of the Discourse concerning Extreme Unction,
to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

Which put an end to this Debate: Though the Vindicator made us hope for a
Reply to that Excellent Discourse; but I presume will not esteem himself
obliged to be as good as his word.

12. A Treatise in confutation of the Latin Service practiced, and by the Order
of the Trent Council continued in the Church of Rome.

13. Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith.

14. Of the Celibacy of the Clergy.

15. Of the incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome.

16. A Discourse concerning the Merits of Good Works.

17. An Historical Discourse concerning the Necessity of the Ministers
Intentions in administering the Sacrament.

I shall perhaps be looked upon to have referred many Tracts to the number of
these Discourses against the Papists, that did not enter into the first design
that was laid for them. But I know not to what Head I could so properly refer
them, as to this; and if they help to make up the Collection of Particular
Points in Debate betwixt us, it matters not by what Occasion, or with what
Design they were first composed.

I do not know that any more of these Treatises have been particularly attacked
by those of the other Communion, except that one only against
Transubstantiation: which having, after some years being let alone, given at
last occasion to a formed Controversy, yet in agitation, I will, before I go
any farther, remark what has hitherto passed concerning it.

The first that appeared in Answer to it, was a Hot New-Convert, under the
Glorious Title of,

Reason and Authority; or the Motives of a late Protestant's Reconciliation to
the Catholic Church; together with Remarks upon some late Discourses against
Transubstantiation.

But the Performance was so mean, so disproportioned to the Strength and Merits
of the Discourse he had undertaken to attack; that it is to be presumed, the
weakness of the New Convert obliged some more able Controvertist to appear as
his Second; and to publish not long after a new, and better Answer, called,

Transubstantiation Defended; and proved from Scripture, in Answer to the First
Part of a Treatise Entitled, A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

And to make all sure; a Third about the same time undertakes the same Cause,
in a Discourse which he calls,

An Answer to a Discourse against Transubstantiation.

It is no part of my Design to give any Character of these Treatises; I will
only observe, that the Second, which seems to have been written with the most
care, continues still unfinished; the Author (whoever he be) having not yet
thought fit to publish his 2d Part. Now this I the rather remark, to satisfy
those who have long expected our Reply to these Treatises, what has been in
some measure the Cause of the deferring it: tho the multitude of other
Discourses that have since been published on this Subject, may well excuse so
small an Omission: However, since after almost a Years attendance, there is now
but little Hopes of any thing more to be expected from this Antagonist, I may
venture to promise the Reader that he shall not continue much longer without
the Answer that has been prepared to what is already published; and which might
long since have been finished, had not the Reverend Author desired to acquit
himself of all his Task at the same time.

And this may serve in short to have been remarked concerning the first Part of
this Design, of the Discourses which our Divines began to publish in the late
King's time upon the Points in Controversy between us and the Church of Rome.

We must now pass to a more troubled and perplexed Undertaking; and endeavor
to reduce to the clearest Method we can, those many Tracts that have since come
out in Answer to one another on both sides; and the number of which is now so
great, that it is no easy matter to give an exact Account of them. And for the
doing of this, I shall consider them not in the Order of their coming out, but
reduce them as near as I can to the several distinct Subjects to which they
refer.

Now the first Thing that began all our Late Disputes, was the Pretense so much
insisted upon, of our MISREPRESENTING the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome: And it shall therefore be the first kind of Discourses I will here
consider.

SECT. I. Of the Treatises that have been Published on the Representing and
Expounding Controversy.
I. WHAT the Occasion and Design of this Uundertaking was, Present State, p. 10.
has already been remarked in the First Part of the Present State: and
therefore I shall not need to say any thing to it here. The Treatises that have
passed on both sides, may be consulted in this following Order.

I. The Representing Controversy.
A Papist Misrepresented and Represented.

R. The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book entitled, A Papist Misrepresented and Represented, etc.

II. Reflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented, etc.

R. A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants; being a Reply to the
Reflections, etc.

III. Papists protesting against Protestant Popery; in Answer to a Discourse
entitled, A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants.

R. An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux 's late B. of
Condom 's Exposition of the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, in the Articles of
the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images.

IV. An Amicable Accommodation of the difference between the Representer and
the Answerer, in return to his last Reply.

R. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the difference between the
Representer and the Answerer.

V. A Reply to the Answer to the Amicable Accommodation.

R. A View of the whole Controversy between the Representer and the Answerer,
with an Answer to the Representer 's last Reply.

And here the matter rested when the first State of the Controversy was
published; and it was then generally believed would have done so. But the
Representer had by this time got too much assurance to be easily put out of
Countenance; and tho by the longer time he took in his Answer to this last
Treatise, than to either of the foregoing, and which his Performance
sufficiently shows was not for any extraordinary pains he resolved to take in
his Reply to it, he seems to have struggled a little with himself, before he
could get the better of his Conscience, in going on at so pitiful a rate of
Vindicating his pretenses, yet at last there came out something that was to be
called an Answer to our last piece, in a Preface to a further Continuation of
his unjust Pretenses against us, viz.

VI. The Papist Misrepresented and Represented; 3d part; with a Preface
containing Reflections upon two Treatises; the one, the State, the other, The
View of the Controversy between the Representer and the Answerer.

But to this too, the worthy Author of the View of the Controversy soon
returned such an Answer as I find has not a little discomposed the Representer:
and I believe no less troubles the Vindicator too of the Bishop of Condom's
Exposition, viz.

R. An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy, etc.

To this the Representer has now satisfied us, that he never intends to reply:
for having lately set out an Answer to another Discourse of which we shall
speak hereafter, viz. The Apology for the Pulpits: he adds triumphantly in the
Title, that it is not only an Answer to that Discourse, but also, A Vindication
of the Representer against the Stater of the Controversy. But such a
Vindication as this, could certainly never have come from any other Pen but the
Representer's: and is by the same figure a Reply to this Treatise, by which he
heretofore told us, that his Papist Represented and Misrepresented was enough
to answer not only all our late Discourses against Popery, Papist Misr. part.
3. Pref.
but a great part of all the Books and Sermons that had ever been writ or
preached against them. The truth is, I can hardly forbear here to leave a while
my design of pursuing the Treatises that have been Published on this
Controversy, to expose the Confidence of this vain Man: But since the worthy
Author of that Book which he pretends to answer, has thought fit to give him up
as a Privileged Person, who is past either sense of Modesty, or hopes of being
reclaimed, I shall pay that deference to his Judgment, as not to trouble my
self with any Vindication of his Discourse against so trivial and occasional an
attempt against it. But if there be any of this Author's Communion who shall
think fit in good earnest to attack this, or any other of those Discourses
which he has published against them, I will then take the liberty to promise,
That tho to our great regret, the incomparable Author of them be now in his
Grave, Dr. Claget.
and no longer in a state to vindicate his own Works, yet neither his Labors
nor his Memory shall want a Defense, and let his Adversaries whenever they
please begin the experiment.

And here I suppose we may now take a final leave of this first Controversy;
The Papist Represented and Misrepresented. I will only add, That since this
first attempt of his began, he has carried it on in two other parts, under the
Title of the catholic Representer. The second of which coming out weekly in
several Chapters, has received a very full, and I suppose a satisfactory
Answer; there being no care taken to reply to what our Divines have with great
care and learning returned to it. The third has been considered, as far as was
thought necessary, by the Late Worthy and Learned Author of the Defense of the
State and View of the Controversy before mentioned.

II. The Expounding Controversy.
It was not long after the beginning of this, that the better to promote the
same design, another Engagement of the like kind was set on foot, under the
Title of

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in matters of
Controversy.

I need not say that this piece was Originally written in French, and published
many years since by the Bishop then of Condom, now of Meaux. The prosecution
that has been made of this matter in the Books that have been published on both
sides, have given a very large Account of this to the world; and what is
farther necessary for the understanding of the design of it, may be seen
already set down in the former part of the Page 15, 16.
Present State of the Controversy. I will therefore only perfect the catalogue
of what has past in this Enterprise also on both sides, by adding to that
already given, those other Treatises, that have been published since the former
State was sent abroad.

1. An Answer to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, etc. with Reflections upon
his Pastoral Letter.

And concerning which I shall observe only, what was before remarked, That to
this day no attempt has been made of returning one word in Answer to it.

2. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the Bishop of Condom, in his Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Catholic Faith.

To this in a little time came out an Answer Entitled,

3. A Vindication of the Bishop of Condom 's Exposition, with a Letter from the
said Bishop.

And to that not long after, a Reply, called,

4. A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England
against the Exceptions of the Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator.

And here this Controversy rested for some time, and it was by many supposed
would have ended. But at last both the Bishop and his Vindicator resolved once
more to venture into the world; and so after a long expectation, an Answer was
published to this last Treatise, viz.

5. A Reply to the Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England; With a Second Letter from the Bishop of Meaux.

To this there have been two Treatises already returned, and we may in some
time expect a Third to be added to them, as soon as the Author has discharged
himself of a new O. W's Appendix in answer to the Discourse of the real
Presence, and Adoration of the Host.
Adversary, which has since attacked Him on another account. The Vindicator it
is hoped will not think much of a little delay in this matter; especially since
I am Commissioned to promise him, that let Him make what have he will, the last
Part shall be got ready for Him, before He has finished any reasonable Answer
to those already published.

If it be enquired here, Wherefore this last Defense was divided into so many
Parts; I presume this account may be given of it; That the Vindicator having
run his Answer into a greater length than the ordinary rate of these Discourses
usually allows of, either no just Reply must have been made to it, which our
Expositor was unwilling they should be able to object to Him; Or if there were,
He thought it would be much more acceptable to the world, as well as less
burdensome to Himself, to publish his Answer at several times, than to be
oppressed with so large a Volume, as it would have amounted to all together. What
is already finished will be found under these Titles:

6. A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against the new Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux and His Vindicator.

Part I. In which the Account that has been given of the Bishop of Meaux 's
Exposition, is fully Vindicated; the dictinction of Old and New Popery,
Historically Asserted; and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in point of
Image Worship, more particularly considered.

Part II. In which the Romish Doctrines concerning the Nature and Object of
Religious Worship: Of the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images and
Relics, are considered, and the Charge of Idolatry made Good against those of
the Church of Rome upon the Account of them.

And thus far our Expositor has carried his Reply: whilst the Second of these
Parts was writing, the Vindicator attacked the First according to their Modern
way of Controversy, in a sheet and half; yet called it,

A Full Answer to the Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, in a Letter to the Defender.

But the Author of the View of the Controversy being at that time engaged in a
Reply to the Representer, and finding some congruity that the Answer to both of
them should come out together, for the reasons given in the Preface to His
Treatise; the Defender was left at liberty to go on with his design, and yet
the Vindicator not suffered to complain for want of Consideration: The Reply I
have in part mentioned before, but I will now give the Title of it at its full
length:

An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy. With a Reply to the Vindicator's Full Answer; showing, That the
Vindicator has utterly ruined the new design of Expounding and Representing
Popery.

III. Having now given account of those two principal Controversies that have
of late been carried on among us, of Expounding and Representing the Points in
debate betwixt us and the Church of Rome; I cannot better close this Point,
than with this remark, That in a very little time after the Bishop of Condom's
Exposition was set forth by the Vindicator, we were also obliged with the
Translation of another of that Prelate's Pieces, called,

A Pastoral Letter to the New Converts of his Diocese.

It is not necessary to say that the Bishop in this Piece pursued still the
design of his Exposition. That has been already shown in the Answer to it,
which I before remarked, at the end of the other Reply that was made to His
Exposition, and which still continues Unanswered. That which has made more
Noise is his open declaring to the New Converts of his Diocese, that they knew
there had been no such thing as a Persecution in France. And the falseness and
unsincerity of which declaration has been sufficiently exposed, both in the
former part of the Page 22. Sec. Defense, Answer to the Bishops Letter.
State of the Controversy; and in the second Defense of the Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Church of England: And thither I shall remit those that desire
to inform themselves more particularly of this matter.

IV. Good Advice to the Pulpits.
I should here have dismissed this Argument, had not the great Misrepresenter
that began this Point, lately pursued it in a new Undertaking, and of which I
cannot better give an Account, than in this place. It is not long since, that
with the old design of exposing the Ministers of the Church of England to the
Censures of the World, as Men who made it their Business, at any rate, to run
down Popery, he set forth a malicious Discourse, called by him,

1. Good Advice tu the Pulpits, etc.

In which he rakes together out of the Sermons published in the last years of
the late King's Reign, whatever he thought would serve to make them odious. The
Design was well enough laid; and the Circumstances of the Times considered, it
were not to be wondered if some things should have passed more hot against those
of the Church of Rome, than was to have been wished. But either our Ministers
were then, as they have always been, very moderate; or this Author has been a
very careless Examiner of their Excesses. However his Attempt soon met with a
solid Confutation, in an excellent Treatise, Entitled,

2. An Apology for the Pulpits.

And in which our Divines are fully justified against his Exceptions.

To this he has lately set forth an Answer, called,

3. Pulpit-sayings; or the Characters of the Pulpit-Papist examined.

To which there is an Answer called,

4. Pulpit-Popery, True Popery.

And hitherto has this first sort of Controversy been carried on: A second
thing which has given occasion to some Disputes these late years, and which,
for the Affinity it has to the foregoing, I choose next to mention, is,

SECT. II. Of a pretended Agreement of the Church of England with the Church of
Rome.
AND this too the Representer is reported to have had a principal hand in. It
is no very long time since a Book was published in order to this end, and
called in express terms,

An Agreement between the Church of England and the Church of Rome. Agreement
between the C. of E. and the C. of R.


I think I needed not have made any change of my former Head for this Treatise;
there being perhaps not a more foul Misrepresentation in the World, than what
the great Chastiser of Misrepresenters has made here in such a pretense as
this. But tho his Title be General, yet the main design of his Book was to
expose a particular person of our Church, D. Sherlock.
and whom indeed they have all the reason in the world, if they can by any
means, to run down; for I know no man that does the and their Cause more
mischief, by those excellent Treatises which he continues still to publish
against them. However both the general and the particular design of this new
Contrivance, has been effectually answered in the two Replies that have come
forth to it, viz.

1. The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
Opposition to a late Book, entitled, An Agreement, etc. 2. A Vindication of
some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholick-Communion; from the
charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. By Dr. Sherlock.
But what this Author attempted in a more general manner, the Publisher of
Discourses against us at Oxford, more particularly endeavored with reference
to the Holy Eucharist; in which, as he pretends, there is little or no
difference between the true Sons of the Church of England, and those of the
Other Communion: And which therefore shall be the next General Head of
Controversies, to which I will now pass, viz.

SECT. III. Of the Real Presence.
Of the Disputes which have passed these last years, concerning the Holy
Eucharist. And here,
I. Concerning the REAL PRESENCE.
THis is the Point in which Mr. W. would fain piece up a kind of Agreement
betwixt us, though all the World sees nothing can be more different than the
Doctrine of the Real Presence as taught in the Church of England, and that of
Transubstantiation, which is the Real Presence believed in the Church of Rome.

But however it be, Mr. W. doubts not to make it appear, That our Divines have
asserted the very same Presence of Christ, in effect, in the Eucharist, that
the Romanists maintain; in a Treatise, called,

1. Two Discourses concerning the Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the
Eucharist.

And the former of which wholly pursues the pretended Agreement I have now been
speaking of.

To this there came out first a London Answer, in which his Quotations were
fully examined, his Pretenses considered, and the whole matter largely stated:
And in return to his Allegations of some of our Church that believed their Real
Presence, an Account was given of several that have lived and died in their
Communion, that neither did nor could believe any such thing. The Title of it
is,

2. A Discourse of the Holy-Eucharist in the Two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host.

Not long after this, a Person of great Worth at Oxford published a second
Confutation of the same Piece, but with this difference, That whereas the
former Discourse examined at large his Quotations, this chiefly considered the
Principles on which he proceeded, and the Arguments he brought to justify his
Pretenses. It is called,

3. A Reply to Two Discourses lately printed at Oxford, concerning the
Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the Holy Eucharist.

And here this Controversy rested till the last Term, when Mr. W. publishing
another Treatise upon the same Subject, viz.

4. A Compendious Discourse on the Eucharist:

Added to the End of it two Appendixes, in answer to the two Tracts that had
been written against them. It appears by the Heat and Bitterness of these
little Satyrs; how much those Books had troubled him, and how unable he is to
command himself, even there where he pretends the most to do it. One would have
thought after what the Representer had done, we had seen the height of what a
licentious Pen could arise to in matters of such seriousness. But indeed this
poor impotent old Man has convinced us of our Error, and shown such an indecent
Passion in the menage of his Answer, as is much more to be pitied than valued.
But I shall leave it to those who are engaged with him, to take notice of these
things: It is not to be doubted, but that in a little time their Answers will
be finished; both the One and the Other, being, as I am informed, already in
good forwardness.

II. Of Communion in Both Kinds.
COMMUNION in BOTH KINDS.
Having thus given an Account of what has passed as to the Point of the Real
Presence; the next thing that naturally offered its self, was the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. But there has passed so much concerning this Controversy,
that I was willing before I came to that, to consider all the lesser Debates
that have risen relating to this Holy Sacrament.

The occasion of this Engagement was this: Monsieur de Meaux having some years
since composed a famous Book upon this Argument, it was thought fit by those of
the Church of Rome to translate that also, as well as the rest of his Tracts,
into our Language. Accordingly we find it to have been published some time
since, under the Title of

A Treatise of Communion under One Kind.

Now however it might have been sufficient for us to have followed their
Example, in translating that most accurate Answer of the late Monsieur Larrogue
to it; yet one of our Divines was content to give it a new Consideration, in an
excellent Book, called,

A Discourse of the Communion in One Kind. In Answer to a Treatise of the
Bishop of Meaux, of Communion, etc.

And here this Flourish ended: The Translator (whoever he was) of the Bishop's
Treatise, looking upon himself to be no more obliged to defend it against his
English Adversary, than the Bishop thought himself to be to vindicate it
against the Attack of his French Antagonists. But tho this Controversy
proceeded no farther, yet the Subject has been lately again revived by a very
Learned Hand, who having searched thoroughly into Antiquity as to this Point,
has given us an accurate Collection, called,

A Demonstration that the Church of Rome and her Councils have erred; by
showing that the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Trent, have in all their
Decrees touching Communion in one Kind, contradicted the received Doctrine of
the Church of Christ.

III. Of Transubstantiation.
Of TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
And now having cleared the way of all other Debates touching this Holy
Sacrament, we are at last arrived to the great Point in dispute betwixt us, the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But how to dispose of my self in so copious a
Subject, and upon which so many Books have been written, is hard to resolve. I
have already remarked what has passed on the occasion of the Discourse of
Transubstantiation, the first that began this Debate. The next that gave
occasion to the revival of this Controversy, was the Author of the Dublin
Letter, who being answered by the Representer in his Second Part, cap. 3. a
learned man of our Communion made good his Party in an excellent Discourse,
which he calls,

Transubstantiation no Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers; being a Defense of
the Dublin Letter, etc.

And that no pretense to Antiquity might remain unconsidered as to this matter,
the same Learned Hand has since obliged us with a full view of all that can
reasonably be desired from the Primitive Fathers as to this matter, viz.

A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to
the Eucharist, wholly different from those of the present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the belief of Transubstantiation, etc.

2. A 2d sort of Discourses there have passed on this Argument in which our
Adversaries of the Roman Communion, have made it their business to prove the
Doctrine of the Trinity to be as full of Contradictions as that of
Transubstantiatiom: But whether this be more likely to make us Papists or
Socinians, to believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or to disbelieve that
of the Trinity, I shall not determine. However our Divines have resolved to
show that there is no manner of reason for them to do either; and the Tracts
that have been published on this Occasion, are especially these.

On the Popish Part.

A Dialogue between a New Catholic Convert and a Protestant, concerning the
Doctrines of the Trinity and Transubstantiation.

On Our Part.

1. An Answer to a late Dialogue between a new Catholic Convert, and a
Protestant, etc. 2. A Second Dialogue between a New Catholic Convert, and a
Protestant, showing why He cannot believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
though he do firmly believe the Doctrine of the Trinity. 3. The Doctrine of the
Trinity and Transubstantiation compared as to Scripture, Reason, and Tradition.
In a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist. In 2. Parts. 4.
Transubstantiation contrary to Scripture; or the Protestant's Answer to the
Seeker's Request.
3. Other Discourses there have been in great numbers on both sides as to this
Point, and it shall suffice only to transcribe the Names of them.

Popish Tracts concerning Transubstantiation.

1. A Seeker's Request to Catholic Priests and Protestant Ministers, for
satisfying his Conscience in the Truth of what he ought to believe of the
Lord's Supper. 2. The Catholic Answer to the Seeker's Request. 3. The Catholic
Letter to the Seeker.
Protestant Treatises against Transubstantiation.

1. A Plain Representation of Transubstantiation, as it is received in the
Church of Rome.

2. The Absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation demonstrated.

3. An Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation.

4. A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface upon the 6th Chapter of St. John.

5. A Brief Discourse of the Real Presence.

6. The School of the Eucharist.

7. Six Conferences concerning Transubstantiation.

8. The Protestant's Answer to the Seeker's Request.

9. The Protestant's Answer to the Catholic Letter to the Seeker: Or, A
Vindication of the Protestant's Answer to the Seeker's Request.

To which we may add two Books, written indeed long since by two eminent
Bishops of this Church, but thought fit to be Reprinted again, since Mr. W's
attempts from Oxford about the Real Presence. The First is,

10. A Brief Declarationn of the Lord's Supper, written by Dr. Nicholas Ridley
Bishop of London, during his Imprisonment. With some Determinations and
Disputations concerning the same Argument, by the same Author.

11. Diallacticon Viri Boni and Literati, etc.

I mention this Book, Of the Notes of the Church.
(tho a Latin one) because it is a very excellent Discourse written by Dr. John
Poynet, Bishop of Winchester, in Edward VI's days, and was very rarely to be
met with till this Reprinting of it.

SECT. VI. Another Subject which has opened a large field to Disputes between
us, and has accordingly been frequently insisted upon, is the CHURCH; with
reference to the Marks, and Nature, and Prerogatives of it.
I. Of the NOTES of the Church.
HE must be very little acquainted with the late Methods made use of by those
of the Church of Rome, in propagating their Religion among us, who knows not
this to have been all along their great Endeavor, to fly, as much as possible,
all particular Disputes, and keep themselves within the general Notions of the
Church: That so applying whatever is, or is pretended to have been said of the
Church Catholic, to their own particular Communion, they might more easily
deceive unwary and ignorant Men. But in this too, as well as in all other
Points in debate, they have not failed to meet enough to encounter their
Pretenses. And to the End it might be better seen how vain a Pretense it is in
them to call themselves Catholics, and their Church the Catholic Church, as if
(in the words of the Prophet) they were alone, Isa. xlv. 6.
and there were none besides them: One of the first Controversies to be
remarked in this Point is, that of the NOTES of the CHVRCH; and upon which they
undertake to show theirs, exclusive to all others, to be the Catholic Church of
Christ Militant upon Earth.

The former part of the State of the Controversy gave an account of the
beginning of these; how our Divines engaged themselves to a weekly
consideration of them, till they had past through the largest Catalogue we have
yet had of these Notes, viz. that of Cardinal Bellarmin. They were then
advanced to the third only, but now the whole is finished; and those little
Exceptions which our Aaversaries thought fit to make to them, are fully
answered, and they altogether compose a just Volume; and plainly show, that
were the Church indeed endued with all those Prerogatives they pretend it is,
yet would it stand them in no stead, seeing, that according to their own Notes,
the Church of Rome cannot possibly be the Catholic or Universal Church.

The Notes which on this occasion have been particularly examined, are these.

1. An Examination of BELLARMIN's First Note concerning, [ the Name of
Catholic.] 2. -- His Second Note, [ Antiquity,] 3. -- His Third Note, [
Duration,] 4. -- His Fourth Note, [ Amplitude or Multitude and Variety of
Believers.] 5. -- His Fifth Note, [ The Succession of Bishops.] 6. His Sixth
Note, [ Agreement in Doctring with the Primitive Church.] 7. -- His Seventh
Note, [ Union of the Members among themselves, and with the Head.] 8. -- His
Eighth Note, [ Sanctity of Doctrine.] 9. -- His Ninth Note, [ Efficacy of the
Doctrine.] 10. -- His Tenth Note, [ Holiness of Life.] 11. -- His eleventh
Note, [ The Glory of Miracles.] 12. -- His Twelfth Note, [ The Light of
Prophecy.] 13. -- His thirteenth Note, [ Confession of Adversaries.] 14. -- His
Fourteenth Note, [ The unhappy End of the Church's Enemies.] 15. -- His
Fifteenth Note, [ Temporal Felicity.]
To which is prefixed,

A Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church; with some Reflections on
Cardinal Bellarmin's Notes.

And annexed,

A Vindication of the Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church; in
Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled [The Use and great Moment of the Notes of
the Church, as delivered by Cardinal Bellarmin (de Notis Ecclesia) Justified.

A Defense of the Confuter of Bellarmin 's Second Note of the Church [
Antiquity against the Cavils of the Adviser.

II. Of the UNITY and AUTHORITY of the Church. Of the Unity and Authority of
the Church.

This is another Argument that has exercised the Pen of a very great Person
amongst as: The occasion of his entering on the Debate, was given by the
publishing of some Papers of His late Majesty, and which are in every Bodies
hand, called,

1. The two Papers written by the late King Charles the Second.

To these an Answer was published, Entitled,

2. An Answer to some Papers lately Printed concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England.

It was not long before two of the other side appeared about the same time, in
defense of the Royal Papers: The one very light, and in some places even
ridiculous, and which shows, that the Author's Talent lies toward Controversy
no more in Prose, than it appears by the Hind and Panther, that it does in
Verse; called,

3. A Defense of the Papers written by the late King of Blessed Memory.

The other, much ore solid and grave than the former, Entitled,

4. A Reply to the Answer made upon the Three Royal Papers.

To both of which the Learned Author returned a most accurate and elaborate
Discourse, viz.

5. A Vindication of the Answer to some late Papers, concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England.

And thus far this Controversy proceeded: But there have been some other
Discourses besides these, published on this Subject: In particular, the
excellent Discourse just published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, with this
Title,

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, Of the Authority and Infallibility
of the Church.
and Communion of the Catholic Church: Wherein most of the Controversies
relating to the Church, are briefly and plainly stated. Part 1. by William
Sherlock, D. D. Master of the Temple.

To these, for the Affinity of the Subject, I cannot do better than adjoyn,

III. Such other Treatises as have been published, relating to the AUTHORITY
and INFALLIBILITY of the Church.
Where first I will beg leave to mention some short Picces which have passed
betwixt a Country Parson, and a Bomish Missioner. The occasion, as I am
informed was this: The Minister having observed some Endeavors to seduce his
Flock, thought it his duty to give them some seasonable directions; which he
therefore published under this Title:

1. The Country Parson's Admonition to his Parishioners, with directions how to
behave themselves, when any one designs to seduce them from the Church of
England.

In which Tract, he advises his Parishioners, as far as possible, to avoid all
Disputes about Religion: But if the Importunity of others shall force them to
it, he then directs them how to bring the matter to a short issue, viz. by
putting them to prove the pretended Infallibility of the Church of Rome. And
this he manageth under the Title of,

2. The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries.

I ought not to conceal how acceptable those little Pieces have been to the
World, nor what good they have done among those for whose use they were chiefly
designed. Of the Infallibility of the Church.
And this those of the other side have been so sensible of, that they have
thought it worth their while to set out a pretended Confutation of them both;
called,

3. The Plain Man's Answer to his Country Parson's Admonition: Together with
the Missionaries Answer to the Plain Man's Reply.

To which the worthy Author of the Two first Treatises, has lately replied,
under these Titles,

4. A Defense of the Country Parson's Admonition.

5. A Defense of the Plain Man's Reply.

And here I think this Controversy has ended. If any Answer has been published
to these last Papers, It is more than I have yet seen or heard of; and I
believe there is none. As for those separate Discourses that have come forth,
relating to this matter, the Principal, if not all, are these that follow.

On the Part of the Church of England.
1. The Pillar and Ground of Truth; a Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be THAT Church, and the Pillar of THAT Truth mentioned by S.
Paul, in 1 Timothy III. 11, 15. 2. A Discourse concerning a Judge of Controversies
in matters of Religion. 3. A Plain and Familiar Discourse by way of Dialogue,
betwixt a Minister and his Parishioner, concerning the Catholic Church. 4.
Reasons why a Protestant should not turn Papist, in a Letter to a Romish
Priest. 5. Monsieur Claude 's Conference with the Bishop of Meaux. Of the
Authority of the Church.
6. An Historical Examination of the Authority of General Councils. 7. Of the
Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. 8. A Sermon on S. Mark 's Day, by
Dr. Patrick. 9. Doubts concerning the Roman Infallibility. 10. A Short
Discourse concerning the Church's Authority in Matters of Faith.
On the Church of Rome 's Side.
1. A Peaceable Method for the re-uniting Protestants and Catholics in Matters
of Faith. Written in French by Monsieur Maimbourg. 2. Seek and ye shall find:
or a search into the Grounds of Religion, etc. 3. Monsieur de Meaux 's
Conference with Monsieur Claude concerning the Authority of the Church.
SECT V. To these Disputes concerning the Church, I do not know any that I can
so sitly subjoin, as those which regard the pretended Privileges and Authority
of St. PETER, and of the POPES, as His Successors.
IT is now some time since an Eminent Person of the other Communion, Dr.
Godden, began the Contest as to this matter, in a Sermon Preached by him in the
Queen Dowagers Chapel, and called,

A Sermon of St. Of S. Peter and the Pope
Peter, preached before her Majesty, the Queen Dowager, June 29. 1686.

In requital of this, a very Learned Man of our Church, set out a Sermon which
he had occasionally Preached in his own Church, the very same Day, upon the
same Text; entitled,

A sermon Preached upon S. Peter 's Day; Printed at the desire of some that
heard it, with some Enlargements, by a Divine of the Church of England.

I will not say any thing more of these Two Discourses, than this, That whosoever
shall please to read them, will find what is to be urged from that famous Text,
Thou art Peter, etc. on either side; and when they compare them together, may
judge as they shall find the evidence of Truth to incline them.

But of this large Subject much more has been set forth; and it shall suffice
to give a very brief Account of it.

1. The Catholic Balance; or a Discourse determining the Controversies
concerning, 1. The Tradition of Catholic Doctrines. 2. The Primacy of S. Peter,
and the Bishop of Rome. 3. The Subjection and Authority of the Church in a
Christian State.
2. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion; with an Answer to Mr. Sclater 's
Reasons, and the Collections of Nobes Testium. 3. A modest Enquiry, Whether S.
Peter were ever at Rome, and Bishop of that Church? 4. Sure and Honest Means
for the Conversion of all Heretics; Of St. Peter and the Popes Supremacy.
and wholesome Advice and Expedients for the Reformation of the Church. 5.
Dialogues between Philerene and Philalethe.
These are, I think, the chief Discourses that have been Published by our
Divines relating to the Prerogatives and Authority that some pretend to, in
behalf of St. Peter, and the Bishops of Rome, his Successors. As for those
which have been sent abroad on this Head by those of the Other Communion, these
are the Principal that have come to my Knowledge.

1. St. Peter 's Supremacy faithfully discussed according to Holy Scripture,
and Greek and Latin Fathers: By Mr. Clenche. 2. The Popes Supremacy Asserted
from the Considerations of some Protestants, and the practice of the Primitive
Church, in a Dialogue between a Church-Divine and a Seeker. In Vindication of
Nubes Testium.
Concerning this last Discourse, you must observe, that it does belong to the
Controversy about the Nubes Testium betwixt the Representer and the Divine of
our Church who answered that Collection. The Representer made a very faint
defense of his Nubes against that Answer, but gave it a good Title, calling it,
The Primitive Fathers no Protestants: To which Mr. G. shortly after replied in
his Primitive Fathers no Papists; after which that Controversy rested, till
the Representer peept out again with this Tract in defense of one point only of
his Nubes Testium; but whoever will take the pains to look into it, will find
that the Representer's Stock is quite spent, and therefore he is forced to
patch up these Learned Dialogues out of his own Nubes Testium, and the
Appendix, with the addition only of a few bold strokes (which F. Sabran would
have called Calumnies) about Dr. Sherlock, etc. So that this Book deserves no
Answer at all; however a very Learned Person of our Church having undertaken to
answer Mr. Clcuche's Book, and Dr. Godden's Sermon about the Pope's Supremacy,
has condescended to consider this Tract also, and the world will very speedily
be obliged with a Complete and Learned Answer to them all under this Title.

A Discourse of the Popes Supremacy, in Two Parts:

The First, In Answer to a Treatise Entitled, Saint Peter's Supremacy
faithfully discussed according to Holy Scripture and Greek and Latin Fathers.
And to a Sermon of St. Peter Preached before her Majesty, the Queen Dowager on
St. Peter and St. Paul 's day, by Tho. Godden, D. D.

The Second, In Answer to a Discourse Entitled, The Pope's supremacy asserted
from the Considerations of some Protestants, and the Practice of the Primitive
Church, in Vindication of Nubes Testium.

SECT. VI. Such have been the Treatises that have passed on both sides
concerning the Popes Authority. The next Point which seems to follow the
nearest upon these, and which indeed is chiefly founded on Arguments drawn from
the Pretenses before mentioned, is that of our unwarrantableness in separating
from the Church of Rome, and Chair of St. Peter: And concerning which much has
been done on both sides.
AS for our Divines, the Treatises they have published in Vindication of our
Reformation from the Charge of SCHISM and HERESY, have been these that follow.

1. A Vindication of the Church of England from the foul aspersions of Schism
and Heresy unjustly cast upon her by the Church of Rome. In two Parts. Of the
Charge of Schism and Heresy.
2. An Answer to a late Printed Paper given about by Some of the Church of
Rome: In a Letter to a Gentleman. 3. An Answer to the Considerations which
obliged Dean Manby to embrace what he calls the Catholic Religion. 4. Notes
upon Lucilla and Elizabeth. 5. An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of
England, in Answer to those who reproach her with the English Heresies and
Schisms, or suspect her not to be a Catholic Church, upon their account. 6. A
few plain reasons why a Protestant of the Church of England, should not turn
Roman Catholic. 7. An Answer to the Spirit of M. Luther, and the Original of
the Reformation, lately Printed at Oxford. 8. Animadversions on Mr. W's
Discourse of Church Government. In two Parts. 9. Reflections on the relation of
the English Reformation, lately Printed at Oxford: and on the Oxford Theses,
Two Parts. 10. An Answer to a Book Entitled, Reason and Authority, or the
Motives of a late Protestant's Reconciliation to the Catholic Church. Together
with a brief Account of Augustine the Monk, and the Conversion of the English.
11. The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began; as it appears
by the Advices given to Paul III. and Julius III. by Creatures of their Own.
12. The Queries offered by T. W. to the Protestants concerning the English
Reformation, Reprinted and Answered.
Nor have those of the Roman Communion been sparing in this Argument, but have
made this a Great Subject of Contention against us: As will appear by the
following Account.

1. Lucilla and Elizabeth, or the Donatist and Protestant Schism Paralleled. 2.
The Sum of a Conference had between two Divines of the Church of England, and
two Catholic Lay-Gentlemen, in 1671. 3. The Church of England truly represented
according to Dr. Heylin 's History of the Reformation. 4. The Gonsiderations
which obliged Peter Manby Dean of Londonderry to embrace the Roman Catholic
Religion. 5. Schelstrate his Dissertation against Dr. Stillingfleet, concerning
Patriarchal and Metropolitical Authority.
As to this Book, since Mr. Schelstrate's Friends heve ventured to expose it in
a Translation here, the Reverend and Most Worthy Dean of Paul's will not fail,
if God continue him health and opportunity, to give an Answer; and I am sure
the world will not be angry with me for raising their Expectations of the
Dean's Answer, since they are satisfied that he will make them sufficient
amends for them.

6. A discourse concerning the Spirit of Martin Luther, and the Original of the
Reformation. 7. Church Government Part V. A Relation of the English
Reformation, and the lawfulness thereof examined. 8. Some Queries to
Protestants concerning the English Reformation: by T.W. 9. The Schism of the
Church of England Demonstrated in Four Arguments, formerly proposed to Dr.
Gunning and Dr. Pearson the late Bishops of Ely and Chester, by two Catholic
Disputants, in a celebrated Conference upon that Point.
This little Paper with a large Title was the other day Reprinted at Oxford by
the Converts there. The foul dealings and egregious disingenuity concerning
that Conference, as well as the weakness and falseness of its Arguments, have
been fully shown in an Answer we have received just now from Cambridg, from a
Reverend Person who was particularly related to one of those abused Bishops.
The Title of his Answer is,

The Reformation of the Church of England justisied, according to the Canons of
the Council of Nice, and other General Councils, and the Tradition of the
Catholic Church, being an Answer to a Paper Reprinted at Oxford, etc.

SECT. VII. And these are the chief Treatises that have been published on these
more General Points. We come now to examine what has been done on the more
particular Controversies. And first we will begin with that which is the Ground
of all,
The RULE of FAITH.
MAny have been the Debates concerning this; both with relation to what we
suppose to be the only Divine Rule, viz. The HOLY SCRIPTUR, Of the Rule of
Faith.
and with reference to that other which those of the Church of Rome have added
to it, viz. The TRADITION of the Church. And,

1. As to the Point of the HOLY SCRIPTURE, these discourses have passed of late
concerning it:

On the part of the Church of Rome.

1. The Protestant's Plea for a Socinian, justifying his Doctrine from being
opposite to Scripture, etc. 2. Protestancy destitute of Scripture Proofs. 3. A
Request to Protestants to produce plain Scriptures, directly Authorizing xvi
Tenets held by them. 4. The 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Chapters of the Second
Part of the Catholic Representer. 5. An Address to the Ministers of the Church
of England. 6. A Clear Proof of the Certainty and Usefulness of the Protestant
Rule of Faith. 7. The Catholic Scripturist. 8. Pax Vobix.
On the Protestant Part.

1. The difference betwixt the Protestant and Socinian Methods, in Answer to a
Book written by a Romanist, and entitled, The Protestant Plea for a Socinian.
2. An Answer to the Request to protestants to produce plain Scriptures directly
Authorizing their Tenets. 3. A Summary of the Principal Controversies between
the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in Answer to Protestancy
destitute of Scripture proofs. 4. The Lay-Christians Obligation to read the
Holy Scripture. 5. The Peoples right to read the Holy Scripture, asserted; in
Answer to the 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Chapters of the 2d part of the
Popish Representer. 6. A Treatise proving Scripture to be the Rule of Faith;
writ by Reginald Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, before the Reformation, about
the year 1450. 7. An Answer to the Address presented to the Ministers of the
Church of England. 8. A Vindication of the Answer to the Popish Address,
presented to the Ministers of the Church of England; In reply to a Pamphlet,
abusively Entitled, A Clear Proof of the Certainty and Usefulness of the
Protestant Rule of Faith. 9. Some Dialogues between Mr. G. and others, with
Reflections on a Book called Pax Vobis.
To which I must add another and fuller Answer preparing to that same little
Piece, not yet Published, viz.

10. The Protestant and Popish way of Interpreting Scripture impartially
compared, in Answer to Pax Vobis.

2. For what concerns the other Point, TRADITION; it has been the great
Endeavor of some of late to set up once more the Infallibility of it. But none
with more Noise, by an accident, which I am now to recount, than Mr. G. and the
great Master of Controveesie, and Patron of this new Hypothesis, J. S.

It happened about a year and half since, that the forwardness of Mr. G. to
engage in a Dispute wherein he was sure to have the disadvantage both in the
Point, and in the Person that was to manage it against him, led him into a
Conference with the Reverend and Learned the Dean of Paul's. I need not say what
passed there, the whole haying since been published: The Subject of the Debate,
was the Infallibility of Oral Tradition. The Conference being over, Mr. G.
(according to the perpetual Custom of the vain and assuming spirit of that
Party) began to make great Boasts in the Coffee-houses, what Feats he had done,
and how great a Victory he had gained; tho the Gentleman, for whose sake the
Conference was held, declared himself much more confirmed in the Communion of
our Church than he was before, and resolved to continue in it. This enforced
the Dean to publish a short Expostulatory Letter, called,

1. A Letter to Mr. G. giving a true Account of a late Conference at the D. of
P.

In return to this, Mr. M. who was with Mr. G. at the Conference, returned a
Letter or two to Dr. Stilling fleet, concerning the Conference; and these
produced a second from the Dean of St. Paul's, called,

2. A second Letter to Mr. G. in Answer to two Letters lately Published
concerning the Conference at the D. of P.

One of the Answers to the D. of P's first Letter, was called,

3. A Letter to the D. of P. in Answer to the Arguing part of his First Letter
to Mr. G.

To this a Person not yet concerned, put in a Reply, Entitled,

4. A Letter to a Friend; reflecting on some passages in a Letter to the D. of
P. in Answer to the Arguing part of his first Letter to Mr. G.

And here Mr. J.S. was thought fit to be entrusted with carrying on this
weighty Controversy; which he did in several Letters, which he calls Catholic
Letters; in Answer to the former Letter, to the second of the Dean's, and to a
Sermon, which in pursuance of this Controversy, he preached at Guildhall. To
these Dr. S. has since replied in a Treatise, which he calls,

5. A Discourse concerning the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith, in
Answer to J. S. his Catholic Letters.

It was expected that this excellent Discourse, which made such a discovery of
the Vanity and Contradictions of that busy Man, would have stopped his Mouth for
the future, especially since the Blackloist Heresy was now like to be brought
on the Stage again. But J. S. was long since past such Modesty; and since, if
the worst that can come, he can eat his words now again, as well as he did
before, when he was cited to Rome, to be censured for those dangerous Heretical
Opinions which he is now again broaching in England: He is for venturing on,
and wrote a Fifth Catholic Letter (as he ridiculously calls it) against the
Dean. But tho his Letter has, I believe, met with as few Readers as Himself has
Admirers, and there is no danger in the World of its doing any Mischief, since
I do not believe it possible to hire any Man of Sense to read three Pages in
it; yet in Compassion, I suppose, to the poor headstrong Man himself, there is
a very Learned Person has undertaken to answer not only that Fifth Letter, but
the other Discourses of the Romanists about Tradition, in

An Historical Discourse concerning Tradition.

This we may expect to have published shortly. In the mean time the Reverend
Dean himself did take another and more effectual course to disprove J. S's
Fantastical Demonstrations of Oral Tradition, by showing, that tho we should
allow Tradition to be as certain and Infallible a Rule as they desire, yet it
would do them no service, who in all those Points wherein they differ from us,
have no Catholic Tradition to warrant them; upon this, in a short time after
the publishing his Discourse, he set forth the First Part of a Work which we
suppose may put a final end to this Debate, viz.

6. The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholic Tradition; in the
main Points in Controversy between Us and the Church of Rome: With an account
of the Times and Occasions of Introducing them. Part I.

We are promised a Second Part, if God continue the Reverend Author Health and
Leisure; we cannot but earnestly wish for it, since the First Part was so very
acceptable, and so very satisfactory.

And thus far this Controversy has been carrled on on both sides. I had almost
forgot to observe, that tho the Dean of Paul's himself undertook Mr. J. S. his
Catholic Letters, yet the Reflecter was not wanting to his own Defense as far
as he was particularly concerned in them. But in a Second Discourse defended
his Letter against Mr. J. S. his Attack in his Second Catholic Letter: the
Treatise is called,

7. The Reflecters Defense of his Letter to a Friend, against the furious
Assaults of Mr. J. S. in his Second Catholic Letter. In four Dialogues.

In this Condition was this Controversy when the Continuation first appeared
abroad. But Mr. J. S. has since carried it a little farther in a new Piece,
which he calls,

8. A Letter to the Continuator of the Present State of our Controversy.

And in which, tho one would think his main Design were what he adds in the
rest of his Title, To lay open the folly of my extravagant Boastings, and the
Malice of my wilful Forgeries: Yes, after two Leaves and a half, spent in
railing at me, he insensibly falls to his old Adversaries, and spends the rest
of his Pains upon them. And to their Correction I shall leave him, who are
chiefly concernl'd to take notice of his Insolence. As for my self, I heartily
pity his Vanity; and shall neither trouble my self, the World, nor him, by
taking the least notice of his Recitings.

Besides this long Encounter upon the Score of Tradition, other Discourses have
been published on both Sides upon this Point, Whether the Church of Rome has
indeed such an Antiquity as it pretends, for the Articles in dispute betwixt
us? And such was,

First, The famous Collection of one of their earliest Converts, Mr. Sclater,
Minister of Putney, in a Book which he called,

1. Consensus Veterum: or the Reasons of Edward Sclater minister of Putney, for
his Conversion to the Catholic Faith and Communion.

And to which a Reply was published, that has put an end to this Undertaking,
viz.

2. Veteres Vindicati: In an Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Sclater Minister of
Putney, upon his consensus Veterum.

But the next Collection was more general, and has run into a longer Debate: It
was called,

1. Nubes Testium: Or, A Collection of the Primitive Fathers, giving Testimony
to the Faith once delivered to the Saints.

To this the same Learned Man who had before Encountered Mr. Sclater's
Pretenses, gave a short but exact Answer; and showed, That tho the Representer
(for it seems his it was) called it a Collection of the Primitive Fathers, he
might much better have entitled a Collection of Natalis Alexander, out of whom
he stole the far greatest part of it. The Representer will, I hope, excuse this
Reflection, which I make only for the sake of Truth, and to show how unwilling
I am in any thing to deserve being thought a Misrepresenter; which is now
become as dangerous a Name, as ever that of Heretic or Schismatic was
heretofore. The Answer is called,

2. An Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes Testium: Wherein is shown, That
Antiquity did not for the first five hundred years Believe, Teach, or Practice,
as the Church of Rome does at present Believe, Teach, and Practice.

And here we are to meet a very strange Accident, the great Chastiser of
Misrepresenters, that honest, sincere Man that cannot endure false dealing, but
was dropped down from Heaven to be the Scourge and Censor of a licentious Age,
himself become a Misrepresenter: And by a stranger kind of Metamorphosis, from
an angel of Light transforming himself into a Spirit of Darkness. In short, He
was it seems enraged to the last Degree, to see not only his venerable
Authorities all ruined, but his Treasury discovered, and the very places marked
from whence he had stolen his Book, without so much as once acknowledging to
whom he was beholden for it. And yet what should he do? Reply to it fairly he
could not; for after all his show of Antiquity, the Fathers were a sort of
Christians that he was utterly unacquainted with; and had he been as well
versed in them as he is in Natalis Alexander, yet could he not have fairly
brought them to speak in behalf of his Church. He therefore resolved under a
new form to pickeer with the Author, and see if he could prevent him by some
cunning Stratagem from being in a capacity of showing him any such trick for
the future. And therefore now no more the Reverend Father he was before, but as
a Zealous Brother of the other Extreme, tho yet a Misrepresenter still, he lets
fly at the Principles of his Adversary; and undertakes out of his grand concern
for the Protestant Interest, to show our Divines that this Gentleman was one,
who for all his Pretenses in their behalf, really endeavored to set up Popery
in Masquerade. And to this end came out a formal Piece called,

3. A Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the Church of England in order
to a Union.

But to the great surprise of this Gentleman, his Adversary, who it seems was
as well acquainted with Henry Hill's Press, as Natalis Alexander's history, and
by a sort of Beauties so essential to the Representer, that do what he can he
is not able to disguise himself, presently found out what an Ass was crept into
the Lyon's Skin. And to let the whole World see what an honest fair dealer this
Representer is, he quickly gave an account of it in Print, in his Answer to the
Pamphlet, Entitled,

4. a Vindication of the Principles of the Author of the Answer to the Compiler
of the Nubes Testium, from the Charge of Popery: In Answer to a late pretended
Letter from a Dissenter, to the Divines of the Church of England.

To this I do not know that the Representer has yet replied: But in defense of
his Nubes Testium we have an Answer that every way befits the Character of its
Author: It is called,

5. The Primitive Fathers no Protestants: Or a Vindication of Nubes Testium
from the Cavils of the Answerer.

And that has produced us another Defense: viz.

6. The Primitive Fathers no Papists: In Answer to the Vindication of the Nubes
Testium. To which is added an Historical Discourse concerning Invocation of
Saints, in Answer to the Challenge of Father Lewis Sabran the Jesuit.

And here it was thought this Controversy would have ended, till the other day
the Representer peept out with his Defense of one Chapter of his Nubes Testium,
which I have already mentioned under this Title,

The Popes Supremacy Asserted.

To which an Answer will be shortly in the Press.

And here this Debate might have ended, had not a short Postscript at the Close
of the first Answer to the Nubes Testium, engaged our Worthy Author in a new
Quarrel with Father Sabran a Jesuit; and who is now grown more famous in the
World from his New Antagonist the Protestant Footman, who as we have before
observed, undertook the Defense of the Reverend Master of the Temple from such
pitiful Cavils, as indeed were not worth the while of the Learned Man himself
to take notice of; and are abundantly answered by his new and more proper
Antagonist.

In his Sermon before the King at Chester, this Jesuit told his Majesty and the
Auditory, that he followed the advice of St. Austin when he recommended himself
to the Blessed Virgins Intercession, and advised them to do the same: And for
this quotes his Thirty-fifth Sermon de Sanctis. Upon this there began a hot
Debate in Letters betwixt F. Sabran, and the Answerer, concerning this
Authority of St. Austin; and at last from a particular Passage, rose up to a
General Point, of the Practice of the Primitive Church as to the Invocation of
Saints. The Pieces themselves may be consulted in this Order.

1. A Letter to a Peer of the Church of England, clearing a Point in a Sermon
Preached at Chester, in Answer to a Postscript joined unto the Answer to Nubes
Testium.

2. A Letter to Father Lewis Sabran Jesuit, in Answer to his Letter to a Peer
of the Church of England, etc.

3. A Reply of Lewis Sabrand of the Society of Jesus, to the Answer given to
his Letter written to a Peer of the Church of England, etc.

4. A Second Letter to Father Lewis Sabran, Jesuit, in Answer to his Reply.

And here the Controversy about St. Austin's Sermon was either ended or dropped,
the Jesuit being now ferretted by the Second Letter out of all his starting
holes. But Mr. G. in his Primitive Fathers no Papists, taking into
Consideration a Challenge, which the Jesuit had made him in one of his Letters
about Invocation, published an Historical Discourse to prove that Invocation of
Saints was neither the Doctrine nor the Practice of the Primitive Fathers. Upon
this the Jesuit begun again, after having taken a little breath, and in a whole
Sheet undertakes to answer that large Historical Account, with this Title,

5. The Challenge of Father Lewis Sabran made out, against the Historical
Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints.

To which Mr. G. very soon after replied in

6. A Third Letter to Father Lewis Sabrah, Jesuit; Wherein the Defense of his
Challenge concerning Invocation of Saints, is Examined and Confuted.

In this Letter Mr. G. made such Discoveries of the strange Disingenuity, and
confident Ignorance of the Jesuit, that he was resolved to rid his Hands of
such an Adversary as had neither Learning nor Good-manners, and therefore told
him in the Conclusion of his Letter that he would trouble himself no more with
answering such an Adversary. Upon this the Jesuit, whose only stock is
Confidence, being turned off by his Learned Adversary, was forced to address
his next Reply to a Third Person, and pitched upon Mr. Needham, because he had
Licensed Mr. G's Third Letter to him; and directed a Letter to him with this
Title,

7. A Letter to Dr. William Needham; In Answer to the Third Letter by him
Licensed, Written to Father Lewis Sabran, of the Society of Jesus.

To which Mr. G. did finally Reply in an Address to the Jesuit's Superiors; and
this it is supposed will end this Controversy, it is called,

8. A Letter to the Superiors, (whether Bishops or Priests) which approve or
License the Popish Books in England; particularly to those of the Jesuits
Order, concerning Lewis Sabrah, a Jesuit.

And all these Engagements the first Answer to the Nubes Testium produced: But
tho we now quit our Author, yet we must not therefore leave the Subject. For
about the same time that the former Answer appeared, another Learned Person of
our Church began to consider it by Parts, in several Letters to a Person of
Quality: And the Account of which I will now give, as far as the Pieces are
come to my Knowledge. The first that appeared, was called,

1. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion: With an Answer to Mr. Sclater 's
Reasons, and the Collections made by the Author of the Pamphlet entitled,
Nubes Testium. In a Letter to a Person of Quality. The first Part.

The next he Entitled,

2. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion, concerning Images: With an Answer
to the Collections made by the Author of the Pamphlet, Entitled, Nubes
Testium. In a Letter to a Person of Quality. The 2d Part.

What Notice has been taken of the former of these, I am not able to say; but
the latter has produced us an Answer, Entitled,

3. A Discourse of the Use of Images, in relation to the Church of England and
the Church of Rome; in Vindication of Nubes Testium.

To which our Author has replied in

4. A Third Letter to a Person of Quality, being a Vindication of the former;
in Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Discourse of the Use of Images.

And to that in pursuance of his First Design, has lately added a Fourth, which
he calls,

5. A Fourth Letter to a Person of Quality; being an Historical Account of the
Doctrine of the Sacrament, from the Primitive times to the Council of Trent,
showing the Novelty of Transubstantiation.

To conclude this Head, I shall only add one General Discourse on this Subject,
which I have before mentioned, and can never name too often, viz.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the RULE of FAITH.

SECT. VIII. Of the Nature of Idolatry.
Having hitherto pursued the business of the Rule of Faith, and the Treatises
that have been published on the Occasion of it; we will now go on to the more
special Examinations that have been made by both these Rules; viz. Scripture
and Tradition, of the particular Points in debate betwixt us. And because I
have just now mentioned some such Examinations of the two great Rocks of
offense to us, The Worship of Images, and the Invocation of Saints; it may not
be amiss first of all to see what has been further done upon these Arguments,
and the other instances of what we esteem,
The IDOLATRY of the Church of Rome.
THere is perhaps nothing in all our Disputes with those of the other
Communion, which they so unwillingly care to enter on, as this. They look upon
the very Name of it to be a kind of Reproach to them, and would be thought as
heartily, as we our selves can desire, to detest the Guilt of it. But yet it is
too evident to be denied, that our Charge is very justly brought against them;
and by consequence that it ought not to be doubted, but that our Separation
from them must have been most reasonable, if it can indeed be made appear, as
we are persuaded we have plainly shown, that we could not have continued in
their Communion, without joining with them in the Practice of one of the
greatest of Sins, viz. Idolatry.

But before we come to the Particulars in which this Charge is brought against
them, it is fit we should first state the general Notion of IDOLATRY; and this
has been effectually done, but very lately. The Reverend the Bishop of Oxon,
having in a Treatise which he published for the abrogating of the Test and
Penal Laws, given us just occasion to do so. This Book is so well known, and
the Answer to it was so lately published, that I shall not need say any thing
more of either, but only add their Titles, which are these, viz.

1. Reasons for Abrogating the Test.

2. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry: In which a late Author's
true and only notion of Idolatry is considered and Confuted.

I must not forget to observe also, that the Bishop in his Tract pretending to
give a new and very strange Account of the Romish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, that part of his Book received two particular
Considerations, the one in the Preface to the Reverend Dean of Paul's Book,
Entitled, The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholic Tradition:
The other in a Learned Discourse, under this Title,

3. Transubstantiation the Peculiar Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

I am told we owe this Book to a very ingenious Nonconformist; and as we cannot
but thank him for the Discourse he has given us, so he deserves to be thanked
for his design of answering the other part of the Bishop's Book about the
Nature of Idolatry; in which he was prevented, as I am told, by the other
Discourse about the Nature of Idolatry coming out while that good design was
under his hands. I cannot but wish that our Brethren had begun sooner to assist
us in such a large Controversy as we have been obliged to manage, and that
others amongst them would follow the Example, which this Learned Author has so
worthily set before them.

Another Writer has given us a very ingenious short Answer to both parts of
the Bishop's Book, and calls it,

4. A Discourse concerning Transubstantiation and Idolatry, being an Answer to
the Bishop of Oxford's Plea relating to those two Points.

As for the particular Instances wherein we make good this charge of Idolatry
against them; I have before mentioned that of the ADORATION of the HOST, See
above, Page 6. 19.
and the Discourses that have been published on that Argument. The two Points
remaining, and of which something was said under the last Head, are, the
WORSHIP of IMAGES, and the INVOCATION of Saints.

I. Of the WORSHIP of IMAGES.
Upon which Point, Of the Worship of Images.
besides the two Letters written in Answer to the Nubes Testium, the following
Discourses have also been set forth, viz.

1. The Fallibility of the Roman Church demonstrated from the manifest Error of
the second Nicene and Trent Councils; which assert, That the Veneration and
Honorary Worship of Images is a Tradition Primitive and Apostolical.

2. A Discourse concerning the second Council of Nice, which first introduced
and established Image Worship in the Christian Church; Anno Domini 787.

For the other Point,

II. The INVOCATION of SAINTS.
Many Discourses have been Published, and a full account given of this Matter;
and if we may judge by the slender Returns that have been made to them, Of the
Invocation of Saints.
little is to be said in Vindication of this Superstition. The Treatises that I
have seen, are these that follow.

1. Speculum B. Virginis: A Discourse of the due Praise and Honor of the
Virgin Mary.

2. A Discourse concerning the Worship of the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints;
with an Account of the Beginning and Rise of it among Christians; in Answer to
Monsieur de Meaux 's Appeal to the ivth Age, in his Exposition and Pastoral
Letter.

3. Wholesome Advices from the B. Virgin to her indiscreet Worshippers.

This Piece was only a Translation which an Ingenious Layman of our Church put
into English, and set a large Preface before it: To this the Catholic
Representer gave an Attack in the 4th Chapter of his Second Part; and thereby
obliged our Author to make a smart Reply upon him, called,

A Letter to the Misrepresenter of Papists.

4. An Account of the Life and Death of the B. Virgin, according to the Romish
Writers, with the Grounds of the Worship paid to her.

5. The Life of S. Mary Magdalene of Pazzi, a Carmelite Nun; with a Preface of
the Nature, Causes, Concomitants, and Consequences of Ecstasy and Rapture; and
a brief Discourse added, about discerning and trying Spirits, whether they be
of God.

6. An Abridgment of the Prerogatives of S. Ann, Mother of the Mother of God.

7. The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome demonstrated in some Observations upon
the Life of Ignatius Loyola.

8. The Virgin Mary Misrepresented by the Roman Church, etc. Part I. Wherein
Two of her Feasts, her Conception, and Nativity, are considered.

We are in hopes that the Excellent Author of this most ingenious and diverting
Discourse will e're long oblige the World with a Second Part, and teach the
Papists at length to grow ashamed of their intolerable Superstitions toward
the Virgin Mary.

As for those of the other Communion, it is but little they have published in
particular on this Subject, besides what I have already mentioned. But two
Pieces there are which I ought by no means no forget, viz.

1. Contemplations on the Life and Glory of H. Mary. 2. An Apology for the
Contemplations, by Dr. I. C.
Which Apology was fully answered in the ingenious Preface to the Book called,
An Account of the Life and Death of the Blessed Virgin.

SECT. IX. Of the Validity of Orders in the C. of E.
I shall mention but one Particular more, on which we have of late, as
heretofore, been attacked by those of the Roman Church, and effectually
Vindicated our selves, both against their Calumnies, and their Reasons; and
that is as to the Validity of ORDERS in the Church of England.
THE Occasion of reviving this Matter, was given by a little Scurrilous Libel
that went abroad, under the name of,

The Church of England truly Represented.

And in Reply to whose Calumnies, Three Discourses have been Published, two of
them new, the other only reprinted, viz.

1. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.

2. A Defense of the Ordinations and Ministry of the Church of England; in
Answer to the Scandals raised or revived against them, in several late
Pamphlets, and particularly in one entitled, the Church of England truly
Represented, etc.

3. A short Defense of the Orders of the Church of England, as by Law
established; against some scattered Objections of Mr. Webster of Linne.

But this Subject has been most largely and learnedly handled by the Learned
Mr Brown, of S. John's College in Cambridge, in his Sermon ad Clerum; and in
another Sermon Preached before the University on Commencement Sunday;
Translated into Latin; and both together Printed at Cambridge under this Title.

4. Concio ad Clerum habita coram Academia Cantabrigiensi Junii 11. An. 1687.
pro Gradu Baccal, in S. Theologia; Vbi vindicatur Vera and Valida Cleri
Anglicani, Ineunte Reformatione, Ordinatio. Cui accessit Concio habita Julii 3.
1687. de Canonica Cleri Anglicani Ordinatione Latin reddita and aucta; a Th.
Brown, S. T. B. Coll. D. Joh. Evang. Soc. annexum est Instrumentum
Consecrationis Matthew. Parker, Archiep. Cant. ex MS. C. C. C. Cantabr.

I hear the worthy Author has been very earnestly requested to Translate these
Latin Sermons into English; and I am told, that he delays it only upon the
account of some Answer that the Papists have been talking they would give to
them, being desirous to make his Translation and Vindication one trouble. I
cannot therefore but in the behalf of those who are so desirous to have these
Sermons in English, request our Adversaries, That if they have any thing to say
to them, they would make a little more haste with it. And for the mighty Master
of Controversy, who I hear has resolved to answer a Paragraph in one of them,
I must needs tell him, That Nine Months is more by Eight and an half, than an
ordinary Controvertist would have taken to answer such a Piece in.

But in this Controversy we have not been merely upon the Defensive Part, but
have attacked their Orders, as well as defended our own. This a Learned Man of
our Church has done in a Book under this Title,

5. Roman Catholics uncertain whether there be any true Priests or Sacraments
in the Church of Rome. Miscellany Treatises.


SECT. X. Having thus reduced the Principal Treatises that have been set forth,
to their Particular Heads, as far as in so great a Confusion of Matter I could
well do it; it remains only to add here such Treatises on both sides, as I have
before passed by, or could not be so readily brought to any special
Consideration.
NOW those of this kind, which have been set forth by the CHURCH of ROME, are
these,

1. Question of Questions.

2. Why are you a Catholic?

3. Popery Anatomized; or the Papists cleared from the false Imputation of
Idolatry and Rebellion.

4. Veritas Evangelica; or the Gospel Truth asserted in xvi useful Questions.

5. Pope Pius Profession of Faith vindicated, etc.

6. Dr. Sherlock sifted from his Bran and Chaff.

7. The Pharisee unmasked.

8. Assertio vii Sacramentorum; by King Henry viiith, against Luther.

9. A Reformd Catechism, by P. Manby.

10. Animadversions on the Rishop of Bath's Sermon, etc.

To these they have, because not at leisure to write new Books, or for some
other better Reason, added an old Book written by one F. Huddleston, a
Benedictine; it is called,

11. A Short and Plain way to the Faith and Church, etc.

To this there is an Answer almost finished by a very Learned Person, who will
demonstrate to the World, how little that Book had in it to convince.

On Our Part have appeared of this Miscellany kind, these that follow.

1. Remarks on Popery Misrepresented, with reference to the Deposing Doctrine.

2. Pope Pius's Creed, with Comments.

3. The Additional Articles in Pope Pius's Creed, no Articles of the Christian
Faith.

4. A few plain Reasons why a Protestant of the Church of England should not
turn Roman Catholic.

5. Thirty plain, but sound Reasons why Protestants differ from Popery.

6. A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that their Religion is the
surest way to Heaven.

7. A Pacifick Discourse of the Causes and Remedies of the Differences about
Religion, which distract the Peace of Christendom.

8. The Missionaries Arts discovered.

9. A Request to Roman Catholics to answer certain Queries on several of their
Tenets mentioned.

10. A Brief Account of the first rise of the Name Protestant, etc.

11. An Historical Relation of several great and learned Romanists that have
embraced the Protestant Religion.

12. A Catechism truly representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome; with an Answer to them.

13. The Plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest Answered by an English
Protestant.

14. A Discourse between two Protestants, in Answer to a Popish Catechism,
called, A Short Catechism against all Sectaries.

15. A Plain Defense of the Protestant Religion, fitted to the Meanest
Capacity: being a full confutation of the Net for the Fishers of Men.

16. Some Queries to Protestants Answered: and an Explication of the Roman
Catholic 's Belief in Four great Points considered; 1. Concerning their Church.
2. Their Worship. 3. Justification. 4. Civil Government.

17. The Judgment of Private Discretion in matters of Religion, defended in a
Sermon at S. Paul 's Covent Garden, By Mr. Kidder.

18. The Protestant Resolved: Or a Discourse, showing the Unreasonableness of
his turning Roman Catholic for salvation.

19. A Discourse, wherein is held forth the Opposition of the Doctrine,
Worship, and Practices of the Roman Church, to the Nature, Designs, and
Characters of the Christian Faith.

20. Two short Discourses against the Romanists, by Mr. Dodwell, Cambden
Professor in the University of Oxford.

21. An Answer to a Discourse concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy, printed at
Oxford.

22. A Letter to a Lady: furnishing Her with Scripture Testimonies, against the
principal Points and Doctrines of Popery.

In return to the last of these Discourses, Father Darrell the Jesuit has been
pleased to set out a Single Half Sheet, which he calls,

A Letter to a Lady: wherein he desires a Conference with the Gentleman who
writ Her that Letter.

This is indeed a new way of answering Books, and becoming the busy, assuming
spirit of that Society. One would wonder, after so little Success as they have
hitherto met with in these Encounters, what should move this Reverend Father to
be so forward to come into the same List with Goodwin, Pulton, and a few others
of the same Character. For tho abundance of Noise in a Conference, and of
Misrepresentation after, may help out a weak Cause, and an Illiterate Defender
of it, when they are sure beforehand of the person for whose sake it is held;
yet methinks they should be more wary than to run upon such Hazards, where, in
all probability, they are not like either to gain their Proselyte, or to have
the opportunity of these kind of Subterfuges to assist them.

However, tho I have neither the Honor to know the Lady, or the Author of that
Letter; yet for this good Father's satisfaction, I will venture for once to
promise him, That if her Ladyship does desire it, not only the Author of that
Letter will be ready to meet him, but to show how willing we are to encourage a
hopeful Design, let him choose his Gownman between Blackwall and Hide-park
Corner, and I dare say there is not one among them all that on this or any
other occasion will decline to show him how little reason he has for his
forwardness.

I am now hastening to an End of this Undertaking; and, I think I cannot better
finish it, than with a short Account of a Controversy which made no small
Noise in the World, between the Reverend Dr. Tenison, and Father Pulton the
Jesuit.

About Michaelmas last they met at a House in Long-Acre, on the acount of a Boy
whom Mr. Pulton had perverted from our Religion. Great things were presently
talked, as usual on such occasions, concerning this Conference; and the Papists
failed not to boast of a mighty Conquest made over the Doctor. This forced him
to resolve on a Publication of what passed, tho otherwise as little fit, as
designed to be communicated to the world. Each Party set forth his own Account,
and first Mr. Pulton his, in two Books, called,

1. A true Account of the Conference, etc.

2. A true and full Account of a Conference held about Religion, between Dr.
Thomas Tenison, and A. Pulton one of the Masters in the Savoy.

Dr. Tenison's was Entitled,

3. A true account of a Conference held about Religion, at London, Sept. 29.
1687. between A. Pulton Jesuit, and Thomas Tenison, D. D.

This was followed on the Jesuit's part, with a new Discourse, called,

4. Remarks of A. Pulton, upon Dr. Thomas Tenison 's late Narrative, with a
Confutation of the Doctor's Rule of Faith; and Reply to A. Cressener 's
pretended Vindication.

To which Dr. Tenison replied in a second Treatise, viz.

5. Mr. Pulton considered, etc.

And this produced another Discourse from another hand, viz. Mr. Meredith, who
was present at the Conference, called,

6. Some farther Remarks on the late Account given by Dr. Tenison of his
Conference with Mr. Pulton.

As for what is added in Mr. Pulton's 3d. Treatise in Answer to A. Cressener,
the meaning of it is this: Mr. Cressener a Schoolmaster, being present at the
Conference, Mr. Pulton in his account of it, gave him some occasion to complain
of his Relation, as to that part of it which concerned him; and therefore, to
justify himself, he published a short Treatise, to which Mr. Pulton there
refers, viz.

7. The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
aspersions of A. Pulton Jesuit and Schoolmaster in the Savoy.

And thus this Controversy ended; but yet I must not leave it, till I have
taken notice of another that it begat, and that no less memorable than the
foregoing. For upon the occasion of this Conference, a Paper was taken notice
of much used by the puny Controvertists of our days, called,

1. Speculum Ecclesiasticum: Or an Ecclesiastical Prospective Glass:

Written, as we are told, by a Soldier of that Party, T. Ward; and to which
Dr. Tenison procured a young Man, a Friend of his, to write an Answer; which he
did, Entitled,

2. The Speculum Ecclesiasticum considered, in its false Reasonings and
Quotations.

But before this was published, the Doctor obtained a Copy of a Defense which
the Soldier had prepared of his Quotations, but was not yet come from the
Press; and to finish all at once, an Answer was set forth to that too at the
same time ere it could appear abroad in the world. This the Soldier resented,
and expressed his sense of it in a Letter to Dr. Tenison; which, together with
a Reply to it, were published under the Title of,

3. An Answer to the Letter of the Catholic Soldier, in a Letter from C. D. to
A. B. the Examiner of his Speculum.

However, not long after, the Defense was published with a dreadful Name, viz.

4. Monomachia: Or, A Duel Between Dr. Thomas Tenison Pastor of St. Martins,
and a Roman Catholic Soldier.

And so I think this worthy Controversy ended.

SECT. XI. Having now run through the several Heads of Controversy that have of
late exercised the Pens of our Learned Men in Defense of our Religion, it may
not be amiss to stop here awhile, and by a brief Recapitulation of the Whole,
see what more remains to a complete Vindication of our Selves against all the
Tricks and Artifices, as well as against the Arguments of our Adversaries.
IT is sufficiently evident from the foregoing Collection, what slender Returns
those of the Church of Rome have made to the many excellent Discourses, which
themselves (without any provocation of ours) have extorted from us. And what
prejudice they have hereby done to their Religion, I am confident they
themselves are not unsensible. I need not say what a Number of Disputes they
have altogether let fall; how many of our Books, to this day, remain
Vn-answered, and are ever likely to be so. In a word, what Trifles many times
they have set forth under the arrogant Title of FULL ANSWERS to those they have
thought fit to take Notice of. And now at last, to complete all, they seem to
have utterly deserted the Controversy; and, too late, to see that Truth and
Learning are not to be run down by those who are utterly destitute of the One,
and, as far as we may be allowed to guess by their performances, have but very
slender pretenses to the Other.

The truth is, Propery is a Religion fit only for an Inquisition to maintain,
and Dragoons to propagate. Ignorance and Barbarity brought it into the World;
Interest and Passion maintain and keep it up: No sooner did Learning begin to
revive, but Popery began immediately to decay; and ever since, the One has
still decreased in proportion, as the Other has flourished. And to think at
this time a day seriously to dispute a Nation so resolute and knowing as Ours,
again into the Errors of it, plainly shows either that our Adversaries have a
very mean Opinion of our Understandings, or I am sure deserve that we should
have no very great one of theirs.

But whatever they once may have flattered themselves withal, I am confident
they now begin to be satisfied, That Popery is a Religion that will not thrive
in our Northern Climate. And tho they are pleased sometimes to divert
themselves with our Divisions, and, it may be, did from thence conceive some
hopes of promoting their Interest amongst us; yet I doubt not but they now see,
that we are not so much divided amongst our selves, as we are all of us
heartily united against them.

As for the Divines of the Church of England, how firmly they have adhered to
the Protestant Interest, is not unknown to any. Their Preaching, their
Conversation, but, above all, their Writings declare it to the World: And how
foully, by consequence, they were heretofore either mistaken, or misrepresented,
when they were exposed by some (who I believe wished them so) as Papists in
Masquerade, or at least as Popishly affected.

Never perhaps was there a Controversy more successfully managed than this has
been in these late Years. Till now, these Points were handled in such a manner,
that if the Learned applauded the performance, yet the Vulgar were but little
the better for it. But in these Discourses, Strength of Argument, and Plainness
of Discourse seem to vie with one another. The Arguments so sound, as to
convince all Gainsayers; and yet the Plainness so great, that the meanest
Persons may comprehend the force of them. And thus have they pursued not one or
two Points, but I may warrantably say, the whole Controversy betwixt us.
Insomuch that from henceforth we may well excuse them any farther trouble, till
either our Adversaries shall think fit to answer their Discourses, or to
advance some other Arguments than those which have already been obviated and
confuted.

But indeed there is no great likelihood of either of these; and I dare venture
to promise my Reader, that let those of the Church of Rome attacque him where
they please, let them in writing or discourse offer what they are able to him,
he shall here in this Collection, which I therefore on purpose make of several
of these Treatises under their proper Heads, find more than enough to answer
all their Allegations.

I. GENERAL DISCOURSES: Or such as consider the most part of the Points in
debate betwixt us.
1. The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented. 2.
Answer to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition. 3. Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Church of England. 4. Two Desences of the Exposition. 5. An Answer to the
Compiler of the Nubes Testium. 6. The Primitive Father no Papists. 7. Pope
Pius's Creed with Comments: 8. the Additional Articles in Pope Pius's Creed, no
Articles in the Christian Faith.
II. Of RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
1. A Discourse concerning the OBJECT of Religious Worship. 2. A Discourse
concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome.
III. Of PRAYER in an UNKNOWN TONGUE.
1. A Discourse of Prayer in an Unknown Tongue. 2. A Treatise in Confutation of
the Latin Service, etc.
IV. Of the INVOCATION of SAINTS.
1. A Discourse concerning the INVOCATIONS of SAINTS. 2. Second Defense of the
Exposition, Artic. III. 3. An Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery. 4. Mr. Gee's third Letter to Father Sabran. 5. The Primitive Fathers no
Papists. 6. A Discourse in Answer to Monsieur de Meaux's Appeal to the IVth.
Age. Paticularly of the B. VIRGIN. See several Discourses collected, Page 52,
53.
V. Of IMAGES and RELICS.
1. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion concerning Images. 2. The
Vindication of it. -- See above, page 48. The Fallibility of the Church of Rome
demonstrated, from the manifest Error of the Second Nicene and Trent Councils,
in the Pint of Images. 4. A Discourse concerning the 2d. Council of Nice, which
first introduced and established Image Worship in the Christian Church. 5.
Second Defense of the Exposition, Part 2. Art. IV. 6. Answer to Papists
protesting against Protestant Popery.
VI. Of IDOLATRY.
A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry, in Answer to the Bishop of
Oxon.
VII. Of MERITS; SATISFACTIONS; PURGATORY; and INDULGENCES.
1. Two Discourses of Purgatory, and PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD. 2. Purgatory proved
by Miracles. 3. Apology for the Pulpits. Appendix of Indulgences. 4. The
Primitive Fathers no Papists. for Purgatory. 5. Summary of the Controversies
for Purgatory. 6. A Discourse concerning the Merits of Good Works.
VIII. Of the SACRAMENTS.
An Historical Discourse of the Ministers Intentions, in Administering the
Sacraments.
IX. Of CONFESSION and PENANCE.
A Discourse of Auricular Consession, as prescribed by the Council of Trent.
X. Of EXTREME UNCTION.
1. A Discourse of Extreme Unction.
XI. Of ORDERS.
1. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England. 2. Concio ad
Clerum, etc. See Page 54, 55. 3. A Defense of the Ordinations and Ministry of
the Church of England. 4. A short Defense of the Orders of the Church of
England. To these Learned Discourles we shall shortly have added another upon
the same good Subject from the Reverend and Leanred Dr. Prideaux, Prebendary of
Norwich, entitled, 5. The Validity of the Orders of the Church of England made
out against the Objections of the Papists in several Letters to a Gentleman of
Norwich that desired satisfaction therein. 6. Roman Catholics uncertain whether
there be any true Priests or Sacraments in the Church of Rome.
XII. Of the REAL PRESENCE.
1. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the two great Points, of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host. 2. A Reply to two Discourses, printed
at Oxford, etc.
XIII. Of TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
1. A Discourse against Transubstantiation. 2. Transubstantiation no Doctrine
of the primitive Fathers. 3. Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the
Ancient Church, relating to the Eucharist, etc. 4. Transubstantiation contrary
to Scripture. 5. A Paraphrase, with Notes and a Preface on the vith of St.
John. See many other Tracts above, from page 22. 7. Veteres Vindicati, in
Answer to Mr. Sclater. 8. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in Answer to Mr.
W. 9. Fourth Letter to a Person of Quality. See above, p. 48. 10.
Transubstantiation the peculiar Dictrine of the Church of Rome, see p. 50.
XIV. Of the SACRIFICE of the MASS.
1. A Discourse concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass.
XV. Of the ADORATION of the HOST.
1. A Discourse of the Adoration of the Host.
XVI. Of COMMUNION in BOTH KINDS.
1. A Discourse of Communion in One Kind, in Answer to the Bishop of Meaux. 2.
A Demonstration that the Church of Rome and her Councils have Erred, touching
Communion in One Kind.
XVII. of the RULE etc. of FAITH.
1. A Discourse concerning a Guide in Matters of Faith. 2. The Protestant
Resolution of Faith. 3. Of the Authority of Councils, and of the Rule of Faith.
XVIII. Of the Holy SCRIPTURE.
1. An Answer to the Request to Protestants. 2. A Summary of the Principal
Controversies betwixt the Church of England, and the Church of Rome. 3. The
Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Scripure. 4. The Peoples Rights to read
the Scripture. 5. The Protestant and Popish way of Interpreting Scripture,
impartially compared; in Answer to Pax Vobis. See other Discourses above, p.
38, 39.
XIX. Of TRADITION.
Discourse about Tradition. 2. An Historical Discvourse concerning Tradition.
3. The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholic Tradition. See more
Discourses above, p. 40, 41, 42. To which I must add an Excellent Treatise
omitted in its proper place, but which ought not by any means to be forgotten,
called. 4. A Treatise of Traditions. In 2 Parts.
XX. Of the CHURCH.
1. A Discourse of the Unity of the Catholic Church maintained in the C. of E.
2. A Discourse of the Charge of Novelty, brought against the Chapter of E. 3. The
Notes of the Church. See above, p. 26. 4. Of the Unity and Authority of the
Church: See Discourses above, p. 28. To which we must add a Book since
published, which ought by no means to be forgotten, being (as we are assured)
the Genuine Issue of the Great and Admired Bishop Sanderson; It is called, 5. A
Discourse concerning the Church, in these following Particulars, 1. Concerning
the Visibility of the True Church: 2. Concerning the Church of Rome: 3.
Concerning Protestant Churches: 4. An Answer to the Question, Where was your
Church before Luther? 6. Of the Authority and Infallibility of the Church.
Several Discourses, p. 29, 30, 31. 7. Two short Discourses against the
Romanists, by Mr. Dowell.
XXI. Of St. PETER, and the POPE.
1. A Sermon Preached upon S. Peter's Day. 2. The Catholic Balance. 3. A
Discourse of the Pope's Supremacy, in two Parts. To which we may add a Tract
since Printed, with this Title, 4. Pope Gregory the Great his Opinion of the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, taken from his own Writings. See other
Discourses above, p. 32, 33, 34.
XXII. Of the REFORMATION.
1. Two Discourses concerning the Necessity of the Reformation. 2. An Answer to
the Spirit of Martin Luther, and the Original of the Reformation. 3.
Reflections on the Relation of the English Reformation, Printed at Oxford. See
other Discourses above, p. 35, 36.
XXIII. Of SCHISM; and HERESY.
1. A Vindication of the Church of England, from the foul Aspersions of Schism
and Heresy, 2 Parts. 2. An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of England,
etc. See other Discourses above, p. 35, 36.
XXIV. Of the CELIBACY of the CLERGY.
1. A Discourse of the Celibacy of the Clergy. 2. An Answer to a Discourse
concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy; Printed at Oxford.
SECT. XII. And now after so full an Account of these Discourses, and of the
several Controversies that have been handled in them; I have only remaining for
the Close of all, to give a short Account of that Excellent Undertaking in
which our Divines are at this time engaged; and which being finished, I do not
see what more can be desired in order to our full Satisfaction in this Matter.
I Have before recounted how by a joint Labor they run through the
Consideration of the pretended Notes of the Church, on which the Romanists
establish their usurped Authority. No sooner were those ended, but they
presently resolved upon another, and a more useful Project, which was to search
into our Adversaries Books; and collect all those Passages of Scripture which
are usually alleged by them to maintain their Errors. And by giving the true
Explication of them, at once to secure their Flock from their false Glosses,
and let them into a better understanding of those Sacred Books. In this
Undertaking they have already made a considerable Advance, as will appear by
the following Catalogue:

1. POPERY not founded on SCRIPTURE: Or, The Texts which Papists cite out of
the Bible for the Proof of the Points of THEIR RELIGION, examined, and showed
to be alleged without Ground.

After which follow the Texts themselves, which they bring for,

2. The Obscurity of the Holy Scriptures.

3. The Insufficiency of Scripture, and the Necessity of Tradition.

4. The Supremacy of St. Peter, and of the Pope, over the whole Church, in Two
Parts.

5. Their Doctrine of Infallibility.

6. The Worship of Angels and Saints departed. In Two Parts.

7. The Worship of Images and Relics.

8. The Seven Sacraments, and the Efficacy of them. In Two Parts.

9. The Sacrifice of the Mass. Two Parts.

10. Transubstantiation.

11. Auricular Confession.

12. Satisfactions. Two Parts.

May they go on with Success to finish this Good Work; whilst we (for whose
sake they take all these pains) encourage their Endeavors, by a firm adherence
both to them and to their Doctrine, and by our constant contending for the
Faith we have received from them, declare to all the World, that their Labor
has not been in Vain in the Lord.

FINIS.
A Postscript of N. N. to Mr. John Sergeant, occasioned by his Letter to the
Continuator of the Present State of the Controversy.
Mr. Sergeant,
Having perused your Letter to the Continuator of the Present State of our
Controversy, I perceive, that you are mightily concerned at the Historical
Discourse concerning Tradition, which he mentioned to be wirting, and that you
Letter to the Continuator, etc. p. 13.
would gladly find some way to save our Friends this vast labor, and excuse
them from this Impossible Task [of answering you]. I quickly apprehended your
meaning, that you had a great desire not to be answered; and therefore in pure
Complaisance to you, the first time I met with the Author of the Historical
Discourse, I desired him, in yours and my own Name, that he would excuse
himself the writing of that Book, and told him, That I understood by your
Letter, that you would take it extremely kindly at his hands, if he would not
give himself the trouble of answering you.

But this Courship would do no good upon him; so that I was forced to alter my
strain, and began to thereaten him; Sir, said I, if you dare to answer Mr.
Sergeant, he will be revenged of you, for he has a plaguey sharp Pen, and will
not spare you. All the answer I had to my Threats, was to be laughed at, he
assuring me he would venture that. Upon this, I told him, it was no jesting
matter; that if he did provoke you, you would turn the rough side of your
Tongue to him; and asked him, whether he could digest the being called Rogue,
or Liar, or Mad Dog? his answer was, that he could not very well: why then,
said I, Look you, Sir, you shall have these, and ten times worse, if you dare
to answer Mr. Sergeant; and upon this I out with your Letter, and showed him
how smartly you could handle your Pen. How will you like, Sir, quoth I, to be
called hot brained Letter to the Continuator, etc. p. 1.
Calvinist in Masquerade, par boiled by the scalding Zeal against Popery, into
a stanch Protestant? To be called P. 2.
a wilful and bold Calumniator? To be told, you are a Careless, P. 2.
Open, and Confident Liar? To be nick-nam'd, a Knight of the Post, that writes
without fear, shame, or wit? To have your Book called, P. 3.
a little ridiculously malicious Satyr, wholly made up of Vapor, Insolence,
silly Amplifications, Ironies, Invectives, and open Falsehoods? To be nick
named, a Thersites with a P. 5.
steeled Impudence? Sir, said I, if Mr. Sergeant could bestow all these
Complements in so very few Pages upon the Continuator, for no reason in the
world, what must you expect, if you should dare to provoke him by an Answer? Be
wise then, and learn so much Wit as to sleep in a whole skin, and thank me for
my good Advice. Now would you think it, Mr. Sergeant, that any man could have
dared to have withstood all this! And yet this strange man did, and bragged
withal, that neither this, nor more than this, should fright him from answering
you.

I had but one other Argument left to persuade him, and concluded, that it
would do his business for him. Well, Sir, said I, to be short with you, why
will you run your head against a Wall? Mr. Sergeant does assure me, that his
Fifth Letter is P. 5.
an Elaborate Discourse, and that it is (in one word) P. 8.
Unanswerable; why then will you be meddling with a Book that cannot be
disproved, that is unanswerable? I always took you for a prudent man, show it
now, and let Mr. Sergeant alone: for he says, the Best P. 8.
Wits of our Nation have also declared in his favor, that his Letters are
unanswerable: P. 8.
That he is informed his Fifth Letter, in particular, has sold so well, that
there are not an hundred left of them. Nay more, that F.W. had said, that these
same Letters (which you will be daring to meddle with) had laid Dr. Stilling
fleet so flat, that he would never be able to rise again. And can you not be
quiet, without bringing the best Wits of the Nation, and F. Warner, a Jesuit,
upon you head? They have declared already against you, and they will in honor
stand up for John Sergeant, and then what will become of you? But all this was
lost, Mr. Sergeant, upon him, and was so far from silencing him, that he seemed
to grow proud of having the honor of baffling John Sergeant, and the Best Wits
of our Nation: And for F. Warner, he had like to have called him F -- for
daring to take Dr. Stilling fleet's Name into his mouth, who had so lately, and
so thoroughly exposed him in his Appendix to the Council of Trent's Examination.

In short, As to the seeling of your Letter, he told me, that if he were not
mis-inform'd, it is no great wonder your Bookseller should not have above an
Hundred remaining, seeing there were but 300. in all Printed, and those at your
own cost, and a considerable number of which you gave in Presents to your
Friends, who therefore were obliged, in Gratitude, to commend it.

And now Mr. Sergeant, you see what pains I have taken in your behalf; and tho
the Continuator neglects you, and this other Author defies you, yet that your
Letter has not been without some effect upon me. What the issue of it will be,
we shall see in a little time, as soon as this Historical Discourse concerning
Tradition comes out; In the mean while, all I can further do, is heartily to
wish you, what I fear you will much more need than the Continuator does
Sincerity, A Better Cause, and a more Civil Pen; and remain, Sir,

Your very Humble Servant, N. N.


