His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Monday the
Twenty fourth Day of February, 1695.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased;
Printers to the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1695.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am come Hither this Day upon an Extraordinary Occasion, which might have
proved Fatal, if it had not been Disappointed by the Singular Mercy and
Goodness of God, and may now, by the Continuance of the same Providence and Our
own Prudent Endeavors, be so Improved, as to become a sufficient Warning to Us
to Provide for Our Security against the pernicious Practices and Attempts of
Our Enemies.

I Have Received several Concurring Informations of a Design to Assassinate Me,
and that Our Enemies at the same Time are very forward in their Preparations
for a sudden Invasion of this Kingdom, and have therefore thought it necessary
to lose no time in acquainting My Parliament with these things, in which the
Safety of the Kingdom and the Public Welfare are so nearly concerned, That I
assure My Self nothing will be omitted on your Part which may be thought proper
for Our Present or Future Security.

I Have not been Wanting to give the necessary Orders for the Fleet; and I hope
We have such a Strength of Ships, and in such a Readiness, as will be
sufficient to disappoint the Intentions of Our Enemies.

I Have also Dispatched Orders for bringing home such a Number of Our Troops,
as may secure Us from any Attempt.

Some of the Conspirators against My Person are already in Custody, and Care is
taken to Apprehend so many of the rest as are Discovered, and such other Orders
are given, as the present Exigency of Affairs does absolutely Require at this
Time for the Public Safety.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
Having now Acquainted you with the Danger which has threatened Us, I cannot
Doubt of your Readiness and Zeal to do every Thing which you shall Judge proper
for Our Common Safety: And I Persuade My Self We must be all Sensible how
necessary it is in Our Present Circumstances, That all possible Dispatch should
be given to the Businesses before you.

FINIS.

