AN EXHORTATION TO MUTUAL Charity and Union AMONG PROTESTANTS. IN A SERMON
Preached before the KING and QUEEN AT HAMPTON-COVRT, MAY 21. 1689.

By WILLIAM WAKE, Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S, And Preacher to the
Honorable Society of Gray's Inn.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard: And W. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1689.

ROMANS XV. 5, 6, 7. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be
like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with
one mind, and one mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the glory of
God.


THE Words are part of that affectionate Application, which the Apostle here
makes of his excellent Discourse concerning the Exercise of Christian Charity,
in that great Instance of Condescension to the Infirmities of our Weaker
Brethren, See chapter xiv. 1.
in the foregoing Chapter.

The Occasion of it was this:
There were in those first times, many among the Jews, who tho they were
converted to the Christian Faith, Acts xv. 1. -- xxi. 20.
yet still continued zealous for the Law; and not only carefully observed
themselves all the Rites and Ceremonies of it, but would also by any means
impose upon all others also, the observance of them. And how earnest they were
upon this account, and how much they hated the Gentile Converts, upon whom the
Apostles did not think fit to lay any such burden, Acts xv. 19, -- 28. Gal. v.
1. etc.
many Passages both in the Acts, and in St. Paul's Epistles, do sufficiently
declare.

But as in all other differences it seldom happens that the whole heat of the
Controversy rests only on one side; so here, tho the Jewish Converts were both
the first beginners of this Dispute, and the more zealous pursuers of it, yet
neither were the Gentile Christians utterly without fault in it; but so far
stood fast in that liberty, wherewith Christ had made them free, as not only to
despise the weakness and ignorance of the others, Gal. v. 1.
Romans xi. 18, etc.
but to be ready almost, even to cut them off from their Communion.

I need not say how dangerous such a Controversy as this might have proved,
nor what a stop it might have put to the progress of Christianity, in those
first beginnings of the Gospel. Great were the difficulties which the Apostles
underwent on this occasion, whilst they endeavored so to menage themselves
between these two Parties, as not only not to offend either, but, if it were
possible, to bring them Both to such a temper with one another, that neither
the Gentile Convert might despise the weakness of his Judaizing Brother; nor
the Jewish Votary judge too severely of the Liberty of the Gentile Christian.

And this was the design of St. Paul in the Chapter before my Text. Where
addressing himself, as indeed he seems to have done this whole Epistle, to the
Gentile Christians; and whom, as having the truer Notion of their Christian
Liberty as to this matter, he therefore calls the (...), the strong in the
Faith: v. 1. Romans xv. 1.
He exhorts them in a most admirable Discourse on this Subject throughout that
whole Chapter, to bear the Infirmities of the Weak; Ibid.
i. e. not to grieve nor despise them for their mistaken Zeal, but by complying
a little, and condescending to their Infirmities, to endeavor, if it should
please God, to draw them out of their Error. Let every one of us please his
neighbor for his good to edification. Verse 2.
And then concludes all in the words of the Text, wherein we have,

First, A hearty Prayer to God Almighty, That he would inspire them so
effectually with a Spirit of Unity and Charity, that notwithstanding all their
differences, they might join unanimously, both Jews and Gentiles, not only in
the same common Worship of God, but with the same hearty affection to one
another: Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded
one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with one Mind and
one Mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And secondly, An Exhortation, as the final result of his whole Discourse, That
they should with all charitable condescension and kindness receive, and love,
and assist one another, and not despise, and censure, and deprive one another,
either of their Charity, or their Communion; Wherefore receive ye one another,
as Christ also received us, to the Glory of God.

In which words, as they thus lie before us in the Occasion and Design of them,
there are two things that will offer themselves to our consideration.

First, An Exhortation to these Dissenting Christians, and in them to all of
us, Not to break either Charity or Communion with one another, upon the account
of such things wherein we may securely differ; but mutually to bear with one
another in our differences.

Secondly, See Theoderet, Chrysostom. Theophylact, etc. in loc.
An Enforcement of this Exhortation, from two of the greatest Considerations
that can possibly engage any Christian to an observance of it; viz.

First, From the Example of Christ toward us.

Secondly, From the greater Glory that will hereby redound to God.

Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the Glory of
God. I shall make it my endeavor with all the plainess that I can, to pursue
both the Exhortation and the Enforcement in the three following Propositions.

I. That there may be differences in matters of lesser moment, between very
good and zealous Christians, without any just reflection either upon the Men,
or upon their Religion.

II. That these differences ought not to hinder such persons from agreeing
together, not only in a common Charity, but, if it be possible, in a common
Worship of God too.

III. That to this End it is the Duty of all Christians, but especially of
those who are the strong in Faith, not only to pray for such a Union, but, as
they have opportunity, heartily to labor Themselves, and earnestly to stir up
all Others, to endeavor after it.

Prop. 1.
And first; That there may be Differences in matters of lesser moment between
very good and zealous Christians, without any just reflection upon the Men, or
upon their Religion.

For proof of which, I think I need go no farther than the very History of my
Text. I have already said how great a division there was between the Jewish and
the Gentile Converts, about the Ritual Observances of the Law of Moses, and
with what a Zeal the Dissenting Parties managed the Dispute, till they had
almost lost their Charity, and made a deplorable Schism in the Church of
Christ. And yet I am confident no man will say that this was at all derogatory
either to the Truth of their common Christianity, or to the Infallible
Authority with which the Apostles had delivered it unto them.

And for the Parties themselves that thus differed with one another, that they
had a true Zeal on both sides for the Glory of God, and thought it matter of
Conscience, the one to observe these Ceremonial Institutions as what God still
required of them; the other to refuse any such Imposition, as not only a
needless Burden, but even repugnant to the Grace of Christ declared to them in
his Gospel; St. Paul, Acts xv. 28. Gal. v. 2.
in the prosecution of this very Argument, does clearly bear witness to them,
Chapter xiv. 6. Where he makes use of this very thing as one Reason why they should
mutually tolerate one another in their Dissentions; viz. That however they
differed in their Notions as to these particulars, yet they were both perfectly
agreed in the same common Zeal for the Glory of God, and the discharge of their
Duty. Romans xiv. 6.
He that regards the day, regards it unto the Lord; and he that regards
not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it. He that eats, eats to the
Lord, for he gives God thanks; and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats
not, and gives God thanks.

And indeed, either we must say, that all, even the least Points, relating to
our Religion, are so clearly and plainly revealed, that no Honest man can
possibly be mistaken if he will but impartially enquire into them; which from
the Diffe^^nces of whole Parties concerning these things, it is plain they are
not: Or else men's different Capacities, and Opportunities, and Tempers, and
Education considered, it is in vain to expect that all Good men should agree in
all their Notions of Religion, any more than we see they do in any other
concerns whatsoever. And who am I that I should dare to pronounce a sentence of
Reprobation against any one, in whom there appear all the other Characters of
an humble, upright, sincere Christian, only because he has not perhaps met with
the same Instruction, or Read the same Books, or does not Argue the same way;
In a word, because he is not so wise, or it may be, is wiser than I am, and
sees farther than I do, and therefore is not exactly of my Opinion in every
thing?

Now if this be so, as both the Principles of Reason conclude it very well may
be, and the common Experience of Mankind, not only in the particular concern of
Religion, but in most other things assures us that it is: That men's
Understandings are different, and they will argue different ways, and entertain
different Opinions from one another, about the same things, and yet may
nevertheless deserve on all sides, to be esteemed very good and wise men for
all that: How vain then must that Argument be, H^st^ire des variations des
Eglises Protestants: par Mr. l' Evesque de MEAUX.

The design of which, may be seen in the Summary of his Preface -- Les
Variations dans la foy preuve certain de fausset e. -- Charactere des heresies
d'estre variables. -- Ce Charactere reconnu dans tous les Ages de l' Eglise. --
Charactere d'immutabilite dans lay foy de l' Eglise Catholic. -- Que les
variations de l' un des partis (de Protestans) est une preuve contre l' Autre,
etc.


which a Late Author of the Church of Rome, has with so much Pomp revived
against us, from our Differences in a few lesser Points of our Religion, to
conclude us to be Erroneous in the greater; and that because we are not exactly
of the same Opinion in every thing, that therefore we ought to be credited in
nothing; that is to say, That because Protestants when they differ, are
mistaken on One Side, therefore when they agree, they are mistaken on Both?

1 st. It is certain that amidst all our other Divisions, we are yet on all
sides agreed in whatsoever is Fundamental in the Faith, or necessary to be
believed and professed by us in order to our Salvation.

There is no good Protestant, but what does firmly believe all the Articles of
the Apostles Creed; and embraces the Holy Scriptures as the Word of God, and
Rule of his Faith, and readily acknowledges whatsoever is plainly revealed
therein, and is at all times disposed to submit to any thing that can by any
necessary and certain Consequence be proved to him thereby. In short, Our
Differences, whatsoever they are, I will be bold to say they do no more, nor
even so much concern the foundations of Christianity, as those of the Judaizing
Christians here did. If their differing therefore with one another, was no
prejudice to the Truth of their common Christianity then, I would fain know for
what reason our Differences, which are lesser, shall become so much a greater
Argument against our common Christianity now. But,

2 dly, If our differing from one another in some Points, be an Argument that
we are not certain in any; How shall we be sure that those of the Church of
Rome are not altogether as uncertain as we are; seeing we are sure that they do
no less differ among themselves, and that in Points too, much more considerable
than we do?

For to take only one Instance instead of many, and that so considerable, that
Card. Praef. ad lib. de Sum. P. T. 1. p. 592. Ingoldstad. A. 1586.
Bellarmin once thought the Sum of Christianity, he meant the Sum of Popery, to
consist in it, viz. The Prerogatives of the Bishop of Rome, both in and over
the Church of Christ. Some there are who hold the Pope to be Head of the
Church, by Divine Right: Others the contrary. * Some, That he is Infallible:
Others, That he is not. * Some, That the Pope alone, without a Council, may
determine all Controversies: Others, That he cannot. Now if in these, and many
other points of no less importance, they themselves are as far from agreeing
with One another, as they can possibly pretend us to be; what shall hinder us,
but that we return their own Inference upon them, That seeing they differ among
themselves in such things as these, they are so far from that absolute
Infallibility they set up for, that in truth they have not so much as any
certainty among them, even in those Points wherein they do agree.

Is it that in their Church, tho there be indeed as many differences as in
ours, yet this makes not against them, seeing they have a certain Rule,
whenever they please, Bellarm to. 1. p. 1377. de Not. Eccl. A.
for the composing of them, viz. The Definition of the Pope, and of the Church?
This, indeed, I find is commonly said by them: But then certainly, if they have
such a ready means, See Mr. Chillingworth, p. 99, 100.
as they say, of Agreement among them, it is the more shame for them, that they
do not agree; he being much more inexcusably guilty in the omission of any
duty, who having a ready means to fulfill it, neglects so to do, than he who has
none, or (which is the same thing) does not know that he has any. But indeed
they have no means of Ending their differences, any more than we have; The Holy
Scriptures we both of us acknowledge to be the Word of God, and an Infallible
Rule of Faith; but for any other direction, they are not yet agreed where to
seek it: And sure that can be no very good means of Ending all their other
Differences, which is its self one of their chiefest Controversies.

Or is it, That they agree in matters of Faith, Bellarm. ib. p. 1378. B.
and differ only in those things that do not belong to it? Because if they
differ about any Point, they for that very reason, conclude it to be no matter
of Faith. But besides the Impertinence of this Answer, which amounts to no more
than this, that they do agree in what they do agree, and differ only in those
things in which they differ: This is what we say for our selves concerning our
Differences; We agree in all those things that are necessary to a Sound and
Saving Faith; and if we differ in matters of lesser moment, it is no more than
what all other Christians have ever done, and what those of the Church of Rome
its self at this day do.

So that still it must remain, either that those Differences which were among
the Christians of old, and which are among us now, are no prejudice at all to
the common Truth which we profess; or if they be, the Consequence will fall
upon those of the Church of Rome no less, that I do not say, and more severely,
than upon us, and be of the same Force against Their Religion, that it can be
against Ours.

But I must carry this Reflection a great deal farther; for,

3 dly. If once this Principle be allowed, That because men differ in some
things, they ought not to be credited in any, what then will become, not only
of the Protestant Religion, as it now stands in Opposition to Popery, but even
of Christianity its self? For might not a Turk or a Jew, if he were minded to
give himself so much trouble to so little purpose as this late Author has done,
draw out a large HISTORY of the VARIATIONS of Christians among themselves, from
the Controversy of the Text, unto this day; and then by the very same
Principle conclude against us all, That we have none of us any certain Grounds
for Our Religion, because the differences that are among us, plainly show, that
some of us must be deceived? And to go yet one step farther; Might not a
Sceptick by the same Rule, argue against all Religion, and even against all
Reason too; That the disagreement of mankind in these and many other Points of
the greatest Importance, plainly shows there is no certainty in any thing; and
therefore that we ought not to rely either upon the one, or upon the other?

It remains therefore, that unless we will overthrow all the measures of
Christian Charity toward our Neighbor, and the common Truth, I do not say
both of their Faith and of our own, but even of Christianity its self, nay and
of all Religion and Reason in general; We must conclude, That good Christians
may differ from one another in matters of lesser moment, without any just
Reflection either upon themselves or their Religion.

But here therefore I must desire not to be misunderstood. For when I say, that
Christians may, without any danger to themselves, or disparagement to the Truth
of their Religion, differ with one another; I mean only (as the Terms of my
Proposition expressly show) in lesser matters; such as do not concern the
Fundamentals of Faith, nor destroy the Worship of God; nor are otherwise so
clearly revealed, but that Wise and Good Men, after all their Enquiries, may
still continue to differ in their Opinions concerning them. For otherwise, if
Interest and Prejudice blind men's eyes, and they err because they resolve they
will not be convinced; and so by their own fault continue in mistakes contrary
to the Foundation of Faith, and destructive of Piety: If, for instance, Men
will profess to believe but in One God, and yet worship Thousands; If they will
read ov^r the second Commandment, and nevertheless both make and bow down
before Graven Images in despite of it; If, whilst* they acknowledge Christ to
have instituted the Blessed Eucharist in both kinds, they command it to be
administered but in One; and pray in an unknown Tongue, tho St Paul has spent
almost a whole Chapter to show the Folly and Unreasonableness of it: These are
Errors in which I am not concerned; and tho I should be unwilling, even here,
at all adventures to pronounce any Sentence against the Men; yet I must needs
say, that Religion cannot be very sound, which stands corrupted with so many,
and such fundamental Abuses.

And this makes the difference between those Errors for which we separate from
the Church of Rome, and those Controversies which sometimes arise among
Protestants themselves. The former are in matters of the greatest consequence,
such as tend directly to destroy the Integrity of Faith, and the Purity of our
Worship; and therefore such as are in their own nature destructive of the very
Essentials of Christianity. Whereas our differences do not at all concern the
Foundations either of Faith or Worship; and are therefore such in which Good
Men, if they be otherwise diligent and sincere in their Enquiry, may differ,
without any prejudice to themselves, or any just reflection upon the Truth of
their common Profession.

Which being thus cleared, in answer to the little Endeavors of one of the
latest of our Adversaries against us upon this Account; I go on, Secondly, to
show,

II. That such differences as these, Prop. 2.
ought not to hinder such persons from agreeing together, not only in a common
Charity, but, if it be possible, in a common Worship of God too.

This is what St. Paul here expressly exhorts these dissenting Christians to,
and earnestly prays to God that he might see accomplished in them. That when
they came together to the public Offices of the Church, to offer up their
common Prayers and Thanksgivings to Him, they might do it, not only in the same
form of words, but with the same affection of mind too, both toward God, and
toward one another: Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be
like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with
one Mind and one Mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Such was their Duty to one another then; and we ought certainly no less to
esteem the same to be our Duty toward one another now: And

First, As to the business of Charity;

God forbid that any differences in Religion whatsoever, much less such little
ones as those we are now speaking of, should ever make us deny that to our
fellow Christians. It Is true indeed, our Savior Christ once foretold to his
Disciples, That there should rise up Men from among their Brethren, who should
upon this account not only put them out of their Synagogues, John c. xvi. 2.
but even think that it was a matter of Religion to kill them. But they were
Jews, not Christians, who were to do this; and He expressly adds, that 'twas
their ignorance of Him and his Religion that should carry them on to so furious
and intemperate a Zeal; -- Verse 3.
For these things, says he, shall they do unto you, because they have not known
the Father nor Me. And we must confess it, to the scandal of our Holy Religion,
that there are a sort of Men who call themselves Christians now, that still
continue to fulfill this Prophecy in the very Letter of it; who not only cast us
out of their Synagogues, that we should not much complain of; and, as far as in
them lies, cut us off from all the hopes of Salvation too; but, to complete the
parallel, openly arm the whole World against us, and teach Men to believe, that
it is a Work of Piety to root us out of it; and therefore, that whosoever
kills us, does do God service. But in this, as well as in the rest of their
Errors, they give us but the more effectually to understand how little they
have in them of the true Spirit of Christianity; for sure such things as these
they could never do, but only that, as our Savior in that other case before
said, they have not known the Father nor Him. And I hope I shall need no
Argument to persuade you not to be misled by that which we all of us so justly
lament, as one of the most deplorable Corruptions even of Popery it self.

Christianity commands us to love our Enemies; and sure then we cannot but
think it very highly reasonable not to hate our Brethren; but especially on
such an account, as, if it be once admitted, will in this divided state of the
Church, utterly drive the very name of brotherly Love and Charity out of it:
seeing by whatever Arguments we shall go about to justify our uncharitableness
to any Others, they will all equally warrant them to with hold in like manner
their Charity from us.

There is no honest, sincere Christian, how erroneous soever he may be, but
what at least is persuaded that he is in the right; and looks upon Us to be as
far from the Truth by differing from Him, as We esteem Him for not agreeing
with us. Now if upon the sole account of such differences it be lawful for us
to hate Another; we must for the very same reason allow it to be as lawful for
Him also to hate Us. Thus shall we at once invert the Characteristick of our
Religion; Joh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another; and turn it into the quite contrary Note; whilst we make our hatred to
our Brother the great mark of our Zeal for our Religion; and conclude him to
love Christ the most, who the least loves his fellow Christian.

How much rather ought we to consider, with our Apostle, the love of our dear
Master to us, even whilst we were yet his Enemies, and love those whom we ought
to hope, notwithstanding all their Errors, are yet still his Friends; and not
think those unworthy of our Charity, whom we piously presume God will not think
unworthy of his Favor? We suppose them to be mistaken in those things wherein
they differ from us, and perhaps they are so; but yet we must consider, that we
our selves also are but Men, and therefore may err; and They as verily think Us
in the wrong, as We do Them: And, for ought I know, we must leave it to the Day
of Judgment to decide the Controversy, which of us is in the right. In the
mean time, if they are mistaken, I am sure our uncharitableness is not the way
to convince them of their Error: but may rather indispose them to consider the
weight of our Arguments as they ought, whilst they see so little regard in our
Affections toward them. In short, if we are indeed, what we esteem our selves
to be, the strong in the Faith, let us then remember, that tho Charity be their
Duty too as well as ours, yet it is to such as We are, especially, that St. Paul
addresses the Exhortation of the Text, Verse 1.
to bear the Infirmities of the weak; -- 7.
and to receive one another, as Christ also has received us, to the Glory of
God. But,

2. Such Differences as these, ought not only not to lessen our Charity, but,
if it be possible, not to hinder us from joining together in the same common
Worship of God with one another.

This was what these dissenting Christians, notwithstanding all their Heats and
Contentions, nevertheless still continued to do. They did with one Mouth
glorify God, even when their differences would not suffer them to do it with
one Heart. They united together in a common Worship of God, tho they could not
unite either in Opinion or Affection with one another.

Indeed where men's Errors are such as utterly do subvert the very Essentials of
our Religious Worship, it is then in vain to hope for any Communion in the
Public Service of God with them. We must not destroy the Principles of
Christianity, out of a Zeal to enlarge the Communion of Christians. He would be
a very condescending Votary indeed, who for the sake of praying to God with the
Papist, would pray to the Blessed Virgin and Saints too with him: Who rather
than be excluded their Churches, would bow down before their Images; and not
only worship their Host, but even give up his Right to the Cup in the
Eucharist, only that he might receive that Holy Sacrament in their Company. It
is, no doubt, a very desirable thing to lessen the differences of Christians,
and enlarge their Communion, as far as ever we can: And it has never gone well
with the Church of Christ, since men have been so narrow spirited as to mix the
Controversies of Faith, with their Public Forms of Worship; and have made
their Liturgies, instead of being Offices of Devotion to God, become Tests and
Censures of the Opinions of their Brethren. But yet when all is done, the
Truths of Christianity must not be sacrificed to the Peace of Christians; nor
the Honor of God be given up, to keep up a Unity and Communion with one
another.

But where men's Differences are in Points that do not at all affect their
Religious Service; or not so much, but that God may be very well worshipped,
and yet Communion with our fellow Christians preserved too; in such cases as
this, our dissentions ought not only not to lessen our Charity, but not to
break our Unity neither: We may continue to differ, as the Christians in my
Text did; and yet with one Mind, and one Mouth, glorify God, as St. Paul
exhorted them to do.

And this brings me to the Third and Last Point.

Prop. 3.
III. That to this End, it is the Duty of all of us, but especially of the
stronger Christians, not only to Pray for such a Union, but also, as they have
opportunity, heartily to labor themselves, and earnestly to stir up all others
to endeavor after it.

I do not believe there is any good Christian so little affected with those
unhappy Divisions under which the Church at this day labors, as not both
heartily to deplore them, and to think that nothing could be too much, that
might innocently be done on all hands, for the redressing of them. But then I
am sure the natural Consequence of this must be, what both my Text, and this
Discourse are designed to exhort you to; viz. That we ought every one of us,
not only heartily to pray for such a Union, but also, as we have opportunity,
earnestly to labor for the attainment of it.

Indeed for what concerns the whole Body of the Catholic Church on Earth, so
many are the Disputes that have arisen among the several Parties and Communions
of it, and some of them in Points so near to the Foundations of Christianity,
that whilst Men resolve to keep fast to their Conclusions, and will not suffer
the plainest Arguments to convince them of their Errors, it is in vain to hope
ever to see things brought to such a Temper, as we could wish in that. But
especially whilst that part which is the most corrupt, is so far from being
willing to concur to any such Union, that on the contrary, she has cut off all
possibility of attaining it. And by arrogating an unwarrantable Infallibility
to her self, and Authority over all others, will neither reform her own abuses,
nor admit any into her Communion, that will not profess the same Errors, in
which she her self stands involved. So that here, all we can even wish for, is,
that Men would at last be so wise, as tho they differ in Opinion, yet to love
as Brethren, and agree together in a common Charity, till we shall be so happy
as to unite in a common Faith and worship of God.

But for us whom it has pleased God, by delivering us from the Errors and
Superstitions of the Church of Rome, to unite together in the common name of
Protestant, Reformed Christians, would we but as heartily labor after Peace,
as we are all of us very highly exhorted to it; I cannot see why we who are so
happily joined together in a common profession of the same Faith, at least, I
am sure in all the necessary points of it; and I hope amidst all our lesser
differences, in a common love and charity to one another, should not also be
united in the same common Worship of God too.

I will not now enter into any Dispute, to show how little reason there is for
any one to separate from the Offices of the Church of England, upon the account
of those few Exceptions that have sometimes been offered to justify the doing
of it. This is a work both too large for such a Discourse; and besides the
design of my present Undertaking. And that one Concession of many of our
Brethren themselves, who tho they continue ordinarily to separate from us, yet
nevertheless freely allow of what they call Occasional Communion with us, I
think sufficiently shows how little real ground there is for those Scruples,
that have so long detained them in an unjust aversion to our Worship. Blessed
be God, who has abundantly justified both the Purity of our Doctrine, and the
Innocence of our Worship, not only by the general Approbation of the Reformed
Churches abroad, who both freely communicate with us in our religious Offices,
and have often given Testimony in favor of them; but in the happy Conviction
of many at Home, who were once Enemies to our Constitution, but who now go with
us into the same House of God as Friends.

And indeed the things for which some forsake us now, are no other than what
they were in the Beginning of the Reformation; when yet there was no such thing
as Separation from our Communion: But on the contrary, the old Non-Conformists
themselves, tho they disliked some things in our Worship, yet freely declared
they thought it a Crime to divide the Church upon the account of them. And they
who at this day separate from us, for the sake of those few Constitutions that
have been made for the Order and Decency of our Public Worship, must for the
same reason have separated from all the Churches of the Christian World, for
above 1500 Years; in none of which they might not have found as great, that I
do not say, and much greater, occasion of Offense, than they can in Ours.

But yet, since men's Scruples are unaccountable, and after all that can be
said, they will still differ even about indifferent things, and be afraid many
times, where no Fear is; and a too long Experience has already shown us, That
if ever we mean to accomplish that Union so much recommended to us by our
Apostle, so advantageous to the Church at all times, but especially at this
time so necessary to our Peace and our Establishment, that it seems to be the
only way that yet remains to settle and to secure us; and upon all these
accounts so much to be desired by all Good Men, we must seek it by that Rule
which St. Paul here proposed to the Dissenting Christians of my Text, We then
that are strong in the faith, Romans xv. 1.
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. I
cannot but think it a Reflection becoming every good Christian among us, but in
a more especial manner, worthy the Consideration of such an Auditory as this,
Whether somewhat may not yet be done for the sake of Peace, and to bring things
to such a See the Petition of the Archbishop and Bishops to King James, for
which they were committed to the Tower.
TEMPER, that both Order and Decency may still be preserved, and yet our Unity
no longer broken.

And for Exhortations to so good and Christian a Work, shall I set before you
the Example of our Blessed Savior recommended to us in the Text, with what a
mighty condescension he has treated Us; how He came down from Heaven, and took
upon Him the form of a servant, Phil. ii. 6, 7.
and being made in the likeness of a sinful man, humbled Himself even to the
Death upon the Cross for us; How He still bears not only with our Infirmities,
but with our Sins too; and by all these wonderful instances of his Love to us,
teaches us, says St. John, 1 John iv. 11.
How we ought also to love one another?

Or rather, shall I show you, how far such a Blessed Union as this, would
conduce to the Glory of God, to the Security of our Religion, and to the
promotion of Peace, and Charity, and Piety among us?

I need not say what a dishonor our Divisions have already brought to the
Reformation, nor what a stop they have put to the progress of it. Great, to be
sure, is the Advantage which our Enemies either have, or at least hoped to have
made, by those Contests which they have taken so much pains both to bring in,
and to keep up among us: And methinks there should need no other Argument to
stir up every true Friend to the name of Protestant, to endeavor all he can to
compose our Differences, than this one thing, That we are sufficiently
convinced who they are that we please, and whose Interests we serve, by the
continuance of them.

Let us add to this, what great Obligations our Holy Religion lays upon us,
Romans xiv. 19.
to follow after those things that make for peace, and whereby we may edify
one another: How our Savior has set it down as the very Badge of our
Discipleship; Joh. xiii. 35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another: What Exhortations his Apostles have given us; Romans xii. 18.
If it be possible, as much as in us lies, to live peaceably with all men. But
especially with reference to the differences about Religion, Romans xvi. 17.
To mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine
which we have learnt, and avoid them.

With what a scrupulous care did St. Paul manage himself between the dissenting
parties in my Text? What admirable Rules did he lay down for them to walk by?
and with what an affectionate earnestness did he enforce them? If there be any
consolation in Christ, Phil. ii.
if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, -- 1.
if any Bowels and Mercies, fulfill ye my joy, -- 2.
that ye be like-minded, having the same Love, being of one Accord, of one Mind.

And may I not beg leave, tho not with the Authority, yet with the Charity of
St. Paul, to apply all this to those unhappy Divisions that at this day rend in
pieces the Church of Christ among us; and beseech you, by all these endearing
Considerations, to pursue those things which may make for our Peace; and for
the closing of those breaches, which the malice of our Enemies too successfully
begun, and our own weakness has too fatally kept up among us.

Never, certainly, was there a time, since our Divisions first began, in which
we had greater reason to consider of such a Union, or, I hope, a fairer
opportunity to promise our selves an Accomplishment of it. Only let us all be
as careful to improve it, as I am persuaded we have all of us not only seemed
to desire, but have indeed earnestly longed for it.

Let us show the sense we have of that wonderful Deliverance God has given us
out of the hand of our Enemies, by uniting our selves in the strictest League
of Friendship with one another.

Hitherto we have defended our Church by our Arguments; let us now by our
Charity settle and establish it, against the like Dangers for the time to come.

This will indeed render both our selves and our Religion Glorious to the
World; and may be a Happy Augury that the blessed time so long wrapped up in
sacred Prophecy, is indeed now ready to be revealed: When the Church of Christ
being purged from those Corruptions that have so long defaced its Beauty, shall
again appear in its primitive Purity. When all Heresy and Schism being every
where abolished, and the Mystery of Iniquity laid fully open, and the Man of
Sin destroyed; true Religion and sincere Piety shall again reign throughout the
World; God himself shall pitch his Tabernacle among us, Rev. xxi. 3.
and dwell with us, and we shall be his People, and he shall be our God.

O Blessed State of the Church Militant here on Earth! the glorious Antipast of
that Peace and Piety which God has prepared for his Church Triumphant in
Heaven! Who would not wish to see those days, when a general Reformation, and a
true Zeal, and a perfect Charity, passing through the World, we should All be
united in the same Faith, the same Worship, the same Communion and Fellowship
one with another? When all Pride and Prejudice, all Interests and Designs being
submitted to the Honor of God, and the discharge of our Duty, the Holy
Scriptures shall again triumph over the vain Traditions of Men; and Religion no
longer take its denomination from little Sects and Factions, but we shall all
be content with the same common primitive Names of Christians and Brethren, and
live together as becomes our Character, in Brotherly Love and Christian Charity
with one another?

And who can tell but such a Change as this, and which we have otherwise some
reason to believe is nigh at hand, may even now break forth from the midst of
us, would we but all seriously labor to perfect the Great Work which the
Providence of God has so gloriously begun amongst us, and establish that Love
and Unity among our selves, which may afterward diffuse it self from us into
all the other parts of the Christian World besides?

But however, whether we shall ever see, I do not say, such a Blessed Effect as
this, but even any good Effect at all of our Endeavors here on Earth, or no;
yet this we are sure, we shall not lose our Reward in Heaven. When to have
contributed, tho in the least degree, to the healing of those divisions we so
unhappily labor under, shall be esteemed a greater Honor, than to have
silenced all the Cavils of our Enemies; and even to have prayed, and wished for
it, and, where we could not any otherwise have contributed our selves, but to
have exhorted others to it, shall be rewarded with Blessings, more than all the
Stars in the Firmament; for number.

Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one mind, and one
mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

To Him be Honor and Praise for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Published by the Reverend Mr. WA(...).
Printed for RICHARD CHISWELL.
AN Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] 4o.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, against
the Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late B of Condom, and his Vindicator.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the new Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART: in which the Account that has been given of the
Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully Vindicated, the Distinction of Old and
New Popery, Historically asserted, and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
point of Image Worship, more particularly considered.

Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against Monsieur de Meaux and his Vindicator, the SECOND PART.

A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host: In Answer to the Two Discourses lately
Printed at Oxford, on this Subject. To which is prefixed a Large Historical
P^eface, relating to the same Argument.

Two Discourses of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead. 4o.

A Continuation of the Controversy between the Church of England and the
Church of Rome, being a full account of the Books that have been of late
written on Both sides.

An Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation Written by an Author of the
Communion of the Church of Rome; rendered into English. With a Preface

Preparation for Death; being a Letter sent to a Young Gentlewoman in France,
in a distemper of which she died.

Printed for WILLIAM ROGERS.
A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry; in which a Late Author (viz the
Bp. of Oxford's) true and only Notion of Idolatry, is considered and confuted.
4o.

The Sum of a Conference between Dr. Clagett and F. P. Gooden, ab^ut
Transubstantiation. Published by this Author. And to be added to Dr. Clagett's
Sermons now in the Press, which will be Published this Term.

Printed for Richard Chiswell, and William R^gers.
AN Exhortation to Mutual Charity and Union among Protestants. In a Sermon
Preached before the King and Queen at Hampton Court, May 26 1689.

In the Press, A Sermon Preached before the Honou^ab^e House of Commons, at St.
Margaret's Westminster, June 5. 1689. Being the Fa^t Day appointed by the King
and Queens Proclamation, to Implore the Blessing of Almighty God upon their
M^jesties Forces by Sea and Land, and Success in the War now declared against
the French King.

Other Tracts by the same AVTHOR.
A Sermon Preached at Paris, on the 30 th of January, S. V. 1684/5.

The Present State of the Controversy.

Sure and Honest Means for Conversion of all Heretics; and wholesome Advice and
Expedients for the Reformation of the Church. Translated, and Published with a
Preface.

A Letter from several French Ministers fled into Germany, upon the account of
the Persecution in France, to such of their Brethren in England, as approved
the King's Declaration touching Liberty of Conscience. Translated from the
Original French.


