His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Tuesday
the Seventh day of November, 1693.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1693.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am always Glad to Meet you here, and I could heartily wish, that Our
Satisfaction were not lessened at present, by Reflecting upon the Disadvantages
We have received this Year at Land, and the Miscarriages in Our Affairs at Sea.
I Think it is Evident, That the former was only occasioned by the great Number
of Our Enemies, which exceeded Ours in all Places; for what relates to the
latter, which has brought so great a Disgrace upon the Nation, I have Resented
it extremely, and as I will take Care that those who have not done their Duty
shall be Punished, so I am resolved to use My utmost Endeavors, that Our Power
at Sea may be rightly Managed for the Future. And it will well Deserve your
Consideration, Whether We are not Defective both in the Number of Our Shipping,
and in proper Ports to the Westward, for the better Annoying Our Enemies, and
Protecting Our Trade, which is so Essential to the Welfare of this Kingdom.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I am very Sensible of the good Affection wherewith you have always Assisted Me
to Support the Charges of this War, which have been very Great, and yet I am
Persuaded that the Experience of this Summer is sufficient to Convince Us all,
that to Arrive at a good End of it, there will be a Necessity of Increasing Our
Forces both by Sea and Land the next Year. Our Allies have Resolved to Add to
theirs, and I will not Doubt, but you will have such Regard to the Present
Exigency, as that you will Give Me a Suitable Supply to Enable Me to do the
like. I must therefore earnestly Recommend it to you, Gentlemen of the House of
Commons, to take such timely Resolution, as that your Supplies may be
Effectual, and Our Preparations so Forward, as will be Necessary both for the
Security and the Honor of the Nation.

FINIS.

