His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Tuesday
the Fifth Day of July, School.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. School.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Cannot take Leave of so good a Parliament, without Publicly Acknowledging
the Sense I have of the Great Things you have done for My Safety and Honor,
and for the Support and Welfare of My People.

Every one of your Sessions has made good this Character: The Happy Uniting of
Us in an Association for Our Mutual Defense; The Remedying the Corruption of
the Coin, which had been so long Growing upon the Nation; The Restoring of
Credit; The Giving Supplies in such a manner for Carrying on the War, as did,
by Gods Blessing, Produce an Honorable Peace; And after that, the Making such
Provisions for our Common Security, and toward Satisfying the Debts Contracted
in so long a War, with as little Burden to the Kingdom as is possible, are such
Things as will give a Lasting Reputation to this Parliament, and will be a
Subject of Emulation to those who shall come after.

Besides all this, I Think My Self Personally Obliged to Return My Thanks to
you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, for the Regard you have had to My
Honor by the Establishment of My Revenue.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
There is Nothing I Value so much as the Esteem and Love of My People, and as
for their Sakes I Avoided no Hazards, during the War, so My whole Study and
Care shall be to Improve and Continue to them the Advantages and Blessings of
Peace.

And I earnestly Desire you all, in your several Stations to be Vigilant in
Preserving Peace and Good Order, and in a Due and Regular Execution of the
Laws, especially those against Profaneness and Irreligion.

Then the Lord Chancellor, by His Majesty's Command, said,
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HIS Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure is, That this Parliament be Prorogued to
Tuesday the Second day of August next; and this Parliament is Prorogued
accordingly to Tuesday the Second day of August next.

FINIS.

