A CHARTER of Regulations Granted to the East India Company by Their Sacred
Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, under the Great Seal of England, Dated
the 11th. of November, 1693. in the 5th. Year of Their Majesty's Reign.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God King and Queen of England, etc.
WILLIAM and MARY,

By the Grace of God King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defenders of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come Greeting.
Whereas the Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the
East Indies, have been long a Corporation, to the Honor and Profit ot this
Nation, And enjoyed diverse Immunities by virtue of several Charters;
Whereas the Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the
East Indies, have been of long time to the Honor and Profit of this Nation, a
Corporation, and have enjoyed diverse Liberties, Privileges and Immunities, by
force of several Charters and Letters Patents heretofore granted to them by
several of our late Royal Predecessors, More particularly by Letters Patents of
our late Royal Uncle, King Charles the Second, under the Great Seal of England,
VIZ,
bearing date the third day of April, in the 13th. Year of his Reign; And by
one other Charter, or Letters Patents, of the said King Charles the Second,
under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the 27th. day of
March, in the 20th. Year of his Reign; And by one other Charter, or Letters
Patents of the said King Charles the Second bearing date at Westminster the
16th. day of December in the 25th. Year of his Reign; And by one other Charter,
or Letters Patents of the said late King Charles the Second, bearing date the
9th. day of August, in the 35th. Year of his Reign; And also by a Charter or
Letters Patents of the late King James the Second bearing date at Westminster
the 12th. day of April, in the Second Year of his Reign: And whereas some doubt
has arisen touching the Validity of the Charters heretofore granted to the
said Company,
And whereas some doubt or Question having been lately made, touching the
Validity of the Charters granted heretofore by our late Royal Predecessors
Kings and Queens of England, to the Governor and Company of Merchants of
London Trading into the East Indies, and whether the same were not in
strictness of Law void by the not actual Payment into the Receipt of our
Exchequer, By the not actual Payment of the first Quarterly Payment of the 5 l.
per Cent. Tax.
of the first Quarterly Payment of the Tax of five pounds per Cent. charged on
the General Joynt-Stock of the said Company; according to a late Act of
Parliament Entitled, (An Act for continuing certain Acts therein mentioned,
and for charging several Joynt-Stocks) And We having taken the same into our
Royal Consideration, We, well weighing the Disorders that would happen if
advantage were taken of the said Forfeiture,
and well weighing what Disorders and Inconveniences would befall the said
Company, and other Persons concerned and employed in their Trade and
Adventures, especially in the remote parts of the World, if we should have
taken advantage of the Forfeiture aforesaid, Did by our Letters Patents under
our Great Seal of England, Did by our Letters Patents, dated the 7th. of
October last, Constitute Sir Thomas Cook, Francis Tyssen, Esquire etc.
bearing date the 7th. day of October now last past, make, constitute, ordain,
declare and appoint that Sir Thomas Cook Knt. and one of the Aldermen of our
City of London, Francis Tyssen Esquire George Earl of Berkeley, Sir John Fleet,
Knt. then Lord Mayor of our City of London, Sir Josia Child Baronet, Sir
William Langhorne, Baronet, Sir Benjamin Bathurst Knt. Sir John Moore Knt. and
one of the Aldermen of our City of London, Sir Sam. Dashwood Knt. and one of
the Aldermen of our City of London, Sir Edward des Bouvery Knt. Sir Thomas
Rawlinson, Knt. Sir William Gore, Knt. and one of the Aldermen of our City of
London, Sir Joseph Herne Knt. Sir Rowland Aynsworth, Knt. John Pery Esquire George
Boun Esquire Richard Hutchinson, Jun. Esquire Frederick Herne, Esquire Ralph Marshall Esquire
Richard Acton, John Cook of Hackney, Francis Gosfright, John Da Bois, Isaac
Houblon, Samuel Ongley and Nath. Mounteney Gentlemen, and all and every other
Person and Person who were Members of the said Company, And all other the
Members of the said or late Company, on the 24th. March last,
or late Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies on the
24th. day of March now last past, who had not before the Date of the said last
recited Letters Patents parted with their Stocks in the said Company, Who had
not parted with their Stocks;
and all and every other Person and Persons who after the said 24th. day of
March last past, and before the date of the said last recited Letters Patents,
And all others who by buying Stocks, etc. Were capable to be Members of the
said Company, To be one Body Politic, By the Name of the Governor and Company
of Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies.
by buying Stocks or otherwise, had come into, and then remained in a Capacity
of being Members of the said Company, should be a Body Corporate and Politic
in Deed and in Name, by the Name of the Governor and Company of Merchants of
London Trading into the East Indies, And them, by that Name, one Body Corporate
and Politic, in Deed and in Name, really and fully for ever, for Us our Heirs
and Successors, We did make, declare, establish and confirm; And we have also
in and by the said last recited Letters Patents for Us, And granted and
restored unto them all the Ports, Islands, etc.
Our Heirs and Successors, given, granted, restored and confirmed unto the said
Governor and Company thereby constituted and confirmed, and their Successors,
All and every the Ports, Islands, Plantations, Territories, Castles, Forts,
Fortifications, Ordnance, Armor, Artillery, Munition, Arms, Guns, Powder,
Shot, Victuals, Magazines, Stores, Ammunition and Provisions of War, Ships,
Junks, Vessels, Boats, Joint Stock, Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Houses,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Wares, Merchandises, Cattle, Chattels
real and personal, Debts, Dues, Duties, right of Actions and Demand in Law or
Equity, Powers, Privileges, Liberties, Franchises, Jurisdictions, Customs,
Rights, Royalties, Immunities and Advantages whatsoever, Which were or might be
lawfully enjoyed by them, on or before the 24th. March last, or since,
and all other things which were lawfully held, received, used, exercised, or
enjoyed, or might or ought to have been lawfully held, received, used,
exercised, or enjoyed by the said Governor and Company, or late Governor and
Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies, on or before the
said 24th. day of March now last, or at any time before the Date of the said
last recited Letters, By Virtue of any Charters formerly granted or confirmed
to them:
Patents, by Force or Virtue of any Grants, Charters, or Letters Patents
whatsoever, thentofore granted unto them, or mentioned to be granted or
confirmed to them, by any of our late Royal Predecessors, Kings or Queens of
England, by any Style or Title of Incorporation whatsoever, or otherwise
howsoever; To have, To enjoy the Premises to the said Governor and Company
hold, exercise and enjoy the Premises to the said Governor and Company, or
late Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies,
and their Successors, in such and the same manner, and to and for such and the
same Intents and Purposes in all things, In the same manner as they might have
done on the 24th. March last.
as the said Governor and Company, or late Governor and Company might or
ought lawfully to have had, held, used, exercised or enjoyed the same, on or at
any time before the said 24th. day of March now last past, as if the same
Powers, Privileges, and Immunities, and other the Premises, And the Powers by
the said Charter, had been particularly recited: Bu^ under the limitations
therein contained.
had been by the said last recited Letters Patents particularly granted, and
the Letters Patents concerning the same at large recited, Under and subject
nevertheless to the Provisoes, Restrictions and Limitations contained in the
said last recited Letters Patents, and in other the Charters formerly granted
to the said Company. And Whereas, And whereas, in the said Charter of the 7th.
October is contained the Proviso following, Viz.
in the said last recited Letters Patents bearing date the 7th. day of October
now last past, there is contained a Provisoe or Condition in the Words
following, (Viz.) Provided always, and upon Condition Nevertheless, and Our
Express Will and meaning is, That if the said Governor and Company of
Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, and their Successors, do not
accept of, and from time to time, If the Company do not accept of, and
^^fectually exec^^e such directions, are rations, etc.
and at all times hereafter Act according to, and put in due and effectual
Execution, and submit and conform in all things unto such Orders, Directions,
Additions, Alterations, Restrictions and Qualifications relating to the
Constitution, Continuance, Determination, Rights, Powers or Privileges of the
said Company, or the Government thereof, Or of the said Governor and Company
or the Encouragement, Management, Regulation or Advancement of Trade, Or of the
present or future Joynt-Stock of the said Company, Or concerning any future
Subscriptions to be made by way of Increase or Addition to the Joynt-Stock, Or
for ascertaining the true Values of the said Joint Stock, at and during the
time of any such future Subscriptions, which, and as We, Our Heirs or
Successors, At we shall make before the 29th. September, 1694.
by the Advice of our or their Privy Council, shall from time to time at any
time before the 29th. day of September, which shall be in the Year 1694. think
fit to make, insert, limit, direct, appoint or express in or by any further or
other Charter, Letters Patents, or other Writing or Instrument under our or
their Great Seal of England; Then these presents to be revokable,
Then and in each and every of the Cases aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful
to and for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, by Letters Patents under our or their
Great Seal of England to determine, revoke and make void these presents, and
the Grant hereby made, And from and immediately after the passing of such
Letters Patents of Revocation or Determination under the Great Seal of England,
These presents, and all the Powers, And all the Powers therein contained to
cease.
Privileges, Grants and other things herein contained shall cease, determine
and be absolutely void to all Intents and Purposes, any thing to the contrary
notwithstanding, As in and by the said last recited Letters Patents (amongst
several other Provisoes, Powers and Clauses therein contained) relation being
thereunto had, may more fully and at large appear. NOW KNOW YE, NOW KNOW YE,
That we considering how highly it Imports this Kingdom, that the East India
Trade should be continued,
That We considering how highly it Imports the Honor and Welfare of this our
Kingdom, and our Subjects thereof, That a Trade and Traffic to the
East Indies should be continued, And being well satisfied that the same may be
of great and public Advantage, And being desirous to make the same more
National,
And being also desirous to render the same (as much as in us lies) more
National, General and Extensive than hitherto it has been (which will be best
carried on and effected by a General Joynt-Stock) Have, (which is best to be
done in a Joynt-Stock,) have for the Purposes aforesaid,
to and for the ends and purposes aforesaid, and in pursuance and part of the
Execution of the Power to us reserved in and by the said Provisoe in our said
Letters Patents, and herein beforementioned, by and with the Advice of our
Privy Council, and of our especial Grace, by the Advice of our Privy Council,
and of our Especial Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, ordained and
constituted:
certain Knowledge and mere Motion, ordained, constituted and appointed, And by
these Presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do Order, direct, ordain,
constitute and appoint, and the said Governor and Company of Merchants of
London Trading into the East Indies, And the said Company de agree to.
do hereby accept and agree to, That all and every Person and Persons, as well
our Natural born Subjects of this our Kingdom, That all our Subjects, and
Persons Naturalized and Indeniz'd, who shall hereafter Subscribe and pay down
the Sums of Money by them Subscribed in such manner as is herein
after-directed, shall be Members of the said Company, as is after expressed.
as Persons Naturalized and endenized, who shall hereafter subscribe and pay
down the several Proportions of the respective Sums of Money by them
respectively Subscribed, in such manner as the same is herein after directed
and appointed to be Subscribed and paid, be, and by the Governor and Company
of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, for the time being, shall
be admitted and become Members of the said Company within the time, and in the
manner herein after for that purpose expressed. And our Will and Pleasure is,
And Our Will and Pleasure is, That,
And we do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant unto the said
Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, and
their Successors, And do hereby order, 744000 l. be Subscribed
direct and appoint, That the Sum of 744000 l. of Lawful Money of England,
shall and may be added to the present General Joynt-Stock of the said Company,
by the New Subscriptions of such Persons who shall be minded to adventure any
share in the General Joynt-Stock of the said Company, and to be paid in to the
use of the said Company, in such manner and proportions, and within such time
as is herein after-mentioned, for the carrying on and managing a Trade to the
East Indies by a General Joynt-Stock. And for the purposes aforesaid, We do
hereby, for us, our Heirs, and Successors, Order, Direct, and Appoint, that a
Book, or Books, made of Vellum for the said New Subscriptions to be Inserted,
in a Book of Vellum. (within Six days to be provided,)
shall be provided within Six Days, after the Date hereof, by the said
Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies,
which shall lie open every Day in the Week ( Sundays excepted) at the
East India House in Leaden-Hall-street, to he open daily from Eight to Twelve,
in the Morning and from Two to Six in the Afternoon, till the 10th. January
next.
London, from the Hour of Eight to the Hour of Twelve in the Morning, and from
the Hour of Two to the Hour of Six in the Afternoon, until the Tenth day of
January next inclusive; In which said Book or Books, it shall and may be lawful
to and for any person or persons whatsoever, being Natural born Subjects of
this Our Realm and Persons Naturalized or Endenized, to pay and Subscribe on or
before the said 10th. day of January now next ensuing, such Sum and Sums of
Money, to be added to the present Joynt-Stock of the said Company, as they
shall think fit to Adventure in the said Trade, So as no one person shall
subscribe more than the Sum of Ten Thousand Pounds; None to Subscribe above
10000.
And We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, direct and appoint, That if
it shall happen, That the New Subscriptions to be made by virtue of these
Presents, shall exceed the Sum of 744000 l. in the whole, If the Subscriptions
exceed 744000 l. to be reduced to that Sum by the Court of Committees.
That then and in such case the Governor or Deputy Governor, and the Court of
Committees of the said Company (to be qualified in such manner as is herein
after expressed) shall lessen and reduce the said New Subscriptions, to the
said Sum of 744000 l. rata pro rata, and in proportion to the several Sums so
newly Subscribed to the Joynt-Stock of the said Company. And Our further Will
and Pleasure is, And we do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Order and
appoint, That all and every Person and Persons so subscribing, shall at the
time of his or her Subscription, The Subscribers to swear the Moneys subscribed
is their own, and for their own use, and not in trust.
respectively take an Oath before the Governor or Deputy Governor, or any
three or more of the Committees of the said Company for the time being, That
the Moneys by him or her Subscribed is his or her own proper Moneys, and that
he or she Subscribes the same for his or her own Use, and not in Trust, or for
the use of any other Person or Persons whatsoever; The Governor, etc. to
Administer the Oath.
To which said Governor or Deputy Governor, or any three or more of the
Committee of the said Company for the time being, We do hereby for Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, give full Power and Authority; to give and Administer the
said Oath, And do hereby Order and direct them, to administer the same
accordingly. Provided always, and our Will and Pleasure is, And We do hereby
for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, strictly require and command, and do order
and direct, That all and every Person and Persons, who shall make such
Subscriptions as aforesaid, shall at the time of such Subscription, actually
and bona fide, pay down or cause to be paid down unto the Committee of the
Treasury of the said Company for the time being, or their Cashire, A Third part
of the Subscriptions to be paid down,
one full and entire Third part of the several Sums of Money, by each of them
respectively Subscribed to the said present Joynt-Stock, and shall also pay the
Remainder thereof on or at any time or times before the said 10th. day of
January now next coming. And further, The rest by the 10th. January.
Our Will and Pleasure is, And We do by these presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, Grant unto the said Governor and Company and their Successors, and
do hereby order and direct, That in all General Courts of the Adventurers of
the said Company, In all General Courts every Qualified Member having
Such Persons (being Members of the said Company, and qualified as is herein
mentioned) shall have for and in respect of such Sums, as they shall
respectively have Subscribed and paid in to the Joynt-Stock of the said
Company, such number of Votes or Voices in a General Court of the said Company,
as are herein after limited and expressed (That is to say) That each Person
having One Thousand pound or more in the Stock of the said Company, 1000 l.
Stock or more, shall have a Vote for every 1000 l. to 10000 l.
shall have one Vote for every Thousand pounds, not exceeding Ten Thousand
pounds; and if Ten Thousand pounds or more, yet that such Person shall have but
Ten Votes whatsoever his or her Stock be. None to have more then Ten Votes,
And further, That no Person or Persons who shall have in the Joynt-Stock of
the said Company, for his or her own use any Sum less than One Thousand pounds,
And no Vote, if less than 1000 l.
shall have any Vote or Voice at a General Court of the said Company for or in
respect of such Sum being less than One Thousand pounds. And further, We will,
and by these presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Grant unto the said
Governor and Company and their Successors, And do also hereby Order and
Appoint, That all and every Person and Persons who were Members, or free of the
said Company by former Charters or capable to be so, All free of the Company by
former Charters, or capable to be so:
And all other Persons who shall Subscribe and pay in any Sum of Money into the
said Joynt-Stock hereby appointed to be raised, in such manner as is herein
before directed, shall be admitted Gratis into the Freedom of the said Company.
And all new Subscribers to be free of the Company, gratis;
But that all and every Person and Persons who shall not be so qualified as
aforesaid, but shall come in by purchase of any part of the said General
Joynt-Stock, shall take upon him or her the Freedom of the said Company, and
before his or her Admission thereunto, shall pay or cause to be paid to the
said Governor and Company, and their Successors, the Sum of Five pounds of
Lawful English Money, Others to pay 5 l. for it;
by way of fine for his or her Admission into the said Freedom: And such Person
and Persons, as also all Subscribers to the said Joynt-Stock, who with the
Subscribers shall take the Oaths, Viz.
upon their Admission shall take the Oaths appointed to be taken by a late Act
of Parliament made in the First Year of our Reign, Entitled, (An Act for the
abrogating of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and appointing other
Oaths) and also the Oath usually taken by all Persons made Free of the said
Company, before the Governor or Deputy Governor of the said Company for the
time being, to whom We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, give Power
and Authority to Administer the said Oaths accordingly. And further, We will,
and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors do grant unto the said
Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, and
their Successors, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Governor or
Deputy Governor of the said Company for the time being, The Governor or
Deputy Governor of the Company to call General Courts and Courts of Committees:
from time to time to call, and we do hereby order and direct, That they shall
call a General Court, and Court of Committees, to be holden for the said
Company, which shall consist only of such Members of the said Company, who
shall at such time have in the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, To consist of
such only as have a 1000 l. Stock each, in their own right, and have taken the
said Oaths.
the Sum of One Thousand pounds at least in his or her own Right, and shall
have also taken the Oaths appointed to be by them taken as aforesaid; (in which
said General Court or Court of Committees, the Governor or Deputy Governor of
the said Company for the time being shall be present, The Governor or Deputy
to have a Casting Voice in such Courts.
And in case of equality of Votes or Voices shall have a Casting Voice). And
further also, that all the Members of the said Company so qualified as
aforesaid, or the Major part of them, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, shall and may have power and Authority Yearly and every Year between
the Tenth and last day of April, to assemble and meet together in some
convenient Place to be appointed from time to time by the Governor, Governor,
Deputy, and 24 Committees, to be yearly chosen in April.
or in his absence by the Deputy Governor of the said Company for the time
being: And that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Governor or
Deputy of the said Governor, and other the Members of the said Company,
qualified as aforesaid, for the time being, or the Major part of them, being so
assembled in a General Court (whereof the Governor of the said Company, or his
Deputy for the time being to be one) to nominate and Elect out of the Members
of the said Company, a Governor, Deputy Governor, and Twenty Four Committees,
each of them being respectively qualified to be chosen into the said several
Offices, in manner as herein after is expressed (That is to say) to nominate
and Elect one of the Members of the said Company, who shall then have in the
Joynt-Stock of the said Company, The Governor to have 1000 l. Stock in his own
right:
the Sum of Four Thousand pounds at least in his own Right, to be Governor of
the said Company for one whole Year from thence next following; and also one
other of the Members of the said Company, who shall then have in the
Joynt-Stock of the said Company, the Sum of Four Thousand pounds at least in
his own Right, The Deputy the same:
to be Deputy Governor of the said Company for one whole year next ensuing;
And also Twenty Four Members of the said Company, who shall each of them then
have in the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, The Committees each 1000 l.
the Sum of One Thousand pounds at least in his own Right, to be Committees of
the said Company, for one whole Year from thence next ensuing. And Moreover,
Our Will and Pleasure is, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, We do grant unto the said Governor and Company of Merchants of
London Trading into the East Indies, and their Successors, and do hereby Order
and Appoint, That when, and as often, as it shall happen, the Governor, Deputy
Governor, or any of the Committees of the said Company for the time being, at
any time within one Year after that they shall be Nominated, Elected and Sworn
into their said several Offices, to Die; that then, and so often it shall and
may be lawful to and for the Residue of the Members of the said Company, If any
die within the year, others (duly qualified) to be Elected in their stead.
qualified as aforesaid for the time being, or the major part of them, within
convenient time after the Death of any such Governor, Deputy Governor, or any
of the Committees of the said Company; to assemble themselves in such
convenient place as they shall think fit, and in a General Court to Elect and
Nominate some other Member or Members of the said Company respectively
qualified as aforesaid, into the Office or Offices of Governor, Deputy
Governor, and Committees of the said Company in the place and stead of him or
them that so died; which Person and Persons being so Elected and Nominated to
the said Office of Governor, Deputy Governor, or Committees of the said
Company, shall have and Execute the said Office or Offices, for and during the
residue of the said Year. Provided always, And our Will and Pleasure is, And
We do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, order, direct and appoint, that
all and every Person and Persons, who shall hereafter be Elected to the Office
or Offices of Governor, Deputy Governor or Committees of the said Company,
shall before they be admitted to the Execution of their several Offices, The
Governor, Depaty, and Committees before they Act to take the Oaths, Viz.
respectively take the Oaths before mentioned, and appointed to be taken by the
said late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the Abrogating of the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths; and also the Oaths for
the due and faithful Execution of their said several Offices, before such
Persons, and in such manner as has been heretofore used and accustomed, by
virtue of any former Charters or Letters Patents, and this as often as the Case
shall require. And further our Will and Pleasure is, and by these Presents for
Us, our Heirs and Successors, We do grant unto the said Governor and Company
of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, and to their Successors,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Governor, and others the
Members of the said Company qualified as aforesaid for the time being, from
time to time to assemble themselves for or about any the Matters, Causes,
Affairs or Business of the said Trade, The Governor and other qualified
Members of the Company may Assemble and hold General Courts where they please,
in any place or places for the same convenient, within our Dominions or
elsewhere, and there to hold a General Court for the said Company, and the
Affairs thereof: And that also it shall and may be lawful to or for them, or
the major part of them being so assembled, and that shall then and there be
present in any such place or places (whereof the Governor or his Deputy for
the time being to be one) to make, ordain and constitute such and so many
reasonable Laws, and (the Governor or Deputy being present) may make Bylaws
for the Companies better Government,
Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, as to them, or the greater part of them,
being then and there present, shall seem necessary and convenient for the good
Government of the same Company: And the same Laws, Constitutions, Orders and
Ordinances so make, to put in use, and execute accordingly; and at their
pleasure to revoke or alter the same, or any of them, as Occasion shall
require. and revoke or alter them,
And that the said Governor and Company so often as they shall make, ordain or
establish any such Laws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances in form
aforesaid, shall and may impose, ordain, limit and provide such lawful pains,
and may impose lawful Penalties, Fines, etc.
punishments and penalties, by Fines and Amerciaments, or by any other lawful
ways and means, upon or against all Offenders contrary to such Laws,
Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, or any of them, as to the said Governor
and Company for the time being, or the greater part of them, then and there
being present (the said Governor or his Deputy being always One) shall seem
necessary, requisite and convenient for the observation of the same Laws,
Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances; And the same Fines and Amerciaments,
shall and may by their Officers and Servants, from time to time to be appointed
for that purpose, levy, take and have to the use of the said Governor and
Company and their Successors, And levy the same to their own use.
without the impediment of Us, our Heirs or Successors, or of any the Officers
or Ministers of Us, our Heirs or Successors, and without any account therefore
to Us, our Heirs or Successors to be rendered or made; All and singular which
Laws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances so as aforesaid to be made, We will
to be duly observed and kept, All which Bylaws shall be kept, etc. if
approved by a General Court, and not repugnant to the Laws of the Land.
under the pains and penalties therein to be contained, so always as the said
Laws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, Fines and Amerciaments, be first
approved by a General Court of Adventurers, or the major part of them, for the
time being, and so as the same be reasonable, and not contrary or repugnant to
the Laws, Statutes or Customs of this our Realm. Provided always, and our
further Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, order and appoint, That the said Governor and Company of Merchants
of London Trading into the East Indies, or their Successors, shall not at any
time hereafter License or permit any Person or Persons whatsoever, to Trade or
Traffic, No permission to any Person to Trade, or Ships to pass into, or from
the East Indies, on any private account,
or any Ship or Ships to Sail or pass into, or from any part of the said
East Indies, on any Private Account whatsoever; and that if any such License or
Permission shall be granted, contrary to our said Order and appointment herein
before declared, That then, and in each such Case, as well these Presents, as
also the said recited Letters Patents, on Penalty of forfeiting this and the
last Charter.
bearing date the Seventh day of October last past, and all and every the
Powers, Grants, Matters and Things therein and herein contained, shall cease,
determine and be utterly void, to all Intents and Purposes, any thing to the
contrary notwithstanding. And We do further hereby for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, direct, order and appoint the said Governor and Company, and their
Successors, That during the continuance of the said Joynt-Stock of the said
Company, No private Contract,
No private Contract for the Sale of any Goods or Merchandises, shall be made
by the said Company, to any Member or Members of the said Company, or any other
Person or Persons whatsoever (excepting only such Saltpeter as shall be sold
for the use of Us, (excepting Saltpeter for the Crown)
our Heirs and Successors): But that all Goods and Merchandises belonging to
the said Company, shall be sold openly and publicly by Inch of Candle, but all
Goods Sold at the Companies Candle, and for their account:
at their public Sales upon the Companies Account; And that all Moneys arising
by the Sale of any Goods or Merchandises of the said Company, shall be
faithfully, and bona fide, accounted for, and applied to the public and common
Benefit and Advantage of the General Joynt-Stock of the said Company, and the
Money arising thereby applied to the Companies use.
and of all and every the Persons therein concerned, ratably and according to
every persons proportion and share in the said Joynt-Stock, and not to the
private Advantage of any particular person or Persons whatsoever. And that no
Lot of any Goods or Merchandises, shall be put up or Sold, which shall exceed
the value of Five Hundred Pounds (Jewels excepted). No Lot of Goods, except
Jewels, to exceed 500 l.
And for the better Increase of Trade, and Encouraging the Exportation of Goods
and Merchandises, of the Growth, Product and Manufacture of this Kingdom, It is
Our further Will and Pleasure, and we do hereby for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, order and appoint, That the said Governor and Company of Merchants
of London Trading into the East Indies, and their Successors, shall Yearly and
every Year, during the continuance of the said Joynt-Stock, Export and carry to
the East Indies, Goods of the Growth, Product or Manufacture of this our
Kingdom of England, To Export yeatly to India 100000 l. worth of Goods of the
Product, etc. of England.
so many as shall amount to the Value of One Hundred Thousand Pounds at the
least: Provided always, and upon Condition, and the said Governor and Company
do hereby for themselves, and their Successors, Covenant, Grant and Agree to
and with Us, our Heirs and Successors, And we do hereby for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, order and appoint, that they the said Governor and Company and
their Successors, shall Yearly and every Year, during the continuance of the
said Joynt-Stock, Furnish, To furnisn the Crown yearly with 500 Tons of
Saltpeter at the Prices tollowing;
Sell and Deliver out of their Warehouses in or near the City of London, unto
the Officers of the Ordnance of Us, our Heirs and Successors, or to such other
Person or Persons as We, our Heirs or Successors, shall in that behalf direct
or appoint to Our and their Own Use, the Quantity of Five Hundred Tons of good,
clean, and Mercantable Sal.-Petre, consisting of One Hundred and Twelve Pounds
to the Hundred, when and as the same shall be required by the Master,
Lieutenant, or other Chief Officer or Officers, of or belonging to the Ordnance
of Us, our Heirs and Successors, or by such other Person or Persons, as We, our
Heirs and Successors shall from time to time Appoint in that behalf, We, our
Heirs and Successors paying to the said Governor and Company and their
Successors, for every Ton of such Saltpeter, the Sum of Thirty Eight pounds
and Ten shillings of Lawful English Money in time of Peace, and in time of War,
the Sum of Forty Five pounds of like Money for every Ton of such Saltpeter.
And Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, Command, direct and appoint that all Dividends hereafter to be made
of the Profits arising by the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, All Dividends to
be made in Money only.
shall from time to time be made in Money and not otherwise. And further, We do
hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Order and Appoint the said Governor
and Company and their Successors, that they, The Companies Accomptant to Enter
in a Book, or Books, from time to time, the Value of the Stock upon Oath;
and their Successors shall Cause an Accomptant to keep a Book or Books in the
Public Office, or place of Meeting of the said Company, to be provided for
that purpose, and therein fairly enter or cause to be entered from time to time
the true Value of the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, the same to be by him
attested upon Oath; which said Book or Books, shall from time to time lie open
to be Viewed, and perused by all Persons concerned. And also that all
Alienations, Mortgages, And also all Alienations and Transfers of Stock
Transferrs and Assignments of any Part of the said General Joynt-Stock, to any
Person or Persons whatsoever, shall be entered and Registered by the said
Governor and Company and their Successors, in the Public, Ordinary and Common
Book or Books to be provided by the said Company for that purpose; to lie open
to the view of the Concerneds.
and that such Common Book or Books shall lie open from time to time for the
View of all Persons concerned. And our further Will and Pleasure is, The
Joynt-Stock to continue 21 Years:
and We do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Order, direct, limit and
Appoint that the Joynt-Stock of the said Governor and Company of Merchants of
London Trading into the East Indies, shall continue for Twenty One Years, to be
computed from the date of these Presents, and no longer, any thing herein, or
in the said recited Letters Patents, or any of them contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. A Year before which time Books for New Subscriptions shall lie
open for a New Joynt-Stock.
And also that during one whole Year next, before the Expiration of the said
Term of Twenty One Years, herein before mentioned for the continuance of the
said Joynt-Stock, the said Governor and Company and their Successors shall
cause, and procure a Book or Books to be kept at their Public Office or place
of Meeting, to which said Book or Books all Persons being Natural Born
Subjects, or Naturalized, or Endenized, shall or may have free access, and
therein make new Subscriptions, for the making a succeeding new General
Joynt-Stock, as to Us, our Heirs or Successors, shall seem meet and convenient.
Provided, etc. as in the former Charter of the 7th. October.
Provided always, and upon Condition nevertheless, and Our Express Will and
Meaning is, and We do hereby Order, Direct and Appoint, And the said Governor
and Company do hereby agree, That if the said Governor and Company of
Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, and their Successors, do not
accept of, and from time to time, and at all times hereafter, Act according to,
and put in due and effectual Execution, and submit and conform in all things
unto, as well all and every the Orders, Directions, Additions, Alterations,
Restrictions, Qualifications, Matters, and Things herein before expressed, as
also all and every such further and other Orders, Directions, Additions,
Alterations, Restrictions and Qualifications, relating to the Constitution,
Continuance, Determination, Rights, Powers or Privileges of the said Company,
or the Government thereof, or of the said Governor and Company, or the
Encouragement, Management, Regulation or Advancement of Trade, or of the
Present or future Joynt-Stock of the said Company, or concerning any suture
Subscriptions, to be made by way of Increase, or Addition to the Joynt-Stock or
for ascertaining the true Values of the said Joynt-Stock, at, and during the
times of any such future Subscriptions, which, and as We, our Heirs or
Successors, by the Advice of Our or Their Privy Council, shall from time to
time, at any time before the 29th. day of September, which shall be in the Year
1694. think fit to make, insert, limit, direct, appoint or Express in, or by
any further or other Charter, Letters Patents, or other Writing or Instrument,
under our or their Great Seal of England; Then and in Each and every of the
Cases aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful to and for Us, our Heirs, and
Successors by Letters Patents under our or their Great Seal of England, to
determine, revoke and make void, as well these Presents, and the Grant hereby
made, As also the said Charter, or Letters Patents, bearing date the 7th. day
of October last past herein beforementioned, And all, and every, or any the
Matters, and things therein, and herein contained, and from and immediately
after the passing of such Letters Patents of Revocation, or Determination under
the Great Seal of England, as well these Presents, as also the said Charter or
Letters Patents bearing date the 7th. day of October last past, and all the
Powers, Privileges, Grants, and other things therein, and herein contained,
shall cease, determine, and be absolutely void, to all Intents and Purposes,
Any thing to the Contrary notwithstanding. In Witness whereof We have caused
these our Letters to be made Patents, Witness Our Selves at Westminster, the
11th. day of November, in the Fifth Year of our Reign.

By Writ of Privy Seal, Pigott.


