monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For a GENERAL FAST.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas for about a Year last past, a Wicked Rebellion has been Carried on
and Maintained against Their Majesty's in Their Kingdom of Ireland (which is
known to be inseparably Annexed to the Imperial Crown of England) which
Rebellion has been Contrived, Encouraged, and chiefly Supported by the French
King, Designing by that means to make an absolute Conquest of the said Kingdom,
and hold it as a Province, or else to bring a total Ruin and Destruction upon
the same; for which, and other Causes, Their Majesty's have been Obliged to
enter into a Just and Necessary War against the said French King. And whereas
His Majesty is Resolved, by the Assistance of God, Vigorously to Prosecute the
said War by Sea and Land, And so Effectually to Reduce that Kingdom, to its due
Obedience, that Their Majesty's Good Subjects there may not only be Rescued
from the present Force and Violence, but Secured against all such Aggressions
for the Future, and be Settled in a Firm and Lasting State of Peace, Safety,
and Prosperity: For which purpose His Majesty has determined to make a Royal
Voyage and go thither in Person, putting His Trust in Almighty God (who has by
his mavelous Providence hitherto Preserved and Conducted His Majesty) That he
will vouchsafe a special Blessing on this His righteous Undertaking, and
thereby Consummate the Deliverance of these Kingdoms. Their Majesty's taking
the Premises into Their most Serious Consideration, have thought fit to
Appoint, and do by and with the Advice of Their Privy Council, hereby Appoint
and Command a General and Public Fast and Humiliation to be Observed
throughout this Realm in most Devout and Solemn manner, for Supplicating
Almighty God for Pardon of our Sins, and Imploring his Blessing and Protection
in the Preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and Prosperity of his Arms
in Ireland, and the Naval Forces, to be Religiously Kept and Observed on
Wednesday the Twelfth day of March next, throughout Their Majesty's Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and thenceforward
to be Observed on the Third Wednesday in every Month successively, during the
present War. And for the more Orderly Solemnizing of the said several Fast
Days, Their Majesty's have given directions to the Right Reverend the Bishops
of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayers suitable to this Occasion, to be
used in all Churches and Chapels, and other Places of Public Worship; And
have given Charge for the Dispersing thereof through their several Diocesses in
the whole Kingdom. And Their Majesty's do most Expressly Charge and Command that
the said Fastings and Prayers be Soberly, Reverently, and Decently Performed by
all Their Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favor of Almighty God, and upon
Pain of such Punishments as Their Majesty's can Justly Inflict upon all such as
shall Contemn or Neglect so Religious a Work.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twentieth Day of February, 1689. In the
Second Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


