W RR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


WILLIAM R.

WHereas Their Majesty's in serious Consideration of the War in which Their
Majesty's (together with most of the Princes and States of Europe) were (and
still are) Engaged against the French King, did, by Their Royal Proclamation
bearing Date the Ninth day of April last, Appoint a General Monthly Fast to be
kept throughout this Kingdom, by Solemn Humiliation and Repentance of Our Sins,
and by humble Supplications to Almighty God for the Preservation of Their
Majesty's Sacred Persons, and the Prosperous Success of Their Arms, which has
been Religiously kept and observed accordingly. And forasmuch as it has
pleased Almighty God of his Infinite Goodness, in answer to the Prayers offered
up on that Occasion, to Protect His Majesty from great and manifold Dangers in
His late Expedition beyond the Seas, and bring Him back in Safety, and to
Preserve Their Majesty's and Their Government against all the wicked
Machinations and Designs of Open and Secret Enemies, and by a Wonderful Success
of Their Arms to Reduce the Kingdom of Ireland entirely to Their Obedience,
whereby Their Majesty's are now Established in the full Possession of Their
Three Kingdoms, and in a Condition, with the Blessing of God, to Settle the
same in a firm and lasting state of Safety, Honor and Prosperity. Their
Majesty's therefore with all Humility Adoring the Mercy of the Divine
Providence manifested to Them and Their People, and duly considering that
Public and Signal Blessings do call for Public and Solemn Acknowledgments,
Have thought fit, and by, and with the Advice of Their Privy Council do hereby
Appoint and Command that a General and Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for
these great Blessings be Observed throughout this Realm of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in most Devout and Solemn manner on
Thursday the Six and twentieth Day of November next ensuing. And for the better
and more orderly Solemnizing of the same, Their Majesty's have given Direction
to the Most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right Reverend Bishops of this
Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this Occasion, to be Used in
all Churches and Chapels, and other Places of Public Worship, and to take
Care for the timely dispersing of the same through their respective Diocesses.
And Their Majesty's do strictly Charge and Command, That the said day of
Public Thanksgiving be Religiously Observed by all Their Loving Subjects, as
they tender the Favor of Almighty God, and upon Pain of such Punishments as
Their Majesty's can justly inflict for the Contempt or Neglect thereof.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Two and twentieth Day of October, 1691.
In the Third Year of Our Reign.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. M DC XCI.


