W R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King, A PROCLAMATION, For Apprehending of William Standish of
Standish-Hall in the County of Lancaster, Esquire.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas His Majesty has received Information, That William Standish of
Standish-Hall in the County of Lancaster, Esquire, has Conspired, with diverse
other Disaffected Persons, to Disturb and Destroy the Government, and for that
purpose bought up Arms, and Abetted and Adhered to His Majesty's Enemies; For
which cause several Warrants have Issued for the Apprehending of the said
William Standish, but he has withdrawn himself from his usual Place of Abode,
and is fled from Justice: His Majesty therefore has thought fit, by and with
the Advice of His Privy Council, and upon an Humble Address from the House of
Commons for that purpose, to Issue this His Royal Proclamation; And His Majesty
does hereby Command and Require all His Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and
Apprehend the said William Standish wherever he may be found, and to Carry him
before the next Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, who is hereby Required
to Commit him to the next Gaol, there to remain until he be thence delivered by
due Course of Law. And His Majesty does Require the said Justice, or other
Magistrate immediately to give Notice thereof to His Privy Council, or one of
the Principal Secretaries of State. And His Majesty does hereby Publish and
Declare, That all Persons who shall Conceal the said William Standish, or be
Aiding or Assisting in Concealing him, or furthering his Escape, shall be
Proceeded against for such their Offense, with the utmost Severity according to
Law. And His Majesty does hereby Promise, That whosoever shall Discover and
Apprehend the said William Standish, and Bring him before some Justice of
Peace, or Chief Magistrate, shall Have and Receive the Reward of Five Hundred
Pounds for so doing. And We do hereby Authorize and Require Our present
Commissioners of Our Treasury, and Our High Treasurer and Commissioners of Our
Treasury for the time being, to make Payment of the said Sum accordingly.

Given at our Court at Kensington the Fourteenth Day of March 1694. In the
Seventh Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1694.


