WR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

CARDELL GOODMAN.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas Cardell Goodman was Accused of High Treason, in Conspiring the Death
and Destruction of His Majesty, and thereupon Apprehended, and afterward upon
some Information and Evidence given by him against several of the Conspirators,
was permitted by His Majesty to be Discharged out of Prison upon Bail; And
whereas the said Cardell Goodman, intending to Suppress the Information which
he has formerly given, and to Prevent the further Prosecution of such
Traitors, in order to bring them to Justice, has lately Absconded from his
usual Place of Abode, and is fled from Justice: His Majesty therefore (with the
Advice of His Privy Council) has thought fit to Issue this His Royal
Proclamation, hereby Commanding all His Loving Subjects, to Discover, Take and
Apprehend the said Cardell Goodman, where ever he may be found, and to Carry
him before the next Justice of Peace or Chief Magistrate, who is hereby
Required to Commit him to the next Goal, there to remain until he shall be
thence delivered by due Course of Law. And His Majesty does hereby Require the
said Justice or other Chief Magistrate immediately to give Notice thereof to
His Privy Council, or to one of His Principal Secretaries of State. And His
Majesty does hereby Publish and Declare, That whosoever shall Conceal the said
Cardell Goodman, shall be Proceeded against with the utmost Severity according
to Law. And whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the said Cardell Goodman,
and Bring him before such Justice of Peace or Chief Magistrate, shall Receive
as a Reward the Sum of One thousand Pounds; which said Sum of One thousand
Pounds the Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury are hereby Directed to Pay
accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Fifth Day of November, 1696. In the
Eighth Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.


