THE False-Prophets tried by their Fruits: BEING A SERMON PREACHED At St.
JAMES's Westminster, November vth. 1699.

In which it is shown, That the Principles, and Practices, of the CHURCH of
ROME, with relation to Those whom they call HERETICS; are not only Destructive
of Civil Society, but are utterly Irreconcilable with the Gospel of Christ.

By WILLIAM WAKE, D. D. and Rector of St. JAMES Westminster.

Published at the Request of the Gentlemen of the VESTRY, and several Others,
who Heard it.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Sare, at Gray's-Inn-Gate in Holborn. M D C C.

MAT. vii. 15, 16. Beware of False Prophets, which come to you in
Sheeps-Cloathing, but Inwardly They are Ravening Wolves: Ye shall know them by
their Fruits.


THESE Words are a Caution given by our Blessed Savior to his Disciples, to
have a Care what Persons They admitted to be their Guides, and Instructors, in
things pertaining to Religion. That They should not blindly follow Every One
who should pretend to lead Them, but should first diligently prove, and Examine
them: And know whether They were indeed the true Ministers of Christ; Or
whether they were not rather False-Prophets, whose design was not to instruct,
but to deceive; Beware of False-Prophets, which come to you in
Sheeps-Cloathing, but inwardly they are Ravening Wolves: Ye shall know them by
their Fruits.

In my Discourse upon which Words, I shall

I. Endeavor to Give you a clear account of the true Meaning of our Savior in
Them. And having done this, I will proceed,

II. To show you what Use We ought to make of them.

(1 st.) In General; with Relation to all such as shall at any time pretend to
Preach the Gospel of Christ to us.

(2dly.) In particular; As they may be more immediately applied to the Subject,
and Solemnity, of this day.

And, I. Let us Enquire, what is the true Meaning of that Caution, which our
Savior here Gave to his Disciples: Beware of False-Prophets.

In order whereunto, I shall distinctly consider these two Things:

1st. Who They were whom our Savior intended to Represent to them, under the
Name, and Character, of False Prophets?

2dly. What those Fruits are, by which He directed them to discover, and to
avoid Them.

1st. As for the former of these, The Persons whom our Savior here designed to
Represent to his Disciples, under the Name, and Character of False Prophets;
They may be reduced to these two kinds: Either, 1 st, Such as should pretend to
set up themselves as Men commissioned by God, in an Extraordinary-Manner to
Reveal hi^ Will to Mankind, though indeed They were never Sent by Him: Or, 2 dly,
Such as should pretend only to teach, and expound the Common Doctrine of
Christ; but yet under the color of that, should deliver their own
Imaginations; and so Preach Themselves, 2 Cor. iv 5.
and not the Lord Jesus.

Of the Former of these, Our Savior spoke to his Disciples Mat. xxiv. 11, 24.
When He told Them, That False Christ's, and False-Prophets should arise, and
should deceive many: Mark xiii. 22.
And therefore warned Them not to be Deluded by them.

Of the latter kind are all Those who in the several Ages of the Church, have
Preached in the Name, and pretended to deliver only that Pure Doctrine of
Christ, which was delivered by Him to his Apostles; and by them Communicated to
the Church; but yet have mingled their Own Errors together with it: And by
means thereof have brought in Damnable Heresies 2 Pet. ii. 1. Scandalous to
Christianity, and dangerous to the Souls of all Those who have unhappily
suffered Themselves to be misled by Them. Act. xx. 29.30.

1 Timothy iv. 1, 2, 3.




Now that Those of this latter kind, no less than those of the foregoing, are
truly comprehended under the Name, and Character, of False-Prophets, the
language of the New Testament will not suffer Us to doubt. Where to Prophesy,
does commonly denote to Preach the Gospel of Christ: And to be a Prophet, Mat.
vii. 22. x. 41. xx.ii. 34.

Luk xi. 50.


signifies no less to be a Teacher of the Doctrine already Revealed, Romans xii.
6. 1 Cor. xiii. 2. xiv. 22. etc.
than to be a Publisher of such Things as were before unknown; and, for the
Confirmation of which, He who did so, was therefore to be, in an Extraordinary
manner, both Commissioned, and Inspired by God.

The truth is, though the former of these Significations of the Word Prophet, was
the more Common under the Old Testament; when such kind of Persons were wont to
be frequently sent by God to Mankind; yet this latter seems to be the more
proper, and standing import of it, under the New. And the additional Character
which is here Given to those of whom our Savior spoke, that they should come
in Sheeps-Cloathing, that is to say, under the Habit, and Appearance of
Disciples; in the Name of Christ, and as Pastors of his Flock; plainly shows
that They were not to be the Publishers of any new Doctrine; but to pretend, at
least, to Teach that Old-Religion, Heb xiii. 20. 1 Pet. v. 4.
which our Blessed Lord, the Great Shepherd of the Sheep, once for all,
delivered to the Saints. Jude 3.

So that however then I would not exclude the other signification of the Word
Prophet from having been, in part, intended by our Savior, in the Caution
before us; And according to which, it is certainly our duty to Beware of
False-Prophets; that is to say, of such as shall Go about to Preach a new
Religion, totally different from that of the Gospel; (which was, in Effect,
Act. xxi. 28. Joseph. Antiqu. lib. xx. c. 2.

De Bell. Jud. lib. v. c. 30, 38. Orig. Contr. Cells. l. 2. Epiph. adv. Haeres.
lib. i. Tom. 2. etc.


the Case of some of the most Early Heretics, in the first Ages after Christ;
and of that Great Impostor Mahomet afterward:) Yet I cannot but look upon the
more General Design of our Blessed Lord to have been, to Caution us against
those, of whom we have commonly more need to Beware; I mean, The Ordinary
Preachers of the Gospel. And concerning whom it is without Controversy our
Duty, and should be our Care too, to take heed that We do not suffer our selves
to be misled by Them: Whilst instead of delivering to Us the pure Doctrine of
Christ, they teach only their own Inventions; and, by so doing, both corrupt
our Faith, and (without Gods Infinite mercy,) Expose Us to Everlasting Ruin
and Destruction.

And this may suffice to show, who the False-Prophets are, of whom our Lord in
the Text, Requires us to Beware. Let us consider,

2dly. By what Marks we may Discover, and so be enabled to Avoid them.

Now the Rule laid down by our Savior in order hereunto, and again Repeated by
him, ver. 20. is this; Ye shall know them by their Fruits. And those may be of
two kinds: Either, 1st. The Doctrine which they Preach, and would Impose on
those to whom they deliver it, for the True Doctrine of Christ; Whether with
Respect to Faith, or Manners; to what we are to Believe, or what we are to Do,
in obedience to his Gospel. Or, 2dly, By their Fruits, we may Understand, the
Efficacy of their Doctrine on the Minds, and Consciences, of those who are
Guided by Them; and the natural Tendency which it has, either to promote that
Piety which our Savior came into the World to teach; or to lead men into any
Wickedness contrary thereunto.

These are the Fruits by which we may judge what the Prophet is who comes to
us; Whether He be indeed a True-Prophet, and as such to be received by us; Or
whether He be only a Woolf in Sheeps-cloathing, and of whom we are therefore to
Beware. And from all which we may now lay down these Three Rules, as containing
the sum of our Savior's Advice to Us, with relation to this Matter.

First: That whosoever, in Matters of Faith, shall Preach any Doctrine contrary
to, Gal. i. 8.
or otherwise different from, that Doctrine which was taught by Christ to his
Apostles, and by them delivered to the Church; (and the Substance of which is
fully, and clearly contained, in the Writings of the New Testament;) is a False
Prophet; and to be Avoided by Us as such.

Secondly: That Whosoever, Ephesians. v. 6. Coloss. ii. 18. 1 Timothy iv. 1, etc.

2 Timothy iii. 5. etc.


in respect of Manners, shall preach any Doctrines which are Inconsistent with
the Piety of the Gospel; Or otherwise apt to corrupt the Morality of it; He
does also thereby show himself to be a Deceiver, and an Impostor; and it is our
Duty to Beware of Him as such.

Thirdly; If such a Prophet shall deliver this False-Doctrine, (whether in the
business of Faith, or Manners) not of his Own Motion, but as Commissioned by
some Church, or Society of Men, calling themselves a Church, so to do; Then
that Church, or Society of Men, which does Commission him, must be looked upon
to be a Corrupt, and Erroneus Church; and be no less avoided by Us than He who
is so Sent, or Commissioned by it.

And thus have I endeavored to give you a clear Account, of the direction of
our Blessed Savior in the Words before Us: I Go on now to the Use I proposed.

II. To make of this Caution; (1 st.) In General; as it respects All Those who
shall, at any time, Pretend to be our Guides in Matters of Religion: And, (2
dly.) In particular; As it may be, in a more especial manner, Applied to the
Solemnity of this Day.

(1 st.) Of the General Use we are to make of this Caution; As it respects All
Those who shall, at any time, pretend to be our Guides in Matters of Religion.

And here, 1 st. If it be Our duty to Beware of False-Prophets; and if the way
of Discovering of them be, To Know Them by their Fruits; that is, as I have now
shown, by the Doctrine which They Teach, and the Practices which They allow of;
then it must follow, That it is not only lawful for Us, but our Duty, in
Obedience to this Command, to Examine the Doctrine which our Spiritual Guides
propose to Us; And to Compare it with that of Christ, and his Apostles: And
either to receive them as true, and lawful Pastors, if what they Teach be
Agreeable thereunto; Or else to reject them as False-Prophets, if it shall
appear to be Otherwise. And indeed, However some, the better to maintain their
usurped Authority over the Consciences of Men, have set up another Method; and
told Us, that the Prophet is to Give Credit and Authority to the Doctrine, not
the Doctrine to the Prophet; And, in consequence thereof, have forbidden Men to
Examine what is delivered by Them, and made them Believe that it is sufficient
that They have it from such hands as can neither mistake Themselves, nor
Mis-lead Others: Yet not only our Reason directs us to a contrary Procedure,
but the Holy Scriptures themselves every where exhort Us to Examine what is
proposed to Us; And not take any thing, at all Adventures, in a matter of such
Vast concern, as it must needs be to Us, to be Guided a-right in those things
which regard the Glory of God, and the Salvation of our Immortal Souls.

Hence it is that we are commanded, sometimes Not to Believe every Spirit, but
to Try the Spirits whether they are of God; Because many False-Prophets are
gone out into the World, Jo. iv. 1. At other times, to Search the Scriptures,
Jo. v. 39. And of Our selves to judge the things that are right, Luke xii. 57.
And as for what concerns the Authority of any man, or Company of Men, to the
contrary; are told by St. Paul, Gal. 1.9. That though They (the Apostles of
Christ) Or an Angel from Heaven should preach any other Gospel unto Us, than
that which We have received, They should be Accursed. And if an Angel from
Heaven, or an Apostle should he rise from the dead, and preach to Us, must not
be received any farther than what He delivers shall appear to be agreeable to
the Gospel of Christ; much less ought We not either without all Examination to
Receive, or against the plain Authority of Holy Scripture to submit to, the
Pretensions of Designing Men; Who the more they set up their Own Infallibility,
and decline the Trial of God's Word, the more ought they to be suspected by Us;
and the more narrowly to be enquired into, that We be not deceived by them.

But, 2 dly. Since our Savior delivered the Caution of the Text, not to his
Apostles only, but to the whole Company of his Disciples; Mat. v. 1. Luke vi.
17.20.
to all Those who came to him, and offered themselves to be Instructed by Him;
it will follow farther, That this Right of Examining what is proposed to Us, in
Matters of Religion, is not any special Privilege of the Pastors, or Governors
of the Church; but is the Common Right, and Duty, of All Christians whatsoever:
Who as they are All concerned to be secure in what they Believe and Practice,
in such Cases as these; so are they All required, in order thereunto, 11 These.
v. 21. 11 Jo. iv. 1.
to Beware of False Prophets, and to Try them by their Fruits.

And this may serve yet farther to show the little regard we are to give to
their Pretenses who tell Us, that the Judgment of these Things belongs only to
the Church; that is, as some of them interpret it, to the Pope, as successor of
St. Peter, and if (we will believe them) Head of the Church: As others
understand it; to the Bishops and Chief Pastors of the Church; And to Them not
separately, and alone, but convened together into a Synod; And that, again, not
in any Particular Church; but in the Catholic; to Them, or Their Deputies,
lawfully met together, in a General Council.

For though it is not to be doubted, but that what is fairly debated, and orderly
concluded upon, in such an Assembly; (where it is fully Assembled, and
permitted freely to judge, and determine, according to the Holy Scriptures;)
must needs be of more Authority; and probably may be more sure, than what is
resolved by Every single Christian apart: Yet, when all is done, as every
particular Person is to Answer to God for his Own Soul, so he must Examine, as
far as He is Able, both What He Believes and How He Practices; and upon What
Grounds he does Both; And not follow any Assembly, though of never so much
Seeming Authority, contrary to that which is of much Greater Authority than any
Humane Assembly whatsoever can be, I mean, The Word of God. And it may as well
be said that all the other Parts of Christian Piety, delivered by our Savior,
Mat. v, vi, vii,
in these Chapters, belong not to Single Persons, or to Ordinary Christians at
all, but only to the whole Church, or at least, to the Pastors and Governors of
it; as that this Command of taking heed of False Prophets, and of Knowing them
by their Fruits, is the Business of Such only, and not the duty of every
Private Person.

But, 3 dly; and to conclude these General Reflections. If such be the case,
that it is not only lawful for, but the Duty of, every Christian to Search the
Scriptures, and to Examine what is Proposed to him; and to satisfy himself
Whether it be the true Doctrine of Christ or no: Then it will follow farther,
That if upon such a Proof of what is tendered to Us by any Person, or Church,
whatsoever, we should chance to be clearly, and evidently convinced, that they
have departed Themselves, and would draw away Us, from the pure Faith of
Christ, delivered to Us in the Holy Scriptures; it is our duty to take heed
that we do not follow them in their Apostasy; but resolve rather to forsake
Them, than to abandon that Gospel, which both They, and We, are commanded to
adhere unto.

That it is possible for Men either by Interest to be Corrupted; by Prejudices
to be biased; or through Infirmity to be deceived; and by any, or all of these
Means, to fall away from the Purity of the Christian truth; both the Condition
of Humane Nature assures us; and the very Caution of the Text, does evidently
suppose.

That by a Careful Attention, and diligent Enquiry into the Doctrine deliverd
to Us in the Holy Scriptures, we may be able to discover when they do so; and
to distinguish between Truth, and Falsehood; Right and Wrong, as to these
matters; not only our Savior's Command to do this; but the plainness wherewith
most of those things are delivered, which make up the sum of what is necessary
for us to Believe, and Do, in order to our salvation, Effectually show.

But then to what purpose should we trouble our selves to Search the
Scriptures, and to Understand our Religion, and to know that we are dealt
fraudulently with, by our Guides, in it; if after all, there is no Remedy: But
we must follow our Church, and the Pastors of it, whether they teach Us the
true doctrine of Christ; or whether they lead Us into Damnable Hereresies,
destructive of the very Fundamentals of it.

And yet how Confidently do some Men here also, rise up against Us: And tell
Us, that we must Believe them before our Own Reason; nay, and (in effect)
before God Himself? That it is Schism, and Heresy, and I know not what besides,
to doubt of, or differ with them, in any thing that they require us to Believe.
And that much better were it for us to shut our eyes altogether, and Go on
blindfold under their Conduct; than to follow the clearest Light that
Scripture, Reason, or even Sense it self, can Give us, in Opposition to their
Errors.

But let them assume what Authority they please to themselves, and raise what
Clamours they can against us; When all is done, this Conclusion will remain
firm as Heaven, and clear as any first principle of Science; that if the
Scriptures be, Romans xv. 4. 2 Timothy iii. 16. 2 Pet. 1.19
as we all agree that they are, the Word of God; and were written for our
Instruction; then we must follow the Conduct of Them: And hold fast to the
Truth which they deliver, though not only a Company of assuming Men, calling
Themselves the Church, (but upon what Grounds, no body could ever learn,) and
pretending to Infallibility; (in Despite of the Grossest Errors;) but the
whole World should conspire together, to Oppose Us in it.

And thus have I shown you, what that General Use is, that we ought all of Us
to make, of this Command of our Savior, to Beware of False-Prophets; and, to
Know them by their Fruits. I proceed,

(2 dly) To that more particular Application which I proposed to make of it, to
the Subject of this Days Solemnity.

I shall not need to tell you, that we are now met together to Bless God for
those wonderful Deliverances, which He has twice afforded Us of this Nation
upon this very Day, from the Designs of Those who are the professed Enemies of
our Religion; and who have never Ceased, from the first Beginning of the
Reformation among Us, to do what in them lies to subvert That, and to destroy
Us, upon the account of it.

But of all the measures that were Ever taken by them in order thereunto, never
was there any more Remarkable than that which was intended to have been
Executed on this Day; had not God, by a miracle of his Providence, discovered,
and disappointed it.

A Design it was, so Black, and Horrid, that we find many among Themselves
ashamed to own it. And therefore, They either altogether deny that there was
ever any such Plot carried on by Those of their Communion: Or else, pretend,
Papists Apology, p. 31. ( With the Answer) Comp. p. 34. Calendar. Catholicum,
An. 1662. 5 th Nov. Hen. Morus, Soc. Jesu Provinciae Anglic. Hist. l. 7. Sect.
19, 21.
that it was only a private attempt of a Few-Desperate Men of their Religion;
Censured, and Condemned for it, by all the Better, and more sober Members of
their Church.

And indeed, far be it from me to charge the whole Body of our English Papists,
either with the knowledge of this Conspiracy heretofore, or with the Approving
of it since. I am sensible that Several among them have not only declared their
Abhorrence of the Design its self; See Widdrington contr. Suarez. page 12. and
153.
but of the very Principles on which it was founded. But yet when all is done,
Certain it is that both the Doctrine on which it was Established; has been
Council. Lateran. 3. Can. 27. Council. Lateran. 4. Can. 3. Council. Lugd. 1. Lab.
Tom. 11. Col. 640, etc. Council. Constant. Sess. 45. Mart. PP. Bull, etc. p.
259. Tom. 12. Lab. See more below.
Confirmed by those of the Highest Authority in the Roman Church: And that
their Greatest Men have not only given their Approbation to such Attempts; As
Tesmond and Gerrard, who were Both concerned in the Powder Plot. Widdrington
contra Schulken, p. 151.
but have favored those who were the principal Actors in Them.

Here then let us fix our selves, and try the Cause between Them, and Us. If
the Doctrines of the Romish Church with Relation to Those whom they call
Heretics, and their Practices toward Them; be agreeable to the Gospel of
Christ; let us allow Them to be, thus far, True Prophets, and approved by their
Fruits. But else, if neither their Doctrines nor Practices, in this Case, can
be Reconciled with the Spirit of Christianity; We must then Pronounce Them to
be False-Teachers, and conclude that they have been justly Rejected by Us as
such.

And 1st, As for the Doctrines of Those of the Church of Rome toward such whom
they call Heretics, they are to this Effect.

* That theirs is the Catholic Church, with which all Christians are bound to
Communicate; to which alone all the Promises of the Gospel do belong; and out
of which there is no Salvation. Council. Constant. Sess. 45. Decretal. de
Haeret. l. 5. tit. 7. c, 13.
That all who differ from them, and forsake their Communion, are Schismatics,
and Heretics; Enemies to God; and Apostates from the Church, and Faith of
Christ.

Council. Lateran. 4. Can. 3. See Foulis Popists Treasons, Book 2. c. 6. Sect.
13. The Bull of P. Paul III. against K. Henry VIII. Bellarm de Laicis. l. 3. c.
21. Decretal. de Haeret. lib. 5. tit. 7. c. 13. Vid. Bullam. Coenae Dom.
That this Church has, therefore a Right to pronounce a Sentence of
Excommunication against Them as Such: And that being, by that means, Cut off
from the Body of Christ, they are, in the next place, to be Cast out of all
Civil Society too; and be put to death, unless They shall Abjure their Heresy,
and return again to their Communion.

Sanders. de Visib. Monarch. p, 730, 734. Parry 's Confession, out of Allen 's
Book, p. 17. Thuanus 's Hist. lib. 135. p. 1206. C.D. Becanus contr. Angl. p.
120. Add; Pope Pius the Fifth's Bull against Qu. Eliz. etc. Decretal. de
Haeret. l. 5. tit. 7. c. 13. Council. Avenionens, An. 1210. Bellarm. Resp, ad
Ap^log. pro Juram: fidel; p. 9, 10.
That this Excommunication the Pope has power to pronounce, not only upon
private Persons, but upon whole Cities and Countries, upon Kings and Subjects:
And that this being done, They also may be Prosecuted with the Sword, and be
Rooted from off the face of the Earth.

See this proved at large from their own Authors, by Foulis Hist. of Popish
Treasons, Book* 2. c. 1, 2, 5, 6. Du Moulin 's Answer to Philanx. Anglicus.
cap. 4. Bp Barlow 's Popish Principles, pernicious to Protestant Princ^s; to
which, add the Bulls of P. Paul III. against King Henry VIII. Of Pius V.
against Q Eliz. Decret. c. 15. qu. 5. cap* Nos. Sanctorum.
That for the better effecting hereof, his Holiness (as they call him) has
power to absolve Princes from their Oaths of Government to their Subjects; and
Subjects from their Obligations of Fidelity to their Princes: To dispose of
Kingdoms; and transfer Them from one State, or Family to another. And that
having done this, that Person, or State, to whom the Pope shall have given such
an Heretical Kingdom, Card. Allen 's Admonition to the Nobility and People of
England; with his Answer to Stanley 's Letter, An. 1587. Becanus Controv.
Anglic. c. 3. q. 2, 3. Suarez Defens. fid. Cathol. Lib. 3. c. 23. cui titulus:
Pontificem summum potestate Coerciva in reges uti posse usque ad depositionem
etiam a regno, l. 6. c. 2. Sect. 7. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 6, 8. Idem
de potestate sum. Pont. contr. Barclaium: in Prolegomen.
has from thenceforth a just Right to enjoy it, and may lawfully Endeavor by
any means to make themselves Masters of it.

Jul. Caes. Bullenger. Hist. l. 6. p. 233. speaking of Parry says, De Theologis
quaerit, an jure Tyrannus Pontificiis diris devotus, necari possit? Illi,
posse, responderunt See Card. Como 's Letter to the same purpose, below.
Suarez. Defens. fid. Cathol. lib. 6. c. 4. Sect. 14, 18. Mariana de Rege and
Regis Institut. l. 1. c. 6, 7. Thuan. Hist. l. 111. p. 517, 518, 520.
Lastly: That if this cannot be done by open force, and it be for the Interest
of their Religion that some other Course should be taken; any King, or Prince,
so Excommunicated, as is aforesaid, by the Pope, may lawfully be Killed by any
private Person; or otherwise, be deposed from his Government: And another set
up to Defend their Religion, and to Extirpate, what they call Heresy, out of
that Country.

This is the Substance of what is taught by Those of the Church of Rome, with
Relation to such as they call Heretics: that is to say, in other Words, to all
those who are not of their Persuasion. And

2dly, For their Practices, in Conformity thereunto, though you are but too well
able of your selves to Recount Them, yet I will call to your Remembrance a few
Particulars, that may suffice to Represent Them to you.

I should perhaps be thought to look back too far, should I Relate to you the Sea Usserius de Christianarum Eccles. Success. c. 10. Crackanthorp contra
Spalatensem, c. 18. Sect. 19.

Mat. Paris. ad An. 1234. says, The Number that was slain was Infinite.


barbarous Butcheries committed by them about the xiiith Century, at the
Preaching of that Whose Severity the very Inquisitors themselves boast of.
Ludov. a Param. de Orig. and Progress. Inquis. l. 2. c. 2. n. 4. Limburg. Hist.
Inquisit. l. 1. c. 10.
Bloody Monk, their now Glorious St. Dominick: And the greatest of whose merit,
seems to have been this, that (as the Histories of those times inform Us,) he
Preached above an Hundred Thousand Innocent Men out of their lives. A most
Apostolical Preacher no doubt! and worthy of the Honor, which in
acknowledgment of his Merits they thought fit to confer upon Him; that for the
good Service he had done in that Cruel Mission, the Inquisition, then begun by
Him, (that most lively Pattern of Hell upon Earth) should be entrusted to the
Monks of his Vid. Leg. 1. Fred. II. apud Limburg. Hist. Inquis. c. 12. l. 1. Et
Hist. progres, Inquisit. per totum lib.
Order; and who, in the management of it, for the most part, do not at all
degenerate from the fiery Zeal of their Antichristian Founder.

If from those we pass on to the Protestants of France, Thuan. Hist. ad An.
1572. Popliniere Hist. de France. live. 29. D'Aubigne Hist. Universe. part. 2. l.
1. c. 4. etc. Mezeray Hist. Charles IX. etc. Hist. des Martyrs; a Geneve, 1619.
l. 7. etc. An. 1557, etc. l. 10. An. 1572. Osiand. Hist. Eccles. ad An. 1557.
1560, 1567, 1568. Lampadius M^llific. Hist. par. 3. p. 475, etc. 48^.
it is hardly to be said what infinite Numbers of Them, in a very few Years,
fell a Sacrifice to the Romish Fury. To which if we add the Persecutions they
have since undergone, within our own Memories, to the utter Ruin of their
Religion in that Country; We shall need no other Evidence to convince Us, what
the true Spirit of Popery is; and what we are to expect from it, if ever it
should happen to prevail any more among Us.

What Havoc has been made of the Evangelical Churches, in the other Parts of
Europe, and that within these few Years, is too fresh in your Memories to need
a Repetition, As for our own Country; not only the Laws still Extant show Us,
what severe Acts were passed against the Reformed, ever since the Time of King
Henry the Fourth; but our Histories tell Us, with what Rigor they were put in
Execution. And the short Period of Queen Mary's Reign, shall I hope be a
lasting, as it was a burning, and shining Monument, of what our Forefathers
Underwent; and of what we ought to fear, should they ever come to have the same
Power in their Hands, that they then had, to Destroy Us.

But to leave these Vulgar Instances of the Romish Cruelties, and come to those
of a higher Nature; In which Princes have been concerned and for whom, if They
chance to Oppose their Interest, They have as little Regard as for the meanest
of the People.

It would engage me on too large a Subject to speak of the several Emperors,
and Kings, who were either murdered, See K. James 's Apology for the Oath of
Allegiance; in his Works Fol. p. 272, etc. Becanus Contr. Angl. p. 144. Edit
Mogunt. 1613. Foulis Romish Treasons, at large, Books 3, 4, 5, 6. from all
sorts of Histories* Vid. Platinam in vit. Bonifacii VIII. etc. Bellarm. de
potest. P. contr. Barclaium.
or deposed by the Pope, and his faction, before the time of the Reformation.
Let the Histories of Europe speak this to you: Scarce a Country of which is
destitute of some Instance or Other of this Nature. I shall only point out to
you a few Particulars, of many, since that time; and those Such as are no more
to be denied, than they are to be Excused, by Them.

See Foulis Popish Treasons, l. 8. c. 6. Histoire des derniers Troubles de
France, An. 1589. Hist. d' Aubigne, An. 1589. Tom. 3. l. 2. c. 22. Thuani Hist.
l. 95. Et lib. c. III. p. 520.
When that desperate Wretch James Clement, undertook the Murder of King Henry
the Third of France; not only the Prior of his Convent Encouraged him in it,
and gave him the very Knife with which he did it; but when the News of this
Horrid Fact was brought to Rome, See the whole Speech in Foulis Popish
Treasons, Book 8. c. 6.
Pope Sixtus the Fifth, in an open Consistory approved the Deed, and in very
extravagant Terms applauded the Doer of it.

And when, afterward See Mezera 's Hist. of France, An. 1594. Histoire de
Troubles de France, An. 1594. See the Sentence of the Parliament against him,
li^. at large. Hist. d'Aubigne, To. 3. l. 4. c. 4. Vid. ib. Inscriptiones
Pyramid. contra Jesuit^s sceler^^ Authors. Thuan. Hist. l. III. n. 1594.
John Chastell atempted, in like manner, to Assassinate King Henry the Fourth,
and was justly condemned by the Parliament of Paris for it; Their procedure was
so heinously Resented at Rome, that they caused their Titulo, Arrestum contra
Joannem Castellum: And again; Oration M Antonii Arnaldi, etc. Arrestum contra
Joannem Castellum.
Sentence to put into their Catalogue of Prohibited Books; that is to say, of
such as they thought not fit for any Member of their Communion to Read.

But I will not look any farther Abroad for the Examples of such Villainies, as
our own History affords Us, but too great a plenty of at Home.

King Henry the Eighth had his private Quarrels with the Popes of His time. He
saw himself tricked and abused by Them; And he bravely Resolved not to suffer a
Foreign Bishop, any longer to Insult it over an English King. And though in all
other Respects He continued to his dying day a Zealous Papist, yet for this one
piece of Rebellion only against that proud Prelate, See the Bull: Bullar. To.
1. p. 704.
was He Excommunicated by Pope Paul the Third; His Subjects were absolved from
their Oath of Allegiance; and Commanded to Use their utmost Endeavors to
Depose him, and Expel him out of his Dominions.

What Paul the Third did to King Henry the Eighth, Pope Pius the Fifth renewed
against his Daughter, See the whole History related by Sanders de Visibil.
Monarch. p. 730. n. 2037. And by Girolamo Catena, in his Life of Pius V. p.
112, etc. Et Append. p. 109, etc.
Queen Elizabeth. He declared her to be an Heretic and a favourer of
Heretics: And therefore, Deprived her of her Crown; Absolved her Subjects from
their Allegiance; and forbade them to Obey Her, on pain of Excommunication. And
all this He did merely on the Account of Her Religion. For before that time;
(which was the Twelfth year of Her Reign) not One Nor yet merely for that,
either before, or after; King James 's Premonition, p. 336. Not 30 Priests in
all Q. Elizabeth 's Reign suffered for Treason, and for Religion not One. Sir
Edw. Coke 's Speech at the Arraignment of the Gunpowder Conspirators.
Papist had suffered on the account of his Religion: When Sanders de Visib.
Monarch. p. 734. Where he makes a Felton a Martyr. Spondan. Contin. Baron. ad
An. 1570. Sect. 4. Cambden. Elizab. An. 1570.
Felton for fixing up this Bull against the Bishop of London's Gate, and
justifying the Fact, was the first of that Party, Condemned, and Executed for
it.

Being thus Encouraged by the Popes Authority, the Romanists of those times
were from thenceforth scarce ever out of some Contrivance, or Other, Cambd.
Eliz. An. 1585. Cardinal Como 's Letter, of Jan. 30. 1584. Le concede (the
Pope) sua Benedictione, plenaria Indulgenza and Remissioni di tutti li peccati,
assicurando si che oltre il merito che a havera in cielo, vuole anco sua
Santita constituirsi debitore, etc. And adds, Metta dunque ad Effetto li suoi
Santi and Honorati pensieri; i. e. To kill the Queen.
to destroy Her. Parry, one of the Chief of Those, who Undertook to Murder Her,
had not only the Popes consent so to do; but, in Consideration of it, had his
Holiness's Blessing sent from Rome to him; with a plenary Indulgence for all
his Sins; and the Assurance of an Extraordinary Crown of Glory in Heaven, for
the barbarous Villainy He had Undertook to Commit on Earth.

This Enterprise failing; they next Resolved upon a Foreign Invasion: See
Fowlis Popish Treasons, Book 7. c. 6. Girolamo Catena Vita di Pio V. In which
the Pope was so Zealous, that He was for pawning the Plate of the Church, and
coming himself in Person, if need were, to further it. p. 117.

Cambd. Eliz. An. 1588. Watson. quodlib. p. 239, 246. Artic. 6, 7.


And the King of Spain was persuaded, by Pope Pius the Fifth, to Engage in it.
But that also miscarrying, their private Attempts were again Renewed: And still
some Priest or Other, in every One of them, to Encourage, and Sanctify the
Assassination.

It would engage Me in too long a Discourse to speak particularly of the
Treasons of Arden, See Watson 's Important Considerations, etc. Reprinted,
Land. 1675. 4o. Bristow makes them all Martyrs; 15 Motive, p. 72. c. 73. For
the Historical Part, see Foulis 's Popish Treasons, Book 7. c. 5, 7. Cambd.
Eliz. An. 1595, 1598, etc. 1602.
and Sommerville; of Hesket, and Lopez; of Cullen and York; of Squire and
Babington: Of the Designs of the Duke of Norfolk; the Earl of Westmorland, and
many Others; who either by Sword or Poison; by private Attempts, or Public
Insurrections, Endeavored to deprive Her both of her Crown and Life.

I will only Observe, that what the other Popes had in Vain attempted here in
England; Foulis Pop. Treasons, Book 9. c. 3.

Cambd. Eliz. An. 1578, 1579, etc.


Pope Gregory the xiiith, and Clement the viiith, no less Encouraged in
Ireland: By not only abetting the Rebellions which were raised there, but
Engaging the King of Spain, once more, to Endeavor her Destruction.

Whilst the Queen of Scots lived, who was a Zealous Papist, Catena. Lettere de
Pio V. p. 329.
the pretense for several of these Attempts then was, ( See the Papists
Apology, (the Edit. with the Answer) 1675. p. 23.
as their Excuse has been since) That she had the Better Title to the Crown of
England. But that Unfortunate Princess being Gone, and Queen Elizabeth now
grown Old; Clement. VIII. See Cambden. Eliz. An. 1600, 1602. Doleman 's Confer.
about the next Succession to the Crown. Tortur. Torti. p. 188. etc. 197, 278.
Thuanus, l. 135. p. 1205, 1214, A. King James 's Apolog. p. 273. Casaubon.
Epist. ad Front. Ducaeum. inter Epist. p. 750. Edit. 4o. 1656. Sir Edw. Coke 's
Plea. Hist Gunpowder Treason. (8o. Land. 1678.) p. 92, etc.
all possible Endeavors were made by those very Persons, (with the Pope at
their Head,) to Exclude the Son, who would be thought to have had so much Zeal
for the Mother.

In this first Attempt the Jesuits seemed unwilling to Engage: But then, to do
them right, See Watson 's Confession: Casaub. Epist. ad. Front. Ducaeum. p.
752, 753.
I must observe, that it was not out of any Checks of Conscience, any dislike
they had to such an Enterprise; but because they had another Design of their
own in hand; which, it seems, was this of the Gunpowder Conspiracy. A Treason
of so horrid, and dismal a Complexion, that the transcendent Cruelty of it not
only staggered Some of the Conspirators themselves, but proved the Happy Means
of our Deliverance from it. Whilst the desire of One among them to save his
friend from that deadly Blow; by the Providence of God, discovered the whole
Design, and saved both the King and the Parliament with Him.

We ought not to wonder, if the better to conceal such a Conspiracy as this,
but About 20, whereof 5 were Jesuits. See Popish Apol. p. 34 Casaub. Ep. ad
Front. Ducaeum. p. 755.
Few were admitted to a particular Knowledge of it: K. James 's Premonition, p.
291.
Though it was generally discoursed among the whole Party, that something was in
Agitation for the Interest of their Cause; and to which they were to be Ready
to lend their Utmost Assistance, as soon as Matters should be Ripe for it. Yet
even among those Few who knew of it, Thuanus ingenuously owns this: Hist. Lib.
135. p. 1213. D. And the public Acts of this Conspiracy u^deniably confirm it.
See King James 's Praemonition, p. 334, 335. Bp. Andrews at large proves it
from Garnet 's Own Confession, Tortura Torti, p. 281, etc. 285, 286. So does
Isaac Casaubon. Epist. ad Front. Ducaeum. p. 757, 761, 773, 774, 775. Add Sir
Edw. Coke 's Arraignment of Garnet, p. 168, etc. And the Relation of his
Execution, Ib, p. 225.
Father Garnet, the Provincial of the Jesuits was One; and that not in
Confession as some now pretend, but by way of Consultation, as Himself (at
last) ingenuously Acknowledged. Historia Pontifical. Part. 5. l. 1. c. 11.
says, That Fawks being in Flanders, Y descubrio s^ empresa a personas
Ecclesiasticas y de su Nation, para hazer les ayunar y rogar a Dios, que su fin
llegasse a efecto. Bulenger confirms it, Hist. l. 12. p. 369. where speaking of
Winter and Fawks, Oeno Jesuitae, says he, consilia aperiunt; qui pietatis
studium laudat. And p. 370. speaking of three Others, among whom, Garne^ One;
says; Rex, cognito tres Jesuitas -- Conjurationis hujus Nefariae flabella
fuisse. -- Thuan. Hist. p, 1206. E. lib. 135. Gerard the Jesuit gave them the
Oath of Secrecy; and the Sacrament upon it. Tesmund confirmed Bates 's
Conscience in it: Rei merito demonstrato: Ib. p. 1207. C. See Winter's
Confession about Owen to the same Effect: King James 's Works, p. 232. Add to
this, my Lord Stafford's Declaration, at his Trial, to this Effect, p. 53.
Mezeray 's H^st. of France, An. 1605. K. James 's Praemonition, p. 291, 335.
Bp. Andrew 's Tortura Torti, p. 280. Casaub. Epist. ad Front. Ducaeum, p. 755.
Sir Edw. Coke 's Arraignment of the Conspirators, p. 96, 104, 105, 113. His
Arraignment of Garnet, p. 166.
That several Others of the Society were acquainted with it, may from undoubted
Proofs be made appear. Give me leave to add, what Foulis Popish Treason, Book
10. c. 2.
Some have farther Affirmed; that Fawks himself, the Villain who was to have
Executed the Treason was, not long before, at Rome, in Conference with some
Considerable Persons there; Bishop Andrews ad Bellarm Resp. c. 5. p. 113.
And had Three Bulls Ready to have been Published, had the Design Succeeded;
but that this Failing they were Suppressed.

And here then let us stop, and not proceed to any following Instances of their
Cruelty, and Perfidiousness: But from what has been already alleged, both of
their Doctrines, and Practices, as to these Matters; Go on, finally to
Consider, Whether such Principles, and such Actions, can ever be Reconciled,
either with the Spirit, or Rules of Christianity. And,

1st. Let them tell Us, if they can, where in all the Scriptures of the
New Testament, either the Title, or Promises of the Catholic Church, are
appropriated to the Roman Church; or indeed to any other Particular Church, or
Society of Christians, whatsoever: Or what Reason can be given for that
Fundamental Arrogance, on which All the best of their Pretenses are built, why
They, any more than We, should be Called, or Accounted, Christ's Catholic
Church upon Earth?

The Truth is, it is a Contradiction in terms, for either of Us to Assume to
our selves such a Character. The Catholic Church, is the Whole Church; of
which every Particular Church, (as the Church of England, the Church of Rome,
etc.) are Parts. And to say that any One of These, Exclusive to All Others, is
the Catholic Church; is to say, that a Part is the Whole; which, I think, is
as plain a Contradiction as can well be affirmed by Any.

Nay, but what if the Church of Rome be so far from being the Catholic, or
Universal Church, that it is not so much as A Catholic, that is, any Sound, or
Orthodox Part of the Church of Christ? Let me not be thought, to speak any
thing with a design to Raise in your Minds a wrong Notion against any: But for
the sake of Truth, and out of the Concern which I have for your Immortal Souls,
I must freely declare; that, after the best Examination I have been able to
make into her Principles, and Constitution; I do, in my Conscience, believe the
Roman Church, as it is at present Established, in Matters of Faith, Worship,
Morals, and Government; to be by far the most Corrupted of any Christian
Church, that I know of, in the World; and in which Salvation can the most
hardly, if at all, be Obtained. But

2dly. Were the Church of Rome all that she pretends to be; and Our Church all
that ever it has been called by it: Yet how comes this to Give them a Civil
Authority over Us? Christ meddled not with Men's Temporal Interests: He taught
no Doctrines of Cruelty and Uncharitableness. He Founded no Dominion in Grace:
Nor ever Pretended to Depose Kings, and Give away Kingdoms. On the contrary, We
know, How He would not so much as Arbitrate in a private Controversy: Luke
xii. 14. But declared freely, that His Kingdom was not of this World; Jo.
xviii. 36. Nor were his Disciples to Expect any thing beyond Other Men, except
it were Troubles, and Losses, and Persecutions in it. Mat. x. Luke ix. 23. Jo.
xv. 20. xvi. 2. etc.

Hence we read that when upon the account of his Adherence to the Temple of
Jerusalem, (which was plainly a Religious Concern) a Certain Village of the
Samaritans denied Him the common Humanity of a Nights Lodging; and some of his
Disciples were so Hot upon it, as to Desire Him to Revenge Himself by Fire from
Heaven for the Affront; All the Answer They got was this Reproof, which One
would have thought might alone have been sufficient to answer all these kind of
Pretensions for ever, That They knew not what manner of Spirit they were of;
Luke ix. 55. For, says He, the Son of Man came not to destroy Men's lives, but
to save them. But

3dly. Our Savior Christ, has not only no where encouraged any Proceedings of
this kind, but Has every where delivered such Doctrines, as are utterly
Irreconcilable with Them. That We must be Subject to Principalities and
Powers, and Obey Magistrates. Tit. iii. 1. That we must do this, not only for
Wrath, but also for Conscience sake: Romans xiii. 5. That We must Love our
Enemies; Must Bless them that curse Us; Do Good to them that hate Us; and Pray
for them that despightfully use Us, and Persecute Us. Mat. v. 44. That We must
not Avenge our selves; but leave that to Him, of whom it is written, Vengeance
is mine, I will Repay says the LORD. Romans xii. 19. That we must not Root up
the Tares before the Time, but suffer them to Grow till the Harvest; and that
the Separation shall be made by God, and not then by Us. Mat. xiii. 29, 30.
That we must bear with Those who are Weak in the Faith; Must Instruct Them in
Meekness; and Endeavor to Convert Them from the Error of their Way, that they
may be Saved. Romans xv, 1. Galat. vi. 1. 1 Thessalonians. v. 14. 2 Timothy ii. 24, 25, 26.
Jam. v. 19^

These are the Doctrines of the Gospel: And accordingly we know how our
Religion Conquered the World, not by Doing, but by Suffering. Not by disturbing
Kingdoms, and Overthrowing of Governments; but by patiently Submitting to all
the Evil that the Rage of Men, or Malice of the Devil, could bring upon the
Professors of it.

And when this is so, what can we conclude but that certainly either the Holy
Scriptures have given Us a very wrong Account of the Doctrine of Christ; and
that neither the Apostles, nor Those who were Instructed by them, Understood
their Own Rights, and what Authority their Ecclesiastical Character Gave them
over Princes, and Countries; (at least in Order to Religion:) Or that, if they
did, then these Men in Teaching, and Acting as they do, in these Matters, must
have utterly departed from the Truth of Christianity; and have only the Name of
Prophets; the Clothing of Sheep; whilst in Reality they are Ravening Woolves.

Which being thus Resolved, I do not see what other Conclusion we can draw from
these Premises, than that which our Savior, in the Text, Recommends to Us;
which is, To Beware of Them.

And indeed so we have all the Reason in the World to be, whether We consider
our Souls, or Bodies; The Interests of this present Life, or the Hope of that
which is to come.

For, First, As to the Concern of our Future State; If it be possible for any
Errors to destroy Salvation, which are not Expressly Contrary to the
Fundamentals of Christianity; though in the Natural Consequence of them, They do
plainly Overthrow the Chiefest of them; Then I am persuaded that the Errors of
the Church of Rome, will, of all Others, be found the most likely so to do.

And, for the Other Thing mentioned, our Present Interests; How far they must
be affected by the return of Popery again among Us; Both the Encroachments it
For which, see Sir Roger Twisden 's Hist. Vindicat. of the Church of England,
etc. which largely shows it, chap. 1, 2.
formerly made upon our Civil Rights and Liberties; and the Pretensions it See
Card. Bellarm. Apolog. pro Resp ad Jacob. R^g. c. 3. where He affirms the Pope
to have a direct Dominion over the Kingdoms of England and Ireland; Ita ut Rex,
tanquam secundarius Dominus, Holds his Realms of him. -- The same is affirmed
by Card. Allen. in his Admonition to the Nobility: That without the Pope's
Confirmation, No Man can lawfully take the Crown, or be accounted King of
England. They Both took it from the Pop^'s Own Mouth; who before His College
of Cardinals declared. That the King of England was His Vassal; nay, in truth,
His Slave. Mat. Paris, ad Ann. 1253.
still keeps on foot against Us, more than against any Other Country, or
People, besides; not to say any thing of its common Principles of Tyranny and
Slavery, Ruinous to Societies, as well as Dangerous to private Persons, and
Families; may suffice to convince Us.

Let Us then, upon all these Accounts, heartily Bless God, who (upon this same
Day) has twice Delivered Us out of its Hands: And let Us earnestly Beseech him,
that He would still continue to defend Us, from ever falling any more under the
Power of it. And though the Petition has too long been left out of our Liturgy,
yet let it never depart out of our Minds, but be often the Subject of our
Private Supplications to Almighty God, both for our Religion, and for our
Country's sake.

See the First and Second Book of King Edw. VI. in the Litany.
From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and his detestable Enormities: Good Lord
deliver Us.
FINIS.
Books printed for Richard Sare, at Gray's Inn-Gate in Holborn.
THE Genuine Epistles of St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp,
the Shepherd of Hermas, etc. with a large Preliminary Discourse. 8 vo.

A Practical Discourse against Profane Swearing. 8 vo.

The Authority of Christian Princes over Ecclesiastical Synods, in Answer to a
Letter to a Convocation-man. 8 vo.

An Appeal to all the true Members of the Church of England, on behalf of the
King's Supremacy. 8 vo.

A Sermon at the Dorsetshire Feast. 1690.

Before the Queen at Whitehall, May 10. 1691.

Before the Lord Mayor, Nov. 26. 1691.

At Grays Inn, on the Death of the Queen.

At St. James's, on the Day of Thanksgiving.

The Church of Rome no Guide in Matters of Faith, In answer to a late Letter
from a Nephew to his Uncle: containing the Reasons why he became a Roman
Catholic, and why he now declines any farther Disputes or Contests about
Matters of Religion. 8 vo. Pr. 6 d.

The Principles of the Christian Religion Explained, in a Brief Commentary on
the Church Catechism. 8 vo. Pr. 2 s.

These 11 by the Reverend Dr. Wake.

Fables of Aesop, and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections.
Folio.

Fables and Stories Moralized; (being a 2d Part of the Fables of Aesop, and
other Eminent Mythologists, etc. Folio.

Both by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

Mr. Collier's View of the Stage.

His Defense.

His Essays upon several Moral Subjects.

Maxims and Reflections upon Plays; (in Answer to a Discourse printed before a
Play, called, Beauty in Distress;) written in French by the Bishop of Meaux;
with an Advertisement concerning the Author and Book. By Mr. Collier.

An Answer to all the Excuses and Pretenses that Men ordinarily make, for their
not coming to the Holy Communion. To which is added, A brief Account of the End
and Design of the Holy Communion, the Obligation to Receive it, the Way to
Prepare for it, and the Behavior of our Selves, both At and After it. Price
but 3 d. for the Encouragement of such Persons as are willing to Give them
away, for the Promoting of Piety and Devotion.


