IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Needham.
Jan. 26. 1686/7.
A Plain DEFENSE OF THE PROTESTANT RELIGION, Fitted to the Meanest Capacity:
Being a Full CONFUTATION OF THE NET FOR THE Fishers of Men, Published by two
Gentlemen lately gone over to the Church of Rome.

Wherein is evidently made appear, that their departure from the Protestant
Religion was without Cause or Reason.

Written for public good by L. E. a Son of the Church of England, as by Law
Established.

Be not tossed too and fro with every Wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of Men,
and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

Ephesians. 4. 14. London, Printed by S. L. and are to be sold by R. Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, 1687.

To Mr. J. C. and Mr. J. M. C. The Authors of the Net for the Fishers of Men.
Gentlemen,
I Hope that your design in publishing your little Treatise, was a zealous
desire to bring others of your Countrymen into the same Church which you have
made your selves Members of, out of pure Love to their Souls, which you (I
suppose) think cannot be safe out of its Communion: and I am the rather induced
to believe it, because you seem so confident of the strength of your Arguments,
that in the Epistle Dedicatory, you reckon them unanswerable, and in that to
the Reader you express your Sense of them to be very high. This I take to be an
effect of your Zeal, for I am sure it is not of your Knowledge, and I would
charitably persuade my self, that you love the Truth too well, to pretend a
defense of what you know is Erroneous, or endeavor to promote the Progress of
delusions; but out of a sincere Heart offer the Reasons which prevailed with
you to a Change, not seeing their weakness; which is indeed so very notorious,
that I never thought to have seen them published, though I have often known
them vigorously pressed in private Discourses, where heat and unwariness may
let them pass without discovering that there is nothing of Force in them; it
being generally the Practice of the Romanists, but especially the Jesuits, to
have a Set of Arguments for private unstudied Adversaries, with which they
catch too many, who because they carry a specious Show at first, examine but
little farther, and without consulting others, suffer themselves to be led
Captive.

I have in the following Treatise, according to your Desire in the Preface,
annexed my Answers to your Queries; for which reason I have done it by way of
Dialogue, that so I might be the more brief, and omit nothing of what you
offered.

I don't doubt but I have shown the weakness of every particular Argument; but
to save you and my self a great deal of Trouble, if you reply, I shall here
take notice of several gross faults in your Arguing, which if they be not
remedied, will create endless difficulties.

You never tell us what you mean by the word Church; in some places you Qu. 1.
take it for the Congregation of the Faithful, in others for a Council, and 41
5.
in others for a particular Church.

In your Allegations out of Scripture you bring many Texts, which indeed prove
nothing to your purpose. Thus in a question of the universal Church, Qu. 5. 41.
46.
you bring a Text that speaks of a particular one, or of every private
Minister. And in the question about Confirmation, in defense of Oil, and Balm,
you cite places which mention only 111.
Imposition of Hands.

You suppose the Roman Church to Qu. 37, 40, 46, 47, 50, etc.
be the only Church of Christ, without any Proof, which is plain begging the
question, and not arguing: So in other places you beg the question: And you
take it for granted that Peter had the chief Charge over the Qu. 54.
Apostles committed to him, that all oral Tradition is Apostolical, that 55.
God has commanded nothing concerning a Liturgy in an unknown 64.
Tongue: and that because Relics have been the Instruments by which Miracles
were wrought, therefore they must be Worshipped. 89.


You mistake the Question, and run on upon a Point not contested; which is
arguing to no purpose, nothing but making a Puppet, and knocking him down. Thus
when the Question is about Praying in an unknown Tongue, you argue for the
lawfullness of speaking Qu. 66.
with Tongues; in the point of Free Will you plead for Free Will in Moral
actions, which we acknowledge, when the question is about those Actions 93.
that are Spiritual: again you argue against Faith without Works, when the
question is, whether Faith alone 95. 96. 97.
justifies, not whether Faith can be without Works; for that we deny as well as
you. So in the point of Religious Vows, you argue for the lawfullness of 102.
103. 104.
Vows in general, when the Controversy is about those particular Vows, which we
Condemn.

You quote several Scriptures famous, not only as to the particular references,
of which there are a Multitude, so many that I am afraid you took them up upon
Trust; but also the very Texts. Thus you make St. Paul call Marriage a
Sacrament, when he calls it only 117.
a Mystery; so you have falsified, Heb. 84.
12 11. and several other places, as I have proved in the Book it self.

I might add several Instances of these and other Particulars, such as your
taking the word Universal in three several Senses, and yet applying all Qu. 11.
You take Universal for being in all Places. Qu. 12. You take it for being
existent at all times, etc. Qu. 13. You take it for being called Universal.
one way, but these shall suffice, and I am in hopes will let you see how
wretchedly your Pretended Fathers have dealt with you, by putting such
Arguments upon you, and founding your Faith upon such weak Grounds.

I desire you would not take it ill that I attribute this work to some of them,
and do so freely tax you with not seeing the Vanity of it; for I suppose you
are Gentlemen, whose Education has engrossed your time to other Matters, and
cannot therefore be reasonably supposed to have sufficient Experience in these
Points to make you able to discern their Sophisms, and unconcluding Arguments,
which they have shamm'd upon you for convincing Reasons.

If you are convinced by this answer, I shall bless God for it; if not, I
desire you would satisfy the World why you are not: But don't follow tht
Methods of some late Writers, who have wisely withdrawn from the main Business,
and only cavilled at a word or two, as being. Improper, or something of that
Nature, when they could not answer the Reasons of their Adversaries, nor defend
their own: I might easily have done so by you, but as I have dealt seriously
and plainly, I expect the same, and I pray God send us his Holy Spirit to lead
us into all Truth. I am,

Gentlemen, Your very humble Servant, L. E.

TO THE Reader,
Courteous Reader,
A Serious Enquiry and search after Truth is the Duty of every rational
Creature, and he that has an unfeigned desire to find it, and happiness in it,
will not neglect any lawful means to arrive at the knowledge of it; seeing by
it the Mind is enlightened, our Faith regulated and fixed, and our actions
guided to that true felicity, which Crowns the Soul with Peace here, and Bliss
hereafter. The Consideration of this, when duly weighed, can never fail of
putting us on Enquiry, how we shall attain it. The Jailer was no sooner
awakened, but he puts the question, what shall I do? Acts 16.
and we have this Enoouragement to prosecute the Search, that if we seek, we
shall surely find, and the Holy Spirit shall guide us into Truth.

Of all the Papers lately published by the Gentlemen of the Romish Church, I
find none which seems more earnestly to seek Truth, than this which I have here
answered, and I am not so uncharitable as to doubt at all of the Sincerity of
the Authors Profession, in the Epistle; but I must say they have not taken the
right Course; these Queries should have been put before they turned; which if
they had, I believe their now Ghostly Fathers had missed their Proselytes;
therefore I desire of thee, Reader, that if any Reply be made to this Treatise,
or if some Emissaries should attempt thee privately in defense of what I have
here answered, thou would Suspend thy Judgment till I have time to Reply, or
else consult some learned Divine, and then I am sure there is no danger of thy
Perversion, if thou retainest a sincere desire to find the Truth; the want of
that Caution has perverted several, within my Knowledge; the Priests
industriously keeping those, whom they design upon, from such Helps, by urging
the plainness of their Arguments, which often catch unconsidering Persons.

For thy Benefit I have answered every Argument, which my Adversaries offer,
setting it first down in their own Words. So that all the Papist speaks, is the
words of their Book, which I have therefore caused to be Printed in a different
Letter; I have been brief in my Answers, yet plain and full; if any reply be
made, I desire it may be done with the same Calmness I have used, and without
running from the question; if any particular be proved Erroneous, I here
promise to recant it, for I write not out of Prejudice or Passion, God is
Witness; but a desire to find the Truth; and I shall receive so much
Satisfaction from being better informed, that I shall not be ashamed to learn.
My Adversaries profess the same. I beg of them, they would keep to it, I
promise nothing but plain Evidence of Truth shall prevail with me, I hope the
same of them: that if they find the Motives of their Change weak and frivolous,
as I think I have made them appear to be, they will not be ashamed to make ^^
better.

Since my Answer was finished, there came forth a Treatise, pretending to
search into the Grounds of Seek and ye shall find.
Religion, which is much to the same purpose with that I have here answered,
and I don't know any Material passage in it but what thou will find resolved
here: it is dressed up with a little more Art than my Adversaries, and
consequently with less Sincerity.

One of the great Charges which they draw up against us is, That we follow the
Private Spirit; a word which they make much use of, Epist. Ded.
but I don't know what they mean by it; if they intend to blame us for
expecting the assistance of the Spirit of God, in teaching, and instructing us;
let them prove that God has not promised it, and we are not to expect it, if
they can: but if they mean (as I suppose) the believing nothing but what Sense
and Reason tells us is from God; if it be this they call the private Spirit, at
the same time they find fault with us, they condemn themselves: for it is no
more than what they must necessarily follow in Reading their Councils,
Catechisms, and Fathers, or in hearing their Preachers; for we do not use our
Reason in the examining the Truth of what God has said; but in examining what
it is that he has said; and let them show us another way to come to the
knowledge of his Will; and they will do more than their infallible Councils
ever thought of.

I would willingly take away all occasion of disputing about Words, for which
reason I desire thee to take notice, that because I would not puzzle the
unlearned Reader with hard Words. I have called several Passages, METAPHORS in
the 61st. Query, which are indeed METONYMIES; but the other term being more
generally understood, I chose to use it, which I hope my Adversaries will take
notice of, and not wrangle about the Propriety of the Expression, when there is
no need of it.

I cannot but take notice what wonderful Reverence my Adversaries and their
Church, pretend to have for the Fathers; and yet these Gentlemen, Quer. 73.
Charge several of them with Blasphemy: for say they, if you say, Christ
descended into the Hell of the Damned, then you Blaspheme, and yet St. Austin
(Ser. 120. de tempore: lib. 12. de Genesi ad litteram c. 33. and Epist. 57. ad
Dardan. and Epist. 59. ad Euo-diam diam, and St. Jerome (Commen. in Zachar. c.
9. verse 11.) teaches that he descended to the Hell of the Damned, even to the
Hell where Dives was punished. So that though the Author of Nubes Testium, P.
208, 209. censures the Protestants for rejecting the Fathers in some things;
yet we find they only are not to be blamed for it; for these Gentlemen and the
Jesuits who approved their Book, charge them with Blasphemy; which is a
something bolder way of treating them, than what that Author accuses them of,
but it is no unusual thing with them; for I can make it appear, that there is
not one of the Fathers of the first five Ages, nay scarce any of later Date,
but are censured and rejected, and accused of Ignorance and Error, by the
greatest of the Romanists.

I will trespass upon thy Patience no longer, but with my Hearty Prayers to the
God of Truth, that he would remove Prejudice from thy Heart, and clearly
discover the Truth to thee, as it is in Jesus. I commend thee to God, and rest,

Thy Servant, L. E.

INTRODUCTION.
IF you had not left the State of the Question wholly untouched, and made use
of general Terms, without explaining in what Sense you intended to have them
understood, when the whole Controversy depended upon the right acceptance, you
would have proceeded with greater Candor than I could ever yet find any of your
Authors showed.

Thus you make serveral Dilemma's upon the Church, the Visibility and Unity of
it, but never tell us what you mean by the Church: But seeing you speak of the
Church of Christ in general, in your first Dilemma, I suppose you intended that
Church, which is thus defined by the Catechism ad Parochos out of St. Austin,
(Par. 1. Page 77. Edit. Lug. ann. 1676) The Church is the faithful People
dispersed throughout the whole World.

Now in this Sense, I answer to your DILEMMA's by way of DIALOGUE.

PA. 1. God has a Church in the World, or he has not.


Pro. He has.


Pa. Then yours is the true Church, or it is not.


Pro. If by our Church you mean those who in opposition to the Roman are termed
the Reformed; I answer that it does not follow that they are either the true
Church, or not: for they may be and are a part of it, and thus in the name of
all Protestants, I affirm we are a part of the true Church.


Pa. If yours is the true Christian Church, then it must have these following
Marks, Visibility, Unity, Universality, Sanctity.


Pro. I told you before we are not the whole, but a part of the true Church,
for we dare not, as you do, exclude all from Salvation, who are not in all
things of our Profession: and therefore to find whether we be a part of it or
no, we are not to look for these Marks, but for the Conformity of our Doctrines
with the Word of God; or if we should allow these for Marks of the true Church,
the way to know whether we be part of the true Church or no, is to enquire
whether we teach the same Doctrine, which we are to prove by the Holy
Scriptures, according to that of St. Austin, (De Unit. Eccl. c. 16.) Let them
show whether they have the Church only by the Canonical Books of the divine
Scriptures. But we deny these to be the Marks of the true Church.


Of Visibility, a Mark of the Church.
PA. 2. The House of our Lord shall be prepared on the top of Mountains, or it
shall not.


Pro. It shall, Isa. 2. 2.


Pa. Why then do you deny that the Church shall be always visible?


Pro. Because that Text (Isai. 2. 2.) is no Promise of a Perpetual visibility,
but only of a time when it shall be so, and so it was in the Primitive times,
but it does not say, it shall never cease to be so visible. Where by visible I
mean, that the true Church shall be always in sight, so as by its external
Glory to be known to be the true Church: and this that Text does not promise;
for it will not follow, that because the Church shall be so, therefore it shall
be always so; and if it be not always so, it can be no mark.


Pa. 3. A City seated on an Hill can be hid, or not.


Pro. It cannot.


Pa. Then the Church cannot be invisible. Mat. 5. 14.


Pro. That does not follow: for in the Judgment of diverse Fathers, this place
is not spoken of the Church, but the Apostles, or the good Works of Christians.
But if it be understood of the Church, all that it proves is, that it cannot be
hid, as long as it is seated upon an Hill; but it does not follow that it shall
be always seated there.


Pa. 4. Christ either founded a Church on Earth that all Nations may be edified
therein, or he did not.


Pro. He did.


Pa. Why then do you say the Church may be invisible, since all Nations cannot
be edified in a Church unseen? Isai. 2. 2. All Nations shall flow unto her,
Psalm. 86. 9. All Nations whatsoever thou have made, shall come and adore before
thee.


Pro. Because there is no Promise that the Church shall be evident to all
Nations at all times, but that there shall come a time when it shall be so: but
it does not say it shall be so always; but it shall be evident so as to edify
all Nations in God's time.


Pa. 5. A Man for not hearing the Church, is termed in Scripture an Heathen,
and a Publican or not.


Pro. He is. Mat. 18. 18. He that will not hear the Church, let him be to thee
as an Heathen or Publican.


Pa. How then shall a Man be termed an Heathen or Publican for not hearing a
Church, that was not visible, or yet extant in the World?


Pro. This Text is nothing to the purpose, and that upon two accounts.


1. Because the question is, Whether the true Church be always visible to those
who are not Members of it, as Heathens, Infidels, etc. Now this Text speaks
only of those who are Members of it; to these it is always visible, but not to
those.

2. Because the question is, whether the Universal Church be always visible;
but this Text speaks of a particular Congregation: and therefore is not to the
purpose; seeing if it proves any Church always visible, it proves every
particular Congregation to be so: but as it is plain that these Arguments do
not prove that the Church is to be always visible; so neither do you at all
prove that if it were so, it would be a Mark of the true Church, seeing Pagan
and Jewish Churches can plead Visibility, and yet it does not follow they are
the true Church, because they have it.

Of Unity, as a Mark of the true Church.
PA. 6. A natural Unity and Connection of the parts among themselves, and to
the Head is necessary for the Conservation of the Body, or it is not.


Pro. It is.


Pa. If it be, Why is that natural Connection proper to a natural Body, and not
a Spiritual Connection proper to a Spiritual Body?


Pro. A Spiritual Connection is proper to a Spiritual Body: but this is nothing
to the Purpose, as a proof that Unity is a Mark of the true Church: for this
Connection of the Spiritual Body must be an Union and Connection of each part
in sound Doctrine; now we must know what Doctrine is sound, before we can know
whether the Parts be united in it.


Pa. 7. Christ promised that there should be Unity in his Church, John 10. 16.
or he did not.


Pro. He did.


Pa. If he did, why do you deny Unity?


Pro. We do not deny it, we maintain it: but we deny it to be a Mark of the
Church: which it cannot be, seeing this Unity must be either in true Doctrine
or in false; it cannot be in false: if it be in true, we must first know which
is true, before we can know whether it be the Unity Christ promised.


Pa. 8. Unity is either requisite in Gods Church, or not.


Pro. It is.


Pa. Why do you then deny the necessity of Unity?


Pro. We do not deny it to be necessary, we maintain that without Unity, in all
points of Faith, there can be no Church; but it will not follow, that because
it is necessary, it is a Mark whereby Heathens may know the Church; seeing
other pretended Churches have Unity as well as the Christian: and nothing can
be a Mark which is not proper to it alone.


Pa. 9. Christ when he Prayed, his Prayer took effect, or it did not.


Pro. It did.


Pa. If it did, then Christ's People are one.


Pro. They are so. What then? but it does not thence follow that Unity is or
can be a Mark to know the Church by. Where pray remember I speak of such a
Mark, whereby those who are not of the Church may know her, to be the true
Church.


Of Universality, as a Mark of the true Church.
PA. 10. To be Universal or Coexstent with Time and Place, is a Mark of the
true Church, or it is not.


Pro. I could wish you would a little explain what you mean by those Terms; if
you mean as Bellarmine and the Catechism ad Parochos, that to be called
Universal, is a Mark of the True Church; or if you intend that to be existent
every where, be a Mark of it, I answer it is not.


Pa. Why then does the Scripture say, Matthew. 28. 20. Go ye teach all Nations,
etc. And behold I am with you even to the Consummation of the World. And again,
Ephesians. 4. 12. He gave some Apostles, etc. to the Consummation of the Saints?


Pro. The Scripture says so, because under the Gospel the Church was not
limited to the Nation of the Jews, but all Nations might be Members of it: and
there should be a Church to the end of the World; but it does not therefore say
this Church should be in all Nations, at all times, much less does it say that
its being so is a Mark that it is the True Church. Besides that Text of St.
Paul, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. is spoken of the perfection of the Saints in Holiness,
not of the consummating their Number, though if it were, it says nothing of the
Name Universal, or the Churches existing every where, being a Mark to know it
by.


Pa. 11. The Church of God is either Universal, or coexistent with all time, or
not.


Pro. It is. John 14, 15, 16. The Comforter shall abide with you for ever. Luke
1. 33. He shall Reign in the House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end.


Pa. If it be, why do you deny Universality?


Pro. Before you took Universality in one Sense, now in another, That the
Church shall abide for ever; and this Universality we do not deny; but we deny
it to be a Mark of the true Church, and that for this Reason, because it cannot
be known what Church shall endure for ever, till the end of all things; matter
of Future Duration being impossible to be known, till the time is finished; for
how can you know beforehand what will endure for ever? the true Church will
endure for ever; but you must first know which of all the Pretenders to it is
the true, before you can know which shall endure for ever. This therefore
cannot be a Mark of the true Church. For the Marks of a thing are always
present, but this Duration is not present, but to come, and therefore cannot be
a Mark.


Pa. 12. Christ's Church is Universal or co-existent with all places, or it is
not.


Pro. You seem here to mean that Christ's Church is dispersed over all the
World, in all places; and if so, I say it is not.


Pa. How then can it be true, that their sound went over all the Earth, or kow
can all Nations be taught?


Pro. All Nations shall be taught; but there is no necessity that they should
be so at all times; or that the Church should be always dispersed in all
Nations; So that this can be no Mark, because a Mark must be always evident,
but it was not evident in the beginning of Christianity, nor is not now in many
places.


Pa. 13. The Church of Christ is either Universal or Catholic, or it is not.


Pro. What mean you by its being Universal, or Catholic? If you mean as we do
in the Creed, that it comprehends all the true Professors of the Gospel, I say
it is.


Pa. Why then do you renounce Universality?


Pro. We do not renounce it, we only say it is no Mark: for seeing the
Catholic Church, is that Church which comprehends all true Christians, we must
first know who are true Christians, before we can know, what Church comprehends
them.


Of Sanctity, as a Mark of the true Church.
Pa. 14. The Church of Christ is eminent for Sanctity of Discipline and
Dectrine, or it is not.


Pro. It is.


Pa. Why then do you deny Sanctity in the Church?


Pro. We do not deny it, we affirm it, that is, Holiness and Purity of
Doctrine, to be the mark of the true Church: and we desire it may be tried
whether we are not of the true Church by that Rule.


Pa. 15. The Church of Christ is either Sanctified, or She is not.


Pro. The Church of the Elect is Sanctified, but the Church of visible
Professors is not; yet the Doctrine of it is indeed Holy, as to the Foundation,
in which respect, we do not deny Sanctity in the Church.


Pa. 16. The Church of Christ is manifested to be Holy by the Grace of
Miracles, or she is not.


Pro. The Grace of Miracles is a new Grace, which I understand not: and I
believe, neither do you; but for the gift of Miracles, I say that is not a Mark
of the Sanctity of the Church.


Pa. Why then did Christ say, Joh. 14. 12. etc. He that believes in me, the
Works that I do he shall do, and greater?


Pro. Christ said so, because he gave the Holy Spirit to his Followers, and a
power of working Miracles as long as it was necessary; but it does not follow,
that it is so always, much less does it follow, that they are a Mark to know
the Holiness of the Church by; seeing Antichrist is to do miracles, and the
Holy Fathers tell us, Heretics did many, yet their miracles will not prove the
Sanctity of their Church.


Pa. 17. Christ either granted true Believers the Grace of Casting out Devils,
or he did not.


Pro. Christ did not grant that Power to all true Believers.


Pa. Why then do you belie the Scriptures? Mar. 16, 17.


Pro. We do not belie them: that Text is not spoken of all, at all times, that
do believe: and this you must grant, or else affirm, that none are saved, but
them who work Miracles: which is absurd and false. That Power was given in the
Beginning of the Church, because it was necessary, but you cannot prove it so
now: However we do not deny that God can work miracles by the Hands of his
Faithful Servants, when he pleases, but we do deny that they either are, or can
be a mark to find the true Church, or its Holiness by: and you cannot prove
that God ever intended or promised that they should be so. The true way, to
find the Church, is to examine the Holiness, and Purity of its Doctrine, and on
this we rest our Cause, that ours is Pure and Holy, and therefore we are of the
true Church.


Pa. 18. Your Church has these abovementioned Marks, or she has not: and if
not, she is false.


Pro. That does not follow, for they are not the marks of the true Church, as I
have proved; Holiness indeed is a mark of the true Church, that is, Holiness of
Doctrine, and that we affirm we have, which is a sufficient Answer to the rest
of your Queries; however let us hear them.


Pa. 19. Your Church has been apparent or visible, ever since Christ, or it
has not; and if not, she is false.


Pro. Our Church has been always visible to its Members: though as a distinct
Congregation, not to those who were not Members of her, but it is not therefore
true, that it is false: for visibility, I have proved not to be a mark of the
true Church.


Pa. 20. Your Church either did appear before Luther and Calvin, or it did not.


Pro. It did.


Pa. If she did, in what Kingdom or Nation was your Doctrine Preached, or by
whom?


Pro. Our Doctrine was Preached by Christ and his Apostles, and by the ancient
Fathers, in all Nations, wherever the Gospel came, and this we are ready to
prove.


Pa. 21. Martin Luther and John Calvin were the first Founders of your Church,
or they were not.


Pro. They were not.


Pa. If not; produce any that ever professed' the same Articles with you before
them.


Pro. We do produce Christ and his Apostles with the general Consent of the
Fathers for the first five Hundred Years after Christ; and even when the Church
was hid in Babylon, and fled into the Wilderness, from the Tyranny of
Antichrist, there were Multiiudes who professed the same as we do.


Pa. 22. Luther and Calvin either separated themselves from the World, or they
did not; if they did, then they departed from the visible Christian Religion.


Pro. I never heard before, that to depart from the World, which is the Duty of
every good Christian, was to depart from the Christian Religion: it was always
accounted a Cleaving to it; but I suppose you mean, they departed from the
Church, or they did not, and then I answer, they did not; they departed not
from the Christian Church, nay, not from the Roman Church; but only from the
errors of it: for we still profess a Communion with all the Orthodox, living in
the Communion of that Church; nay at that time the Church was visible in the
Waldenses, etc. from whom they separated not: so that they departed not from
the visible Church, though if they had, they had done no more than what the
People of God are commanded to do, in obedience to that Call, Rev. 18. 4. Come
out of Babylon, my People.


Pa. If they did not, who joined with them, or to whom did they adhere?


Pro. All who obeyed that Call of God, whose Eyes God opened to see, and whose
Hearts he encouraged to leave those Corruptions they lived under: all these
joined with them: and for the other question, To whom did they adhere? I
answer, they adhered to Christ and his Apostles, and the triumphant Church in
Heaven, to the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and to all those who had shaken
off the Corruptions of Rome: Who were at that time in Bohemia, Germany,
Piedmont, France, England, etc. many Thousands; they adhered likewise to the
Eastern Churches who never acknowledged the Pope, nor were polluted with the
Corruptions of Rome. Lastly, they adhered to all who lived in the Communion of
Rome, and were not tainted with the Corruptions of it.


Pa. 23. Your Church either has Unity, or it has not.


Pro. It has.


Pa. Why then are there so many Sects and Schisms among you?


Pro. There are none who differ in essential Points: In which Unity of Doctrine
consists: as for those Sects who do differ in essentials, they are none of our
Church, but the Spawn of Yours, as we can prove.


Pa. 24. All your Reformers did either agree in matters of Faith, or they did
not.


Pro. They did: All those who we own to be of our Church, did.


Pa. Why did they so much differ in essential Points?


Pro. They did not differ in any Essential Points.


Pa. 25. Luther and Calvin were either true Reformers, or they were not: If
not, then you follow false Reformers.


Pro. They were true Reformers. But if they were not, you can bring no Argument
against us, for we follow them no f^^^ther than they followed Christ.


Pa. If they were, why did they differ in the most essential Point of the Holy
Sacrament?


Pro. They do not differ in an essential Point; their difference there, is not
Essential, they both agree that Christ is Present, but for the manner of his
Presence, it is no essential Point.


Pa. But they differ in the Government of the Church.


Pro. They do not differ in any essential Matter in that Point, even according
to your own Principles.


Pa. 26. All your Reformations either do agree, or they do not.


Pro. All our Reformations do agree in essential Points; as for others, who
call themselves Reformers, but are not, we have nothing to say to them.


Pa. If they do produce any two that agree in all Points.


Pro. All of them agree in all necessary Points, and I challenge you to produce
any differences in such Points among us; the difference we have about lesser
questions, are greater among you than us.


Pa. 27. Your Church either is Universal, or it is not?


Pro. I have proved that Universality is no mark of the true Church; and
therefore the question is impertinent: we do not say we are the Catholic
Church, but a part of it, and this we are ready to prove; but it is not
necessary to show any of our Preachers in Japonia, etc. For the same question
might be put to the Christian Church in the ancient times, before many Nations
were converted: and to your Church it self, at the first discovery of America;
show one of your Preachers in those Countries.


Pa. 28. Your Church has either converted Nations, or she has not.


Pro. She has.


Pa. If she has, show one Nation that she has ever converted.


Pro. All Nations converted by the Apostles, and Primitive Christians, or by
the true Church in any Age, were converted by that Church, of which we are a
part: New England, and many other Parts of the West Indies, with several Places
in the East, have in particular been Converted by the Protestants.


Pa. 29. Your Church either has been Universal, or it has not: If not, She is
not the true Church.


Pro. I told you before, we are only a part of the true Church; and for the
question, Whether it be Universal or not: it has been as Universal as the true
Church has been; but I would willingly know what you mean by Universal; for if
you mean in all places, we deny it to be a Mark of the true Church, as I proved
before.


Pa. What time has your Church been coexistent before Luther and Calvin?


Pro. I told you just now, our Church was existent in the Apostles, and
Primitive times, and ever since, though not so visible as then. If you mean any
thing else by the term Coexistent, when you explain it, I will give you a
farther Answer; which is a clear Answer to the next Query, 30. In whatever
Place the Apostles and Primitive, and Orthodox Christians were, there was our
Church, and this we are ready to prove.


Pa. 31. Your Church has Sanctity, or it has not.


Pro. It has.


Pa. If she has show one of yours that ever was Canonized.


Pro. That is an impertinent question: How comes Canonization to be a note of
the Churches Sanctity? and where did ever God command it? So that it cannot be
an Evidence of the Churches Sanctity, but is indeed a mere, invention of Men;
but our Sanctity we will prove by the Word of God, because we teach the same
Doctrine which that contains.


Pa. 32. Luther and Calvin, and the rest of your Reformers, confirmed their
Doctrine with Miracles, or they did not.


Pro. What if they did not?


Pa. If they did not, they were not true Apostles.


Pro. The Doctrine they Preached was not theirs, but that which Christ and his
Apostles taught, and confirmed by Miracles; so that it needed no more
Confirmation: except we had received it upon their Authority, which we did not:
We acknowledge they were not Apostles, as the twelve were; and therefore no
need of their working Miracles.


Pa. 33. The Signs which Christ said in Scripture, followed your pretended
Reformers, or they did not.


Pro. All the Signs which Christ said, should always accompany the true
Preachers of the Gospel, did follow them.


Pa. If they did, show one Man they dispossessed, or one sick that they
restored to Health: for if these Signs did not follow them, they are not true
Believers.


Pro. That does not follow, for Christ never made that a Sign of True
Believers; nay, you must confess that many never worked any of these Miracles,
who are yet true Believers. If indeed they had Preached any new Doctrine, you
might call for Miracles, but seeing they Preached none new, but the Doctrine
that was taught by Christ, his Apostles, and the Ancient Fathers, there is no
need to confirm that by Miracles, seeing all the Miracles Christ, and his
Apostles wrought, were for that end. However we can show many certain instances
of Men's being dispossessed, by the Prayers of the Faithful in our Church; and
many among us who have had their Health restored them in answer to their own
and the Churches Prayers: but for all that we have better grounds for our
Faith, which we rest upon.


Pa. 34. Your Reformers were either famous for their virtuous Lives, or they
were not.


Pro. They were.


Pa. If they were; why did they break their Vows made to God, and teach Men so
to do?


Pro. The Vows which they broke, were unlawful Vows, and your own Canons
expressly say, that an unlawful Vow ought to be broken: (C. 22. qu. 4. c. in
malis.) by breaking then their Vow of single Life, that is, by repenting of it,
and not observing it, they did no more than what they were in duty bound to do:
and therefore were holy Men for all that?


Pa. 35. The Catholic Roman Church and no other stands firm and infallible,
against all the Tempests of Apostasy, Heresy and Schism.


Pro. The Roman Church is not firm nor infallible, but as to the visible part
of it, is fallen both by Apostasy, Heresy, and Schism.


Pa. 36. The Romans had once the true Church, or they had not.


Pro. The question is Ambiguous; if you mean by it that the Roman Church was
the true Church, as the Mother of all other, I deny it: if you mean that the
Roman Church was a true Church, and had the true Faith; I answer that she had
the true Faith.


Pa. If the Romans had the true Faith, they retain the same still infallibly,
or do not.


Pro. They do not.


Pa. 37. If they do not, then they must have their fall, either by Apostasy,
Heresy, or Schism.


Pro. She has fallen by them all.


Pa. The Ancient, Apostolic, Catholic, Roman Church, fell by Apostasy, or it
did not.


Pro. The Ancient, Apostolic, Catholic Church, fell not at all: Nay the
Ancient Roman Church fell not: but the present Roman Church is fallen.


Pa. If she is fallen by Apostasy, what prudent man will say that she ever
renounced the sweet Name of Jesus, which she ever has in so great Veneration?


Pro. She may have fallen by Apostasy, and yet not, have renounced the Name of
Jesus, so that her having it in so great Veneration, is no Argument that she is
not fallen by Apostasy.


Pa. 38. The Roman Church fell by Heresy, or she did not.


Pro. She did.


Pa. If she did, by what General Council was she ever Condemned? which of the
Fathers ever wrote against her? Or by what Authority was she otherwise reproved?


Pro. If nothing be an Heresy but what a General Council condemns, then those
Heresies which sprang up in the first three hundred years, were wrongfully
esteemed such in those times, seeing there was then no General Council: If a
Doctrine may be Heretical which was never Condemned by a general Council, then
the Dostrines of the Church of Rome may be Heretical, though never Condemned by
a General Council, so that question does not vindicate her from being guilty of
Heresy.


Pa. But, which of the Fathers ever wrote against her?


Pro. All the Ancient Fathers disclaim those Doctrines which the Roman Church
now holds: but they could not write purposely against her, because she did not
then profess those Doctrines. But if it be a good Argument, the Church of Rome
fell not into Heresy, because no Father wrote purposely against her; then the
same Argument will vindicate us, seeing no Father has writ against us: but if
no Father had writ against the Church of Rome, she might be Heretical for all
that, so that this question and the former are both impertinent.


Pa. But by what Authority was she reproved?


Pro. By the Authority of the Scriptures, by the Authority of the Testimony of
the Ancient Church, and the Authority of right Reason.


Pa. 39. The Ancient Roman Church fell by Schism, and by dividing herself from
some other Church, or she did not.


Pro. She did.


Pa. If she did, whose company did she leave? from what Body did she go forth?
Where was the true Church she forsook?


Pro. She forsook the Primitive Church, the Eastern Church, and all those
Christians who always maintained their Freedom from the Roman Yoke.


Pa. 40. The true Holy Apostolic Catholic Church is fallible, and can err, or
it cannot.


Pro. Remember by the Church I mean the Faithful throughout the World, and of
these I say, they all cannot err in any point of Faith.


Pa. Why do you then falsely condemn her?


Pro. We do not condemn her, we are part of her, but for the Roman Church, we
condemn her.


Pa. 41. The Church of God is infallible in all her Proposals, and Definitions
of Faith, or she is not.


Pro. All Definitions made by the whole Church of Christ, are infallibly true.


Pa. If she be, why do you deny infallibility?


Pro. The Infallibility we deny, is that of a Pope or Council; and this we
deny, because they are not the whole Church, and therefore though the Church of
Christ be infallible, yet they are not.


Pa. 42. Christ being the Head of the Church, and the Holy Ghost the Soul of
the Church, guiding and directing the Church in all Truth; she can err, or she
cannot.


Pro. She cannot.


Pa. Then she is not fallible.


Pro. The Church of Christ is not fallible; but the Roman Church is.

43. Christ is either a true Prophet, or he is not.


Pro. He is.


Pa. If he be, how then can the Gates of Hell prevail against the Church?
Seeing he prophesied in St. Matt. 16. 18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against her.


Pro. The Gates of Hell cannot prevail against the Church, nor never shall;
that is, they shall not prevail against the whole Church, but against any
particular Church, as the Church of Rome, they may and have prevailed. But
here, as in the rest of your Queries, you beg the question, supposing the
Church of Rome to be the only Church of Christ.


Pa. 44. The Holy Ghost suggesteth all truth to the Church, or it does not.


Pro. It does.


Pa. If it does, then it will suggest no Errors.


Pro. It will not: But that does not hinder, but it may permit Satan to suggest
Errors to a particular Church: this you will allow; and therefore to the Church
of Rome, which is but a particular Church.


Pa. 45. Christ was a wise Man, or he was not.


Pro. He was.


Pa. Why then did he build his House upon the Sand, and make it subject to the
infernal Tempests.


Pro. He did not build his House upon the Sand, nor did he make it subject,
that is, he did not subject it to the infernal Tempests; but he made it liable
to them, yet still he defeats their force: and though he suffers them to
overthrow some outer parts of it, yet the House it self shall never be
overthrown.


Pa. 46. A Congregation of People in dispising Christ, are guilty of Apostasy,
or they are not.


Pro. If they were People that professed Christ before, then they are guilty of
Apostasy in despising him; but not else: if they never Professed Christ, they
are guilty of horrible Sin, but not of Apostasy.


Pa. If they be, how can you clear your selves of Apostasy in despising his
Church? seeing it is said in Scripture, Luke 10. 16. He that hears you,
hears me, etc.


Pro. We do not despise the Church: it is you despise her, by teaching so many
things contrary to her Doctrine, as we are ready to prove.


Pa. 47. Your Church is guilty of Heresy, or she is not.


Pro. She is not.


Pa. If not, how does the Definition of Heresy agree with you, in adhering to
so many singular and private Opinions, and Errors of Faith, contrary to the
general approved Doctrine of the Catholic Church.


Pro. It does not agree at all to us; we teach no such private and singular
Opinions; the Doctrines we teach, are the received Doctrines of the Catholic
Church; but it agrees very well to you, whose Doctrines wherein we dissent from
you, are such private and singular Opinions, and contrary to the received
Doctrine of the Catholic Church; and this we will at any time prove.


Pa. 48. Your Church is guilty of Schism, or it is not.


Pro. It is not.


Pa. How then does the Definition of Schism agree with you, in dividing your
selves from the Body of all Faithful Christians, and in breaking Communion with
the Ancient, Apostolic, Catholic, Roman Church?


Pro. It does not agree to us: we made no such Division, we indeed divided our
selves from the corrupt Roman Church, but we never divided from the Ancient
Apostolic Church, but you did, and this I am ready to make good; See here
again you beg the question, and suppose the Roman Church the only Church of
Christ, which is the point in Controversy, and you can never prove.


Pa. 49. That Church to which Apostasy, Heresy, and Schism agree, is a false
Church, or she is not.


Pro. She is.


Pa. Then your Church is a false Church, seeing they so aptly agree with her.


Pro. They do not agree with her, but rather with you, as I have proved.
Therefore she is no false Church.


Pa. 50. All that which the Ancient holy Catholic Roman Church holds as
Articles of Faith, is pious, good, and lawful.


Pro. All that the Ancient holy Catholic Church held, is pious, good, and
lawful, and so is all that the Ancient holy Roman Church held, for she held
nothing but what the Catholic Church held, but all that the present Roman
Church holds, is not pious, good, and lawful.


Pa. I prove it is out of holy Writ; and by common Sense and Reason.


Pro. Both holy Writ, and common Sense and Reason are against you, but go on.


Of the Popes Supremacy.
PA. 51. The Foundation of the Church of God, next after Christ was builded
upon St. Peter, or it was not.


Pro. It was no more builded on St. Peter, than upon the other Apostles.


Pa. Why then does the Scripture say, Mat. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church?


Pro. Christ says not there, that he will build his Church upon the Person of
Peter, but upon the Confession that he had before made, verse. 16. Thou art
Christ the Son of the Living God, which is the Foundation of the Christian
Religion; so St. Austin explains it (Aug. trac. 10. in 1 John) What means this
(says he) upon this Rock will I build my Church? Upon that Faith, upon that
which is said, Thou art the Christ: seeing then Christ did not build his Church
on Peter more than the other Apostles, we with good reason deny his Supremacy.


Pa. 52. Christ did prefer Peter before the other Apostles, or he did not.


Pro. He did not give Peter any Preference of Order, or Power more than to the
other Apostles.


Pa. If he did not, why did he say to Peter only, John 21. 16, 17, 18, feed my
Lambs, feed my Sheep?


Pro. He did not say it to Peter only, St. Austin tells us, (Aug. de ago.
Christ. c. 30.) when it is said unto Peter, Feed my Sheep, it is said unto all,
and St. Amb. (Lib. de Sacerd.) which Sheep, and Flock, St. Peter did not
receive alone, but we all received them with him. Seeing then here was no
Prerogative given to Peter, but what the rest of the Apostles, and all Pastors
received, we have good reason to deny his Supremacy.


Pa. 53. The Apostles were of equal Authority, or they were not.


Pro. They were.


Pa. If they were, why have you Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, and no equal
Authority as they had?


Pro. The Question is impertinent, all Archbishops are of equal Authority in
their own Provinces? All Bishops are of equal Authority in their respective
Dioceses: So that we have an equal Authority. But as Bishops were under the
Apostles, and Presbyters under them, so we have the same degrees, but for the
Office of an Apostle, that is; no longer in the Church.


Pa. 54. To whom the chief Charge of feeding Christ's Sheep was given, he was
chief of the Apostles, or he was not.


Pro. He was.


Pa. Why then do you deny Peter's Supremacy, to whom the chief charge was
committed.


Pro. The chief Charge was not committed to him, therefore we deny his
Supremacy. And although I acknowledged that, if the chief Charge had been given
to any, he had been Chief; yet seeing it was given to none, as I proved before,
there was no chief over the rest.


Of Oral Tradition.
PA. 55. Oral and Apostolical Tradition, without written Books, either was the
means of Planting and Conserving the Christian Religion, or it was not.


Pro. It was not.


Pa. If not, how did the Apostles propagate the Faith of Christ, without
written Books?


Pro. They did not, but in propagating the Faith they always appealed to the
Scriptures of the Old Testament; they indeed taught the Christian Doctrine by
word of Mouth, before they committed it to Writing, but that was no Tradition
handed from Father to Son, which is the Tradition you plead for.


Pa. 56. The number of the Canonical Books are mentioned in Scripture, or they
are not.


Pro. They are not.


Pa. If not, how do you know the Canonical Books, but by Oral Tradition?


Pro. By written Tradition, the Testimony of all Ages, in their Writings.


Pa. 57. The Christians of the Primitive Age, on pain of Damnation, held
nothing for Faith, but what they had received from Christ and his Apostles for
such, or they did not.


Pro. They did.


Pa. Why then do you deny Tradition?


Pro. We do not deny all Tradition: but we affirm that Tradition is not as the
Council of Trent affirms, of equal Authority with the written Word; but the
Primitive Christians received their Faith from Christ, and his Apostles, by
means of the Scriptures, not by means of unwritten Tradition.


Pa. 58. Apostolical Tradition is the Rule by which we may be infallibly
assured; both what Doctrine Christ and his Apostles taught, and what Books they
wrote, or else not.


Pro. If you can show us any Apostolical Tradition, and prove it to be such, we
will own it; but for unwritten Tradition, it is not the Rule.


Pa. If not, how otherwise can we be assured?


Pro. What Doctrine Christ taught, we can be assured by the Scriptures; what
Books the Apostles wrote we can be assured by Universal written Tradition, the
greatest Historical Evidence; but not by unwritten.


Of the Eucharist.
PA. 59. That natural Body and Blood, which Christ offered upon the Cross, for
the remission of Sins, it was the same which Christ gave to his Apostles, or it
was not.


Pro. If you mean that material Body and Blood, it was not.


Pa. Why do you then deny that Scripture of St. Luke 22. 19. This is my Body
which shall be given for you? and that Matt. 26. 20. This is the Blood of the
New Testament, which shall be shed for many, for the Remission of Sins?


Pro. Why do you falsify the words of St. Luke, and St. Matthew? their Words
are, This is my Body which is given for you; and This is my Blood which is shed
for many, not which shall be, and we deny not the Words of the Evangelists, but
we deny the real Presence you assert, because Christ spoke here of his real
figurative Sacramental Body, not of his real natural.


Pa. 60. Christ either gave his Body and Blood to his Apostles at his last
Supper, or he did not.


Pro. He did.


Pa. Why then do you deny the real Presence?


Pro. We do not deny a real Presence; but a natural Corporal Presence we do; we
affirm Christ to be present really and sacramentally; but not naturally, in the
Body and Blood, on which he hung upon the Cross, according to that of St.
Austin (in Psalm. 98.) You shall not eat that Body which was Crucified, nor
drink the Blood which was shed upon the Cross.


Pa. 61. When Christ said, This is my Body, did he speak Metaphorically or not?


Pro. He did.


Pa. If he did, prove the Metaphor out of Scripture.


Pro. So we do, both from the words of the Institution, and the parallel places
of Scripture.

1. From the Words of the Institution, This is my Body, either those words are
to be understood in a Metaphorical Sense, or they are not; if not, then they
are to be understood in a litteral; if they are, then they are a Metaphor.

If they are to be understood in a litteral Sense then they are either true in
that Sense or they are not: If they are not, then Christ was a Liar, which is
Blasphemy; if they are true in a litteral Sense, then the Bread is Christ's
Body, or it is not; if it is not, then those words, This is my Body, are false;
if it be, then an Impossibility is true, for your own Authors confess that it
is impossible that the Bread should be the Body of Christ literally; (Gra. de
Consec. did. 2. c. 55) But an Impossibility cannot be true, therefore the
Bread is not Christ's real Body. If it be not Christ's real Body, they cannot be
taken in a litteral Sense therefore they must be taken in a Metaphorical.

2. From the Parallel places of Scripture, when Christ, says, I am a Vine, it
is a Metaphor; when he says, I am a Door, it is a Metaphor; when he says, I am
a way, it is a Metaphor, when he says, this is the Cup of the New Testament, it
is a Metaphor: These are parallel Places of Scripture, all Metaphors; therefore
This is my Body, is a Metaphor too. According to Theodoret. (Dial. immutab.) he
who called himself a Viae, called the Sign his Blood.


Pa. 62. The blessed Body of Christ not being contained in the Bread, can be
eaten, or it cannot.


Pro. That Body, which is not contained there, viz. His Natural Body, cannot be
eaten; but his Sacramental Body which is Spiritually there, may; therefore we
do not maintain that we eat the Body which is not contained in the Bread; but
that which is therewith given to the Faithful we do eat.


Pa. Does it not imply a great contradiction, seeing you hold, the Body is
eaten in the Eucharist, and not eaten in the Eucharist.


Pro. No. We do not say his Body is not eaten: we affirm it is, but not
Carnally, but Spiritually; so that it is eaten by the Faithful, not eaten by
the unworthy receiver; to maintain (as you do) that it is eaten and not eaten,
at the same time by the same person, would be a contradiction; but it is none
to affirm that it is eaten by the worthy, and not eaten by the unworthy
receiver.


Of Liturgy in an unknown Tongue.
PA. 63. That which the Apostles practiced, is either lawful for us to
practice, or it is not.


Pro. Every thing they practiced is not lawful for us to practice, for some
things they did, which their Extraordinary Office warranted, which is not
Lawful for us to do; but every thing they practiced as private Christians, is
lawful for us to practice.


Pa. If it be, why do you deny the Lawfulness of the Liturgy in an unknown
Tongue, seeing the Apostles had their public Liturgies, in Greek, Syriack, and
Latin.


Pro. We do not deny the Lawfulness of Liturgies in any Tongue, but we deny the
Lawfulness of using them among, and imposing them upon a People, who understand
not the Language they are in. And though I deny the Liturgies you speak of, to
have been extant in the times of the Apostles; yet if they were, they never
used a Greek Liturcy among the Latins, but among the Greeks, these several
Liturgies being for the several Nations whose Language they were penned in.


Pa. 64. Seeing God has commanded nothing concerning the Language of the
public Liturgy, we ought either to follow the Commands of the Church, or we
ought not.


Pro. God has commanded already, that the public Service should be in a known
Tongue, and not in an unknown; so that you suppose what is not true; the whole
fourteenth Chapter of 1 Cor. forbids Prayer, or Preaching in an unknown Tongue?


Pa. Why do you deny the Liturgy in an unknown Tongue, seeing the Church
commands it?


Pro. The Church does not command it: the Roman Church indeed does, but that is
not the Church; we deny it therefore, because it crosses the ends of Prayer,
which is Edification, and because God has forbid it in the forecited place.


Pa. 65. The Man that prays and gives thanks in an unknown Tongue, either does
well, or he does not.


Pro. He that gives thanks or prays in a Tongue unknown to himself, does not
well: and he that publicly prays, and gives thanks in a Tongue unknown to his
Auditors, does not well.


Pa. Why do you condemn that place of Scripture, 1 Cor. 14. 17. Thou indeed
give thanks well, but the other is not edified?


Pro. We do not condemn that place. The Apostle there speaks of the matter of
such a person's Thanksgiving, which he says may be good; but at the same time
he condemns the manner, the doing it in an unknown Tongue, because others are
not edified; and he commands, verse. 26. that all things be done to edifying.
This then being a Breach of that Command, is not lawful; the Apostle says, he
may give thanks well for the matter, but not in a right manner, seeing the
other is not edified: For which reason we condemn the use of a Liturgy in an
unknown Tongue.


Pa. 66. That which is praised in Scripture, and proved to be pleasing unto
God, is either lawful and expedient for us to prastise, or it is not.


Pro. That which is proved to be pleasing to God for us to do, is lawful.


Pa. Why then do you deny the Liturgy in an unknown Tongue? seeing the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 14. 2. He that speaks with Tongues, speaks not to men, but
God; and verse. 14. If I pray with Tongues, my Spirit prays, but my
Understanding is unfruitful; and verse. 30. to speak with Tongues forbid not.


Pro. For God's sake, Sir, consider how strangely you argue, this is the very
reason why we Condemn public Prayer in an unknown Tongue, because it is not to
Edification; and because the Understanding is unfruitful, and we ought to pray
with Understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 15. the Apostle here in verse. 30. commends
speaking with Tongues, and so do we, but it is one thing to speak with Tongues,
and another to speak in an unknown Tongue; it is not unlawful to speak to, or
Pray with the People in Greek and Hebrew, if they understand it, or I, or any
other, interpret it to them. But to speak or pray in a Tongue, they do not
understand, without interpreting what I say; is expressly forbid by the Apostle,
1 Cor. 14. 27, 28. If any Man speak in an unknown Tongue, let one interpret;
but if there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church. Thus
Prayers in an unknown Tongue, are so far from being recommended, that they are
expressly forbidden; therefore we reject them.


Of Confession and Absolution.
PA. 67. The Apostles being made Spiritual Judges by our Lord, had power from
him, to bind and loose from Sin, or they had not.


Pro. They had no power to bind and loose from the Guilt of Sin; but a power of
binding and loosing they had.


Pa. Why then do you reject Absolution?


Pro. We do not reject it, but the Absolution of the Church of Rome we do,
which pretends to more than Christ ever gave: and we also deny that it is a
Sacrament as Baptism, and the Lord's Supper are.


Pa. 68. The Laity are obliged to disclose their Faults to their Judges, or
they are not.


Pro. If by their Judges you mean their Ministers, they are not their Judges:
and they are not obliged to disclose all their faults to them.


Pa. If not, how can they absolve them from what they know not.


Pro. Absolution is either general or particular; the general is sufficient,
except in particular grievous Sins which trouble the Conscience, for these we
enjoin a particular Absolution: but for the general, it is sufficient for the
Ministers to know in general that they are Sinners, and see that they profess
to be Penitent.


Pa. 69. Christ in speaking these words, whose Sins ye forgive, etc. John 20.
24. spoke true or false.


Pro. He spoke true.


Pa. Why then do you deny the power of Absolution?


Pro. We do not deny the power: but we condemn your abuse of it.


Pa. 70. That which the Scripture commands, either is necessary, or it is not.


Pro. Whatever the Scripture commands as our Duty, is necessary.


Pa. Why then do you deny that of St. James 5. 16. Confess your faults one to
another.


Pro. We do not deny it, but we say it does not prove the necessity of
Confession to a Priest, it speaks of confessing one to another, to our
Brethren; therefore by no means proves Confession of all our Sins to a Priest,
necessary to Salvation. We condemn not the use of Confession, but the making it
necessary to Salvation, and part of a Sacrament.


Of Purgatory.
PA. 71. There either is a Penal Prison or Place of temporal Punishment and
Payment after this Life, or there is not?


Pro. There is not.


Pa. Why then do you falsify that Scripture, Zach. 9. 11. Thou also in the
Blood of thy Covenant; have set forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit, wherein
there is no Water?


Pro. We do not falsify it; but you do; it is not Thou in the Blood of thy
Covenant, but as for thee in the Blood of thy Covenant, (or whose Covenant is
by Blood) I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit, wherein there was no
Water: and it speaks not a word of Purgatory, but of the Deliverance of the
Israelites, and the Redemption by the Messiah.


Pa. Why do you falsify that Text. Mal. 3. 3. He shall purify the Sons of Levi.


Pro. We do not falsify it, but we affirm it proves nothing of Purgatory, but
of the Conversion, even of the Priests, by the Gospel of Christ, which we find
was fulfilled, Acts 6. 7. Or if it did speak of a Purgatory it speaks only of
one, for the Sons of Levi; and therefore says nothing of such, a third Place as
you maintain.


Pa. But you falsify that Text, 1 Cor. 3. 15. The work of every Man shall be
manifest, and yet he himself shall be saved, yet so as by Fire.


Pro. We do not; but we say it is evident that this whole Text is an allusion
to the trial of Metals by the Fire, and all it says, is this, That he who has
held firm the Foundation, if he has taught any vain ungrounded Doctrins; yet,
if in the main he be found sincere, he shall be saved, but as one that scapeth
out of the Fire: and therefore speaks nothing of a Place of Purification, after
this Life, much less of a place of temporal Punishment; for the Apostle does
not say he shall be saved by Fire, but so as by Fire, that is, as one that has
escaped the Fire, with much Difficulty.


Pa. But why do you falsify that Text. Mat. 5. 25. Be at an agreement with the
Adversary quickly, etc.


Pro. We do not falsify it; our Savior speaks there of the Prison of Hell, and
of no other; therefore we say there is no ground for Purgatory in this Place,
therefore we deny it.


Pa. 72. Those Souls which our Blessed Savior and his Apostles, raised from
Death, were either in Heaven or Hell, or they were not: If not, why then do you
deny a third Place.


Pro. I might very well except against this loose and idle way of arguing, from
such unknown Points; but I wave it, and tell you it was not necessary they
should be either in Heaven or Hell.


Pa. Then they must be in a third Place.


Pro. It Is true, but you cannot argue that because on such an extraordinary
occasion God kept them in a third Place for a time; therefore there is a third
Place for all to go to; but if we should grant that, there is no Consequence
from hence that will prove that place a place of Punishment and Purification,
if there were a third Place destined to Souls, (which we deny) yet it does not
thence follow, it must be a Purgatory.


Pa. 73. Christ's descensiou either was into the Hell of the Damned, or it was
not.


Pro. What if it was?


Pa. Then you Blaspheme.


Pro. I deny that Christ might go down there to triumph over the Powers of
Darkness upon their own Ground; or for several other reasons.


Pa. But if it was not into the Hell of the Damned, it was into a third Place.


Pro. What then? was it therefore into Purgatory: suppose that Expression, he
descended into Hell be meant only of the grave, or the State of the Dead, as
Sheol in Hebrew, and Hades in Greek signify: what is that to Purgatory? I still
affirm therefore with St. Austin (Ser. 232.) Let no Man deceive himself, for
there are two Places, and there is no third; he that deserves not to reign with
Christ, shall without doubt perish with the Devil.


Pa. 74. When Christ Preached to the Souls in Prison 1 Pet. 3. 19. It was
either to the damned, or it was not.


Pro. We are no where told that Christ went and Preached unto the Damned in
Hell, or any Spirits in a separate State. That which the Apostle says, is, That
there are many Spirits now in Prison, to whom Christ once Preached by his
Spirit in the Ministry of Noah: So this speaking nothing, as appears from v.
20. of Christ's Preaching to Spirits already in Prison, you can draw no
Argument from thence.


Of Venial and Mortal Sins.
PA. 75. All kinds of Sin, either rob the Soul of Justice, and make her guilty
of Damnation, or they do not.


Pro. Guilty of Damnation is an odd Phrase, but all kinds of Sin do make a Soul
deserve Damnation, though every Sin does not rob it of Justice, or
Righteousness.


Pa. If they do, why then does Christ make three different sorts of Sin, of
which the least makes a Man guilty of Damnation? Mat. 5. 23.


Pro. If the least of them makes a Man guilty of Damnation, (as you Phrase it)
then every Sin does so: and this overthrows you; but I believe you mistake your
own meaning. However you beg the question, for Christ does not there make three
different kinds of Sin, but speaks of the different degrees of Punishments,
alluding to the Punishments among the Jews.


Pa. 76. All Sins are either Mortal, and sufficient to break Charity betwixt
God and Man, or they are not.


Pro. In their own Nature all Sins are Mortal.


Pa. If they be, then the Apostles themselves are not in the Charity of God,
seeing it is said in St. James 3. 2. We all offend in many things.


Pro. It Is true, the Apostles themselves had not been in the Charity of God
upon that account, if the Grace of Christ had not been stronger than the guilt
of those Sins: so that we do not deny, but there are Sins, which we call Sins
of humane Infirmity, which in a regenerate Person are but venial, because the
Grace of Christ forgives them, though in their own Nature they are mortal.


Pa. 77. All idle Words either are mortal Sins, or they are not.


Pro. All idle sinful Words are in their own Nature mortal.


Pa. If they be, how can any one hope for Salvation, seeing Man (morally
speaking) can avoid idle Words?


Pro. By the grace of Christ, pardoning those unabidable Imperfections.


Pa. 78. All Sins are even unto Death, or they are ^ot.


Pro. If by that Expression you mean deserving Death, ^hey are.


Pa. Then you make Christ a Liar, who said, There is Sin unto Death, and a Sin
not unto Death.


Pro. It was not Christ but St. John who said so, 1 Jo. 16. But he there speaks
not of a Sin which barely deserves ^eath, but of that Sin, which, whosoever
commits it, shall ^ertainly dye Eternally, that is, the Sin against the Holy
Ghost; he does not say there is a Sin not deserving Death, ^ut there is a Sin,
not unto Death, by which as appears by v. 18.; he means those Sins of daily
Incursion in the Regenerate, which though they deserve Death, yet they do not
bring it; because the Grace of Christ covers and forgives them.


Of Invocation of Angels and Saints.
PA. 79. The Enjoyment of God, Angels, Saints, and the Glory of Heaven, either
robs Men of their Knowledge, or it does not.


Pro. It does not.


Pa. If not, why do you deny the Prophets now in Heaven can know things at a
distance, as well as they did on Earth?


Pro. We deny not but God may reveal things to them in an extraordinary manner,
as well as when they were on Earth; but as his revealing some things to them on
Earth, did not prove they knew all things; so neither will it prove they know
all things now: that Knowledge then, while here, being only particular and
extraordinary, they are not robbed of, if they have it not; but if they have it,
what is that to praying to them?


Pa. 80. The damned Spirits of Hell either know more than the Blessed Souls, in
the Glory of the Father, or they do not.


Pro. They do not.


Pa. If not, why do you acknowledge the Devils to understand our most secret
Thoughts and Prayers, and not the Saints and Angels also?


Pro. We do not acknowledge that the Devils understand our thoughts, we say, it
is Blasphemy, to assert it. For God only knows the Thoughts: but we do affirm
the Devils who are always about us, do know what we speak and act; but the
Saints are at a distance from us, and therefore cannot; and the Angels (if the
Opinion of every Persons, having one for a Guardian, be true) may possibly know
the actions of those whom they are Guardians to, but this proves no knowledge
of the Thoughts, nor, if they did know them, is there any Reason we should pray
to them.


Pa. 81. The Angels of God have prayed for those on Earth, or they have not.


Pro. They have not.


Pa. Why then do you not agree with us, that Angels pray for us?


Pro. We do agree with you that they pray for us, but what is that to our
Praying to them?


Pa. 82. It is either Lawful to pray to the Angels, or it is not.


Pro. It is not.


Pa. If not, why do you accuse Jacob of an Error, in invocating the Angel to
bless his Children? Genesis 48 16.


Pro. Jacob did not there invocate any created Angel, but the Angel of the
Covenant, the Lord Jesus Christ. So says St. Athanasius, (orat. 4. in Arrian.)
the Patriarch Jacob in his Prayer joined none with God, but him only who is the
Word, whom he calls Angel; so that we do not condemn him of an Error.


Pa. Why do you condemn this Text, Job. 5. 1. Call therefore, and turn to thee
some of the Saints.


Pro. We do not condemn that Text, but we may justly condemn you for alleging
it after such a manner, and to such a purpose: the Words are, Call now if there
be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn?
whereby Eliphaz upbraids Job, as unworthy of such a Privilege as he had enjoyed
in Chap. 4. v. 16. of a Vision to instruct him, but says nothing of Prayer to
Saints, or any thing like it.


Pa. Why do you condemn that Hos. 12. 4. Jacob prevailed against the Angel, and
wept, and prayed to him?


Pro. We do not condemn it: the Prophet there speaks of the Angel which he met
in Bethel, Genesis 23. 24. Which Angel was no created Angel, but Christ; for Genesis
32. 30. Jacob calls him God: now will it follow, that because Jacob worshipped
God, therefore we must invocate a Created Angel? Are these Arguments for Men of
Reason to use?


Of the Worshipping of Angels, and Images.
PA. 83. When St. John in the Apocalypse 22. 8. fell down to adore before the
Feet of the Angel, be knew it either to be lawful, or it was not.


Pro. It was not.


Pa. Then you accuse the most Wise and Excellent Apostles of gross Ignorance,
and wilful Idolatry.


Pro. We do not accuse them of gross Ignorance, it was no invincible Ignorance;
for it is plain, St. John took him for Christ, in that the Argument he uses to
withhold him is, that he was a Created Spirit, and such an Ignorance St. John
was guilty of; but for wilful Idolatry We do not accuse him, he did not, as you
do, worship that which he knew not to be God, but he was about to worship that
which he took for God. I wonder how you can allege this Text in your Favor,
which is so clearly against you.


Pa. Again, when Lot adored the Angels, Genesis 19. 1. with his Face bowed toward
the Earth, he either committed Idolatry, or he did not.


Pro. You beg the question, Lot did not adore the Angels, the Scripture tells
us, he rose np to meet them, and bowed himself with his Face toward the
Ground; which was only a civil Salutation, for he took them only for Men, and
therefore could not adore them: So that there is no Argument to be drawn from
hence.


Pa. 84. All that which is recorded in Holy Writ, to have been done by the
known Saints of God without reproof, either is Lawful or it is not.


Pro. All that they so did without an extraordinary Call to it, is Lawful; but
there were some things which were peculiarly lawful to them, which is not so to
us.


Pa. If all things they did (as their ordinary Duty) be Lawful, then why do you
call it Idolatry to worship Images?


Pro. Because the Saints of God never worshipped them.


Pa. Did not John the Baptist, the great Precursor of Christ, worship the very
Latchets of our Saviors Shoes?


Pro. This is a pleasant question, where do you find he ever did? The Scripture
says no such thing; he said indeed, he was not worthy to bear them, but he
never worshipped them. Prove it if you can.


Pa. Why did Jacob worship the top of Joseph's Rod, Heb. 11. 21.


Pro. He did not; there is no text of Scripture that says he did; that place
which you quote, is plainly perverted; for the words are, He worshipped upon
the top of his Staff; that is, leaning on it; or that he worshipped leaning
toward the Beds Head; and therefore St. Jerome, whose Translation you profess
to follow, (in his questions upon Genesis,) rejects that Version, which yet
you retain: we affirm then still that the Saints of God did not worship Images.


Pa. 85. The holy Veneration and Worship of Images have either profited the
Jews and Christians, or they have not.


Pro. They have not.


Pa. How then were the Israelites healed of the biting of the Serpents in the
Deserts?


Pro. Not by worshipping any Image, no not the Brazen Serpent; but by looking
on it, thereby exercising their Faith on Christ whom it was a Type of.


Pa. How then did the Primitive Christians receive special benefit by
venerating the Shadow of St. Peter, and St. Paul? Acts 5. 15. and 19. 11.


Pro. Here again you suppose what is not; the Shadow of St. Peter healed many,
and so did St. Paul, but they did not venerate or worship either their shadow
or their Persons.


Pa. 86. It is lawful to bow the Knee to Images, or it is not.


Pro. It is not.


Pa. If not, why does the Apostle say, at the Name of Jesus every Knee shall
bow? Phil. 2. 8. Which Name is nothing else but an Image of the Hearing.


Pro. This is as impertinent an Argument as ever I heard; the question is about
graven visible material Images; not about Images in the Hearing; but pray
remember St. Paul does not say, Every Body shall worship that Name: So that it
is nothing to your purpose, about visible material Images, or worshipping them.


Of the Veneration of Relics.
PA. 87. The Honor and Veneration of the Relics of Saints, which God himself
has approved by many famous Miracles is good, or it is not.


Pro. It is.


Pa. Why then do you condemn the Veneration of Relics?


Pro. Because God has never approved it either by Miracles or any other way.


Pa. 88. That Woman which was miraculously cured of the Bloody Flux, by only
touching the Hem of Christ's Garment, was Cured, either for venerating the
Relics, ^^ she was not.


Pro. She was not, but for her Faith.


Pa. Why then was not she Cured afar off?


Pro. That is nothing to us; it is sufficient that it was Christ's Pleasure to
have it as it was, and that he tells us it was by Faith she was Cured, Matt. 9.
22. Daughter (says our Savior) be of good Comfort, thy Faith has made thee
whole.


Pa. 89. The virtue of casting out Devils, and curing the Diseases, consisted
in the Napkins and Handkerchiefs, that had but touched the Body of St. Paul, or
it did not.


Pro. I cannot say that it consisted in them: but it was conveyed by them.


Pa. If it was why do you deny the veneration of Relics.


Pro. If I should allow that the virtue of doing those Miracles did really
consist in those Napkins, and Handkerchiefs, yet cannot an Argument be deduced
from hence that we must worship Relics; for those Napkins and Handkerchiefs
were never Worshipped.


Pa. 90. The Bodies of dead Saints have either restored Men to Life, or they
have not.


Pro. The Bodies have not; but God by the Bodies has


Pa. If so, then the Relics of Saints are worthy to be Venerated.


Pro. I deny that; by Moses's Rod, by Elizeus's Mantle, and his Bones, Miracles
were wrought, yet those Relics were never worshipped.


Of Free Will.
PA. 91. God either left Man to his own Free Will or he did not.


Pro. If you speak of the state of Man before the Fal^ I answer, God did leave
him to his own Freewill; but since the Fall, I affirm God has left Man to his
own Fre^ Will, as to moral Actions, but as to Spiritual, he has no^ So that we
do not deny all Free Will, but only in Spiritu^ things.


Pa. Why do you falsify that Scripture, Eccl. 15. 14. G^ from the Beginning
made Man, and left him in the hand ^^ his own Counsel.


Prot. That Passage is in Ecclesiasticus, not in the Canonical Scripture, and
therefore of no Authority in this Case; but if it were, it speaks nothing of
Free Will to Spiritual actions in Men since the Fall; but of the Power which
Adam had in the Beginning.


Pa, 92. The choice of Good and Evil is either left in Man's Free Will, or it is
not.


Pro. The whole choice of Moral goed and evil is; but the right acceptable
choice of Spiritual good is not.


Pa. Why then do you deny that of Josh. 24. Choose you this Day, whom you will
serve?


Pro. We do not deny it; but we say that it is nothing to your purpose: Seeing
to choose Spiritual good or evil is in Man's Power; but to choose it aright is
not; that is, to choose it from a right Principle, and to a right End.


Pa. Why do you deny that, Joh. 1. 12. As many as received Christ, to them he
gave Power to become the Sons of God.


Pro. We do not deny it; but we say that a right choice of Spiritual good is
not in Man's Power, and this is clear from this very Text; for receiving Christ,
follows choosing of him; but till he gave them more Power than they had before,
they could not choose him so as to become the Sons of God; therefore they had no
Power Naturally to choose him aright: So that this Text overthows your selves.


Pa. 93. Man has Power either to keep his Virgin, or he has not.


Pro. If you mean by that Expression what the Apostle intends 1 Cor. 7. 37. I
answer, he has.


Pa. Why then do you deny Free Will?


Pro. We do not deny Free Will in moral actions, such as this is, where the
Apostle is only treating of the Power of Guaraians, or Parents over the Virgins
under their Care; but that which we deny it in, is Spiritual Actions, of which,
this is no Instance.


Pa. 94. All that God commands, is either in Man's free Power, or it is not.


Pro. All that God commands Man to do by his own Power is; but all that he
commands, such as that Precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart, is not.


Pa. Then you condemn God of Tyranny, in commanding that which is not in Man's
Free Power to do.


Pro. That does not follow; as long as God will enable him to do that, for
which his own free Power is not sufficient, as in the Text you cited just now,
Joh. 1. 12. To those, whose own Power was not sufficient, he gave Power to
become the Sons of God.


Pa. But is not this as if I should threaten my Servant with horrible Death,
for not bringing me the Man in the Moon?


Pro. No, for if you did so, you would be unjust and Tyrannical, seeing your
Servant could not do it; neither could you enable him: but God requires nothing
but what either Man can do, or God will enable him to perform.


Of Faith without Works.
PA. 95. Faith working by Charity, either justifies, or it does not.


Pro. Faith, properly speaking, does not justify; but by such a Faith we are
justified.


Pa. If so, then your justifying Faith flies without Wings.


Pro. I deny that; for there is no such a thing as a Justifying Faith without
Works: we affirm, that no Faith is true, but that which works by Love.


Pa. 96. A Man only saying, Lord, Lord, either may be Saved, or he may not.


Pro. He may not.


Pa. If not, then where is your justifying Faith?


Pro. In the word of God, and the Heart of every true Believer, who shows his
Faith by his Works.


Pa. 97. You either hope to be saved by believing in God only without Works, or
you do not.


Pro. We do hope to be justified, and consequently Saved, by Faith in Christ
only.


Pa. Then the damned Spirits may expect Salvation, seeing they believe and
tremble.


Pro. That does not follow: that Faith which the Damned have is but an
Historical Faith; but the Faith by which we are justified, is a Faith which
purifies the Soul, and is productive of good Works, which the Damned cannot
have. We do not then hope to be saved by Faith without Works, but by Faith, and
not by Works.


Of the Merit of Works.
PA. 98. Every Man will be rewarded at the last Day according to his Works or
he will not.


Pro. He will,


Pa. If he will, then good Works will be meritorious, and receive a good Reward.


Pro. They will receive a Reward, which they never deserved, but which by the
Grace of Christ is purchased for and given to them, but not for any Merit in
them; but by Virtue of his Promise and free Love, not by way, of Debt due to
the Works.


Pa. 99. Christ either encouraged his Apostles to suffer Afflictions patiently
in expectation of a Reward, or he did not.


Pro. He did.


Pa. Why then were not their Persecutions meritorious and consequently our good
Works.


Pro. Because the reward is not given to the desert of their Works, which bear
Proportion with the greatness of the Reward; but it comes only from the pure
Mercy and Grace of God, and if our good Works give us any Title to that Reward,
it is not from themselves but the Promise.


Pa. 100. That Crown of Justice which St. Paul said was laid up for himself,
was either the Reward of his good Fight, or it was not.


Pro. It was.


Pa. If it was, how can you deny the Merit of good Works?


Pro. Because that Reward was not merited by his good Fight, but purely given
to him, out of Grace.


Pa. 101. A Cup of cold Water given in the Name of a Disciple, is either
Meritorious, or it is not.


Pro. It is not.


Pa. Why is it said then, Mat. 10. 42. That he who gives it, shall in no wise
lose his Reward?


Pro. He shall not lose the promised Reward: but who at is this to deserving
that which free Grace had promised?


Of Holy and Religious Vows.
PA. 102. The sacred Vows which are taught us in the Holy Scripture are lawful,
or they are not.


Pro. They are.


Pa. Why then is not a vow lawful to us?


Pro. A Vow is Lawful to us; we do not deny it, but the question is about some
particular Vows, which we say are unlawful.


Pa. 103. The greatest Perfection of a Christian Life consists in Evangelical
Poverty, or it does not.


Pro. It does.


Pa. Why then do you reject the vow of Poverty as an humane Invention?


Pro. Because God has no where warranted it, the Evangelical Poverty, which so
much perfects a Christian is not to renounce all Worldly goods, but to be poor
in Spirit, and to be able in the midst of Plenty to despise the World, and its
Riches.


Pa. If it be not the greatest Perfection to renounce the World wholly, then
why did our Savior say to the Young Man, Mat. 19. 21. Sell all that thou have,
and give it to the Poor?


Pro. Our Savior did not there give a Precept, so to do, only to the Youngman
of whom he required it by way of Trial, because he knew his Heart was set upon
his Riches.


Pa. 104. It either was a virtue in Eunuchs, who gelded themselves for the
Kingdom of Heaven, or it was not.


Pro. That is according as you take the last Words for the Kingdom of Heavens
sake; if to avoid a present violent Temptation it be done, we must commend it;
but if upon mature deliberation it be done, when they might have recourse to
Marriage, it is not well done.


Pa. Why do you condemn that of St. Matt. 19. 12. There are some who have made
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake?


Pro. We do not condemn the Text; but your Exposition of it; for it is
doubtful on what account those our Savior speaks of there, were Eunuchs, or
whether they were so actually, or only in design; but take it in which Sense
you will, we do not find our Savior commends it; and it is nothing to that
slavish Vow which you require.


Pa. He who resolves in his Heart to keep his Virgin, either does well, or not.
1 Cor. 7. 37.


Pro. He does well.


Pa. Why then do you deny the holy Vow of Continency.


Pro. We condemn that vow which you call Holy, because it is no where
warranted in the word of God, that place of the Apostle speaks not of any Vow,
but if it did, it speaks not of Personal Continency, but of the Power of a
Guardian or Father, in Marrying or not Marrying the Virgins under their Care.


Pa. 105. We ought either to obey our Prelates and Superiors, or we ought not.


Pro. We ought in all lawful things.


Pa. Why then do you reject the vow of Obedience, as a Popish Fiction?


Pro. We do not reject all vows of Obedience, but such as are purely Popish;
and these we condemn because the matter of them is unlawful, not because all
Vows of Obedience are so.


Pa. Our Savior in obedience to St. Joseph and the Blessed Virgin, either gave
us an Example of Obedience, or he did not.


Pro. He did, Of Obedience to our Parents.


Pa. If he did, then the vow of Obedience is evident to be a pious action by
Christ's own Example


Pro. We do not condemn all vows of Obedience in general, (though if we had no
other reason to allow them, but this Example, we should reject them; for Christ
here made no Vow, and his Obedience was to his Parents, not to superior
degrees in the Church) but yours we do because of the matter of it, which you
must prove to be good, by examining the particulars; not by such general
Arguments as these.


Of the Possibility of keeping the Commandments.
PA. 106. A Man being assisted by the special Grace of God, can either keep the
Commandments of God, or he cannot.


Pro. He can.


Pa. Why do you then deny the possibility of keeping the Commandments.


Pro. We do not deny it, we say it is not only possible; but necessary that we
should keep all the Commandments of God; but we deny that we can keep them
perfectly, that is, that we can arrive to that Degree of Perfection, as to
observe them to the highest Pitch, without any defect in the manner of the
Observation: this we say, None on this side Heaven can do.


Pa. 107. It is either impossible with Man to keep the Commandments or it is
not.


Pro. To keep them perfectly with a perfection of Degrees is impossible.


Pa. Why do you then accuse God of commanding Impossibilities?


Pro. We do not: God commands nothing but what we must perform, we must keep
the Commandments perfectly, as to all the parts of them; but as to the Degrees,
by reason of our natural Corruption we cannot do it, but Christ our Surety has
done it for us.


Pa. Hearers of the Law only are justified, or they are not.


Pro. Bare Hearers are not.


Pa. If not, then the fulfilling of the Law is necessary.


Pro. That does not follow: The doing of it is necessary, Romans 2. 13. But for
the fulfilling it as to the degrees of it that is no where required


Pa. 108. God according to his Promise, either enabled Man to keep his
Commandments, or he did not.


Pro. God enables a Man to do whatever he promises to assist him to do.


Pa. Why then do you deny in Man the Possibility of keeping the Commandments?


Pro. We only deny the possibility of keeping them perfectly with a Perfection
of Degrees, and God has never promised to enable Man to do it.

All his Promises are, that he will enable him to keep them so, as shall please
him; but here is nothing of keeping them perfectly.


Pa. 109. It is evident in holy Writ, that some either keep the Commandments,
or they do not.


Pro. None keep them with such a Perfection as I mentioned.


Pa. Why do you belie that of St. John 1. 6. Zacharias and Elizabeth were both
just before God, walking in all the Commandments, and were justified without
Blame.


Pro. That Text is not in St. John, but in St. Luke, 1. 6. and is not as you
read it, they were justified without Blame, but they walked in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless, or without Blame: Now this
Text we do not belly, but we desire you to consider that St. Luke only says,
they were blameless, not perfect, they were blameless, that is, they were so
Holy, that no Person could find fault with them. He had spoken of their
Holiness with reference to God before, and he speaks now of their Reputation
among Men; but this is nothing to the keeping the Commandments perfectly, with
such a Perfection as we deny.


Of the Seven Sacraments.
PA. 110. Christ for the Sanctification of Mankind, either instituted seven
visible Signs of invisible Graces or he did not.


Pro. He did not.


Pa. If he did not, answer me to these following Prepositions, viz.

Baptism is either a Sacrament, or it is not.


Pro. It is.


Pa. 111. Then we are agreed in that Point; but Confirmation is either a
Sacrament, or it is not.


Pro. It is not.


Pa. If not, Why has it the Visible Sign, viz. Oil and Balm?


Pro. It has no such Sign of Christ's Institution, which is requisite in a
Sacrament, but only of your own Invention.


Pa. See Act. 19. 5, 6. And when Paul had imposed his Hands upon them, the Holy
Ghost came upon them. And Acts 8. 14, 15, 16. St. Peter and St. John did impose
their Hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost.


Pro. These Texts speak not a word of Oil, or Balm, practiced by the Apostles,
but of the laying on of Hands. Your Confirmation therefore is no Sacrament,
seeing there is no Warrant of Christ for the outward Sign, nor any Divine
Promise to annex an invisible Grace to it.


Pa. 112. The Eucharist either is a Sacrament, or it is not.


Pro. It is.


Pa. Then the Controversy in this Point is ended. But to go on,

113. Penance either is a Sacrament, or it is not.


Pro. It is not.


Pa. If not, why has it the visible Sign, viz. The Penitent's Confession, and
the Priest's Absolution, of an invisible Grace, which is the remission of Sins?


Pro. There are no such Signs instituted by Christ, for Confession to a Priest
is no where commanded as I showed before: and Absolution is only a part of
Discipline, and therefore can be no part of a Sacrament: besides, here is no
outward and visible Sign, which must be in a Sacrament, for the words of
Absolution are the form of the Sacrament, according to the Council of Trent,
now the outward Sign is never the form of a Sacrament: The matter of this
pretended Sacrament being as I showed no where commanded by Christ, it can be
no Sacrament.


Pa. 115. Extreme Unction either is a Sacrament, or it is not.


Pro. It is not.


Pa. Why then has it the visible Sign, the Priests Prayer, and the anointing
with Oil, of an invisible Grace, James 13, 14, 15?


Pro. It has no Sign of an invisible Grace, St. James ^n that place speaks of
it as a means to heal the Sick, but that is no invisible Grace; therefore it is
no Sacrament: Whether that rite be still to be retained is another question,
and not to our purpose.


Pa. 116. Holy Order either is a Sacrament, or it is not


Pro. It is not.


Pa. Why then has it the visible Sign, the words of the Bishop, and the things
given to him that is ordained, of an invisible Grace? according to that, 1 Timothy
4. 14. neglect not the grace that is in thee by Prophecy with imposition of
hands of the Priesthood.


Pro. It has no such visible Sign instituted by Christ, which we challenge you
to prove; therefore it is no Sacrament, and neither is there any Grace given by
it, though Gifts are indeed bestowed: So that you have falsified that Text of
St. Paul, which is not, neglect not the Grace that is in thee, but neglect not
the Gift: (...), now there is a great difference between a Gift and a Grace.


Pa. 117. Matrimony either is a Sacrament, or it is not.


Pro. It is not.


Pa. If not, why has it a visible Sign, the mutual consent of both parties, an
invisible Grace and Supernatural Conjunction made by Almighty God? Matt. 19. 6.
Ephesians. 5. 31, 32.


Pro. The mutual consent is no visible Sign, but an invisible Action; neither
is there any Supernatural Grace given by it, for none of those Texts you cite,
mentions any such thing: that of Ephesians. 5. you have fassified, St. Paul says not,
it is a Sacrament, but a Mystery, (...).


Pa. 118. A visible Sign of an invisible Grace, Divinely instituted by Christ,
either is the true Definition of a Sacrament, or it is not.


Pro. It is not.


Pa. Then you deny the Definition which your selves attribute to a Sacrament.


Pro. You are Mistaken, for that is only a part of the Definition; we say that
a Sacrament must be not only an outward and visible Sign of an inward and
Spritual Grace, Ordained by Christ; but it must also be a means whereby we
receive the same, and a pledge to assure us of it: now seeing your pretended
Sacraments have neither outward Signs instituted by Christ, nor invisible
Graces annexed to them, and conveyed by them, we reject them and assert they
are no Sacraments.


Pa. 119. Baptism and the Lords Supper is either more evidently said in
Scripture, than any of the other five to be Sacraments, or they are not.


Pro. The word Sacrament is no where used in Scripture, and therefore Baptism
is no where called a Sacrament, nor the Lords Supper: But in Scripture we find
the outward and visible Sign of Baptism ordained by Christ; and the invisible
Grace annexed to it, and conveyed by it, and so of the Lords Supper; but we
find no such thing of the other five: now seeing nothing can be a Sacrament but
what has such a Sign with a Grace annexed, and Baptism and the Lords Supper
have them; we say they are Sacraments, and when you show us the same in
Scripture of the rest, we will receive them for such: It is therefore
impertinent to ask us where Baptism is called a Sacrament, for we don't contend
about a word; but the question is whether Confirmation, Penance, Extreme
Unction, Orders and Marriage be Ordinances of the same Nature with Baptism and
the Eucharist: this we deny, and we are sure you cannot prove.


APPENDIX.
Pa. 120. YOur Church either has her succession from the Waldenses, etc. or
she has not.


Pro. If you mean her Succession of Pastors, She has not.


Pa. If not, then you must have no Succession, unless it be from the Roman
Church.


Pro. That part of our Church which in opposition to Rome is termed the
Reformed, had its Immediate Succession from the Church in communion with Rome.


Pa. 121. Luther and Calvin either had their Mission from the Roman Church, or
they had not?


Pro. They had.


Pa. If they had, the Roman Church either had the Spirit of God when they gave
them that Mission, or she had not.


Pro. She had the Spirit of God, as much as was necessary for that power of
giving them their Mission.


Pa. If they had, how could she fall into Errors? and why did they depart from
the Spirit of God?


Pro. They did not depart from the Spirit of God: and that portion of the
Spirit which she for that end had in Ordination, is only a power given by the
Spirit, and therefore no security from Error, seeing all Heretics have so much
of the Spirit.


Pa. Either they had their Mission from God, or they had not.


Pro. They had.


Pa. If they had, why did not they confirm their Doctrine by Miracles?


Pro. Because Christ and his Apostles had done it before and seeing they
preached no new Doctrine, there was no need of them.


Pa. 122. Luther and Calvin's Doctrine either was manifested to be true by
Miracles, or it was not.


Pro. It was not by any Miracles wrought by them: but by the Miracles of Christ
and his Apostles it was.


Pa. If they did no Miracles, then seeing you cannot allege any Text of sacred
Writ to vindicate their Tenets, you must of necessity have recourse to the
private Spirit.


Pro. Are not you ashamed of such an Argument? when you know we produce Texts,
plain Texts of Scripture for every one of our Doctrines, and we found them upon
nothing else; and for the private Spirit, it is a thing we know not, neither do
you know what you mean by it, we renounce any such thing: but the Assistance of
the Spirit of God we own and pray for.


Pa. 123. The Apostles either had the private Spirit, or they had not.


Pro. What you mean by the private Spirit, is best known to your self: But that
Assistance of the holy Spirit which we hope for, and God has promised, they
had.


Pa. If they had, why then did they call a Council? Acts 19.


Pro. I appeal to your self, whether that is an Argument that they had not even
a greater, viz. An infallible Assistance of the Spirit attending every one in
particular, which if they had, you cannot deny them the Assistance we plead for.


Pa. 24. Your private Spirit either is of God, or it is not.


Pro. The Assistance of the holy Spirit promised an^ given to every private
Man, who seeks it with Humility and Prayers, is of God.


Pa. Why then are there so many disagreeing Sects among you?


Pro. There are no disagreeing Sects among us in matters of Faith, in which
alone the Assistance of the Holy Spirit is given.


Pa. 125. A Man endowed with your private Spirit either can interpret
Scripture, or he cannot.


Pro. A Man endowed with the Spirit of God (which in the only assisting Spirit)
can interpret Scripture aright.


Pa. If they can, what need have you of Preachers?


Pro. To instruct the ignorant, to convince the erroneous, to stir up the
negligent, to excite the slothful, to comfort the Brokenhearted, and
Administer the holy Sacraments.


Pa. But after all, no Man will believe any thing but what his Spirit suggests
unto him.


Pro. No Man ought to believe any thing but what the Spirit of God suggests
unto him, either by the Scriptures, the Law of Nature, or internal Convictions;
for which he makes use of Ministers as the Means.


FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Desire the Gentlemen against whom I write, would deal so fairly with me; as
to let me and the World know what Scandals and Calumnies they aim at in their
Caution to their Adversaries, and who they are, who they say could never learn
to speak or write Truth, and what those sores are which they threaten to rip
up; a few words will explain their meaning, which is there a little dark.


