Imprimatur, Liber cui Titulus, The Missionarie's Arts Discovered, etc.

Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo Patri, ac Domino Domino, Wilhelmo Archiep.
Cantuar. a Sacr. Domest.
Feb. 28. 1687/8.
ERRATA.
In the Preface.
PAge, 7. Line 39. in marg. r. avons. Ibid. l. 40. r. done. p. 14. l. 36, in
marg. after danse r. a la.

In the Book.
PAge, 2 l. 20. r. acknowledged. Ibid. 13. l. 5. dele of. p 22. l. 21. r.
pretenses. p. 24. l. 29. r. Tower. p. 36. l. 5. r. those Pillars. p. 43. l. 4.
dele. 3. p 47. l. 5. r. given. Ibid. l. 13 r. Barbarini. p. 48. l. 3r. r. as.
p. 53. l. 12. dele when. p. 54 l. 33. r. vigorous. p. 67. l. 13. r.
unwillingly. p. 76. l. 31. after the r. decisions of the. p. 78. l 19. r
Ireland. p, 81, l, 10, r, exposed. p, 82* 28, for and r, had. p, 90, for LEAVE,
r, BELIEVE, p. 96, l, 24, dele a.

In the Margin.
PAge 6, line 8* r, fimo. p, 11. l. 15, r, p, 9. p. 20, l, 9, r, perjurii.
Ibid, r, aeternae. p 23. l. 5. 1602. p. 30, l. 5, after Epistle r, of
Epiphanius, p, 32, l, 11, r, commecdavit. p. 53. l, 13, (...), p, 64, l, 8. for
in r, and. p, 69, l, 1, r, c, 18. p, 70, l, 4, r, misrep. p, 83, l, 4, r,
Contz. Ibid. r, sect, 8, Ibid, l, 6 r, p, 78, p, 89, l, 10. r, pigritia, p, 90,
l, 7, r, p, 10. In some of the French Quotations, the (e) is left without an
Accent, which with some few literal faults the Reader will easily amend.

THE MISSIONARIE'S ARTS DISCOVERED: OR, AN ACCOUNT of their Ways of
INSINUATION, their ARTIFICES and several METHODS of which they serve themselves
in making CONVERTS.

WITH A LETTER to Mr. PVLTON, challenging him to make good his Charge of
Disloyalty against PROTESTANTS.

AND, An HISTORICAL PREFACE, containing an ACCOUNT of their introducing the
HEATHEN GODS in their Processions, and other Particulars relating to the
several CHAPTERS of this TREATISE.

Jer. 12.6. Believe them Not though they speak fair Words unto thee.

Tertull. Adv. Valent. Habent Artificium quo prius persuadent quam edoceant.
Veritas autem docendo persuadet, non suadendo docet.

Persius. Sat. 5. -- front politi,
Astutam vapido servant sub pectore vulpem.
LONDON, Printed, and Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall. MDCLXXXVIII.

To the Reverend Mr. Pulton, Jesuit and Schoolmaster in the Savoy.
Reverend Sir,
THough the Author of the The Primit. Rule before the Reformat. par* 2. p. 23.
Ant. 1663. 4 to.
Answer to Dr. Pierce's Sermon had the hardiness to affirm, that it is evident
more Rebellions have been raised against Princes for Religion only, in this
last Reformed Age, in a few Protestant Countries, than have been raised by
Catholics for any cause whatsoever, in seven Ages before throughout all
Christendom; wherein he is seconded by another, who with the same modesty tells
the world, that in this last Century, See Vindic of the (...) the (...) p. 116.
(...) 1679. 4 to.
there have been more Princes deposed and murdered for their Religion by
Protestants, than have been in all the other since Christ's time by the
attempts and means of Roman Catholics: Yet these Gentlemen were so politic,
as to avoid the infamy which a Confutation would subject them to, by concealing
themselves from the world: But what either a Sense of their inability, or a
consciousness of their immodesty hindered them from prosecuting, you have very
freely engaged your self to perform; by renewing their Assertion, Mr, Pulton's
Acc. p. 18.
and advising your learned Adversary not to meddle with the Subject of the
Disloyalty of your Party, lest you return the Charge upon the Reformed Churches.

But, Sir, we are not to be frighted with blustering words; nor will your
informing us that Mr. Pulton's Remarks, p. 31, 32.
you have many Remarks in store to show that whatever Catholics have judged in
the Theory about the deposing Power, it was the Reformers who reduced it to
practice, and that you will produce them if farther provoked, terrify us any,
more than your several Volumes of Collections out of the Fathers, which you
boast of; we know, Sir, your Assertion is untrue, and therefore are not afraid
to bring it to the Test.

I DO THEREFORE HERE CHALLENGE YOU AS YOU WOULD NOT APPEAR A SLANDERER, AND
GUILTY OF VENTING A MOST PERNICIOUS AND NOTORIOUS FALSEHOOD, AS YOU VALUE THE
HONOR OF YOUR CHURCH, AND YOUR OWN REPUTATION, TO PUBLISH THOSE REMARKS YOU
SAY YOU HAVE MADE; AND VINDICATE YOUR SELF, OR ELSE ACKNOWLEDGE THAT YOU HAVE
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED AN ASSERTION, WITHOUT REGARD EITHER TO TRUTH OR MODESTY.

I must confess in any other case I should be apt to censure my self for the
freedom of this Address, but it is certainly a time to speak, when a man
pretending to be a Priest of the living and true God, shall in defense of his
Religion ( which if true, needs no such abominable Arts to uphold it,) vent so
bold a Slander, tending to expose the pure Churches of Christ, as Enemies to
their Sovereigns, and so render them odious to those from whom they have all
imaginable Reason to expect Protection, as from nursing Fathers.

I will not tie you up to your own Assertion, that the Reformers have deposed
and endeavored to depose more Princes in the space of one hundred and fifty
years, Mr. Pulton's acc. p. 18.
than the Roman Catholics had done in sixteen hundred; for you will be more
puzzled to find a Papist in the first Centuries of that period, Dr. T's Acc. of
the Conference, p. 16.
than you were to tell under what Pope the fourth Council of Lateran was
assembled.

Nor do I desire the enquiry should be confined to the term of the last seven
hundred years on the Romish side, which the above cited Author pitched upon;
Prim. Rule bef. the Ref. par. 2. p. 23*
but will freely remit you above five hundred of that, and in the time since
the Reformation do engage my self to prove what I have asserted p. 76. of this
Treatise.

I do not much expect an Answer to this Challenge, Vind. of the Sincer. of the
Prot. Relig. p. 61. etc. Land. 1679. 4 to. I have defied them now seventeen
years to call me in question before our Judges, and so I do still.
for those men who could lie near twenty years under such a Charge as Dr. Du
Moulin laid against them, and dared them to call him to an account for, the
Murder of K. Charles the First, without ever venturing to clear themselves, may
easily bear this; Besides your Champions have of late left their Doctrines to
defend themselves.

However I once again renew the Challenge, which if you accept, it will soon be
seen that you are not alone, guilty of such insincere and immodest dealing,
Reply to the Def. of the Exposit. of the Doct. of the Chapter of Eng. Pref. p. 12.
since the Vindicator of Mr. de Meaux has told the world, that not only the
protestations but the practices of the Romanists have justified them in the
point of Obedience to Princes.

A little time will show who is in the right; for having your Remarks ready, I
suppose we need not expect long, if you have any design to justify your self,
and think you are able; but if not, do but own your rashness and error, which
in duty you are bound to do, that the Church of God may have some reparation
for so bold a Calumny; and notwithstanding this freedom you shall find me on
all occasions,

Reverend Sir Your most Obedient Servant as far as Love to Truth will permit
ANONYMUS.

ADVERTISEMENT.
GOod and Solid Reasons why a Protestant should not turn Papist, or Protestant
Prejudices against the Roman Catholic Religion in a Letter to a Priest. Sold
at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1688.

THE PREFACE.
THE Design of the ensuing Discourse is laid down in the Introduction; so that
the business of this Preface is chiefly to supply some particulars which either
are omitted or could not conveniently be inserted in the Book it self.

. 1. The device of bewitching men's Senses with Pomp and Show, I have both
mentioned and exposed, yet is it looked upon so considerable in that corrupt
Church, that it is not only defended by Cardinal Pallavicini, and thrust into
the number of the Notes whereby they pretend to distinguish their Church from
all others; and prove that it is the only true one; but so much Stress laid
upon it, that it seems one of the main Pillars of the Roman Fabric; which if
we may believe one of the Learnedest Divines of France, could not subsist
without it. The world (says he) could not bear a Religion calculated only for
Philosophers; The People did not know what it was to think, and to govern
themselves by the impressions that abstracted thoughts made on their Minds,
they must have outward things to strike upon their Senses and Imaginations: to
amuse, to terrify, Three Letters concern. the Pres. State of Italy. p. 83.
and to excite them; so Legends, dreadful Stories, and a pompous Worship were
necessary to make the Impressions of Religion go deep into such course Souls:
from whence he concluded, that the Reformation had reduced the Christian
Religion to such severe terms, that it was only a Religion for Philosophers:
Thus these Gentlemen contradict themselves, one while pretending that our
Religion is founded upon such loose Principles, See Chap. 5.
as require no Strictness nor Mortification of its Professors; at another time
advancing a charge which would sound well in the Mouths of any but such as bend
their whole Endeavors to find a way for men to go to Heaven and keep their
sins too, and who blame the Reformed Churches for nothing more than their
calculating their Doctrines in opposition to the Laziness and Lusts of men as
their great Master, whose steps they follow, did before them.

The Precepts of Christianity are so severe in themselves, that the Founders of
the Papal Greatness could not find their Interest in too strictly pressing the
Observation of them; the ambitious, the covetous and the luxurious man can see
nothing there to gratify his predominant Desire; and seeing such a Grandeur as
that of the Papacy could not be upheld by those melancholy Virtues of Humility,
contempt of the World, Meekness and Mortification; there must be some method
found to dispense with them: the first step in the prosecution of this design
was; to draw men insensibly from the Contemplation of the more spiritual part
of Religion, to external Pomp, which by charming the Senses might keep them so
fixed as to afford no leisure for inward reflections; while the spirits being
dilated and the Affections raised by the impression they make on the beholders
of them, those superficial Emotions, are highly extolled for divine Transports,
and the operations of the holy Spirit.

They knew well that nothing renders any thing more odious to the vulgar, than
to represent it in a ridiculous manner; and therefore instead of the more
rational way of convincing men's Understandings, they have taken up the method
of jeering men out of their Opinions; though the shame sometimes (as it ought
always to do among thinking men) returns upon themselves; as it did See (...) a
RR. PP. Jesuits. Sur leur procession de Luxembourg, Du 20. May, 1685. p. 2. 12
s.
when they attempted to ridicule the Jansenists in a procession at Mascon in
the year 1651.

I have noted the concession of Baronius, that the Heathen Rites and Ceremonies
were purposely introduced among the Romanists in their service of God; and I
thought that pretty difficult to do without violating the very first Principles
of Christianity; but the And not only they, but the Jesuits of Aix in Provence
have done the same and there is nothing more usual among those of Goa in the
East Indies. See Avis anx R.R. P. P. Jesuits des Aix en Provence. Col. 1687.
12s. and De la Vall^'s Travels. p. 203.208. Land. 1665. Fol.
Jesuits of Luxembourg have found a way to consecrate not only the Pagan
Rites, but their Gods too, to the service of the Blessed Virgin, which they
pretend is the service of God.

The Relation is of such nature, and so scarce even in French, that I am sure
the Reader will not be displeased to see, what a profane puppet-shew they make
of Religion, and to what Extravagances their humor of gorgeous Shows carries
them.

Avis a RR. PP. Jesu. p. 5. Pendant que la procession marchera elle rencontrera
dans le ville, diverse Theaters, don't les spectacles differens, serviront a
inspirer agreeablement la piet^ envers N^tre Dame de Consolation. Mars command
a ses Guerriers, and a Vulcaine, Bronte, Ste^ope, Pyracmon, and autres anciens
Bombardiers de prendre guard de ne plus fair aucune insulte a la Chapelle de
N. Dame de consolation. -- Mot. pour le Dieu Mars Procul o, procul este profani.
There were several Pageants carried through the Town which they tell us were
designed to inspire agreeable Sentiments of Piety toward our Lady of
Consolation; in one of them sat Mars the God of War, who commanded his
Soldiers, not to do any mischief to the Chapel of our Lady of Consolation;
and the word for this God, was, Procul, O procul este profani. As if any thing
could be more profane than this Heathen Deity in a Christian procession; no
doubt the people were wonderfully excited to piety by this Object introduced
into one of the most solemn Acts of their Religion.

Id. p. 6. Ceres, Flore, Pomone, les Naiades, les Nymphs des Prairies, and des
Bois, se rejouissent du retour de Notre Dame de Consolation, a la Campaign. --
Mot des Nymphs, and dez Divinitez rustiques -- Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt
Saturnia Regna.
Then came Ceres, Flora, Pomona, the Naiades, the Nymphs of the Field and of
the Groves, rejoicing for the return of our Lady of Consolation; (whose Image
they were conducting to her Chapel) and the word for these rustic Divinities,
was, -- Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna.

Ibid. p. 7. La Renommee accompann^e de la Religion, de la verite, and de la
Gloire, publie au monde que Louis le grande n'et pas moin illustre par la
solid piete envers la Saint Vierge, que par l'eclat de ses Victoires. Mot
pour des quatre Nymphs, Cedant arma sacris.
Then four Nymphs, Fame, Religion, Truth and Glory, the first of which
affirmed, that Lewis the Great was as illustrious for his piety toward the
holy Virgin, as for his many Victories; and the word for them all was, Cedant
arma sacris. Religion was certainly very much advanced in the esteem of the
Beholders, who saw her put in the same rank with Fame and Glory.

After them came Ibid. p. 8. La Joye, la Force, la Abondance, and la Sante
effets ordinaires de N. Dame de Consolation, marchent a la test des vi^es du
Luxembourg pour marquer que ces agreeables Nymphs ont persuade a toute la
Province de se mettre sous la protection de la Saint Vierge.
Joy, Fortitude, Plenty and Health, the ordinary effects of our Lady of
Consolation; at the head of the Towns of that Province, persuading them to put
themselves under the Protection of the Virgin; who La Province du Luxembourg*
fait voir sur son char la Ste Vierge triomphante, and montre d'un cote la paix,
l'abondance and les beaux arts; and de l'autre Mars, and Bellone dans les
Chains. On comprend assez de son geste and de sa contenance qu'elle attribue
l'eloignement de ses maux and le retour de son bonheur a la protection de sa
chere Patronne. p. 9.
appeared in triumph, with Peace, Plenty and Learning on one side, on the other
Mars and Bellona in Chains; who discovered by their looks that the deliverance
of that Country from War was only to be attributed to their Patron the
Blessed Virgin. Which was farther expressed in these following Verses; Ibid.

Si Mars arreste ses Guerriers.
Si le sang repandu ne tient plus des (Lauriers)
Et si la Paix long temps bannie,
Et l'abondance and les beaux art's,
Rentrent dans nos heureux Remparts,
Cest l' effet du repos que nous done Marie

Mars says the word, the Sword devours no (more;)
Our Laurels are no longer died in Gore,
Peace, which we long desired and wished in (vain)
Learning and Plenty are returned again;
To Mary's Bounty we these Blessings owe
Who freely does this sweet Repose bestow.


And the three Ibid. p. 12. Inscription pour les trois Gentes, de l' Eglise, de
la France, and du Luxembourg.
Genii of the Church, of France, and of Luxembourg, are made to speak thus, By
an irrevocable Law we three Pard' immuables Loix,
Nous conspirons tous trois,
A celebrer les grandeurs de Marie,
Nos Clefs, nos Lions, and nos Lis,
Luy sont par faitement soumis.
Le Ciel benit cette belle harmony
Qui tient nos coe^rs si bien unis,
Et la terre en par^it rav^e*


To Celebrate Great Mary's Praise agree,
Our 1. Keys and 2. Lillies we to her submit
Our 3. Lions humbly couch beneath her Feet.
The Heavenly Powers bless this Accord of Heart,
In which the Earth seems to bear a part.
1. The Arms of the Church. 2. The Arms of France. 3. The Arms of Luxembourg.


From the praise of the Virgin they pass to another Subject; but still
designing to raise Devotion in the Spectators, where they bring in Ibid. p. 15.
Louis XIII. de glorieuse memoire accompagne de sa Cou^ qui offer sa person,
and son Royaume, a la Saint vierge -- Inscription pour Louis le Just.

Just en la Paix, just en la Guerre,
Louis repandit par la Terre,
Un Nom que la justice orna deces appas
Mais ce Monarque Auguste
jamais ne fut plus just,
Que quand trazant la regle aux autre Potentats,
A la Rein e du Ciel ii offrit ces Estats.

Lewis the Thirteenth, dedicating himself and Kingdom to our Lady; for which
they extol him in these Lines.

Lewis whose Virtues Fame resounds a far
Lewis the just in Peace, the just in War,
Was never so just as in one glorious Deed,
By which he did even himself exceed:
And has a Rule to other Princes given,
Offering his Kingdom to the Q. of Heaven.
And thus having introduced false Gods to honor the Virgin, in the next place
they endeavor the same by false Assertions, for Ibid. p. 16. La Victoire and
les Vertus chargees de Palms and couronnees de Lauriers, qui representent en
plusieur^ Tableaux les grandes actions de nostre invincible Monarque faite pour
l' honneur and le service de la Saint Vierge.
Victory and the Virtues, carrying Palms and crowned with Laurels, expose upon
seven Tablets the great Actions of the present French King, Inscription pour
Louis le Grand.
Pendant que la Terre ^tonnee
Decent prodiges inouis
Que fait l' admirable Louis
Ne comprend pas Le But de cette destinee,
Le Ciel applaudissant a ses faits glorieux
Nous Dit que ce Grand Roy S'acquerant (la Victoire,)
Travaille bien moins pour sa Gloire
Que pour l' honneur de la Reine des (Cieux.)

which he performed for the honor of the Virgin.

But because the World would not easily believe that the ensuing Particulars,
were undertaken with that Design; they pretend a revelation of it, which like
the old Heathen Oracles is delivered in verse.

An Inscription for Lewis the Great* While the whole World his mighty Actions
sees,
It wonders at the amazing Prodigies
Before unheard of; but the true Design
It cannot find, because it cannot Divine:
That lay unknown to all, from all concealed,
Till Heaven applauding it, the cause revealed;
He sought not Glory for himself alone,
But he preferred the Virgins to his own,
To honor her more than himself he fought.
And won his Victories her Glory to promote.


Then descending to Particulars, Ibid. p. 17. Tableau 1. Eglises de diees a
Nostre Dame baties, reparees, and ornees.
the first Tablet tells us of Churches built and dedicated to the Blessed
Virgin.

The Ibid. Prise de la Hollande and retablissement du culte de la Vierge dans
les Temples reconciliez.
second sets forth the taking of so many Towns in Holland, and re-establishing
the Worship of the Virgin in their Churches.

The Ibid. p. 18. Adversaries du culte de la Mere de Dieu chassez de
Port Royal, and de la France.
third informs us that the Enemies of the Virgin are driven from Port Royal and
out of France.

In the Ibid. p. 19. Mahometans Ennemis de Jesus Christ, and de Marie punis de
Alger.
fourth they tell us that the Algerines were punished by the French Bombs for
being Enemies to Mary.

The Ibid. 20. Defaite de l' heresy Ennemie de la Mere de Dieu.
fifth brags of the extinction of the Heretics in France Enemies of the Mother
of God.

The P. 21, 22. Le Roy met fin a la guerre contraire aux honneur de nostre Dame
de Cons^^ation. -- Paix redonnee a ^^ Europe qui va retablir la surete a la
campagn^ ensuite les Pelerinages. and les autres devoirs de piete que l'on a
coust^me de render a nostre Dame de Consolation.
sixth and seventh are much to the same purpose, importing that the French King
has put an end to the War, which was so dishonorable to our Lady, so that now
they can go on Pilgrimage and pay their Devotions to her.

These Tablets are composed of so many false and ridiculous Materials, that I
cannot forbear inserting some Reflections which one of the Roman Communion has
made upon them; who P. 17. Il ne parroit par aucun act public qu^ la guerre,
contre les Hollandois ait este pour cause de Religion: and de plus pour quoy
pretendre que le but du Roy, dans la reconciliation de quelques Temples en
Hollande ait este le cul^e de la Vierge plustot que l' adoration du S.
Sacrament, and le retablissement en general de la Religion Catholic. N'est ce
pas donner lieux aux heretics de croire qu'on met toute la Religion dans le
cul^e de la Vierge cequi ne leur peut etre qu' un grand sujet de scandale?
wonders that they should pretend the War of Holland was on a Religious
Account; but is very much scandalized at their telling the world that the
Reconciliation of the Churches was in honor of the Virgin, while they take no
notice of the greater parts of their Worship then restored; which passage he
freely acknowledges would incline one to believe, that they place all Religion
in the Adoration they pay to her.

He positively P. 18. Car c'en est une horrible adire -- Il est faux, etc.
affirms that the second Tablet is absolutely false; and P. 19. Ory eut il
jamais une plus grand chimere que de vouloir qu'il act fait bombarder Alger,
pour punir les Mahometans de ce qu'ils sont ennemis de Jesus and de Marie. Il
fau droit donc qu'il eut mis pour condition dans la paix qu'il a fair depuis
auec eux, qu' a l' avenir ils porteroient plus d' honneur a la Saint Vierge.
laughs at the Inscription of the third, for if the design against Algiers had
been to punish them for their Enmity to our Lady, they would certainly have
been obliged by the Articles of Peace, to render her more Honor for the future.

He P. 20. Nous nous plaignons avec raison de ce que les Heretics pour nous
render odieux nous imputent beaucoup de chooses que nous avous toujours soustenu
N'estre poiut les sentimens de l' Eglise Catholic. Nous devons done garder le
mesme equite envers eux. Or ils toujours proteste qu'ils n' etoient point
Ennemis de la Vierge,
charges them with misrepresenting those they call Heretics in the fifth
Inscription, who he says are no Enemies to the Blessed Virgin, and that in the
P. 21. Orn'est ce pas Louis le Grand qui a assiege cette place, vous ne le
representez done point comme fort de vot a la Saint Vierge puis qu'un di^ant
d'unepart qu'il a mi^ fin a la guerre contraire aux honneurs de Nostre Dame de
Consolation, nous f^ites ^^^endre de l' autre qu'il a fait un^ guerre contraire
aux honneurs de Nostre Dame de Consolation.
sixth they have represented that great Prince (whom they designed to flatter)
as an Enemy to the Q. of Heaven, while they tell us that the War of Luxembourg
was dishonorable to her* when all the World knows the City was besieged and
taken by that Monarch.

And indeed the whole Procession throughout was such a piece of Heathenish
Pomp, that the same Author though a ROMANIST P. 3. Ces mannieres Theatrales d'
honorer la Mere de Dieu, sont si indignes de la gravite de la Religion
Chrestienne, and qui ne peuvent que donner sujet aux Ennemis de l' Eglise de
decrier la devotion que les fidelles ont a la Saint Vierge, and de la fair
passer pour un culte superstitieux and profane.
complains of it as unworthy the gravity of the Christian Religion, and which
is sufficient to make the Worship of the Blessed Virgin be looked upon as
superstitious and profane; P. 11. Et en effet comment peut on croire que tant
de persons peu spirituelles que la curiosite a fait trouver a cette feste,
ayent pu avoir une attention raisonnable a cet auguste mystere parmi tant de
vains spectacles qui rempliss^ient leur esprit de continuelles distractions and
qui les port^ient incessemment a penser a toute autre chose.
for (says he) can any one believe that it was possible for so many persons of
all sorts as were Spectators out of Curiosity, and little enough acquainted
with spiritual things, to have any serious reflections upon the great Mysteries
of Religion in the midst of so many vain Shows which continually distract the
Mind, and insensibly lead it to other Subjects.

These Considerations are so Weighty with that Reverend Ibid. On Szait aussi qu
c'est pour ce la que M. l' Archeveque de Malines avoit defendu avec grand
raison non seulement de meler des chooses profanes aux chooses Saints dans les
Processions; mais m^sme d^y porter les Images des Saints quand on^y port le S.
Sacrament, parce que l' experience a fait connoitre, que c'est un suj^t de
tentation, a la p^us grande part du peuple, qui s' occupe bien d' avantage a
regarder ces Images, s^ornees and si bien parees, qu'^ rentrer dans soymem^
pour adorer Jesus Christ, etc.
Prelate the Archbishop of Mechlin, that he has prohibited not only such
profane Spectacles in their Processions; but even the carrying the Images of
their Saints, at the same time with the Sacrament, which is found by Experience
prejudicial to Devotion, the generality of the people being so busied in
observing the curious Images, and their rich Ornaments, that they have no
leisure for serious Devotion. And this perhaps is one of the Reasons why that
Bishop is said to be a Jansenist and but little esteemed among them.

Neither is it altogether to be passed over that these Jesuits could not be
content to expose those Pagan Deities under the names of Gods and Divinities,
to the Eyes of the Spectators, but they have also With this Title. La Ste
Vierge Patron Honoree and bien faisante dans la France, and dans le
Luxembourg, Dessein de la Procession qui se ^erapar les Ecoliers du Colege de
Compagnie de Jesus, a Luxembourg le 20. May 1685. Jour auquel l'image miracule
use de Notre Dame de Consolation Patron du Duche de Luxembourg and Compte de
Chiny sera reportee de la Capitale de la Province en sa Chapelle.
published an Account of the Procession, which because I could not procure, I
have given but an imperfect Relation from the Adviser; but which I think is
sufficient to the end for which I have inserted it, and I appeal to all the
world whether it be possible for such a representation, wherein Avis p. 10.
Parmi tant de chooses profanes and de verses de Poets Payense il n'y a pas un
seul mots de l' Ecriture, qui auroit du fair seule les ornemens d' une
Procession vrayment Chretienne. --
there is not one word of Scripture, but several passages out of Heathen Poets;
nothing of Religion, of the Benefits and Beauties of it, but Pagan Divinities
bestowing Blessings, delivering from War, etc. and such a medly of Falsities,
to tend any way to promote Holiness, when every particular is in it self
destructive of it.

. 2. Every day furnishes us with fresh Instances of the strange immodesty of
these Gentlemen; I have shown p. 29, 30, 31. that it is an usual practice among
them when pressed with any passage out of the Fathers or other Writers, to deny
that they wrote the Book out of which it is quoted; or else to set themselves
to devise some interpretation by which to avoid its force, the Reader will find
several Instances of it, and that the Inquisitors and other of their Divines
defend this Method, and advise to use it; but Mr. Meredith without any proof,
affirms, that when the Work of any Father is quoted by Catholics, M^r.
Remarks. p. 70.
if it were ever doubted of there is no remedy but it must pass for spurious,
and when it shall happen to be undoubted, they will do as much as in them lies
to render it dubious, at least in those places which are quoted. But when
nothing of this will do, their last shift is Interpretation: And this (he says)
is one of the methods which the Protestants use in their Disputations.

It Is true, the Papists have forged so many Authors, and corrupted others to
that degree, that it is reason enough to be suspicious of every thing they
publish; but we are so far from doing this, that the Books we call in question
are such as have Evident Characters of Forgery in them, and which are suspected
by the learned Romanists themselves; we fairly propose our Objections to be
answered, which generally have that Weight as to convince the more knowing of
our Adversaries; we decry all such shifts as this Gentleman mentions, while any
one that looks into the second Chapter of the following Discourse will find,
that it is a Rule among those of his Communion, to invent some favorable
Exposition, or deny the Authority and genuineness of the Author.

The Charge shows so much* impotent Malice, which would fain be doing some
mischief, that I am apt to believe it is rather an insinuation of some furious
Missionary, than the real product of Mr. Meredith's Pen; who seems more zealous
than spiteful in his erroneous Profession, and knowing no better, may perhaps
be prevailed on to publish another pretended Observation, which neither he nor
any for him can make good: If they can, it is incumbent on them to prove it, by
as full Evidence as I have given of their being guilty of this dis-ingenuous
Artifice.

I know the Methods of these Gentlemen too well to let any thing pass, which
may be liable to an Exception without preventing it; if they would fairly
answer a Discourse, I would wait till they publish their Objections, but the
trick of running about and casting virulent Reflections upon particular Passages
in private, makes it necessary for me to give the reason why I affirm, that the
cause of the great bitterness against the Waldenses was, P. 82.
their freedom in taxing the vices of the Pope and Clergy; I could demonstrate
the truth of it from what is acknowledged by themselves of those poor people,
who could deserve such Treatment upon no other account, seeing according
Rainer. cont. Wald. c. 4* ^olummodo Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant and clerum.
to Rainerus their bitter Enemy they were blameless in every thing, but that
they spoke against the Roman Church and Clergy; but I will confirm my Assertion
with the Authority of the Sieur du Haillan. l' Hist. du France. p. 511. Et bien
quils eussent des mauvaises opinions, si est ce qu'ell ne susciterent pas tant
la haine du Pape, and des grands Princes, and des Ecclesiastiques contre Eux,
que fut la liberty du language; ce fut le principal Point qui lesmit en haine
universalle and qui les charger de plu^ de mes chantes opinions, qu'ils n'en
avoyent.
Sieur du Haillan, in his History of Philip the Second, who affirms, that though
they had some ill Opinions, yet they did not irritate the Pope and Princes and
Clergy against them, so much as their freedom of Speech did; which brought upon
them an universal hatred, and caused so many abominable Tenets to be falsely
imputed to them.

This Testimony coming from a Roman Catholic of his Quality, both confirms my
Observation and shows the Original of those Misrepresentations and Calumnies we
labor under, that they are purely in prosecution of their Doctrine, which
avows the lawfulness of slandering another to preserve ones honor; a position
which is owned and defended by their greatest Casuists, and which they reduce
into practice upon all occasions, as I have proved in the third Chapter.

3. Thus they dealt with Molinos, a few Months since at ROME insinuating that
his design was, under the pretense of raising men to a higher strain of
Devotion, to wear out of their minds the Sense of the Death and Sacrifice of
Christ, See the Acc. of the Quietists in Three Letters concerning the present
State of Italy. p. 27, 28. etc.
and attempting to persuade the people that he was descended of a Jewish or
Mahometane Race, and carried in his Blood or first Education some seeds of
those Religions; to which they added several immoral Crimes, though they were
ashamed to insist upon them in his process, so that their slanderous Reports
have gained but very little Credit.

They have been so kind of late as to let us see who they were that first
devised those noisie Calumnies that most of the Clergy of our Church were
Papists, by appearing barefaced and endeavoring to prove that the whole
Controversy lay between the Dissenters and the Church of Rome; since when, In
the Agreement between the Chapter of Engl. and the Chapter of Rome.
one of their greatest Champions has put on the disguise of a Letter from a
Dissenter, Land. 1687. 4 to. p. 2, 3. See the Answer to it, and Primitive
Fathers no Papists. p. 4, 5.
Dissenter, and attempted to persuade us that the Learned Answerer of Nubes
Testium held several Popish Principles, and that it would be all one to join
with the Papists or the Church of England: but he was soon discovered by his
ingenious Adversary, and so exposed for his wretched Artifice that if he had
not a face of an unusual Composition he would blush to appear in public after
such a shameful trick: which I hope will make our Brethren the Dissenters more
cautious how they entertain such Surmises of those men, who so learnedly and
successfully oppose Popery, when they who would be thought the only true
Protestants, are content to sit still, and be lookers on.

I expect to have the The Title of it is, Decretum SS. D. N. Innocentii Divina
providentia Papae XI. quo 65. casuistarum propositiones damnavit.
Decree of the 2d. of March 1679. opposed to it, Decree made at Rome 2^. of
March, 1679. Land. 1679. 4 to.
and to have a great many hard names bestowed on me, for daring after that to
lay such Doctrines as are condemned in it to their Charge.

But besides that this Decree is an unanswerable Evidence that those Doctrines
were taught by the Jesuits and other Casuists, it is notoriously known that
these Censures are so little regarded that they are almost contemptible.

The Bern. Ger. Pat. Apolog. p. 135, 136. Trans Alps Catholici non aeque se
vel Concilii [Tridentini] vel congregationis [Romanae,] legibus subjecerunt
adeoque nemo sibi privilegium arrogari patitur, quod aliis plerisque omnibus
liberum esse ac solutum videat; qua quidem in re nihil eos peccare, ipse
Gretserus Jesuita, in libro suo primo de jure and more, prohibendi libros
malos. c* 38. -- demonstrat. In Hispania autem alio librorum vetitorum indice
utuntur, eoque ^it ut plures libri palam ibi venales prostant, quos in Italia
legere piaculare sit, sic rursum alios ibi legere nefas habent quos Romae
nemini Religio sit cognoscere, Veneti nostri, satis se Catholici hominis
officio fungi arbitrantur, si libris fidem Catholicam bonosque mores ex
professo oppugnantibus se abstineant; caeterum nec Romano nec Hispanico
Librorum Indice se obligari patiuntur, neque eo nom^ne quisquam adhuc Romanorum
Ponti^icum Venetae Reipublicae nego^^^m ^ace^ere animum induunt, etc.
Apologist for the Decree of the Senate of Venice against the Jesuits, tells
us, that on this side the Alps the Censures of the Roman Congregation are so
little valued, that every person is at liberty to read those Books, which they
condemn; whose practice in this point is defended by Gretzer. That in Spain
they have an Index of prohibited Books peculiar to themselves, whereby those
Books are frequently allowed, which are forbidden at Rome, and many others
which are permitted there, are censured in it; but at Venice they observe
neither Index, nor do they admit of any of the Roman Decrees; which indeed are
in themselves of no moment being often grounded See St. Amour's Journal, Par.
4. chapter 7.
on mistakes and misconceptions, by which the best Books are sometimes
prohibited and condemned. So that See his Letter at large in the History of the
Irish Remonstr. p. 524.
Doctor Holden assures us that among all thinking and sober men there is little
or no regard had to them.

And it is impossible to be otherwise: when a Book shall upon the most strict
Examination be twice approved and yet afterward condemned as contrary to the
Faith; which is the Case of Doctor Molinos at this time; whose Treatise
entitled the Spiritual Guide was in the year 1675. printed with the
Approbation of the Archbishop of Rheggio, See the Letter about the Quietists
p. 19, 25, 26, 33, 34 39.
the General of the Franciscans, D'Eparsa a Jesuit, and Qualificator of the
Inquisition, and two others, and received with great Applause in all places,
even of the Present Pope himself, who lodged him in his Palace, and gave
several marks of a great esteem* for him: and when his Book and the Discourses
of the now Cardinal Petrucci were afterward upon some complaints, brought
before the Inquisition, and severely* examined; they were again approved, and
the Answers which the Jesuits had writ censured as scandalous; but upon the
Interposition of the French King the same Treatises were condemned by that very
Court which had approved them, Molinos publicly exposed and sentenced to
perpetual imprisonment. Cardinal Petrucci under disgrace, and the Pope himself
so far suspected, that some were deputed by the Inquisition to examine him, so
Heretical were those Opinions now, which but a little before were sound and
Orthodox.

That Passion and Interest as Doctor In his Letter before cited.
Holden observes, influence all the determinations of that Court is so well
known to our English Romanists, that the Author of Nubes Testium, not only
read, but transcribed his whole Book out of Alexandre Natalis; though the Pope
had two years before By his breve of July* 10. 1684. wherein are these words.
De Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine omnes and singulos libros supradictos
tenore praesentium damnamus and reprobamus, ac Legi, seu retineri prohibemus
ipsorumque librorum omnium and singulorum impressionem, descriptionem,
lectionem and usum, omnibus and singulis Christi fidelibus etiam specifica and
individua mentione and expressione dignis, sub poena Excommunicationis per
contra facientes ipso ^^cto absque alia declaratione incurrenda -- omnino
interdicimus. See it at large in Nouvelle de la Rep. des Lettres 8vo. 1684.
forbidden all the faithful under pain of incurring Excommunication ipso facto
without any other denunciation, to read, keep, print, transcribe, or use any of
that Friars Works, and when his Learned Adversary Answ. to N^bes Testium in the
Pref. p. 4. Land. 1688. 4 to.
told him of this, he makes so light of it, Primit. Fath* no Prot. p. 7, 8.
as to turn it off with a flout as a matter not worth regarding, and not only
so, but he affirms, that Natalis was then of very good Repute as to his
Authorities and every thing else.

And as little respect have the Romanists of France shown to the Decree of
March 2. 1679. for by the Jesuits means, See Burnet's History of the Regale,
pref p. 38. and his Sermon on Jan. 30. 1680/1.
who informed the Procurator General that since the Court of Inquisition was
not acknowledged in France, it would be prejudicial to the King's Authority to
suffer any Decree made in it to be printed there, a Remonstrance was made to
the Court of Parliament at Paris, and the Censure declared to be of no
Authority in that Kingdom, before the Lord Mayor. p. 21.22.
so an Impression that was made of it was called in, since which it has not
been publicly sold in France.

The pretense of the Jesuits for procuring this Act, was the Honor of the
King, but the true motive appears to be their love to the Propositions
condemned in it; For the first draught of the Declaration of the Parliament had
these words, Though that these propositions are justly condemned; Policy of the
French Clergy. p. 67, 68. When this decree was objected in a Disputation at
Thoulon against one of the Propositions condemned in it, the Moderator who
defended that Position answered, that it was not made by the Pope in
Consistory. And Mr. de la Berchere now A. B. of Aix, ordered the Morals of M.
Abelly (which maintain many of the points censured in that Decree) to be taught
in his Seminary. See Avis au R.R. PP. Jesuits de Aix en Provence sur Imprime
qui a pour Titre, Ballet danse Reception de M l'Arceveque d' Aix. p. 49, 51,
52.61. A. Col. 1687. 12 s.
but Father le Chaise caused them to be struck out.

Thus in this part of the world we find the Censures of that Court, to have no
Authority, and even among those who pretend to own them, a faculty may take off
the Obligation, and they be dispensed with from yielding Obedience to them; and
we know that such private Dispensations are not difficult to be obtained in the
Roman Court. So that upon all accounts the Romanists according to their own
Principles and Practices are at liberty still to teach those Doctrines which
are censured in that Decree; and there is some reason to believe that it was
not designed to hinder them, but only to amaze the world, seeing it was not
made by the Pope in Consistory which would have given it much more Authority,
than the Cardinals of the Court of Inquisition could stamp upon it.

. 4. In the fourth Chapter I have mentioned the Bulla Coenae as a lasting
Evidence of the claim which the Pope lays to a power over Kings, but not having
the Bull by me, I only gave a short hint of it from a late Author of that
Communion: but I find in Cardinal Tolet, that not only the persons there
mentioned are Excommunicated every year, See Tolet. Instruct. Sacerdot. cap.
20. ad 32. Fulminatur contra Hereticis credentes, re^eptat^res, legentes paucas
lineas librorum Haereticorum. -- Appellantes ad futurum Concilium -- imponentes
nova paedagia seu gabellas in terris suis, praeterquam in casibus sibi a jure
ex speciali sedis Apostolicae licentia permissis; qui deferunt ad infideles aut
Haereticos arma and equos, lignamima, eorumque materiam ferrum, filum ferri
stannum, and alia metallorum genera, etc. eos q^i aliqua injuria afficiunt,
venientes ad sedem Apostolicam, -- eos qui avocant causas beneficiales a
commissariis Apostolicis, and authoritate laicali imp^diunt earum cursum; vel
executi^nem literarum Apostolicarum, -- eos qui impediunt Archiepiscopos, etc.
ne possint uti jurisdictione Ecclesiastica; occupantes quaevis loca
jurisdictionis Ecclesiae Romanae, sive sint fructus, sive redditus sine
licentia Romani Pontificis. -- Imponentes onera, decimas, etc. quibuscunque
Personis Ecclesiasticis -- quoscunque Magistratus and quomodo libet se
interponentes in causis criminalibus personarum Ecclesiasticarum -- Protestatur
Pont. absolutionem solennem in Die Jovis Coenae faciendam non comprehendere nec
suffragari ulli ex praedictis, nisi prius a commissis cum vero proposito
similia non committendi destiterent. -- Praecipit in virtutes sanctae
obedientiae Patriarchis, etc. ubi libet constitutis ut, praesentes literas
semel in anno aut pluries in Ecclesiis suis dum in eis major Populi multitudo
ad divina convenerit solemniter publicent.
but that the Absolution which is given the next day after the publishing of
that Bull extends not to such as impose Taxes on their people without the
Pope's Consent, who imprison or punish or otherwise bring a Clergyman into
secular Courts, who harbor Heretics or read so much as two or three lines in
their Books; who furnish Heretics with Arms or Materials for Arms, with Ships
or Timber to build them with; who hinder Appeals or Journeys to Rome, who
hinder the Romish Clergy from exercising their Jurisdiction, and who possess
any Church Lands or Goods; but all these are left under the Sentence of
Excommunication; till by repentance they obtain Absolution from his Holiness;
and all Ecclesiastical Persons are required to publish this Bull in the
greatest Congregations, that all the faithful may know the Contents of it.

Thus his Majesty of Great Britain, the French King, the States of Venice and
Holland, Sweden, Denmark, the Princes of Germany, etc. are Excommunicated by
this Bull; who have done and daily do refuse to observe several, if not every
part of it: and what they look upon an Excommunicated Prince to be may be seen
in their Canon Law, Cause. 15. cann. Nos Sanctorum. Eos qui excommunicatis
fidelitate aut sacramento obstricti sunt, Apostolica auctoritate a juramento
absolvimus, and ne sibi fidelitatem observent omnibus modis prohibemus.
whereby all those who have sworn Allegiance to him are absolved from their
Oaths, and forbid to yield him any manner of Obedience.

I reserve the Account of their Treasons to be published when ever Mr. Pulton
or any for him shall think fit to begin with us, as he has threatened he would
upon the first provocation, WHICH I HAVE GIVEN HIM, but having affirmed, p. 71,
72. that they have been often both in public Courts of justice and in other
places, called upon to renounce the Deposing Power as unlawful, but could not
be persuaded to it; to prevent their Cavils at that Assertion I thought it not
unnecessary to give some few instances which may suffice to prove it.

We are assured by the greatest Statesman of his, and perhaps of any Age, that
the Priests who were apprehended and executed for Treason in his time See
Declarat. of the favorable dealing of her Majesty's Commiss. p. 4. 1583. 4 to.
always restrained their Confession of Allegiance only to be the permissive
Form of the Popes Toleration; As for Example, if they were asked whether they
did acknowledge themselves the Queen's Subjects and would obey her, they would
answer, yes, for they had leave for a time so to do; And at their very
Arraignment when they labored to leave in the minds of the people an opinion
that they were to dye, not for Treason, but for matter of Faith and Doctrine --
they cried out that they were true Subjects, and did and would obey her
Majesty; immediately -- they were asked by the Queens learned Council whether
they would obey and be true Subjects if the Pope commanded the contrary, they
answered by the Mouth of Campion, this place (meaning the Court of her
Majesty's Bench*) has no power to judge of the Holy Fathers Authority; and
other Answer they would not make.

The very same account of them, with some other Particulars, is given us by the
secular Priests, in their P. 68.
Important Considerations; that being asked which part they would take, if the
Pope or any others by his appointment should invade the Realm: some answered,
when that case happened they would then consider what they had best to do;
others, that they were not resolved what to do, and others positively, that if
any such deprivation or invasion should be made for a matter of Faith, they
were then bound to take part with the Pope. Which Mr. Campion was so zealous
for, that he was not contented to affirm that he would take part with his
Holiness, but very earnestly demanded, Pen, Hunt. of the Romans Fox, p. 146, 147.
Ink and Paper that he might sign his Resolution. And Mr. Kirby, Cottom,
Richardson, Ford, Shert, Johnson, Heart and Filbee all Priests, affirmed under
their hands to her Majesty's Commissioners appointed to examine them, that the
Pope has Power to depose Princes, and her Majesty was not to be obeyed against
his Holiness's Bull; in which answer they all agreed, Fowl's Hist. of Romans
Treas. p. 55, 56, 57, 58.
only two sheltred themselves under this general Assertion, That they held as
the Catholic Church held.

And his Majesty of Blessed Memory, K. Premonition p. 291. of his works.
James tells us, that The Conspirators who suffered for the Gunpowder Treason
justified themselves, and even at their deaths would acknowledge no fault;
Account of the Proceedings, p. 126.
And when Faux and Winter were admitted to discourse together in the Tower,
they affirmed, they were sorry that no body set forth a Defense or Apology for
the Action; but yet they would maintain the cause at their death.

Hist. of the Gunp. Treas. p. 29.
When some of the Plotters escaped to Callis, and the Governor assured them of
the King's Favor, and that though they lost their Country they should be
received there, they replied that the loss of their Country was the least part
of their Grief, but their Sorrow was, that they could not bring so BRAVE A
DESIGN to perfection; And not only they who were engaged in it justified the
Design, Copley's Reasons. p. 23.
but Mr. Copley assures us, that he could never meet with any one Jesuit who
blamed it.

Some time after the Jesuits were banished FRANCE for the attempt upon the KING
by Chastel one of their Scholars, when they were soliciting a repeal of that
S^^tence, See Hist. Jesuit. p. 160. Oportetigitur ut illi qui tenent and in
regno vestro manner volunt, eas [sc. opiniones] public in suis collegiis
abjurent.

One was dated Sep. 22. 1606. Another Aug. 23. 1607. A third, Feb. 1. 1608. And
a fourth, May, 30. 1626.


the Parliament of PARIS remonstrated to the KING, that it was absolutely
necessary for them to renounce those treasonable Doctrines of the Popes power
over Princes, or else France could not with safety admit them to return; but
though they were very desirous of admission they would not renounce those
positions for it.

It is notoriously known how many Breves were sent over into England to forbid
the taking the Oath of ALLEGIANCE, which they affirm to contain many things
contrary to the Catholic Faith.

Immediately after the Murder of K. Henry the Fourth of FRANCE, the Jesuits
desired leave to teach Schools in their Colleges, upon which the Parliament
required, that they should first declare, Hist. Jesuit. p. 219, 220, 221, 222,
223, 224, 225.
that it is unlawful for any person to conspire the death of the King, that no
Ecclesiastic has any power over the Temporal Rights of Princes, and that all
are to yield the same obedience to their Governors which Christ gave to
Caesar: these positions were proposed to them to subscribe, but they refused to
do it without leave from their General.

Franck. Ann. p* 6, 7.
Ann. 1614. Father Ogilby a Jesuit was taken in Scotland, who being asked
whether the Pope be judge in Spirituals over his Majesty, refused to answer
except the Question were put to him by his Holiness 's Authority, but affirmed
that the Pope might Excommunicate the King; and that he would not to save his
life, say it is unlawful, if the K. be deposed by the Pope, to kill him.

Cressy's Exomolog. p. 72. Par. 1647. 8 vo.
In the time of the late Confusions, when Mr. Cressy published the Reasons of
his leaving the Church of England and turning Romanist; he therein inserted a
Declaration differing little from the Oath of Allegiance, affirming that all
the Roman Catholics in England were ready to sign it; but his ^uperiors were
of another mind, Lord Clar. against Cressy. P* 76, 77.
and therefore that Edition was soon bought up, and the profession of OBEDIENCE
omitted in the second: and when some English Gentlemen of that Communion had
subscribed certain propositions of the same import with that declaration, Hist.
of the Ir. Remonst. p. 523, 524.
their subscribing was by the Roman Congregation censured as unlawful.

What opposition was made to the Irish Remonstrance, after the King's
Restoration is generally known, and I have given a short account in the third
and fourth Chapters; all that I shall remark here is this, that it was a
Transcript of Mr. Cressy's declaration which the Pope forbad the Irish Clergy,
and they refused to sign; Nay, Hist. of the Ir. Rem. pref. p. 3.4.
when Father Walsh advised them to beg his Majesty's pardon for the Execrable
Rebellion, they not only refused to ask pardon, but so much as to acknowledge
that there was any need of it: affirming publicly, THAT THEY KNEW NONE AT ALL
GVILTY OF ANY CRIME FOR ANY THING DONE IN THE WAR.

They often offered to declare that the Deposing Power was not their Doctrine,
Hist. of Ir. Rem. p. 763.
but could not be persuaded to condemn the Doctrine which abets it as unsound
and sinful, wherein they have been imitated by some late Writers on their
side, See Pap. not misrep. by Prot. p. 58. 1688. 4 to, and Answer to Pap. Prot.
against Prot. Popery. p. 131. Land. 1686. 4 to.

See Three Letters of the pres. State of Italy, p. 46.


who though called upon to affirm it unlawful to maintain such a power over
Kings, would never do it. But though Father Cann would not renounce these
Doctrines, he proposed at Rome that a formal OATH abjuring the OATH of
ALLEGIANCE should be imposed upon those who had taken it; and that all who
should be admitted Students in the Jesuits house, should SWEAR never to take
the OATH; since as he affirmed, a time might come, in which it would be
necessary for their interests, that they be under no such tie to an Heretical
Prince.

. 5. The last Chapter of the following sheets, gives a brief Account of some of
their Artifices to MISREPRESENT the Doctrines of the REFORMED CHURCHES, for
every single instance, I might have given some hundreds, for I never yet saw
any of their controversial writings which represent our Doctrines as they are,
but lest I should be charged with imitating such a bad Example, I desire the
Reader to take notice that the first Quotation out of Securis See p. 8^.
Evangelica is not quoted as a strict Misrepresentation, but to show how while
they Pap. Protest. against Prot. Popery. p. 18.19.
tell us; that the People swallow all down greedily in the lump, that
Antecedents and Consequen^s go down with them all at once, and therefore we
ought not to draw odious Consequences from their Doctrine; they are doing that
which they blame us for, and are licensed to do it by the greatest Licensers of
their Church; now if their Rule be good, then is Father Porter guilty of a
notorious Misrepresentation in that instance, if it be not good, then they must
acquit us from that imputation which with so much Noise and little Reason they
have endeavored to fix upon us: Let them choose which side they think best

. 6. Before I close the Preface I must take notice of one thing more which I
have not touched in the Book it self, it being my design there only to prevent
the danger of their usual manner of Address; which would be of no force if our
People did not give them a very great Advantage, by running on all occasions
into disputes with them; I would not have them kept in ignorance (FOR BLESSED
BE GOD OUR CAUSE NEEDS NO ROMISH ARTS TO UPHOLD IT) but it is an ill-thing to
be making Experiments in Religion, and for unskilful and weak men to be trying
their skill, with those who by reason of their Sophistry will be too hard for
them; I cannot therefore but earnestly request the Reader to keep them (if he
fall into their company) to plain Scripture, which it is his duty to be well
acquainted with; or else to propose their Arguments to some learned Minister,
and I dare appeal to the judgment of any impartial Person, on which side the
truth lies. I designed to have published some directions for the help of the
unlearned, by which they might be able to deal with the Missionaries, but I am
happily prevented by the Learned and Reverend Doctor Sherlock, whose seasonable
and excellent Discourse ought to be in the hands of all PROSTESTANTS, who by it
may be enabled to deal with the greatest Champion among them; In his
Preservative against Popery, Land. 1688. 4 to.
and I am heartily glad that so good a pen has undertaken a work of that
Consequence, and I hope in a little time will oblige the world with the second
part, in the mean while the Answer which has appeared against it has showed
the WORLD how little can be said for Popery. Answer to Dr^ Sherlocks Preser.
against Popery. Land. 1688. 4 to. Pap. prot. against Prot. Popery. p. 17.


. 7. I would not have the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome pretend, that I have
(as one of their celebrated Writers expresses himself) imitated the Scavenger
in stopping no where but at a Dunghill, for I have quoted none but allowed and
approved Authors; such as are daily published with allowance by their Party,
and therefore they ought not to be ashamed of, or such as have been long
received with Applause among them; and as for what I have cited out of
Protestant Books, let them invalidate their Testimony if they can, I will
engage for the truth of my Quotations and know of no Objections against any
Author I have cited which are of any force.

. 8. I design very speedily to publish the SECOND PART giving an account of
several other ARTIFICES, by which they endeavor to possess the people with
favorable Opinions of them; such as their Miracles, the brags of the Holiness
of their Church, of their Succession, Unity and Certainty; of the usefulness of
their Confession, and that all Antiquity is on their side: exposing their
method of disgracing the Holy Scripture, of forging and corrupting Authors, the
sowing several Sects and Heresies to divide us; and that successful Artifice
of disguising and palliating their doctrines; to which add the working on the
peoples affections by asking WHAT IS BECOME OF THEIR POPISH ANCESTORS? and
blinding their judgments by perplexing and sophistical Similitudes; with
several other Topics which they frequently insist on.

But after all that we can do, it is GOD alone must give the Blessing who is the
GOD of TRUTH, to whom if our Prayers be constant and fervent, and our Obedeince
to his Commands universal and sincere, he is engaged by his Promise which can
never fail to keep us in the Truth; in which that all who read this Treatise
may continue unmoved, and order their Conversations so as becomes the GOSPEL of
TRUTH, and HOLINESS, is the hearty Prayer of the AUTHOR of it.

The Catalogue.
That the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome may have all the help in the world to
convince me of Falsifications, if they can; and to spare them that trouble
which they put us to, by careless and ignorant Quotations, I have here given
them a Catalogue of the Books cited in the ensuing Treatise, with their
Editions.

A.
ARcana Societatis Jesu, Edit 1635. 8 vo. Acts of the Conference at Paris, 1566
Land. 1602 4 to. Acosta de noviss. tempor. Ludg. 1592 8 vo. Answer to the
consid. on the Spirit of Martin Luther, Oxford 1687 4 to. Animadv. on
Fanatacism fanatically (...) to the Cath. Church, Land. 1674, 8 vo.
Animadversions on a Sermon of the Bish. of Bath and Wells, Land. 1687 4 to.
Augustini opera, Paris 1571 fol. Ambrosii Opera, Col. 1616 fol. Answer to the
Provin. Letters, Paris, 1659 8 vo. Advice to the confuter of Bellarmine, Land.
1687, 4 to. The Agreement bet. the Chapter of Eng. and the Chapter of Rome, Land, 1687,
4 to. Athanasii Opera, Col. 1686, fol, Answer to the Letter to a Dissenter,
Printed for H. Hills, Land. 1687, 4 to. Answer to two main Questions of the
first Letter to a Dissenter, Land. 1687. 4 to. Answer to a Disc. against
Transub. Land, 1687, 4 to, Avis aux R. R. P. P. Jesuits sur leur Procession de
Luxembourg, Edit. 1685, 12 s. Ans. to the Let. from a Diss. Land, 1688. 4 to.
Answer to Pap. Prot. against Prot Popery, Land, 1686, 4 to. Answer to Dr.
Sherlock's Preservat. against Popery, Land, 1688. 4 to. Avis aux R. R. P. P.
Jesuits d' Aix en Provence. Sur on imprime qui a pour Titre: Ballet danse a la
Reception de Monseigneur Archeveque d' Aix, A Col. 1687. 12 s.
B.
BVrnet's Answer to the Letter of the Fr. Clergy, Land, 1683, 8 vo. Bellarmini
Controvers. Colon. 1628, fol. Baronii Annals, Antw. 1610, fol. Dr. Burnet's
Letters of his Travels, Rotterd. 1687, 8 vo. Lucae Brugensis in Evangel. Antw.
1606, fol. A. B. Bramha^'s Works, Dubl. 1676. fol. Dr. Burnet's History of the
Reformation, Land. -- His Vindicat. of the ordin. of the Chapter of England, Land.
1677, 8 vo. -- His History of the Rights of Princes, Land, 1682, 8 vo. Bernardi
Giraldi Patavini Apologia pro Repub. Venetorum. -- Vid. Arcana Societatis,
Jesu. Birckbeck's Protestant Evidence, Land. 1635, 4 to. Baiting of the Pope's
Bull, Land. 1627, 4 to. Burnet's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Jan. 30. 1680/1.
4 to.
C.
F. Cross's Sermon before the Q. April 21. 1686. Land. 1687, 4 to.
Considerations on the Spirit of Martin Luther, Oxford, 1687, 4 to. Jesuits
Catechism, Edit. 1602, 4 to. P. Crasset La veritable devotion envers la S.
Vierge, Paris, 1679, 4 to. Discourse of Communion under both species, by the
Bp. of Meaux, Paris, 1685, 12 s. Conference with Campion in the Tower, Land.
1583, 4 to. Crashaw's Falsificationum Romanarum, Tomi primi, lib. primus, Land.
1606, 4 to. Catholic Scripturist. Land. 1686, 8 vo. Chrysostomi Opera. Paris,
^636. Canones and Decreta Consilii Tridentini, Col. 1577, 12 s. Contzeni
Politica Mogunt, 1620, fol. Collection of Treat. concern penal Laws, Land.
1675. 4 to. Copleys Reasons of his departure from the Chapter of Rome, Land. 1612,
4 to. Cressey's Exomologesis, Paris, 1647, 8 vo. Cressener's Vindication, Land.
1687, 4 to. Jo. Camerarius, de Frat. Orthod. Eccles. in Bohemia, deest mihi
Titulus. Campion's Reasons, Land. 1687, 4 to. And the same in Latin Cosmop.
1581. Corpus Confessionum Fidei, Genesis 1654, 4 to. The Connection, Land. 1681, 8
vo. Conference enter deux Docteurs de Sorbonne, etc. Edit. 1566 8 vo.
D.
DRelincourt's Protestants self defense, (...) Def. of the Expos. of the Doct.
of the Chapter of England, Land. 1686. 4 to. Discovery of the Society in relation
to their Politics, Land. 1658, 8 vo. Defense of the confut. of Bell. sec. note
of the Chapter Land, 1687, 4 to. Defense of the Papers written by the late K. Land.
1686, 4 to. Difference between the Prot. and Socin. methods, Land. 1686, 4 to.
Diff. bet. the Chapter of E. and the C. of R. L 1687, 4 to. A Discourse for: taking
off the Penal Laws and Tests. Land, 1687, 4 to. A Discourse of the Notes of the
Church, Land. 1687, 4 to. Declaration of the favorable dealing of her
Majesty's Commissioners, 1583, 4 to. Decree made at Rome, March 2 d. 1679, 4
to.
E.
EUropae Speculum, Land. 1687, 8 vo. Capt. Everard's Epistle to the
Nonconformists, Edit. 1664. 8 vo. Exposit. of the Doctrine of the Church of
England* Land. 1686. 4 to. Exposit. of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
Land 1685* 4 to. F. Ellis's Sermon before the K. Dec. 5. 1686, 4 to.
F.
FIfth part of Chapter Government, Oxf. 1687, 4 to. Fowlis's History of Romish
Treasons* Land. 1681, fol. Franckland's Annals, Land. 1681, fol. The Franciscan
Convert, Land. 1673, 4 to.
G.
GAge's new Surv. of the West Indies, Land. 1655, fol. Gee's foot out of the
Snare, Land. 1624. 4 to. The Gunpowder Treas. with a discourse of the manner of
its discovery, Land. 1679, 8 vo. Good Advice to the Pulpits, Land. 1687. 4 to.
Gratian, Edit. 1518, 4 to.
H.
HOspiniani Historia Jesuitica, Tig. 1670. fol. History of the Irish Rebellion,
Land. 1680. fol. Dr. Harsenet's Declarat. of egregious Pop. Impostures in
casting out Devils, Land* 1603, 4 to. The Hind and the Panther, Land. 1687, 4
to. Hunting the Romish Fox, Dubl. 1683. 8 vo. History of Geneva by Mr. Spon.
Land. 1687, fol. History of the Church of Great Britain from the Birth of our
Savior, Land. 1674, 4 to. History of the Powder Treason, Land. 1681. 4 to.
Histoire de France par Seigneur du Haillan. deest mihi titulus.
I.
INstructiones secret. pro super. Societ. Jesu. see Arcana societ. Jesu. Index
expurg. librorum qui hoc seculo prodierunt, Edit. 1586, 12 s. Instance of the
Church of Englands Loyalty, Land. 1687, 4 to. The Jesuits Reasons Unreasonable,
Land. 1662, 4 to. See Collection of Treatises. Important Considerations, Land.
1601. 4 to. It is in the collection of Treatises concerning the Penal Laws. K.
James' Works, Land. 1616, fol.
K.
MR. King's Answer to the Dean of Londonderry, Land. 1687, 4 to. Key for
Catholics, Land. 1674, 4 to.
L.
LAst Efforts of afflicted Innocence, Land. 1682, 8 vo. Long's History of
Plots, Land. 1684, 8 vo. A Letter in answer to two main Questions in the first
Letter to a Dissenter, Land. 1687, 4 to. Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines
of the Church of England, Land. 1687, 4 to. Three Letters concerning the
present State of Italy, 1688, 8 vo.
M.
MYsterium Pietatis, Vltraj, ^686, 8 vo. Moral Practices of the Jesuits, Land,
1670, 8 vo. Maldonati in 4 Evangelia, Mogunt, 1624, fol. Masoni, Vindiciae
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, Land. 1625, fol. Mirror for Saints and Sinners, Land.
1671. fol. Manual of Controversies, Doway, 1671, 8 vo. Monomachia, Land. 1687,
4 to. Mr. Meredith's Remarks on Dr. Tennison's Account, Land. 1688, 4 to.
N.
NOvvelle de la Republique des Lettres Juin. 1686, 8 vo. Novelty of Popery, by
Dr. Du Moulin, Land. 1664, fol. Nubes Testium, Land. 1686, 4 to. New Test of
the C. of E. Loyalty, L. 1687, 4 to. Nouvelle de la Republique des Lettres,
Oct. 1684, 8 vo.
O.
OGilby's Japan, Land. 1670, fol.
P.
PRotestancy destitute of Scripture proofs, Land. 1687, 4 to. Pontificale
Romanum, Col. 1682, 8 vo. Pastoral Let. of the Bish of Meaux, L 1686, 4 to.
Present State of the Controversy between the Church of England and the Church
of Rome, Land. 1687, 4 to. Pap. misrepres. and repres. Land. 1685, 4 to.
^ult^n's Remarks, Land. 1687, 4 to. Provincial Letters, Land. 1657, 8 vo. Mr.
Pain's Answer to the Letter to a Dissenter, Land. 1687, 4 to. Policy of the
Clergy of France, Land. 1681, 8 vo. Pulton's account of the Confer. Land. 1687.
4 to. Popery Anatomis'd, Land. 1686, 4 to. Parson's Treatise tending to
Mitigation, 1607, 8 vo. The Primitive Rule before the Reformation, Antw. 1663,
4 to. A Picture of a Papist. Edit. 1606, 8 vo. Primitive Fathers no Protest.
Land. 1687, 4 to. Preservative against Popery, by Dr. Sherlock, Land. 1688, 4
to. Primitive Fathers no Papists, Land. 1688, 4 to. Papists not misrepresented
by Protestants, Land. 1686, 4 to. Papists Protesting against Prot Popery, Land,
1686, 4 to. Parsons's 3 Conversions out of Eng. 1604 8 vo.
R.
RI^herii Histor. Council. Gener. 1683, 8 vo. Rushworth's Collect. P. r. Land.
1659, fol. Reply to the Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Chapter of
Eng. Land. 1687, 4 to. Reflections on Mr. Varillas, Amst. 1686, 12 s. Reply to
the Reasons of the Oxford Clergy against Addressing, Land. 1687, 4 to. Ricau^*s
State of Greek and Armenian Churches, Land. 1679, 8 vo. Reflections on the
Answer to the Papist Misrepresent. Land. 1685, 4 to. Religio Laici, Land 1682,
4 to. Request to Romans Cath. Land. 1687, 4 to. Reynerus adv. Waldenses. Ingol.
1613, 4 to. Rogers's Faith, Doctrine and Religion professed in England, Cambr.
1681, 4 to. Reasons of Friar Neville's Conversion, Land. 1642, 4 to. Reflections
on the Historical part of the fifth part of Church Government, Oxford, 16^7, 4
to.
S.
SUmmary of the Principal Controver. bet. the Church of England and the Church
of Rome, Land. 1687, 4 to. Secret instructions for the society of Jesus, Land.
1658. 8 vo. Sure and Honest Means for the Conversion of Heretics, Land. 1687 4
to. State of the Church of Rome before the Reformation, Land. 1687, 4 to. Saul
and Samuel at Endor, Oxf. 1674, 8 vo. Spanhemii Histor* Imaginum, Lug. Bat.
1686, 8 vo. Surii Commentar. brevis, 1574, 8 vo. Smith's acc. of the Gr.
Church, Land. 1680, 8 vo. -- His Miscellanea, Land. 1686, 8 vo. Sheldon's
Survey of the Miracles of the Church of Rome, Land. 1616, 4 to. Dr. St^ll.
unreas. of separ. Land. 1681, 4 to. Speed's Chronicle, Land. 1623. St. Amors
Journal, Land. 1664, fol. Seissellius adv. Valden. Paris, 15^0. Securis
Evangelica, Romans 1687, 8 vo. A Supplication to the King's most excellent
Majesty, Land. 1604, 4 to. St. Peter's Supremacy discuss'^* Land, 1686, 4 to.
T.
TReleinie's undeceiving the people in the point of Tithes, Land. 1651, 4 to.
Terry's voyage to East India, Land. 1655, 8 vo. Tertulliani Opera, Franek.
1597, fol. Touchstone of the Reform. Gosp. L. 1685, 12 s. Transubstantiation
defended, Land. 1687. 4 to. Traver's Answer to a supplicatory Epistle, Land.
1583, 8 vo. Toleti Instructio Sacerdo^um, Venet. 1616, 4 to. Travels of Sig. de
la Valle, Land. 1665. fol.
V.
VIndica* of the Bishop of Condoms Exposition, Land. 1686, 4 to. Vasquez de
cultu adorationis* Mog. 1601 8 vo. Bp. Vshers Life and Letters, Land. 1686,
fol. Vidicat of the sincerity of the Prot. Religion, Land. 1679, 4 to. Veritas
Evangelica, Land. 1687, 4 to. The Use and great Moment of the Notes of the
Church, Land. 1687, 4 to.
W.
WAlsh's Histor. of the Irish Remonstrance, Land. 1674, fol. -- His 4 Letters
on several Subjects, 1686, 8 vo. Wilson's Hist. of G. Britain, Land. 1653, fol.
Correct the Errata thus. 95. l. 19* in the Margin r. p. 12. p. 32. l. 11. r.
commendavit.

INTRODUCTION.
HAving observed the difference between the Method followed by Protestant
Divines, and that which the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome take, in their
unwearied endeavors, for gaining Proselytes; I have several times taken
notice, that instead of handling particular Controversies, they, for the most
part, wholly decline them, and take another course; wherein what their design
is, will easily be apprehended, if we consider that their experience tells
them, that Prejudice is the main prop of their Church, which renders their
people deaf to whatever is objected to their Doctrines; and they know very well
how far that goes to make them believe whatever is imposed on them. It is an
usual thing to hear the Common people justify themselves in matters of
practice by the examples of those they have an esteem for; and if they can find
any thing they are blamed for, countenanced or practiced by a person they look
upon as a pious or wise man, it is their common argument, such a man who is much
better and wiser than I, is of this opinion, or acts as I do, and why may not
I? I am sure he would not do it if it were not Lawful: which observation those
Masters of Craft, who manage even the Eternal affairs of Souls by the wiles of
Policy and Cunning, make such use of as to bend all their endeavors to create
in the people a good opinion of them, and then they know their work is as good
as done; and not only my own observation assures me that this is their design,
but I offer this evidence of it; Among all the Romish Converts you shall scarce
find one, who is able to give you any particular reason for his change, but
only this, that he cannot think so holy a Church would deceive him; and he is
convinced, that it is his duty in all things to submit to her without examining
her Doctrines, which is a clear proof that their main endeavor is to insinuate
themselves into the good opinion of those they would pervert; and having
sufficiently possessed them with such favorable thoughts, they easily prevail
upon them to give themselves up to be conducted by them; so that prejudice and
affection makes more Papists than evidence of Truth and Reason.

Thus by insisting upon generals to possess the affections, rather than inform
the judgments of men, they go on uncontrolled, our Divines going the fairer way
to work, and aiming at the rectifying men's understandings, not the forming of a
party of Proselytes, as if truth was to be found by the voices of the giddy
multitude, and not by rational and convincing evidence; which made the
ingenious Answerer to the Dean of Londonderry, profess, Answer to the
Considerations which obliged Peter Manby, etc. p. 3. Land. 1687. 4to.
That he always believed that they rather designed to gain Proselytes by
confounding their heads than by clear reason and information; their design
being, Sum. of Prin. Cont. p. 3. Land. 1687. 4to.
To make a show of saying somewhat, ours to instruct our people. I have had
occasion to be acquainted with several of their Converts, and do profess I
could hardly ever meet with any who understood the matters in dispute, but
acknowledge it was the force of these general arguments that prevailed on them
to a change.

And this way is not only followed by some among them, but the whole See Burn.
Answ. to the Meth. of the French Clerg. 8vo. 1683.
Clergy of France, have propounded general Methods to be prosecuted to this
end, and the University of Mysterium Pietatis Vltraj. 8vo. 1686.
Lovaine have published theirs.

Finding therefore that all their success proceeded from particular artifices,
I thought it my duty to endeavor, to prevent their doing any farther mischief,
by laying them open to the world, that the unchristian sleights being
discovered, and their force enervated, the people may be upon their guard,
knowing what dealing they are to expect from these busy men, and not be so
easily possessed with those fatal prejudices which they labor to instill into
them, in order to enslave them to such a number of errors and superstitions, as
no one Sect besides was ever guilty of; which I shall endeavor to do in the
following Chapters.

CHAP. I. Of their Manner of Address.
WHen the Missionaries have a design on any particular person, after
acquaintance once got, they are very cautious not to begin to insist closely
upon any Religious subject, until by their industry and diligent observation
they have discovered the disposition and inclination of their intended
Proselyte: this is one of the secret Rules found in the College of Jesuits at
Paderborn, that in attempting to gain young men to list themselves in their
Instruct. secret. pro super. Societat. Jesu, p. 17.

It is one of the pieces published in the Arcana Societat. Jesu. 8vo. 1635. See
it in English. Printed at London for Tho. Dring. 1658. 8vo in the 2d Part of
the Mystery of Jesuitism.


Order, they endeavor to please them with such diversions as are best suited
to their tempers, and most apt to allure them, to be of that Society where they
meet with what is so agreeable to their inclinations. It is indeed usual with
them to cast out several loose words, either concerning the holiness and
certainty of their Faith, or the uncertainty and vanity of the Protestants,
which they know are as so many latent Darts, which will pierce deeper when
other arguments come to drive them on; But till they find how the disposition
of the person lies, they cannot practice their several arts, which vary
according as the tempers differ of those they deal with.

Their Character of Religious men gives them always an opportunity to discourse
with a serious look, and grave accent of the great things of salvation, which
they seldom or never omit to lay hold on, seeing such discourses are very apt
to make impressions upon the minds of those who are devoutly inclined; and if
the person they deal with be such an one, they are very proper and seasonable
to be used to him; and on the other hand, if he be not, they can put no stop to
their design, for by their reiterated pretenses of zeal for the salvation of
Souls, their frequent instances of their trouble to see so many led in error,
and ready to perish, and their free offering the utmost of their service for so
good a work, with their earnest and serious urging the great danger a
Protestant is in, they gain even with the loose and vicious, a good opinion of
them, that they are really in earnest, and believe and design what they
pretend; and there being scarce such a thing in the world as a real speculative
Atheist, they know that all are desirous of happiness hereafter, though not
willing to leave their sins for it, therefore even with the worst they get this
advantage, that by their lamentations, and zealous pretenses, they are believed
to have a design only to lead them to Heaven; which point gained, they know
how to accommodate their doctrine even to those, by offering them such an easy
way to future happiness, that distasting the four methods of repentance, and
universal holiness, they will willingly go where they have hopes of gaining
heaven, and keeping their sins too.

By this means being sure to gain by serious discourses whoever they have to
deal with, you will certainly meet with as heavenly and religious expressions
as can be invented; and after they have enlarged upon the worth of souls, the
importance of the right faith, and their own intentions being only to
enlighten those who are in the darkness of Heresy, which they will express
with the utmost of their Rhetoric, and set off with the most devout looks, and
earnest actions; they will vary their expressions, to find out what is most
taking; sometimes they will tell you, we require what God never commanded, Thus
where we teach Meditation to be the duty of every Christian. Fa. Cross in his
Sermon before the Q. Ap. 21. 1686. says, I do not approve the opinion of those
who hold it obligatory to all.
by teaching those duties under pain of damnation, which are in themselves not
necessary, and the omission of them only venial transgressions, which do not
in themselves deserve damnation; and that we call those mortal sins, affirming
that all are absolutely obliged to avoid them, which God never esteemed as
such; and that we make the case of Christians too hard, affirming that there is
no difference between Counsels and Commands; whereby we bind every one to do
those things, which none according to them, except by a particular vow, are
obliged to; that we affirm all our duties to be so imperfect, that they are in
themselves sins, thereby discouraging Christians in their performance of them;
and affronting the grace of God, as if he could not enable us to keep all his
Commands perfectly, but there will still be imperfections in their
performances, which make work for daily repentance, so over-burthening the
Consciences of Christians, where God has not done it: This, they know, will be
greedily caught at by the Libertine, who is glad to hear of an easier way to
Heaven, than the Protestant Church shows to her Members; and if the person they
address to, should happen to be of a devout and severe principle, they know how
to make use of the same charge, to work their ends; by complaining, that
whereas God has left some things only recommended by way of Counsel, we by
preaching them as Commands, take away all the Merit of those performances,
which is greater where men are left free, than when they are obliged under
penalties; and that we do thereby frighten men from real holiness; and by such
a general discourse, which they can apply to all tempers, they make their way,
toward fixing a good opinion of themselves, in the minds of men, who are much
taken if they be inclined to vice with the hopes of more liberty, which is
offered them under the show of holiness, and if serious with the hopes of
meriting, and attaining to a greater degree of glory, by their free uncommanded
obedience, than they could expect from an obedience yielded only to severe
Commands; for the feeding of whose humor they will enlarge upon that usual
Topic, that we have no repentance nor good works in our Church, (a scandal
which they often cast upon us) and consequently have none of that strictness
which a pious soul delights in; and this seeming argument for the greatest
strictness they can turn to the encouragement of an idle and vain disposition,
by extolling the easiness of their absolution and penance, when we take such
methods, as keep a man all his life to a serious examination and enquiry
whether his repentance be sincere.

These discourses, and such as these being applicable to all sorts of men, are
common with them even at first; but when they have made a discovery of your
dispositions, they come more particularly to their several methods, which are
suited to each temper; And having endeavored with all their power by actions,
as well as words to render themselves esteemed, according to that secret
instruction to the Instructiones pro super. Societ. Jesu, p. 4. -- Vt se gratam
and acceptam praebeat societas incolis l^ci, multum ad hoc conducet explicatio
finis societatis, praescripti in regula secunda summarii, incumbere in salutem
proximi aeque ac suam. Quare humilia obsequia obeunda, in Xenodochiis, and limo
jacentes invisendi. -- Eleemosynae conqui^endae, dandaeque pa^uperibus allis
videntibus, ut aedisicati facto nostrorum sint in nos liberaliores.
Superiors of the Jesuits, that they should ingratiate themselves with the
people, by showing the end of the society, to be as tender of the welfare of
their neighbor as of their own; and upon this account undergo the meanest
Offices, visit the Hospitals, and assist the Poor; make charitable Collections,
and dispose of them to the poor in public, that others being excited by their
liberality, may be the more kind to the Society. They begin afresh, if they
deal with a devout Soul, to enlarge upon their care of Souls, and their
unwillingness to meddle with these matters being more inclined to the more
practical duties, as when the Jesuits have a mind to advance any of their
Partisans to a high place in any Prince's Court, they are directed to Ibid. p.
30. -- Saepe inculcent principib^^, distributionem honorum and dignitatum in
Repub. spectare ad justitiam; graviterque deum offendi si contra eam a
principibus peccetur; se tamen nolle dicant ingerere in ullam administrationem
reip. and haec se invitos dicere ratione sui officii; Quod ubi apprehenderint
principes, explicetur ipsis, quibus virtutibus praediti esse debeant viri
ass^mendi ad dignitates reip. commendationis capita sumantur, ex amicis
societat^s nostrae, etc. --
insist upon the great concern that Religion and Justice has in those who are
advanced to Dignities, and therefore that such ought to be elected as are
eminent for their virtues, which they are to enumerate, and then be sure to
propose a friend of the Societies, as endued with the virtues they before
commended; but at the same time express their unwillingness to meddle. Just so
they govern themselves in making Converts, among the piously inclined; and as
Europae Speculum, p. 71, 72^ Land. 1687. 8vo.
Sir Edwin Sands observes, of their gestures, and such pretenses, When a Friar
an abandoner of the world, a man wholly rapt with divine affections and
ecstasies; his Apparel denouncing contempt of all Earthly vanity; his
Countenance preaching severity, penance and discipline, breathing nothing but
sighs for the hatred of sin; his Eyes lifted upward as fixed on his joys; his
Head bowed on the one side with tenderness of love and humility, extending his
ready hand to lay hold on men's souls, to snatch them out of the fiery jaws of
that gaping black Dragon, and to place them in the path that conducts to
happiness; when such a man, I say, shall address himself to a woman -- or to
any other vulgar person of what sort soever, persuading, beseeching with all
plausible motions of Reason, yea with sighs of fear, and tears of love,
instanting and importuning no other thing at their hands than only this, to be
content to suffer God to save their souls, and to crown them with everlasting
happiness: which they shall certainly attain by ranging themselves with the
heavenly army of God, that is, by adjoining themselves to the Church of Christ
and his Vicar; and this again and again iterated and pursued with show of
incredible care of their good, without seeking other meed and commodity to
himself, save only of being the instrument of a Soul's salvation. Is it to be
marvailed, though -- he prevail and possess them in such forcible sort, that no
access remain for any contrary persuasion -- and certainly by their dealing
thus with men at single hand in private -- they prevail as experience does
daily show exceedingly.

But as they take this method to deal with some, so they address themselves to
others in a quite contrary manner, they having (as I shall prove more
particularly hereafter) not only several ways of insinuation, but several, yea
contrary doctrines framed on purpose to be as baits for all sorts of men; which
as I have often observed, so I find it noted by that ingenious Gentleman, who
had spent a great part of his time in Italy, the mint of their policies, which
they have, to my knowledge, made great use of in these Kingdoms, and some
neighbor Nations: Europae speculum, p. 37, 38.
The particular ways (says he) they have to ravish all affections, and to fit
each humor -- are well nigh infinite; there being not any thing either sacred
or profane, no virtue or vice almost, nothing of how contrary condition soever,
which they make not in some sort to serve that turn; that each fancy might be
satisfied, and each appetite find what to feed on; Whatsoever either wealth can
sway with the lovers, or voluntary poverty with the despisers, of the world;
what honor with the ambitious; what obedience with the humble; what great
employment with stirring and metall'd spirits; what perpetual quiet with heavy
and restive bodies; what content the pleasant nature can take in pastimes and
jollity; what contrariwise the austere mind in discipline and rigor; what love
either chastity can raise in the pure, or voluptuousness in the dissolute; what
allurements are in knowledge to draw the contemplative, or in actions of state
to possess the practick dispositions; what with the hopeful, prerogative of
reward can work; what errors, doubts and dangers with the fearful; what change
of vows with the rash, of estate with the inconstant; what pardons with the
faulty, or supplies with the defective; what miracles with the credulous; what
visions with the fantastical; what gorgeousness of shows with the vulgar and
simple; what multitude of ceremonies with the superstitious and ignorant; what
prayer with the devout; what with the charitable, works of piety; what rules of
higher perfection with elevated affections; what dispencing with breach of all
rules with men of lawless conditions. And so he goes on to show how the very
constitution of their Church is made up of such contrariety; which I shall
insist farther on in another place, my business here being to show how they are
prepared to fit each temper and inclination, with suitable discourses and
allurements. They know the greatest part of men in the world are either very
much taken with gaudy and pompous sights, which bewitch their senses, and so
wholly possess them, as to take away all room for rational reflections; or so
charmed with the delights of their beloved corruptions, that they are unwilling
to part with them.

To catch the first sort, we find them boasting of the splendor and outward
glory of the Church of Rome, to such a degree, that they have made this Bellar.
lib. de not. Eccl. c. 18.
pomp a mark of the True Church; this is observed by an ingenious Author of
their own Communion: That Sure and Honest means for the Conversion of Heretic.
p. 110. Land. 4 to. 1687.
they insist much upon the fine Churches they have at Rome, whose admirable
Structure does greatly edify Believers, and as Cardinal Pallavicini says [lib.
8. c. 17.] is of it self capable to convert infidel Princes* this way of
catching people by gaudy Shows, and splendid Sights is looked on with such a
favorable Eye among them, that the three Bishops See their Letter at large in
Vergerius; and lately in English; entitled, The State of the Church of Rome,
before the Reformation. 4 to. 1687.
from Bononia in a Letter of Advice to Pope Julius the Third, observe that the
vulgar are given to admire and to be amused with these things, in the
contemplation of which their minds are as it were so entangled that they have
no relish for any other Food; no inclination to any other Doctrine: they affirm
that they were designed for that purpose, and therefore give it as their
Judgment, that they should be augmented and multiplied, for (say they) if the
introducing and appointing those few which we have mentioned were of such use
to the Settlement of your Kingdom, of what advantage would it be were there
some new ones added, and this Advice was so exactly observed, that the
excellent Richerius a Doctor of the Sorbon, tells us, that Richer. Histor.
Council. Genesis l. 4. par. 2. p. 246, 247. Colon. 1683. 80.
this was the the Scope and Design of the Reformation established by the TRENT
COUNCIL, nothing being effected for the Truth, but external Pomp provided for;
so that innumerable splendid, gaudy Ceremonies were daily invented; whence
proceeded a magnificent and theatrical Way of adorning their Churches, the
Sacerdotal Ornaments glittering with Gold and Silver, while the Priests who
wore them were mere Stocks; by which Artifices the peoples minds were amused
and insensibly drawn from the consideration of the necessity of Reformation:
which made the Apud Richer. ubi sup.
learned Andreas Masius complain, that Piety was extinguished and Discipline
neglected, while all Applications were made and Inventions used to increase
their Pomp. The glittering Gold in their Temples and curious Images of Saints
and Angels, the numerous and stately Altars, the mighty silver Statues, the
rich and glorious Vestments you see up and down in their Churches, strike the
Senses into a kind of Ecstasy; which they are so sensible of, that with all
their Rhetoric they enlarge upon this Subject striving to persuade their
intended Proselytes to see with what Magnificence they perform their Worship;
thus when his MAJESTY of Blessed Memory Ru^shw. Collect. par. 1. p. 83. fol.
Land. 1659.
KING CHARLES the First being then Prince, was in the Spanish Court, there were
great Sums expended in solemn glittering Processions, and their Churches set
out with their richest Ornaments, to charm his Senses, but he was too well
grounded in his Religion to be caught with that Bait: And I remember this is
given by In his Epistle to the Nonconformists. 1664, 8 vo.
Capt. Robert Everard as a Motive to his Conversion as he calls it to the Roman
Church. The great use they make of it, enclines me to believe this device is
accompanied with more than ordinary Success; it is also so universal, that in
the Indies they have these Pageants, to delight the Senses and Phancies of the
INDIANS; Gages New Survey of the West Indies. p. 152. Edit. Land. 1655. fol.
Against Christmas Day, they set up a thatch't House like a Stall in some
Corner of their Churches, with a Blazing-Star over it, pointing to the three
Wise Men from the ^ast; within this Stall they lay a Crib, and the Image of a
Child, the Virgin Mary standing on one side, Ogilby in his History of Japan,
edit. Land. 1670. p. 242, 246, 247, etc. gives an account of the same method
used by the Missionaries in that Country.
and Joseph on the other, there is likewise an Ass and an Ox, the three Wise
Men kneel and offer their Gifts, the Shepherds stand aloof off with theirs, and
the Angels hang about the Stall, with several Instruments of Music* and there
is scarce an Indian that comes not to see this Bethleem, as we are assured by
one who was a Friar, and dwelt in those parts above twelve Years; who gives
several other Instances of the same Nature:

I have frequently been answered by their Converts (when desiring to know what
they found amiss in our Church) that we d^d nothing to keep up the Remembrance
of our Savior, which they were at the greatest Charges to effect; and I have
received a Relation from a Gentleman very conversant among them, which for
several Reasons I think worth inserting.

This Gentleman in his Travels being at Brussels in the Low Countries, was
often invited by the Priests there to their Churches and Convents, after some
time spent in debating Points in difference between the two Churches, they
finding no probability of his Conversion; one day told him, there would be a
great Ceremony at such a Church the Friday following (being Good-Fryday) at
which they desired he would be present, one of them adding that he thought the
sight of it alone was enough to convert any Heretic; and instanced in one or
two Persons on whom it had a very powerful effect: according to their desire
the Gentleman went, and by the motion he felt in himself, (the Representation
being so lively that it melted him into Tears) does profess, he believes the
weaker sort of men, who are not very well grounded in their Religion may be
strangely altered by such a sight; though upon deliberation he found it so gross
a piece of IDOLATRY that it created in him a greater detestation of the
Religion of the Church of Rome than he had before. It being never that I know
of related by any Author, I believe it will be very acceptable to the Reader to
have an Account of it.

At the upper end of the Church there is a large Stage erected, in the midst of
which is set up a Cross, on which is nailed an Image of our Savior (given as
they say by the INFANTA ISABELLA) made of Pastboard, but exactly to the Life,
having Joints, and the Veins appearing as full of Blood; it is crowned with
Thorns, and hangs in the posture of a crucified Person; on one side stands the
Image of the Blessed Virgin, all in mourning and on the other, a Coffin to lay
the Image in. After the Sermon, (the Governor, and most of the Nobility being
present,) there come forth, six Friars barefoot in their Stoles, who fall
prostrate before the Image, frequently beating their Breasts, lifting up their
Heads, and looking on it with all the signs of Grief and Adoration; then rising
by degrees, two of them remain kneeling, each holding an end of a large Swathe
which is put under the Arms of the Image; two standing under the Image to
receive it, and the other two ascending two Ladders which are placed at the
Back of the Cross; when one with a great deal of Reverence taking off the Crown
of Thorns, wipes it and descending brings it to the Front of the Stage, where
showing it to the people they all kneel with much Devotion, then approaching
the Image of the Virgin, he falls on his Knees and lays it at her Feet; then
returning up the Ladder, they with a great noise and knocking take out one of
the Nails, upon which the arm of the Image falls, exactly like the arm of a
dead man: this Nail he carries to the people, who, as before, prostrate
themselves, and he with the same gesture presents it to the Virgin; after which
the other nails are shown and presented: the Body being taken down, and brought
by them with a slow pace, and mournful look to the people, they adore again,
when the Friars upon their knees present it to the Virgin, and with much
ceremony lay it in a glass Coffin, in which it is carried round the Town the
several Orders (the Carthusians and Jesuits excepted, who attend at no
procession) with lighted Candles preceding, the Governor of the Netherlands,
and the Nobility following bare-headed: what they did afterward, the Gentleman
saw not.

Thus have the Romanists brought the most gross Pageantry into their Church to
be motives to their Religion, not considering that the Heathens of Japan and
China, and the Inhabitants of America, whose Images and the inside of their
Temples are all of Massy Gold, have in this respect a fairer Title to be the
True Church than they; from whence the Heathens of old cannot be excluded (if
Pomp, as Bellarmine and others teach, be a Mark of the true Church) seeing
their Ceremonies and Rites of this nature are copyed from them, as is confessed
by Cardinal Ad ann. 200. sect. 5. Consulto introductum videtur ut quae erant
gentilitiae superstitionis ^fficia eadem very Dei cultui sanctificata in verae
religionis cult^m impenderentur.
Baronius, that the Offices of Pagan Superstition were purposely introduced and
consecrated to the service of God, (as he calls it) and true Religion. And yet
by this very Method they gain so much that Europae speculum. p. 8. Land. 1687.
^0.
a diligent Observer of them before cited, affirms, that were it not that the
Music, Perfumes, and rich Sights, did hold the outward Senses with their
natural delight; surely their Worship could not but either be abandoned for the
fruitlesness or only upon fear and constraint frequented.

And in this particular they have their several Baits according to the several
Dispositions of men, for the more refined sort of those who are caught with
these glorious and splendid sights, they have such representations as I have
mentioned; but for the less discerning, they are (like their Similitudes) so
gross, that in a person of a very moderate understanding, they are fitter to
excite a loathing and contempt than admiration; for what other effect can
proceed from such a picture, as of that over the Altar at Worms, Burnet's
Letters of his Travels. p. 287, 288. edit. Roterd. 1687. 80.
which one would think was invented by the enemies of Transubstantiation to
make it appear ridiculous? There is a Windmill, and the Virgin throws Christ
into the Hopper, and he comes out at the eye of the Miln all in Wafers, which
some Priests take up and give to the people. But notwithstanding the coursness
of this Emblem, it is so agreeable to the Genius of the German Boors, that it
is to this day over one of their Altars there.

This practice of theirs, in which they place so much confidence, and to which
they are beholden for much of their success, is so far from being warrantable,
that it is directly contrary to the design of the Gospel, whose simplicity is
such, as that it needs none of these gew-gaws to support it, and therefore was
spread by the first planters of it without them: Saint Paul was so far from
making use of such vanities, that he durst not use the 1 Cor. 2 4, 5.
enticing words of man's wisdom in his Sermons and Exhortations; which surely
is much more tolerable, than to endeavor to gain men to the true Religion, by
bewitching them with those sensual objects, which the design of Christianity is
to wean them from; and certainly when we are cautioned not to be like Ephesians.
4.14.
children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, through the slight of
men; there is a particular caution included therein against suffering such vain
shows, and gaudy pomps to make impression on us, which are the peculiar
delights of children, and must needs argue us very much 1 Cor. 14.20.
children in understanding and religion to be enticed by them.

The truth of this is so clear, that those among the Romanists, who endeavor
to fix in their minds a right Idea of Christianity, remembering that the Founder
of it said, His Kingdom was not of this world, conceive such an indignation
against these carnal and vain Methods, that one of them does not stick to say,
Sure and Honest means for converting Heretics. p. 110.
That if any man be converted by these, he is a fool; and assures us, that he
knows that upon people of understanding, who apply themselves to solid things,
and grow in spirit and truth, this has a contrary effect, for these things do
debauch the mind, and set it on wandering. The enquiry (continues he) is about
seeking God, and finding him in those places; and it is not the sight of the
fine guilding, or the excellent painting of an Edifice, nor the hearing of a
sweet Harmony, but rather the lifting up of our minds above sensible objects,
and separating them as much as possibly we can from sense and imagination: it
is the fixing the eyes of our understanding with a religious attention upon
that invisible spirit, upon that Sun of Justice; and when we do it with that
Love and Reverence that is due to it, we shall never fail of seeing and hearing
the most delightful things. And then he goes on to lay down reasons why we
ought not to be wrought upon by such external things: Ibid. page 111. For this
he cites, Hill. contr. Auxentium. and Hieron. ad Marcellam viduam.
The Fathers (says he) were of opinion that Antichrist should one day seize
upon the most Magnificent Temples of the Christians; this was the opinion of
St. Hilary, and of St. Jerome; this last mentions the very Rock of Tarpeius.
Therefore the Popes ought not to glory overmuch in their Buildings, since
Antichrist shall one day place himself in them. -- I like well enough to see
such fine things as these, but I confess that I have more devotion in a little
Church without magnificence or rich ornaments, than I have in such places. I
find that my devotion does insensibly divide, and that sense does sometimes
carry away a part of my mind, and transport it to sensible objects which do not
deserve it, and that my affection is thereby weakened, whatever care I take to
gather it up and unite it. This has a much more dangerous effect upon the
Common people, who have no knowledge, and whose Religion lies only in their
eyes and ears, they do in an horrible manner fasten on these things, which are
only obvious to their sense, and go no higher.

And shall these things which the sober Romanists themselves confess to be an
hinderance of piety, destructive to devotion, and fit to prevail upon none but
fools, be the motives to rational men to leave the pure worship of God, to have
their eyes delighted by gaudy shows, and their ears pleased with all sorts of
music? I doubt not but the doctrine of Ecstasies and raptures, so highly
applauded in the Romish Church, has its greatest support from these external
glories, which are proper to raise the affections to such a pleasing height, as
renders them almost insensible; which though only the effect of the pleasure
the senses are entertained with, are by them extolled as holy motions, and
divine illuminations, while the soul is not at all affected, or bettered by
such transports.

There lies therefore an indispensable obligation upon every person, but
especially upon such as by their natural dispositions are apt to be affected by
such things, to keep a constant and severe watch over their affections, that
they do not blind their understandings; remembering Religion consists in the
Understanding and Will, being rightly informed and directed; not in the motion
of the spirits, and tickling of the senses; the Doctrine of the Gospel being
designed for the good of Souls, never an Article of it calculated to gratify
and please the flesh. Besides, how unreasonable is it that those things which
ANTICHRIST shall boast of, and pride himself in, should be ever used as an
argument to proselyte any to a party? as if they must needs be the only true
Church, because in this they resemble ANTICHRIST. If men would but seriously
reflect, it is an easy matter to perceive even from hence, that what I noted
in the Introduction, of their designs, is true; for what does all these
glorious shows tend to the making a man wise unto salvation, or the fitting him
for the enjoyment of God? All the tendency they can have is to work upon men's
affections, which I before observed, is their main design. Now we know that
such emotions are seldom permanent, which made the excellent Richerius, Lib. 4.
Part 2. p. 246.
speaking of these things, (though himself a Papist) affirm, That those who
thought these methods would be long of force, will in a little time find
themselves mightily deceived. And this is not unknown to the Missionaries, who
therefore strike while the Iron continues hot, and ply the person whose
affections are thus raised with their Miracles, their Holiness and such
particulars, which we shall discourse of anon.

And I cannot think it one of the least weighty considerations, to deter men
from being gulled by such trifles, to reflect that these things are designed
either for such as have no real sense of Religion, or to bring them to have
none; the first sort being very glad of such a Worship as gratifies their
voluptuous humors; and others more soberly inclined, are thereby taught to
worship God wholly in a sensual manner, and so estranged from the pure and
spiritual part of Religion, which God alone delights in.

Neither is this method only calculated for such, but they have likewise a
singular dexterity in accommodating themselves even to the vices and
corruptions they find men most addicted to; if ambitious, they endeavor to
feed that humor; if voluptuous, to gratify them in that; if revengefull, they
permit them to follow their inclinations; if covetous, (though of all vices,
they are most enraged against that) yet, for a while, they can find a way, not
to be grievous to them, and as pliable they are to the prodigal. This is an
observation made of the Jesuits by several Doctors of the Sorbonne in Paris;
Moral Practice of the Jesuits, p. 384. Land. 1670. 8vo.
They speak of nothing but magnificence and liberality to those who are vain;
telling them, that by these actions they establish their reputation; and the
more to puff them up with such conceits, they cite examples to that purpose.
Nay, lest they should be terrified with the torments of Purgatory after this
life: Lib. 2. de Purg. c. 7.
Bellarmine affirms, that in probability there is a Purgatory where those pains
are not endured; which is seconded by many of their Divines, who, together with
Bellarmine, found it upon Revelations made to venerable Bede, and others: and
Moral Practice of the Jesuits, p. 386.
Aquila expressly and purposely defends this opinion; And lest they should grow
cold, considering that they must not meet with sensual joys in Heaven, all the
happiness of the blessed Spirits consisting in the Vision of God, which these
voluptuous men cannot apprehend any great delight in, they have therefore
coined a new description of that happy place; Ibid. p. 388, 389.

Note, that this Book entitled, The Business of the Saints in Heaven; was
written by F. L. Henriquez, approved by Fr. Prado Provincial of Castile. Ap.
28. 1631. and allowed of by order of the General of the Jesuits, Mutius*
Vitelleschi.


affirming that there shall be a sovereign pleasure in kissing and embracing
the Bodies of the Blessed; that the Angels shall put on women's Habits, and
appear to the Saints in the dress of Ladies; that women shall rise with long
Hair, and appear with Ribbands and Laces as they do upon Earth; that married
people shall kiss one another, and their Children as in this life. Thus these
subtle Deceivers will rather follow Mahomet's steps in asserting a sensual
Paradise, than lose one of their Proselytes.

I neither design here to enlarge upon this Subject, nor pretend to instance in
all their turnings and artifices to this end: the first, because I refer it to
another Head, when I come to treat of their disguising and varying their
Doctrine; the latter, because I cannot pretend to do it, their Arts being
numberless; but by such instances as these are, the Reader may easily discover
them, when they act a part of the same nature.

In Christmas Ann. 1624. one Father Leech told Gee's foot out of the snare. p.
13. 4 to. Land. 1624.
Mr. J. Gee, That if any but hear Mass, and after hearing be sprinkled with
Holy Water and kiss the Priest's Garments, he could not commit that day any
mortal sin, though he would never so fain; and my Author cites in the Margin,
some Barst. in lib. instit. The Propitiator. page 74. vid. Fitz-sim. in fin.
citat. in diverse. loc.
Authors who teach the same; an excellent Maxim to make the greatest Sin become
none at all, and very much akin to that, that God sees no sin in his Children.

This suiting themselves to the carnal desires of men, is so usual among them,
that Ebber. in praef. in com. Philip* super. Christ. ad Cor. cited by Mr. Gee.
p. 17. thus. An non audis dicentes grata multitudini, flectentes, fingentes, ac
refingentes, religionem ad nutum and cupiditates Dominorum and coetuum quorum
gloriam nisi suam pluris faciunt quam gloriam Dei?
one of their own Authors could not forbear making this Observation. Do not you
hear them how they speak plausibly to itching Ears, altering, fashioning and
re-fashioning their Religion; according to the will and wantonness of them
whose glory next unto their own they prefer before the Glory of God?

This prostituting the holy Name of Christianity to serve the interest of a
Party, and making that God in whom is no Variableness, and who is infinitely
Holy to be the Author of such contrary and wicked Doctrines, is in it self so
odious, and does at first sight appear so unworthy, that I think it needless to
make any Reflections on it.

I shall close this Chapter with some Reflections upon what I mentioned in the
beginning, their great pretenses of Zeal for the good of Souls, after I have
briefly mentioned their remaining Arts, which they practice in their first
Address; in endeavoring to discover the Capacities of those they deal with,
that if they be of slow and heavy Understandings, they may deal with them as
with such, where Arguments of the nature of that Emblem beforementioned of
Christ thrown into the Hopper, will be most proper: if they discover quick and
sprightly parts, all the ingenious Reflections upon the Protestants, that they
can call to mind, are with a pleasant Smile cast out, and they endeavor with
all manner of Address to render their Company acceptable and diverting; and
when they have thus ingratiated themselves, if you speak of any of our Books or
Divines, they will with a slighting accent tell you, they are not worth their
minding; as I remember, objecting a passage out of Dr. Stillingfleet against
Idolat^^, to one of them; he replied, he mistook the Question so, that he had
not patience to read him; though another went further, affirming that he was
either a Knave or a Dunce: thus the Author of the Request to Protestants,
begins with such a Magisterial Sentence, against his Answerer; Protestancy
destitute of Scripture-proofs. p. 1. 4 to. 1687.
that he concluded it a Pamphlet unworthy of special notice, and expected, if
not more pertinent, yet at least more plausibly replies, except Protestants
meant their Profession should be exposed by Silence, or a silly Defense, and
for the future esteemed destitute of any divine Evidence* though what little
reason he had to say so, the World has since seen, and I dare appeal to any
impartial Person on their own side, whether, there be not more of affected
Scorn than Truth in that fine Speech. Nay, they will not only make the World
believe that they despise us, but will express their Contempt even in the most
unhandsome Language, Acts of the, Conf. at Paris in July, and August. Ann.
1566. in the preface. p. 8. 4 to. Land. 1602.

This conference was printed the same year 1566. in French with this Title,
Conference enter deux Docteures de Sorbonne, and deux Ministres de l' Eglise
reformee. 8vo.


as Dr. Ruze, though a Frenchman and at Paris when the Ministers Monsieur de
Spina and Monsieur Barbaste Minister to the Q. of NAVARR, desired liberty to
pray before they began the Conference, which was then to be held, in the house
of the Duke de Montpensier, told them, that if They would go pray, He would go
to piss during the time of Prayer.

I cannot here forbear anticipating the next Chapter by desiring the Reader
that whenever he meets with such Carriage, he would make it rather a Subject
for his Laughter, than his serious Thoughts; and in the following Chapter I
shall give him some Reason for it; and I desire he would take this as a Maxim,
to suspect every thing they say; a Maxim very necessary to be observed, as an
Antidote against their great Design in the beginning of a proselyting Intrigue;
for I durst venture any person among all their Reasons, if this insinuating way
of engaging men's Affections were laid aside.

If men would learn to love those who are of another Profession, while they
hate their Errors and Superstitions, we might hope to see again the primitive
Charity restored; and therefore notwithstanding the bitterness of Romish
Spirits, and their greatest Kindnesses carrying a design in them, it is our
duty to love their persons, especially those who by particular Obligations
deserve it; I know it is an usual way among them to enquire into the Wants and
Conditions of others, and they know where to get Money to supply them, and are
ready with all officiousness to assist and oblige their acquaintance,
especially those they are tampering with; and though we see through these
Artifices, yet we are bound to be ready to do the same, or greater kindnesses
for them if we are able; but on the other side our just respect for them ought
not to lessen our love to truth or make us less diligent in searching after it;
neither ought we to have such an opinion of them as to have a less esteem for
our Religion: To suffer that would be to love them more than God, and to concur
with them to our own deceiving in such unworthy Actions, as an honest Heathen
would be ashamed of; I know they have made several Converts by this one
Artifice; they will go to a person whom they know to be under straits, and
among other Arguments, insist on the want of Charity in our Church, and advise
them to go to some of our Ministers and see what they will do for them; upon
this some of them have come to some Divines whom I could name, and that very
lately, complaining of their wants, and that there is no provision made for
them, relating what proffers they have from the Gentlemen of the Church of
Rome, if they will be of that Church. Now for a Minister to maintain these
people is impossible, all that he can do being to give them some present
Relief; this the Priests make their Advantage of, remonstrating how true it is,
that as they affirmed our Church is void of Charity; which so abounds in
theirs, that if they will be reconciled they shall have a plentiful Allowance,
which gilded Bait has been greedily swallowed by too many. I cannot say that
they have kept their words with none, but I know there are several whom they
have gained by this means, who being once made sure by the Sea the Oath in the
Pontifical, Edi^. C^lon. 1682. p. 450, 451. 8 vo. Where after they have
professed obedience to the Pope, they go on thus, Jurans dico per Deum
Omnipotentem, and sancta Dei Evangelia, me in unitate and communione praemissis
in concusse mansurum. Et si (quod absit) ab hac me unitate aliqua occasion vel
argumento divisero, perjuris reatum incurrens aeterne obligatus p^enae
^nveniar, and cum auctore schismatis habeam in futuro saeculo portionem.
Oath which they make them take, have their Allowances taken off, under
pretense that the Stock is exhausted by the multitude of Converts, and they are
able to continue it no longer.

From several Instances which may be produced of this kind, it were an easy
matter to form very strong Arguments against too much Credulity; but our HOLY
RELIGION needing no worldly Consideration to uphold it, I shall only reason
from the weakness of a change which is begun to be effected by such an
Artifice; it being one of the most heinous Sins to choose a Religion for
profit's sake, and incompatible with true Holiness. Seeing worldly Gains are so
far from being permitted to have any force in a Soul endued with that, that the
being Christ's Disciple infers a renunciation of them all; from whence I may
draw another proof; That the design of those Gentlemen is not to inform men's
Understandings, but so they get them to their side, they have their end; but
this I refer to the SECOND PART, where I design to treat more particularly of
this Method.

There is yet another effect which the readiness of the MISSIONARIES to OBLIGE
those they deal with, is designed to produce, the creating such a good opinion
of them, as shall incline men to be guided by their Directions: this I
mentioned before, but chose to insist upon it here, because it is usually
furthered by the opinion of Zeal and Love to Souls, which by their words and
gestures they endeavor to drive the people into a belief of.

But here it is to be considered that a fair Carriage is not the sign of a
messenger of Truth, but may be and is found in deceivers and false Prophets;
Matt. 7.15.
our Savior having long since told us that false prophets come in sheeps
clothing; and the great Apostle of the Gentiles informs us, that with Romans
16.18.
good words and fair speeches they deceive the Hearts of the simple; and
therefore is the more earnest with the Col. 2.4.
Colossians, because he knew deceivers would use enticing words; such going
about for that end who have a 2 Timothy 3.5.
form of Godliness though not the power; and for these who go about in the name
of Christ to promote their own ends, with words Psalm. 55.21.
smoother than Butter; our Savior, when he told us of them, gave us likewise a
rule how to deal with them, Matt. 7.16.
ye shall know them by their fruits, not by their outward actions, for none are
more outwardly strict than deceivers, but by their Doctrines; if they be not of
God, all the rest is but sheeps clothing, but pretense to innocence and
sincerity when the Essence of it is wanting; that sheeps clothing being
expounded by the Romanists themselves to imply Lucas Brugensis in loc. Edit.
Antwerp. 1606.
an affected simplicity and sincerity, Maldonate in loc. Edit. Mogunt. 1624.
enticing words, and specious works. Now for any man to be caught with these
which are the special properties of false prophets and deceivers, would appear
incredible, if Experience did not show how little the Cautions of our Savior
are reflected on, which renders such weak persons the less capable of excuse,
because though they were warned of this Snare they would not avoid it.

This show of Zeal and Piety, we are told by the Jesuit Joseph. Acosta de
noviss* tempor. l. 2. c 20 Edit. Lugd. 1592. 8vo. Ad signorum magnitudinem
accedet apta and composita ad decipiendum sanctitatis simulatio qua solet (sc.
Antichristus) homines parum cautos externa specie vehementer allicere.
Acosta, will be industriously affected by the Messengers of Antichrist,
whereby he says, they will ensnare many heedless and unthinking Souls; which
makes that caution of the Wise Man, absolutely necessary to be frequently
reflected on, and diligently observed, when he speaks fair, believe him not,
for if the ANTICHRISTIAN EMISSARIES shall bid as fair for the good opinion of
men by such specious preserve, how great an indifference ought every one to
preserve for all persons, Pro. 26.25.
till they see their fruits. This is equally the duty of all sides, neither can
we be too suspicious in matters of our Eternal Concern, where nothing but
evident proof from Divine Authority should prevail with us. For in obedience to
the command of St. John 1 John 4.1.
to try the spirits whether they are of God, it is our business to receive no
Doctrine till it is confirmed by the word of God; this suspicion and caution is
recommended to us by the great Champion of the Romanists at OXFORD, so that all
reason concurs to excite us to that diligence, for which the Apostle Paul so
highly commends the Inhabitants of Act. 17.10, 11.
BEREA, that they would not believe what he taught till by searching the
Scriptures they found he agreed with them. I know indeed the Gentlemen of the
Church of Rome will not allow such a search, but the aforesaid Considerat. on
the Spirit of Martin Luther p. 2. Oxford, 1687. 4 to.
Author expressly affirms that when new Doctrines come into the world,
Christians are directed to try such Doctrines whether they be of God, which is
all I at present plead for.

If I should urge to this end, the same reason which SOLOMON does, where he
gives this Advice; Prove. 26.24, 25.
He that hates, dissembleth with his Lips, and lays up deceit within him;
when he speaks fair believe him not, for there are seven Abominations in his
Heart. I could find several Instances given by their own Divines to justify
such a Caution; but because this Chapter is lengthen beyond what I at first
intended, I shall remit them to another place, and mention only the instance
of Mr. Parsons the famous Writer against K. James's Succession to the Crown,
and in defense of the Pope's deposing power; of whom several Jesuits Catech.
praef. p. 9. Edit. 1604. 4 to.
French Divines observe; that no man's Writings are fuller of Spite than his.
But it is mixed with such floods of Crocdiles Tears, when he is most spiteful,
that he then always pretends so much Charity and tenderness, as if every hard
word he uses went to his very heart; by which the simpler sort are greatly
blinded. Nay, they are so used to this pretense of love to Souls, that in the
INQVISITION, when they are tormenting a Heretic, as they call him, with the
greatest Torments, they pretend all is out of love to his Soul; though all the
WORLD KNOWS, that Tortures make no real Converts; and consequently seeing they
can have no effect upon the Soul, they can do that no good.

I know it is very hard for one whose disposition is ingenious, to guard
himself from such Insinuations, and therefore have been the more prolix, in
setting forth the COMMAND of our SAVIOVR, and the NECESSITY of being very
WATCHFVLL over our selves, lest out of a piece of good nature we throw away our
Souls, and make shipwreck of the Faith. Let us endeavor to have a real Love
for them, and our desires for their Salvation be sincere and fervent, but till
they can show us a CHVRCH that does more sincerely advance the great ends of
HOLINESS and PIETY, let us hold fast the profession of our Heb. 10.23.
Faith without wavering; and not throw away our selves out of love to others,
as those unfortunate Mr. Rockwood and Sir Everard Digby. See the
Gunpowder-Treason, with a discourse of the manner of its discovery, p. 125,
127. -- Land. 1679. 8 vo.
Gentlemen who purely out of love to Catesby, became partakers of his Guilt in
the GVNPOWDER-TREASON, and so lost their Fames, their Lives, and greatly
hazarded their Souls.

CHAP. II. Of their strange Confidence in asserting any thing that may tend to
their Advantage.
TO strengthen that Advice with which I concluded the former Chapter, it is an
excellent Observation, no less true than ingenious made by an eminent Dr.
Brevint. Saul and Samuel at Endor. praef. p. 5. Ox. 1674. 4 to.
Divine who lived seventeen Years abroad among the ROMANISTS, Ibid. p. 3.
that the proper Genius, and as it were the universal Spirit of that Church
consists much in a confidence to raise any thing which they have, although that
were but a Dunghill into a Castle, and by the noise of strange Expressions to
persuade you out of your own knowledge, that you may believe the Enchantment.
Transubstantiation, etc. had been as soon tumbled down as started up, had they
not been kept on foot by this kind of ROMAN-HECTORING.

Which is so fit a name for their Carriage, that there are no men in the world
to whom the Appellation of SPIRITVAL HECTORS, so properly belongs, as to these
Gentlemen; all the Brags, feigned Stories, huffing Expressions, confident
Assertions, and supercilious Looks, which are the very constituent Qualities of
those we call Hectors, are so exactly copyed by these men, that an indifferent
person would be ready to conclude the difference to be very small, if any.

They do with much unconcernedness insist upon the common Arguments of their
Predecessors, without taking the least notice of the Answers which have been
made to them, yea reiterate the very same objections to the same person who has
answered them before; like Flies, which although you drive them away will still
return and never cease to trouble you; so these men after you have refuted all
their objections they come to you again and produce the same things, as if they
were new: And as Flies bring others with them and all together make one, and
the same buzzing, so when you can suffer these people no longer, they send you
their Emissaries and Disciples, you see many new faces, but you hear still the
same song, and see them go round the same circle; insomuch that Drelincourts
Protestants self defense, in the preface, L^nd. 1685. 12 s.
Monsieur Drelincourt professes that one certain objection has been made him,
and refuted above an hundred times.

This excellent Method our present Controvertists are so fond of, that they do
not scruple to propose objections verbatim out of Authors who have not only
been several times refuted, but convicted of the greatest insincerity and
wilful forgery: The Author of the Oxford. 1687. 4 to.
Fifth part of Church Government has copyed out of SANDERS, who not only
reviles our Princes with all the bitter words of an overflowing Gall, and dyed
in open Rebellion; but has been often refuted, and convinced of Forgery by
several, and particularly by Dr. Burnet, in his History of the Reformation from
public Records; and in pleading against our Ordination, has brought no
Arguments, but such as were distinctly replied to by In his consecration of
Protest. Bishops vindicated, in the first ^ome of his works, Dublin, 1676. fol.
and in Tom. 4.
Archbishop Bramhall, Mr. Vind. Eccl^s. Aug. Land. 1625. fol.
Mason, and Dr. In his History of the Reformation. Land 1679. fol. and his
vindicat^ of the Ordination of the Church of England, Land, ^677 8 ^o.
Burnet; the two first long since, and the last very lately; transcribing as
the LEARNED REFLECTER observes not only the matter but the very form of those
Arguments which have been so often confuted.

And the Collector of (that Book so much admired among them, and recommended at
this very day by no less a Person than the Vindicator of the Reply to the Def.
of the expos. of the Doct. of the Chapter of Eng. p. 3. of the preface, Land. 1687.
4 to.
Bishop of Condom) the Nubes Testium has exactly transcribed that notorious
Plagiary ALEXANDRE NATALIS, whose wretched Falsifications have been several
times exposed, and particularly in the point of IMAGES by Spanhemii Histor.
Imaginum, Lugd. Batav. 1686, 8 vo.
Spanhemius, to say nothing of our own Divines, and yet this Disturber of
ANTIQUITY copies even his very Forgeries, without the least notice of the*
little credit he is of among the Romanists themselves.

If at any time they apprehend a rub in their way, either from any Doctrine or
Practice of their own, or any Passage of the ancient Fathers, it is almost
incredible with what prodigious Assurance they will deny it. Wherein they have
an excellent Example set them by the BISHOP OF MEAVX, who writing to the new
Converts of his Diocese very gravely tells them; Bishop of Meaux Pastor. Let.
p. 3, 4. Land. 1686, 4 to.
THAT NOT ONE OF THEM HAS SUFFERED VIOLENCE EITHER IN HIS PERSON OR GOODS; SO
FAR HAVE YOU BEEN (says he) FROM SUFFERING TORMENTS THAT YOU HAVE NOT SO MUCH
AS HEARD THEM MENTIONED; I HEAR OTHER BISHOPS AFFIRM THE SAME; BUT FOR YOU MY
BRETHREN I SAY NOTHING TO YOU, BUT WHAT YOU MAY SPEAK AS WELL AS I, YOU ARE
RETURNED PEACEABLY TO US YOU KNOW IT. This strange Assertion coming from a
person of his Character, was received at Paris with such surprise, that men
began presently to believe, he would strike it out of the next Edition; so that
the Author of the Nouvelle de la Republique des Lettres. Juin. 1686. p. 736. Il
est apparent que M. de Meaux retranchera l'endroit cidessus marquis, and que
les Gens d' honneur se plaindront in petto de ce qu'on se tue de leur sou
tenir* que les Huguenots ont sign le Formulaire le plus v^l^ntairement du
monde.
Republique des Lettres was inclinable to credit that report, because men of
Sense would complain in their minds to be thus eternally wearied with these
pretenses, that the Huguenots signed the Formulary with all the readiness in
the world, but instead of that in his Letter of May the 13 th. this present
Year, he confirms that bold passage with a On parle e^core dans cette cinquieme
objection de ceque jay dit dans ma Lettre Pastorale touchant ce qui c'est pass
dans le Diocese de Meaux. and dans plusieurs autres, don't les Evesques mes
confrere and mes amiss n'avoient fait le recit; and may je persist a dire, sons
les y ieux de Dieu, qui jugera les vivans and les morts, que je n'ay rien dit
que de veritable; and que l' Autheur de le Republique des Lettres av^it rezen
un mauvais memoire, quand il a di^ que ^e retranchi^^^ cet Article dans les
Editions ^^^bantes, puisque, je n'y ay pas se^lmeat Song- Reply to the Def. of
the expos. of the Doct. of the Chapter of Eng. p. 181.
solemn protestation in the presence of God who is to judge the quick and dead,
that he spoke nothing but the truth, and that he never designed to expunge that
Clause: it is not without a sensible regret that I relate this passage, but
when a person of his Quality, and refined Wit, shall with so great solemnity
impose upon the world wherein so many thousands can convince him of imposture,
and call God to witness to so notorious an untruth, we may well expect to meet
with very little sincerity from others, who are so great admirers of this
Bishop. It is a very true and just Remark made by a late Present state of the
Controv. between the Chapter of Eng. and the Chapter of Rome, p. 22. Land. 1687. 4 to.
Author, that his MAJESTY'S BRIEF alone may serve for a Confutation of so
shameful an Assertion, and show us how little we can rely upon these Gentlemen
when they talk to us of things that were done twelve or fourteen years ago,
that make no scruple of dealing thus with us in a matter of Fact, in the sight
of the world, before whose eyes these things are acted, to which I may add the
witness ALL COUNTRIES can bear to the contrary, where multitudes of those poor
distressed, persecuted Christians have taken sanctuary. But for the particular
matters of Fact in that Prelates Diocese my Ibid. 22, 23, 24.
Author informs us, That as far as he can learn, the Dragoons, (by whom they
make their Proselytes) were not lodged in the Bishopric of Meaux; but they
came up to the very Gates of the City. Being thus in sight of their danger, and
expecting every minute when it would fall upon them, the Bishop thought that
certainly now if ever they would be disposed to a compliance; (so that though not
tortured they were frighted into it.) With this advantage he invites them to a
conference, appears more moderate than even his own exposition; and desires
very little more of them, than what any one might venture to subscribe. Such
advances backed with the terrors of the Dragoons at the Gates, prevailed upon
them; upon which the Dragoons were dismissed. How this agrees with not so much
as hearing violences mentioned, and returning peaceably, is only for them to
make out who are so good at reconciling Contradictions; especially if we look
on his carriage afterward, when Ibid. p. 23.
he actually proceeded to mention Violence, for he threatened those that would
not come, and quartered the Dragoons* upon the obstinate; and particularly on
Monsieur de Seguier Cousen to the late Chancellor of that name, who are to this
day Prisoners on th^^ account. Nay this same Gentleman who so gravely tells ^s
he heard the same from other Bishops, viz. that there was no force used, His
pastoral Letter, bears date March 24. and this to the Gentleman, April 4.
did in a Letter dated but a few days after that wherein he denies any violence
to be used to the Protestants, both own and justify the Persecution to a
Person of Quality who had escaped out of France, and he desired to reclaim;
which kindled such an indignation in that honorable Person, that he Printed
the Bishops Letter to him: and yet can this Prelate appeal to God concerning
the truth of that which he had contradicted under his own hand?

We need not wonder at his singular dexterity in this matter, seeing it has
been his chief Employment as a Bishop, to make Proselytes, and it would be a
great wrong to his quick Apprehension; to suspect his being thoroughly versed in
the artifices necessary for accomplishing his end. Which is an opinion none
that is conversant in his Works can well be of, he having taken so much Care to
furnish us with instances of his excellency therein. For being charged by the
Learned Expos. of the Doct. of the Chapter of Eng. p. 7. of the preface, Land.
1686. 4 to.
Expositor of the Doctrine of our Church, with teaching Prayer to Saints in
such a manner, as that it was directly contrary to the same Doctrine as laid
down in Laveritable devotion envers la Sr. Vierge, Par. 1679. 4 to.
Father Crassets Book on that Subject, by his Vind. of the Bishop of Condom's
Exposition, p. 115, Land, 1686, 4 to.
Letter of April the 6 th. 1686. Reply to the def. etc. p. 181.
affirms he never read that Jesuit's discourse, neither ever heard it mentioned
that it was contrary to his exposition; which he again asserts in his Letter of
May 13. 1687. now to prove this of the same stamp with the former passage, the
very looking into the Edit. Paris, 1685. 12s.
Bishops Book of Communion under one kind, where he is answering Monsieur
Jurieux, who objects that Book of Father Crasset against his Lordship, and
spends several pages to prove that it plainly contradicts his Exposition* is
sufficient. So that we must either conclude the BISHOP answered a Book which he
never read, or that his PROTESTATION that he never heard there was any thing in
that Jesuits Book contrary to his, MVST BE VNTRVE; for he could not peruse
Monsieur Jurieux discourse, without finding the difference insisted on. This
was urged against him by his Def. of the Expos. of the Doct. of the Chapter of
England, p. 114. Land. 1686. 4 to.
Adversary, but he thinks fit in his Reply to take no notice of it; contenting
himself with an unjust reflection upon that French Divine, but never offers to
weaken this Argument, which had been alleged purposely to prove his Assertion
false. And which will always remain as an unanswerable instance of his
insincerity; unless he fly for refuge to that equivocating shift, that he never
HEARD Father Crassets Doctrine was different from his, though he had indeed READ
a discourse which affirmed that it was, which is an excuse fit for such a Cause
and the best that it will ever bear.

There seems to be a kind of Conspiracy among the French-Clergy to deny this
Persecution, or at least to represent it as neither so violent or universal as
indeed it is, to which purpose it is See Last Efforts of afflicted Innocence,
p. 5, 6. Land. 1682. 8 vo.
affirmed in a discourse said to be written by order of the Clergy, (under this
Title A LETTER FROM A CHVRCH MAN TO A FRIEND) That there were not forty
Churches of Protestants demolished in the ten years preceding the Year Eighty
Two, when it is notoriously known, that in the Province of POITOV alone, near
that number were pulled down; and the Agent of the Clergy had the May before
said at the opening of the Assembly, that the K. had demolished an infinite
number of them.

But it is not particular Actions only, which they are so ready to deny and
disclaim; but if any Authors, whether Fathers, or of a latter date, of
whatsoever kind be objected to them, they reckon it a good and sufficient
Answer, either to deny that there are such Authors, or that they wrote those
Books, or that the passages insisted on are to be found in them; or if all
these be made too evident to be handsomely denied, they have then some wrested
interpretation which without any hesitancy they will offer as the Sense of the
Author they are pressed with.

This Liberty of rejecting Books when they are pressed with them, is not only
practiced but defended; De cultu Adorat. lib. 2. disput. 5. c. 3. Mogunt. 1601,
8 vo. Speaking of Alanus Copus and Sanders denying the Epistle to Joh.
Hierosol. to be his, says, id commune etiam and frequens effugium esse solet
iis qui testimoniis conciliorum, aut Patrum in aliqua controversia nimis
premuntur.
VASQUEZ telling us, that it is frequent among the Catholics, when they are
urged with Testimonies out of the Councils or Fathers to deny that they are
theirs, and this* he says is the readiest (and often the best) refuge they can
find; and Ad ann. 32. n. 18, 19.
BARONIVS, being pressed with a passage out of Clement's Constitutions, answers,
that he might deny the Authority of them, which he affirms to be a very
justifiable shift; this is confessed by the Authors of the In Catholicis
veteribus plurimos feramus errores and extenuemus, excusemus, excogitato
commento persaepe negemus, and commodum iis sensum affingamus, dum opponuntur
in disputationibus, aut in conflictionibus cum adversariis, Index expurg.
libror. qui hoc seculo prodierunt, Edit. 1586. 12 s.
Index Expurgatorius Belgicus to be their usual practice, and they give
directions how to improve it; which the Missionaries are very observant of, as
the experience of those who converse with them, may easily discover.

I remember when I urged one of them with the Novelty of Transubstantiation, he
told me it was so far from being new, that it was never questioned, till
BERENGARIVS opposed it; when I desired him to call to mind that BERTRAM lived
SOME AGES before that he mentioned, he replied in a GREAT HEAT, THERE WAS NO
SUCH MAN, and turning to the Company, desired them to take notice how we coined
Authors at our pleasure; but when I undertook to justify both that there was
such a Writer who opposed their Doctrine, and had satisfied those who were
present, he had no way to come off, but by pretending he mistook the name, but
I could not prevail with him to tell who it was he supposed I named. When
Campion the Jesuit who made such a bustle with his Brags of challenging the
UNIVERSITIES was Confer. with Campion in the Tower p. 134. Land. 1583. 4 to.
pressed with some Texts out of the Book of Judith to prove that she was not
inspired by God, he confidently affirmed, there were no such passages, though it
was presently proved that they were to be found in the Vulgar Latin: and Mr.
Chark Ibid. 146, 147.
alleging Tertullian against Hermogenes in defense of the sufficiency of
Scripture, Mr. Campion first denied that Tertullian wrote the Book, and being
convinced of that, without reading the place, he immediately of his own head
began a discourse of the Fathers design therein; as if it were revealed to him
by Inspiration, for he had just before disclaimed the knowledge of any such
piece of Tertullians, which way of expounding the FATHERS and SCRIPTURE at
random, he was so in love with, that in the last Conference, being pressed with
that passage of our SAVIOR, Thou shall Ibid. p. 166.
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; from whence Mr.
Clark inferred Mat. 4.10.
that as the Text of Deuteronomy, Thou shall worship no Deuteronomy. 6.14.
strange gods, justified our Saviors adding the word ONLY, him ONLY shall
thou serve, so we by the same warrant and words do in the question of
Justification, take the words Romans 9.11. Gal. 2.16.
NOT BY WORKS, Romans 3.21.
NOT BY LAW, to import as much as FAITH ONLY, for ALL WORKS whatsoever being
excluded by these negative Speeches, FAITH ALONE, remains. To evade this Mr.
Campion with his usual boldness replied, that the word WORSHIP does of
necessity infer so much, and therefore CHRIST did well to expound it by ONLY:
but it was not so in the other instance. Where by endeavoring to outface that
Argument, he gave up the whole Cause of worshipping Images and Saints, by
confessing that GOD ALONE is to be worshipped.

And the Jesuit COTTON Confessor to HENRY the great of France, Hospi^. Histor.
Jesuit, p. 222, 223. Edit. Tig. 1670. fol. Pater Cotton, tum dixit eum librum
nequaquam a suae societatis hominibus emanasse, sed Genovae ad constandum
Jesui^is odium fictum ab haereticis fuisse. Qui tamen postea, long aliter,
quid sentiret, expressit, laudato Scribanii opere and distributis multis illius
exemplaribus, atque etiam claro admodum viro commandaret eum, tanquam juventu^i
Latinis literis imbuendae apprime utile, etc.
when Carolus Scribanius, under the feigned name of Bonarscius had published
his Book wherein he defended the power of Popes over the Lives and
Temporalities of KINGS, finding how ill it was resented at the Court of France,
confidently asserted, that it was a Book written by the Heretics, and
published only to make the Jesuits odious; and yet the same man when he had
opportunity highly commended, the very same Book; as very fit for the
instruction of youth, and was a means of dispersing many Copies of it.

Let the impartial Reader but reflect on this carriage which is so universally
approved among them, and he will find it was not without reason that I desired
of him in the former Chapter, TO DISTRUST EVERY THING THEY SAY. It was a Habit,
I was very unwilling to endeavor after, till my experience of their way of
writing, and observations of their discourses, convinced me of the absolute
necessity, all who deal with them lie under to attain it; for I cannot call to
mind any one of their Books, nor remember any particular Conversation which I
have been engaged in with them, wherein I have not met with such shuffling and
insincere Answers, offered with as grave a countenance, and as much assurance
as if there was no juggling at the Bottom.

To allege all the instances which the late passages of this nature furnish us
with, would be as troublesome to the Reader as tedious to me. See Answer to the
Considerations on the Spirit of Martin Luther, p. 12, 13. Oxford. 1687. 4 to.
The Oxford Champion, gives Luther the Lie, for quoting a passage which though
this Civil Gentleman is pleased to deny it, is in the Author he professes to
take it from: The late See his Letter in the preface to the history of the
Irish Reb. Land. 1680. fol.
Bishop of Mead assures us, There are who contrary to all evidence confidently
aver, write and openly proclaim to the world, that there was no Rebellion in
Ireland in 1641. but they themselves, the IRISH and PAPISTS of Ireland were
then the SUFFERERS, and the PROTESTANTS the first AGGRESSORS, which they back
with such confidence, that the Bishop assures us, it has already gained great
belief with many. An eminent Divine lately discoursing with some of the Roman
Church, and producing the Roman Breviary, in confirmation of the point he was
insisting on, one of them very confidently told him that it was forged by the
Protestants, and when he offered the Passion week printed in English at Paris
he met with the same Answer. And at this day they spread among their people a
report, that the reason of the few hardships (for they strive to represent them
as few as possible) of the French Protestants is because they designed to
Rebel against the King.

It is almost incredible what a multitude of such instances might be given, and
as strange, that men who pretend to so much Religion, should be guilty of them;
but they find the effects of them so pleasing, that there is no hope they
should ever be prevailed on to relinquish these unhandsome Methods, and behave
themselves with more modesty and respect to Truth. For hereby they have so
possessed their people with false notions, and filled their heads with such
invented stories, that they look upon us as a parcel of men who can neither
write nor speak truth; insomuch that but a few days ago, when I offered to a
Gentleman of that Communion to prove his Church guilty of FORGING AVTHORS, and
altering the genuine works of the ancient Fathers and modern Divines, he
replied that he was so sure of the contrary, that though I should swear it he
would never believe it true; nay if I should show him the very Books, he was
sure they must be some of our own making, and therefore would giv^ no credit to
them; just such an encounter See his Falsificationum Roman^rum (...) primi
Liber pri^^s, in the preface, Land. 16^6. 4^o.
Mr. Crashaw had with some of the same Religion upon this Subject; when
objecting the INDEX EXPURGATORIUS, they presently replied it was never done by
the Catholic Church, but it was some trick of BEZA or JUNIUS devised to
disgrace the Catholic Cause. To justify his Accusation he produced STELLA on
Luke, which was purged as the Title it self declared according to the rules of
that Index; they answered, the Title might be put in by some of us in malice,
to make the world believe the Romish Church did what they have not done. Nay,
when he produced Possevine the Jesuit affirming that he was so purged; they
would not be satisfied but still declared there was no such thing. And this is
the case of many thousands at this day among them.

Neither is this confident trick of asserting whatever they fancy may advance
their Cause, practiced only when they are pressed with an Argument or
Authority; but in their own Arguments against us they will not stick to publish
the greatest Falsities, if it may either create an ill opinion of us, or
enhance their peoples esteem for them. Their usual entrance is with great
boasts of their Cause, and that if their Enemies dare mee^ them, the world
shall see with how much ease they will baffle all their Arguments, though the
Jesuit See Du Moulin 's life* p. 14, 15. prefixed to his Novelty of Popery,
Edit. Land. 1664 fol.
Gontiere was sadly foiled, when having so far prevailed upon Monsieur
Liembrun, that the Gentleman had promised to become a Romanist; after a
conference which he desired the Jesuit would hold with Dr. Du Moulin; when the
conference began, he was so puzz'ld to prove his own mission, that after much
turning over the Bible, he retired ^^lent and in confusion to a Corner of the
Room; upon which Monsieur Liembrun in indignation addressed himself to
Gontiere: Father, said he; you told me that if I brought a Minister before you,
you would confound him, here is one, and you stand dumb. Upon which, the
Gentleman was confirmed in his Religion. And Mr. Campion, notwithstanding all
his brags, and vain challenges, was so miserably baffled, in the four
conferences held with him in the Tomes, that whoever reads the Relation
published by his own party, will have other thoughts of his Abilities and
Learning, than he could possibly form from the Idea, the Commendations given of
him by the Missionaries, might prevail with him to entertain.

These brags having raised the expectation of the people to admiration, they
are well prepared to feed the humor, in which the description given of
Reflections on Mr. ^ari^^as, p. 14. Amsterd. 1686. 1^ s.
Monsieur Maimbourg, is a character of their conduct, that they have no regard
to truth, or likelihood in what they assert; and though I know there are many
among them who abhor such practices, yet the much greater number of them do all
copy after the same pattern; when the ingenious Author of the Edit. Land. 1685.
Chap. 11.
Pap. Misrepresented and Represented, would establish the Books (which our
CHURCH rejects for Apocrypha,) as a part of the Canon of Scripture, he cites
St. Gregory Nazianzen and St. Ambrose, neither of whom have any thing to the
purpose, the first only mentions the persons of the Maccabees, and commends
them; and the latter quotes them as we do any other books, but has not the
least tittle of their being part of the sacred Canon; but thinking to establish
two points by one Authority, he tells us in the same Chapter, that St. Jerome
doubted of the Book of Judith, which for some time seemed to him Apocryphal,
till the Council of Nice declared it otherwise: now though I doubt not it was his
design, to establish the Authority both of a General Council, and the Book of
Judith by this one instance, yet he has unhappily failed in both; the
confidence with which he backs this Affirmation being all the strength of it,
for it was impossible there should be any truth in it, seeing when the Council
of Nice sat, St. Jerome was either not born, or but two years old; and the
Council made no Decree at all about the Books of Scripture, yet does that witty
Author venture these three untruths in one Chapter, as if because setting a
good face on the matter, prevails with the people of his Communion, who are
kept from examining what they hear affirmed, we must therefore believe all he
says with the same implicit Faith.

But when Baronius and Bellarmine, those Champions of the Church of Rome,
Richer. H^stor Council. Genesis lib. 4. par. 2. p. 135. Quibus viris hoc propositum
esse nemo nescit ut temporalem Curiae Romanae Monarchiam quovis jure vel
injuria vendicent.
care not by what means they establish the Doctrine of the Pope's power, which
is the character given of them by a learned man of their own Communion; their
unfaithfulness being so obvious, that a Walsh. Hist. of the Irish Remonstrance,
pref. to the Cath. p. 9. Edit. Land. 1674. fol.
Franciscan Friar yet living observes, that the great Annalist Baronius, seems
to have had no other end in writing his twelve laborious Tomes, than to heap
together how well or ill soever all the Topics he could imagine for asserting
to the Bishop of Rome the universal Monarchy; when we find that Pillar of the
Cause pointing out the way to the inferior Missionaries it is no wonder if an
exact imitation of these great Examples be affected by them. And indeed this
disposition is so natural to the Guides of that Church, that no sooner can a
Proselyte breath among them, but he is running in the same path; thus Mr. See
Animadversions upon Fanaticism fanatically imputed to the Catholic Church, by
the Lord Clarendon, p. 66. Land. 1674. 8 ^e.
Cressy very seriously attempts to persuade the world that when examination is
made of Miracles in order to the Canonization of any Saint, the Testimony of
women will not be received, for which he gives this reason, because naturally
imagination is stronger in them than judgment, and whatever is esteemed by them
to be pious, is easily concluded by them to be true; but though there be very
much weight in this reason, yet the matter of Fact is so notoriously false,
that there is scarce any of their noted Saints, in the process of whose
Canonization we do not find the Oaths of women pass current, nay, sometimes
without any other Testimony to confirm them; for as his Right Honorable and
Learned Answerer observes, the single Testimony of the Nurse was the only
evidence of the first Miracle that St. Benedict (Mr. Cressy's great Patron)
wrought: Ibid. and p. 67.
and in the Canonization of Ignatius Loyala the Founder of the Jesuits; the
Attestation of Isabella Monialis was taken to confirm his working Miracles; and
yet no doubt this plausible Assertion of Mr. Cressy's passes for truth among
very many who being destitute of opportunities to discover the mistake, yield
firm credit to it, because it is confidently advanced.

There is nothing more frequent in these Gentlemen's mouths, than ALL THE
FATHERS are of this opinion, ANTIQVITY is VNANIMOVS in this point, and such
like bold expressions; though they deserve as much credit as Mr. Cressy's
pretense and very little more.

For though Catholic Scripturist p. 191. Land. 1686. ^ vo.
Mr. Mumford the Jesuit, tells us, that the Text of St. Paul, Let a Bishop be
the Husband of one Wife, was only a permission at that time, when it was
impossible to find fit men for that office who were single; (an Assertion
perfectly false) that the Apostle would have no man who married a second Wife
be made a Bishop; and that the Text is so interpreted by the COVNCILS and
FATHERS VNANIMOVSLY, (...). Hom. 2. in Tit.
St. Chrysostom will tell him that this Text is so far from being only a
permission of Marriage for a time, that it is designed for increasing the
esteem of it; and if he pleases to consult him in another (...). Hom. 3. in 1.
Tim.
Homily upon the same Subject, he will find, that the interpretation he calls
ridiculous is given by that great Divine, the Apostle (says he) forbids
excess, because among the Jews the Association of a second Marriage was lawful
and to have two Wives at once; so that all the Fathers we see are not unanimous
in his Exposition, though he is pleased to say they are; and if we are as he
tells us in the same place ridiculous in interpreting the words of Saint Paul
in this Sense, that a Bishop should have but one Wife at once; we have very
good Authority for being so; though his Consideration or Sincerity was but
small when he tells us ALL the Fathers are VNANIMOVS of his side, and that it is
ridiculous to dissent from him. With the same briskness we are told by the
Animadversions by way of Answer to a Sermon preached by Dr. Ke^n. etc. p. 4.
Land. 1687 4 to.
IRISH Animadverter on the Bishop of Bath and Wells's Sermon, that
Melchisedeck's Bread and Wine is owned by all to be a Type of the Sacrament; I
suppose he meant ALL of his Communion, for he must be very ignorant, not to
know that the Protestants deny it; and yet by his telling the Bishop, that he
durst not meddle with that point, because of this UNIVERSAL Consent, he seems
to extend his ALL beyond the narrow ^ounds of the Roman Church. But we may well
expect such a spirit of Confidence in the Members of a Church, in whose RVLE OF
FAITH, the COUNCIL OF TRENT we find this Assertion, Sess. 21 c 4. eos nul^a
(...) necessitate i^ fecisse sine controversi^ credendum est.
that the ancient Fathers when they gave the Eucharist to Infants, did not
teach it was necessary to Salvation that they should receive it. An affirmation
which we may in some sort excuse the Fathers of that Council for being so hardy
as to advance, their Skill in Antiquity being so very small, that it is more
than probable very few of them knew the contrary; though a little more modesty
might have been expected, than so rashly to pronounce against the whole current
of the Fathers, and the universal Tradition of the Church for some Ages, nay
against the decree of Pope Innocent the First, who as Lib. 2. ad Bonif. cont.
duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 4. Beatae memoriae Innocentius Papa sine baptismo
Christi, and sine participatione corporis and sanguinis Christi, vitam non
habere parvulos dicit.
Saint Augustine assures us, taught, that little children cannot have eternal
Life, without Baptism and the participation of the Body and Blood of Christ;
with which place when Mr. Campion was pressed, he after the example of this
Council, as Confer. with Camp. in the Tower the second day, p. 41.
positively answered there is no such Decree, though the very work of Saint
Augustine was brought, and this passage showed him. With the very same
Sincerity, does De Romano Pontifice* Lib. 1. c. 10.
Bellarmine affirm that the WHOLE CHVRCH and ALL the Greek and Latin Fathers
teach, that when Christ said upon this Rock will I build my Church, he thereby
meant Peter; and Dissert. 4. p. 1. pa. 274.
Alexandre Natalis, that the Fathers with a NEMINE CONTRA DICENTE interpret the
Rock to be that Apostle; there needs but very little reading to confute this,
notwithstanding all the assurance it is backed with, for not only particular
Fathers tell us, that when our Lord said upon that Rock, he meant, upon the
Faith of the Confession Peter had then made, insomuch that Saint Non enim de
carne Petri sed de ^ide dictum est, Lib. de Sacrament Incarnationis.
Ambrose is positive it is not of the flesh but of the Faith of Peter, that
this is said, but that main stream of Antiquity runs this way to establish that
exposition which Super hanc fidem super hoc quod dictum est, Tu es Christus. In
Epist. primam Johannis tract. decim.
St. Austin so plainly gives, that the Church was established upon that Faith
which Peter had then confessed, when he said thou art Christ the Son of the
living God; nay, so far are the Ancient Writers from being unanimous in this
point, that there are three several Opinions among them, some and but very few
affirming it was Peter's Person, in the same sense as all the Ephesians. 2*2^.
Apostles are called the Foundation of the Church, others that it was himself,
CHRIST designed by the word ROCK, and the third that which I have mentioned
that it was the Faith then confessed by St. Peter which has near threescore
Fathers and Councils to authorize it; where the first has hardly six* judge
now on which side the NEMINE CONTRA DICENTE lies.

By this time I think it pretty evident, that these Gentlemen are too much akin
to those, 1 Timothy 1.7.
who are desirous to be Teachers of the Law, but understand not, (or at least
mind not,) what they say, nor whereof they affirm; which makes the Advice of
one of themselves in another case very seasonable, Good Advice to the Pulpits,
p. 50. Land 1687. 4 to.
who tells us, that this huffing humor is caution enough to any reasonable man
to take care; for if it be our duty to take nothing in Religion upon trust, it
is certainly of very great concern that we be suspicious in trusting those,
whose insincerity is so very great, that they are not ashamed to publish the
most palpable Untruths; what is to be expected then from their discourses with
ignorant and unwary men, especially in private, where they are in no such
danger of being exposed.

CHAP. III. Of their Slanders.
WHen the Prophet Jeremiah was in the name of the Lord, endeavoring to Reform
the Corruptions of the JEWISH CHURCH, he complains, that his enemies said one
to another, Jerem. 18.18.
Come and let us devise devices against him, and let us smite him with the
Tongue; Chap. 20.10.
Report say they, and we will report it; which made him give that Caution and
Advice to those who obeyed the Voice of the LORD by him. Chap. 9.4.
Take ye heed every one of his Neighbor, and trust ye not in any Brother: for
every Brother will utterly supplant, and every Neighbor will walk in Slanders;
whose Case being so very like that of the REFORMED CHURCHES, both in the work
he undertook, REFORMATION, and in the opposition which was made to him by
CALUMNIES and SLANDERS, his Advice is as seasonable to us, as to the Reforming
Jews; we having to deal with a politic sort of men, who notwithstanding the
WISE Prove. 10.18.
Solomon has pronounced that he that utters Slanders is a fool, establish it
as a Maxim which they are very diligent observers of, THAT IT IS NO MORTAL SIN
TO CALVMNIATE FALSELY TO PRESERVE ONES HONOR, like the Heretics Ep. 137. Qui
non habendo quod in causa suae divisionis defendant, non nisi hominum crimina
colligere affectant; and ea vice plura falsissime jactant, and quia ipsam
divinae Scripturae veritatem criminari and obscurare non possunt, homines per
quos praedicatur adducunt in odium, de quibus and fingere quicquid in mentem
veniat possunt.
St. Augustine speaks of, who not being able to defend their Cause set
themselves to revile their adversaries, spreading the most false reports, that
seeing they cannot evade the force or obscure the evidence of the truth
contained in the holy Scriptures, they may render those who preach it odious,
by reporting all the evil of them they can invent.

I know this is a severe charge, and will be looked upon even by many sober and
impartial men, as uncharitable, but if they can either prove that the passages
I relate are false, or the Authors I cite, who maintain it lawful are forged
and corrupted; I am willing to lie under that imputation: But on the other
side, if they prove to be truly cited, I must desire of the Reader that their
Character of religious men, and their formal pretenses to sincerity, may be
looked upon as indeed they are but a fair covering, and cloak for their
designs; and I CHALLENGE the WHOLE BODY of them, to prove one particular
Instance or Citation false; wherein I do not (as Mr. Pulton in his Remarks)
charge those Slanders on them, which are only the additions which a story gets
by running from hand to hand; for I know it is possible a man may relate things
that are false, without being guilty of the Slander, by being deceived in the
account which was given him of those matters; but when men make it their
business to defame and assert the lawfulness of doing it by false Reports, I
think it is no piece of injustice or want of Charity to call them SLANDERERS.

I am not insensible that the generality of men are apt to reason with
themselves, that surely Religious Men cannot be of such seared Consciences, as
to damn themselves by such malicious backbiting; but in this case such a
reflection is ungrounded, for their great Casuists defend it to be lawful; and
are so far from being apprehensive of damnation, that they justify its
practice, as Father De Jus^. l. 2. tr. 2. disp. 12. n. 404. See this passage in
the Provincial Letters, p. 362. Edit. Land. 1657. 8 vo.
Dicastillo informs us; I have maintained (says he) and do still maintain that
Calumny when it is used against a Calumniator, though grounded on absolute
Falsities, is not for that any mortal sin either against Justice or Charity.
And to prove it I have brought a cloud of our Fathers to witness it, and whole
Universities consisting of them, all whom I have consulted, and among others
the Reverend Father John Gans Confessor to the Emperor, the Reverend Father
Daniel Bastele Confessor to the Arch Duke Leopold, Father Henry, sometimes
Preceptor to those two PRINCES; All the public and ordinary Professors of the
University of Vienna, all the Professors of the University of Grats, all the
Professors of the University of Prague, of all whom I have at hand the
Approbations of my opinion written and signed with their own hands: Besides
that, I have on my side, Father Pennalossa a Jesuit, and Confessor to the King
of Spain, Father Pillecorolli a Jesuit, and many others. And when this was
objected to the Jesuits by the Author of the Provincial Letters in his
fifteenth Letter; the Answer to the Prove. Letters, p. 342. Edit. Paris. 1659. 8
vo.
Answerers of that Letter where they undertake to defend themselves, instead of
condemning add more Authority to Father Dicastillo's Position, by citing
several Authors besides those mentioned before in defense of it. Neither do
they deny the Doctrine of Caramuel who asserts, that it is a probable opinion,
Prove. Letters. p. 363.
that it is not any mortal sin to caiumniate falsely to preserve ones honor,
for it is maintained by above TWENTY grave Doctors so that if this Doctrine be
not probable there is hardly any such in all the body of Divinity. And the same
is asserted by the Theses of the Jesuits at Ibid. p. 361.
Lovain, Ann. 1645. in case of calumniating and imposing false Crimes, to ruin
their Credit who speak ill of us.

Besides these Vniverslties and Divines, who teach the lawfulness of Calumnies
and false Reports, we find it among other Rules of the Jesuits; that they
should be sure to put this Doctrine in Practice, even against those of their
own Cummunion, the ancient Orders of the Roman Church; for if such happen to be
an hindrance to their ambitious Designs, by standing in their way, Instruct.
secret. pro super. societ. Jesu. p. 11, 12.
the rule is, let their faults be diligently noted, and they represented as
dangerous to the public peace, which as is observed by Discov. of the society
in relat. to their Politics, p. 4. Land. 1658^ 8vo.
one no enemy to their Order, was a succesfull means of their enlargement, and
succeeding greatness, their instilling into the minds of Princes by false
insinuations, an evil opinion of the other religious Orders. Instruct. secret.
ut supra. p. 20.
Among the same instructions they are directed, that all those who hinder and
dissuade men from giving ESTATES or MONEY to the SOCIETY should be turned out,
and to prevent their doing mischief after their ejection. Ibid. p. 22. Dicantur
malae ejus inclinationes, vitia, defectus, quos de se in manifestatione
conscientiae aliquando superioribus aperuerat. -- Externis insinuentur causae
dismissionis illae ob quas vulgus nos odio habent, sic enim plausibilior erit
dismissio quorumcunque.
LET THEIR FAULTS BE EXPOSED (says the eleventh Rule) EVEN SUCH AS IN
DISCHARGING THEIR CONSCIENCES THEY HAVE REVEALED TO THEIR SUPERIORS: and let
Strangers be possessed that they were guilty of those Crimes which the people
are wont to hate us for; this made Bernardi Giraldi Patavini pro Repub.
Venetorum Apologia p. 129. He cites Mariana's words in his Book de Regimine
societatis Jesu, c. 2. Si ipse Paulus Apostolus, Generali Jesuitarum and
assentatoribus ejus contradiceret, neque errores illorum probaret, futurum
esset ut pro extravagante, inquieto, and turbatore pacis haberetur.
Mariana a famous Member of that Society affirm; That if the Apostle St. Paul
himself should contradict the Jesuits, and not approve their Errors, they would
be sure to represent him, as an extravagant and restless Disturber of and enemy
to Peace. The observation of which Spirit and Doctrine made Anthony Tirrell in
his exam. before Commissioners, June 25. 1602. See it at the end of Dr.
Harsenet's Declaration of the Popish impostures, Land. 1603. 4 to.
one who had been many years a Priest declare, They do not account it evil (as
I verily think) to calumniate the Protestants by any device whatsoever that may
carry any probability with it, nor make any conscience to tell and publish any
untruths, which they think being believed may advance and promote such points
and matters, as they take upon them to defend for the honor of the Church of
Rome and dignity of their Priesthood, which he affirmed upon Oath the 25 th. of
June 1602.

. 3. This is observed to be their way of treating their Adversaries, by the
Ingenious and Loyal Four Letters on several subjects, p. 69. -- 1686.
Father Peter Walsh, a Friar of the Franciscan Order, who acknowledges, that
their Catholic Writers are generally hurried on to exorbitant Passions and
barbarous Language (besides many DOWNRIGHT LIES and MERE CALUMNIES often)
against all those that leave their Church. Neither is the treatment they afford
those who continuing Members of their Church oppose any of their designs more
Christian and sincere; an example whereof we have in a Hospir. Histor. Jesuit.
p. 249* -- Pontum Tyardaeum Episcopum Cabillonensem, eruditionis ac pietatis
singularis, ^irum, cum Jesuitae in suam factionem and conspirationem contra
Regem Henricum Tertium pertrahere non possent, -- populi furiosum odium and
invidiam in caput ejus modis omnibus concitare studuerunt. Est Collegium
Divioni Jesuitarum, quod Episcopi hujus non exiguis beneficiis adauctum fuit.
Erat enim bonae partis fundi illius Clientelaris Patronus; -- quamobrem
libello, etiam Graecis, Latinis and Gallicis versibus, atque oratione soluta
scripto and ipsi dicato cum amplissimo laudum ejus praedicatione, habuerunt
gratiam, and fidem dederunt. Sed quod in conspirationem Jesuitarum, and
parricidium Regis consentire noll^t, quidam Carolus inter Jesuitas Collegii
istius ascriptus linguam suam and Calamum superiorum instinctu, vehementer
contra illum acuit. -- Contra hunc Praesulem, ob dictam causam non solum in
familiaribus colloquiis, sed etiam publicis in contionibus atque editis quoque
libellis debacchatus est: ac inter alia (...). -- se quadraginta quatuor
haereses in tribus foliolis Homiliarum ejus in orationem Dominic^m
exprompsiss^, etc. vid. locum.
French Bishop, who had been a great Benefactor to the Jesuits, insomuch that
in their Poems and Panegyricks, they had magnified and extolled him for an
excellently learned and very pious Prelate; but when he refused to join with
them in their Conspiracy against King HENRY the Third, they set themselves to
defame him; both in their ordinary Discourses, their Books and Sermons,
affirming they had discovered four and forty Heretical Tenets in three single
Leaves of his works; which drew such a Vindication from the Bishop as will be a
blot to their whole Order, while the remembrance thereof remains in the minds
of men. And indeed it cannot be supposed they will let slip any occasion of
discrediting their Enemies, when as you have s^en before they believe they may
do it without hazarding their Salvation; and that by the Credit they have in
the world they may calumniate without any great fear of being accountable to
the justice of men.

Provincial Letters p. 368, 369, 370, 371.
When Monsieur Puys Pastor of St. Niceer at Lions, translated into French a
Book, concerning the duties of Christians toward their Parishes against those
by whom they are diverted from them: The Jesuits esteeming themselves to be
reflected on (though no mention was made of the Society) one of that Order,
Father Alby, wrote against the Translator, affirming that he was become
SCANDALOVS, lay under the suspicion of IMPIETY, of being an HERETIC and
EXCOMMUNICATED, and deserved to be cast into the FIRE: But all these
imputations were only the pure Offspring of their own Inventions for some time
after, (in the presence of Viz. Mr. De ville, Vicar General to the Cardinal of
Lions. M. Scarron, Canon and Pastor of St. Paul's. M. Margat. messieurs Borrand,
Seve, Aubert and Darvie Canons of St. Nicier. M. du Gu^ President of the
Treasurers of France. M. Groslier, Provost of Merchants. M. de Flechere,
President, and Lieutenant General. Messieurs de Boissat, de St. Romain, and de
Bartoly Gent. M. Bourgeois the King's Advocate in the Treasurers Court of
France. M. de Cotton, Father and Son and Mr. Boniel.
several Divines and Persons of Quality, who all signed the Declaration made by
both the Fathers) viz. Sep. 25. 1650. when Mr. Puys declared to the Jesuit that
in what he had written he designed no reflection upon that SOCIETY, for which he
had a very great esteem; Father Alby immediately replied, Sir, the belief I was
in that your quarrel was against the Society, of which I have the honor to be
a Member, obliged me to take pen in hand to answer it; AND I THOUGHT THE MANNER
OF MY PROCEEDING LAWFUL AND JUSTIFIABLE. But coming to a better understanding
of your intention, I do now declare, That there is not any thing that might
hinder me from esteeming you a man of a very illuminated judgment, of sound
Learning and ORTHODOX, as to manners UNBLAMABLE, and in a word, a WORTHY PASTOR
of your Church. So that by the Jesuit's own Confession he had no ground for his
Calumnies, but thought it a LAWFUL and JUSTIFIABLE manner of proceeding to
represent a person IMPIOUS and an HERETIC, in whom he knew no fault, but that
he supposed him no friend to his Order. This passage is so generally known, In
their Answer to the fifth Letter.
that the Jesuits who pretended to Answer the Provincial Letters, durst not
deny it, and therefore pass it over.

In the same manner is that pious and venerable Prelate the late Bishop of
Pamiers, treated by them; whose Life was an exact Copy of the Primitive
Holiness and Simplicity, yet the Burnet's Hist. of the Rights of Princes, p.
399. Land. 1682. 8 vo.
Jesuits affirm he was damned, for he had excommunicated three of their Order,
and put them all under an interdict of hearing Confessions in his Diocese.

Whatsoever Crimes they can imagine will render the PROTESTANTS odious to the
people, they with all imaginable diligence, pronounce them guilty of; in which
they act (as Europ. Spec. p. 101.
Sir Edwin Sands observes) like a supernatural Artist, who in the sublimity of
his refined and refining Wit disdains to bring only mere Art to his work,
unless he make also in some sort the very matter it self; so these men in
blacking the Lives and Actions of the Reformers, have partly devised matter of
so notorious untruth, that in the better sort of their own Writers it happens
to be checked, partly suborned other Postmen to compose their Legends that
afterward they might cite them in proof to the world as approved Authors and
Histories.

Because they supposed it would be a means to render the Reverend Dr. Du Moulin
contemptible to the world, they reported (as Novelty of Popery, p. 627.
he tells us himself) that he was a Friars Son, though the whole City of
Orleans knew the contrary, where his Father was born, and of very good note.
And I know a Minister who traveling in some Popish Countries and having been a
means to recall a Person to our Church, who was near seduced by the continual
Importunities of some English Priests, had a report raised of him, that he was
a Drunkard, and continually spent his time in an Alehouse or a Tavern; which
report the very Priest that raised it was afterward ashamed of, when it was
proved to his face, that the Gentleman had not been within the doors of a
public House except the first night, he came to that Town, during the stay of
some months, which he made there: With the very same dis-ingenuity we find the
Author of Advice to the Confuter of Bellarmine, p. 1. Land. 1687. 4 to.
Advice to the Confuter of Bellarmine, insinuating that the Writer of the
Reflections on the notes of the Church, employed his PEN to confute them over a
pot of Ale; which unhandsome passage he has neither been pleased to explain,
though Def. of the Confut. of Bella^* 2 d. note of the Chapter p. 1^ Land. 1687. 4 to.
his Answerer desired to know why he commenc't his advice with such a
suggestion? nor to defend the truth of a charge which such a passage
necessarily implies.

But they are not content to invent Crimes, and charge men with Actions, they
never owned or were guilty of, but pretend likewise to dive into men's thoughts,
which Laurentii Surii Comment. brevis, p. 259. Col. 1574. 8 vo. Quod quidem nos
de sectarum authoribus dictum praecipue volumus, quos plerosque perspicuum est
contra suam mentem and conscientiam long aliter and scribere and docere quam
rem ipsam se habere non sint nescii.
Surius was so expert at, that he sticks not to affirm, that the Protestant
Divines do generally write against their Consciences, and maintain positions,
which they know are false; and Bishop Usher's Life and Letters, p. 63.65. Land.
1686. fol.
Mr. Cambden's Adversary was so well acquainted with that learned persons
interior (to use a monkish word) that he tells the world, Mr. Cambden
dissembled his Religion* a calumny, those who are inclined to credit may see
clearly refuted in the place cited in the Margin.

That eminent Patriarch of the Greek Church, (whom with Dr. Smith I shall not
be ashamed to esteem a HOLY MARTYR) Mr. Thomas Davis, his Letter to Arch-B.
Usher, ib. 381.
CYRILLUS LUCARIS, could no sooner begin to Print some of the ancient Fathers,
and other Discourses against the Popish Errors, but the Emissaries of Rome
persuaded the Bassa who then presided at Constantinople, that the Patriarch
under pretense of Printing would coin and stamp false Money, and Smith's acc.
of the Gr. Chapter p. 266, 267, 268. Land. 168^. 8 vo, See also his Miscellanea. p.
95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103. Land. 1686. 8 vo.
finding some passages in one of his Books, against the Mohammedan Religion,
they ACCUSED HIM TO THE VIZIER FOR WRITING AGAINST THE ALCORAN, (were not these
Fathers rare Christians?) and that he designed to stir up the Greeks to mutiny,
which had near cost that Holy man his life, but upon the English Ambassador Sir
Thomas Row his expostulating the matter with the Vizier, the malicious and
false Informations of the Missionaries appeared so horrid and abominable, that
the Grand Vizier promised to restore all the Goods which had been seized upon
the first Accusation, and cast the Jesuits into Prison, where they had all been
strangled, if the Intercession of the English Ambassador had not prevailed for
their lives; but they were banished the Grand Segniors Dominions, and their Mr.
Davis's Letter, ut supr.
House and Library give to the Patriarch.

In the same manner because Father Paul the famous Writer of the History of the
TRENT COUNCIL, opposed himself to the ambitious pretenses of the Pope, who
claimed a temporal Authority over all Princes, Fowls Hist. of Romans Treasons,
p. 470. Land. 1681. fol.
the Court of Rome carried the greatest bitterness against him daily writing
Libels and invectives stuffed up with Lies and Forgeries; in the inventing of
which there was none more concerned than Maffeio Barbarian at that time Nuncio
in France, and afterward Pope by the name of Urban the Eighth; nay so far are
they guided by this Principle that rather than be wanting in the observation of
it, they care not how unlikely their Slanders are, or else they could never
have been guilty of so great an indiscretion against the famous Causabon, Ibid.
p. 514.
as after they had aspersed his Father and his whole Family to declare him (as
they did) a man of no judgment, affirming that he could not write Latin, or
scarce understand it; when he was known to all the learned Men of Europe, to be
one of the greatest Scholars of that Age.

But the Jesuit Sheldon's Survey of the Miracles of the Church of Rome, p. 25.
Land. 1616. 4 to.
Parsons was resolved not to trouble himself with particular persons, nothing
less than the whole Body of Protestants in England would serve his turn; which
made him several times assure Mr. Sheldon, that he would undertake to make the
Devil speak in any Bishop, Archbishop or Arch-heretick in England: and
therefore the Priests concerned in the exorcising of See their Examinations in
Dr. Sam^el Harsene^'s. Declaration of Popish Impostures in casting out of
Devils.
Sarah Williams and her Sister (of whom we shall give a larger account when we
come to treat of their Miracles) were accustomed frequently to affirm that all
the Protestants in England were possessed, and they should have their hands
full with those possessed Creatures when the nation became Catholics.

These one would think were pretty handsome Calumnies, and fit for such men to
invent and publish; but their late poetical Court has taught the succeeding
Gentlemen who shall be employed in this office, a way to affirm the truth of
their reports notwithstanding all imaginable evidence of their falsity; for, he
not content to affirm that Defense of the Papers written by the late King, p.
126. Land. 1686. 4 to.
among all the Volumes of Divinity written by Protestants, there was not one
original Treatise which handled distinctly and by it self, that Christian
Virtue of Humility; he renews Hind and Panther in the Pref. Land. 1687. 4 to.
the same Challenge near a year after, though the Difference between the
Protest. Socinians and methods, p. 62. Land. 1686. 4 to.
Author of the Difference between the Protestant and the Socinian Methods, had
told him there was one written by Mr. Will. Allen; and set down the place
where, and year in which it passed the Press. In the first indeed he limited
his assertion, to such as he had seen and heard of, wherein as he showed some
modesty, so he was likely to do no great harm, it being sufficiently known that
in matters of Divinity his acquaintance goes but a very little way, though in
his own Profession he is deservedly esteemed a Master; but to enlarge his
assertion, and after such an information, to make that General, which he was
too modest to do before, shows him an excellent Proselyte: and in this point he
seems able to instruct even his ghostly Fathers.

Another artifice by which they endeavor to create an aversion in the peoples
minds for the Ministers of our Church, is by flying at them altogether, and
reproaching them as covetous and greedy of Wealth* this they are instructed to
do by Seignior S^illin. Unreason. of separat. pref. p. 22. Land. 1681. 4 to.
Ballarini, who giving Advice to Father Young, concerning the best way of
managing the Popish Interest in England; among the other Directions, lays down
this, That the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England be represented us
worldly and careless; which Letter was found in Father Young's Study after his
death, and translated out of Italian into English. And this Slander they have
so far improved, that as a Person of Honor Lord Carend. against Cressy, p. 13,
14.
observes, they have entered into a Conspiracy in undervaluing whatsoever is
written by any Clergyman how learned or virtuous soever in defense of the
Church of England, as if he spoke only for his own Interest, so that they who
would undermine it by all the foul and dishonest Arts imaginable have the
advantage to be considered as persons engaged in that Account, merely and
purely by the impulsion of their Consciences, and for the discovery of such
Errors as are dangerous to the Souls of men; whilst they who are most obliged
and are best able to refute those malicious pretenses, and to detect the fraud
and ignorance of those seditious undertakers, are looked upon as men not to be
believed, at least partial, and that all they say is said on their own behalf;
this is a sad truth, and a new engine to make a battery, at which Atheism may
enter without opposition, with all its instruments and attendants. In
prosecution of which design it is usual with them to recount the Riches of the
Clergy, while they maliciously and falsely insinuate that the Revenues
Ecclesiastical in England are far greater than in Popish Countries; but if we
come to examine but the Wealth of eclesiastical Persons in the Popish times in
this Nation, we shall find, that it exceeded by many degrees that poor pittance
which Reformed Divines enjoy^, among whom it is known that multitudes have
hardly sufficient to buy themselves Bread; Speed in his Chronicle reckons that
in the beginning of King James his time, there were 4543. Livings under ten
pound, Edit. Land. 1623. at the end of the Reign of K. Henry the Eighth. p.
1101.
several hundreds of our Livings not amounting to ten pound a year a piece, and
several not to five, when the sole Revenues of the Monasteries and Hospitals,
beside the two Universities and several Monasteries not valued, in K. Henry the
Eighth's time, amounted to Ibid. p. 1100.
one hundred eighty six thousand, five hundred and twelve pounds odd Money;
besides the Bishoprics and Parishes which being joined to the former Sum, the
Clergy of the Church of Rome were possessed of the yearly Sum of above three
hundred and twenty thousand one hundred and eighty Pounds even in those times,
what would they have yielded then at this day? if then the Gentlemen of the
Church of Rome judge the Provisions for the Reformed Clergy too great, the
Possessions they enjoyed will certainly appear subject (and consequently
themselves) to the same Accusation, but upon much better grounds. Especially
when we consider that NEVER ANY CLERGY IN THE CHURCH OF GOD, HAS BEEN OR IS
MAINTAINED WITH LESS CHARGE THAN THE ESTABLISHED CLERGY OF THE CHURCH OF
ENGLAND; which an ingenious The Undeceiving of the people in the point of
Tithes. by Ph. Trelinie Gent. Land. 1651. 4 to.
Gentleman has evidently proved. To whose Arguments, if our Adversaries think
fit to reply, they shall not want a Defender: And I am ready to prove out of
their own Authors, that the Revenues of the French Clergy amount to above one
million, and two hundred thousand Pounds of our English Money yearly, that they
possess seven parts in twelve of the whole Revenue of the Kingdom; and that the
Archbishopric of Toledo in Spain is as rich as some Kingdoms. And now let all
the world judge to whom the Appellation of hirelings belongs, which they are so
ready to bestow on us. But not content to cast their reproaches upon the Body
of the Clergy, the Oxford Writer has attempted to bring the Charge of
worldliness home to a particular Bishop, but so unsuccessfully, that it is
evident, he was forced to use his invention to maintain it, which all his
assurance, (though he has a great Talent that way) will not be able to do; for
whereas he affirms, that the Fifth part of Chapter Government, p. 68.
Excellent Hooper (who in Q. Mary's days sealed the Protestant RELIGION with
his Blood,) held two Bishoprics at once; it is notoriously false: See Appendix
to Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation, vol. 2. p. 396. Reflect. on the
Hist. part of Ch Government, par. 5. p. 35. Oxford, 1687. 4 to.
For he never held but the Bishopric of Worcester, from which Gloucester was
divided by K. Henry the Eighth, and reunited to it by K. Edward; so that all
Hooper enjoyed was but one Bishopric which had some years been divided into
two; and yet our Author pretends he held them in Commendam.

If this means will not do the work, and our Divines still keep up their esteem
in the minds of the people, the next design is to expose them as guilty of some
immoral Crime; to this end they have (in this City) dressed some of their own
party in the Habit of a Minister, who according to instructions resorted to
houses of ill repute, while others of the gang planted there on purpose,
pointing at the supposed Minister have been heard to say aloud there goes Dr.
or Mr. such an one, that the people might suppose the most eminent of their
Ministers, frequenters of such places; and I can name some Divines whom they
have by this Artifice endeavored to defame.

If they have a design that any one of our Ministers should be esteemed idle
and lazy men, and negligent in their Office, they watch till he is gone abroad,
then repairing to some sick person of their Acquaintance; they desire them to
send for him while they are in the house and when the messenger returns, with
an account that he is not within; they take occasion to tell the sick persons
that our Ministers are never to be found; but always gadding abroad, without
minding the concerns of their people, but for their parts, they are always
ready to perform the duty of their Office to all sorts, that send for them; and
thus they served an Eminent Divine very lately.

But that Gentleman had a pretty good stock of Confidence, who urging a Woman
to become his Proselyte told her; that our Divines were men of no Learning, and
could not Preach but by the helps they received from hearing and reading the
Sermons of the Romish Priests: and yet this was very gravely urged by one of
them not many months since. I do not relate this passage that I think there is
any danger of its being believed even by the meanest understanding to our
prejudice; but to let the world see that there is no Slander how improbable or
senseless soever which these men are ashamed of.

The truth is they find Calumny their best weapon, and therefore are resolved
to use it at all adventures, hence it is we find among the rest of the
Directions given by the Jesuit Adami Contzen Politicorum Libri december. p. 96.
he advises to follow the example of those, Qui cum recusarent, quasi superbi
contumaces in obedientes magistratui accusabantur, etc.
Contzen, in his Advice for bringing Popery into a Country, that those who
preach against a Toleration, suspecting the design of the Papists in it, be
traduced as men that preach very unseasonable Doctrine that are proud,
conceited and enemies to Peace and Union. And for the better managing the
Popish Interest in England, Seignior Long's Hist. of Plots p. 89. Land. 1684.
v8 o. Dr. Stillin* unreasonableness of separation, p. 21. of the preface.
Ballarini, directs Father Young, To make it appear under hand that the
Doctrine, Discipline and Worship of the Church of England comes near to them;
that our Common Prayer is but little different from their Mass; and that the
ablest and wisest Men among us are so moderate, that they would willingly go
over to them or meet them half way; for thereby the more stayed Men will become
more odious, and others will run out of all Religion for fear of Popery.

And we find even at this time they are observing this Instruction, to which
end The Agreement between the Chapter of Eng. and the Chapter of Rome, Land. 1687. 4 to.
one of their number has been at the pains to show, that the Church of England
and the Church of Rome are agreed; and the whole Controversy lies between the
Church of Rome and dissenting Protestants; but I suppose since the Difference
between the two Churches has been so clearly related in the The Difference
between the Chapter of Eng. and the Chapter of Rome. Land. 1687. 4 to.
Answer to that Pamphlet, they will for the time to come keep closer to the
advice of doing their Business under hand, for the Discourse will hardly
convince any body that we are agreed with them.

But it is very pleasant to behold these Gentlemen laboring with all their
might to asperse the Reformers, when if those passages they lay to their Charge
be blots indeed, they are as prejudicial to the Gospel it self and to the
greatest of the Romish Saints, as if we allowed them in their full latitude,
they can be to us. Thus the Considerations on the spirit of Ma^tin Luther,
sect. 32.
Considerer upon the Spirit of LUTHER, spends much time and pains to prove that
Luther's Doctrine was not of God, because he relates several Arguments which
the Devil used against the Mass, thereby attempting to drive him to despair,
because he had for many years been a Romish Priest; upon which Pulton's
Remarks, p. 1.
Mr. Pulton puts this question, Now I ask whether the Doctrine delivered by the
Spirit of untruth can be from the Holy Ghost? Now though we tell these Gentlemen
that Luther spoke this by way of parable, yet seeing that they are deaf on that
ear, let it be for once allowed that it was a Real Conference, and all they can
draw from it is, either that knotty question of Mr Pulton, Whether the Doctrine
delivered by the spirit of untruth can be from the Holy Ghost? or that Luther
could not be an Holy Man, because the Devil was so often with him, which is the
great Argument of the Oxford Considerer, and Mr. Pulton himself in the tenth
page of his Remarks. As for the Question, I find in the Gospel, the Devils
themselves bearing testimony to our SAVIOR, Luke 4.41.
that he was Christ the Son of the living God, acknowledging him to be the Mar.
1.23, 24.
Holy One of God; and an whole Luke ^.28, 29, 30.
Legion of these unclean spirits crying out, what have we to do with thee Jesus
thou Son of God? And when to St. Paul, the spirit of Divination bore the same
witness, A^^. 16.16, 17.
That he was the servant of the most high God, and showed the way of Salvation;
nay I find also that God made use of the evil spirit's Testimony for the
Conversion of many, when the Act. 19.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Sons of a Jew undertook to call upon a man who was possessed, the name of the
Lord Jesus saying, we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches; the evil spirit
answered Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? And the man in whom the
evil spirit was leap't on them and overcame them, -- And this was known to all
the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus, and fear fell on them all, and
THE NAME OF THE LORD JESUS WAS MAGNIFIED; of which the following verses give
particular Instances. Now the same Answer which Mr. Pulton will make to an
Heathen, putting the same Question in this case, will give full satisfaction to
that which he puts to us, for if it be a good evidence to prove the Doctrine of
LVTHER false, because the Devil owned the truth of it, the conclusion will hold
as firm against the Deity of Christ, and Truth of the Gospel, which the Devil
was forced to confess. And if the second inference concludes against Luther
what shall we think of their admired In vita Antonii, inter Athan ^pera, vol.
2. Edit. Colon. 1636. (...).
St. Anthony, to whom the Devil frequently appeared, and using an articulate
voice spoke to him, acknowledging that he had often attempted to corrupt him,
but was not able; nay, that he was seldom without the company of the Devil
either beating him or discoursing with him, the Author of that Life informs us
in a multitude of Instances; and yet for all this, the Papists will maintain
his Saintship, so that the Devil's molestation is no Argument against Luther or
his doctrine; and there is hardly any of their noted Saints whom the Writers of
their lives do not affect to represent to us as persons from whom the Devil was
seldom or never absent.

Nor is it any wonder these Gentlemen should be so busy in scandalizing our
Divines, though the reflection falls as severely upon their own Canonized
Saints, when they have so little consideration as to charge us with those
things, which others of their own writing at the same time, and on the same
Subject, do acquit us of; an instance of which we have in their frequent cries,
that the Answer to a Letter to a Dissenter, p. 4. Printed for H. Hills, 1687. 4
to.
Exclusion Bill was managed in the House of Commons by the Sons of the Church
of England, and that the Mr. Pain's Answer to the Letter to a Dissenter, p. 2.
1687. 4 to.
Rebellion was to be laid to their Charge; Reply to the Reasons of the Oxford
Clergy against Addressing, p. 6, 7. 1687. 4 to.
that if we look to the excluding Party they were five to one Church of England
men; so that our Church must take the shame of all those things to her self;
these loud Clamours have made more noise in the world, than all their new Tests
and Instances of the Church of England's Loyalty, which I shall examine in
another place; But to the comfort of our Church her Adversaries agree not
together, so that she needs no vindication but what she is able to bring from
her greatest enemies; therefore one Letter in answer to two main Questions, p.
7.14. by T. G. Land. 1687. 4 to.
of them tells the Dissenters, that they were the Actors not only in 48. but
in the business of the Rye and the West too; and one who pleads the very same
cause assures us, Discourse for taking off the Test, -- p. 35. Lo^d. 1687. 4 to.
that the Dissenters appeared so rigorous in choosing their Representatives,
that they carried it for three Parliaments successfully against the Church of
England; and it was in those three Parliaments, that the Exclusion Bill was
promoted and stickled for; which is a clear demonstration, that the
Exclusioners were not five to one of the Church of England. But as these
Gentlemen contradict themselves in this point, so by the same assertion they
overthrow their great work of persuading the Dissenters that the Church of
England never was, nor never will be willing to ease their Consciences by a
Comprehension; when by affirming the Exclusion Parliaments to have been
composed of Church of England men, they give themselves the lie, seeing all the
world knows it was in those Parliaments, that the Bill of Comprehension was
promoted.

As they will coin immoral Actions for us, so likewise with the same sincerity,
they make a great complaint of our FALSIFICATIONS, when he that examines into
the matter will find no such thing; thus the Vindicator of Monsieur de Meaux
fills part of a page, with a list of his ADVERSARIES Falsifications, and
Calumnies, etc. of which you may judge by this instance; Defense of the Expos.
of the Doct. of the Chapter of England, p. 3^.
That ingenious Gentleman tells us, that Mr. de Meaux had affirmed, that the
denying of Salvation to Infants dying unbaptiz'd was a truth, which never any
one before Calvin durst openly call in question; this the Reply to the Defense,
etc. p. 62.
Vindicator calls a corrupting the Bishops words; which are these, Expos. of
the Doctrine of the Chathol. Church, p. 20 Land. 1685. 4 to.
the Lutherans believe with the Catholic Church the absolute necessity of
Baptism, and are astonished with her that such a Truth should be denied, which
never any one before Calvin durst openly call in question: now I APPEAL to all
the world, whether it be not the same thing, to affirm that Baptism is
absolutely necessary to Salvation, and that those who dye unbaptiz'd are not
saved; for if it be absolutely necessary, then without it there can be no
Salvation, and whoever asserts that denies Salvation to those who have it not;
let our Vindicator then defend himself from the imputation of Calumny, which I
lay to his charge in this particular, the calling that a Falsification and
Corruption which is the true meaning of the Bishops words.

I shall end this head with two Instances of their calumniating the poor
Protestants of France, though I could give as many hundreds Policy of the
Clergy of France, p. 57, 58, 59. Land. 1681. 8 vo.
durirg the heat of the War between France and Holland, the Reformed of
Dauphine had kept a Fast in all their Churches; and the Synod that had ordered
it had enjoined all the Ministers that belonged to it assisted by their
Ancients to visit Families, and put them in mind of what had been promised God
on the Fast Day, which one of the Ministers (against whom the Friars of St.
Anthony had a long time watch't for an occasion) performing, those pretended
Religious wrote to Mr. le Tellier Secretary of State, that something was
contriving against the King's Service; that the Hugonots had celebrated a Fast
through all the Dauphinate; that there was a Plot couched under this Fast, and
that Devotion was only the pretext of it; That this Minister had held secret
Assemblies at the houses of the Principals of his Parish, that he had Prayed
for the Success of the Hollanders Arms, and that great Sums of Money were
gathered by him and his party to send to the Prince or Orange; and with this
fair story they caused a great deal of trouble to the Gentleman, and suborned
Witnesses to maintain the Accusation, but he broke through all and cleared his
Innocence to the shame of his false Accusers: And as they persecuted those poor
people with Slanders in their own Country, so they continue to prosecute the
same unworthy Methods against them in ours, where they are fled for Relief from
the grievous Oppressions of their Enemies; for knowing the greatest part of
their Subsistence must come from the Charity of their Protestant Brethren, they
have endeavored to hinder them of that by spreading a report that they are
Papists: this as to London is known to many hundreds, and that they have done
the same in Ireland, we are informed by an ingenious and worthy Hunting of the
Romish Fox, p. 94, 95. Du^lin. 1683. 8 vo.
Gentleman, who tells us who they are that can prove the truth of his Assertion.

Thus are we dealt with by the Romanists as the Primitive Christians were
treated by the Heathens, but that which supported them does likewise encourage
us, seeing he whom we serve has pronounced Matt. 5 11.
blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and say all manner
of evil against you falsely for my sake: though we cannot forbear to admonish
our Adversaries of that divine threatening, Psalm. 101.5.
whosoever privily slandreth his Neighbor, him will I destroy; which is spoken so
particularly to them, that it is impossible for them to escape while they do
such things, though they may flatter themselves, that their Slanders are
public, when the denunciation is against those who slander privily; but if one
of those crimes be of such an heinous nature, how much greater is the guilt of
both, which I wish I had no reason to charge upon them. Nay, we have this to
comfort our selves with, that these Answer to a Letter to a Dissenter, p. 5.
printed for Henry Hills.
false Accusations are commonly the last refuge and therefore that cause which
stays it self so much upon them cannot hold long.

I noted before that these Gentlemen pretend to know what passes in the most
inmost Recesses of the hearts of men, and well they may, when they are so ready
to dive into the Secrets of the divine Providence, and from the sudden death of
persons to conclude what the designs of God in such particular Dispensations
are. In which knowledge they pretend to be so versed, that it is one of the
notes whereby to know their Church, given us by themselves, the unhappy death
of the Churches Enemies, that this can be no note of the Church, I shall not
concern my self to prove, but refer my Reader to the Disc. of the notes of the
Church, p. 333. to 365. Land. 1687. 4 to.
Discourse on this Subject where he will be abundantly satisfied, that it
cannot be a note to know the Church by; and that it is more favorable to us
than the Roman Church if it were one: All I shall observe is, that if all the
Stories they invent and the Reports they spread of the unhappy end of their
Adversaries were true, yet we know Ecces. 7.15.
that there is a just Man that perishes in his Righteousness, and there is a
wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness, Chap. 8.14.
that there are just Men to whom it happens according to the work of the
wicked, and there are wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of
the righteous; so that Chap. 9.2.
seeing all things come alike to all, there can nothing be concluded against
any Church, from the judgments which fall on the heads of particular Members of
it. And our Savior himself assures us, that such judgments are often sent,
where the persons punished are not greater sinners than those who at the same
time are spared, which he illustrates by the Instances of those upon whom the
Tower of Luke 13.4.
Siloam fell; and the unfortunate Luke 13.1.2.
Galileans whose Blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices.

But let our Savior observe what he will, there are a sort of men, whose
policies scorn to be founded upon his holy maxims, and are therefore resolved
to invent dismal Stories, where they cannot find true ones, to work upon the
Spirits of the more unthinking sort; and therefore in the time of the Siege of
Paris, during the League in France, the Priests were grown to that height of
immodesty, (not to give it a worse name) as Europae Spec. p 135.
to persuade the people there, who generally believed it, that the thunder of
the Pope's Excommunications had so blasted the Heretics, that their Faces were
grown black and ugly as Devils, their Eyes and Looks ghastly, and their Breath
noisome and pestilent. Wilson's Hist. of Great Britain. p 26. Land. 1653. fol.
And in Spain the same Instruments of Rome had possessed the people, that since
the English left the Roman Religion they were transformed into strange horrid
shapes, with Heads and Tails like Beasts and Monsters; which was so generally
believed among them, that when the Earl of Notingham went Ambassador into
Spain Ann. 1603. the Country people could hardly believe their eyes, that the
English were such comely and accomplished Gentlemen, whose deformity they had
before so often heard confidently asserted.

And as they are always employed in aspersing the living, so they exert the
same diligence in forming some hideous relation of the manner of their deaths,
their implacable malice following them as it did Father Fowlis Hist. Romans
Treasons p. 470.
Paul Sarpi the Venetian to his Grave, publishing impudent and fabulous Stories
concerning his death, of his dying howling, of strange Apparitions of black
Dogs, of terrible noises heard in his Cell and Chambers, and several such lying
Forgeries, as those idle people used to invent upon Luther, Calvin and others
who will not truckle to the Usurpations of the Roman Court. But the people of
Venice who knew him better, accounted him a Saint, hanging up their votive
Tablets at his Sepulcher.

Nay, they can go yet a step farther, and those very judgments which God
inflicts upon themselves, they have the face to affirm, were strokes of divine
Vengeance on the Protestants; thus when there were some Wilson 's Hist. of
Great Britain, p. 241.
hundreds of the Rom^sh Profession met to hear Father Drury a noted Jesuit
^reach, in the Black Friars, Oct. 26. 1623. it pleased God that the Chamber
where they were, fell down, and near a hundred Persons with the Preacher were
killed outright, and many hurt, yet had they the Confidence to affirm, that
this was a Protestant Assembly, publishing Mirror or Looking-glass both for
Saints and Sinners, p. 195. Land. 1671. fol.
a Book relating great Judgments shown on a ^ort of Protestant Heretics, by
the fall of an house in Black Friars London, in which they were Assembled to
hear a Geneva Lecture; and Dr. Key for Catholics, p. 258. Land. 1674* 4to.
Gouge tells us when and where this Relation was Printed, in his Account of
that sad Providence.

I might particularize in abundance of such passages, but these are enough to
let the Reader see that it was not without cause I gave him Caution in the
first Chapter to suspect them, for into what a maze of Errors does he run, who
takes the Accounts given by those men of the Lives and Deaths of their
Adversaries upon their Authority, who give themselves such a Liberty to devise
Fables and then report them.

This over politic and wise sort of men, reach yet a note higher, and knowing
of how great Consequence the Revolt of any eminent Divine is, are as liberal in
their Reports that such and (...) Persons are become Catholics (as they call
them) in which they have as little respect to truth, as in the former
Instances. Europ. Spec. 114, 115.
But they find by their experience that news make their impression upon their
first reporting, and that then if it be good, it greatly raises up the Spirit
and confirms the Mind, especially of the Vulgar, who easily believe all that
their betters tell them; that afterward when such Stories happen to be
controlled, men's spirits being cold are not so sensible as before, and either
little regard it or impute it to common error or uncertainty of things; yea,
and that the good news comes to many men's ears who never hear of the Check it
has; and at least it may serve their turn for some present Exploit, as
Merchants do by their news, who finding some difficulty in accommodating their
Affairs, have in use to forge Letters or otherwise to raise bruits, either of
some prosperous success in Princes actions, or of some great alteration in some
kind of merchandise, which may serve for that present instant to expedite their
business.

Whether the Missionaries take this piece of Policy from them, or are only
imitated by them, is not material, but that, being secure of an evasion if
their report be found untrue, that they were misinformed, and knowing well
that hundreds who hear the account they give, are never undeceived by wanting
opportunities to discover its falsity; they are no modester in this particular,
than in the other Slanders is most certain.

M. Spon's History of the City and State of Geneva, p. 144. Land. 1687. fol.
Thus in the year 1597. they spread a report throughout Germany, Holland and
Italy, that Beza had renounced his Religion before the Senate, and had exhorted
the Magistrates to reconcile themselves to the Church of Rome; Jesuits Catech,
p. 62.
and that by his example many Citizens of Geneva had done the like; Sands
Europ. Spec. p. 113.
whereupon he was absolved by the Bishop of that City, before his death, by
special Order from the Pope. This we are assured by several Jes. Catech. p. 62.
French Priests was generally believed, till Beza wrote several French and
Latin Letters, to convince the world of the Forgery, and that he was yet alive,
and History of Genesis p. 144.
he died not till six years after.

Of the very same nature, was the report of the Conversion of the Novelty of
Popery, Lib. 7. c. 10. cont. 8. p. 627.
Reverend Peter Du Moulin, which even while he was Minister of the Protestant
Church in Paris, and writing against Rome, was publicly preached in the City
in many Pulpits, and Benefices assigned to him; they asserted in their Sermons,
that he was preparing to go to Rome; which was so generally believed that the
people flocked to a certain Church, and there waited expecting to hear him make
his Recantation. Upon which he observes, that such tricks are apt to astonish
the people for a season, and an untruth that was belie^^d for three days has
done some effect. And I am able to prove that a Minister now in England
traveling in company with others of our Nation of the Protestant Religion, and
making a small journey alone, to a neighbor City to that they then resided in;
the Priests came to several of his fellow Travelers, assuring them that the
said Minister was become a Romanist, that he was publicly reconciled, and
therefore surely they would not refuse to relinquish that Religion, which he
whose Profession obliged him to defend it, and who understood it best, durst
not continue in. This report was affirmed with so much confidence, that upon
the Ministers return, several persons of the Roman Catholic Religion,
congratulated him for his happy Change, and one of the English was ready to
follow his example if he had not in time discovered the cheat.

And it is no longer since than the Winter 1685. that a report went current
through all the Countries in England, where there are many Romanists, that Dr.
Burnet was at Rome become a Papist, and (...) great Preferments were bestowed
upon him; this has been (...) to me by several for a certain truth, when I
made (...) enquiry, those Gentlemen affirming, that they had it from very good
hands, and had seen some Letters from foreign parts which confirmed it. But
more immodest was the pretense of the Dean of Norwich's Conversion about two
years since, which several Priests affirmed to a Servant Maid, whom they knew
to be a great admirer of that Divine, urging ^er to follow the example of such
a Learned Man, who was so deservedly esteemed by her, which they reiterated
with so much confidence, and frequency, that the Maid promised to turn
likewise; but being convinced by an eminent Person, (who carried her to hear
the Reverend Dean preach) that she was abused by a notorious untruth; she was
confirmed in her aversion to that Church, which is upheld by such unworthy
means: And I cannot but observe the Provid^^ce of God in this matter, that the
Sermon which the Maid was carried to hear, was levelled against the Popish
Errors; whereby she was not only informed of the abuse, but instructed too.

But their greatest traffic is in the pretended Conversion of dying persons,
thus they would make a Romanist of dying Beza six years before his death; and
this blot they have endeavored to cast upon the Memory of that excellent
Prelate Bishop King, Mr. Gee's foot out of the Snare, p. 76.
Musket the Jesuit publishing a Book of his Conversion to Rome upon his
deathbed, entitled the Bishop of Londons Legacy. This relation we are assured
did mightily Birckback's Protestant Evidence. Cent. 16 p. ^88. Land. 1635. 4 to.
shock the peoples minds; but it is wholly false, his Son Dr. Henry King since
Bishop of Chichester, Preaching a Sermon for his Fathers Vindication at St.
Paul's Cross, Nov. 25. 1621. where he assures the world, that the Bishop before
his death received the Eucharist at the hands of his Chaplain Dr. Cluet,
together with his Wife, his Children, his Family, Sir Henry Martin his
Chancellor, Mr. Philip King his Brother, etc. protesting to them that his Soul
had greatly longed to eat that last Supper, and to perform that last Christian
Duty before he left (...); and ga^^ thanks to God, that he had lived to finish
that blessed Work. And then drawing near his end, he caused his (...) to read
the Confession and Absolution in the Common Prayer. And the person who was
reported to reconcile him, Mr. Ib. p. 189. and foot out of the Snare. p. 77.

See a relation of this forgery in the History of the Chapter of Great Britain from
the Birth of our Savior. p. 134.188. Land 1674. 4 to.


Thomas Preston, being examined before the A. B. of Canterbury and other
Commissioners, protested before God, as he should answer it at the dreadful
day of Judgment, that the Bishop of London did never confess himself to him,
nor ever received sacramental Absolution at his hands, nor was ever by him
reconciled to the Church of Rome; neither did renounce before him the Religion
established in the Church of England; yea he added farther, that to his
knowledge he was never in company with the Bishop, never received any letter
from him, never wrote to him, nor did he ever see him in any place whatsoever,
nor could have known him from another man. The same did Foot out of the Snare*
p. 77.
Father Palmer the Jesuit (whom they affirmed to be one of those by whom he
was reconciled) affirm that he never saw the Bishop. This Book of Musket's was
known to be such a notorious forgery, that Ib. p. 78.
Mr. Anderton an ingenious Priest, expressed his sorrow that ever such a Book
should be suffered to come forth; for it would do them more hur^ ^han any Book
they ever wrote* yet have they since altered the Title, and so printed it
again, and a It is a thick Quar^o, I have seen it, but cannot remember the
Title.
Book exceedingly admired among them, written about fifteen years since and
Dedicated (as I remember to the D. of Buckingham) insists much upon this
Conversion; which makes me beseech my Brethren of our Church, that they would
be careful to what Assertion they give credit; and believe nothing in the
writings of these men upon their Authority, for let a thing be never so false,
they will not stick to report it, and though it be exposed and confuted, they
will urge it with the same confidence, as an uncontradicted truth.

In the same manner when Father Redmond Caron, who wrote in defense of Loyalty
to the King against the rebellious Opinions and Doctrines of the Court of Rome,
History of the Irish Remonstrance, p. 759.
lay upon his death bed in Dublin, ann. 1666. the Priests raised a Report that
he retracted his Signature of the Loyal Irish Remonstrance, and all his Books
on that Subject, but they were too quick in spreading this piece of Calumny
against that Loyal Man, for the account came to his Ears before he died, upon
which in the presence of many of his own Order, he protested solemnly that he
was so far from recanting, that the Doctrine which he had taught, he looked
upon as the Doctrine of Christ, and that it was his duty to maintain it. Thus
if any of their own Church be of a sounder Principle than themselves, they
cannot help practicing that rule of the Instruct. secret, p^o super. societ*
Jesu. p. 23. De d^smiss^ in exhortationibus dicatur, quod iterum ardenter petat
ingredi societatem.
Jesuits, whereby they are directed, to report that such as leave them are very
desirous to be received again; and although they are so often proved and
exposed to the world as Calumniators and Forgers, they with the greatest
unconcernedness invent and report anew upon the next occasion.

But that the World may not be always fed with false Stories, they cast about
for an artifice to deceive them by false Converts, appointing men to pretend
themselves Protestants, and after some time to be reconciled to the Romish
Church, by the means of their Missionaries. Hunting of the Romish Fox, p.
155.156,
Thus ann. 1583. at the Sessions at Gloucester in the month of August, one
Richard Summers was apprehended, who outwardly seemed a Protestant, but being
one day present at a discourse between one of the Bishop of Glocesters
Chaplains and a Puritan (as they were then called) used this Expression, If
this be the fruits of Protestantism, I will lament my ways and turn to my
Mother the Chapter of Rome, seeing the Chapter of England is divided. The Chaplain upon
this suspecting this man, one day disguised himself, and traced him to an
house, where he found him in a Surplice, and heard him say Mass; after which he
dogged him to his Lodging and had him apprehended.

It Is an attempt not impossible to succeed, to raise such reports of particular
private Men, but to tell the world of whole bodies of men, whole Nations and
Countries and Sovereign Princes becoming Converts, when they know the contrary
to be the real truth; is something more amazing, and able to surprise the most
thinking men; Europ. Spec. p. 112, 113.
yet were not these Gentlemen ashamed to affirm even at Rome it self (where it
is an ordinary practice) with great Solemnity, that the Patriarch of Alexandria
with all the Greek Church of Africa, had by their Ambassadors submitted and
reconciled themselves to the Pope; and received from his Holiness Absolution
and Benediction; but though this was found a Fable, about the same time they
reported that the Ibid.
K. of Scots (K. James) had chased the Ministers away, and executed two of
them, bestowing their Goods upon the Roman Catholics; that not only Ibid. in
Hist* of Geneva, p. ^44.
Beza had recanted his Religion, but the City of Geneva also sought to be
reconciled, and had sent to Rome an Embassage of Submission: This news was
whispered among the Jesuits two months, before it became public, but at length
there came a solemn account of it, which run through all Italy, and was so
verily believed to be true, that several went to Rome on purpose to see those
Ambassadors; and to make up the full measure of this Romish Policy, there was
news sent from Rome to Lions, that Q. Elizabeth's Ambassadors were at Rome
making great instance to be absolved.

And there is a certain secular Priest who not long since assured me, that he
had seen an original Instrument under the hand of the late Archbishop of York,
and other Prelates, with several Divines, among whom he named Dr. Wallis of
Oxford, approving several of the Romish Doctrines, and particularly Prayer to
Saints, or for the dead; but though upon my earnest entreaty he promised to
procure me a sight of it, yet he never performed it to this day: But this is
usual among them; when they have a design either to make or confirm Proselytes,
these Shel^on of Miracles p. 52.
Assertions that our greatest Men are Papists, in private, are never out of
their mouths; and within these few years they reported publicly Franciscan
Convert by Ant. Ega^. p. 24. Land. 1673. 4 to.
in Ireland, that not only his late and present Majesty, but all the Nobility
and Gentry of the Kingdom of England, were privately of their Religion.

And no longer since than Ricaut's State of the Gr. and Armenian Chapter p. 451.
Land. 1679. 8 vo.
the year 1678. it was generally reported at Rome for six months together that
the Armenian Patriarch with six and thirty Bishops were on their way thither;
to submit to, and acknowledge the Apostolical See; though this was a Sham like
the rest of their Great Conversions, on which I shall make some few Reflections
by a short account of the greatest of them, which they are most ready to boast
of at this day.

The Conversions in the Indies have made so great a noise among them, that
multitudes are possessed with a belief of every thing they are pleased to report
concerning them; but Acosta. de procur. (...). Lib. 4. c. 3. Pos^ (...), ab
(...) turba, vix quemquam (...), quid vita aeterna, etc. (...) C^^echisandi
ratio umbra^itis and (...) s^milis. -- (...) simile supervisum est inter tot
millia Christianorum nomine donatorum, tam esse rarum qui Christum agnoscat, ut
quod Ephesii olim de Spiritu sancto, Paulo responderunt, possint hi de Christo
melius usurpare, neque an sit Christus audivimus. Id. lib. 5. c. 2. -- Invenies
tam tenuis and inopis messis apud Indos potentissimam causam in eo esse quod
divinis and occultis quidem sed justis consiliis, antiquis Gentibus
praedicatores fuerint praedicatione sua digni, cum nostri tam sint plerique
indigni, ut long plus evertant and dissipent quam aedisicent, atque plantent.
Id. l. 4. c. 4. See more out of the same Author ap. Hesp in. Histor. Jesuit. p.
231.
a Jesuit of note assures us, that during forty years of the Missionaries
abode among them; there was hardly one Indian to be found who understood any
two Articles of the Creed, knew any thing of Christ, or an eternal Life; that
the Missionaries are careless and do not take any right course for their
Conversion; that among so many thousands of Indians who are said to be
Christians, it was a rare thing to meet with any who owned Christ, but all like
those Ephesians who St. Paul mentions not to have heard whether there be an
holy Ghost, might answer we have not heard whether there be a Christ; and this
small progress he imputes to the carelessness and evil examples of those who are
sent thither, who took no pains to that end, so that though the ancient Priests
were suitable to their calling, yet the Missionaries were so unworthy, that
they destroyed more Souls than they gained or converted. So little did they
make it their business to make them Christians, that they Provin. Letters, p.
83, 84* and mor. pract. of the Jesuits. p. 390.
permit them to pray and worship before their ancient Idols, so they direct
their intention to a little Image of Christ or some Saint which they have under
their Clothes; against which the Congregation of Cardinals de propaganda fide
published a Decree, July 6. 1646. which considerations made one of their own
Sure and honest means, etc. p. 82.
Communion affirm, that they are the strangest Conversions in the world, that
they take no care at all to instruct these people or to teach them any thing;
they Baptize them only without explaining to them the virtue of that Sacrament
or what it signifies; nay without turning them from their former Idolatry.
These now are their Conversions, neither are they any better in that part of
the Indies subject to the Mogoll, where they have indeed spilt the water of
Baptism upon some few Faces (says Terries Voyage to Eas^-India, p. 450. Land.
1655. 8 vo.
one who lived in a public Employment some years there) working upon the
necessity of some poor men, who for want of means which they give them, are
content to wear Crucifixes, but for want of knowledge in the Doctrine of
Christianity are only in name Christians. So that the Jesuits Congregations
there are very thin, consisting of some Italians which the Mogoll entertains to
cut his Diamonds; -- and of other European Strangers which come thither, and
some few Natives. Ibid. p. 440.
And yet the Christian Religion is tolerated there, and the Priests of all
Religions very much esteemed by the people. Ogi^by's Japan, p, 262.
Much the same account is given of the Converts in Japan, that besides reading
Pater Noster, Ave Maria, and some Prayers to Saints, they have little or no
knowledge of Religion.

Nor are these remote Converts only in such a miserable Condition, but to come
a little nearer home, if we look upon the Proselytes in France, we shall find
their case very little better if not worse; for so little are they instructed
Last Efforts, p. 291.
that two hundred Peasants came at once to the Intendant of their Province,
complaining, that since their Conversion they knew not what Prayers to make,
for they had been forbidden their old Prayers, and were not taught any other;
nay they are so unwilling of that Profession Nouvelle de la Repub. des Lettres,
Juin, 1686. -- Dans la de^nier Fete Dieu plusieurs (...) mieux aim payer une
Amend que de tender devant leurs Maisons.
that upon Corpus Christi Day 1686. many of them chose rather to pay a Fine,
than put up Hangings before their Houses for the Procession; and yet we hear
daily brags of these Converts which are such as we should be ashamed of, and so
would any other Church but that which glories in her shame.

But as they triumph mightily in Conversions which were never made, and
Converts not instructed, nor really altered but only frighted for a time; so
upon every little occasion they raise as loud reports of the Accession of whole
Nations to their Church; wherein they are indeed a little more ingenious than
in those which had no ground at all.

Smith's account of the Greek Church, p 242, 243. and his Narratio de vita
Cyrilli Lucarii* p. 6. inter jus Miscellanea.
Thus when several Bishops of Lithuania and Russia nigra (in the year 1595.) in
hopes of restoring themselves to some honors in the Diet of Poland, which by
means of the Jesuits they were deprived of; sent two of their number to Rome to
offer their Submission and Obedience to Clement the Eighth then Pope; there was
and is yet great boastings of those Churches being reconciled to Rome; though
their going thither in the name of the Ruthenick Churches was protested against
by Constantine Duke of Ostorovia, and the rest of the Greek Church who resolved
to continue in obedience to the Patriarch of Constantinople.

I could give more Instances of this nature, but I refer them to another
Chapter; and conclude this point of feigned conversions, with a known passage
of the Intendant Marillac's in France, by which we may learn what credit to
give to the reports of this nature, when they have the confidence to affirm
such a thing of a Person of Honor in public, and before his own face; yet did
that Persecutor of the Protestants in Poictou one day dining with the Last
Efforts, 134, 135.
Marquess of Verac, give order that the Inhabitants of the place should
assemble at the Cross; where he went after Dinner, and getting upon the steps
of the Cross told the People in the Marquess's presence, that the King required
them all to turn Roman Catholics, which he exhorted them to do, by telling
them, that their Lord the Marquess was there come along with him to change his
Religion; which bold and impudent untruth, that noble Gentleman immediately
contradicted by assuring the people of the contrary and that he had no design
to change his Religion. After this what credit can be given to these men's
Reports in private.

The Affinity between the slandering the persons of our Divines, and
misrepresenting the Doctrines of our Church, leads me to expose that
unchristian Artifice, but because the charge of Disloyalty is advanced with
great Confidence against us, and of great Moment, I shall give that a Chapter
by it self.

CHAP. IV. Their accusing us of Disloyalty.
IT is one of the Directions given by the Jesuit Lib. 2. c. 8. Sect. 6.
Contzen, to traduce such as oppose their designs as men that are Enemies to
the public Peace, which advice Seignior Unreason. of Sepa. pref. p. 22.
Ballarini in his Letter to Father Young thinks most proper to be followed, for
the better managing the Popish Interest in England, to asperse the Bishops and
Ministers of this Church, as so factious that it were well they were removed.

And that the Missionaries are at this day observing those Directions, is so
evident, that it would be time and pains spent to no purpose, to prove it:
hence we have had New Test of the Chapter of Engl. Loyalty, Land. 1687. 4 to.
a new Test of the Church of Englands Loyalty, an Instance of the Chapter of Engl.
Loyalty, Land. 1687. 4 to.
Instance of the same, and such scurrilous and weak Pamphlets, sent abroad in
the world, either to create an ill opinion of our Loyalty, or to exasperate the
Members of our Church, and provoke them to some undecent carriage; endeavoring
to find some failure on their part, that they may catch at an occasion to make
the world believe, that they have New Test of the Chapter of Eng. Loyalty; p. 8.
forfeited that Protection his MAJESTY has so graciously promised to afford
them.

But our Loyalty has a better Foundation than to be shaken by such malicious
Arts, it being founded upon the same Bottom with our Church, the Apostles and
Prophets and our Blessed Savior, the chief Cornerstone of the building, which
all the Arts of men and Devils shall never overthrow, not upon the will of man
as theirs is.

Yet these Gentlemen think it sufficient to prove us disloyal, to cull out a
few Instances of men of rebellious Practices; and this they charge upon the
Church of England; but with what justice let the world judge. They cry out upon
us as misrepresenters of their Doctrines, because we affirm they teach the
deposing power to rest both in the Pope and in the People and show their
Practices to accord with that Doctrine, when ever they had occasion: If this be
to misrepresent, what name may we call their dealing by, who charge us with
Rebellion, when we freely condemn all such practices and that openly; and that
in our Religion there is no Rule to be found that prescribes Rebellion, nor
any thing that dispenses Subjects from the Oath of their Allegiance, nor any
of our Churches that receive that Doctrine. When on their side several General
Councils have asserted, above TWENTY of their Popes pronounced that right
inherent in them, and I am able to prove, that above three hundred of their
Divines defend and plead for either the Popes or Peoples power to depose their
Princes.

And though I know there are many in that Church, who (at least at present) do
heartily disown that Doctrine, yet I will not stick to affirm that it has all
the Characters of an Article of Faith, nor does the dissent of so many hinder
it from being so, for there are multitudes among them who disown
Transubstantiation, others the Pope's Supremacy, and several other points which
others amongst them acknowledge to be Articles of their Faith.

Reflex. on the Answ. to the Pap. misap. p. 10. Land. 1685. 4 to.
Neither will a late Author's plea, that if it were such an Article the
opposers of it would not escape without a brand of Heressie, prove the contrary;
for we know that they have been often marked with that Brand, and are once a
year Excommunicated at Rome in the Bulla Coenae; wherein Sure and Hon. means,
p. 88.
all persons who hinder the Clergy in exercising their jurisdiction, according
to the decrees of the Council of Trent (which France does) all secular powers
who call any Ecclesiastical Person to their Courts, all Princes that lay any
Taxes on their people without the Popes consent, are declared Excommunicate,
and if they remain so a whole year they shall be declared Heretics.

We are told by Fa. Ellis Ser. before the K. dec. 5. 1686. p. 21. St. Gregory's
judgment is become that of the whole Church, being inserted in the body of the
Canon Law.
one of themselves, that a Doctrine when inserted in the body of the Canon Law
becomes the Doctrine of their Church, now in the Canon Law we find it asserted
Gratian. Cau. 15. Quaes. 6. Can. Auctoritatem -- Edi^. 1518. 4to. A fidelitatis
etiam juramento Romanus Pontifex nonnullos absolvir.
that the Pope may absolve persons from their Oath of Allegiance, that Pope Id.
Ibid. Can. alias.
Zachary deposed the K. of France not so much for his Crimes as that he was
unfit to rule, that we Id. ibid. Can. nos sanctorum.
are absolved from all Oaths to an Excommunicate Person, and it is our duty to
yield no obedience to him. That Id. dis^i^ct. 63. fol. 90.
Clergymen ought not to swear Allegiance to their Prince, and that Id fol. 135.
col. 3. ^it. ^.
they are exempt from the jurisdiction of the secular Magistrate. And the
Decernit and prae^ip^t (...), Canones and Concilia generalia omnia, nec non
alias Apostolicas sanctiones in favore Ecclesiasticarum personarum, libertatis
Ecclesiasticae and contra ejus violatores editas, etc. sess. 25. c. 20.
Council of Trent has confirmed all these Canons, to the observation of which
Bulla Pii 4 ti. super forma juram. profess. fidei. They are enjoined to swear
thus, Omnia tradita a sacris canonibus indubitanter recipio, atque profiteor,
and contraria omnia, damno rejicio and Anathematizo.
all their Priests and dignifyed men are sworn: Let the world then judge
whether this doctrine be an Article of Faith or no.

But they have not only taught and established this treasonable Principle upon
the same foundation with their other Doctrines, but though often called upon to
join in a denial of it, and to condemn it as sinful, they could never be
prevailed on to clear themselves from such an odious Charge as has been all
along justly brought against them. This was once thought the only way they had
to justify themselves, by a person who has since made himself a Member of
their Church, who tells us. Mr. Drylen's Religio L^ici, in the Preface, Land.
1632. 4 to.
It Is not sufficient for the well-meaning Papist to produce the Evidences of
their Loyalty to the late King ( Charles the First) I will grant their
Behavior to have been as loyal and as brave as they can desire, but that
saying of their Father Cress. is still running in my head, that they may be
dispensed with in their obedience to an Heretic Prince, while the necessity of
the times shall oblige them to it, for that (as another of them tells us) is
only the effect of Christain Prudence, but when once they shall get power to
shake him off; an Heretic is no lawful King, and consequently to rise against
him is no Rebellion. I should be glad therefore that they would follow the
advice which was charitably given them by a Reverend Prelate of our Church:
namely, that they would join in a public act of disowning and detesting those
Iesuitick Principles, and subscribe to all Doctrines which deny the Pope's
Authority of deposing Kings and releasing Subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance. And Sure and Honest means, p. 100, 101.
a late Author of their own Church judges this so necessary, that he affirms,
NO CLERGY MAN OUGHT TO BE RECEIVED WITHOUT SUBSCRIBING THE CONDEMNATION OF THE
BULL DE COENA DOMINI; AND TILL THE MONKS AND JESUITS SHALL SOLEMNLY RENOUNCE
AND CONDEMN IT, IT WILL BE NO GREAT INJUSTICE DONE THEM, TO ACCUSE THEM OF
ATTEMPTING AGAINST THE LIVES OF KINGS. If any man did suspect me to be an
Arian, and I knew it, and could justify my self from such cursed opinions, and
did it not; the world would have reason to impute to me all the Consequences of
this pernicious Heresy; and the same Author tells us, it is well known all the
Monks and especially the Jesuits have by their fourth Vow obliged, themselves
to the Execution of this INFERNAL BVLL.

Nor is it only by private men they have been exhorted to such a Renunciation
of those Doctrines, but in public Courts of justice both in France and
England. It is indeed very usual with them to deny this Doctrine in discourse,
but that it is only a formal denial, when they really maintain it, I offer to
prove against them from their own Principles and Practices; a plain instance
whereof Sheldon of the Miracles of the Chapter of Rome, p. 186.
Mr. Sheldon gives us of his own knowledge; who was one morning denied
Absolution by a Sussex Jesuit, because he would not acknowledge the Pope's
Power to depose Princes; and yet the very same day at dinner in the pres^^ce of
several, this Jesuit denied any such power in the Pope.

But the Doctors of Rome have been very careful to provide against any such
scrupulous persons, as cannot persuade themselves of the lawfulness of this
point, and therefore have found out a way to discharge the Conscience from any
guilt, and set men at liberty to follow an opinion which they believe unsound;
upon which Principle there is no manner of security from such men, for they may
declare their judgment of the unlawfulness of any Action, and yet do it the
next moment by virtue of the rare Engine of PROBABILITY by which they can do
any thing in that Church.

For it is a Doctrine taught by almost all their Divines, and insinuated into
the Peoples minds by the Confessors, that the Authority of a Learned Doctor
makes an opinion probable, and that every one without hazarding his Soul may
follow what opinion he pleases, provided that it be taught by some Eminent
Doctor; yea he is obliged to follow the opinion of his Confessor if he be
learned, and if he do not he sins. And when the Author of the Provincial
Letters complained of this Doctrine, his Answer to the Provincial Letters, p.
34, 35.
Answerers defended it for Lawful and Orthodox.

Now as one of their own Church observes, The Jesuits Reasons unreasonable. --
See it in Collectos Treat. concern. the Penal Laws. p. 110. Land. 1675. 4 to.
the Generals of Orders can raise whole Legions of Divines to speak what they
have a mind should pass for probable; but there is no need of it in this case,
where so many Councils, Popes, and so many hundred Doctors, have maintained the
Treasonable Doctrines we charge upon them; which accordding to them is a
sufficient warrant for any to reduce these Speculations into practice, as has
been asserted by them in this very case, and with reference to his late
Majesty; for when Father Walsh pressed the Irish Clergy to subscribe the Loyal
Formulary, Father John Talbot and others told him, Hist. of the Irish Remonst.
p. 567.
That it was to no purpose to expect any Profession, Declaration or Oath of
Allegiance from them, being it was in point of Conscience Lawful enough for
such as would or did take such Oath to decline from, retract, and break it;
even the very next day, or next hour after having taken it; provided only they
followed herein the Doctrine of probability, that is, if they followed any
Divines who hold such an Oath to be unsafe and unsound in Catholic Religion,
or otherwise unlawful or sinful. And by the same Argument did the Romish
Bishop of Ferns in the year 1666. defend all that was done in the Irish
Rebellion, and refuse to acknowledge it any sin; because See his Letter in the
Hist. of the Irish Remonst. p. 624.
(says he) the Authority of those who teach the contrary is great, their
Learning great, their Sanctity great, the Light they had from God great, and
their Number great.

I might instance in a great number of such Doctrines confirmed by the highest
Authority among them, but I think this sufficient to let the world see, how
confidently the Missionaries attempt to cast the odium of Disloyalty upon us,
whose Doctrines disallow and detest all such Principles as damnable and
heretical, which for many hundred years they have maintained with the greatest
vigor.

But that Church is too politic, to content her self with teaching such
Doctrines only, for she has provided such means for putting them in practice
in any Country whatsoever, as were too subtle for any other Politicians to
invent, to which end she obliges all her Clergy to a single life, that so they
may continue in a more absolute Subjection: This could not be hoped for while
they were married, and the Princes and several States of Christendom had such a
pawn of their Fidelity as their Wives and Children, therefore having raised the
esteem of the Clergy that their persons were counted sacred and liable to no
punishment, that there might be nothing so nearly related to them wherein they
might be punished as their Wives and Children they have prohibited marriage to
them all; by which means being ready for any desperate Attempt they have such
multitudes of them as are sufficient to make a good Army in most Princes
Dominions; but it is not the Clergy alone, who are thus at their Devotion* but
by Dispensations and Tolerations to be Administrators of Abbeys and Bishoprics
and other Benefices given to Laymen, Europ. Spec. p. 59.
they oblige them to uphold their Interest; as for their Religious Orders, they
(especially the Jesuits) give their Generals an account of all Occurrences of
State in those Provinces and Kingdoms whereof they are the Respective
Assistants; to which end they have Correspondents in the Principal Cities of
all Kingdoms; D^scov. of the Jes in relat. to their Politics.
who sending all their Informations to the General, they balance the interests
of every Prince, and then resolve that the Affairs of such a Prince shall be
promoted, the designs of another opposed, as is most for their own Advantage;
to effect which, the Confessors of great Men give intelligence of the
Inclinations of those whose Consciences are unfolded to them; whereby they
become acquainted with all determinations concluded in the most secret
Councils; and have a particular account of the Power, Possessions, Expense and
Designs of every Prince of their Communion; and the very same advantage they
make of Confession, by diving into the peoples Inclinations, and thereby
discovering who stand well affected to their Prince who dissatisfied and
exasperated, by which means they sow discord between Princes and their
Subjects, rendering them odious to and fearful of one another, wherever they
find their advantage by such distrusts; thus knowing all the discontented
people in a State, they are able at any time to raise a party, and being
acquainted with the Princes Designs, they know how to defeat them, that the
insurrection may be more successful.

But Mr. Pulton tells us, In his Account. p. 17.
that it is expressly prohibited the Jesuits to speak of the deposing Power even
in private discourses, but it is then to be observed, that the Doctrine it self
is not blamed, only silence imposed concerning it; this Order was made in the
year 1616. since which several of that Society have defended that point,
Jesuits Reasons unreasonable, p. 112, 11^.
and even in Rome it self where Sanctarellus's Book that pleads for it was
printed Ann. 1625. and that it was only for France, is affirmed by a Papist,
who answers this Objection of Mr Pulton's; when the Jesuits asserted that by
that Order they were bound under pain of Damnation not to speak of that
Subject, that none in the Church were bound under the like penalty not to teach
it, but they; wherein he observes, their immodesty in the assertion, when none
of their Rules bind under so much as a venial Sin; and their Concession that
none in the Church think it damnable to teach that the Pope may depose PRINCES.

I suppose Mr Pulton was conscious of his imposing upon the world in this
point, therefore he presently shifts from that to lay a grievous Charge to our
door; In his Account, p. 18.
That it was manifest from History that the Reformers had deposed and
endeavored to depose more Princes in the space of one hundred and fifty years,
than the Roman Catholics had done in 1600. wherein he has backed that hardy
assertion of the Author of Philanax Anglicus, Vindicat. of the sincerity of the
Prot. Religion p. 116. Land. 1679. 4 to.
who affirmed, that in the last Century there have been more Princes deposed
and murdered for their Religion by Protestants, than have been in all the other
since Christ's time by the Attempts and Means of Roman Catholics.

If it were not that I know Mr. Pulton's Skill in History to be very mean, I
should look upon him as the most immodest man that ever wrote; who after the
Confutation of the others Assertion, has the face to renew it again, and
publish it to the world; but when I consider it is want of knowledge in History
that makes him so bold, I am willing to excuse him upon that account, from
wilful imposture though all the world cannot clear him from strange rashness and
confidence.

I will therefore bate him all but near two hundred years, and undertake to
prove whenever called to do it, that the R^manists Treasons owned by their
Popes and great Men, since the Reformation do far out number all the Plots and
Insurrections they can lay to the Protestants Charge; which notwithstanding
have been condemned by the whole body of our Divines.

Mr. Pulton himself affirmed to Mr. Cressener, that all good Princes ought to
consent to the Church; to which it being returned, what if Princes have no mind
to part from their Right in obedience to the Churches decrees, must they be
dispossessed against their will? Cressen. Vind. p. 14. Land. 1687. 4 to.
he asserted, that in such a case the Church has power to decide in favor of
it self; This relation had been given the world of their discourse, before Mr.
Pulton published his Remarks, in which he does not once deny this passage
though he makes Reflections upon others (...) Cressener's Vindication.

But Mr. Pulton is not alone in this Opinion, for there is a certain Jesuit,
who highly brags of the Loyalty of his Church, that very lately affirmed in my
hearing, that in case of oppression of the Subjects by their Prince, it is but
reasonable that the Pope being the common Father of Christendom should have a
power to depose or other ways punish the Oppressor; and another great stickler
for that Church, a Convert, never attempted to clear his Church of this Charge,
it being very plain (as he affirmed) that such a power must reside some where,
and the Pope was certainly the fittest to be entrusted with it. And indeed I
cannot see how men of any ingenuity can condemn it, when they pretend the
Pope's Approbation of M. De Meaux's Book, is a clear Evidence that the Doctrine
contained in it is the Doctrine of their Church, for (not to mention at present
the Actions of former Popes) this very Pope, who approved that Book does at
this time notoriously assert his power over Kings, by Excommunicating his
Majesty of France in the matter of the Franchises; thereby approving of that
Doctrine as much as the Bishop's, and giving us the same Authority for the
deposing power, that the Papists pretend for that Prelates Exposition.

Let Mr. Pulton or any for him make good his bold Slander against our Church;
and find so many Treasons and Rebellions in the Protestant Communion if he can,
as I will undertake to prove upon the Romanists; affirming confidently is a
Talent possessed by most of the Missionaries, but proving what they affirm is
beneath them; there have been above six and fifty open Rebellions raised, and
Parricides committed upon great Princes in about one hundred and sixty years,
and eighty two Bulls, Indulgences and Supplies of the Popes for the furtherance
of those Treasons, besides an infinite number of horrid Conspiracies, upon
which I cannot but observe that at the beginning of the Reformation they owned
these Doctrines publicly, and till the Pope gave them leave, would never pay
Obedience to our Princes; but by all the traitorous Conspiracies imaginable
endeavored to depose and murder them; they had the Pope's Bulls and Resolution
of many Universities to satisfy their Consciences, which may be well put into
the balance with the late Decrees of the Sorbonne against the deposing power;
for if their Decrees of late be Evidence enough to acquit the Roman Catholics
from the imputation of disloyal Principles, as Answ. to two main Quest. of the
Let. to a Diss. p. 10.
some affirm they are, then surely so many Decrees of the same Faculty
defending those Principles, so many censures of other Universities passed upon
the Opposers of them, and so many Bulls and Breves of Popes to the same
purposes may well justify us in affirming that there is no security of their
obediences any longer than the Pope pleases.

Till he forbad them, they took the Oath of Allegiance and defended it, but
ever since have refused it with a strange Obstinacy; and what security is there
that his Orders shall not have the same obedience rendered to them in other
points? nay since that, we have seen the Romanists of England who before were
ready to subscribe the Remonstrance, decline giving the King any assurance of
their obedience, because the Pope commanded them not to do it. See History of
the Irish Remonstrance.


Could they have been prevailed on to renounce these Doctrines, as sinful and
unlawful, they would have at least shown that at present their principles were
such as become faithful Subjects; but when they cannot be persuaded to do
this, all their profession that it is not their Doctrine gives no assurance of
their Loyalty.

But if they should do this, it is well observed by a late Writer* Request to
Romans Catho. p. 38. Land. 1687. 4 to.
that while they found their Loyalty upon this Supposition, that the deposing
Doctrine is not the Doctrine of the Roman Church, does not this Hypothesis
afford a shrewd suspicion that if it were the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
or ever should be so; or they should ever be convinced that it is so, then they
would be for the deposing of Princes no less than those who at this day believe
it to be the Doctrine thereof.

And I wonder how the Gentlemen of that Church can allege the Decrees of the
Sorbonne as an Evidence that they hold not the Doctrine of the deposing Power,
for the same Faculty, Aug. 9. 1681. and the 16 th. of the same Month approved
the Oath of Allegiance, and condemned the Pope's temporal Power over Princes as
Heretical, Walsh's Letters, p. 557, 558, 559.
and yet our English Romanists will not take the Oath, nor be persuaded to
condemn the deposing power; though they pretend to disclaim it.

And indeed it would be folly to expect that the decree of one single Faculty
should be of more Authority than the Bulls of so many Popes, and Canons of
Councils the Supreme Heads of the Roman Church.

But (as I observed before) it is more strange to hear these men affirm that
the Doctrine contained in the Bishop of Condoms Exposition, is the Doctrine of
their Church, and yet deny that the deposing power is so, when all the
Authority that Exposition has is from the Pope and Cardinals approbation,
which in a more solemn manner has been often given to that Doctrine; so that
either their Argument for the Bishops Book concludes nothing, or it is an
evident Demonstration that the Roman Catholic Church teaches the Doctrine of
deposing Princes.

I offer to prove against them, that the Popes power in that point was
universally believed as a matter of Faith in that Church for near five hundred
years; now let them answer this Argument, nothing can be believed as a matter
of Faith, but what was taught them by their Fathers, and so upward from the
Apostles times; but the Doctrine of the deposing power, was believed as a
matter of faith, therefore it was delivered from the Apostles times: let them
either answer this Argument which is their own upon other points, or confess
that the deposing power is an Article of Faith in that Church; for if the
Argument be good, it proves that to be an Article of Faith as well as others,
if it be not, they give up all their brags of the Evidence of Oral Tradition
from hand to hand; so much insisted on by Mr. G. and others of their Champions
among us.

But because it may be objected, that the deposing Bulls were the effects of
the passionate Tempers of those Popes, I desire that one of their own Communion
may be heard in that point; Sure and honest means, p. 69, 70.
who speaks thus, I maintain that all these disasters proceeded not only from
the pettish humor of any one Pope, but were the natural effects of the
principles of the Papacy; and though we do not see it visibly break forth every
day by some bloody Example, yet we ought not to believe that the habit or the
will is ever the less, but that there is some external extraordinary Reason
which suspends the Action, and which does sometimes make them act directly
contrary to their own Inclination. -- How can any man maintain that Princes
need not stand in the fear of the Pope, when three Popes of this present Age,
have condemned the opinion that the Pope cannot depose Kings as wicked and
contrary to the Faith?

And now I have examined and refuted their Calumny, of our Disloyalty in
general, and Mr. Pulton's Charge in particular; which I have known asserted by
others with so peculiar a confidence, that it has staggered many Loyal but
weak Protestants, in which as in All the rest of this Discourse I once again
challenge the whole Body of the Romish Clergy to find one false Quotation; and
by the falsity of Mr. Pulton's Assertion I beg the Reader to judge what Credit
the rest of their defaming Insinuations deserve.

CHAP. V. Of their laying Doctrines to our charge which we never taught.
AFter such a bold Assertion as that of Mr. Pultons, Tertullian. Apolog. c. 7.
etc. Dicimur sceleratissimi, de Sacramento infanticidii, pabulo inde and post
convivium incesso, quod eversores luminum caves, lenones scilicet tenebrarum
and libidinum impiaram in verecundia procurent, etc.
which I refuted in the preceding Chapter; we need not wonder if we meet with
the same Treatment which the Christians in Tertullian's time under went; seeing
we have to do with a sort of Men who repeat their Slanders the oftener they are
reproved, and not ashamed to impute Doctrines to the Reformed which their
Confessions disclaim, and the Writings of their Divines confute.

At a time when the Gentlemen of that Communion make so loud Complaints of
being misrepresented as to their doctrines and practices, and with the utmost
of their Rhetoric exaggerate the Injury which by such Misrepresentations is
done to Truth and their Church; it might rationally be expected that they
should believe what they say, and have some Sense of such injust proceedings;
or at least should in policy take care that their own Writings be not stuffed
with false Charges against their Adversaries.

But it is somewhat surprising to find no care taken in so material a point,
and that they are no more solicitous to represent our Doctrines right, than to
defend their own, which they seem wholly to abandon; if any pains be taken by
them, it is to bespatter the Protestants, and coin opinions for them; for they
find it much more easy to refute those imaginary Positions, than overthrow the
well-grounded Tenets of the Reformed Churches.

Hence it is that that there is no Calumny so absurd which they blush to
publish; Popery Anat. p. 15.
and that the old Charge against the Waldenses and Albigenses is renewed, by the
Author of Popery Anatomized, who copies from the Jesuit In his Three Conver. of
Engl. p. 3. c. 3. Edit. 1604. 8 vo.
Parsons, affirming, that they denied the Resurrection of the dead, or that
there is any such place as Hell; that with the Manichees they held two Gods,
and that it avails a man nothing to say his Prayers; with several other
Doctrines of a horrid nature: but if we consult the Authors that wrote in and
near the time, we shall find a quite contrary Account; Rainer. contra Wald. c.
4. Haec secta magnam habet speciem pietatis, eo quod coram hominibus just
vivant, and been omnia de Deo credant, and omnes Articulos quae in Symbolo
continentur.
that they were to all appearance a very pious people, living righteously
before men, and believing all things rightly concerning God, and all the
Articles of the Creed; and that their lives Claud. Seiss. adver. Wald. p. 9.
Puriorem quam caeteri Christiani vitam agunt.
were more holy than other Christians; insomuch that when the Joa. Camer. p.
4^9. Illi ad Regem referunt illis in locis homi^es baptizari, Articulos fidei
and Decalogum doceri, Dominicos dies religi^se coli, Dei verbum exponi,
beneficia and stupra apud eos nulla esse. His auditis Rex jurejurando addito;
me, inquit and caetero populo meo Catholico meliores illi viri sunt.
King of France sent Commissioners to enquire of, and inspect their Life and
Doctrine, and they informed him, that they baptized, and taught the Articles of
the Creed and Precepts of the Decalogue, observed the Lord's Day, preached the
Word of God, and that they were not guilty of those abominable Crimes imputed
to them; he SWORE that THEY WERE BETTER THAN HE OR HIS PEOPLE, WHO WERE
CATHOLICS.

But though the Romanists have no Authority for their Charge, yet they have a
motive which is always prevalent in that Church, the Waldenses and with great
freedom reproved the Vices of the Pope and Clergy; and this was the chief thing
which subjected them to such an universal hatred, and caused several wicked
Opinions to be fathered upon them, which they never owned. For they agreed with
the Faith of the Protestants at this day as Popliniere affirms, who alleges
the Acts of a Disputation between the Bishop of Pamiers and Arnoltot Minister
of Lombres, Usher's Life and Letters, p. 14. Letter to Mr. Tho. Lydiat.
written in a Language favoring much of the Catalan Tongue; affirming that
some had assured him that the Articles of their Faith, were yet to be seen
engraven (...) certain old Tables in Alby, agreeing exactly with the Reforme^
Churches: And Mr. Fountain Minister of the French Church at London told
Archbishop Usher, that in his time a Confession of the Albigenses was found,
which was approved of, by a Synod of French Protestants.

Thus, as the Romanists have brought most of the Heathens Rites and the
ceremonious part of their Worship into theirs, so they seem to be actuated by
the same Spirit which taught the Pagans to represent our Holy Religion in the
most odious manner; and they have found such success attending this unchristian
Artifice, that it is hugged as their darling, and when any party discovers
their Corruptions, they endeavor to expose them as men of seditious
Principles, which will effectually render Princes jealous of them, and draw
upon them the displeasure of those under whose protection they might otherwise
be secure; that the common people may entertain as great an Aversion to them,
it is not only their practice, but a principle of their Policy, laid down by a
famous, Carpantur primum illa quae in vulgus male audiunt, quaeque absurditatem
primo aspectu etiam rudibus ostendunt, cont. Politic. c. 18. p. 8.
Jesuit, to charge them with such Opinions as are absurd in themselves and
abhorred by all men.

By this means they are sure to possess the vulgar with such prejudices, that
they will lend no Ear to the other side, whom they look upon as a sort of
Monsters, according to the Character these Politicians have given of them. And
such Opinions being easily confuted if they can but once persuade an ignorant
Protestant, that the Church of which he is a Member holds them, there needs no
great industry to prevail with such a man to leave it.

This course the Popish Bishop of Ferns in Ireland took to perswa^e Father
Andrew Sall, who had left the Jesuits among whom he had continued many years,
and about sixteen years since became a Member of our Church, to return to the
Romish Communion; insomuch that Father Walsh confesses, Walsh. Let. p. 8.
that he had strangely misrepresented the Church of England in his Book against
that Convert.

But I think never did any of their Writers equal Father Securis Evangelica
Romae, 1687. 8 vo.
Porter, Reader of Divinity in the College of St Isidore at Rome, who this very
year in a Book printed there, and dedicated to the Earl of Castlemain; and
Licensed by the Companion of the Master of the Sacred Palace and others, as a
Book very useful for the instruction of the faithful; tells us, that the
Colligitur Deum Religionis reformatae non differ a Diabolo, nec ejus
paradisum ab inf^rno, p. 151.
God of the Protestants, does not differ from the Devil, nor his Heaven from
Hell; and that the whole P. 130. Structura Religionis reformatae, fundatur in
hoc horrenda blasphemia, Christum esse falsum Prophetam.
Frame of our Religion is founded in this horrid Blasphemy, THAT CHRIST IS A
FALSE PROPHET; which he attempts to prove by another Misrepresentation as great
as this, for (says he) the Ibid. -- Confessio Angliae art. 19. and art 20.
dicit Concilia Generalia, gubernata a spiritu sancto, possunt errare.
English Confession of Faith asserts, that General Councils GUIDED BY THE HOLY
GHOST AND THE WORD OF GOD may Err; for which he cites the 19. and 20. Articles
of our Church; the latter of which only asserts that the Church ought to be
guided in her decisions by the Word of God, Roger's Faith, Doctrine and
Religion professed in Engl. Cambr. 1681. 4 to.
and though the former does affirm, that the Church of Rome has erred, yet it
says nothing of General Councils, the 21 Article indeed affirms that they may
Err, and the Reason it gives is because they are an ASSEMBLY OF MEN WHO ARE NOT
ALL GUIDED BY THE SPIRIT AND WORD OF GOD; so that all this Friars Exclamation
of the horridness of such a Doctrine, as he charged upon us, serves only to
show his own immodesty, and to let the world see with what strange Confidence
some men can advance Assertions, and allege Authorities which any one that can
read, will discover to be forged.

This I confess seems to be a new Charge of his own inventing, but that which
he brings in another place, Secur. Evang. p. 95.
that we are not obliged by our Religion to pray, was long since framed by the
Priests at the beginning of the Reformation who persuaded the people, Europ.
Spec. p. 134.136.
that in England the Protestants had neither Churches nor form of Religion* nor
served God any way; and they had so possessed them with that opinion, that
several persons were reckoned Lutherans only because they were horrid
Blasphemers.

That the Decalogue is not obligatory to Christians, and that God does not
regard our Works, is one of the monstrous Opinions which Campion had the
confidence to (...) both our Universities was maintained by the Church of
England; Campion's Reasons Reas. 8. Land. 1687 4 to. See it also in the first
Edition in Latin, Cosmop. 1681. Norunt isti suorum axiomata, opera nostra Deus
nequaquam curat, etc.
and like a Child, who to cover one untruth backs it with another, he quotes
the Apology of the Church of England, as his voucher wherein these words are
found, (which are so clear that they alone are enough to make those blush who
by Translating and Publishing this Treatise of Campions, the last year have
made his Forgeries their own; the words of the Apology are these) Quamvis autem
dicamus nihil nobis esse praesidii, in operibus and factis nostris, and omnem
salutis nostrae rationem constituamus in solo Christo, non tamen ea causa
dicimus, laxe absolute vivendum esse quasi tingi tantum and credere s^tis sit
homini Christiano, and nihil ab eo aliud expectetur, vera fides viva est nec
potest esse otiosa, ergo docemus populum, Deum nos vocasee ad bona opera ut in
eis ambul^m^^, etc. Corpus Confess. Fidei. p. 98. Genesis 1654. 4 to.
although we acknowledge we expect nothing from our own Works, but from Christ
only, yet this is no encouragement to a loose life, nor for any to think it
sufficient to believe, and that nothing else is to be expected from them; for
True Faith is a living and working Faith, therefore we teach the people that
God has called us to good Works.

And that the Reader may see what Credit is to be given to the Romanists in
this point, I shall give an account of the Doctrine of the several Reformed
Churches about the necessity of good Works; and then show with what confidence
these Gentlemen affirm that the Protestants teach that good Works are not
necessary.

The four Confess. Argentin. c. 4. Nolumus autem haec sic intelligi, quasi
salutem in ignavis animi cogitationibus fideve charitate destituta -- ponamus:
quandoquidem certi sumus neminem justum aut salvum fieri posse nisi amet sum
Deum, and intitetur studiosissime. --. c. 5. Negamus quenquam plene posse
salvum fieri, nisi huc per spiritum Christi evaserit, ut nihil jam bonorum
operum in eo desideretur. --.c. 6. Praecationes and religiosa jejunia actiones
sanctissimas, quaeque Christianos plurima doceant habemus, etc.
Imperial Cities in their Confession of Faith presented to the Emperor, in the
year 1530. having explained the Doctrine of Justification by Faith only, have
these words, But we would not have this understood as if we allowed Salvation
to a lazy Faith, for we are certain that no man can be saved, who does not love
God above all things, and with all his might endeavor to be like him; or who
is wanting in any good Work: And therefore enjoin their Ministers to preach up
frequent Prayer and Fasting as holy Works and becoming Christians, in which the
Confess. August. Art. 6. Docent quod ^um fide reconciliamur necessario sequi
debeat justitia bonorum operum.
Augustan Confession agrees with them, that good Works necessarily follow a
true Faith; (for even at that time the Calumny that they denied the necessity
of them was very common as appears by their solemn disclaiming any such Opinion
in the Art. 20. Quod adversarii criminantur nos, negligi a nobis doctrinam de
bonis operibus, manifesta calumnia est, etc.
twentieth Article) affirming, Ibid. sec. de bonis operibus. Nec existere fides
potest nisi in his qui poenitentiam agunt.
that he cannot have true Faith who does not exercise Repentance. The same is
taught by the Confess. Basil. sive Mylhysiania Art. 8. -- Haec [Fides] per
opera charitatum se sine intermissione exercet, exercet atque ita probatur.
Helvetian Churches in their Confession composed at Basil, Ann. 1532. that true
Faith shows it self by good Works; and in another Art. 13. Fides -- praeclaros
omnium fructus pullulat -- and est operum foecundissima.
framed at the same place, Ann. 1536. we find this Assertion, that Faith is
productive of all good Works.

The Confess. Bohe. Art. 5. Docent ut qui in Dei nomine dum in vivis est
poenitentiam agere neglexerit, eum malo exitio perdendum.
Bohemian Churches affirm that he who does not exercise Repentance, shall
certainly Perish; and that good Works are absolutely necessary to Salvation, is
the Doctrine of the Confess. Saxon. Art. De nova obedientia. -- Necessaria est
cura vitandi tales lapsus. Haec manifesta necessitas, proposita summa poena si
quos non movet ad been operandum.
Saxon Reformers, in their Confession of Faith offered to the Council of Trent,
Ann. 1551. and in that presented to the same Council by the Duke of Confess.
Wirtemb. Art. de Lege. Agnoscimus legem Dei cujus epitome est decalogus,
praecipere optima justissima and perfectissima opera, and hominem obligatum
esse ad obediendum moralibus praeceptis Decalogi.
Wirtemberg the following year, there is this Profession, we acknowledge the
Decalogue to contain injunctions for all good works, and that we are bound to
obey all the moral Precepts of it. -- Ibid. Art. De bonis operibus Docemus bona
opera, divinitus praecepta necessario facienda esse.
We teach that good works are necessary to be done. Ibid. Art. de Jejunio.
Jejunium sentimus utile esse. etc.
And in particular it commends Fasting, and in the Confess. Gall. Art. 22.
Tantum abest igitur, ut been sancteque vivendi studium fides extinguat ut etiam
illud cieat and inflammet in nobis unde bona opera necessaria consequuntur.
twenty second Article of the French Confession it is affirmed, that the
Doctrine of Faith is so far from being an hindrance to a holy Life, that it
excites us to it, so that it is necessarily attended with good works.

The Church of England agrees with the rest of the Reformed, Artic. 12. that
good works are acceptable to God, and do necessarily spring out of a True and
lively Faith. And the Confess. Helv. c. 16. Eadem [Fides] retinet nos in
officio quod Deo debemus and proximo, and in adversis patientiam firmat, and
confessionem veram format, atque facit, and ut uno verbo omnia dicam omnis
generis bonos fructus and bona opera progignit. Docemus enim vere bona opera
enasci ex viva fide. -- Quamvis ergo d^ceamus cum Apostolo, hominem gratis
justificari per fidem in Christum and non per ulia bona opera, non ideo tamen
vili pendimus, aut condemnamus opera bona. -- Damnamus itaque omnes, qui bona
opera contemnunt, non curanda and inutilia esse blaterant.
Confession of Faith subscribed by all the Churches of Helvetia, Ann. 1566. and
afterward by the Reformed of Poland, Scotland, Hungary and Geneva; gives this
account of the Faith of those Churches. Faith causes us to discharge our duty
toward God and our Neighbor, makes us patient in Adversity, and produces all
good works in us, so we teach good works to be the Offspring of a lively
Faith. And although* we affirm with the Apostle, that we are justified by Faith
in Christ, and not by our good works; yet we do not reject them: But condemn
all who despise good works, and teach that they are not necessary. And in the
thirteenth and fourteenth Articles of the Confess. Scot. Art. 13. Causa bonorum
operum, and Art. 14.
Scotch Confession, they maintain the necessity of all good works, because they
are commanded by God; which is likewise the Doctrine of the Dutch Churches, as
appears by the Profession of their Faith in the Confess. Eccles. Belgicar. in
Synodo Dordr. Art. 24. Fieri non potest ut sancta haec fides in homine otiosa
sit: siquidem non loquimur de fide vana, sed de ea quae in scriptura dicitur,
Fides per charitatem efficax; quae inducit hominem ut illis operibus quae Deus
verbo suo praecepit, sese execeat*
Synod of Dort, affirming, that it is impossible that True Faith should be
without works, seeing it is a Faith working by love; which causes a man to do
all those good works, which God has commanded in his word. And the same
Doctrine is delivered in the Articles of the Church of Ireland, but because I
have not those Articles at hand I omit the words.

Thus by an UNIVERSAL CONSENT of ALL the PROTESTANTS, we find the NECESSITY OF
GOOD WORKS maintained, and I CHALLENGE OUR ADVERSARIES TO PRODUCE ANY ONE
ALLOWED AUTHOR WHO HOLDS THE CONTRARY AMONG US (WHICH IS A UNITY BEYOND WHAT
THEY CAN SHOW IN THEIR CHURCH FOR ANY ONE POINT) though if they could, it would
not justify their Charge who so often tell us, that we must not take the Faith
of any Church from private writings, but their public Confessions.

But these Gentlemen scorn to be tied by any Rules, though never so just, even in
their own opinions; and therefore in A Supplication to the K. most excellent
Majest. Land. 1604. 4 to.
a Supplication directed to King James, by several Romish Priests, they affirm
that whosoever leaves their Communion for ours, begins immediately to lead
a worse life, so it is grown into a Proverb, that the Protestant Religion is
good to live in, but the Papist Religion good to dye in. And indeed they made
it their business to possess their people with that Opinion, so that Father
Francis Reasons of Fat. Neville's Conversion, Chap. 2^.
de Neville a Capuchin, confesses, That he did imagine for a long time, that
they of the Reformed Churches admitting Justification by Faith alone, did it to
exclude good works from the way of Salvation, and show themselves in that to be
Enemies of Charity and of other Virtues, and did therefore extremely condemn
them: but when he came to sound their Doctrine, and see how they judge good
Works necessary to Salvation; and that the Faith whereof they speak is not a
dead Faith, but a lively Faith accompanied with good Works: He acknowledged
they were wrongfully blamed in this, as in many other things also.

But though this Gentleman was so sincere, yet there are but few among them who
tread in his steps; for to pass by all the Controvertists of the last Age, we
need go no farther than these late years to find instances of their
Misrepresentations in this Particular, Verit. Evang. p 41.108 Land. 1687. 4 to.
one of them in a Book dedicated to her Majesty, tells the world, that the
Principle of our Religion takes from us the yoke of fasting, freeth us from all
necessity of good works to be saved, and of keeping the Commandments of God;
and that we might not think he asserted these only to be consequences of our
Doctrines he adds, that most Protestants hold that position, and that it is our
express Doctrine; and in another place he affirms, that praying, watching and
fasting are wholly out of use among Protestants, and not only contrary to the
liberty of their new Gospel, but even fruitless, vain, superstitious Toys
according to the Tenets and Principles thereof. Touchst. of the Refor. Gos. p.
51. Land. 1685 12 s.
Another sets it down as one of the Protestant Articles, That good works are
not absolutely necessary to Salvation. Which Father Manual of Controv. p. 65.
Doway, 1671. 8 vo.
Turbervill confirms by being more particular, The Catholic Church (says he)
teaches much Fasting, Prayer and Mort^^^cation, she exhorts to good works,
voluntary Poverty, Chastity and Obedience, the contrary to all which holy
Doctrines, are taught by Protestants. And a Use of the Notes of the Church, p.
6.
very late Author insinuates that it is all one to Protestants whether God be
served with Fasting, Watching, Mortifying, or without; But the Roman Divine
Father Secur. Evang. Introd. Sect. 2. Ra. dices ex quibus horror Catholitorum
pullulat, sunt -- Horror jejuniorum and operum poenitentiae, Pigritia and
tedium frequentandi cultum laudesque divinas.
Porter, is more express, that one of the Causes which renders the Reformed so
averse to Popery, is, that they abhor Fasting, and Repentance, and account
Prayer and other Offices of Religion tedious; Idd. p. 179. I^dulget praetensa
Reformatio, credere quod bona opera non sint necessaria ad saultem.
that our Religion allows us to believe that good works are not necessary to
Salvation, Id. p. 151. Coelum Religionis Reformatae admittit, homicidas,
adulteros, blasphemos, etc. qua tales, esto nunquam sua peccata detestati
fuerint modo crediderint. And in another place, p. 107. Ex Principiis ejusdem
Religionis, sequitur adulteros, homicidas, idololatras, Qua tales tam esse
filios Dei, quam fuere Apostoli, etc.
that by our Doctrine Thieves, Murderers, Blasphemers, etc. may attain Heaven
BY THEIR BEING SO, if they will but believ^* and that BY BEING SVCH they are as
much the Sons of God, as the Apostles were, with abundance more of such
abominable stuff, fit only for carrying on a most malicious Design.

When with their best Rhetoric these Gentlemen have endeavored to persuade
the world, that they are abused in the account given of their Doctrines by our
Divines, all they pretend to complain of amounts to no more than this, that we
have drawn Consequences from our Doctrine which they will not hear; and we find
not that their greatest malice can pretend to much more; surely then it is high
time for them to reflect a little upon that Counsel of our Mat. 7.5.
SAVIOR, first to pull the Beam out of their own Eye.

It Is not for want of Materials, but because I would not be prolix, that I
produce no more particulars in this point of good works, for I do not remember
to have seen any one of their writings which is not guilty in this kind; I have
more need to make an Apology for insisting so long upon this one particular,
but I was easily induced to it, knowing that one of their great Designs is to
possess the devouter sort of men with a belief that we left their Communion to
have greater Liberty for the Flesh, in prosecution of which they are so
strangely immodest, as to publish such false Opinions for us, as directly
contradict our public Confessions, the discovering of which I looked upon the
best way to oppose their Slanders.

But to take a short view of other particulars: The Author of Veritas
Evangelica before cited, runs wholly upon this point, that we believe the whole
Church has failed, and thence argues that Christ had no Church for some years;
into the same Error Father Catholic Scriptur. p. 77.
Mumford the Jesuit runs; and another affirms Primit. Rule bef. the Refor. par.
1. p. 7.
that we teach the Church of all Nations is confined to England.

Because we reject all Traditions that are not according to the Rule of
Lirinensis, received every where, at all times and by all; Father Secur.
Evangel. p. Quintum Principium* Omnes omnino Traditiones sunt inventiones
humanae.
Porter lays this down as one of our Principles, that all Traditions of all
sorts are the inventions of men; though he could not but know that we receive
the Scriptures from such an universal Tradition, and are ready to embrace any
other Doctrine conveyed to us as they are.

With the same sincerity and modesty he affirms, Secur. Evang. Introd. Sec. 4
Sec. 5. Sec. 6. and p. 9. Where under this Head, Recensentur praecipuae
heterodoxae Religionis Principia. He reckons that for one.
that we pretend that the EXPRESS WORDS of Scripture are our RULE OF FAITH
without any interpretation or consequence drawn from them; though (not to mention
other Churches) the Art. 6.
Church of England declares, that we are to be guided not only by the express
words of the Scripture, but by the consequences drawn from it, and yet this
Gentleman affirms, that our Confessions of Faith pretend only to the express
words.

It is notoriously known that our Differences about Church Government are no
Articles of our Faith, and yet this Author tells Secur. Evang. p. 26. Omnes
Pastores Ecclesiae aequalem habent authoritatem and potestatem, etc. -- Haec
sunt dogmata fidei Reformatae, hae bases and fundamenta pretensae Reformationis.
us, that the equality of power in the Pastors of the Church is one of the
fundamental Articles of the Reformation. A way of misrepresenting which has
been sufficiently blackened by themselves, so that I need say nothing to expose
it.

But to leave this Friar, whose whole Book consists of little else but as bad
or worse Assertions; one of their Transub. defend* in the Introduction.
Champions, could persuade the world, that we account the belief of
Transubstantiation to be Idolatry: a cunning Artifice to draw the people from
considering where the Charge is laid, not against the Doctrine of the corporal
Presence, but the Adoration of the Host. And his fellow Answ. to a Dis. against
Trans. p. 7.
Advocate, seems resolved not to be behind hand, when he affirms, that we
believe there is nothing to be hoped for of substance in the Sacrament.

We dispute with great earnestness against the Idolatrous Worship given to
Angels and Saints in that Church, and our Adversaries have found it impossible
to make a fair defense for it, therefore they betake themselves to prove that
those happy Spirits pray for us, which we acknowledge as well as they,
Touchstone of the Reform. Gosp. p. 63.71.
and yet a very celebrated writer affirms that we deny it: We profess to
believe the Article of the Communion of Saints, but Mr. Monomachia. p. 20.
Ward has the assurance to tell the world, That Protestants believe no
Communion of Saints.

Hitherto we have had Instances of their direct way of misrepresenting, but
they are not so unskilful as not to be furnished with finer Methods, and which
are not so easily discovered by the vulgar; when they are eagerly disputing
it is an easy thing to drop some Assertion which in the heat of Discourse shall
pass unheeded by the warm Adversary, but they will be sure to resume it (and
make their Advantage, of its not being contradicted,) either during the
conference or afterward, to some of the persons then present; which renders it
necessary for those who engage with them to watch every word, and not only
attend to the main Question; for by this method they gain one of these two
points, if their Insinuation be not answered at first, they will urge the point
as granted, and if the disputant deny it, they presently cry out that he is now
reduced to a strait, and so denies what he owned before, which observation
shall be surely seconded and applauded by their Adherents, and often leaves an
impression in the weaker Hearers: on the other hand, if when they find
themselves pressed, and at a stand, (which is their usual time to drop such a
bye assertion) and that their Artifice is discovered, and their position
denied, they leave the first point and pursue the other, and so engage
insensibly in a desultory dispute from one thing to another, never fixed, by
which they render most disputations ineffectual; so that whether stopped in their
design or not, they make their Advantage, either to misrepresent our Doctrine
or extricate themselves from the difficulties they cannot resolve.

Thus one of their Divines urging the Authority of the Fathers to a Protestant,
and not willing to expose himself so far, as to affirm in express terms that we
thought those Holy Men divinely inspired, used this Expression, that seeing we
owned the Authority of the DIVINELY INSPIRED FATHERS, he would prove the
Infallibility of the Church from their Writings: to this the Gentleman not
regarding the Epithete, answered that he could not, and so proceeded in the
dispute: they had not been parted many hours, but the Friar desired some of the
company to observe how the Protestants contradicted themselves about their Rule
of Faith, professing to receive whatever was inspired by the Holy Ghost, and
yet not admitting the writings of the Fathers into the Rule, though the opponent
had acknowledged that they were inspired from above; and when it was replied
that there was no such Concession, he urged that when he termed them Divinely
inspired, there was no exception taken at it, which was a tacit affirming them
to be so. But the Gentlemen were too wise to be caught with so very slight an
Appearance.

I shall have occasion to give a farther account of this under another Head;
therefore I shall at present only observe that how thin soever this Artifice
is in it self, they use it in their public discourses, as well as private
Conversation; Mr. Clench arguing for the Infallibility of Councils, has these
words (speaking of our Appeal to the four first General Councils) St. Peter's
Supremacy discussed, p. 20.
I know no reason why the Church should be credited in the four first General
Councils, and slighted and dis-believed in the following: Christ promised he
would be with them to the consummation of the world, -- I can find no place
where Christ promised to be with them for a limited time, so as to direct them
in their first Assemblies, and to leave them for the future to themselves. Here
he would make the Reader believe that we receive those Synods as believing them
secured from Error, by Christ's promise; for else his Argument is impertinent;
but we do not receive them on any infallible Authority of theirs, not because
they could not err, but because they did not; and therefore we reject others,
because they have erred, for we know of no promise made to them, but are yet
ready to receive any such Councils as the first were, who govern themselves by
the Holy Scriptures.

They find no great difficulty in confuting imaginary Opinions, which makes
them so very dexterous in this Method; to dispute against our Doctrine of
Justification by Faith was too hard a task, Man of Cont^. p. 258.
and therefore F. T. coins a new definition of it in the middle of his Argument
and immediately runs away with that, endeavoring to prove, that Faith is not
an assured Belief that our sins are forgiven; learnedly arguing against his own
imagination: however he had what he aimed at, for he made a show of saying
somewhat, and if he could but persuade any ignorant Protestant that the
definition was owned by the Reformed, he was sure he had overthrown it.

With the same sincerity another of their Champions would insinuate, that the
Protestants left the Communion of Rome, because of the wickedness of the
Members of that Church, Nubes Testium, p. 2.
and therefore heaps up Authorities to prove that it is not a sufficient motive
for a separation from them; but all his Labor is to very little purpose, for
we know the Tares and Wheat are to grow together till Harvest, and not only
the wickedness of their Priests and Bishops, but the Errors and monstrous
Corruptions of their Church, could not have justified our Separation, if they
had not endeavored to force us to be partakers of those Abominations, which we
durst not do least we should be partakers of those Plagues, which are denounced
against them. It was an easy matter to prove the former no ground for
Separation, but some thing hard to undertake the other Point, so that our
Author wisely waved it.

It was observed by the In his Answer to the Span. Ambass. inform. See the
Connection, p. 143.
Duke of Buckingham, that these Gentlemen served themselves of hateful
Nicknames when they are pressed in disputes about Religion; which is another
of their Artifices to promote the same end; it was long since put in practice
by those Bishops at Nice, who set up the worship of Images, Council. Nicaen.
(...). Act. 6.
for no sooner were they pressed with a passage out of Eusebius, but they Brand
him with the Title of an Arian; which Example has been since followed by the
Gentlemen of that Communion on purpose to make the world believe that their
Adversaries held the Doctrines those names import: The Nicolaitans are
represented in the Revelation as the worst of men, therefore the defenders of
Priests marriage had that name imposed on them, that the common people might
think they held the community of wives as tha Sectt did; and so the opposers of
Transubstantiation were nick-nam'd Stercoranists and Paintes.

This Artifice they made great use of in suppressing the Loyal Remonstrance in
Ireland, which I gave some account of in the former Chapter; Hist. of (...) p.
506.
the name of Protestant is a most odious appellation among them, therefore
Riddere the Commissary in his Letter to Cardinal Barberin styles them Irish
Protestants, and the same Cardinal had before called them* the Valesian Sect.

The success attending this method has been so great, that Father Contzen has
formed it into a Rule; Cont. Pol. p. 97. Traver's Answer to a Supplicatory
Epistle p. 339, 340* Se^ the Picture of a Papist, p. 37.
and how well it is observed, may be seen by their daily practice. For as Mr.
Travers complains, they call us Calvinists, etc. but we content our selves with
the honorable Name of Christians; To be a Franciscan, a Thomist, a Scotist, we
leave to them who have rent asunder Christ's Body, but we have no such custom
to name our selves of any men. It was an old device of the Arians, to call
themselves the only true Catholics, and all others Ambrosians, Athanasians,
etc. but this is not the only Heretical Example, after which the Romanists do
exactly copy.

The preceding instances are warrant enough for me to renew my request to the
Reader, NOT TO LEAVE THEM WHEN THEY AFFIRM THAT SUCH A PARTICULAR DOCTRINE IS
PART OF THE REFORMED RELIGION; for we have seen that they are not over sincere
in that matter: If men are found fathering Doctrines upon their Adversaries,
which they abhor as much or more than they; will any man in his wits believe
such an imputation coming from those men? But not only the insincerity of the
persons, but the deceit of the method it self, ought to make us cautious; for
if any particular Doctrine were taught by some of our Divines, it does not
follow that it is a part of the Protestant Religion; if a person be of any
particular Opinion, he ought not to lay such a stress upon it as to make it
part of his Religion, for that consists in a few and plain Articles, and if the
other be overthrown as long as these remain, the Religion remains entire.

I mention this because I have some experience that these Gentlemen do not
misrepresent our Doctrines only to make the world have an ill opinion of them,
but to get advantage of engaging with those who hold some particular ill
grounded opinion, that having refuted it, they may seem to have triumphed over
a Protestant Principle. And this advantage is too often given them by unwary
men, who presuming on their own Abilities, choose rather to defend some private
sentiment than the common Articles of our Faith. An ill cause will not admit of
a sound defense, and therefore it is no hard task to overthrow unwarrantable
positions: which should make those who deal with them use more care; for if
they should be able to defend their opinion, the truth of the Protestant
Religion is not one jot more apparent but the Adversaries of it have a
plausible pretense to affirm that such a position is one of the Doctrines of
it; and if it be foumd incapable of defense, these Gentlemen who brag when
there is no cause, will triumph unmeasurably and amuse many ignorant and weak
Souls.

The Sum of all is, that having to do with men whose Talent at misrepresenting
improves daily, it is our indispensable duty to be well acquainted with the
particulars of our Faith, that neither their Eloquence in persuading, their
Artifice in deforming our Doctrines, nor the fame of their Abilities, may
either put us on defending those Doctrines which we do not teach, nor persuade
us, that our Religion approves them. We have many instances of those who have
split upon this Rock; I NEVER MET WITH ANY OF THEIR CONVERTS WHO UNDERSTOOD OUR
RELIGION, BUT HAVING ENTERTAINED WRONG NOTIONS OF IT, WERE PERSUADED TO CHANGE
UPON THE CONFVTATION OF THOSE IMAGINARY TENETS. I desire these Gentlemen to
name any one Book of Controversy which they think is written with most
sincerity on their side; And I engage my self to produce several false
Imputations in it; by this trick they find most success, so that if all our
People would labor to understand their Religion, the Romanists would have but
few Converts.

FINIS.

