DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas Their Majesty's have received Information upon Oath, That the Persons
herein after particularly maned, have Conspired together, and with diverse other
Disaffected Persons, to raise Rebellion, and for that purpose have made
Provision of Arms, and have Lifted themselves in several Regiments, Troops and
Companies, under pretense of Commissions from the late King James; Their
Majesty's have thought fit, by the Advice of Their Privy Council, to Issue out
this Their Royal Proclamation, and do hereby strictly Charge and Command Thomas
Tilde^ley of the Lodge in Mairs Cough in the County of Lancaster, John
Girlington of Thurland Castle in the same County Esquire. Thomas Tildesley of the
Lodge in Mairs Cough in the County of Lancaster, John Girlington of Thurland
Castle in the same County, Esquire. Thomas Tildesl^y of the Lodge in Mairs Cough
aforesaid Gent. Ralph Tildesley of the same place, Gent, Henry Butl^r Son of
Richard Butler of Rancl^ffe in the said County of Lancaster, Esquire Richard Butler
another of the Sons of the said Richard Butler, Alexander Butler of
Tanderstaffe in the said County, Gent. Thomas Carus Son of Christopher Carus of
Westhall in the said County, Esquire William Westby Son of Francis Westby of Mairs
Cough aforesaid, Gent (...) Goodan late of Orkliffe in the said County, Clerk,
George Carus of Sellet-Hall in the said County, Gent, Thomas Butler Gent,
another Son of the said Richard Butler, Esquire (...) Knype Eldest Son of William
Knype of Hallinghall in the County of York Gent. (...) Cole late of Thurland
Castle, Gent. William Mollineux, Esquire Son of Caryll Lord Viscount Mollineux of
the Kingdom of Ireland, William Gerrard, Son of Six William Gerrard of Garswood
in the said County of Lancaster Baronet, Thomas Westby of Mowbruck in the said
Country of Lancaster, Esquire Robert Molineux of Mosborough in the said County of
Lancaster, William Massey of Puddington in the County of Chester, Esquire
Christopher Carus of Halton in the said County of Lancaster, Esquire Richard
Stanley Son of Chester, Esquire. Chirstopher Carus of Halton in the said County of
Lancaster, Esquire Richard Stanley Son of Thomas Stanley of Eccleston in the said
County of Lancaster, Esquire George Carus Son of the said Christopher Carus of
Halton, Charles Townely Son of Richard Townely of Townely in the said County of
Lancaster Esquire William Standish of Standish in the said County of Lancaster, Esquire
Richard Woolsall of Highton in the said County of Lancaster, Esquire Edmund
Threllfall of the Ashes in the said County of Lancaster, Gent, Thomas
Worthington junior of Wiggan in the said County of Lancaster, Surgeon, (...)
Goodwin a Romish Priest; and also the several Persons lately called by the
names hereafter mentioned, Viz. Captain Harrington, Captain Penny, Lieutenant
Penalt, Colonel Tempest, Captain Byerley, alias Barlow, David Thornton of
Oldsteds in the County of York, and (...) Colton of Oldsteds aforesaid, and
every of them, forthwith of Render themselves to some one of Their Majesty's
Justices of the Peace. And in case they do not Render themselves, Their
Majesty's do hereby Require and Command all Their Loving Subjects to Discover,
Take and Apprehend them wherever they may be found, and to carry them before
the next Justice of the Peace of Chief Magistrate, who are hereby required to
Commit them to the next Goal, there to remain until they be thence delivered by
due course of Law. And Their Majesty's do hereby Require the said Justice or
other Magistrate, immediately to give Notice thereof to Them or Their Council.
And their Majesty's do hereby give Notice to all Persons that shall Conceal the
Persons above named, or any of them, or be Aiding or Assisting in the
Concealing of them, or furthering their Escape, That they shall be Proceeded
against for such their Offense with the utmost Severity according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirtieth Day of May, 1690. In the Second
Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Q^^^^^ most Excellent Majesty's 16^^


