THE PRINCIPLES OF THE Christian Religion EXPLAINED: In a Brief COMMENTARY UPON
THE Church Catechism.

By WILLIAM WAKE, D. D. Rector of St. James Westminster, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Sare, at Gray's Inn Gate in Holborn. 1699.

THE PREFACE.
THE Design of the following Treatise being to Instruct those, who are yet to
learn, in the Principles of their Christian Religion, I shall not think it
necessary to make any Apology for my Publishing of it. It is so proper a Part
of our Ministerial Office, not only to Teach these Things, but to Use our
Utmost Endeavors, to Inculcate them upon the Minds of those who are committed
to our Charge; that we never more truly pursue the Business of our Calling,
than when We are doing of it. And no One ought to make an Excuse for doing
that, the Neglect of which would Need an Excuse, or rather would not admit of
Any.

It has pleased God, to whose Providence I desire in All Things to Submit my
Self, to engage me in a Cure, in which it is next to Impossible, in the Ordinary
Method of Teaching, to instruct All Those who belong to it. Neither will Our
Churches Receive Them; nor can I hope, by any Private Application, effectually
to supply what I am sensible must be Wanting in our Public Ministration. To
make up the Defects of Both, I knew no way so Ready, as to compose a Short
Summary of what is most Necessary for Every Christian to know; and to Order it
in such Wise, that every One who pleases may partake of the Benefit of it. This
I have done in the present Treatise: Which as it was designed by me
particularly for those of my Own Parish, for whose Instruction I am principally
concerned; so, to Them I must beg Leave, in a more Especial Manner, to
Recommend the Use of it. I am not aware (...) that there is any Thing in it
Above the Capacity of the most Ordinary Christian to comprehend; who will but
duly Consider what he Reads, and is not utterly a Stranger to the Principles of
his Religion. It Is true, I have inserted many Things into this, which are not
wont to be handled in Other Catechisms: As designing it not for Children, (for
whom such Treatises are commonly framed;) but for Men and Women; for such as
either have, or I am sure Ought to have, already passed the First Rudiments of
the Gospel of Christ. But I have endeavored to express my self with so much
Clearness, and Perspicuity, that I hope All sorts of Persons may be able to
profit by what I have done; and see, in a short Compass, both what that Holy
Doctrine which we profess is, and upon what Grounds we build our Belief of it.

I have chosen to do this in the Form of a Catechism, not only because I look
upon that to be the Plainest, and most Natural Way of Instruction; but because
it is certainly the Shortest, and most Easy to the Memory. And would but
Parents take Care to teach their Children, at a Competent Age, to Answer the
Questions here proposed; they might possibly, thereby, not only take a Good
Method for the Instruction of Them in the Knowledge of that Religion into which
they were Baptized; but might, at the same time, improve Themselves too, in the
Understanding of it.

It has been the Wisdom, as well as Piety, of the Church of England, to make a
Suitable Provision for the Instruction of all Sorts of Persons in her
Communion, in the Knowledge of their Christian Profession. In Order hereunto,
she has appointed Catechetical Exercises for Younger Persons, as well as
Sermons for those of a Greater Age, and Understanding: And has Obliged Masters,
and Parents, no less to send their Children, and Servants, to the One, than to
come Themselves to the Other. How Others may judge of this Her Pious Care, I
cannot tell: But, for my Own Part, I must freely profess, that I never think my
Self employed to better Purpose, than when I am discharging this Part of my
Ministry. And I am confident, that would all sorts of Persons but duly attend
upon these Instructions; they would Reap a more substantial Benefit by them,
than from those Other Exercises which have, I know not how, so universally
Crept into the Place of them. It being certain, that the only Way either
judiciously to hear, or truly to profit by, Sermons; is to lay a Good
Foundation for both, by a previous Catechetical Institution in the Principles
of Religion: And which, if Men have neglected when they were Young, the best
way to Remedy that Defect, will be, not only to send their Children, but to
come Themselves also, to our Public Catechizings; where not only the Ignorant
may be Informed, but those who are the Best Improved, may possibly meet with
Somewhat, either to Confirm their Faith, or to Direct their Practice.

I have divided the following Treatise into 52 Sections; that so taking of one
Every Lord's Day, the Whole may be Gone through Once in the Year. I have more
or less Referred to Scripture-Proofs, for every Point that I have proposed: And
that not only to show upon what Ground I build my Answers, but moreover to
accustom the Pious Reader to a better Acquaintance with those Holy Writings.
And I have purposely made the Sections very short, that so He may not only
Peruse what I have written; but may be Encouraged thereby, at the same Time,
diligently to compare it with, and examine it by, the Great Rule of our Faith,
The Word of God.

If by what I have done, I shall minister to the Improvement of any Good
Christians in the Knowledge of their Religion; but especially to Those of my
Own Cure; I shall think my Pains very happily bestowed. If not, yet at least I
shall have this Satisfaction, that I have done what in me lay to Supply their
Necessities: And that it must be, in some Measure, their Own Faults, if they
shall still continue Ignorant of what was needful to have been Known by them,
in Order to their Salvation.

THE PRINCIPLES OF THE Christian Religion explained: IN A BRIEF COMMENTARY UPON
THE Church-Catechism.
SECT. I.
Q. FRom whence is the Word Catechism derived?

A. From a Greek Word, Acts xxi.21, 24. Luke 1.4. Acts xviii.25, 26.
which signifies to Teach by Word of Mouth: And therefore it has been used
particularly to denote such a kind of Instruction, as is made by way of
Question and Answer.

Q. What is that you call your Church-Catechism?

A. It is a plain, and summary Institution of the Principles of the Christian
Religion, set forth by Authority, and required to be learned of every Person,
in order to his being Confirmed by the Bishop; and prepared both for the
profitable Reading, and Hearing of God's Word, and for the worthy Receiving of
the Lord's Supper.

Q. What do you look upon to be the proper Subject of such an Institution?

Heb. v.12. -- vi.1, 2.
A. It ought to comprehend all such things as are generally necessary to be
known of All Persons, in order to their due serving of God here, and to their
being saved hereafter.

Q. What are those things which may be accounted thus necessary to be known by
All Christians?

A. They may, in general, be reduced to these two Heads: viz. The Knowledge of
the Gospel Covenant; Heb. viii.8. etc. Genesis iii.15.
that is to say, Of the Promises made by God to Mankind through our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of the Conditions upon which We may become Partakers of them. And,
2dly, Of the means which God has appointed whereby to convey his Grace to Us;
and thereby both to assist, and confirm Us, in the discharge of our Duty to Him.

Q. What are the Promises which God has made to Mankind, through Jesus Christ?

A. Pardon of Sins: Grace to fulfill our Duty in this Life: Heb. viii.12. Luke
xi.13. 1 Pet. 1* 2. Jo. iii.16, 17. 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.
And, upon our sincere Performance thereof, Everlasting Salvation in the Life
which is to come.

Q. What are the Conditions required of Us by God, in order to our being made
Partakers of these Promises?

A. A hearty Repentance of our Sins past: A sincere Endeavor to live according
to God's Commands for the time to come: 2 Cor. vii.10^ Jam. v.20.
And both these made perfect, by a lively Faith in God's Mercies toward Us,
through Jesus Christ, Jo. iii.16.

Q. What are the Means ordained of God, whereby to convey his Grace to Us?

A. They are chiefly two: Constant Prayer to God for it: And a worthy Use of
the Holy Sacraments, Luke xi.13. Mark xvi.16. Acts ii.38. 1 Cor. x.16. xi.23,
etc.

Q. Are there not, besides these, some other means ordained by God, and
necessary to be made use of by Us, in order to our Salvation?

A. Yes there are; particularly the Hearing, Reading, and Meditating upon his
Word: The Substance of which, though it be sufficiently gathered together, and
represented to Us in our Catechism, yet ought not that to hinder our Reading of
the Holy Scriptures, nor to deprive Us of any other Means of Christian
Instruction; but rather should be used as a Help whereby to render both the
Reading, and Hearing of God's Word, more plain and profitable to Us. Psalm. i.2.
2 Timothy iii.16. Jo. v.39. Romans xv.4.

Q. Does your Church-Catechism sufficiently instruct you in All These?

A. It does: For therein both the Nature of the Christian Covenant is declared
to Us, and the Conditions are set forth on which we may become Partakers of it.
And we are particularly Instructed, both how we ought to Pray to God; and what
those Sacraments are, which are necessary to be Administered unto, and Received
by All of Us.

SECT. II.
Q. WHat is your Name?

A. N. or M.

Q. Who gave you this Name?

A. My Godfathers, and Godmothers, etc.

Q. What is that Name which is here demanded of you?

A. It is my Christian Name; therefore so called, because it was given to Me by
my Godfathers, and Godmothers, at my Baptism. For as from my Natural Parents I
derive the Name of my Family; so from those who were my Spiritual Parents, I
take that Name which properly belongs to me as a Member of Christ's Church.
Genesis xvii.5, 15. Genesis xxi.3, 4. Luke i.59, 60. Luke ii.21.

Q. Whom do you mean by your Godfathers and Godmothers?

A. I mean those Persons who became Sureties for me at my Baptism: And upon
whose Promise there made in my Name, I was Baptized, and so foederally admitted
into the Communion of Christ's Church.

Q. What are the Benefits which by your Baptism have accrued to you?

A. They are Many, and Great Ones; but may, in general, be reduced to these
Three; that thereby I was made a Member of Christ, the Child of God, and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Q. How were you hereby made a Member of Christ?

A. As I was made a ( a) Member of his Mystical Body, Romans xii.5. Ephesians i 22, 23.
the Church; of which Christ is the ( b) Head. (a) 1 Cor. xii.27. Ye are the
Body of Christ, and Members in particular. (b) Ephesians. iv.15. v.23. Christ is
the Head of the Church.

Q. How were you hereby made the Child of God?

A. As, by this means, I was taken into Covenant with Him; Jo. i.12; 13 Heb.
ii.11 12, 13. Romans viii.14, 15. Acts iii.25.
was adopted into his Family; dedicated to his Service; and entitled to his
Promises. Gal. iii.26, 27, Ye are All the Children of God by Faith in Jesus
Christ. For as many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. -- And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according
to the Promise. See Gal. iv.5, 7. Ephesians. i.5.

Q. How were you hereby made an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven?

A. As, by my Baptism, I became entitled to a Right to it; Romans viii.15, 17.
Gal. iv.5, 7. Ephesians. 1.5. 1 Pet iii.21.
and was actually put into such a State, that if I be not wanting to my self, I
shall not fail of being made Partaker of it. Tit. iii.4, etc. But after that,
the Kindness and Love of God our Savior toward Man appeared, Not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy, he saved us, by
the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost: -- That being
justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs according to the hope of
Eternal Life. 1 Pet. i.3, etc. Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who according to his abundant Mercy, has begotten us again unto a
lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead; to an
Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for Us.

Q. Are All, who are Baptized, made Partakers thereby of these Benefits?

A. They are all, at that time, 1 Pet i.3, 4 5 Gal. iii.26. Heb. ii.3,
either made Partakers of them, or entitled to them. But those only continue
to hold their Right to these Privileges, who take care to fulfill their part of
the Covenant which was therein made between God and Them.

Q. Have none, but such as are Baptized, a Right to these Benefits?

A. None have a Right to them but such as are Baptized, or were ready to have
been Baptized, had they had the Opportunity of Receiving that Holy Sacrament.
Jo. iii.5. Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Mark xvi.16. He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved.

SECT. III.
Q. WHat did your Godfathers, and Godmothers then for you?

A. They did promise and Uow three things in my Name, etc.

Q. What is the first Thing which your Godfathers, and Godmothers, promised in
your Name?

A. That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, Ephesians. ii.1, 2, 3.
the Pomps, and Uanity, of this Wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.

Q. What does the Renouncing of all these import?

A. It imports an utter forsaking of Them: And obliges me not only inwardly to
detest Them; but so to watch, and govern all my Outward Actions, as not to
follow, nor be led by Them.

Q. Do you think that you shall be able thus to renounce the Devil, the World,
and your Own Flesh?

A. So perfectly, as I could wish, I cannot hope to do it in this present Life:
Yet I trust that, by the Grace of God, I shall always from my heart detest, and
abhor them; And so order my Life, and Actions, as not to be drawn into any evil
Courses by them; nor even into the actual Commission of any very great, and
voluntary Sins.

Q. What mean you by the Devil?

A. It is the common name given in Scripture to those wicked Spirits, Mat.
xiii.39. Luke viii.12. Je. viii.44. Ephesians. iv.27. -- vi.11. 1 Timothy iii.6, 7. Heb.
ii.14. Jam. iv.7. 1 Jo. iii.8, 9, 10.
who having rebelled against God, and being thereupon justly cast off from that
Glorious State in which they were created by him; do make it their constant
Business and Endeavor to draw as many of us as they can into the same
Rebellion, and thereby into the same State of Misery with themselves. 1 Pet.
v.8. Be sober, be vigilant: because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring
Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

Q. What are the Works of the Devil, which, together with him, you, at your
Baptism, promised to Renounce?

A. Jo. viii, 44. 1 Jo. iii.8.
All manner of Sin: But chiefly I comprehend, under this first Rank, those Sins
which either more immediately relate to him, or proceed from his Suggestions; 1 Timothy iii.6. Jo. viii.44. Jam. 3.14, 15. 1 John ii.15. -- v.19.21.
such as Pride, Malice, Envy, Revenge, Murder, Lying; and, above all,
Witchcraft, and Idolatry.

Q. What is the next Enemy which, at your Baptism, you promised to Renounce?

A. This Wicked World, with all the Pomps, and Uanitiy, of it.

Q. How is it that you call the World, (the Work of God's Hands) a Wicked World?

A. Not that it is in its self so, but only to show how far, and in what
respect, I am to Renounce it; namely, in all such cases in which it would draw
me into any Wickedness, for the sake of any thing which I desire, or enjoy, in
it. Gal. 1.4. Christ gave himself for our Sins, that he might deliver us from
this present Evil World. Jam. iv.4.
1 John ii.15. Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World: If
any Man Love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him.

Q. What do you mean by the Pomps, and Vanity, of this Wicked World?

A. They do most properly denote the vain show, 1 Jo. ii.16. Act xxv.23. Phil.
ii.3.
and magnificence, of such as are Great, and Rich, in it: But do withal
comprehend the Riches themselves which minister to these Vanities; together
with the Covetousness, Injustice, Oppression, and whatsoever other Sins, of the
like kind, Men commit for the support of their Vanity, and to obtain such
things as minister only to the Pomp, and Pride, of Life.

Q. What is the Third Enemy, which your Religion engages you to Renounce?

A. The Sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

Q. What mean you by the Word Flesh?

A. I mean that Natural Corruption which dwells in our Flesh, and through which
we are continually apt either to be led into Sin, or to be hindered in our
Duty. Romans vii.18.23. For I know that in me, that is in my Flesh, dwells no
good thing. Romans viii.13. Therefore, we are Debtors not to the Flesh, to live
after the Flesh: for if ye live after the Flesh ye shall die; but if ye,
through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live. See Gal.
v.16, 17.

Q. What do you understand by the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh?

A. Those inordinate Desires, and Inclinations, which proceed from this
Principle; and dispose us to those Sins which are in a peculiar manner called,
in Scripture, The Works of the Flesh: See Gal. v.19. Romans viii.13. Coloss.
iii.5. 1 John ii.16.

Q. What was the Second thing which your Godfathers, and Godmothers, promised
for you at your Baptism?

A. That I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

Q. Where are those Articles to be met with?

A. They are only to be found in, and believed upon the Authority of, God's
Word: Yet have been collected into that short Summary of our Faith, which is
commonly called The Apostles Creed.

Q. What was the Third thing, which your Godfathers, and Godmothers, promised
in your Name at your Baptism?

A. That I should keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same
all the days of my Life.

Q. Has there been any such Summary Collection made of God's Commandments, as
you say there has been of the Principal Articles of your Christian Faith?

A. Yes there has, and that by God himself, Mat. xix.17.18, 19.
in those Ten Commandments which God delivered to the Jews heretofore; Exodus
xx, Romans xiii.9. Luke xviii.20.
and which continue no less to oblige us now. Mat. v.17, etc.

Q. Do thou not think that thou art bound, etc.

A. Yes verily, and by God's help so I will, etc.

Q. Upon what grounds do you think your self obliged to make good what your
Godfathers, and Godmothers, promised for you at your Baptism?

A. Upon many accounts; but chiefly because what was then transacted, was not
only done in my Name, but for my Benefit, and Advantage: And I must resolve to
fulfill what they promised for me, or I shall not receive the Blessings, which,
in consideration thereof, God was pleased to make over to me. Besides that they
promised nothing on my behalf, but what it would otherwise have been my Duty,
as well as Interest, to have fulfilled.

Q. By what means do you hope you shall be Able to fulfill what they promised
for you?

A. By the Grace of God, which I am assured shall not be wanting to me, Jo.
vi.44. 2 Cor. iii.5.
if I do but heartily pray to God for it, and take care to use it as I ought to
do. Phil. 1.6. -- ii.13.
Luke xi.13. If ye being Evil know how to give Good Gifts unto your Children,
how much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
him?

Q. How are you assured of God's Grace to enable you to Believe, and to Do,
what he requires of you?

A. Inasmuch as by my Baptism I was put into a State of Salvation, Jerem.
xxxii.40. Ezekiel. xxxvi, 27. 1 Jo. iii.9. 2 These. iii.3.
which I could not have been, were I not thereby secure of whatsoever is
needful, on God's part, to be bestowed upon me, in order to my attaining of
Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Romans i.16. The Gospel of Christ,
is the Power of God unto Salvation to every one that Believes. Phil. ii.13,
14. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling: For it is God which
works in you both to Will, and to Do, of his Good Pleasure.

Q. How came you to be called unto such a Blessed State as this?

A. Only by the Mercy of God, Tit. iii.4, 5. 2 Timothy i.9. 1 Jo. vi.44. Ephesians.
ii.8. Phil. i.29.
and through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Savior; and therefore I do most
heartily thank our Heavenly Father, that He has called me to this State of
Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

Q. Do you think that you shall be able still to go on, and persevere in this
State?

A. It is my earnest desire and purpose so to do; and I trust that by the Grace
of God, Jo viii.31. Gal. vi.9. Rom, ii.7. 1 Cor. xv.58.
I shall do so. 1 Cor. i.8. 2 Cor. i.22. Ephesians. iv.30.
For which Cause, I will never cease to pray unto him for the continuance of
his Grace; that so I may be found Faithful and Sincere in my Duty to my Lives
End. 2 Thessalonians. iii.3. The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you
from Evil. Ephesians. iv.30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby you are
sealed unto the day of Redemption. Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very
thing, That he which has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the
day of Jesus Christ.

SECT. IV.
Q. BUt what if notwithstanding all your present Desires, and Resolutions, you
should chance to fall away from your Duty; and thereby put your self out of
this state of Salvation; ^s there no way left for you to recover your self, and
to return again to it?

A. Yes, there is; 1 Jo. i.8. Luke xv.7.18, etc.
by a true Repentance for the Sins which I shall have Committed, and an humble
Confession of them to God; with earnest Prayer for his Forgiveness, through the
Merits, and Intercession, of Jesus Christ, our Blessed Savior and Redeemer.

Q. What mean you by Repentance?

A. I mean such a Conversion of a Sinner to God, whereby he is not only
heartily 2 Cor. vii.10.
Sorry for the Evil he has done, and Resolved to forsake it; Ezekiel. xviii.21.
Isa. i.16, 17. Prove. xxviii.13.
but does actually begin to renounce it, and to fulfill his Duty according to
his Ability; with a steadfast purpose to continue God's faithful Servant unto
his Life's End.

Q. What are the chief Acts required to such a Repentance?

A. To forsake Evil, and to do Good: To turn from those Sins which we repent
of; Psalm. xxxiv: 15. Isai. i.16.
and to serve God by an Universal Obedience of him, in whatsoever he has
required of us.

Q. What is the first step toward a true Repentance?

A. To be thoroughly Convinced of the evil of our Ways, Psalm. xxxviii.18.
and heartily Sorry for it.

Q. Is any kind of Sorrow to be looked upon as a part of true Repentance? 2
Cor. vii.9, 10, 11,


A. No; there is a Sorrow for Sin which proceeds, not from any Love of God, or
Sense of our Duty to Him; 2 Cor. vii.10.
nor yet from any real Hatred of the Sins which we have committed; but merely
from the fear of God's Judgment, and of the Punishment which we may be likely
to suffer for them. This is that Sorrow which is commonly called Attrition; and
may be in the most Wicked Men, without ever bringing them to any true
Repentance for their Sins.

Q. What then is that Sorrow which leads to a true Repentance?

A. It is that Godly Sorrow which proceeds from a Sense of our Duty, and of the
Obligations we lie under to the performance of it. When we are Sorry for our
Sins upon the account of our having thereby offended God; broken the Covenant
of the Gospel; and grieved the Holy Spirit which was given to us; and are
therefore resolved immediately to forsake our Sins, and never to return any
more to them.

Q. How is such a Sorrow to be wrought in a Sinner?

A. Only by the Grace of God, and the serious Consideration of our Own Estate
toward him: the former to be attained by our constant Prayers for it; the
latter, by accustoming our selves often to Examine our Souls, and to try our
Ways, by the measures of that Obedience which the Gospel of Christ requires of
us.

Q. Does not God make use of many other ways to bring Men to such a Sorrow?

A. God has many ways whereby to bring Sinners to Repentance. Sometimes he does
it by bringing some temporal Evils, and Calamities, upon them: Sometimes by
visiting them with Terrors, and Disquiets of Mind: Sometimes he calls upon them
by the Outward Ministry of his Word; and Sometimes by the Evils which befall
Others, especially those who were their Companions in their Sins. But whatever
the Occasions be which God is pleased to make use of to bring us to Repentance,
it is the Grace of the Holy Spirit, and the serious Consideration of our own
wretched Estate, that begins the Work, and produces in us that Godly Sorrow,
which finally ends in a true Repentance.

Q. What are the chief Motives, with respect to us, to engage us thus to Sorrow
for our Sins?

A. The Threats of God, denounced in the Holy Scriptures, against Impenitent
Sinners; Mat. xviii.3. Luke xiii.3. Prove. xxviii.19.
and the Promises there made of Pardon to all such as shall truly Repent, Ezekiel.
xviii.30. -- xxxiii.11. Isa. lv.7. 1 Jo. i.8.
and return to their Duty, as they ought to do.

Q. What is the next thing required in order to a true Repentance?

A. Confession of Sin: Not that God has any need of being informed by us of
what we have done amiss; but to the end we may thereby both raise in our selves
a greater shame, and sorrow, for our Evil Doings; and give the greater Glory to
God, by such a solemn humbling of our selves in Confession before him.

Q. Is such a Confession necessary to our Forgiveness.

A. So necessary that we have no promise of any Pardon without it: Prove.
xxviii.13. He that covers his Sins shall not prosper; but whosoever confesses
and forsakes them shall have Mercy. 1 John i.8, 9. If we say that we have no
Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. If we confess our Sins,
he is Faithful and Just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness.

Q. To whom is our Confession to be made?

A. Always to God; and in some certain Cases to Man also.

Q. What are those Cases in which we ought to confess our Sins to Man, as well
as unto God?

A. They are especially these Three. 1. I^ case we have Offended, Mat. v.23.
or Injured our Neighbor, and upon that account need to obtain hi^ Pardon, as
well as God's. 2. If by any open and notorious Transgression we shall happen to
have either deserved, 1 Cor. v. 1 Timothy v.20.
or, it may be, to have fallen under, the Censures of the Church; an^ so
Confession to the Church be necessary, to restore us to the Peace of it. Jam.
v.16.
Or, 3. If we shall have any private reason that may move us to acquaint any
Person with our Sins; for Advice, for Prayer, for Absolution; or for any the
like Advantage, which cannot be had without it.

Q. What think you of that Confession (commonly called by them
Auricular-Confession) which the Church of Rome requires, as necessary to
Forgiveness?

A. I look upon it as a great and dangerous Imposition, that has no warrant
from God; is a great Rack and Snare to the Consciences of Good Men, and may be
apt to encourage most Others in their Sins: Whilst by the Absolution, which is
so readily given them thereupon (and the Efficacy of which is so highly
magnified in that Church) they are taught to entertain a much less Opinion both
of the Heinousness, and Danger, of their Evil-doings, than either the Scripture
Warrants, or their own Interest should prompt them to admit of.

Q. Is there not somewhat yet required, beyond this, in order to our
Forgiveness?

A. Yes there is: for to all this there must be super-added an Actual forsaking
of those Sins which we Confess, and that Absolute, Prove. xxviii.13. Isa, Lv, 7,
Ezekiel, xxxiii 11,
and without Reserve: so that we must firmly resolve, and, as much as in us
lies, heartily endeavor, never to return again any more to them.

Q. But ought there not, beyond all this some Satisfaction to be made to God,
for the Sins which we have committed?

A. Yes certainly; Heb, ix, 2^, 26, 28, Heb. x.12, 14. 1 Pet. ii.24. -- iii.18.
1 Jo. i.7.
and such there has been made, by our Savior Christ, for us; who has fully
satisfied the Justice of God in that kind, and left nothing more for us to do,
in that behalf.

Q. What do you then say to those Satisfactions, which the Church of Rome
teaches we may, and ought to make, for our Sins?

A. That they are built upon a false Foundation; are contrary to the Goodness
of God, and beyond the Capacity of Man.

Q. What is the Foundation upon which they are built?

A. It is this; That when God forgives us our Sins, whether upon our Own
Repentance, or by virtue of the Priest's Absolution; He remits indeed the
Fault, and purges away our Guilt; and by this acquits us from the Everlasting
Punishment that would otherwise have been due to them; But yet still retains us
under an Obligation to some temporal Sufferings, either by Satisfactory Works
to be done for them in this Life; or by undergoing a certain proportion of Pain
for them after Death, in a Place which they call Purgatory.

Q. How does it appear that this Foundation is false and erroneous?

A. Because, in the first place, it is Absurd to suppose, that God should
forgive the whole Guilt of our Sins, and yet, having done so, should afterward
punish us for them: And, secondly; It is injurious to the Sufferings and Merits
of Christ, whose Death was a sufficient Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole
World; and has left no room either for God to require, or for us to Pay, any
thing more.

Q. Does Repentance then, if it be sincere, without any thing more, restore us
again to our State of Grace, and reconcile us to God Almighty?

A. If it be sincere, it does, through Faith in Jesus Christ.

Q. Does God allow Repentance to all Sins? Jo. vi.29. Act. xiii.38. xvi.30, 31.
2 Pet. i.5, etc.

A. There is No Sin but what True Repentance washes away: But there may be some
Cases in which God may deny Us his Grace, so that we shall not be able truly to
Repent.

Q. What Cases are They?

A. They may All be reduced to this One General; namely, a Wilful Abuse, Prove.
1.24, etc. xxviii.14. Heb. iii.13, 15. -- vi.6. -- xii.17.
and Resistance, of the Divine Grace: Whether it be by a long Habit of Sinning;
or by frequent Acting against the Dictates of our own Consciences, and the
Motions of God's Holy Spirit: To say nothing of some Sins, which are in an
Eminent manner destructive of the Divine Grace, Prove. xvi.5. Jam. iv.6. 1 Pet.
v.5. Psalm. x.3. 1 Cor. v.11. vi.10. Ephesians. v.5. Jam. iii.15* Jud. 19.
such as Pride, Covetousness, Sensuality; but especially that Sin which is
particularly called in Scripture, the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Q. What is meant by that Sin?

A. I suppose it to have been the particular Sin of the Jews heretofore, in not
only obstinately refusing to receive our Blessed Lord for their Messiah, after
sufficient Proofs given by Him to convince Them that He was so; but ascribing
those Miracles which He wrought in proof of his Authority, to the Help of the
Devil, Jo. ix.14* Jo* v.44.
when at the same time they either were abundantly convinced, Or, but for their
Own Fault might have been, that He did Them by the Power of God. Mat. xii.31.
Comp. Mark iii.28. Luke xii.10.

Q. Do you look upon this Sin to have so wholly belonged to those Men, as not
to be capable of being Committed by Any Now?

A. That very Sin, which in Scripture is so called, cannot now be committed,
because Christ is not now upon Earth, nor have we therefore any Occasion Given
us, thus to Blaspheme against the Holy Ghost. Yet some Sins there are of a like
Nature, which may still be committed; and which, being Committed, may prove no
less dangerous to Those who are Guilty of Them, than that Sin did prove to the
Pharisees heretofore.

Q. What Sins are those, which you suppose to come the nearest to it?

Heb. vi.4. etc. (...) x.26.
A. Apostasy from the Christian Religion, after having been convinced of the
Truth, and made Partakers of the Promises of it. Next to that, an Apostasy from
the Truth, and Purity of the Gospel, for the sake of some worldly Fears on the
One hand, or present Hopes on the Other, to the Communion of a Church, which
not only obstinately resists the Truth; but damns, and persecutes, all such as
profess it. And, lastly, Apostasy to Idolatry, which seems to be the Sin unto
Death spoken of by St. John, 1 Jo. v.16. and for the Remission of which He
gives Us but little Encouragement to Pray, V.16.

Q. What then do you think of Those who Go off from the Communion of the Church
of England, to That of the Church of Rome?

A. As of Apostates, and Idolaters: To whom God may, by an Extraordinary Effect
of his Mercy, give Grace for Repentance, and so for Salvation; but of whom
otherwise, we have no Ground of Hope.

Q. Do you think such in a more dangerous Estate, than those who were from the
beginning bred up in the Roman Communion?

A. I do; forasmuch as they have both rejected the Truth once known, and
received by them; and cast off the Way, in which the Providence of God had
placed them; and that, it may be, on some base grounds, to be sure, without any
sufficient Reason to justify their doing of it.

Q. What then do you think of those who have always been of the Communion of
that Church?

A. I think them, in general, in much greater danger Now, than they were before
the Reformation: And still those in more danger who have lived among those of
the Reformed Church, and so were in a better Capacity of being convinced of the
Errors of their Way. But, most of all, do I think the Estate of those
dangerous, or rather desperate, who are Learned, and know their Errors; or are
Priests, and so called to instruct the People in the Purity of Christ's
Religion. The Sincere, and Ignorant, who want Capacity, or want Opportunity, to
know the Truth, I hope God will forgive: The Careless, the Prejudiced; but,
most of all, the obstinately blind, among them, I neither can acquit, nor do I
think that God will forgive Them.

SECT. V.
Q. WHat was the second thing which Your Godfathers, and Godmothers, promised
in your Name?

A. That I should Believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

Q. Where are those Articles to be found?

A. In the Holy Scriptures; and particularly those of the New Testament.

Q. What mean you by the Holy Scriptures?

A. I mean those Books, 2 Timothy iii.16. 2 Pet..i.28.
which through the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, were written by Moses, and the
Prophets, under the Law; and by the Apostles and Evangelists of Christ, since
the publishing of the Gospel; to direct us in the Knowledge of God, and of the
Duty which He Requires of Us.

Q. How do you know what Books were written by these Persons, in order to these
Ends?

A. By the Constant, Universal, and Undeniable Testimony both of the Jewish and
Christian Church: From the former of which we have Received the Scriptures of
the Old, from the latter those of the New Testament.

Q. How do you know that these Books were written by the Assistance of the Holy
Spirit?

A. By the Authors who wrote them; who were doubtless no less inspired in what
they Wrote, 2 Pet. iii.15.
than in what they Taught, of the Gospel of Christ. 2. By the Design of God in
the composing of Them; Jo. xx.21. Luke i.4. 2 Timothy iii.14, 15, 16.
which was to leave thereby a Constant, Infallible Rule of Faith, to the
Church, in all Ages of it. 3. By the Opinion which all Christians from the time
that they were published, have had of Them; and the deference which, upon that
account, they have paid to Them. And, lastly, By the Subject Matter of Them,
and those internal Marks of Divine Wisdom, and Piety, which are so conspicuous
in all the Parts of Them.

Q. Do you look upon these Scriptures, as the Only, present, Rule of your Faith?

A. I do: Nor is there any Other certain Foundation, on which to build it.

Q. What think you of the Tradition of the Church?

A. Could I be sure that any thing, not contained in the Scriptures, 2 These.
ii.15.
came down by a certain, uninterrupted Tradition, from the Apostles, I should
not except against it. Nay, I do therefore receive the Holy Scriptures, as the
Rule of my Faith, because they have such a Tradition to warrant me so to do.
But because there is no such Tradition for any thing besides, therefore neither
do I build my Faith upon it: But, on the contrary, do suppose that, by the
Providence of God, the Holy Scriptures were purposely written, to prevent those
Doubts, those Forgeries, and Deceits, which his Infinite Wisdom foresaw, an
Oral Tradition would always have been liable unto.

Q. Can the Holy Scriptures alone make your Faith perfect?

A. They Can: 2 Timothy iii.17.
Nor ought I to believe any thing as an Article of my Faith, which is not to be
found in them, or cannot plainly be proved by Them.

Q. What do you think of the Church's Definitions?

A. That I ought to submit to them in whatsoever they define agreeably to the
Word of God: But if in any thing they require me to believe what is contrary to
the Word of God, or cannot be Proved thereby; I ought absolutely to reject the
One, and am under no Obligation to Receive the Other.

Q. But is not this to make your self wiser than the Church?

A. No, by no means; but only to make the Word of God, of more Authority with
me than the Word of Man: Whilst I choose rather to Regulate my Faith by what God
has delivered, than by what Man Defines.

Q. Are the Holy Scriptures so Plain, and Easy to be Understood, that every One
may be Able to judge for Himself what he ought to Believe?

Psalm. cxix.105. Jo. v.39.
A. In Matters of necessary Belief, they are very plain, even to the most
Ordinary Christian: Yet we do not deny but that every Man ought to hear the
Church; and attend to the Instructions of those who are the Pastors of it. Only
we say, that neither the Church, nor its Pastors, ought to teach any thing as
an Article of Faith; or Require any Man's assent to it, as such, that cannot be
shown to have been either expressly delivered in the Word of God; or, by a plain
and necessary Consequence, be Proved thereby.

Q. But how shall the Unlearned be able to know what the Scriptures propose;
seeing they are written in a Language which such Persons do not understand?

A. By Reading them in their Own Vulgar Tongue, into which every Church has, or
ought to have them faithfully translated, for the Benefit of Those who do not
understand the Languages in which they were Composed.

Q. Do you then think that the People ought to be suffered promiscuously to
Read the Holy Scriptures?

A. Who shall forbid Them to Read what was purposely designed by God for their
Instruction? Mat. xxii.29. Jo. v.39. Acts xvii.2.11.
The Scriptures are as much the Voice of the Apostles, and Evangelists, to Us
of these Times, as their Preaching was to those of the Age in which they lived.
And it may, with as good Reason, be Asked, Whether we think the People ought to
have been promiscuously Suffered heretofore to hear the Apostles Preach; as
whether they ought to be Suffered promiscuously to Read their Writings Now.

Q. But amidst so many Things as the Holy Scriptures deliver, how shall the
People be able to judge what is necessary to be Believed by Them?

A. Let them Believe All they meet with there, and then to be sure they will
Believe all that is necessary. But for the sake of those who either want
Ability to Read, or Capacity to judge, what is most necessary, in Point of
Faith, to be known, and professed by Them; the Act viii.36.37. 2 Timothy 1.13.
Church has, from the beginning, collected it into a short Summary; which every
Person, of Old, was Required both to Know, and assent to, before he was
admitted into the Communion of it.

Q. What is that Summary of which you speak, and which you account to
comprehend all the most Necessary Articles of our Christian Faith?

A. It is commonly called The Apostles Creed: not that the Apostles Themselves
Composed it; (at least not in the very Form in which we now have it;) but
because it seems to come the Nearest, of any, to the Apostles Times; and does,
with the Greatest Simplicity of Expression, comprehend a short Summary of the
Apostles Doctrine.

Q. What mean you by the Word Creed?

A. It is the same in Latin, as Belief in English: And it is so called in both
from the first words of it, I BELIEVE; and which in Sense, though not in
Expression, Run through every Article of it.

SECT. VI.
Q. REhearse the Articles of your Belief.

A. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

Q. You said that those Words I BELIEVE, were not only the First Words of your
Creed, but the most Material; as running, in effect, through Every Branch of
it. Tell me, therefore, what do you mean when you say, I Believe?

A. To Believe, in the General, is to Assent to the Truth of any thing, upon
the Sole Authority of the Person who delivers it: Who, if He be a Man only, the
Assent which I give to what He says, produces in Me a Humane Faith; if, as
here, He be God, then the Assent which I give to what is delivered by Him, is
properly a Divine Faith.

Q. What is the difference, with respect to Us, between these Two?

A. It is very Great: For because a Man, though never so Wise, and Careful
himself, may yet not be honest, and so Impose upon Me: Or should he be never so
Upright, may yet, after all his Care, be Mistaken himself, and thereby lead Me
into Error; therefore in Assenting to what such a One proposes, I can at the
most give but such a Belief to it, as is suitable to a mere Humane Testimony. I
may Believe what he says to be True, but yet so as not to exclude a Possibility
of its being Otherwise. Whereas God being neither capable of being Deceived
Himself, nor of Imposing upon any Other; when I give my Assent to what he has
Revealed, I do it not only with a certain Assurance that what I believe is
true, but with an absolute Security, that it cannot possibly be false.

Q. But why do you say, I Believe, and not WE Believe; as when you pray, you
say, OUR Father, etc?

A. Because though One Man may Pray, yet One Man cannot Believe for another.
And however in Charity I may suppose every Christian to believe what is here
delivered; yet since it is certain there are many Infidels, and Hypocrites,
scattered up and down among the Faithful, and I cannot certainly distinguish
who are indeed Believers, and who not; neither can I, with an Assurance of
Faith, say, WE Believe, because I cannot certainly tell, whether another Man
does truly believe these Articles or No. Besides, that this Creed being
intended to be the Form, upon the Confession whereof, Persons should be
admitted to Baptism; and in that Case, every One was to make a distinct
Profession of his Faith, in order thereunto; it was fitting the Creed its self
should be penned after such a manner, as was most proper for the main End for
which it was Composed.

Q. Are all the things contained in this Creed to be proved by Divine
Revelation?

A. They are all plainly delivered to us in the Holy Scriptures; which being
confessed by all Christians to be the Word of God, what is delivered by them,
must be looked upon to be delivered to Us by God Himself.

Q. What are the General Parts of which this Creed does consist?

A. They are these Four: First, It shows us what is most needful to be
Believed, and Professed by Us, concerning God the Father: Secondly, Concerning
our Lord Jesus Christ: Thirdly, Concerning the Holy Ghost: And Fourthly,
Concerning the Church of Christ; its Duties and Privileges here, and the
Blessings and Glory which God has prepared for it hereafter.

Q. Do you think it necessary not only to Believe all these things, but also,
upon Occasion, to Profess the Belief of them.

A. I do think it necessary, whenever our Duty to God; or the Edification of
our Neighbor; or the Honor of our Religion, shall Require it of Me. Mat.
x.32. Whosoever shall Confess me before Men, him will I Confess also before my
Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before Men, him will I
also deny before my Father which is in Heaven. Romans x.9. If thou shall confess
with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy Heart, that God has
Raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. For with the Heart Man believes
unto Righteousness; and with the Mouth confession is made unto Salvation. See 1
Pet. iii.14.

SECT. VII.
Q. WHAT is the first Article of your Creed?

A. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

Q. What is God?

A. He is an Eternal, Infinite, Incomprehensible Spirit; Jo. iv.24. Isa. vi.3.
-- xli.4. -- xliv.6. 1 Kin. viii.27. Psalm. xc.2. Job xi.7. 1 Timothy vi.15, 16.
Heb. xiii.8. Jer. xxxii.27. Mat. xix.26. Jer. xxiii.23. Psalm. cxxxix.7.
Immortal, Invisible; most Perfect himself, and the Giver of all Perfection, to
all Other things.

Q. How do you profess to Believe in God?

A. I do firmly Believe that there is such a Being as God, Heb. xi.6. and that
there is but One such Being; so that besides Him there neither is, nor can be,
any Other. 1 Cor. viii. 4.6. Deuteronomy. vi.4. Jo. xvii.3. Mark xii.29. 1 Cor.
viii.4. Ephesians. iv.6.
We know that there is none Other God but One: -- To us there is but One God
the Father. Isaiah xlv.5, 6. I am the Lord, and there is None else; there is no
God besides Me: I am the Lord, and there is None else.

Q. Upon what Account do you give to God the Title of FATHER?

A. Upon several Accounts, but chiefly on these Two: 1. With Respect to our
Lord Jesus Christ, whom, in the next Article, we profess to be his Son: And,
secondly, as he may also be accounted our Father. 2 Cor. i.3. Blessed be God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. See Joh. x.25, 29, etc.

Q. How do you believe God to be our Father?

A. By Right of Creation; so he is the Father of all Mankind: 1 Cor. viii.5. To
Us, there is but One God the Father, of Whom are all things. By Right of
Adoption; Romans viii.15. Jam. i.18. 1 Jo. iii.1.
so he is the Father of Us Christians in particular. Ephesians. i.3, 5. Blessed be
the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ -- Who has predestined Us unto
the Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ, to Himself.

Q. What do you mean by the Attribute of ALMIGHTY?

A. I mean Two things: Psalm. xciii.xcvii.xcix.
(1 st) That God has a Right of absolute Power, and Dominion, over all the
World. Dan. iv.34. His Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion, and His Kingdom is
from Generation to Generation. Genesis xviii.14. Psalm. cxxxv.6.
And (2 dly) That He has an Infinite Power of Action; so that He can do all
things, and with Him nothing is Impossible. Mat. xix.26.

Q. Can God then Do All things?

A. He can do All things that are not either simply Impossible to be done, Tit.
i.2. Hab. i.13.
as implying a Contradiction: Or else contrary to his Goodness, and Perfection,
to Do; as to Sin; to be Ignorant; and the like.

Q. By what Act especially has God manifested Himself to be Almighty?

A. By Making the Heaven, and the Earth.

Q. What do you understand by that Expression, The Heaven, and the Earth?

Genesis i.1. Col. i.16.
A. I comprehend under it All things that ever were made; Visible, and
Invisible; as being all Made, and Created by God.

Q. How did God Make All these?

A. After Two different Manners. Some He produced by an Immediate Creation:
Thus were the Angels formed, and the Spirits of Men; And thus was that first
Matter produced, of which Moses speaks, Genesis i.1. That in the Beginning God
Created the Heaven, and the Earth. To the Other parts of the Creation he gave
Being, by forming them out of an Antecedent Matter: So he made this Visible
World, as we Read, Genesis i.

Q. By Whom did God make the World.

A. By his Son; sometimes called The Word: Job. i.3. All things were made by
Him, and without Him was not any thing made that was made. And again, vii.10.
The World was made by Him.

Q. Was this Son, the same JESUS, who afterward came into the World, to
publish the Gospel, and Die for Us?

A. So the Scriptures expressly tell us: Heb. i.1, 2. God, who at sundry Times,
and in diverse Manners, spoke in Time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets,
Has in these last Days spoken unto Us by his Son; by whom also he made the
Worlds. And St. Paul, speaking of him, in Whom we have Redemption through his
Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins; Col. i.14. tells us, Ver. 16. That by Him
were All things Created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, Visible and
Invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers,
all things were Created by him, and for him; and He is before all things, and
by him all things Consist.

Q. Is there any thing more comprehended in this Article, with relation to God
the Father?

A. This only; That as God, Neh. ix.6. Job ii.10. Psalm. xxxvi.6.
at the Beginning, thus Created All things; so having Created them, he has ever
since continued to Support and Preserve them. Heb. i.3. And that so
particularly, that there is not the least thing in the World, to which his
Providence does not extend it self. Mat. vi.26.30. x.29, 30.

Q. How do you profess to Believe all this of God?

A. Because though some part of it might have been discovered by Natural
Reason, and accordingly was found out by the Wiser Heathens; yet the full, and
perfect Knowledge of all this, is due to Revelation: And by the Accounts we
have of these things in the Holy Scriptures, we both more clearly Understand
Them, and are more firmly persuaded of the Truth of Them.

SECT. VIII.
Q. WHAT does the Second Part of your Creed contain?

Jo. xiv.1. 1 John iii.23.
A. It contains a short Summary of all Such things as are Necessary to be
known, and believed by Us, concerning our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

Q. How is He here described to Us?

A. By his Person; his Office; his Relation to God, and to Us.

And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.

Q. How is his Person set out, in this Article, to Us?

A. By the Name Which he went by whilst He was upon Earth; Luke ii.21:
JESUS.

Q. How came our Savior to be called by that Name?

A. He was so called by the express Command of God, delivered by an Angel;
first to the Blessed Virgin, Luke i.31. and then to Joseph. Mat. i.21.

Q. Is there any particular Significancy in that Name, that should move God, in
such an Extraordinary manner, to give it to Him?

A. There is: For it denotes a Savior; and was given by God to our Blessed
Lord to show, that He was to be the Savior of the World; and that No other was
to be so: Mat. i.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, 1 Timothy i.15. Luke ii.11.
Acts xiii.23.
for He shall Save his People from their Sins. Acts iv.12. Neither is there
Salvation in any Other; for there is none other Name under Heaven given among
Men, whereby we must be Saved.

Q. How was this Jesus to Save the World?

A. By delivering Us both from the Power, and from the Punishment of our Sins;
and by putting us in a way of attaining unto Everlasting Salvation. Tit. ii.11,
etc. Romans vi.4, 5, etc.

Q. What is the Title given to our Blessed Lord, with respect to his Office?

Q. He is called CHRIST; which is the same in Greek, that MESSIAH is in Hebrew,
or Syriac: And is as much as to say, the Anointed. Joh. i.41. We have found the
Messiah, which is being interpreted, In the Margin, the Anointed.
the Christ. Joh. iv.25. I know that Messiah comes, which is called Christ.

Q. Why had our Savior this Title given to Him?

A. To show, that as by the Ceremony of Anointing heretofore, God consecrated
Those whom he called to some certain Offices; so was this Jesus to be
separated, though not by a Visible Unction, yet by the Invisible Power, and
Grace of the Holy Spirit, for all those Offices, to which Men were Anointed, by
God's Command, under the Law. Act. x.38. God Anointed Jesus of Nazareth, with
the Holy Ghost, and with Power.

Q. What were those Offices, to which Men were consecrated, by the Ceremony of
Anointing, under the Law?

A. They were chiefly Three; 1 Kin. xix.15, 16. Exodus xl.13, 15. 1 Samuel xv.1.
to the Office of a Prophet, a Priest, and a King.

Q. Was our Savior to be consecrated to All These?

A. He was; and that by express Prophecies, before his Coming into the World.
See Psalm. xlv.cx. Deuteronomy. xviii.15, 18, etc. Isa. ix.6. lxi.1.

Q. How did God Anoint him to these Offices?

Isa. lxi.1. comp. Luke iv.21, 22.
A. The Holy Ghost came upon him; and God, by a Voice from Heaven, declared him
to be his Son, and commanded all the World to Hear him: Mat. iii.16, 17. And he
Received the Spirit without Measure, for the Discharge of all of Them. Joh.
iii.34.

Q. You say, that God before Prophesied of such a Christ; Did the Jews know
that He had done so?

A. Yes; and at that very time that Christ came into the World, they Generally
expected the coming of Him. Mat. xi.2. Joh. iv.25. vii.31. Luke iii.15.

Q. How then came it to pass, that They did not more readily Receive Him?

A. Because they had flattered themselves with the Expectation of a temporal
Prince; who should deliver them from their Enemies, and Restore again the
Kingdom unto Israel: Joh. v.44. -- ix.14.
And therefore they could not bear the disappointment of Receiving such a
Messiah, as our Savior professed himself to be. Luke xxiv.21. Act. i.6.

Q. What Security have we, that this was indeed the Messiah, of whom Moses, and
the Prophets Spoke?

A. The Greatest that can be Imagined. ( a) He came at the exact Time that the
Messiah was to Come. (a) Genesis xlix.10. Malach. iii.1. Dan. ix.25* 26. Man.
xii.35. Mat. xxii.42. Heb. vii.14.
He descended of the Tribe out of which the Messiah was to proceed. Genesis
xlix.9, 10. Isa. xi.1, 10. comp. Mat. i. Luke iii. Joh. vii.41, 42. Luke ii.4*
11.
He was born at the Place where the Messiah was to be born. Mich. v.2. Mat.
ii.1. He was conceived of a Virgin, as the Messiah was to be conceived. Isa.
vii.14. Mat. i.25. Luke i.27, 34. Besides all which, he had such extraordinary
Witness born to him, as is not to be Gainsaid. Isa. xl.3. Mal. iv.5. Luke
i.17. Mat. iii.3. Mark i.2* 3. Mat. xi.5. Jo. iii.2. -- xxi.25.
God raised up a Singular Forerunner to prepare the Way for him. Being come
into the World, He Owned him, by a Voice from Heaven, to be his Son: Mat.
iii.17. He himself wrought such Miracles, as no One ever did: Joh. vii.31. Jo.
xiv.12
He empowered his Disciples to work the Same Miracles in his Name, and for the
Confirmation of his Authority. Mat. x.7, 8. Mark xvi.17, 18. Being put to Death
at the Instigation of the Jews, He was by God raised again the Third Day from
the Dead; and, in the presence of his Disciples, See below* Sect. xii.
visibly taken up into Heaven, where he now sits at the Right Hand of God.
Acts i.3, 9.

Q. You said that Jesus was called Christ, because he was to be consecrated by
the Holy Ghost to the several Offices, to which Men were Anointed under the
Law: Tell me therefore, How does it appear that this Christ was a Prophet?

A. It is manifest that He exercised all the Parts of the Prophetic Office. He
foretold things to Come. Jo. ii.19. Mat. xvii.22, 23. xxiv.2, etc. He declared
God's Will to the World: Mat* v.^vi.vii. Luke ix 35^ Heb i.1.
And he commissioned his Disciples, to Go and Publish the same Doctrine of
Salvation to all Mankind. Mat. xxviii.19, 20. Mar. xvi.15.

Q. How do you believe Christ to have been a Priest, seeing He was not
descended of a Priestly Tribe, or Family. Heb. vii.14.

A. As the Scriptures teach me to believe: I believe him to have been a Priest
not according to the Legal Institution; but of another, and more ancient Kind:
after the Order of Melchisedeck. Psalm. cx.4. Heb. v.10. vi.20. vii.14, etc.

Q. What is the Order of which you speak?

A. It is evident that when God chose the Tribe of Levi, and the Family of
Aaron, to minister unto him under the Law, He took them instead of the
Firstborn of Every Tribe, and Family, who, by virtue of their Birthright, had
the Priesthood belonging to them. Exodus xix.22. xxiv.5. Now Melchisedeck living
before this was done, was a Priest by that ancient Right, and not According to
the Law. But then besides this, Genesis xiv.18.
He was a King too; and so the High Priest over his People. Now such a Priest,
and Prince together, was Christ over his Church. Heb. vii.1, 2. Again: Of
Melchisedeck we know not either who went before him, or who succeeded Him in
these Offices. So that his Priesthood, as to us, was a solitary Priesthood, in
which as He succeeded None, so neither does it appear that any succeeded Him.
And such also is the Priesthood of Christ: There was never any such High Priest
before, nor shall there ever Rise up Any like him. Heb. vii.3, 6. -- 23, 24.

Q. Wherein did He exercise this Office?

A. In all the Parts of the Priestly Function: He offered up himself a
Sacrifice for our Sins. Ephesians. v.2. Heb. x.10.
Heb. vii.27. ix.12, 26, 28. Having done this, He Ascended into Heaven, Romans
viii.34.
there to Appear in the Presence of God for Us, Heb. ix.12, 24. And He Blesses
us, Acts iii.26.
not only by delivering Us hereby from the Punishment of Our Sins, but by
Sanctifying our Souls; and so freeing Us, in great Measure, even from the
Present Power of Them. Heb. ix.14. x.10, 14, 16, 17.

Q. How does it appear that Our Lord was not only a Prophet, and a Priest, but
a King also?

A. The Scripture expressly calls him so: Isa. ix.6, 7. Luke i.32, 33. Mat.
xxi.5. Rev. xix* 13, 16.
Jo. xii.15. xviii.37. and that Authority which He has all along exercised over
his Church, proves him to have been so.

Q. What is that Authority?

A. While he was yet upon Earth, He gave Laws unto his Church, for the
Regulation of the Lives and Actions of Those who should become Members of it.
Mat. vii.24, 26. These Laws he established with the Royal Sanction of Rewards
and Punishments: Mat. vii.19, 21. He settled a Ministry, for the Conduct of his
Church under Him: Jo. xx.21, 22, 23. He Rules in the Hearts of the Faithful, by
his Spirit. He has already begun to subdue our Enemies, Sin, the Devil, and
Death: And he will hereafter utterly destroy them. 1 Cor. xv.24, 25, 26. He now
sits, in full Power, at the Right Hand of God, Interceeding for Us: And, at the
End of the World, he will descend from thence with Glory, to Judge the World,
and so put in execution his Promises, and Threatenings; by Infinitely Rewarding
Those who shall be found to have Observed his Laws; and exceedingly Punishing
those who shall have broken them: Mat. xxv.31, etc.

SECT. IX.
Q. WHAT is that Relation which Christ is here said to have to God?

A. He is His Only Son.

Q. In what Respect do you believe Christ to be the Son of God?

A. He is called so in the Holy Scriptures upon several Accounts: * As he was
Conceived by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary: Luke i.45. * As He was anointed
by the Holy Ghost to the Office of the Messiah: Jo. x.34. * As he was Begotten
again of God when he Raised Him from the Dead: Act. xiii.33. Romans i.4. And,
lastly, * as being Raised from the Dead, He was made by God the Heir of All
things. Heb. i.3.

Q. In which of these Respects do you here profess to believe, that Jesus
Christ is the ONLY Son of God?

A. Precisely speaking, in none of them all; though yet I acknowledge the most
of them to be so proper to Him, as not to be capable of being applied to any
Other. But when I here profess Christ to be God's ONLY Son, I do it upon a much
higher, and more excellent Foundation; namely, upon the Account of his Eternal
Generation, and that Communication which God the Father thereby made of the
Divine Nature to Him.

Q. Do you then look upon Christ to have been made by God Partaker of the
Divine Nature; and so, to have been from all Eternity, God, together with Him?

A. If I believe the Scriptures to give a true Account of the Nature of Christ,
so I must believe: For I find the same Evidences in them of the Godhead of
Christ, that I do of that of the Father.

Q. What be those Evidences?

Psalm. xiv.8. Isa. vii.14. -- ix.5. Acts xx.28.
A. First, they give the Name of God to him; and that in such a Manner as
plainly shows it is to be understood, in its most proper Import, and
Signification. Jo. i.1. xx.28. Romans ix.5. 1 Timothy iii.16. 1 Jo. v.20. Phil. ii.6.

Secondly, they ascribe the most proper, and incommunicable Attributes, of God
to Him. Such as Omnipotence; Jo. v.17. Rev. i.8. xi.17. Omniscience: Jo.
xvi.30. xxi.17. Luke vi.8. comp. Jo. ii.24. Rev. ii.23. Immensity: Jo. iii.13.
Mat. xviii.20. xxviii.20. Jo. iii.13. Immutability: Heb. i.11, 12. xiii.8. and
even Eternity it self: Rev. i.8, 17. xxii.13. Prove. viii.22. Mich. v.2. Isa.
ix.5.

To him, Thirdly, they ascribe such Works, as can belong to None that is not
God. The Creation of the World: Jo. i.3, 10. Col. i.16. Heb. i.2, 10. The
Preservation of it: Heb. i.3. Miracles: Jo. v.21, 36. vi.40. The Mission of the
Holy Ghost: Jo. xvi.7, 14. xiii.26. And, in short, all the Works of Grace, and
Regeneration: Jo. v.21. x.16. xiii.18. Act. xvii.31. xx.28. Ephesians. v.26, etc.

Add to this, Fourthly, that he is there shown to be Honored as God: Jo. v.23.
Heb. 1.6. Prayer fs made to him: Act. vii.59. 1 Cor. i.2. Faith, and Hope are
directed to be put in Him: Jo. xiv.1. Psalm. ii.12. Praises and Thanksgivings
are Given to Him. Jo. xiv.1. Rev. iii.5. Glory, and Honor, are rendered to Him.
Rev. v.13. compare iv.11.

And no wonder; since, Lastly, the Nature of God is therein also expressly
ascribed to Him: Heb. i.3. Phil. ii.6. Col. ii.9. compare Col. i.15, 19.

Q. But if Christ, therefore, be God, as well as the Father, how can He be
called the Son of God?

A. Because he Received his Divine Nature from the Father; who is the
Beginning, and Root, of the Divinity; and has communicated his Own Essence to
Christ: Who, therefore, though he has the same Nature, and so, in that, is
Equal with the Father; yet is He in Order after him; as being God of God.

Q. How does it appear that Christ Received his Divine Nature from the Father?

A. It can only be known by that Revelation which God has made of it in the
Holy Scriptures: Where he is, for this Reason, said to be the Brightness of his
Glory, and the express Image of his Person, Heb. i.3. The Image of the
invisible God: Col. i.15. 2 Cor. iv.4. to be from God: Jo vii.29. to have Life
from the Father: Jo. v.26. and the like. And upon this Account it is, that our
Savior himself says, that the Father is greater than he: Jo. xiv.28. That he
can do Nothing of Himself, but what he sees the Father do: Jo. v.18, 19. Or if
this be not yet plain enough; they tell us farther, in express terms, that he
is the Begotten, and the Only begotten, Son of the Father, Jo. i.14, 18.
iii.16, 18. Heb xi.17. 1 Jo. iv.9. v.1.

Q. But will not this make the Holy Ghost, as much God's Son, as Christ? And
how then is Christ his Only Son?

A. In Matters of this kind, which are so far above our Capacities, and of
which we know Nothing, but what God has been pleased to Reveal to Us, we must
speak, as God, in his Word, has taught us to speak. Now the Scriptures no where
call the Holy Ghost, the Son of God; nor God, the Father of the Holy Ghost: And
therefore though we know not what the precise Difference is, yet because the
proper Act of a Father is to beget; we say that Christ Received his Divine
Nature from God by Generation; Jo. i.14. -- iii.16. Act. xiii.33. Comp. Heb
i.5, 6. v.5.
but of the Holy Ghost we say, as the Scriptures do, that He Proceeds from
the Father: Jo. xv.26. and is the Spirit not of the Father only, but of the Son
also. Gal. iv.6. Romans viii.9. Phil. i 19. 1 Pet. i.11.

Q. What is the last Respect in which our Savior is here Represented to Us?

A. His Relation to Us: OUR LORD. Ephesians. iv.5. 1 Cor. viii.5. Rev. x.6.

Q. How is Christ OUR Lord?

A. As he is God, together with the Father; Acts x.36. Jo. xx.28. Psalm. ii.8.
Romans x.12.
and as by Him God Created the World; so has he the same Original Right of
Dominion with him, and is Lord of All his Creatures.

Q. Is there not some Other ground for this Title, and which Restrains it in a
particular Manner to Mankind?

A. Yes, there is: Romans xiv.7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. ii.8. Phil. ii.8, 9, 10, 11. Acts
ii.36.
Inasmuch as by his Coming into the World, and Dying for Us, he Redeemed Us
from Death, and so became Our Lord, by virtue of that Purchase which thereby he
made of Us.

Q. When did Christ begin, in this Respect, to be Our Lord?

A. He entered, in part, Jo. xiii.3.
upon this Authority before his Death, though not without Respect to his dying
for Us: As is Evident from his publishing his Gospel; abrogating the Law; and
setting out the Conditions of Life and Death to Mankind. Hence, before his
Death, he asserted to himself the Power to forgive Sins: Mat. ix.2, 6. Romans
xi^*9. Phil. ii.8, 9, etc.
But the full exercise of his Dominion, he entered not upon till after his
Resurrection; when, as himself declared to his Apostles, Mat. xxviii.18. All
Power in Heaven and Earth was given unto Him. See Ephesians. i.20, 21.

Q. How long will Christ continue, in this Respect, to be Our Lord?

A. Christ will continue to be Our Lord for Ever; and of his Kingdom there
shall be no End: Luke i 32, 33. But then as the subject Matter of a great part
of that Authority which he now exercises over his Church, is proper only to the
present State of it, and will determine at the Day of Judgment; so will all the
farther exercise of such Authority cease together with it. Christ, as Mediator,
must Reign, till he has put all his Enemies under his Feet; till Sin, Death,
the Devil, and all Wicked Men, shall be destroyed; and all his Faithful
Servants, be delivered from the Power of them. Psalm. cx.1. 1 Cor. xv.25. But
that being done, Christ will deliver up this Authority, to God, even the
Father: 1 Cor. xv.24. Nevertheless, still, as God-Man, he will continue to
Reign with, and over, his Saints, to all Eternity, in Heaven: And so make good
what Daniel foretold concerning him, Dan. vii.14. That his Dominion is an
Everlasting Dominion; which shall not pass away; and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed.

SECT. X.
Q. WHAT does your Creed teach you farther to Believe concerning our Lord Jesus
Christ; in the following Articles which Relate to Him?

A. All such Matters as are necessary to be Known, and Believed by Us, with
Relation to the great Work of our Redemption, which was accomplished by Him.

Q. By what means did Christ accomplish the Redemption of Mankind?

A. By giving up Himself to the Death upon the Cross for Us. 1 Pet. i.18, 19.

Q. How could Christ, whom you believe to be God, die?

A. He took upon him our Nature, He became Man, like unto one of Us; and being
found in fashion as a Man, he yielded up himself to Death, even the Death of
the Cross for Us: Phil. ii.7, 8. Act. xx.28.

Q. After what manner was Christ made Man?

A. Not by the Conversion of his Divine Nature into the Humane; Jo. i.14.
Heb. ii.14.
nor by any Confounding of the Two Natures together: But by Uniting our Humane
Nature to His Divine; after a Singular manner, and such as cannot be perfectly
Expressed by Us.

Q. Were then Two distinct Natures, the Divine and Humane, United together in
Christ?

A. Yes, there were: And that in such wise as to make the same Jesus Christ, by
the distinction of the Two Natures, in the Unity of the same Person; become
truly, and really, at Once, both God, and Man.

Q. How was Christ made Man?

A. He was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Uirgin Mary.

Q. How could Christ be conceived by the Holy Ghost?

A. Not by the communication of any part of his Own Substance to Him; Mat.
i.18, 20. Luke i.35.
but as that Blessed Spirit set Nature on Work, and took away the need of any
Human Concurrence to his Production: And as, having thus prepared a Body for
him, of the Substance of the Virgin; he breathed into it a most Perfect,
Reasonable Soul.

Q. Wherefore was it needful for the Holy Ghost to do this?

A. Both for the Honor, and Purity of our Blessed Savior: Heb. vii.26. 2 Cor.
v.21. 1 Pet. i.19.
That so he might come into the World free from all tincture of Sin: Mat. i.23.
Isa. vii.14. Luke i.27.
And also, that by the extraordinariness of His Birth, He might fulfill the
Prophecies, which God had before delivered concerning it.

Q. How was Christ born of the Virgin Mary?

A. The Substance of his Body, was derived from that of the Blessed Virgin:
Gal. iv.4. Luke ii.5, 6, 7. -- xi.27.
He grew in her Womb; and at the full time of her Delivery, she brought him
into the World: And upon all these Accounts, she was as much his Mother, as any
Other Woman is Mother of the Child that is born by Her.

Q. Had our Savior then a Real Body, like unto One of Us?

A. He had both a Real Humane Body, Luke xxiv.39. 1 Timothy ii.5. 1 Cor. xv.21.
1 Jo. iv.2, 3 and Rational Soul; Mat. xxvi.28. Luke xxiii.46. And was in all
things like unto Us, only without Sin. Heb. ii.17. iv.15.

Q. Wherefore do you give the Title of Virgin, to the Mother of our Lord?

Mat* i.25. Luke i.34, 35. Isa. vii.14.
A. To testify our belief, that in the Production of our Savior she had no
knowledge of any Man, but was at once a Mother, and a Virgin: Not to determine
any thing of her Condition afterward; though we piously suppose, and it has
been Generally Received, that she still continued, as she then was, a Virgin.

Q. Should not this Relation of the Blessed Virgin to our Savior, oblige Us to
pay a more than Ordinary Respect to her?

A. No doubt it should: And therefore it will become us always to mention her
with Honor; to imitate her Virtues; and to give thanks to God, for that
extraordinary Favor which he was pleased, to bestow upon her, that she should
be the Mother of our Lord. Luke. i.48.

Q. What think you of that Worship, which, upon this Account, is paid to Her,
in the Church of Rome?

A. As of the grossest Idolatry that, it may be, was ever committed in the
World: Such as no Good Christian can think of without horror; nor any One
partake of, without the hazard of his Salvation.

Q. What is that Worship, of which you speak such hard Things?

A. It is the most proper Worship of God. *They pray to her in all their
Religious Service: * They put their trust in her: they Rely upon her for *
Grace, and * Salvation: * They consecrate particular Offices of Devotion to
her: *They erect Societies to her Honor: * They depend more on her Mercies,
than Christ's; and * Recur much oftener to her, than to him, for Pardon, and
Forgiveness.

SECT. XI.
Q. YOU said, that the End of Christ's being Born of the Virgin Mary, was, that
he might thereby be in a Capacity of Dying for Us: Tell me, therefore, how did
Christ do this?

A. He Suffered under Pontius Pilate; was Crucified, Dead, and Buried.

Q. Who was Pontius Pilate?

A. He was Governor of Judaea, Mat. xxvii.1, 2. Luke iii.1.
under Tiberius the Roman Emperor, at the time of Christ's Death; and condemned
our Savior to be Crucified.

Q. Why do you take notice of the Person under Whom Christ Suffered?

A. For several Reasons. 1. To fix the time of his Suffering, which had been
particularly foretold by the Prophet Daniel, Dan. ix.26.
490 Years before it came to pass. 2. To show that at that time the Scepter was
departed from Judah, and so the time of Jacob's Prophecy, Genesis xlix.10.
concerning the Coming of the Messiah, accomplished. And, 3. To account for the
Manner of Christ's Death; which was also extraordinary, and foretold by the
Prophets: Crucifixion being not a Jewish, but a Roman, kind of Punishment.

Q. How came Pontius Pilate to condemn our Savior to this Death?

A. He did it to satisfy the Importunity of the Jews, after having plainly
declared, that he was not worthy to die. Mat. xxvii.24. Luke xxiii.14, 15..

Q. What do you Observe from this?

A. The same which the Providence of God evidently designed to declare by it;
viz. That Christ suffered for Our Sins, Isa. liii.5, 6. Romans iv.25. 1 Cor.
xv.3. Heb. vii.26. ix.28. x.10. 1 Pet. ii.21, 22.
not for any Evil that Himself had done.

Q. Did Christ suffer any thing before his Crucifixion; that you say, first, he
Suffered; and then that he was Crucified?

A. Yes, Mat. xxvi.2, 24, 45, 70. Luke xxii.22, 48, 57. 1 Cor. xi.23.
very much: He was Betrayed by One of his Own Apostles, was Denied by Another;
Mat. xxvi.56. Mar. xiv.50.
was Forsaken by them All. Luke xxiii.^, 5. Jo. xix.12
He was Accused as a Rebel, and False-Prophet by the Jews; Mat. xxvi.xxvii.
Luke xxii.xxiii. Jo. xviii.xix.
was Evil-intreated by the Soldiers; Hurried from the Chief Priests to Pilate;
thence to Herod; from him back to Pilate again. He was Blind-folded; Buffeted;
Scourged; Crowned with Thorns; Spit upon: He carried his Own Cross through the
City: And besides all this, underwent that Inward Grief, and Anguish of Mind in
the Garden, which much surpassed all that he endured upon Mount Calvary. Mat.
xxvi.37, 38. Mar. xiv.33, 34.

Q. Wherefore was Christ Crucified?

A. To fulfill both the Types, and Prophecies, concerning his Death. Genesis
xxii.6. Numb. xxi.9. comp. Jo. iii.14. Psalm. xxii.17. Zach. xii.10. And, in the
next Place, to deliver Us from the Curse of the Law, by Making himself a Curse
for Us. Gal. iii.13.

Q. How did Christ suffer all this?

A. Only in his 1 Pet. iii.18. -- iv.1.
Humane Nature: His Body bore all the Inflictions of the Jews, and Soldiers,
without: His Soul was the Seat of all his Fears, and Horrors, and Pains, which
he felt within. The Acts xx.28. 1 Cor. ii.8.
Divine Nature only gave worth, and value, to what the Humane bore. The same
Person was God, and Man, who underwent all this: But the Man only Suffered; the
Divine Nature, neither did, nor could Suffer any thing.

Q. Wherefore to his being Crucified, do you add, that he Died?

A. Because though Crucifixion (...) was Capital Punishment, and extended unto
Death, Luke xxiii.46. Mar. xv.37.44. Acts ii.2^* v.30, etc.
yet it was not necessarily, in its self, Mortal. So that Christ might have
been Crucified, and yet for all that, not have Died.

Q. Was it necessary to our Redemption, that Christ should Die?

A. It was: For the Wages of Sin is Death: Isa. liii.10. 1 Pet. i.18, 19.
Romans vi.23. and without shedding of Blood there could be no Remission: Heb.
ix.22. And therefore we could not have been delivered from Death, on any other
Terms, than by Christ's dying in our stead. Whereas by dying, Rom v.10.
viii.32. Col. i 21.
He has made a full Satisfaction for our Sins; has taken away the Sting of
Death; And conquered him who had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil. Heb.
ii.14. ix.x. Romans v.6, 8. 1 Cor. xv.55, 57.

Q. How was Christ's Body disposed of, after he was Dead?

A. It was decently, and honorably Buried, by Joseph of Arimathea, and
Nicodemus, principal Men among the Jews; and that according to the Prophecies
of God to that purpose. Mat. xxvii.60. Mar. xv.46. Jo. xix.38, etc. comp. Psalm.
xvi.9. Isa. liii.7, 8.

Q. What became of his Soul, while his Body lay in the Grave?

A. He therein Descended into Hell. Psalm. xvi.10. Act. ii.31.

Q. What does the Word Hell signify?

A. It is diversely Used in the Holy Scriptures. Sometimes it signifies the ( b)
Genesis xxxvii 35. -- xlii.38. 1 Samuel ii.6.
Grave: Psalm. xvi.10.
Sometimes the State of the Dead: And sometimes (especially in the New
Testament) it denotes the Psalm. ix.17. Mat. v.22, 29, 30. x.23. xxiii.33. Luke
xii.5. etc.
Place of the Damned, wherein they are to be tormented for Ever and Ever.

Q. In which of these Significations do you here understand it?

A. In the first it cannot be taken: For of the Burial of Christ's Body there
was mention before; and a Soul cannot Go into the Grave. Neither can it be
taken in the last; for Christ finished all his Sufferings on the Cross: Jo.
xix.30. and had nothing to undergo in the Place of Torments.

Q. But might not Christ descend thither, to triumph over the Devil in his Own
Place? Or to deliver from thence, all such as should there Believe in Him?

A. Something of this, I confess, has been suggested; but without any
sufficient Arguments to support it.

Q. What then do you take to be the true Meaning of this Article?

A. It is evident that it must Refer to the Place whither Christ's Soul went in
its State of Separation: Acts ii.31. Now what that Place was, seems clearly
pointed out to us in the Holy Scriptures. For, First, Our Blessed Savior
promised the penitent Thief, but a little before his Death, that That Day he
should be with him in Paradise: Luke xxiii.43. And, Secondly, As he was
Expiring, he gave up the Ghost, with these Words, Father, Luke xxiii.46.
into thy Hands I Commend my Spirit. Christ therefore having now finished his
Passion, expired upon the Cross. His Body was laid in the Sepulcher; his Spirit
Returned unto God that gave it; Eccles. xii.7.
and together with the Soul of the Penitent Thief, was carried by the Holy
Angels into Paradise, where the Souls of the Righteous rest till the Day of the
Resurrection. And from thence it returned on the third Day, and was again
Reunited to its Body, as Ours also shall be, at the Day of Judgment.

Q. What is your Opinion of the Limbus Patrum, or Prison, in which those of the
Church of Rome suppose the Souls of Holy Men, who dyed before the time of
Christ, to be shut up: And to deliver whom, they say, our Savior now went down
thither?

A. As of a mere Fiction, for which there is not the least ground in Scripture,
Mat. viii.11. Luk* xvi.22, 23*
but much to the contrary; and fit to keep Company with their Other Dream of
Purgatory since.

SECT. XII.
Q. WAS Christ to continue always under the Power of Death?

A. No, but the contrary was foretold concerning Him: That God would not leave
his Soul in Hell, nor suffer his Holy One to see Corruption. Psalm xvi.10. Acts
ii.31.

Q. How was he delivered from the Power of the Grave?

A. He Rose again the Third Day from the Dead.

Q. How do you understand these Words?

A. That upon the Third Day after his Death, his Soul and Body, which had been
separated from One Another, were, by the mighty Power of God, Ephesians. i.19, 20.
brought together again, and vitally United to One Another. And so the same
Jesus who was dead, became again alive; or, as it is in my Creed, Rose again
the Third Day from the Dead.

Q. Did Christ Raise Himself from the Dead?

A. I before said, that he was Raised by the mighty Power of God: Acts ii.32.
Gal. i.1.
Nor could any thing less than a Divine Power have done it: Ephesians. i.19, 20. Yet
as Christ was God, as well as Man, so he did also, Jo. v.21.
upon that account, concur to his Own Resurrection. And thus the Scripture
tells us, Jo. ii.19. Destroy this Temple (says Christ to the Jews) and in Three
Days I will Raise it up. Jo. x.17, 18. Therefore does my Father Love me,
because I lay down my Life that I may take it up again. No Man takes it from
me, but I lay it down of my self: I have Power to lay it down, and I have Power
to take it again. Which is also, by the way, another Evident Argument to prove
that Christ is God.

Q. How does it appear that He did thus Rise from the Dead?

A. By the Testimony of Those who were Eyewitnesses of it: Acts i.21, 22.
And saw Him first cruelly put to Death, and afterward beheld Him Alive again.

Q. Are the Persons who give testimony hereunto, such as may be securely Relied
upon, in a Matter of this Moment?

A. They are: For, First, Mat. xxvii.50, 59. Luke xxiii.55. -- xxiv.i.11, 20.
we have the Testimony of his most bitter Enemies, as well as of his Friends,
to prove his Death: Mar. xv.39, 44, 45. Mat. xxvii.62, etc. Nor will the
Sufferings which He underwent, permit Us to doubt of it: Jo. xix.33, 34. And,
Secondly, as for his being Alive after; the Jews, who set a Guard upon his
Sepulcher, on purpose to prevent his being Stolen away, and the Pretense of
his Resurrection, which they were afraid his Disciples had designed to Raise
thereupon, yet could not deny, but that in despite of all their Care, He was
Gone out of the Sepulcher; and what was become of Him they could not tell. Mat.
xxvii.62, etc. xxviii.11, etc.

Q. But what positive Witness have you, of his being Alive after his
Crucifixion?

A. We have the 1 Cor. xv.5, etc. Luk xxiii.37. Jo xx.19, 25, 27. Acts i.3, 21,
23.
Witness of his * Apostles; of his * Disciples; of above * Five hundred
Persons, who saw him, and conversed with him; and many of which died for the
Testimony which they gave unto it: None ever went back from it. We have besides
this, the Witness * of Jo. xx.12.
Angels: The Witness * of a Acts ix.4.
Persecutor, by this very Assurance converted into an Apostle. And, lastly, the
Witness * of Acts ii.4, 32. -- iii.8, 15. -- iv.8, 10, 33. -- v.12, 15, 31, 32.
God Himself; who, without all dispute, enabled the first Preachers of this
very Article to work wonderful Miracles, in Confirmation of it; and thereby as
effectually, as could be desired, Gave his Own Evidence to the truth of it.

Q. Why do you add the Circumstance of the Time of his Resurrection; that He
Rose the Third Day?

A. To show that he Rose according to the Types, and Prophecies, that had gone
before concerning Him; and upon the very Day that He himself had foretold he
would Rise. Jon. i.17. ii.10. compare Mat. xii.38. -- Mat. xvi.21. Jo. ii.19,
20.

Q. How does it appear that it was the Third Day on which he Rose?

A. Mat. xxvii.62. Mar. xv.42. Luke xxiii.54. Jo. xix.32.
He Suffered on the Sixth Day, being Our Friday, between Nine and Twelve a
Clock in the Morning: Mat. xxviii.1. Mar. xvi.1, 2. Luke xxiv.1. Jo. xx.1.
He Rose on the First, commonly called, Our Sunday Morning after; and so was
Dead, part of Friday; all Saturday; and part of Sunday. For the Jews computed
the Day from the Evening; and so Saturday Night, Six a Clock, the First Day of
the Week, according to them, began.

Q. Was there any thing Remarkable in the Day on which he Rose?

A. It was the Day on which God had before designed he should Rise. And
therefore, on this Day, the Sheaf of the First Fruits, by which their Harvest
was to be consecrated, was lifted up before God, among the Jews; Lev. xxiii.10.
to signify, that Christ, our First Fruits, should on this Day be Raised up by
God from the Dead; and so become a Surety to Us, of our future Resurrection.
See Romans xi.16. 1 Cor. xv.20, 23.

Q. What is the special Importance of this Article to Us?

A. It is very great: Inasmuch as, First, 2 Cor. xiii.4. Acts xiii.33.
It does beyond contradiction confirm the Divine Authority of our Blessed Lord;
Romans i.4. and the Truth of our Religion: Romans viii.33, 34. And, in the next
Place, does Assure Us, that the Price of our Redemption was fully paid by Him;
Romans iv.25. and is a Pledge to Us, that as Christ was raised from the Dead, 1
Pet. i.3. Romans 1.10.
so shall our mortal Bodies be quickened also, by the same Spirit of Christ,
which dwells in Us. Romans vi.5, 9. viii.11.

SECT. XIII.
Q. HOW did our Blessed Lord dispose of Himself, after that he was Risen from
the Dead?

A. He continued upon the Earth, Forty Days, with his Disciples, both to
Confirm them in their Belief of his Resurrection: Jo. xx.19, 25, 27. Act. i.3.
and to Instruct them more fully in all those things, which they were afterward
to preach to the World: Acts i.3. And then, at the End of them; He Ascended
into Heaven; where he now Sits at the Right Hand of God, the Father Almighty.

Q. After what Manner did Christ Ascend into Heaven?

A. He went up Visibly in the Presence of all his Disciples. Luke xxiv.50, 51.
Acts i.9, 10.
A Cloud came down under his Feet; and he mounted by degrees in it. They
followed him a long time with their Eyes; till at last having lost Sight of
Him, but yet still looking after him to the Place Where he passed, Two Angels
appeared to them, and thus confirmed them in the Truth of what they had seen;
Ye Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus which is
taken up from you into Heaven, shall so Come in like manner, as ye have seen
Him Go into Heaven. Acts i.9, 10, 11.

Q. Did Christ Ascend in the same Body, in which He conversed with his
Disciples, after his Resurrection?

A. He did Ascend in the same Body; and has assured Us thereby, that We shall
hereafter be Received up thither in our Bodies, as well as Souls; and so Reign,
in Both, together with Him.

Q. Into what part of Heaven did Christ Ascend?

A. He ascended into the Highest Heaven; where God does in a singular Manner
show his Majesty, Ephesians. iv.10. Heb. iv.14. -- vi.19. -- ix.24..
and Glory. And therefore our Creed tells us, that being ascended into Heaven,
he Mar. xvi 19. Psalm. cx.1. comp. Act. ii.34. (...). i 13.
sat down at the Right Hand of God, the Father Almighty: Where also He shall
continue, till he shall come again from thence to judge both the Quick, and the
Dead. Luke xxii.69. 1 Cor. iii.1, 2.

Q. What do you mean by the Right Hand of God?

A. Not to Represent God under the Figure of a Man; nor to intimate any
particular See Romans viii.34. 1 Pet. iii.22. Acts vii.56.
Posture of Christ Above; though having a Humane Body, he might well enough be
described in it. But, as by the One, I understand a Place of Power, Honor, and
Authority; 1 King. ii.19. Psalm. xvi.11. xliv.3. Luke xxii.69. Heb. i.3, 4. So,
by the Other, I suppose is meant, the settled Possession, and Enjoyment of all
these: Prove. xx.8. Heb. x.12. And the Sense of the whole I take to be this;
Phil. ii.8, 9. Ephesians. i.20, etc. Act. v.30, 31.
That Christ being Ascended up into Heaven, was immediately thereupon enstated
by God in the full Possession of his Regal Office, and Dignity; and 1 Cor.
xv.25. Heb. x.12, 13* Psalm cx.1.
shall continue to enjoy it, till he shall have finished the whole Work of our
Redemption: By bestowing Glory, and Salvation upon all his faithful Servants;
and by finally destroying, in Hellfire, all the Enemies of his Power and
Dignity.

Q. Does our Savior do any thing, at present, for Us, with God in Heaven?

A. Yes; he perfects his Priestly Office there, by Interceding Effectually with
God for our Forgiveness: As the High Priest under the Law, when he went into
the Holy Place, before the Ark, with the Blood of the Sin-offering, did thereby
finish the Propitiation which he was to make, for the Sins, and Offenses, of
the People of the Jews. Romans viii.34. 1 Timothy ii.5. Heb. ix.11, 12, 24. 1 Jo.
ii.1.

SECT. XIV.
Q. HOW long shall our Savior Christ continue to Sit, and Intercede for Us, at
God's Right Hand?

A. Till the End of the World: Which being Come, He shall Return from thence
with Glory to Judge both the Act. x.42. 1 Pet. iv.5. 2 Timothy iv.1.
Quick and the Dead. Mat. xvi.27.
Acts iii.21. The Heavens must Receive him till the times of Restitution of all
Things. And then, This same Jesus, which was taken up into Heaven, shall so
Come in like manner, as he was seen to Go into Heaven. Acts i.11.

Q. What do you mean by that Phrase, the Quick, and the Dead?

A. By the Quick, I understand those who shall be found Alive on the Earth at
the Day of Judgment: 1 Cor. xv.51. 1 Thessalonians. iv.15. By the Dead, those who shall
have before departed out of this Life. And I make mention of Both to show, that
ALL Men shall be judged; And that Act. xvii.31. Romans xiv.9.
Christ shall be the Judge of ALL. Acts x.42. 2 Cor. v.10. 2 Timothy iv.1. 1 Pet.
iv.5.

Q. Do you then believe that there shall be a General Day of Judgment, to the
whole World?

A. I do believe there shall be such a Day, and that most Solemn, and Terrible:
Mat. x.15. xi.22, 24. xii.36. Jo. v.22, 25. Acts xvii.31. Romans ii.5, etc. 2
Pet. ii.9. iii.7, Heb. vi.2. ix.27. 1 Jo. iv.17. Jude 6. Mat. xxiv.31. --
xxv.32. 2 These. ii.1.
Wherein, first, the Angels shall Sound the Trumpet; at the Voice of which, all
that are in the Graves shall Arise, and Come forth, and be Gathered together
into One certain Place: Dan. vii.9, 10. Rev. xx.4, 11, 12.
Then our Savior shall come down in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and Great
Glory; and the Books shall be Opened, and the Judgment sit; and every Man be
judged out of the things which are Written in those Books, according to his
Works. See Mat. xxv.31. comp. Mat. xxiv.30.

Q. After what Manner shall this Judgment be transacted?

A. The particular Manner is unknown to Us: Yet this we are told, that we shall
then be called to an Account for all that we shall have done in the whole
Course of our Lives here on Earth. Every evil Work; every foolish, and wicked
Word; every secret Thought, shall be brought to light. Nothing that we now
covet the most to hide, but shall be then disclosed. And we shall be either
Acquitted, or Condemned, according to what we shall have done, whether it be
Good, or whether it be Evil. Eccles. xii.14. 1 Cor. iv.5. 2 Cor. v.10. Mat.
xii.36. Romans ii.5. Rev. xx.12.

Q. Shall there be any particular Method observed, in the Proceedings of this
Judgment?

A. Yes, there shall: For, First, The 1 Cor. xv.23. 1 These. iv.16, 17. Mat.
xxv.32, 34.
Just shall be Raised, and Judged, and Acquitted; and Caught up into the Air,
at some convenient distance from the Earth, where, with the Holy Angels, they
shall fill up the Retinue of our Blessed Savior. Then the Mat. xxv.41. --
xix.28. 1 Cor. vi.^.
Wicked shall be Raised, and brought to Judgment: And being condemned, not only
by Christ, and his Saints, but by the Sentence of their Own Consciences, they
shall, together with the Devils, Mat. xxv.46.
be driven away by the Angels thereunto appointed, into their Place of
Torments. Which being done, Our Savior shall, together with all his Saints,
Return triumphantly to Heaven, and there Reign in Glory at the Head of them for
Ever, and Ever. Mat. xxv. 1 Thessalonians. iv, etc.

SECT. XV.
Q. WHat does the THIRD PART of your Creed contain?

A. It contains all that is needful to be Known, and Professed by Us, with
Relation to the Holy Ghost.

Q. What do you account needful to be believed concerning Him?

A. Not only that there is a Holy Ghost; but that he is the Third Person in the
ever-blessed Trinity; and partakes, as such, of the same Divine Nature, with
the Father, and the Son.

Q. How does this appear?

A. By the plain Testimony of the Holy Scriptures; by which alone we are
capable of knowing any thing, in these Matters. Now those Sacred Writings
evidently speak of him, not only as a Person; but as a Divine Person; and that
distinct both from the Father, and from Our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. Wherein do the Holy Scriptures speak of this Blessed Spirit, as of a Person?

A. * They give him the Proper Names of a Person: God; Acts v.3, 4. Lord; 2
Cor. iii.17. The Spirit; 1 Samuel xvi.14. Jo. xvi.13. The Comforter; Jo. xiv.26.
xvi.7, etc. * They ascribe to Him the Properties of a Person; Understanding, 1
Cor. ii.11. Will, 1 Cor. xii.11. * They Represent Him as doing Personal Acts:
He is Sent; He Comes; Goes; Hears; Teaches: Jo. xiv.26. xv.26, 27. Jo.
xvi.7, 13, etc. Is Tempted; Resisted; Grieved: Ephesians. iv.30. Speaks;
Commands; Intercedeth: Acts x.19. xiii.2. Romans viii.26. * They join him with
those who are confessedly Persons; viz. God the Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. In the Form of Baptism: Mat. xxviii.19. In St. Paul's Wish for the
Corinthians: 2 Cor. xiii.14. In St. John's Catalogue of Witnesses: 1 Jo. v.7.
They Oppose him to such Spirits, as We All allow to be Persons: 1 Samuel xvi.14.
* They represent him under Personal Apparitions: Mat. iii.16. Acts ii.3. and by
all this undoubtedly assure Us, that He is a Person.

Q. By what Arguments from the Holy Scriptures do you prove, that He is a
Divine Person?

A. By the same by which I before showed the Son so to be. They ascribe to him
the Names of God: Acts v.3, 4. 2 Cor. iii.17. The Attributes of God: Heb.
ix.14. Psalm. cxxxix.7. Job xxvi.13. The Honor of God. They tell us, That He is
the Spirit of God: 1 Cor. ii.11.17. That a Sin may be immediately committed
against Him: Mat. xii.31. That his dwelling in Us, makes our Bodies the Temples
of God: 1 Cor. iii.16. That Christ, by being Conceived by him, became the Son
of God: Luke i.35. They teach us to Baptize in his Name, together with those of
the Father, and Son: Mat. xxviii.19. And show Us even St. Paul himself paying a
Religious Invocation to him: 1 These. iii.12, 13. 2 These. iii.3, etc.

Q. How do you prove him not only to be a Divine Person, but a Person distinct
both from the Father, and the Son?

A. He proceeds from the Father; Comp. Man. iii.16. xxviii.19.
and therefore is not the Father: Jo. xv.26. He is sent by the Son; and
therefore is not the Son: Jo. xvi.7, 15. He is sent, sometimes by the Father,
Ephesians. ii.18. Gal. iv.4, 5, 6.
in the Name of the Son; and sometimes by the Son, 1 Jo. v.7.
from the Father; and therefore is neither the Father, nor the Son: Jo. xiv.26.
xv.26.

Q. But did not you before say, that there is but One God? And how now do you
say, that the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God?

A. That there is but One God, the Holy Scriptures plainly declare; and even
Reason it self confirms it to Us. And yet the Same Scriptures as plainly
declare, Every One of these Three to be God. And the only way we know of
Reconciling these Two, seemingly contrary, Assertions; is to say, that these
Three partake of One, and the same Divine Nature, communicated from the Father,
to the Son; and from Both to the Holy Ghost: And that therefore They together
make but One God.

Q. How can it be possible that Three distinct Persons, should so partake of
the One, Divine Nature, or Essence, as All together to make but One God?

A. That is not my Concern to determine: This I am sure, that if the Scriptures
be (as We all allow that they are) the Word of God, what they plainly deliver
must be true, because it is, in effect, delivered by God himself; who can
neither be Himself deceived, nor will deceive Me. Now that they deliver both
these Propositions to me; That the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy
Ghost is God: And yet, that there are not Three Gods, but One God: I am as
sure, as I can be of any thing that is spoken, or written, for my
Understanding. That therefore both these Assertions are True, and Credible, I
am sure. But how, or after what manner, I am to understand them, so as to
remove all show of Contradiction in them, this the Holy Scriptures have not
Revealed; nor do I therefore presume to pronounce any thing, more particularly,
concerning it.

Q. Why then do you say that they are Three Persons, and but One, in the Divine
Essence?

A. Because I know not how better to express the Unity, and Distinction of
them; and they are Terms which the Church has long Received; and I see no
Reason to depart from them, unless I knew of some better, and more apt
Expressions, to Use in their Stead.

Q. Is there any thing farther needful to be known, concerning the Holy Ghost?

A. Yes, there is; and that is with Relation to his Office: That it is he who
Sanctifies Me, and All the Elect People of God.

Q. How is it that the Holy Ghost does this?

A. He Regenerates Us at our Baptism: Jo. vi.44: Deuteronomy. xxix.4. Acts xiii.48. 1
These. ii.13. Jer. xxxii.40. Ezekiel. xxxvi.27. 1 Cor. iii.6. 1 Jo. iii.9. 2 These.
iii.3. Mat. vi.13.
Jo. iii.5. Tit. iii.5. Gal. v.15. He Unites Us unto Christ: 1 Cor. xii.12, 13.
1 Jo. iii.24. Co-operates with Us in all our Religious Undertakings: 2 Cor.
ix.5. He Illuminates our Understandings: Psalm. cxix.18. Acts xvi.14. Disposes
our Wills: Phil. ii.12. Settles us in the Faith of Christ: Ephesians. ii.8. Phil.
i.29. Heb. iv.2. Enables us to fulfill our Duty: Romans viii.14. Gal. v.16. Helps
our Prayers: Romans viii.26, 34. 1 Jo. v.14. Fortifies us against Temptations: 1
Cor. x.13. And Carries us through all the Dangers, that either our Own
Weakness, or the Cunning, and Malice of the Devil, may raise against Us; to
draw us away from, or hinder Us in Our Duty. Phil. i.6. 1 Cor..i.8. 2 Cor.
i.22. Ephesians. iv.30.

Q. Will the Holy Ghost alone do all this for Us?

A. No, but we must Use our Own Endeavor, if ever we mean to be assisted by
him. 2 Cor. iii.5.
It is by the Grace of the Holy Spirit alone, that we are Able to do those
things which God, and our Duty, Require of Us. But that Grace is not to
exclude, but to assist and perfect our Own Endeavors; and to enable us thereby
to do that, which, without it, we should never have been able to have done.
Phil. ii.12. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling: For it is God
which Works in you, both to Will, and to Do, of his Good Pleasure.

Q. By what means may we obtain this Help of the Holy Spirit?

Ephesians. iv.30.
A. By fervent Prayer to God for his Grace: Luke xi.9. and by a diligent Care
to use that Portion of it, whatever it be, which God has given Us, to his
Honor, and Service: Mat. xiii.12. xxv.29. And upon our doing of which, not
only that Grace which we have already, shall be sure to be continued to Us, but
greater Degrees shall be added to it. 2 Pet. iii.18.

Q. Are these the only Ends for which the Holy Spirit was given by Christ, to
his Church?

A. No; His Operations are very many, and can hardly be particularly
Enumerated. He not only Regenerates, Acts iv.31. -- v.41. -- xiii 52. Romans
xiv.17. 1 These. i.6.
and Sanctifies Us; Disposes us to our Duty; and Fortifies Us against
Temptation; but moreover, Directs us in Our Doubts; Comforts us in our
Afflictions; Supports us in our Troubles; Arms us against the Fear of Death;
Gives us Strength, Romans viii.37. 2 Cor. iv.13, 16. Ephesians iv.30. Phil. i.2^.
and Courage, in Trials and Persecutions: And, in such Cases as he sees
needful, Seals our Souls, with such an Inward Sense, and Assurance of God's
Favor, as makes us firmly satisfied of our future, Everlasting, Salvation.
Romans v.5. viii.14, 17. 2 Cor. i.22. Ephesians. i.14. Gal. iv.6.

Q. How long shall the Holy Ghost continue thus to Comfort, Sanctify, and
Guide, the Faithful?

A. As long as there shall any Faithful Remain in need of his Assistance: Which
because there will be to the End of the World, therefore Christ has promised,
that He shall also, till then, continue to Conduct, and Govern, his Faithful
Servants. Jo. 14.16. Mat. xxviii.20.

SECT. XVI.
Q. WHat does the FOVRTH, and Last Part of your Creed Relate to?

A. To the Church of Christ: Its Duty and Privileges here; and its future Hope
of Glory and Immortality hereafter.

Q. What is the First Thing which you are taught to believe concerning Christ's
Church?

A. That there is a Holy Catholic Church.

Q. What is that Church, of which this Article speaks?

A. It is the Universal Church of Christ; the General Assembly of All those,
who from the time of the first publishing of the Gospel, to this Day, have
believed in Christ; or shall hereafter profess his Faith, to the End of the
World.

Q. How can such a Church be the Object of our Faith?

A. Not as to that part of it which we see, and communicate with; but chiefly
in these Two Respects. First, As we Believe, by the Word of God, that those who
have Gone before Us, in the true Faith of Christ, 1 Cor. xv.^3. 1 These. iv.13.
Luk* xx.38.
and the Fear of his Holy Name, though out of all Visible Communion, at
present, with Us, do yet Live to God; and are still Members of Christ's Church,
though in a different State from Us; and shall, together with Us, be gathered
into One Glorious Society at the last Day. And, Secondly, As, upon the same
Grounds, Mat. xvi.18.
we do also farther believe, that in all the Ages yet to come, to the End of
the World, Christ shall continue to have a Church upon Earth; So that no Power
of Men, or Malice of the Devil, shall ever be able utterly to Root it out, or
to destroy it.

Q. How can a Society, consisting of such different Members, and those at so
great a distance, both in Time and Place, from One Another, yet all together
make but One Church?

Acts ii.41. etc.. 1 Cor. x.17. Gal. v.5. Ephesians. i.22. iv.3, 4, 5. v.23, 26. Col.
i.18. Heb. xii.23.
A. Because how different so ever the Members of this Church may otherwise seem
to be; yet they are all * United together under One Head, the Lord Jesus: * Are
* Sanctified, and Ruled, by the same Holy Spirit: * Endued with the same Love
to God, and toward One Another: * Live by the same Laws: * Profess the same
Faith: * Partake of the same Sacraments: * Have the same Hope of Salvation set
before them: * Worship the same God, by the same Advocate, and Savior Jesus
Christ: And (as to what concerns all the true, and lively Members, of this
Society) * shall one Day be Gathered together into One actual Place, and
Portion; in the Glorious Kingdom of God for Ever.

Q. Wherefore, do you give this Church the Title of Catholic?

A. Upon several Accounts, but chiefly these Two: Psalm. lxxvi.1, 2. --
cxlvii.19, 20.
First, To distinguish it from the Jewish Church; which was confined to a
certain People; and was to continue, but for a certain Time: Whereas the
Christian Church takes in all Mankind; and is to last to the End of the World.
Psalm. ii.8. Acts x.34, 35. Mat. xxviii.19. Mark xvi.15. Luke xxiv.47. 1 Cor.
xii.13.

And, Secondly, To show that in this Creed, which comprehends what is to be
Believed by all Christians; we profess not our Faith of any One, determinate,
Church; which may cease, and fail; (such as the Church of England, or Church of
Rome;) but of the Catholic, Mat. xvi.18. -- xxviii.19, 23.
or Universal Church of Christ; as that which shall never fail; and to which,
alone, the Promises of God belong.

Q. May not any One, determinate Church, be called the Catholic Church.

A. No, it may not; any more than London may be called England; or England, the
Whole World. The Catholic Church, is the Universal Church; and that neither
Ours, nor any other particular Church is; nor, whilst there are more such
Christian Churches in the World, can be. But, a Catholic Church, a Particular
Church may be called: And such Ours is; though that of Rome, I doubt, will
hardly be able to make a Good Pretension to this Title, any more than to the
Other.

Q. Do you make a difference then, between A Catholic Church, and THE
Catholic Church?

A. There is certainly a wide difference between them. THE Catholic Church,
is, as I before said, The whole Church. But A Catholic Church, implies no more
than a Sound part of it; a Church in Communion with the Catholic Church of
Christ, in opposition to the Conventicles of Heretics, and Schismatics: Who,
whatsoever they may pretend, are really no parts of the Catholic Church; nor
shall be considered by Christ, as such.

Q. Whom do you account Heretics, and Schismatics? And how does it appear
that they are not Parts of the Catholic Church?

A. The Catholic Church, is that Church which professes the true Faith which
Christ, and his Apostles delivered to it; and that, if not free from All Error
whatsoever, yet without any such Errors, as destroy the Foundation of that
Doctrine, which was committed to its Custody. Now a Heretic is One, who not
only Errs in some Matters of lesser moment, but in Matters of such Consequence,
as subvert the very Foundation of Christianity. But he who does this, can never
be a Member of that Church, whose Doctrine he not only does not Receive, but
rejects: And who by his Errors destroys that very Faith, by which alone he can
be entitled to the Character either of a true Disciple, or a sound Member of
Christ's Church.

Q. But why may not Schismatics be accounted true Members of Christ's Church.

A. Because none are Schismatics but such as forsake, and cut themselves off
from, the Communion of the Catholic Church. Now it is a Contradiction that
those should continue Members of the Catholic Church, who by their Own
voluntary departure from it, have renounced the Communion of it.

Q. Do you look upon the Church of England to be a true part of the Catholic
Church?

A. It certainly is: Inasmuch as it professes the true Catholic Faith,
delivered in the Holy Scriptures, and drawn up in the Creeds of the Church;
and, by the most ancient Councils, acknowledged to be sufficient to denominate
those who professed according thereunto, to be truly Catholic Christians: And
also holds Communion with all such Churches as profess the same Faith; and, as
far forth, as they do so.

Q. What is your Opinion of the Church of Rome, in this particular?

A. That she is both Schismatical, and Heretical. Schismatical; in cutting off
all Others from her Communion, who will not profess her Errors, and submit to
her Usurped Authority: Heretical; in professing such Doctrines as quite destroy
the Foundations of Christianity; and are inconsistent with that Truth, which
yet she pretends to maintain.

Q. In what Respect do you believe the Catholic Church to be Holy?

A. As both the * End of Christ in Gathering of it; the * Rules he has given to
it; Ephesians. i.4. -- iv.3. -- v.26, 27. Col. 1.22. 2 Timothy 1.9, 11, 19. 1 Pet i.15,
16.
the * Promises he has made it; * Its Sacraments, * Ministry, all its *
Ordinances, were designed to make it Holy. But especially, as * All Those who
are indeed the Faithful Members of it, are actually Sanctified by the Grace of
the Holy Spirit: And so are truly, though imperfectly, Holy, now; and shall be
made altogether Holy, and without Spot, hereafter. Ephesians. 5.25.

SECT. XVII.
Q. WHat is the first Duty, or Privilege, belonging to those who are Members of
Christ's Church?

A. The Communion of Saints.

Q. What do you mean by Saints?

A. Though the Word, in our Language, be more Restrained; yet in that, in which
this Creed was composed, it may indifferently denote either Holy Persons, or
Holy Things: And this Article may very well be extended to both of Them.

Q. Whom do you mean by Holy Persons?

1 These. iv.7. 2 Cor. vii.1. Heb. xii.14. Romans i.7. xv.25, 26, 31. Ephesians. i.3.
Phil. i.1. Col. i.4. iii.12, etc.
A. Though all Christians in General, are so called in Scripture; and we are
Charitably to presume that All such are Holy Persons: Yet, by Saints, we are
most properly to understand, such as answer the End of their Calling, by a
Lively Faith, and a Holy Conversation; in which Two, the Gospel-Saintship seems
to consist.

Q. With Whom, and in what Things, do you believe such Persons to have
Communion?

1 Cor. i.9. Ephesians. iii.9. -- v.23, 25, 26. 1 Jo. i 3.
A. I believe that all the true Members of Christ's Church, have a Right of
Fellowship, or Communion, with God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ; as
they are Received into Covenant by the One, through the Death, and Passion, of
the Other.

Jo. xiv.23. 1 Cor. xii.16. 2 Cor. xiii.14. Gal. iv 6, 7. Phil. ii.1.
I believe that they have a Fellowship with the Holy Ghost, by his Dwelling in
Them, and Sanctifying of Them.

Luke xv.10. -- xvi.22. Heb i.14. Mat. xviii.10.
I believe that they have Fellowship with the Holy Angels; who both Minister
unto them in their Exigencies, and have a most tender, affectionate Concern for
Them.

1 Cor. xii.26. 1 Jo. i.7. Romans xii.15.
I believe that they all have a Fellowship with One Another, as * Members of
the same mystical Body of Christ; * Professors of the same Faith; * Heirs of
the same Promises; * Guided by the same Spirit; and * Governed by the same
Laws: And I believe that they ought, as living Members, * to have a Fellowship
of Love, and Charity, also toward Each Other.

Act. ii.42. Romans xii.13. -- xv.27. 1 Cor. x.16.
And, Lastly, I believe that they have a Right of Communicating in all the
Ordinances of the Gospel: In the Prayers of the Church; in the Ministry of the
Word and Sacraments; and whatsoever else has been ordained by Christ, or
established in the Church, for the common Good, and Benefit, of all the Members
of it.

Q. Do you not, by this Account of the present Article, utterly shut out those
from any part in it, who yet are most commonly called Saints; I mean, Such as
have departed this Life in the Fear of God, and the Faith of Jesus Christ?

A. No, by no means: Heb. xii.22, 23.
I believe them to partake in this Communion also; as they are still living
Members of Christ's Holy Catholic Church. And therefore I believe, that They
have a Fellowship, no less than We, with God, and Christ. That they are
Sanctified by the same Spirit; Are Visited by the Holy Angels; Have some kind
of Fellowship with One Another; and with Us also, however separated, by Death,
from Us.

Q. Wherein do you suppose their Fellowship with Us to consist?

A. I look upon the Case to be much the same with Us, as it is with Members of
the same Civil Society upon Earth; when they are, in a foreign Country, far
distant from One Another. * We are Members of the same Church; * United to the
same Head; * Sanctified by the same Spirit; * Heirs of the same Promises; *
Shall, in a little time, be in the same Place, and State; and when the End of
the World comes, * we shall All be translated to the same Glory and Happiness,
in God's Heavenly Kingdom.

Q. To what Offices of Communion does this Belief oblige Us, at present,
toward Each Other?

A. To the Members of Christ's Church still Living, it obliges Us to Love and
Charity; to mutual Prayers for, and Help of, Each other; in all such Things as
may promote the Salvation of Us all. How the Saints departed maintain Communion
with Us, We cannot tell. Probable it is that they do, in general, pray for us,
as it is certain they wish well to Us. But for our selves, who are yet here on
Earth; we must Bless God for the Grace he was pleased to bestow upon Them; and
by which they were delivered from the Sins, and Temptations of this Evil World;
and enabled Faithfully to serve him unto the End. We must set before Us their
Examples, and Imitate their Virtues. We must account of them as Living Members
of Christ's Body; and be not only Ready, but Desirous, to Go to them, whenever
it shall please God to call for Us. We must take care decently to dispose of
their Bodies; and faithfully to fulfill, as much as in Us lies, what they have
left in trust with Us, to be done for Them after their departure.

Q. What think you of that Honor which is paid to Them in the Church of Rome?

A. It is not only Vain, and without all Warrant from God's Word; but is indeed
Superstitious, and Idolatrous. To Pray to any Creature, and He at a vast
Distance from Us; In the House of God; with all the Outward Marks of Adoration;
nay, and oftentimes, in the same Words, and in the same Breath, that We pray to
God; and that, lastly, with a Confidence that the Person so prayed to, can Hear
our Prayers, and Answer our Desires; being evidently to Give to the Creature
the Honor due to the Creator; which cannot be done without the Peril of
Idolatry.

SECT. XVIII.
Q. WHat is the next Privilege which you believe does, of Right, belong to
those, who are the Members of Christ's Church?

A. The Forgiveness of Sins.

Q. What is Sin?

A. It is the Transgression of God's Law, 1 Jo. iii.4. Whether by our Omitting
to do what that Required us to have done; Or by Our doing any Thing contrary to
its Commands.

Q. What mean you by the Law of God?

A. The Will of God, howsoever made known to Us; whether by the Light of our
Own Consciences, or by the Declarations of his Word; especially that which is
delivered to us, in the Books of the New Testament.

Q. How does God forgive Sin?

A. He washes away the stain of it by his Sanctifying Grace; Jo. i. Psalm.
xxxi.1, 2. Comp. Romans iv.8.
and Remits the Punishment of it; for the Sake, and through the Merits, and
Mediation of Jesus Christ, our Savior.

Q. What Assurance have we that God will thus Forgive Us our Sins?

A. The Covenant of the Gospel is founded upon the Promise of it: Luke xxiv.47.
Act. iii.29. xiii.38, 39. 1 Cor. xv.4. 2 Cor. v 21.
So that if we Believe that Christ died for our Sins, we must also Believe that
God, for Christ's sake, will forgive all those, who truly Repent of their Sins.
Luke xxiv.47. Acts v.31. xiii.38. xxvi.18. Ephesians. iv.32.

Q. Is this the peculiar Privilege of the Church of Christ?

A. So the Scriptures tell us: There being no Other Name under Heaven given
among Men, by which we must be Saved, but only that of the Lord Jesus. Acts
iv.12.

Q. From whom is this Forgiveness to be Sought?

A. Who has Power to forgive Sins but God only? Mark ii.7. Of Him therefore it
must be sought, in the Name of Jesus Christ.

Q. But has not Christ left a Power with his Church to forgive Sins?

A. He has left with his Church a Ministerial Power, to declare forgiveness of
Sins, to all such as truly Repent of them, and Believe in him. And when the
Ministers of his Word, are called in to the Assistance of Sick, or Scrupulous
Persons; they may, upon the Supposition of a true Repentance, pronounce, in
God's Name, the Pardon of their Sins to them. But in this they only deliver the
Sentence of God; which, if the Sinner be truly Penitent, God will infallibly
make Good: Otherwise, it will be of no Use to them; because it was erroneously,
though charitably, Passed upon Them.

Q. But does not the Church of Rome, ascribe much more, to the Absolution of
the Priest, than this?

A. Yes, it does: Nor is this One of the least Presumptuous, or least
Dangerous, of its Errors. They tell Us, that the Sentence of the Priest, in
this Case, is not only Declarative, but Judicial. And, which is yet worse, they
add; that though a Sinner be not affected with such a Sorrow for his Sin, as
would Otherwise be sufficient to obtain God's Pardon; yet, by rightly
Confessing to a Priest, his Sins shall be forgiven; and an Entrance Opened into
Heaven, by the Power of the Keys, in Absolution. By the former of which, as
they Usurp upon the Prerogative of God. Mark ii.7. So do they, by the latter,
lay a very dangerous Stumbling Block in the way of Wicked Men; whilst they
Encourage them to Rely on such a Sorrow for the Forgiveness of their Sins, as
will certainly fail, and Ruin them in the End.

SECT. XIX.
Q. WHat is the Third Privilege promised by God to Christ's Church?

A. The Resurrection of the Body.

Q. Shall not All Men whatsoever be Raised again at the last Day?

A. They shall.

Q. How then is this a Privilege of those who are the Faithful Members of
Christ's Church?

A. Because though all Men shall be Raised, yet not All after the same Manner.
Phil. iii.21. Mat. xiii.4.3. Dan. xii.3.
The Bodies of the Faithful shall be raised in a most Blessed, and Glorious
State: 1 Cor. xv.42, etc. They shall be perfected in all their Parts, and
Qualities; shall be rendered an Habitation fit for a Glorified Soul to dwell
in; and be prepared for the Enjoyment of an Everlasting Felicity. And thus to
Rise; in such a State, and for such an End, is certainly a very Great Benefit,
and the peculiar Privilege of Christ's Holy Church.

Q. How then shall the Wicked be Raised?

A. Their Bodies shall also be Restored to them; and that in such a State, Jo.
v.28. Act. xxiv.15.
as to be capable of Undergoing for Ever those Torments which God has prepared
for Them. But their Resurrection shall be to Shame, and Misery: And what is the
Blessing of the Righteous, shall to the Wicked be a means of Increasing their
Pain, and Enlarging their Punishment.

Q. Shall we Receive the same Bodies, we now have, at the Resurrection; or
shall some Other Bodies be prepared for Us?

Dan. xii 2. Jo. v.28. Romans viii.11. 1 Cor. vi.15, 19. 2 Cor. v.10.
A. The very Nature of a Resurrection does unanswerably prove, that we shall
Receive our Own Bodies; And the End of it confirms it to Us: Our Bodies being
therefore Raised, and Restored to Us, that we may be Rewarded, or Punished, in
the same Estate both of Soul and Body, in which we had done Things Worthy
either of Reward, or Punishment.

Q. Shall All Mankind, not only Good, and Bad, but Every Single Person, of
either kind, be Raised at the Last Day?

A. All that ever died shall be Raised: Jo. v.20. 2 Cor. v.10. But many will be
found, at the Last Day, Alive on the Earth. Now they shall not die, nor, by
consequence, Rise from the Dead. But they shall be Changed: That is to say, The
Men of that Age, (whether Good or Bad) shall, by the mighty Power of God, be
put into the same State with those who being Dead, were Raised from the Dead:
And so be brought, with them, before the Judgment Seat of Christ: 1 Cor. xv.51.
1 These. iv.15.

SECT. XX.
Q. WHAT shall follow upon the Resurrection?

A. The Last, and General Judgment of Mankind; which being passed, and the
Sentence pronounced upon Every One, according to his Works; It shall
Immediately be put in Execution: The Wicked shall Go into Everlasting
Punishment, but the Righteous into Life Everlasting. Mat. xxv.46.

Q. Shall the Wicked, as well as the Righteous, live for Ever?

A. They shall; if such a State of inexpressible Misery, as they shall be
condemned to, may be called Living. For they shall never cease to be; nor ever
cease to be tormented to all Eternity. Mat. x.28. xxv.41, 46. xviii.8. Compare
Mark ix.44.

Q. How then is Everlasting Life a Privilege of the Church of Christ?

A. As the Resurrection of the Body, was before said to be. That Life which
alone deserves to be so called; that Happy and Glorious Life, which God has
prepared for the Faithful in his Kingdom; That is the Singular Privilege of
Christ's Church, and of the Faithful Members of it. The Other, is rather an
Everlasting Duration; a State of endless Dying, rather than an Everlasting Life.

Q. But can it be consistent with the Justice, and Mercy of God, to punish the
temporary, and transient Sins of Men, with an Everlasting State of Misery, and
Sufferings?

A. We must confess it so to be, or say, Mat. xx^ 41.46. -- xviii*8. Mark ix
43, 44.
(which is as Unreasonable* as it would be Wicked) that God will deal Unjustly,
and Unmercifully with Sinners, at the Last Day. For certain it is, that this he
has declared shall be the Result of their Evil-doings.

Q. Why may we not by the Everlasting Death, and Everlasting Punishment, of
which the Scriptures speak, on this Occasion; understand rather the final
Destruction of such Wicked Persons; than an Eternal Continuance of Them in
Pain, and Misery?

Comp. Rev. ii.11. xiv.11. xxi.8.
A. Because the Scriptures have plainly declared, were Men willing to
understand it, that by Everlasting Punishment, is meant Everlasting Torment.
That their Worm shall not die, nor their Fire be quenched; but they shall dwell
in Everlasting Burnings. Mark ix.44. Isa. lxvi.24. That there shall be weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth. Mat. viii.12. xiii.42, 50. All which
Phrases, howsoever they be understood, must denote Suffering, as well as
Punishment: An Eternity of Pain, not an Eternal State of Death, and
Insensibility. Besides that Everlasting Death, or Destruction, would not
otherwise be, properly speaking, an Everlasting Punishment. For as soon as Men
are thus Dead, they cease to suffer; and, for that very Reason, cease to be
punished. And one may as well say, that a Malefactor, who was Executed for his
Crimes a Hundred Years ago, still continues to be punished by the Magistrate;
as that after a Man should be once annihilated, he should afterward continue
to be Punished, for his Sins, by God Almighty.

Q. Wherein do you suppose the Everlasting Happiness of the Righteous shall
Consist?

A. As to the Particulars of it, they are altogether Unknown to Us; nor indeed
are we able in our present Estate, perfectly to comprehend the Greatness of
them. Thus much, in General, 1 Cor. xv.42, etc. Phil ii.21. 1 Jo ii.2. Rev.
xxi.4.
we are told; that we shall be placed in a most Glorious, and Perfect State;
free from all Sin, and from all Misery: Where we shall Enjoy all the Pleasure,
and Satisfaction, that our Natures, vastly enlarged, shall be capable of. Psalm.
x^i.11.
We shall dwell in the Presence of God; shall be continually entertained not
only in the Contemplation, but with the Fruition, of all the Riches of his
Goodness, and Glory. We shall be Companions with the Holy Angels; and pass our
time, in the Greatest Love of God, and of One Another, that can be imagined. We
shall turn all our Service, into Praise, and Wonder; shall have nothing left to
wish, or desire of him. And we shall both Love, and Serve, and Praise him, with
such Rapture, and Satisfaction; with such Joy to our selves, as well as such
Fervor toward God; as no Thoughts can Conceive, 1 Cor. ii.9.
nor is it possible for us, by any Words, to express the Greatness of it.

SECT. XXI.
Q. WHat was the Third Thing, which your Godfathers and Godmothers promised for
you at your Baptism?

A. That I should Keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and Walk in the same
All the Days of my Life.

Q. Do you account it to be Necessary for you, herein also, to fulfill what they
Promised for you?

A. I do; and that so Necessary that I cannot be Saved without it.

Q. Do you then expect to be Saved by Virtue of your Own Good Works?

A. God forbid: On the contrary, I am persuaded that when I shall have done All
that I can, I shall be but an Unprofitable Servant: Mat. vii.21, 24, etc.
Luke xvii.10. But however, I must sincerely Endeavor, what in Me lies, to
keep God's Commandments; and then I am assured that God will Reward Me, not
according to my Works, but according to his Own Mercy, and Promises to Us, in
Jesus Christ.

Q. Are you able, of your self, by your Own Natural Strength, to Keep God's
Commandments?

A. No, I am not: For in Me, that is to say, in my Flesh, dwells no Good
Thing. Romans vii.18. It is the Grace of God which must work in me, both to Will,
and to Do, according to his Good Pleasure. Phil. ii.13.

Q. Being thus assisted by the Holy Spirit, can you Perfectly keep God's
Commandments?

A. No, I cannot; nor will it ever be possible for me, in this Life, to do it.
I must serve God Sincerely, Mat. xxii.37. etc.
with all my Heart; I must serve him Zealously, with all my Strength; I must Go
as far as I can, Mat. v.48. -- xix.21. Col. i.28. 1 Pet. v.10. 2 Cor. vii.14.
-- xiii.9.
and as the Measure of the Grace which he is pleased to allow me, will enable
me to do, toward Perfection: But to discharge a Perfect, that is to say, an
Vnsinning Obedience, to God's Commandments, this neither I can; nor did ever
any One else, but he who was God as well as Man, do it. For, in many Things, we
Offend all: And if we say that we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the
Truth is not in Us. Jam. 3.2. 1 Jo. i.8.

Q. Will not this Undervalue the Grace of the Holy Spirit, by which we are
Sanctified?

A. Not at all: Forasmuch as I ascribe to that the Glory of all the Good I do;
and take to my self the Shame, of whatsoever is Evil, or Defective, in Me*

Q. What think you of Those of the Church of Rome, who, notwithstanding* this,
talk of Works of Supererrogation: and thereby pretend not only Perfectly to
keep God's Commandments; but to do even More, than God Required them to have
done?

A. I think that they neither understand Themselves, nor their Duty: It being
certain, that the Measure of our Duty, Mat. xxii.37. Compare Deuteronomy. x.12.
is to Love the Lord our God with all our Heart, and with all our Soul, and
with all our Strength: Beyond which, as it is not possible for any Man to Go;
so neither is there any that can justly say, He has ever, for any long time
together, absolutely come up to the utmost height of it.

Q. Seeing then our Obedience cannot be brought to Perfection in this Life;
what is that Obedience which God does Now Require of Us in Order to our
Salvation?

A. It is the Obedience of an Honest, Humble, Psalm. cxix.16. 1 Cor xv.48.
Sincere Heart: Such as Leads us, in the First Place, to an Universal Obedience
of All God's Commandments. Secondly, to a hearty Endeavor to come up to as
perfect a Discharge of Our Duty, Mat. xxii 37. 2 Pet. iii.18.
according to the Measures of them, as our present Condition will admit of. And
that, Thirdly, with Constancy, and Perseverance, unto our Lives End. Mat. x*22.
1 Cor. i.8. 1 Pet. i.13. Heb. x.38, 39. Rev. ii^ 10.

SECT. XXII.
Q. HAS there been any such Summary Collection made, of the main Branches of
what we are to Do; as we Had in the Creed, of what we are to Believe?

A. There is such a Collection, and that delivered by God himself; in what we
commonly call the Ten Commandments.

Q Do those Commandments which were Given by God to the Jews, still continue in
force, and Oblige Us Christians?

Mat. xix.16. -- xxii.37. Romans xiii.9. Jam. ii.8.
A Yes, they do; Mat. v.17, etc. and that in Some measure more Strictly than
they did Them: The most part, if not All of them, having been either more fully
Expounded, or more perfectly Delivered to Us, by Christ in the New Testament,
than they were first given by God to the Jews in the Old. See Mat. v.vi.vii.
Chapters.

Q. Why do you call Them the Ten Commandments?

A. Not only because they have been usually divided into that Number; but
because they were Originally delivered so by God; and are accordingly so called
by Moses. Exodus xxxiv.28. Deuteronomy iv.13.

Q. What do these Commandments in General Refer to?

A. To the Two Great Branches of Our Duty; Our Duty toward God, and Our Duty
toward Our Neighbor.

Q. What Authority Have you for this Division of these Commandments?

A. The Authority of our Blessed Savior, Mat. xxii.37. And indeed God Himself
seems to have had Regard unto it, when he commanded Moses to prepare Two Tables
for Them: On the One of which, were to be Engraven Those which concern our Duty
toward God; on the Other, Those which contain our Duty toward our Neighbor.
Exodus xxxi.18. xxxii.19. xxxiv.1.4.28.

Q. How many Commandments does each of these Tables comprehend?

A. As to the Commandments themselves, it is not doubted by Any, but that Those
of the First Table end with that which Concerns the Sabbath; and that the
Second begins with that which Requires Us to Honor our Father, and our Mother.
But in Dividing the Commandments of Each Table, there is a difference between
Us, and Those of the Church of Rome. For they join the Two First into One; and
then, to complete the number of Ten, divide the Last into Two: And so assign,
not as we do, Four to One Table, and Six to the Other; but Three to the First
Table, and Seven to the Second.

Q. Is it a Matter of Any Moment, How each Precept is divided, so long as All
are Retained?

A. In its self it is not: But as the Design of this New Division was to enable
them thereby to drop the Second Commandment, against their Image Worship,
altogether; (and which accordingly, from thenceforth they did oftentimes Omit,
in their Common Books of Devotion;) so it is certainly of Great Moment to be
taken Notice of. Now the First, and Second Commandments, have apparently a
Different Prospect, and were designed to Prohibit Two very different Things.
But the Last Commandment solely Respects the Sin of Coveting: And if the
difference of the Instances which are Given in it, the better to clear, and
enforce the Observance of it, be sufficient to make a Several Command,
according to the Distinction of them; They may as well divide it into Six, or
indeed into Six hundred Commands, as into Two. For at this Rate, Thou shall not
Covet thy Neighbor's House, will be One: Thou shall not Covet thy Neigbour's
Wife, Another: Nor his Manservant, will be a Third: Nor his Maidservant, a
Fourth: Nor his Ox, a Fifth: Nor his Ass, a Sixth: Nor any Thing that is his; a
Hundred more, in One General Expression.

Q. But is there not One Great Branch of Our Duty here wanting, namely, Our
Duty toward our Selves?

A. There is not: For all those Duties which we so call, have a manifest
Regard, more or less, to our Duty to God, and our Neighbor; and may be
comprised under the Offices relating to Them. At least, since there is no Duty
of this kind but what is Required by God of Us, the better to fit us for his
Service, and Acceptance; it must be confessed, that the First Commandment
alone, will take in, whatsoever of this Nature may seem wanting in the Whole.

Q. Is there any other Division of these Commands, that may be fit to be taken
Notice of, before we proceed to the particular Consideration of Them?

A. There is yet One; namely, That of these Commandments, some are Positive,
and declare what we are to Do; as the Fourth Commandment of the First Table;
the Fifth in the Second. Others are Negative, and show Us what we are to Avoid;
As all the Others of Both Tables.

Q. What do you Observe from this Distinction?

A. A Great Difference with Respect to our Obligation to Obedience. For (1 st)
The positive Commands, though they are always in force, and therefore Oblige
all who have any Concern with them, and so long as they are under the Power of
them; yet they do not extend to All Persons, nor Oblige at All Times. As for
Example: To Honor our Father and Mother, is a Duty of Eternal Obligation. But
then many there are, Who have no Father, nor Mother; and therefore neither can
They lie under any Obligation to Honor Them. Again; To Observe the Sabbath Day
to keep it Holy, is a Command that never Ceases to Oblige. But yet should a Man
be made a Prisoner, or a Slave, in a Pagan, or Other Country, where he had no
Means, nor Opportunity to Observe it; whilst he lay under those Circumstances,
he would not be Guilty of any Sin by not Observing of it. But now the Negative
Commands, not only Oblige always, but all Persons; at all Times; and in all
Circumstances. And therefore, to Worship any other God, besides the Lord: To
make any Graven Image, to bow down before it, and worship it: To take God's
Name in Vain: These, and the like Prohibitions, oblige Men to a constant,
uninterrupted Observance of them; be their Circumstances, or Conditions of
Life, what they will. Nor can it, at any Time, or upon any Occasion, be lawful
for any Man, To worship another God; To make a Graven Image to worship it; To
take God's Name in Vain; and the like.

Q. Have you any thing farther to Observe from this Division?

A. This only; that these Two kinds mutually Include one Another: So that when
God commands any Duty to be performed, we are to understand that he does, by
the very same Command, forbid whatsoever is contrary thereunto, to be done by
Us. And again, when he forbids any thing to be done; he does thereby Require Us
to fulfill the Opposite Duty, implied; as well as to avoid the Sin which is
expressly taken Notice of. To clear my meaning in an Instance of Each Kind. God
commands us, in the Fourth Commandment, to keep holy the Sabbath Day; and that
by Sanctifying of it to a Religious Rest: And, by the same Commandment, he
forbids Us to do any servile Work upon it; or any thing whereby this Day, may
be unhallowed, or profaned by Us. And this would have been understood, by the
Other part of the Command, though God had not expressly taken notice of it. In
like manner; When in the Sixth Commandment, God forbids us to Commit Murder; we
are to understand, that we are not only prohibited thereby to stab, or poison,
our Neighbor; but are Required to do, what in Us lies, to Cherish, and
Preserve his Life: To help him, if he be assaulted by Another; to feed, and
cloth him, as far as we are able; and to prevent, according to Our Ability,
whatsoever may bring him in danger of losing of it.

Q. Are there any Other General Rules that may be of Use to us, in the
Understanding of the Commandments here proposed to Us?

A. There are Several such Rules; but those of most consequence seem to be
these Four. First, That in every Commandment, the General thing Expressed,
comprehends under it all such Particulars, as either directly depend upon it;
or may Fairly, and Reasonably, be Reduced to it. Thus the Seventh Commandment,
though in express Terms, it Forbids only the Sin of Adultery; yet, under that
General, is to be extended to all manner of Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness; not only to all unchaste Actions, but to all wanton Words,
Thoughts, Desires: To all immodest Behavior, and indecent Attire. To
whatsoever, in short, may entrench upon that Gravity, and Reservedness, which
our Religion Requires of Us; or may be apt to tempt Us to such Sins as are here
forbidden: Such as high and full Diet; soft Clothing; the Company (...)
Younger, especially of wanton Women; from all which we must abstain by virtue
of this Commandment: As also, from all Places of Danger; such as Play Houses,
Balls, Dancings, Musick-meetings, and the like.

Q. What is the next General Rule to be Observed, in the Interpreting of these
Commandments?

A. That where any Duty is Required, or Sin is Forbidden; we are to Reckon our
selves obliged thereby, to Use all such Means as may Enable Us to Fulfill the
One, and to Avoid the Other. Thus, because in the Eighth Commandment we are
Required not to Steal; therefore, in order to our more constant, and ready
Avoiding of it, we must account our selves obliged, not only to watch our
Actions, that we do not in any Thing defraud our Neighbor; but moreover must
do, what in us lies, to keep our selves out of such Circumstances as may be
likely to tempt us thereunto. We are therefore, by virtue of this Commandment,
Required to Work for the supply of our Own Needs, and of the Wants of those who
depend upon Us. We are to live Soberly, and Frugally; free from Vice, and all
Extravagance. We are to avoid all Lewdness, Gaming, and the like Occasions of
Excess: To abstain from all Idle, Dissolute, and Dishonest Conversation, and
Acquaintance; and from whatsoever else may be apt to tempt us to, or engage Us
in the Sin, which is here forbidden to Us.

Q. What is the Third Rule to be Observed, for the better Understanding of
these Commandments?

A. That the last Commandment is to be looked upon by Us, not so much as a
Single Commandment, as a General Caution Given to Us, with Relation to most of
the Duties of the Second Table; which ought to be Governed, and Influenced by
it. Thus because we must not steal from, or defraud our Neighbor of his Goods,
neither must we Covet them. Because we must not commit Adultery, neither must
we Lust. Because we must do no Murder, neither must we desire the hurt, or
death of our Neighbor. For this is the first spring of Evil in our Hearts; and
by stopping of which, we shall the most effectually Arm our selves against the
Commission of it.

Q. What is the last General Rule to be observed, for the better Interpretation
of God's Commandments?

A. That wheresoever we are Prohibited to Do any thing our Selves, as Sinful,
there we are to take Care that we be not Partakers of Other Men's Guilt, who do
Commit what was so prohibited: By Advising, Assisting, Encouraging, or
Otherwise Aiding, and Abetting them, in it. Nay, we must not so much as Give
any Countenance to the Evil which they do, by making Excuses for, and
extenuating their Guilt; by hiding, or concealing of it; least by so doing, we
make our selves accessory to it, and contract to our selves a stain by it.

SECT. XXIII.
Q. YOu said that the First Table contained those Commandments which concern
our Duty toward God: What is the first of These?

A. Thou shall have none Other Gods but Me.

Q. Is this all that belongs to this Commandment?

A. Yes, it is.

Q. What then do you account that which goes immediately before it, and was
also delivered by God Himself; namely, I am the LORD thy God, which brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage?

A. It is a General Preface, or Introduction, to the Commandments; and
represents to us the Two great Grounds, or Motives, on which God Required the
Jews to Obey those Commandments which He was about to deliver to them; namely,
First, Lev. xviii.21. xix.14, 16, 18, etc. xxi.12, etc. xxii 2. etc. Number.
iii.13, 41, 45.
That He was the Lord their God: And Secondly, That He had brought them out of
the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage. Deuteronomy. i.30. vi.21. xxvi.8.
Judge. ii.1.

Q. Do these Reasons extend to Us Christians?

A. They do, and that no less, if not more, Romans ii.28, 29. 1 Cor. x.18. Gal.
iii.23, 26. vi.15, 16. Phil. iii.3. Heb. viii.6.8, etc. Luke i.74, 75.
than they did to the Jews. For we are the Spiritual Israel, and Heirs of the
Promises. He is the LORD our God, by a more Excellent Covenant than He was
theirs. He has brought Us out of that Slavery of which the Jews Egyptian
Bondage was but a Type: Gal. iv, 26. Heb. xii.22. Rev. iii.12. xxi.2, 10, etc.
And has prepared for Us an Inheritance in Heaven, in comparison of which their
Land of Canaan is nothing to be accounted of.

Q. What is the full Import of the first Commandment?

A. * That we should have the LORD for our God; and * that we should have no
Other besides Him.

Q. What is it to have the LORD for our God?

A. It is to Think of Him, and to Worship Him, as God.

Q. How ought we to Think of God?

A. As of an Eternal, and All-Perfect Being; the Maker, See before, Sect. vii.
and Preserver, of All things: And Our most Gracious and Merciful Father, in,
and through his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Q. How ought we to Worship God?

Psalm. v.7. xlv.11. xcv.6. cxxxii.7. Jo. iv.24. 1 Cor. vi.20. Phil. iii.3. Heb.
x.25. Mat. vi.5, etc.
A. With all the Powers and Faculties both of our Souls and Bodies: In Public,
and in Private: According to all that in his Holy Gospel he has required, or by
the Force of our Own natural Reason, directed Us to do.

Q. What are the main Things wherein we are to express our Duty toward God?

A. It is almost impossible to Recount them: But, in general, it is our Duty,
to Heb. xi.6. Jo i.12. vi.29. Act. xiii.39. Romans x.9. Gal. iii.22. 1 Jo.
iii.23. v.13.
Believe in Him; to Psalm. xxii.23. xxxiii.18. xxxiv.11. Mat. x.28. Luke i.50. 2
Cor. vii.1. Phil. ii.12.
Fear Him; to Mat. xxii 37.
Love Him, with all our Heart, with all our Mind, with all our Soul, and with
all our Strength: To See before.
Worship Him; to Psalm. xcii.i. cv.1. cvi, etc. Ephesians v.20. 1 These. v.18.
Give him Thanks; to Psalm. ii.12. xviii.30. cxv.9, 10, 11. Romans xv.12. 2 Cor.
i.9. 2 Timothy vi 17. 1 Pet. iii.5.
put our whole Trust in Him; to Psalm. xiv.4. xviii.3. cxvi.2, 13, 17. cxliv.18.
Act. ii.21. Romans x.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. i.2.
Call upon Him; to Psalm. xcix.3. lxvi.2. cxix.11, etc. 105, 140, 161, 162. Col.
iii.16. 1 These. ii.13. Heb. ii.2. iv.12. Jam. i.21.
Honor his Holy Name, and his Word; and to Psalm. ii.11. c. 2. Luke i.74. 1
These. i.9, 10. Heb. ix.14.
Serve him truly all the Days of our Life.

Q. What are the chief Offenses that may be Committed, against this Part of the
first Commandment?

A. They are chiefly these: First, Atheism, and Infidelity, whether it be
Speculative, or Practical; that is to say, whether Men do Really believe that
there is no God; or live so as if they did; without either any due Worship of
Him, or Regard to Him. Next to these; all Unworthy Opinions of God, or
Blasphemous Thoughts, or Speeches, against Him. Such are the Thoughts, and
Speeches, of Those who not only deny the Doctrine of the Trinity, but make it
their Business to Expose, and Ridicule the Belief of it. And, lastly; Such are
all the Heinous, but especially the Habitual Sins, which Men fall into; and the
consequence of which plainly shows, either that they do not, in Good Earnest,
believe the LORD to be their God, or that they are yet to consider what that
Belief requires of Them.

Q. What is the Other thing proposed to Us in this Commandment?

A. Not to have any Other, besides the LORD, for our God?

Q. Is there any Other God, besides the LORD?

A. No, there is not; nor does this Commandment at all Suppose that there is.
But when these Commandments were delivered, the World generally believed in,
and worshipped, Other Gods, besides the LORD; who was almost utterly forgotten
by Them. And therefore it was highly necessary, that the LORD should, in the
very first Place, caution his People against this Folly, and Idolatry.

Q. How many ways may a Man have Others for their Gods, besides the LORD?

A. By as many ways as we are capable of showing, that We have Him for our God:
Namely, First, by Thinking of them as God; and, Secondly, by Worshipping of
them as Such.

Q. Is it possible for any Man who knows, and worships the LORD, to have any
Other God besides him?

1 Cor. viii.5, 6. Gal. iv.8. 1 Kin. xi.4. 2 Kin. xvii^ 33, 34.
A. So this Commandment evidently Supposes; and so indeed it may easily enough
be: There being nothing so Unreasonable which an immoderate Superstition is not
capable of leading, sometimes, even Wisemen into. And therefore not only God
here gives this Caution to the Jews; but St. Paul, in like manner, forewarns
even the Christians to whom he preached, to flee from Idolatry; 1 Cor. x.14.
and not to keep Company with a Brother, that is a Christian, who was Guilty of
it. 1 Cor. v.11.

Q. How can this be; seeing He who knows, and believes aright of God; must
know, and believe, that there neither is, nor can be, any God besides Him?

A. Would Men always Act consistently to their Own Knowledge, and Profession,
it would then indeed be Impossible for those who had a Right Notion of God, to
have any Other God besides Him. But, as in Other Cases, Men may know very well
what their Duty is, and yet Act contrary to it; so it is certain that they not
only may, but have done, in the Case before Us. In short, Whosoever gives
Divine Honor to any Being, does thereby profess that Being to be God, as much
as He who swears Allegiance to any Person, does by such his Action, Recognize
that Person for his Prince. Now such an Honor Religious Prayer, and
Invocation, without all controversy are. Yet these the Church of Rome does
publicly, and solemnly, Pay to Others, besides the LORD; and, by so doing,
shows to all the World, that She has Other Gods, besides Him.

Q. What do you then suppose to be the full import, of this Second Part, of the
present Commandment?

A. That we should neither Believe in, Account of, or Worship any Other, as
God, besides the LORD: Whether it be by Forsaking Him, and Falling off
altogether to Idolatry; or by Giving the Honor of God to Any Other Being,
together with Him.

SECT. XXIII.
Q. WHAT is the Second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, etc.

Q. How does this Commandment differ from the Foregoing?

A. The Design of the First Commandment was to determine, and set us Right in,
the Object of our Religious Worship; and to prevent Us from giving Divine
Honor to any besides the true God. The Design of this, is to direct Us in the
Manner of worshipping Him; that so we may not only serve the true God, but may
serve him after such a Manner as he Requires, and is most sitting for Us to do.

Q. What is the full Import of this Commandment?

A. It is this; First, * That we must not make any Image of God, at all; be our
Design what it will, in making of it. Nor, Secondly, * That of any Other Being,
with an Intention to pay any Honor, or Worship, to it.

Q. Do you think it utterly Unlawful to make any Image at all of God?

A. It is certainly Unlawful, and is in many Places of Scripture expressly
forbidden; Lev. xix.4. xxvi.i. Acts xvii.29. Ezekiel. xiv.5.
as being highly dishonorable to the Infinite Nature, and Majesty of God; and
of Great danger, and harm to Us. See Deuteronomy. iv.15. Isai. xl.18. xlii.8. Romans
i.23.

Q. What think you of the Image of Christ; may that be made without offending
against this Commandment?

A. Christ being Man, as well as God, his Body may certainly be aptly enough
Represented by an Image; nor would it be any Sin so to do, provided that No Use
were made of any such Image, in any part of our Religious Worship. But to
Represent God the Father in a Graven Image; to paint the Holy Trinity, and that
in so profane a manner as it has often been done in the Church of Rome, is
certainly a Great Sin, and a Great Scandal; and directly contrary to the
Intention of this Commandment.

Q. Do you then look upon all Use of Images in God's Service to be Unlawful?

A. I do account it contrary to the Prohibition of this Commandment, Lev.
xxvi.1. Deuteronomy. iv.16. Amos v.26.
and by consequence, Unlawful. And therefore when Aaron first, and afterward
Jeroboam, made Use of them for this purpose; we find how highly God was pleased
to Resent it; and with what detestation it is condemned in the Holy Scriptures.
Exodus xxxii. 1 Kings xii.30. xiii.34. Psalm. cvi.20.

Q. What say you to the Practice of the Church of Rome, in this particular?

A. That it is Scandalous, and Intolerable: There having never been greater
Idolatry committed among the Heathen in the business of Image Worship, than has
been committed in that Church; and is, by Public Authority, still practiced by
it; especially in the Ceremony of their Good Friday, Cross-Worship.

Q. Do you think they are so foolish as to Worship the Cross; or is it Idolatry
to worship Christ, in presence of the Cross?

A. If we may either believe their Own Words, or judge by their Actions, they
Adore the Cross, as well as Christ; and Both alike, and with the same Worship.
As for the new pretense of worshipping Christ in Presence of the Cross, it is a
mere delusion, contrived only to cheat ignorant People: And carries just as
much sense in it, as if you should ask, whether it were lawful to say your
Prayers in Presence of a Post; or to write a Letter in the Presence of a
Candlestick; the Nonsense of which there is no One so dull as not to discover.

Q. What is the Positive Duty Required of Us in this Commandment?

A. To worship God after a manner suitable to his Divine Nature, and
Excellencies: God is a Spirit, and whosoever will Worship Him aright, must do it in
Spirit and in Truth, Jo. iv.24. Romans xii.1. Comp. Mat. xv.8, 9.

Q. How has God enforced these Commandments?

A. He has done it after a very singular Manner: By declaring, 1st; That He is
a jealous God, Acts xvii.29. and will not suffer His Glory to be given to
Another; Deuteronomy. viii.19. Isai. xlii.8.
neither his Praise to Graven Images. Isai. xlii.8. But 2dly, Will Visit this
Sin not only upon Those who commit it, but on their Posterity also, to the
Third, and Fourth Generation. As, on the Other side, 3dly; Psalm. cxv.14.
To those who are Careful to Worship Him as they ought to do, He will show
abundant Mercy in this present Time; and, in the World to come, Give them Life
Everlasting.

Q. Can it consist with the Justice of God to Punish One for the Sin of Another?

A. No certainly, nor does God here threaten any such thing. But God, who is
the great LORD of the whole World, may so punish a Man for his Sins, that the
Evil of it shall Reach not to Himself alone, but to his Posterity also. And
thus the Children may be Visited, and yet not Punished, for their Father's
Idolatry. As in the Case of High Treason, the Father by forfeiting his Honor,
and Estate, brings the Ill-consequence of his Crime upon his Family as well as
upon himself; and the Prince, by exacting the Penalty of the Law, does truly
Visit; tho not Punish, his Posterity; for the Offense which He alone Committed.

Q. How then do you Understand this Part of the Commandment?

A. God had, in general, promised to the Jews Temporal Blessings to Encourage
their Obedience; and had denounced present Evils against them, to keep them
from Sinning. But to set a particular Mark of his Indignation upon the Sin of
Idolatry, He thought fit to declare, that if they Offended in this Matter, He
would not only severely punish them Himself, 1 Kings xiv.22, xv.13. 2 Kings
xxii.17. xxiv.3. Lam. v.6.
but would deliver them up into the Hands of their Enemies, who should both
Oppress Them, and their Children after Them. Whereas if they continued firm to
his Worship, though otherwise they should be guilty of many lesser Crimes, yet he
would not cast them off from his Favor; 1 King. xi.34. 2 Kings viii.19.
but, on the contrary, would bless both Them, and their Posterity, with Plenty,
and Prosperity, all their Days. This I take to have been the literal meaning of
the present Denunciation; and how exactly it was made Good to Them, their
History sufficiently declares to Us.

Q. May this be, in any wise, Applied to Us Now?

A. Thus far it may, To teach us how heinous the Sin of Idolatry is; how Odious
in the sight of God; how worthy of his Vengeance; how certain to feel it. The
Jews were, in their whole Estate, a Figure to Us: 1 Cor. vi.9. Gal. v.20. Rev.
xxi.8. -- xxii.15.
As therefore God threatened that he would, with the utmost Severity, Require
this Sin of Them; so most certainly he will do it of Us; It may be in this
present Life, but without all Controversy in the Life which is to Come.

SECT. XXV.
Q. WHat is the Third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the Name of the LORD thy God in Uain, etc.

Q. What is the Design of this Commandment?

A. To secure that Honor we ought to Pay to God, by a reverend Esteem of
whatsoever Relates to Him.

Q. What mean you by the Name of God?

A. I understand thereby God Himself, and whatsoever has any Immediate Relation
to Him. Psalm. xxix.2. Exodus xxxiv.14. Deutr. xxviii.58.

Q. When may we be accounted to take God's Name in Vain?

A. When we make mention of God, or of any thing which belongs unto Him,
Rashly, and Irreverently: In a way that is not suitable to his Divine Honor,
and Majesty; nor to that deference we ought to pay, to his Sovereign Power, and
Authority over Us.

Q. Upon what Occasions, especially, may God's Name be made Use of by Us?

A. Chiefly on these Three; In Swearing: Vowing: Praying: And in all these it
may be, and oftentimes is, taken in Vain.

Q. When may we be accounted to take God's Name in Vain, by using it in
Swearing?

Isai. xlviii.i. Mal* iii.5.
A. When we swear falsely: Lev. xix.12. Whether it be by a positive asserting
of what is Untrue; Psalm. xxiv.4.
or by Tricking, and Equivocating, in what is in some Respect true; though not in
that, in which we would be understood to Swear. 2dly, When we swear Needlessly;
Mat. v.34, etc.
where either the Matter was not of Moment enough to justify the Solemnity of
an Oath, or might have been sufficiently determined without One. Of which kind
are the greatest part of those Voluntary Oaths, which are so frequently Used by
Profane Persons in their Common Discourse. 3dly, When we Swear Rashly, but
especially in Matters of Promise; in which we are the most exposed to the
Danger of Perjury. And 4thly, When we Swear Irreverently: Whether we take an
Oath carelessly, and lightly, and without due Regard to the Honor of God's
Name, our Selves; or Administer it So to Others.

Q. What think you of Those who Swear not only by the Name of God, but by that
of some Creature; such as the Blessed Virgin, or the like Saint?

A. I think it to be, without all Controversy, Sinful: As Giving that Honor
to the Creature, which is due only to the Creator. And so God himself declares
that he accounts it: Deuteronomy. vi.13. Thou shall fear the LORD thy God, and serve
him: and shall swear by his Name; Ye shall not Go after Other Gods. And again,
Deuteronomy. x.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God; Him shall thou serve, and to Him
shall thou cleave, and Swear by his Name. And when, in process of time, that
People began to do otherwise; the Prophet Jeremy tells us how heinously God
Resented the Affront that was thereby put upon Him: Jer. v.7. How shall I
pardon Thee for this? Thy Children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are
no Gods. And again, Amos viii.14. They that Swear by the Sin of Samaria, and
say, Thy God, O Dan, lives, and the manner of Beersheba lives: Even they
shall Fall, and never Rise up again. Comp. Josh. xxiii.7. Jer. xii.16. Zeph.
i.5.

Q. How does it appear that to Swear by any Creature, is to Give to that
Creature by whom we Swear, the proper Honor of God?

A. The very Nature of an Oath declares it: Which supposes the Person whom we
Swear by, to be capable both of discerning the Truth, or Falsehood, of what is
Sworn; and the Sincerity or Insincerity, with which we Swear; and also of
Punishing us for our Perjury, if we Swear Otherwise than we ought to do. All
which are Actions proper to God alone: And above the Capacity of any Creature;
and therefore being ascribed to One who is not God, must needs give the Honor
due to God alone, to that Person by whom we Swear.

Q. Is it lawful to Swear in any Matter of Moment; if we take care to Swear in
such a manner as we ought to do?

A. It has been the Opinion of many Good Men, that We should decline all
Voluntary Swearing, even in Matters of Moment, as much as may be: And that for
fear of Perjury, which is a Sin of a very heinous Nature, Yet if we are
required to do it by such whom we ought not to disobey, and we do it
Faithfully, and Reverently; it is both an Act of Religious Worship; Psalm.
lxiii.11.
and for the Glory of God; and upon both those Accounts undoubtedly Lawful. Nor
did our Savior ever intend to forbid Swearing altogether; but only to Restrain
all Voluntary, and Needless, Use of it in Common Conversation; and to keep Us,
when we do Swear, to the Doing of it only by the Name of God, and not by that
of any Other Thing, or Person. See Mat. v.34, etc.

Q. How may God's Name be taken in Vain, by Vowing?

A. * By Vowing to do any thing which may not lawfully be fulfilled: Judge. xi
31. Numb xxx.3.
* By Vowing that which we are not Able to fulfill: * By Vowing Rashly, and
Indiscreetly; what though we should be Able to fulfill, might yet much better, and
more prudently, have been let alone: * By Vowing any thing for a long time to
Come, it may be for One's whole Life; and of our future Capacity to make Good
which hereafter, we cannot, at the present, judge: And lastly; * By accustoming
our selves to Vow frequently; which must necessarily expose Us to the hazard of
not performing our Vows.

Q. Is it not then Good to make Vows at all?

A. There is no doubt to be made but that a Vow, duly Regulated, is not only
Lawful, but Acceptable to God. But then that it may be so, we should take heed;
1st, Not to Vow upon every Occasion; but when we have some considerable Motive
to engage Us to the doing of it. 2dly, To see that what We do Vow, be in its
self Good; Deuteronomy. xxiii.21, 22, 23. Psalm. lxvi.11. Prove. xx.25.
fit for Us to Vow, and for God to Accept. 3dly, That we be sure not to Vow any
thing, but what we are in a Capacity to fulfill. Eccles. v.4, 5. When thou
Vowest a Vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for He has no pleasure in Fools;
pay that which thou have Vowed. Better is it that thou should not Vow, than
that thou should Vow, and not Pay.

Q. When do we take God's Name in Vain, in Praying?

A. * When we pray, without minding what we are about: * When we pray for such
things as we ought not to pray for: * When, in our Prayers, we use vain
Repetitions of God's Name, Mat. vi.7.
without Need, and against Reason. But, especially, when we join the Name of
any Creature, with that of God, in our Prayers; as the Papists in many, or
rather most, of their Prayers, do.

Q. Are there not Other ways, of taking God's Name in Vain, besides those we
have hitherto spoken of?

A. There are several Other ways: * By profane Cursing, as well as Swearing: *
By any light, Lev. xxi.6
and unfitting Use of God's Name, in our Common, and Vain Conversation: * By
all lewd, Lev. xxiv.16. 2 Kings xix.10.
Atheistical Discourse: * By Blaspheming, or speaking Reproachfully, of God, or
his Religion: * By murmuring against him: * By Ridiculing, Abusing, Lev.
xxii.2. Luke viii 18. 1 Cor. xi.27. Prove. xiii.13.
or otherwise Profaning his Holy Word: * By Despising, or Exposing his
Ministers, upon the Account of their Function; and as they stand Related to
him: * By an Irreverent Behavior in his Public Service; in the Use of his
Prayers, and Sacraments: In short, * By a Contemptuous treating of any thing in
which his Name, and Honor, are concerned.

Q. What does this Commandment positively Require of Us?

A. To Honor God's Holy Name, and Word: Psalm. xcix.^* Isai. lxvi ^
To employ our Tongues to his Praise, and Glory: Never to make mention of God,
Jer. iv.2. Mat. v.37. 1 Cor. x.31. Col. iv.6. Heb. xii.28.
or of any thing which Relates to Him, without a Religious Reverence: And to
Use our Utmost Endeavor, upon all Occasions, to keep up the Reputation of
Religion; and the Respect which is due to Holy Things, for the sake of God, and
as they have a Relation to Him.

Q. What is the Sanction wherewith God has enforced this Commandment?

A. It is this; that the LORD will not hold Him Guiltless that takes His Name
in Uain.

Q. What do you Understand thereby?

A. That He will severely Punish such Sinners; and not suffer his Name to be
Profaned by Them, Lev. xxiv.16. 2 Samuel 12.14. -- xxi.1. 2 Kings xix.35. Zech.
v.3, 4.
without bringing some Exemplary Vengeance upon them, for such their
Presumption.

Q. If this be so, how comes it to pass that such Persons oftentimes escape,
without any such Exemplary Mark of God's Vengeance against Them?

A. We are not to call God to Account for his Actions. It is enough that he has
assured Us, that He will not hold such Persons Guiltless: And that therefore
every such Sinner, must either Repent, in a very singular manner, of his
Offense in taking God's Name in Vain; or he shall assuredly be punished with an
extraordinary Severity for it; It may be in this present Life, but without all
question, in that which is to Come.

SECT. XXVI.
Q. WHat is the last Commandment of the First Table.

A. Remember that thou keep Holy the Sabbath Day, etc.

Q. What do you mean by the Sabbath Day?

A. The Commandment it self explains it. It Is a Seventh Day of Rest, after Six
of Work and Labor: Six Days shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to
do; but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the LORD thy God; In it thou shall do
no manner of Work.

Q. Wherefore did God establish a Seventh Day of Rest, after Six of Work and
Labor?

A. In memory of his having Created the World in Six Days; and on the Seventh
Day Rested, Gen ii.^*
or Ceased from Creating it: And to keep up thereby the Memory of his being the
Creator of the World; and to engage Mankind solemnly to acknowledge, and
Worship Him, as such. -- For in Six Days the LORD made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all that is therein, and Rested the Seventh Day; wherefore the LORD
Blessed the Sabbath Day, and Hallowed it.

Q. Was this Command given by God to Mankind from the beginning of the World?

A. So Moses tells Us, Genesis ii.2. And it is not to be doubted but that
accordingly such a Sabbath did continue to be Observed, so long as any Sense of
true Religion Remained upon the Earth.

Q. How then did it become Needful for God to Renew it again in this Place?

A. As it was needful for him to Renew many Other Precepts, which yet were
certainly both given by him, and Observed in the World, long before. No body
doubts but that Adam, and his first Descendents, both knew, and worshipped the
True God; Yet this was provided for again Now. So immediately after the Flood,
the Law against Murder was solemnly promulged; Genesis ix.6. Yet nevertheless the
same Command was here again Repeated. As for the Case before Us; as Men lived
farther off from the Creation, and Wickedness prevailed over the Face of the
Earth, and the true Worship of God was corrupted by almost a Universal
Idolatry; so was the Solemn Day of his Worship neglected likewise. And though it
may have in some measure been received after the Flood, and continued, in some
part of Abraham's Family; yet, in their Egyptian Slavery, it was utterly
abolished; and the very memory of it seems to have been lost among them.

Q. When did God Renew this Command to Them?

A. Presently after their passing through the Red Sea, Exodus xvi. when he began
to give the Manna to Them. For then he commanded them to gather it every
Morning Six Days; but on the Sixth Day to provide a double Quantity for the
next Day; because that thereon they should keep the Sabbath to the LORD, and no
Manna should fall, or be Gathered, upon it.

Q. On what Day of the Week did that Sabbath Day fall?

A. On that which They, from thenceforth, Observed for their Sabbath Day, and
which answers to our Saturday.

Q. Was that the same Day on which God Rested from the Creation, and which He
had before Commanded Adam to keep in memory of it?

A. That we cannot tell: By the Providence of God so it may have been; but that
it was so, God has not declared to Us, nor is it possible, (without a
particular Revelation,) for Us to come to the knowledge of it. That which is
more certain is, that God designed this Particular Day to be kept by the Jews
in memory of his delivering of them out of their Egyptian Slavery, and of his
Miraculous feeding Them with Manna in the Wilderness. And for this Reason it
was that He Required that strict Rest of them, of which we Read: Exodus xxxi,
12, etc. Nehem. xiii.15. Isai. lviii.13. that thereby they might both keep up
the memory of the hard Work they had been held to during their Abode in Egypt,
where they were not suffered to Rest on the Sabbath Day; and be the more
engaged to serve that God, who had so wonderfully delivered them from that
Wretched Estate.

Q. How then, upon the whole, are we to consider the Jewish Sabbath, here
established by God?

A. It is evident from the several Reasons Given for it, in the Command its
self, that it must be considered in two different Respects: 1st, As a Day to be
Kept by Them in memory of the Creation: Exodus xx.11. and to declare themselves
thereby to be the Worshippers of that God, Who Created the Heaven and Earth:
And to this End, they were Required to Observe a Seventh day of Rest, after Six
of Labor; because God wrought Six days, and Rested the Seventh. And, 2dly, as
a day to be Observed in Memory of their Egyptian-Bondage, and of God's
delivering them out of it: Deuteronomy. v.15. And thus the Jews were tied to Observe
not only the proportion, but the very day of the Week too; as being that day on
which they had passed the Red Sea, and so were set entirely free from their
Slavery. For which Reason also they were obliged not only to worship God upon
it, but moreover to abstain from all bodily Labor; and that under the Pain of
Death, Exodus xxxi.12, etc. Numb. xv.32.

Q. How far do you suppose this Command Obliges Us now?

A. As much as ever it did the Jews, though not exactly after the same Manner. We
worship, as they did, that God who in Six days Created the Heaven, and Earth;
the Sea, and All that in them is, and Rested the Seventh day: and in
acknowledgment thereof We stand Obliged, with Them, to keep a Seventh day of
Rest, after Six of Labor. But then as they worshipped this God under the
peculiar Character, of the God who brought them out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the House of Bondage, so were they determined to take that particular day,
the Seventh of the Week, for their Sabbath, on which he completed their
Deliverance; and strictly to abstain from all bodily Labor upon it. Now in
this respect We differ from them. We worship God, the Creator of the World,
under a much higher, and more divine Character; as he is our Father, and
Deliverer, by Jesus Christ our Lord: Who upon the first day of the Week, Rose
from the Dead, and thereby put an End to the Jewish Economy. And in testimony
hereof, we keep the First day of the Week for our Sabbath; and so profess our
selves to be the Servants of the True God, through the Covenant which he has been
pleased to make with Us, in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Q. Upon what Authority was this change of the Sabbath Day made?

A. Upon the greatest that can be desired: The Reason of it has been already
mentioned; viz. Christ's Rising on this Day from the Dead. The Thing it self
was done by the Apostles, Act. xx.7. 1 Cor. xvi.1, 2. R. v.i, 10.
who no doubt had in this, as in all the Rest that they did, the Direction of
the Holy Ghost. And as for the Jewish Sabbath, which is the Seventh day,
besides that the Ground of it does not concern Us; St. Paul speaks of it as
ceasing with the Law, no less than the New Mons, or Meats, and Drinks,
prescribed by the same Law. Col..ii.16.

Q. How are we to keep our Sabbath day?

A. We are to consecrate it to a Religious Rest, Jer. xvii.24. Isa. lviii.13.
Act. xiii.27. -- xv.21. -- xvi.13.
* by attending upon the Public Service of the Church; * And hearing God's
Word Read, and Preached there. * By participating of the Holy Sacrament: * By
private Prayer, Meditation, and Reading: * By Works of Charity, and Mercy: * By
taking all the Care we can to improve our Own Piety, and to help Other Men in
the enlivening of Theirs.

Q. Is all bodily Labor forbidden to Us, upon this Day, as it was to the Jews?

A. No, it is not:. Works of Charity, and Necessity, may certainly be done upon
it. Friendly Visits and Entertainments may, in a reasonable Measure, be allowed
also: Provided that neither the public Service of the Church, nor the
Necessary Improvement of our Own private Piety, be at all neglected thereby.
But as for all Works of Gain; all such Allowances as are inconsistent with the
Religious Design of the Day, or may be apt to give Offense to any Good Men;
they ought, without question, to be avoided upon it.

Q. What is forbidden by this Commandment?

A. To neglect, and profane the Sabbath: Not to employ it to the Honor, and
Service, of God; much more to spend it in Idleness and Pleasure; in Sin, and
Debauchery, as too many wicked Persons are wont to do.

Q. Is there any Thing farther Required of Us, in Order to the full Observance
of this Commandment?

A. This only; that we be careful not only to Sanctify the Sabbath day our
Selves, but to see that All who belong to Us, do likewise. For, for these also,
the Commandment tells us we are to answer: In it Thou shall Do no manner of
Work; Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter; thy Manservant, nor thy
Maidservant; thy Cattle, nor the Stranger that is within, thy Gates. And since
now the Piety of our 20 Car. II. c^p 7.
Own Laws have provided for the better Observation of this Day; we ought, in
Obedience to them, as well as out of Conscience toward God, not only to be
careful of our Selves, and Families, but to bring all Others, as much as in Us
lies, to a due Regard of It: If not out of Duty toward Him, whose Sabbath it
is, yet for Fear of that Punishment, which the Civil Magistrate is to inflict
on those who despise, and profane it.

SECT. XXVII.
Q. WHat do the Commandments of the Second Table Respect?

A. Our Duty toward Our Neighbor.

Q. What is the General Foundation of Our Duty toward Our Neighbor?

Mat. xii.39. Mat. ii.12.
A. To Love Him as my Self; and to Do to All Men as I would they should Do unto
Me:

The One of which shows, what that Inward Affection is, which Every One ought
to have for his Neighbor; the Other, how we ought to Regulate our Outward
Actions toward Each Other.

Q. Is a Man Obliged, in all Cases, to Do all that for his Neighbor, which he
would desire his Neighbor should Do for Him?

A. Yes, certainly; provided the Rule be but Rightly Stated, and duly Limited,
by Us: Otherwise it may prove a Snare, rather than a Guide, to Us.

Q. How then do you Suppose that this Rule is to be Understood by Us?

A. We must first set our Selves in our Neighbor's Place, and then put it to
Our Consciences; Were his Case our Own, what would we desire that One, in Our
Circumstances, should Do for Us, and then conclude, that We ought to Do the
Same for Him. Thus for Example; If a poor Man ask an Alms of Us; We must not
think that We are at Liberty to Refuse him, because we neither need, nor
desire, that Any One should Relieve Us: But we must bring his Case home to our
selves; and suppose that we were in his Circumstances; poor, and destitute;
would we not then think it Reasonable, that One, in Our Circumstances, should
Relieve Us; and that will show Us, that therefore we ought to Relieve him.

Q. But must We then, after such a Change of Circumstances, absolutely Do to
Others, whatsoever we would, in the like Circumstances, desire, that They
should do to Us?

A. I do not say that neither: Men may desire what is Unlawful, and then in
Conscience of our Duty to God, we must deny them. They may desire what is
Unreasonable, or may be Greatly Inconvenient to Us; and, in such Cases, though
we Owe a Duty to our Neighbor, yet we must Remember that we Owe a Duty to our
Selves too; and must consider our Own Interests, as well as those of Our
Neighbor. If a Man should fall into such Circumstances, as to need my telling
of a Lie; or Forswearing my self, to bring him safely out of Them; though I
should be so Wicked as to desire, in the like Case, that Another would do the
same for Me, yet I am not therefore Obliged, by this Rule, to do this for Him;
because neither ought I to desire such a Thing of Another, nor ought Any Other
to desire it of Me.

Again; Should a Man desire me to be bound with him for a considerable Sum of
Money; which I cannot pay, without great Damage to my self, and Prejudice to my
Family: Though I should perhaps wish, that, had I the same Occasion that this
Man has, Another would be bound for Me; yet because the desire is Unreasonable,
and such as in Duty to my self, and my Family, I ought not to comply with;
neither am I obliged, by virtue of this Rule, to answer his Desires in it.

Q. What then do you take to be the true Import of this Rule?

A. That whatsoever I could justly, and reasonably, Desire of Another Man, in
my Circumstances; and it would become him, in Charity, to do for Me; the same
ought I to do for my Neighbor: And thereby make it manifest, as the Other Rule
directs, that I do, indeed, Love him as my Self.

Q. To how many Commandments has God Reduced our Duty toward Our Neighbor?

A. To Six; which make up the whole of the Second Table?

Q. What is the First of These?

A. Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that thy Days may be long in the Land
which the LORD thy God gives Thee.

Q. What is the proper Extent of this Commandment?

A. It expressly Regards only our Natural Parents; Isa. xlix.23. 2 Kin. v.13.
Genesis xlv.8. Job xxix.16. Judge. xvii.10. -- xviii.19. 2 Kin. ii.12. -- vi.21. --
xiii.14. 1 Cor. iv.15.
But the Reason of it extends to all Sorts of Persons who are in any Respect
our Superiors, and to whom we Owe any Singular Honor upon that account: And
to the most of which the very Name of Fathers is Given in the Holy Scriptures.

Q. What are the chief Relations to which this Commandment may be Referred?

A. They are especially these following: 1. Of Children toward their Parents.
2. Of Subjects toward those who are in Authority over Them. 3. Of Scholars
toward their Governors. 4. Of Ordinary Christians toward their Ministers. 5.
Of Servants toward their Masters. 6. Of Wives toward their Husbands. 7. Of
Younger Persons toward the Aged. And, 8. Of those who are in a lower degree,
toward such as are in a higher Place of State, and Dignity.

Q. Does not this Commandment Require some Return of Duty from those, who are,
upon any of these Accounts, to be Honored by Us?

A. In the Equity of it, it certainly does: And therefore as it is Our Duty to
Honor Them, so it is no less their Duty to behave themselves, as their
Relation requires, toward Us.

Q. What do you mean by Honoring of such Persons?

Lev. xix.15. Ephesians. vi.1, 2. 1 Timothy vi.1, 2. 1 Pet. ii.17. 1 Timothy v.3, 17, 18.
Mat. iv.6. Mark vi.10, 11, 12.
A. Not a bare, formal Respect; but, with that, all that Love, Duty, and
Obedience; all that Help, and Service; which they may justly expect from Us,
and which our Own Reason tells Us, we ought to yield to Them.

Q. What are the Particular Duties which are Required of Children toward their
Parents?

Deuteronomy. xxvii.16. Prove. i.8. xxx.17. Lev. xix.3. Mat. xv.4. Mark vii.10. Ephesians.
vi.1, 2. Col. iii.20. 1 Timothy v.4. 2 Timothy iii.2.
A. To Love, Honor, and Succor, their Father and Mother: To Obey their
Orders, and Bear with their Infirmities; and Submit to their Correction. To
promote their Comfort, and Welfare, by all fitting Means; and if they Need, and
their Children are Able, to Provide for, and Support Them.

Q. Are all these Duties to be equally paid to both our Parents?

A. They are, and that by the express Words of the Commandment, Honor thy
Father and thy Mother. Comp. Prove. i.8. vi.20. Ephesians. vi 4.

Q. What Return of Duty ought Parents to make to their Children?

Deuteronomy. xi.7, 11, 19. Prove. xiii.24, xxii.6, 15. xxiii.13, 14. Luk xi.11. 2 Cor.
12.14. 1 Timothy v.8. Ephesians vi.4. Col. ili.21. Heb. xii.9.
A. It is their Duty to breed them up Carefully whilst they are young;
Virtuously, and Religiously, when they are capable of discerning between Good
and Evil. To Love them: To Provide, according to their Ability, for them: To
bring them up to some honest and useful Employment: To Encourage them when they
do Well; to Correct them when they do Amiss: To be Gentle, and Courteous,
toward them; and not by their Passions, or Perverseness, provoke them to
Anger, and Alienate their Affections from them.

Q. What is the Duty of Subjects toward those whom God has set in Authority
over Them?

A. To submit to their Laws, Exodus xxii.28. Eccles. x.20. Prove. xxiv.21. Mat.
xxii.21. Romans xiii.2. Tit. iii.1. 1 Pet. ii.13, 17. 2 Pet. ii.10, 11. Jude 8, 9.
to be faithful to their Interests, and Obedient to them in all their Just
Commands. To live Quietly under their Government; and to Contribute, according
to their Capacity, toward the Support, and Defense of it: By their Counsel;
their Estate; and (if need be) by Venturing their very Lives for their Service.

Q. What if the Civil Power shall command Me to do that which is contrary to my
Duty toward God?

A. I must, in that Case, Act iv.19. -- v.18, 29, 41.
Obey God rather than Man. If for this I shall be punished, I must patiently
yield to it; and Glorify God, That He has thought Me worthy to Suffer for my
Duty to Him. Exodus i.15, 16. Dan. iii.14, etc. vi.6, etc.

A. What if any Difference should arise in the Commonwealth, of which I am a
Member, between the Prince, and the People?

A. I must carefully Examine where the Right lies; and Act so, as is most
agreeable to the Rules of Religion first; and, (where they are Silent,) to the
Laws, and Constitution of the State, to which I belong.

Q. What is the Duty of the Civil Magistrate toward his People?

A. To order all his Counsels, Designs, and Enterprises, as much as in Him
lies, 1 Kin. iii.7, 9. Psalm. lxxii.2, etc. lxxviii.71. Prove xx.38. Romans xiii.3.
1 Timothy ii.2. 1 Pet ii.1^.
to the Public Good. Not to Vex, or Oppress his Subjects, but to Rule them
with Gentleness, and Moderation; but especially with an Exact Justice, and
Equity. To be Faithful to the Trust committed to Him; and not seek to Oppress,
or Enslave his People. But above all, to take Care of the Service of God; and
See that the true Religion be Maintained, and Protected in his Dominions: And
to Use his utmost Endeavors for the Suppression of all Vice, Profaness, and
Irreligion; as being at once both Odious to God, and Destructive of the Public
Peace, and Welfare, of any People. Psalm. ci. Isa. xlix.23.

Q. What is the Proper Duty of Scholars toward their Teachers; and (which is
much the Same) of Ordinary Christians toward their Spiritual Rulers and Guides?

Mal. iii.8. Mat. x.14, 15. Luke x.16. 1 Cor. iv.1, 15. -- ix.7, etc. 1 These.
i.12, 13. 1 Timothy v.17. Heb. xiii.7.17. Gal. vi.6.
A. To Respect them highly for their Office, and Works Sake: To attend upon
their Instructions with Care, and Diligence: To submit themselves to their
Conduct, in those things wherein they are set over them: And to Reward them
according to their several Stations, and the Work which they have to do.

Q. How ought Those, who are Teachers, to behave Themselves toward Them who
are Committed to their Charge?

Ezekiel. iii.18, etc. Mal. ii 7. 1 Pet. v.2. Romans xii.7. 1 Timothy iv.12, etc. 2 Timothy ii.2, 15, etc. Act. xx.30. 2 Timothy iv.2. Tit. ii.7, 8.
A. They should attend to their Teaching with Faithfulness and Diligence:
Should be careful to consider what Instruction is most proper for every One,
and give it in that way that may be likely to prove the most profitable to
Them. They are freely to tell them of their Faults; to admonish them of the
Danger, as well as Sinfulness of them; and to help them, according to the best
of their Power, to Correct them. In short; it is their Duty, and ought to be
their Study, and Endeavor, to Guide those whom they have the Charge of, the
best, and most direct way they can, for the attainment of that Knowledge which
they pretend to bring them to.

Q. What is the Duty of the Wife toward her Husband?

A. Faithfully to Observe her Marriage Vow and Covenant: To Love, Honor, Prove.
xxxi.11. Ephesians. v.22, 23, 33. Col. iii.18. 1 Pet. iii.^. 1 Timothy ii.12.
and Obey him; to be true and just to him in all his Concerns: To Order his
House with prudence and discretion: To bring up his Children in the Nurture,
and Fear of the Lord; to instill Good Principles betimes into them, and Root out
bad Ones: Not to forsake him in any Troubles, or Adversities, that may fall
upon him; but to continue Faithful, and United to him, in Person, and
Affection, to her Lives End.

Q. What is the Husbands Duty toward his Wife?

A. To be true to her Bed; Col. iii.19. Ephesians. v.25. etc. 1 Pet. iii.^.
Kind and Loving to her Person; to Communicate to her of his Substance; and to
look after her in all her Sicknesses, or other Distresses: To protect her
against the Injuries of Others, and to Cherish her himself as his Own Flesh: To
keep only to her, and not be separated from her, so long as it shall please God
to continue her Life to him.

Q. What is the Duty of Servants toward their Masters?

A. To be Diligent in their Business; Col. iii.12.22. Ephesians. vi.^.6. 1 Timothy vi.1.
Tit. ii.9, 10. 1 Pet. ii.1^.
True and Just to what they are Entrusted withal; Careful in the Management of
their Concerns, as if it were for Themselves: Not Profuse, or Extravagant, in
any thing which is Committed to their Care, but Thrifty, and Watchful* Not to
be Eye-Servants, but to Use the same Industry, and Integrity, in their Master's
Absence, as they would do if he were Present with them.

Q. How ought Masters to behave themselves toward their Servants?

Jos. xxiv.15. Col. iii.22. -- iv.1. Jam. 5.4. Ephesians. vi.9.
A. With Kindness and Gentleness; providing for them what is Convenient; not
laying too much Work upon them, nor too Rigorously exacting what they do. To
have a due Regard to their Souls as well as Bodies; and in order thereunto, not
only to allow them a sufficient Time for the Service of God, but to see that
they Employ the Time so allowed them, to the Glory of God, and the promoting of
their Souls Welfare. And, lastly, To be Just in paying them their Wages;
neither keeping it back from them, when it is due, nor Otherwise defrauding
them of their hire.

Q. What is the Duty of the Younger toward the Aged?

Lev. xix.32. Job xxxii.7. Prove. 16.31. 1 Timothy v.1, 2.
A. To give a seemly Respect, and Honor to them; and not to Injure, or Affront
them, for any Infirmities which their Age may chance to have brought upon Them.

Q. How ought Elder Persons to behave themselves toward the Younger?

Tit. ii.2, 3.
A. They ought to Advise them in their Affairs; to Encourage them in their
Duty; to set a Good Example to them; and prudently to Reprove them for, and
endeavor to Reform in them, what they see Amiss.

Q. How ought Those who are in a lower Degree, to behave themselves toward
Such as are in Fortune, and Quality, above them?

Rom* xiii.7.
A. They ought to give them Honor, suitable to what the Difference of their
Ranks, and Stations, may justly Require: Not to Envy, or Back-bite them; not to
Wish, or Do Them any Evil, out of any Malice, or Enmity against them, for what
they Enjoy, in Character, or Estate, beyond them.

Q. What is the Duty of those who are of a Higher Rank, toward Such as are
below Them?

A. Not to behave themselves proudly, Prove. xxix.23. Romans xi.20. -- xii.16. 1 Timothy vi.17.
or arrogantly, toward them; Not to despise them for their Poverty, or
Meanness in the World; but to Remember that they are both Men, and Christians;
and, upon both those Accounts, as high in God's Esteem as themselves. That when
we come before the Judgment Seat of Christ, we shall All stand upon the same
Level; All Titles, and Honors, and Distinctions shall be laid aside; and only
the Virtue, and Piety of the Soul be considered. That in the mean time, the
poorest, and lowest Man, may be Wise and Good, Brave and Constant, Chaste and
Temperate; and that these, in Reality, make a great Man, Psalm. xli.1. 1 Timothy
vi, 17.18. 2 Cor. ix.9. Heb. xiii.16.
beyond all the Outward Trappings of Titles, and Retinue. And, lastly, It is
their Duty to be Liberal, and Charitable, out of what God has given them, to
those who are in Need; which is the best Use that any Man can put his Riches
to, and will turn to the highest Account at the last.

Q. What Encouragement has God given Us, to make us the more careful to Observe
this Commandment?

A. That thy Days may be long in the Land which the LORD thy God gives Thee.

Q. What is the Import of this Exhortation.

Ecclus. iii.9. Deuteronomy. v.16.
A. It contains a Promise to those who should Honor their Father and Mother;
that they should Live long in that Good Land, to which the Lord was then
leading them, by the Hand of Moses his Servant.

Q. What Encouragement does this Give to Us now? Ephesians. vi.2, 3.


A. It shows us, in a Type, what we may promise our selves upon our Obedience.
That as long Life, and that in the Land of Canaan, their expected Inheritance,
was the Highest Temporal Promise God could make to the Jews; as being indeed
the Foundation of All the present Blessings they were capable of Receiving: So,
if we carefully Observe this Command, it shall not only promote our present
Peace, but shall be a Good Means to procure to Us an Everlasting Inheritance,
in our Heavenly Canaan; and entitle us to a more than ordinary Degree of
Happiness in it.

SECT. XXVIII.
Q. WHat is the Sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall do no Murder.

Q. What is Murder?

A. It is the Wilful, and Unlawful, taking away of the Life of a Man, by what
way, or means, soever it be done.

Q. Is not all Killing, Murder?

Genesis ix.5.
A. No; that only is Murder, which is Voluntary, and Unlawful.

Q. Wherefore must the Killing be Wilful, and Designed?

Exodus xxi.13. Number* xxxv.22.
A. Because if a Man Slay another purely by Chance, without any Design, or
Intention, so to do; without Malice, and without Premeditation; it is a
Misfortune, it is not Murder.

Q. Wherefore must the Killing be Unlawful?

A. To exclude those Cases in which though the Killing be Voluntary, yet it is
not Murder; nor Forbidden by God as Such.

Q. What are those Cases?

A. Exodus xxi.14. Number. xxxv.30. Romans xiii.4.
The Execution of Justice, after a Lawful Manner, for a Suitable Offense; and by
a Lawful Magistrate. Number. x.9. Deuteronomy. xxi.10. Prove. xx.18. -- xxiv.6.
The Killing of an Enemy in a just War: Exodus xxi.14. Number. xxxv.30. Romans xiii.4.
The Killing of Another for the Necessary Defense of a Man's Own Life: To which
under the Law were added some Other Cases, of which it may be doubted how far
they are to be allowed under the Gospel.

Q. What be They?

A. Deuteronomy. xiii.5, 6, 7, 8.
The Killing of any Person who would have enticed them to commit Idolatry: Number.
xxxv.19, 27.
The Avenger of Blood, slaying Him who had Unawares killed his Brother. And,
lastly, Exodus ii.11. Comp. Acts vii.25. 1 Samuel xv.33.
The Execution of Vengeance on any Wicked Person, by an extraordinary Impulse
from God; as Phineas did, in the Day of the Assembly. Number. xxv.7, etc.

Q. What is your Opinion of Self-Murder?

A. That it is as much Forbidden by this mandment as any Other.

Q. What think you of those who meet in a set Duel, and so Kill?

A. If both agree to it, which soever falls, they are Both guilty of Murder.

Q. What if Men draw in a sudden Heat, and one be Slain?

A. The Heat being Criminal, it will not excuse the Mischief consequent upon
it, any more than Drunkenness, in the like Case, would have done. The Laws of
Men may distinguish as they please; but in the Sight of God it is Murder.

Q. What are the peculiar Aggravations of this Sin?

A. They are very many, and very great Ones: Murder being above most Other
Sins, 1. A heinous Offense against God, who is the Sole Lord of all his
Creatures; Genesis ix.5.
After whose Image we are made; And who must therefore be, in a singular
Manner, both Injured, and Affronted, by the Destruction of his Creature, and
his Image. 2. It is a Sin against Nature; which has Established a Common
Relation betwixt Us; designed Us for Society; and, in Order thereunto, has made
it one of its Fundamental Laws, that we should Love, and Protect, and Do Good,
to One Another: And this Law cannot by any thing be more eminently trampled
under Foot than by Murder. 3. It is a Sin against the Civil Society; the End of
which is Protection; to provide for the Safety, and Security, of those who are
the Members of it: And the very Bands of which must therefore be broken hereby.
4. It is a Sin against the Magistrate; who alone, under God, has the Power of
Life and Death; and who, by this Violence, is deprived of the Counsel, Help,
and Support, of one of his Subjects. And, lastly, it is a particular, and
signal Offense, against all the Relatives of Him who is Murdered, and such as
perhaps may be utterly Ruinous to Them. To say nothing of the Injury that is
hereby done to the Person Murdered; and who, thereby, is not only deprived of
his Life, and of all the Advantages He enjoyed by it; but is, it may be, taken
off in the midst of his Sins, and so undone to all Eternity.

Q. Is there nothing Else, besides Murder, forbidden by this Commandment?

A. Yes, much more; viz. All Variance, Hatred, Emulation, Envy, Revenge,
Evil-speaking, Mat. v.21. Gal. v.20. Romans xii.1^* Jam. iii.14, 16.
Quarrelling; All Rash and Immoderate Anger; and, in One Word, whatsoever tends
toward Murder, or may be likely to End in it.

Q. What are the Positive Duties which this Commandment requires of Us?

A. To do all we can for the Safety, Romans xii.18.20. Mat. v.9, 44. Luke x 34.
Gal. v.22. Ephesians. v.2. 1 These. iv.9* Heb. x.24. Jam. ii.8. 1 Jo. iv.7.21.
and Preservation, both of Our Own, and our Neighbor's Lives: If they are
Sick, to Advise and and Assist Them, with our Money, and our Service. If they
are Well; to prevent their Quarrels, and make up their Differences. If they are
Needy, to Feed them, and Cloth them. If they have injured Us, to forgive them:
If we have injured them, to make them all Reasonable Satisfaction. In one Word;
to do all we can to promote Love, and Peace, and Good Will, among All Men.

SECT. XXIX.
Q. WHat is the Seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Q. What is Adultery?

A. It is the Violation of the Marriage Bed, by which Party soever it be done.

Q. How many ways may the Marriage Bed be polluted?

A. Either by the One's Leaving the Other altogether, and Marrying again; Lev.
xviii.2^* Prove. vi.29.
or by the One's being False to the Other, whilst they still continue to hold
together.

Q. Is this All that is here forbidden by God?

A. It is all that this Commandment does Expressly forbid; and seems to have
been Chiefly designed by God, when he delivered it to the Jews: But our Savior
has taught Us to extend it much farther.

Q. What does our Savior teach us to understand by this Prohibition?

Mat. v.29, etc. Gal. v.19. Ephesians. v.3, 4. Col. iii.5. 1 Cor. iii.17. vi.9.
ix.27. 1 Timothy ii.9. 2 Timothy ii.22. 1 Pet. ii.11. -- iii.3. -- iv.3.
A. That we are to abstain not only from Adultery, but from all manner of
Carnal Pollutions whatsoever, and from all the most distant Approaches to it,
and Incitements toward it. Such as Fornication, Uncleanness, Sensual Desires,
and Inclinations; all Lewd, and Effeminate Conversation; all Wantonness of
Behavior; all undecent Dressing; all familiar Conversation of younger Persons
of different Sexes together: All excess of Meat, Drink, Sleep, Clothing: All
Places, and Exercises, which may be likely to Raise our Passions to any
Immoderate Height. In short; from whatsoever is contrary to the Gravity, and
Modesty, and Purity, of the Gospel of Christ.

Q. Was Adultery the only Pollution that was forbidden by God under the Law?

A. No; Fornication was forbidden Then, no less than it is Now: Exodus xxii.16.
Deuteronomy. xxii.28. xxiii.17. So were all Incestuous and Unseemly Marriages: Lev.
xviii.6. etc. Deuteronomy. vii.3. All Unnatural Communication between near Relations:
Lev. xx.11, etc. Deuteronomy. 22.30. But above all, most detestable was the Sin of
Sodom accounted then, as well as now it ought to be: Lev. xviii.22, 23. xx.13,
15, 16. Romans i.26, 27. comp. Versa 22.

Q. What are the Positive Duties comprehended under this Commandment?

A. To keep our Bodies in Temperance, Soberness, and Chastity: And, in Order
hereunto, Job xxxi.1, 9. Mat. xv.19. Romans xiii.19. Ephesians. v.3, 11, 18. 1 These.
iv.3, 4, etc. Col. iii.5, 8. Gal. ^.24. 2 Cor vii.1. Tit ii 3. 1 Pet. v.8*
not only carefully to Avoid all Temptations, and Incentives, to the Contrary;
but, if need be, to Exercise our Selves in Great Watchings, and Fastings, and
Other Corporal Austerities; which are in no Cases more proper, than for the
Suppression of these Sins. To be Modest in our Behavior; Grave, and Chaste, in
our Conversation; To Regulate, as much as may be, our very Thoughts, and
Desires: And, above all Things, to take Care that We have somewhat to employ
our Selves about; that may spend our Spirits, and take up our Thoughts: As
considering that there is nothing more dangerous to the Purity of a Christian,
than Idleness; and that Unhappy Privilege of a Great Fortune, To have nothing
to do.

Q. How was this Sin of Adultery punished under the Law?

A. It was punished with Death: Lev. xx.10. Job xxxi.11. Prove. vi 29. 1 Cor.
vi.9, 10. Ephesians. v.5. Heb. xiii.1^.
And that not only upon a Civil Account, as being most injurious to Society;
but also typically, to denote what such Persons are to Expect from God in the
Other World, even Death Eternal.

Q. What are the Particular Aggravations of this Sin?

A. That it is not only a very heinous Sin in the Sight of God, but such as is
destructive of Humane Society also. That it breaks the most Solemn Vow that can
be made between Man and Man: Seperates the nearest Relations: Lays the Ground
of infinite Quarrels, and Hatred, and Divisions in Families; and oftentimes
occasions Murders, Seditions, and Contentions, in the Civil State. That it
Propagates Sickness, and Infirmities, to Men's Posterity: Is an Enemy to all
Serious Counsels, and Generous Actions: Emasculates Men's Minds; Enfeebles their
Bodies; and, upon all these Accounts, ought as well to be severely punished by
the Civil Magistrate now, as We are sure it shall be punished by God with
Eternal Damnation.

SECT. XXX.
Q. WHat is the Eighth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Steal.

Q. What do you here understand by Stealing?

Lev. xix.11, 13.
A. Not only the Secret, and fraudulent Taking away of what is Another; but
all kind of Unlawful Getting, or Detaining of any Thing, whereby another is
injured, or oppressed, in what of Right belongs, or ought to belong, to him.

Q. What are the chief Ways whereby this Sin may be Committed?

A. Ephesians. iv.28. Lev. xix.11, 13. Romans ii.21.
Chiefly by these Three: 1. By Stealth, and Robbery; as the One implies a Secret
Thievery, or Conveying Away of Another's Goods; the Other a more violent, and
forcible Taking of Them.

Prove. xx.10. xxii.16. xxviii.8. Psalm. xxxvii.21. Luke 18.11. 1 Cor. v.10, 11.
vi.10. vii.5. 1 These. iv.6. Jam. v.4.
2. Exodus xxiii.9. Lev. xxv.14.
To these may be added, as not very different from them, all the artificial
Ways which Men have Got of doing the same thing; by Cheating, in Buying and
Selling; in Borrowing what they are not Able, or never Intend, to pay; which is
in truth Stealing. By Extortion upon, or Oppression of, those who are in Need;
Or whom we are Otherwise able by our Power, or Authority, to Over-bear; which
is the same thing with downright Robbery.

3. To all which, let me add, lastly; all Aiding, Advising, Encouraging, or
Otherwise Communicating with Others in any of these Crimes: By Receiving,
Buying, or Concealing what is Stolen; By helping any One to Cheat, or Overreach
Another; By serving any Great and Violent Oppressor, in Crushing, and Ruining a
Poor Man.

Q. Are there yet any Other Vices forbidden by this Commandment?

A. There are several Others that may fairly be Reduced to it: Such as *
Prodigality, in spending a Man's Estate, and Beggaring his Family. 1 Timothy v.8.
* Negligence in making an honest Provision, according to a Man's Station, and
Opportunities, for his Children. Prove. vi.1. xi.15. xxii.26. Deuteronomy. xxiii.19,
20. Psalm. xv.5. Prove. xxviii.8.
* Contracting of Debts, which We are not able to Pay. * Engaging for Others,
beyond what we are able, or it is fitting for Us to answer. * Taking Usury of
any, Especially of a Needy Man. To which may be added the whole Mystery of
Ruining Estates, and Families, * by the excessive Rates of Procuring,
Continuing, Advancing of Money, and Interest; * By Buying Men's Goods, or
Estates, at Vnder-rates; * By taking Advantage of Gain by Men's Private Wants,
or by the Public Necessities; * The Trade of Pawns, as it is commonly managed,
and the Exactions depending thereupon; * And, lastly, Jer. xvii.15. Prove. x.2.
xiii.11. xx.21.
all Such Other Trades as live upon the Vices, and Extravagancies of Men; with
all manner of Unlawful, and Injurious Ways of Gain.

Q. What think you of Going to Law?

Mat. v.40. 1 Cor. vi.1, 6, 7.
A. That as it may be managed both by the Counselor, and the Client, it is as
much Theft as ever the Law punished; and will, as such, be Required of Both by
God. And therefore though such Cases there be in which a Christian may Go to Law
without Violating this, or any Other Command; yet is it certainly the last
Resort, and not to be Used till all other Means have proved ineffectual, to
secure our Property, or to Recover our Right. And, for the most part; it is in
Law, as in War, where One side is Certainly in the Wrong, and Generally Both
are to blame: And let those who by their Purse, their Tongue, or their Art,
defraud another of His Right, know assuredly, that however they may build up
their Houses by Iniquity, and escape the Punishment of Man for what they do,
yet they shall not be acquitted at the Tribunal of God.

Q. What are the Duties which this Commandment Requires of Us?

A. To be fair, and upright, in all our Dealings; Psalm. xv.1, 2. Prove. xvi.11.
Ezekiel. xxxiii.15, 16. Mich. vi 8. Ephesians. iv.28. 2 These. iii.11, 12.
not willingly to wrong, or be accessory to the wronging of, Any. If we should
happen to have unwillingly injured any Man, to be Ready to make him a full, and
ample Restitution for it. To be free, and charitable to the Poor; Careful to
provide a Competent Subsistence for our Families; and diligent in pursuing some
Honest, and Useful Calling, in Order thereunto.

SECT. XXXI.
Q. WHat is the Ninth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear False-witness against thy Neighbor.

Q. What do you here understand by Bearing of False Witness?

A. The False-accusing of, Luke iii.14. Prove. vi.18, 19.
or Witnessing against Him in Judgment: And which is commonly attended with
Perjury, as well as Lying; and so becomes an Offense at Once against the Third
Commandment, by our taking God's Name in Vain; and against this, of Injuring
our Neighbor, by Bearing False-witness against Him.

Q. Is there any thing else forbidden in this Commandment?

A. There is; namely all sort of Calumny, Tit. iii.1, 2. 1 Timothy vi.4.
and Evil-Speaking, against any; whether it be in, or, out of, Judgment.

Q. How do you distinguish between Calumny, and Evil-speaking?

A. By Calumny I mean, a Reproach falsely Raised upon, and Reported against, a
Person, who is wholly Innocent of it. When we are the Makers, as well as
Spreaders, of an Untruth; at least, know what we say of our Neighbor to be
false; or have just reason to believe it to be so. By Evil-speaking, I
understand, the Relating of what is, or has been told to Us, as true; Lev.
xix.16 Prove. xi.30. -- xviii.8.
and is believed by Us so to be; When we do it not to the Person concerned, for
discovery of the Truth; Or to some Friend of his, in Order to his being
admonished of it; but to our Indifferent Acquaintance: And that whether it be
done with a Design to defame him, or only in the common way of Discourse, for
want of better Matter to entertain our Company withal.

Q. Is there any thing yet more forbidden in this Commandment?

A. To this Commandment must be Reduced all * Subornation of False-Witnesses in
Judgment; 1 Kings xxi.10. Mat. xxvi.59.
* all Credit; or Countenance that is given to Them; * all Counterfeiting of
Hands, and Seals, or any Other Writings to His Prejudice: Psalm. xv.1.3. Mat.
vii.1, 2. Ephesians. iv.25. Jam. i.26.
All * Tale-bearing; * Rash-speaking, and * Censuring: All * Credulity, or
being Ready to believe what is Evil of our Neighbor: All * Encouragement that
is Given to those who are apt to speak Evil of Other Men.

Q. What is Required of Us by this Commandment?

Psalm. xv.1, 2.
A. To be Religiously strict in speaking Truth of our Neighbor; Ephesians. iv.25. 1
Pet. iii.10.
* Not Only to take care that what we say be true, but that by our manner of
delivering it, by our flourishing upon it, or Otherwise Circumstantiating of
it, we do not give Occasion to any to Mistake Us. Mat. vii.1, 2. 1 Cor. xiii.5,
7. Luke xxiii.41. Acts xxv.8.
* To be charitable both in what We hear, and say of Other Men. * To Vindicate
their Reputation as far as fairly we can; and to * hold our Tongues, at least
not to * Aggravate their Faults, where we cannot.

SECT. XXXII.
Q. WHat is the last Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Covet thy Neighbors House; Thou shall not Covet thy
Neighbors Wife; Nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
Any thing that is His.

Q. What is the Sin forbidden in this Commandment?

Romans vii.7. Gal. 5.22. 1 Pet. ii.11. Col. iii.5. Ephesians. iv.22.
A. The Unlawful Desire of what is Another Man's.

Q. When is such a Desire Unlawful?

A. When it puts Men on any deliberate Thoughts, and Contrivances, to obtain
that which is Another; without the Consent, and Allowance of Him to whom it
belongs.

Q. What if a Man's Desire be so bounded, as not to put him upon any undue
Means to Obtain what is Another Man's?

A. If it be so bounded within the Use of Lawful Means, that He is determined
not to make use of any other, though he should never obtain it, it is not Sinful.
1 Kings xxi.
As if Ahab had only desired Naboth's Vineyard for the Convenience of it; and
as soon as he saw that Naboth would not part with it, had Rested in the
Refusal, and Gone no farther; he would have done nothing Amiss. But if a Man's
Desire be Violent, and Unreasonable, if it makes him Resolve to compass what he
Covets by any means; if fair means will not do, to have it by foul Ones; such a
Desire as this, is Sinful. And therefore when Ahab grew discontented at
Naboth's Refusal; Ib. ver. 6.
and after that the Malice and Cunning of Jezebel had destroyed him, went down,
-- 16.
and took possession of it; the Event showed his Coveting to have been
Criminal; and that his Desire was as Inordinate, as the Event was Tragical.

Q. What think you of such a Desire, as though it be Violent and Immoderate, yet
is presently Suppressed; and does not proceed to any Wicked Resolutions,
Endeavors, or Actions, in Order to the Accomplishment of what it Covets?

A. St. James seems to warrant us to think favorably of it: Jam. i.14, 15. Yet
it cannot be doubted but that all such Desires proceed from an Evil Principle
within Us; and we ought to Watch all we can, even against the first Motions of
them, and suppress them. Mat. v.28.29, 30.

Q. What is the Duty Required in this Commandment?

A. Contentment with our Estate whatsoever it be, so as neither to Murmur
against God, Ezekiel. xxxiii.31.
nor to Envy our Neighbor, 1 Timothy vi.6. Phil. iv.11. Heb. xiii.5. Romans
xiii.13. 1 Cor. xiii.4. 1 These. iv.11, 12.
upon the account of any thing which He possesses. There being nothing more
Certain, than that He who is not satisfied with what Himself Enjoys, will be
apt, upon every Occasion, criminally to Covet what is Another Man's.

SECT. XXXIII.
Q. WE have now done with the several Branches of that Duty which God Requires
of Us; and which our Godfathers, and Godmothers, promised, at our Baptism, that
we should fulfill: Is there any thing yet Remaining necessary to be known by Us
in Order to our Salvation?

A. Yes there is; namely, To understand what those Means are which God has
Ordained for the conveying of his Grace to Us, and to enable Us to fulfill that
Duty which He has Required of Us.

Q. By what means may we obtain the Grace of God, in order to this End?

See the Preface to this Prayer: Chapter Cat.
A. Chiefly by these two: Hearty Prayer to God for it; and a Right Use of the
Holy Sacraments.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. It is a Religious Romans x.14.
Calling upon God, founded upon the Belief both of his Infinite Knowledge,
Power, and Presence; and of his Gracious Goodness, and Mercy toward Us in Jo.
xvi.24.
Jesus Christ: And by virtue whereof, He is not only always Psalm. lxv.2.
xciv.9. 1 Kings viii.30, etc.
Present with Us, to Hear and Receive our Prayers, Mat. vi.8.
Thoroughly Acquainted with All our Needs; and Lev. xxxii.17, 27.
fully Able, to Supply them; but is also most Mat. vii.7. xxi 22. Luke xi.9.
Jo. vi.24. Jam. i.6.
willing, and ready so to do; if We call upon Him as we ought to do.

Q. Upon what is the Necessity of our Praying to God founded?

A. Besides that it is a part of that Religious Worship which it behooves Us to
Pay to Him; Psalm. v.2. xliv.20, 21. l.23. Isa. xlv.20.
and being publicly Performed, is One of the Highest Acts of Outward Honor,
that we are capable of Giving to him; it is necessarily Established upon these
Two Principles; First, Jam.i.5. Mat. vii, 7, 8.
A due Sense of our Own Weakness, and Wants: And, Secondly, A firm Belief, that
God is both Able, and Willing, to Relieve Us.

Q. What are the Wants, which we chiefly need to have Supplied by God?

A. There is Nothing wherein we do not stand in need of his Support. Our Life,
Health, Food, and Raiment; all that we have, Act. xvii.25, 28.
or hope to Enjoy, in our present Estate, proceeds from him; and We do, in all
These, entirely depend upon his Providence. But that for which we ought to be
more especially concerned, and have yet more need to beg the Divine Assistance,
Luke xi.9. Jo. xvi.24. Jam. i.5.
is for the supplying of our Spiritual Wants; That God would Enable Us to
fulfill our Duty toward Him; and thereby, (...) would Qualify Us for his Favor
at the present, and for his Pardon, and Acceptance, when we Come to die.

Q. Are we not able, of our Selves, to fulfill our Duty toward God, as we ought
to do?

A. So far from it, Deuteronomy. xxix.4. Act. xiii.48. Jo. vi.44. 1 Cor. iii.6. Ephesians.
ii.8. Phil. ii.13.
that we cannot have so much as any Saving Knowledge of it, or Desire after it,
without the Concurrence of his Grace, to Open our Understandings, to Purify our
Affections, to Regulate our Wills, and to prepare us both to Believe, and Do,
according to his Good Pleasure.

Q. By what Means may we be Enabled to Live according to God's Commandments?

Luke xi.9. Mat. xiii.12. xxv.29. Luke viii.18.
A. By the Special Grace of the Holy Spirit; which he never denies to any
Christian who heartily Prays for it, and duly Improves that Portion of it,
which God has before bestowed upon him.

Q. Does God always Answer the Prayers that are made to Him?

Mat. vii.7. -- xxi.22. Jo. xvi.23, 24. Jam. iv.3. 1 Jo. iii.22.
A. He does, if they are made after such a Manner as he Requires; and for Such
Things as He sees to be Expedient for Us; unless he should have some
extraordinary Reason to Refuse Us: In which Case, though he may not Grant Us
the very Things which we desire, yet He will recompense Us the more abundantly
in Some Other way.

Q. After what Manner ought we to Pray to God?

Jam i.6. v.14, 16. Luke xviii.1. Romans xii.12. Ephesians. vi.18.
A. With Faith; with Diligence; with Attention; with Fervor; and with
Perseverance.

Q. Are these Conditions so strictly Required by God, that no Prayers are heard
by Him which want any of Them?

A. That may not Generally be affirmed: There are great Inequalities in the
Affections of the best Men in their Prayers; Nor can Any avoid all kind of
Wanderings, and Disturbances, in them. Nay, sometimes the best Christians, may
be the most distracted, with vain Thoughts, and melancholy Fancies, in their
Devotions. That which is certain is this, that Every Man ought to Pray as
frequently as his Circumstances of Life will permit him; and when he does pray,
ought to do it with the utmost Zeal, and Attention, that He is able to do.
Which having sincerely Endeavored, he ought not to doubt, but that God will
Pardon his Infirmities, in that, as well as in the other Instances of his Duty,
and accept his Prayers; and grant him his Desires.

Q. What are the Things which we ought to Pray for?

A. For those of this Life in General only, 1 Jo. v.14. Mat. vi 25. Heb.
xiii.5. Prove. xxx.8. Ephesians vi.18. Phil iv.6. Col. iv.2. 1 These. 5.17. 2 These.
i.11. Heb. xiii.18. Jam v.16. 1 Pet. iv.7.
unless it be on some special Occasions; and with an entire Submission of our
Selves to God's Will, in whatsoever He shall please to Order for Us. But as to
the Graces which are necessary for Us, in Order to the Other Life, we are to
pray particularly; earnestly; absolutely; and without any Qualifications;
because we know these Things to be always proper for Us to Ask; and always
Suitable to the Will of God, to Give to Us.

Q. At what Times ought We to Pray?

A. Continually, and without Ceasing: Zech. viii 21. Luke xxiv.53. Act. vi.4.
Heb. xiii.15. 1 These. v.17. Romans i.9. etc.
Not that we are to account our selves thereby Obliged to Spend our whole Time
in Prayer, but to look upon those Expressions to imply a constant, daily
Attendance, upon this Duty; the Frequency whereof must be left to Every One's
State, and Condition, to determine.

Q. What is that General Proportion which Every Christian ought to observe, in
the Times of his daily Prayers?

A. If He has Opportunity for it, and can have leisure so to do, it were to be
wished that He should come Every Day to the Public Prayers of the Church: But
if this cannot be done, He must at least, every Day, without fail, Pray to God
in Private, Psalm. lv.17.
Morning and Evening; and, if He has a Family, he should every Day, Jos.
xxiv.15. Psalm. ci.
at some convenient Time, Pray with that also, in Order to the better keeping
up a Sense of Religion in it.

Q. Do you think it to be a Matter of Necessary Duty, to Pray Publicly with
the Church?

Heb. xii.25. Act. i.14. -- ii.1, 46. -- iii.1. 1 Cor. xi.22. xiv.13, 19, etc.
A. In General it certainly is; especially upon the Lord's Day, and such Other
Solemn Times of Prayer, as both the Laws of the Realm, and the Canons of the
Church, require of Us. As for the daily Prayers, if we live in a Place where
they are publicly Read, and are not hindered by any necessary Business to come
to Them, I do not see how we can excuse our selves from usually joining to Them.

Q. Has our Savior left Us any particular Direction how we should Pray?

A. He has left Us a Form of his Own Composing, not only to be continually made
Use of by Us; but also to be a Pattern to Us, after what manner We ought to put
up our Own Addresses to God.

Q. In what does that Form chiefly direct Us to compose aright our Own Prayers?

A. It teaches us especially these Four Things: First, That we should make our
Prayers short, and pertinent; as being most suitable both to the Wisdom, and
Majesty of God; and to our Own Weakness, and Infirmities. Secondly, That we
should Pray for Others, as well as for our Selves; and that in our Private, as
well as our Public Prayers. Thirdly, That we may pray for the Necessaries of
this Life; though our main Concern should be, in our Prayers, as well as our
Endeavors, after Those of the Other. Fourthly, That we should Pray to God
ONLY, and to Him as our Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Q. Have you any thing Else to Observe from the Form of this Prayer?

A. This only, that to Pray to God by a Set-form, is so far from being a Thing
either in its self Unlawful, or Injurious to the Holy Spirit; that we see our
Savior himself has here given Us an Example for it; as under the Law, Number.
vi.14* -- ^.35, 36.
God was pleased, in several Cases, to direct the very Words in which he would
be addressed to by the Jews.

SECT. XXXIV.
Q. SAY the Lord's Prayer.

A. Our Father, etc.

Q. What are the General Parts of this Prayer?

A. It is divided into Three General Parts: * A Preface, or Introduction; * The
Petitions; and * A Doxology, or Conclusion.

Q. What is the Preface to this Prayer?

A. Our Father which art in Heaven.

Q. Wherefore did our Savior begin his Prayer with this Compellation of God,
Our Father?

A. To show us, that all our Hope of being heard, or accepted by God, is by
virtue of that Relation wherein we stand to him, in, and through his Son Jesus
Christ. Jo. xiv.6. 2 These ii.1^* Ephesians* ii.18*
No Man comes unto the Father, but by Me. Jo. xv.16. xvi.23, 24. Verily,
Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will
give it you. -- Ask, and ye shall Receive, that your Joy may be full. See Col.
iii.17.

Q. Why was that Circumstance added, Which art in Heaven?

A. To show the Difference between Him, and our Earthly Parents; who sometimes
are hard toward their Children, and will not give them what they ask:
Oftentimes are not able to supply their Needs: And, in many Cases, cannot tell
what is best for them; but either deny them, when they ought to have given them
what they desired; or Give them, when it would have been more advisable not to
have done it. 1 Kin viii.38. Psalm. cxv.3. cxxiii.1. Luke xi.11. Jam i.17.
Whereas our Heavenly Father is All-Merciful, All-Powerful, and All-Wise; and,
by consequence, liable to none of these Defects.

Q. What do you Learn from this Introduction?

A. To come to God with Great Assurance, but with Great Reverence too: Psalm.
ciii 13. Lam. iii.41. Eccles v.2. Mat. vii.9, 10. 2 These* ii 16.
Who as Our Father will not fail to hear his Children, if they ask, as they
ought, of him; As he is a Heavenly Father, can give us whatsoever we stand in
Need of.

Q. Is God so in Heaven, as our Earthly Fathers are upon Earth?

Jer. xxiii.23. 1 Kin* viii.23, 27, 38, 39. Isa. xl.22. Psalm. cxxxix.7, etc.
A. No, by no means: For God being infinite, is every where present; neither
shut out of any Place, nor Circumscribed by any. Psalm. xi.4. cxxiii.1.
cxxvi.28. Mat. v.16, 45. xii.50 xvi.1. xxiii.9. Act. vii.49.
But because God is pleased to show himself in Heaven, in the highest
Excellencies of his Divine Majesty, and Glory; and is there attended by his
Holy Angels; therefore Heaven is considered as his Court, and his Throne. And
we very properly direct our Prayers to God there, where our Savior sits to
Intercede with Him for Us; and where the Blessed Spirits attend upon him, and
fall down before him, and worship him.

Q. Wherefore are we taught to say, OUR Father?

A. Not as if God were not the Father of Every One of Us in Particular, as well
as of Us All in General; or that We might not Each of Us truly, and properly
say, My Father: But to enlarge our Affections, and correct our Pride, and
increase our Charity; and to teach us that there is no Man so mean, but what
has as Good a Right to call God his Father, as the Greatest among Us; nor any,
therefore, who ought not to be looked upon as a Brother by Us, and to be
treated, and loved, and prayed for by Us, accordingly.

SECT. XXXV.
Q. HOW many Petitions are there in this Prayer?

A. Six: Three with respect to the Honor, and Glory of God; and which may be
accounted pious Wishes, rather than formal Petitions: And Three with Relation
to our Own Needs.

Q. What is the First of These?

A. Hallowed be thy Name.

Q. Wherefore did Christ begin his Prayer, with this Petition, or Desire?

A. To show us that we ought to make God's Glory the First Thing in our
Prayers, Psalm. cxlviii.13. Prove. xvi.4. Isa. vi.3.
as well as the Chief End of all our Actions. 1 Cor. x.31. Whether ye Eat, or
Drink, or whatsoever ye Do, do all to the Glory of God.

Q. What is here meant by the Name of God?

1 Kin. v.5. Psalm. xx.i. xliv.20. Act. vii.47.
A. The same as in the Third Commandment: viz. God himself; and whatsoever does
in any wise Relate to Him. Exodus vi.3. xxxiv.5, 6. Psalm. cxxxviii.2.

Q. What is meant by Hallowing?

Exodus xx.1^. xxix.1. Lev* x.3. 1 Kin. ix.3.
A. It denotes the Separation of any Thing to a Holy Use; and the Treating, and
Respecting, of it accordingly.

Q. What then do you look upon to be the full Import of this Petition?

Psalm. lxxii.19. lxxxvi 9, 12. cxiii (...) Mat. v ^6. Jo. xv.8. Act. xiii.48.
Romans xv.6. 1 Cor. x.31. vi.20. 1 Pet. iii.15. iv 11. ^ These. 1.10, ^^.
A. That it would please God to make himself Known to, and to be Adored, and
Glorified by, the whole World. That he would so dispose Ours, and all Other
Men's Hearts, that we might never mention his Name, but with a Religious
Reverence. That whatsoever has any Relation to him, his Word, his Sacraments,
his Ministers, his Houses of Prayer, may all be treated by Us with a Regard
suitable to the Majesty of Him to whom they belong: And that neither we our
Selves, nor any Others, may ever entertain any Opinions, or commit any Sins,
whereby either God the Father, or his Son Jesus; the Glory of the One, or the
Gospel of the Other, may be vilified, or profaned.

SECT. XXXVI.
Q. WHAT is the Second Petition of this Prayer?

A. Thy Kingdom Come.

Q. In how many Respects is God a King?

A. Chiefly in these Three: First, Psalm ciii.19* cx.^ cxiv.11, ^^.
As he is the King of all the World; which he Created by his Power; and Rules,
and Governs, as well as Supports, by his Providence. Secondly, Mat. iii.2*
iv.13. xxiv.14. Heb. i.8.
With Relation to his Church and People; which he Governs, and Conducts, by his
Word, and Holy Spirit. And, Thirdly, With Mat. v.14, 20. xiii.4^. Luke
xxiii.42, 43. 1 Cor. vi.9* 2 Pet. i.11.
Respect to his Heavenly Kingdom, where he Reigns with Glory, and Majesty, over
his Angels Now; and will Rule over all his Saints hereafter, to all Eternity.

Q. How is it that we here, either Wish, or Pray, that God's Kingdom may Come.

A. As we desire; First, Act. xxvi.18. Col. i.13.
That all Men may both more clearly Know, and more worthily Obey the true, and
only God; the Lord of Heaven, and Earth. Secondly, That, to this End, it would
please God to enlarge the Borders of his Church, Psalm. ii.8. Mich iv.8. Rev.
xi.15. xii.10. Mat. xxviii.19. 1 Cor. xv.25.
and bring all Nations within the Pale of it. And that where it is already
established; he would Go on, more and more, by his Grace, to destroy the Power
of Sin, and the Dominion of Satan; and to implant the Fear, and Love of his
Name, in the Hearts of all his Servants. That so, Thirdly, His Eternal Kingdom
may also be enlarged; Tit. i.3. -- ii.12, 13*
the Fullness of his Saints be accomplished; and the blessed Time come, when we
shall All be translated into his Heavenly Kingdom; and all Other Powers, and
Dominions, being done away, God alone shall be Exalted, and Rule over his
Saints, for Ever and Ever.

SECT. XXXVII.
Q. WHAT is the Third Petition of this Prayer?

A. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven?

Q. How does God declare his Will to Us?

A. Chiefly Two Ways; By the Dispensations of his Providence, and by the Rules
he has set us to Live by; whether They be by Nature implanted in Us, or be
Revealed to Us in the Gospel of Christ.

Q. Does this Petition respect both these?

Mat. xxvi.42. Act. xxi.13, 24.
A. It does; and so teaches us to Pray, that (with Respect to the former of
Them) we may always seriously consider the Ways of his Providence, and discern
what it is that He would have Us either Do, or Suffer, in Obedience thereunto.
That whatsoever it be, that he shall thereby call us to, whether to a
Prosperous, or Unprosperous State; to Receive Good from him, or to Suffer Evil;
we may, in the One, improve his Blessings to the Glory of his Name, and the
Benefit of those about Us; Luke xxii.42. Job. i 21. Heb. x.17.
In the Other, may patiently submit to whatsoever he shall call us to Suffer
for his Sake. With Relation to the Psalm xl.8. -- cxliii.10. Mat. vii.21. Jo.
iv.34. vi.37, 38. Act ix.6. Romans ii.18. xii.2. Ephesians vi 6. 1 Pet. ii.15. 1 Jo.
ii.17.
Latter, (the Rules he has Given Us to walk by) that we may faithfully Obey all
his Commandments, how contrary soever they may chance to be, to our Own corrupt
Desires, and Affections; and continue his Obedient, and Constant Servants, all
the Days of our Life.

Q. Why is this Circumstance added, As it is in Heaven?

Psalm. ciii.20, 21. Job i.16. Isa. vi 2. Mat. xviii.10.
A. To show us what kind of Obedience we ought to pay to God's Will. That as
the Angels in Heaven not only Do the Will of God, but do it with all Readiness,
Cheerfulness, Constancy, and Delight; so may We, if it shall please God, in
some measure fulfill it too.

Q. Is it possible for us, ever to attain to such a Perfection of Obedience, in
this present Life?

A. It is hardly to be Expected, yet we must Pray for it, and endeavor to Come
up as near as is possible to it. And in the mean time, must Learn from hence
not only how we ought to Serve God, but how we shall hereafter do his Will,
when we come to the blessed State, as well as Place, of those Holy Spirits in
Heaven.

SECT. XXXVIII.
Q. WHAT is the First of those Petitions, which you said Related to our Own
Needs?

A. Give us this Day our daily Bread.

Q. What do you Observe from the General Composure of this Part of the present
Prayer?

A. That as Man consists of Two different Parts, A Soul, and Body; and has need
of several Things to be given him for the Good of Both: So are we here directed
to beg of God, First, What is necessary to our Present Life; and Secondly, What
may conduce to the Everlasting Happiness of our Souls, in the Life that is to
Come.

Q. How does our Savior express what is necessary to be asked by Us, for the
Sustenance of our present Life?

A. He calls it Our daily Bread.

Q. What does the Word Bread denote?

A. It is Commonly used in Scripture for all sort of Provision, as it is indeed
the chiefest, Genesis iii.10. xliii.31, 34. Ps xxxvii.25. -- xli.9. Isa. xl.1.
Mar. iii.20. Luk iv.1. 2 Cor. ix.10. 2 These. iii.8, 12.
and most necessary; and such as may Supply the Defect of all Other. And it is
here made Use of, to signify All that is Necessary for our Support; excluding
at the same time whatsoever is Superfluous; and desired rather to Gratify our
Lusts, than to Preserve our Life.

Q. What is meant by Our Bread?

Prove. xxx.8. 1 Timothy vi.8.
A. It may imply these Two things: Either, First, What is Necessary for Us;
that is to say, for Our Selves, and for those who depend upon Us. ^ These.
iii.1^*
Or, Secondly, It may be called Our Bread, as intimating that we are to Labor
for it; and so it is Ours, because Gotten by our Own Work, and the Blessing of
God, upon our Endeavors after it.

Q. What do you Understand by the Word Daily?

Exodus xvi.5. 2 Kin. xxv.20. Neh* v.18. ^am. ii.15.
A. What is Sufficient for the Next Day: But then we Add withal, this Day, or
Day by Day; to show, that though because such is the Uncertainty of Our present
Life, that how Many, or how Few Days, we may have to Come, we cannot tell,
therefore we ask no more of God than what is needful for our present Support:
Yet we trust, Mat. vi.25, etc. Heb xiii.5. ^ Pet. v.7.
that God, of his Goodness, will every Day Give us Our Bread, as he did the
Jews their Manna in the Wilderness, so long as he shall think fit to continue
Us in this State of our Pilgrimage; until he shall bring Us to our Heavenly
Canaan, that Good Country which he has provided for Us.

Q. Wherefore do we Pray to God for such a Support?

Gen iii.19. Act. xx.34. 1 Cor. iv.12, 1 Timothy vi.8. 2 These. iii.12.
A. Not to exclude our Own reasonable Care in providing for it, much less to
excuse our laboring after it; but to show, that we depend altogether upon the
Providence of God, and Owe our Lives, and all the Support of them, not to our
Own Cunning, Deuteronomy. viii.3. Comp. Mat. ^v.4. Act. xvii.28. 1 Pet. v.7.
or Industry, but to his Blessing: And to engage Us thereby both to Rely the
more confidently upon God, and to make those suitable Returns of Love, and
Praise, and Gratitude, that We ought to do, to Him.

Q. Are the Rich as mueh concerned thus to Pray to God, as the Poor?

A. They are altogether: Our Savior composed this Prayer for Both alike. It is
the same Providence of God which maintains both; and and gives abundance to the
One, and a Competency to the Other.

Q. Is it Unlawful for any Man to take Care of, or provide for any thing more
than the Next Day?

A. No, by no means: God himself has sent Us to the Ant to learn the contrary;
Prove. vi.8. Who provideth her Meat in the Summer, Acts xi.28, 29, 30. 2 Cor.
xii.14*
and gathers her Food in the Harvest. Such a Care as goes no farther than a
prudent Foresight, and neither prompts us to any Evil, nor keeps us back from
any Good, is certainly not only Innocent but Commendable. Without this, the
World could not subsist Otherwise than by a continual Miracle; which we ought
not to Expect, where Ordinary Methods are to be had. The Solicitude which our
Savior forbids, Mat. vi.25.
and which is indeed sinful, is that which proceeds from an immoderate Concern
for the future: When Men are uneasy, and discontented; distrustful of God's
Providence, and still hoarding more up, as if they could never have enough; and
trust more to their Own Care, and Foresight, than to God's Blessing.

SECT. XXXIX.
Q. WHAT are the Blessings which we are here taught to ask of God for our Souls?

A. The Forgiveness of Sins past; and the Prevention of them for the time to
Come.

Q. How do you pray to God for the Forgiveness of your Past Sins?

A. In these Words; And forgive Us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against Us.

Q. What do you mean by forgiving of Trespasses?

A. I pray that God would do away All my Sins, Psalm. cxxx.3.
of what Nature, or Quality soever they be; 1 Jo. i.9.
that he would wash away the Guilt, and remit the Punishment of Them.

Q. Do you trust that God will do this?

A. Yes, if I take care to make Good the Condition upon which I ask it of him;
Luke vi.37.
by forgiving of those who trespass against Me.

Q. Will that alone suffice to intitule you to God's Forgiveness?

A. No, it will not: Without forgiving of Others, I shall never be my self
forgiven; Mat. vi.15. but that I may be forgiven by God, I must not only
forgive Others, 1 Jo. i.8, 9.
but must my Self Repent of my Sins, and ask Pardon for them, in the Name, and
through the Merits, and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Savior.

Q. Why then is this added, as the Condition upon which we are to Pray to God
for his Forgiveness?

A. It was fit to be mentioned upon several Accounts: 1st. As a Consideration
very fit to be Offered by Us to God, Luke xi.4.
to Induce him to forgive Us. If we who are Proud, and Peevish; Easy to be
Affronted, and hard to be Reconciled; yet, for God's sake, and in Obedience to
his Commands, forgive those who have offended Us; how much more shall our most
Gracious, and Merciful Father forgive Us, in what we have Offended him. It was
fit to have been added, 2dly; as a Motive, upon the same Grounds, Mat. vii.11.
to assure Us, that if we truly Repent of our Sins, and beg of God the
Forgiveness of Them, God will certainly Remit them to Us. It was fit to have
been added, 3dly; to put us continually in mind of the necessity we lie under
to forgive Injuries, and to engage Us readily, and heartily so to do:
Considering that till we have done it, Mat. vi.15. Mark xi.25.26.
we cannot pray to God for his Forgiveness; and that if we do not Do it
sincerely, God will certainly find it out: And though by pretending a
Reconciliation where Really it is not, we may delude Men, yet we cannot
possibly deceive God.

Q. What think you of Those, who say their Lord's Prayer, and yet either
continue at Variance with their Neighbor; or at least do not truly, and from
their Hearts, forgive Him?

A. I think that they. Do not pray for Pardon, but for Vengeance: They
Imprecate the Wrath of God upon their Own Heads; and do, in Reality, Pray after
this desperate Manner. Thou, O God! have Commanded me to forgive my Brother his
Trespasses: Thou have declared that unless I do so, thou will not Forgive me my
Sins. Well; let what will come, I am resolved to stand to the hazard of it. I
will not Forgive, nor be Reconciled to my Brother; do thou deal as thou
please with Me.

SECT. XL.
Q. WHat is the last Petition of this Prayer?

A. And lead Us not into Temptation, but deliver Us from Evil.

Q. What is meant by Temptation?

Mal. iii.15. Mat. xxii.18. Acts v.9. Jam. 1.2, 12.
A. It, in General, signifies no more than Trial; and may be taken in an
Indifferent, or even in a Good Sense, to denote any Occasion of proving, and
experimenting a Man's Faith, or Obedience. So God tempted Abraham: Genesis xxii.1.
But it is more usually taken in an Ill Sense; Mat. iv.13. xxvi.41. Luke viii.13.
to denote such a Trial, as is designed to seduce, and lead Us into Sin. So the
Devil tempts Us: Gal. vi.i. 1 These. iii.5. Heb. ii.18. So every Man is tempted
by his Own Lusts; Jam. i.14. So God tempts no Man: Jam. i.13.

Q. What is the Evil which you here pray against?

A. That also may be taken in a double Sense; and signify Either an Evil
Person, or an Evil Thing. In the former it may Respect all Wicked Men, Mat.
iv.3.
but especially the Wicked One, the Tempter. In the latter, not so much the
Evil of Sin its self, as the Evil of Temptation, Jo. xvii.15.
to which is seems most properly to Refer.

Q. What then is the full Import of this Petition?

Mat. xxvi.41. 1 Cor. x.13. Heb. ii.18. Rev. iii.10.
A. I therein desire, that God would neither Try me himself beyond my Strength,
nor suffer the Devil, the World, or my Own Flesh to do it. That, if it be his
Will, I may not be exposed to any Great Temptations at all: But if for any Ends
of his Wise Providence He shall think fit to 2 Samuel xxiv.1. 1 Chr. xxi.1. Job.
1. 1 Pet. v.8.
suffer me to be Tempted; that then He would be pleased Psalm. xxiii.4. 1 Cor.
x.13. 2 Pet. ii.9.
Graciously to strengthen, and support me in my Temptations, and Carry me with
Innocence, and Integrity, through them; and not suffer me to be led into Sin by
Them.

SECT. XLI.
Q. WHAT does the last Part of this Prayer consist of?

A. A Doxology, or Conclusion: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the
Glory, for Ever, and Ever. Amen.

Q. What do you mean by a Doxology?

A. A Form of giving Glory, and Praise, 1 Chr. xxix.11.
and Honor to God.

Q. Why was this Doxology here added by our Savior?

A. To show Us that all the Religious Service we pay to God; whether we Pray,
Confess, 1 Cor. x.31. 1 Pet. 4.11.
Give Thanks, or whatever we do, still we ought to design it All to his Glory.
Psalm. xcvi.7.10.
It was also added to keep up in our Minds a due Sense of the Reason we have
both to Pray to God for all the things we have before considered; and to expect
a suitable Return of them at his hands.

Q. How does this Doxology show, that we ought to Ask these Things of God?

A. Very plainly: Psalm. xxii 2^.
For because God is King of all the World, therefore he ought to be applied to
by all his Creatures. Because his is the Power; He is able both to hear, and
answer our Requests; and therefore of him it is most fit to desire whatsoever
we stand in Need of. 2 Chronicles. xx.6.
Because his is the Glory, of all our Religious Invocation; ('it is a Worship
that peculiarly belongs to God, as distinguished from the Creature;) therefore
to him only ought we to make our Prayers, and not to any Other.

Q. How does this Doxology encourage us to Hope that we shall Receive what we
Ask of God?

A. Because we do hereby profess to believe that he can Grant what we desire;
and the things we ask are so much for his Own Glory, as well as Our Advantage,
that we ought not to doubt but that We shall Receive them from Him.

Q. After what manner do we acknowledge these Excellencies to be in God?

A. In a super-eminent manner, beyond what they Are, Psalm. xcvi.7, 10. Dan.
ii.37. 1 Timothy 1.17.
or Can be, in any One besides. Others may have Authority; but as derived from
him, who only is the Supreme King over all the Earth. Others may have Power,
but God only is Almighty. Others may have Glory; a Majesty suitable to their
Station, and Character in the World. But to God only belongs the Excellency of
Divine Honor, and Worship. To him only is Prayer, and Religious Invocation to
be made: He only is either capable of it, or can pretend any Right to it.

Q. Why do you to this Doxology add, for Ever and Ever.

A. To show that these Divine Perfections, and Prerogatives did always belong
to God; Phil. iv.20. 1 Timothy vi.16. 2 Timothy iv.18. 1 Pet. iv.11.
and will always continue to belong, in this singular manner, to Him.

Q. What does Amen import?

A. It is a Word of Wish, and Approbation; and denotes our Assent to that to
which it is subjoined, Numb. v.22. 1 Kings i.36. Jer. xxviii.6. 1 Cor. xiv.16.
with an Earnest Desire of its accomplishment. So that putting its several
Significations together, 2 Cor. i.20.
it is as much as if we should say; God of his Goodness Grant what I have here
prayed for; and so I trust he will do, of his Mercy toward me, through Jesus
Christ our Savior.

SECT. XLII.
Q. WHAT is the Other Means appointed by God for the Conveyance of his Grace to
Us; and to confirm to Us his Promises, in Christ Jesus?

A. The worthy participation of the Holy Sacraments?

Q. What mean you by this Word Sacrament?

A. I mean an Outward and Uisible Sign of an Inward and Spiritual Grace, given
unto Us, and Ordained by Christ Himself, as a Means whereby we receive the
same, and a Pledge to assure Us thereof.

Q How many such Sacraments has Christ Ordained in his Church?

A. Two only as generally Necessary to Salvation; that is to say, Baptism, 1
Cor xii.1^.
and the Supper of the LORD.

Q. How does it appear that these two are properly Sacraments?

A. Because the whole Nature of a Sacrament, as before described, does belong
to them. For, 1st. There is in both these an Outward and Visible Sign; viz.
Water, in Baptism; Bread and Wine, in the Lord's Supper.

2dly. There is an Inward and Spiritual Grace, both signified, and conveyed, by
these Signs. The Washing of Regeneration, Tit. iii.5. by the One; the Body and
Blood of Christ by the Other. 1 Cor. x.16.

3dly. There is for both a Divine Institution. For Baptism, Mat. xxviii.19. Go
ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. For the Lord's Supper; Luke xxii.19. This do in
Remembrance of Me. See 1 Cor. xi.24, 25.

4thly. They were both Ordained as a Means whereby to Convey their several
Graces to Us, and as a Pledge to assure Us of them. Baptism to Regenerate Us;
Jo. iii.5. Tit. iii.5. The Lord's Supper to communicate to Us the Body, and
Blood, of Christ: 1 Cor. x.16.

For which Reason, lastly; they are Generally necessary to Salvation. All
Christians have a Right to them; nor may Any, without hazard of missing of
these Graces, refuse to Use them, who have the Opportunity of being made
Partakers of them. Jo. iii.5. Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. xi.24. This do in
Remembrance of Me.

Q. Are these All the Sacraments that any Christians Receive, as established by
Christ?

A. The Church of Rome to these adds five more; though They cannot say that they
are all of Christ's Institution; viz. Confirmation: Penance: Extreme Unction:
Orders: and Matrimony.

Q. How does it appear that these are not truly Sacraments?

A. Because not One of them has ALL the Conditions Required to make a
Sacrament, and the most part have hardly Any of Them.

See below. Sect. lii.
CONFIRMATION is, we confess, an Apostolical Ceremony: As such it is still
Retained, and Practiced by Us. But then it is, at most, but an Apostolical
Ceremony. Christ neither Ordained any such Sign; nor made it either the Seal,
or Means, of conveying any Spiritual Grace to Us.

PENANCE; if Public, is confessedly a part of Church Discipline. If Private,
is only the Application of the Power of the Keys to a particular Person, for
his Comfort, and Correction. It has neither any Outward Sign instituted by
Christ, nor any inward Grace, particularly annexed to it. Indeed if a true
Penitent Receive Absolution from his Minister, God Ratifies the Sentence, and
forgives the Sin. But so God would have done, had neither any Confession been
made to, or Absolution Received from, Him. And that the Sin is forgiven, is
Owing to the Mercy of God, upon the Repentance of the Sinner; and not to be
ascribed to the Priest's Sentence.

In EXTREME UNCTION there is an Outward Sign, but neither of Christ's, nor his
Apostles, Institution. Mark vi.13. 1 Jam. v.14, 15.
They anointed Sick Persons for the Recovery of their Bodily Health; and, in
certain Cases, advised the Elders of the Church to be sent for, to do likewise.
But as to any Spiritual Effects, they neither used any such Sign themselves,
nor Recommended it to Others: Nor is there any the least Ground on which to
expect any such benefit from the Use of it.

MATRIMONY, is a Holy State, ordained by God, and highly to be accounted of by
All Men. But it neither confers any Grace where it is not, nor Increases it,
where it is: And therefore is not to be looked upon as a true, and proper
Sacrament.

ORDINATION, is also a Divine Institution. By the Administration of it
Authority is Given to those Who partake of it, to minister in Holy Things;
which, otherwise, it would not have been lawful for them to do. We do not at
all doubt but that the Grace of God accompanies this Ordinance; and the
Discharge of those Ministries which are performed in consequence of it. But
then this Grace, is only the Blessing of God upon a particular Employ; not such
a Grace, as is necessary to the making of a Sacrament. And it is given to such
Persons rather for the Benefit of Others, than for the furtherance of their Own
Salvation.

Q. How many Parts are there in a Sacrament?

A. Two; the Outward and Uisible Sign, and the Inward and Spiritual Grace.

SECT. XLIII.
Q. WHat is the First Sacrament of the New Testament?

A. It is Baptism.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. It is the Sacrament of our New, and Spiritual Birth, Jo. iii.4. the Seal of
our Adoption, Romans iv.11. and the Solemn Means of our Admission into the
Communion of the Christian Church* Acts ii.41. Col. ii.11, 12. By the Outward
Washing whereof, our Inward Washing from our Sins, by the Blood, and Spirit, of
Christ, is both clearly exhibited, and certainly sealed to Us. Romans iv.11. Acts
ii.38.39. Heb ix.14. Tit. iii.5.

Q. How is Baptism performed?

Mark. vii 4. Numb. viii.7* Exek. xxxvi.25. Heb. x.2^.
A. By dipping in; pouring on of; or sprinkling with Water; in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Q. In which of these was this Sacrament administered at the Beginning?

Mat. iii 6.16. Jo iii.23. Acts viii.38.
A. To Aged, and Healthful Persons, in that Hot Country in which our Savior
lived, it was for the most part administered by dipping, or plunging, the Person
who was Baptized, into the Water: According to the common Ceremony among the
Jews, of Receiving Proselytes with the very same Ceremony; and from which our
Savior seems to have taken Occasion to institute this Sacrament.

Q. Were any Baptized otherwise at the Beginning?

A. It cannot be doubted but that as All who Embraced the Gospel were Baptized,
so many of these could not be dipped in Water. Such were very Old, and Sick
Persons; and it may be All, at the first; when Three, and Five Thousand at a
time, believed, and were baptized; very likely in a private House; Acts ii.41.
Acts iv.4. where it would have been very difficult to have had Water enough,
and endless, to have dipped them all.

Q. What are the Necessary Parts of this Sacrament?

A. Water, and the Word: The One to Represent our Spiritual Washing, and
Cleansing, by the Blood of Christ; the Other to declare the Faith into which we
are Baptized, and by which we hope to be saved; namely, of God the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Q. How came the Custom of Dipping, to be so universally left off in the Church?

A. Chiefly upon the ground of Charity; because when the Gospel became every
where Received, and the Persons to be Baptized were the Children of believing
Parents; many of which (in these Cold Countries, and for a Great Part of the
Year) could not be dipped in Water without the hazard of their Lives; it was
necessary either to Sprinkle them only with Water, or not to Baptize them at
all.

Q. What Ground had the Church to admit of Sprinkling, as sufficient to answer
the Design of this Sacrament?

Isa. lii.15. Ezekiel. xxxvi.25.
A. The Example of the Purifications under the Law, which were made as well by
Sprinklings, as Washings: Heb. ix.13, 19. The Application of this made by St.
Paul, to the Spiritual Cleansing of us from our Sins: Heb. x.22, 24. And by St.
Peter to the same Purpose: 1 Pet. i.2. Lev. xvi.14, 15, 19. Heb. ix.13. -- x.4.
The Analogy between the Sprinkling of the Water in Baptism, and that
Sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, by which we are Cleansed from our Sins: All
these, as they left a sufficient Latitude to the Church to administer this
Sacrament, in any of these Ways; so the Law of Charity Required that the Church
should make Choice of Sprinkling, rather than of a total Immersion; and we
cannot doubt, but that the God of Charity does approve of it. Mat. ix.13.

SECT. XLIV.
YOU said, that in Every Sacrament there were Two Parts, an Outward, and
Visible Sign, and an Inward and Spiritual Grace: Tell me therefore;

Q. What is the Outward Uisible Sign, or Form in Baptism?

A. Water wherein the Person is Baptized, in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Q. Is this Element so necessary a part of this Sacrament, that the Church may
in no Case depart from it?

A. It is of Divine Institution, and was designed to denote our Spiritual
Cleansing by Christ's Blood: That as our Bodies are washed with, and cleansed
from their Pollutions, by Water; so are our Souls purified from Sin by the
Blood of Christ: And for both these Reasons it is a Necessary, and Immutable
Part, of this Holy Sacrament.

Q. Is the Form of Baptism necessary to the Administration of this Sacrament?

A. It is Necessary; nor can this Sacrament be duly administered by any Other.

Q. Was no Other Form ever used in the Apostle's Times?

A. It is indeed said of Some in those Times, who had been Jewish Converts, or
had Received John's Baptism, Act. ii.38. -- viii.16. -- xix.^.
that they were Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. But this does not
hinder but that they may have been Baptized (as no doubt they were) in the
Words appointed by Christ for that purpose. All it implies is, that they were
Baptized into the Faith, and Gospel of Christ; as by comparing the Passages of
Scripture together, it will Evidently appear. See Act. viii.16. x.48. xix.5.
Romans vi.3. Gal. iii.7.

Q. Are then the Words appointed by Christ so necessary, that to Use any Other,
will destroy the Efficacy of this Sacrament?

A. That I dot say: For as Persons of all Countries are to be Baptized, so, no
doubt, but the Form of Words may be translated into the Language of Every
Country; and Baptism be effectually administered, so long as the Sense is
preserved. That which we insist upon is, that every Person who is Baptized,
ought to be Baptized in the Name, as well as to profess the Faith of, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Q. What is the Inward or Spiritual Grace, of this Sacrament?

A. A Death unto Sin, and a New Birth unto Righteousness; for heing by Nature
born in Sin, and the Children of Wrath, we are hereby made the Children of
Grace.

Q. Are all Men, by Nature, born in Sin?

Psalm li.5. Romans v.12.
A. They are, ever since that by the Transgression of our First Parents Sin
entered into the World: Nor was ever any Exempt from this unhappy State, but he
only who knew no Sin, the Lord Christ Jesus.

Q. Are all Men, by Nature, Children of Wrath?

Ephesians. ii.3.
A. Being born in Sin, they must of necessity be also Children of Wrath: Seeing
All Sin is both hateful to God, and worthy of his Punishment.

Q. Have the Children of Believing Parents, in this Case, no Privilege above
Others?

Act. ii.39. Romans 9.8. 1 Cor. vii.14.
A. Yes, they have: For being descended from those who are Members of Christ's
Church, they are born within the Covenant; are the Heirs of God's Promises; and
have a Right to Baptism, as the Children of the Jews had to Circumcision. And
therefore should they chance to Die before they have Received it, yet this
being no Fault of theirs, we piously believe that it shall be no bar to their
Pretensions; but that they shall nevertheless be saved, by the Merits of Jesus
Christ.

Q. How are those who are Baptized, made thereby Children of Grace?

Mark xvi.16. Act. ii.38, 39. -- xxii.16. Ephesians. ii 4, 5. Tit. iii.5. Gal. iii
27. 1 Pet. iii 21.
A. As by Baptism they are taken into Covenant with God; are Regenerated by the
Holy Spirit; and Washed from their Sins by the Blood of Christ: So that should
they Die before they commit any Actual Sin, we are assured, by God's Word, that
they shall certainly be Saved.

Q. Are all who are Baptized made Partakers of these Benefits?

A. They are all thereby put into a State of Salvation, and become Children of
Grace. But those only continue in this State, and hold fast their Right to
these Benefits, who take care to Live according to the Gospel of Christ; and to
fulfill those Promises, which either Themselves made; or which were, by Others,
made in their Name, and on their Behalf, at their Baptism.

SECT. XLV.
Q. WHat is required of Persons to be Baptized?

A. Repentance, whereby they forsake Sin; and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
Believe the Promises of God made to them in that Sacrament.

Q. What Repentance is required to prepare any Person for Baptism?

A. The same which is Required to qualify a Man for God's Forgiveness after
Baptism. For Baptism, if duly Received, washes away all Sin: And therefore no
One can worthily come to it, who does not heartily Repent of all his Sins; and
firmly Resolve never more to Return to any. Act. ii.38, 41. iii.18. viii.37.

Q. What is the Faith which Every One ought to bring to this Sacrament?

A. A firm Belief of the Truth of the whole Christian Religion; but more
especially, Mar. xvi.16. Heb. x.22. xi.11, 13.
of all those Articles of it, which he solemnly, at his Baptism, is to profess
his Belief of to the Church. Act. viii.37.

Q. If such a Repentance, and such a Faith, be Required of all who are
Baptized, How come Infants to be Baptized, who by reason of their tender Age
cannot perform either of Them?

A. Because they promise them Both by their Sureties, which Promise when they
come to Age themselves are bound to Perform.

Q. Are not Actual Faith, and Repentance, required of those who are to be
Baptized?

A. Yes, if they be Persons capable of it: Otherwise it is sufficient that they
be Obliged to Believe, and Repent, as soon as they shall be Capable of so doing.

Q. How can any One Promise this for Another?

Deuteronomy. xxix.12, 12.
A. Upon a Supposition of Charity: That as Children are born of Christian
Parents, and under a Security of being bred up to a Sense of their Duty, and
the Knowledge of the true Religion; and of the infinite Obligations that lie
upon them, to Repent, and Believe; So they will take care (by God's help) so to
order both their Faith, and Manners, as their Interest, as well as Duty,
Requires them to do.

Q. But what if they should not fulfill, what has been promised in their Names?

A. In that Case, the Covenant made on their behalf will be Void: And so by not
fulfilling what was promised for them, they will lose all those Blessings,
which God would Otherwise have been obliged to bestow upon Them.

Q. Would it not be more Reasonable to tarry till Persons are Grown up, and so
in a Condition to make the Covenant themselves, before they were permitted to
be Baptized?

A. We are not to consider what we think best, but what God has directed Us to
do. Now God expressly ordered the Children of the Jews to be admitted into
Covenant with Him, at Eight Days Old. Genesis xvii.13. Deuteronomy. xxix.10, 11, 12.
Into the Place of Circumcision, Baptism has succeeded; as the Gospel has into
the Place of the Law. There is therefore the same Reason why our Children
should, from the Beginning, be admitted into the Christian; as why the Jews
Children should have been entered into the Legal Covenant. Our Infants are as
capable of Covenanting, as theirs were: And if God thought fit to Receive them;
1 Cor. vii.14.
and did not Account the Incapacity which their Age put them under, any bar to
hinder them from Circumcision; neither ought we to think the same Defect, any
sufficient Obstacle to keep our Infants from being Baptized.

SECT. XLVI.
Q. WHat is the Other Sacrament of the New Testament?

A. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

Q. Why do you call it the Lord's Supper?

A. Because it was both Instituted by our Lord at Supper, Mat. xxvi.20, 26.
Mat. xiv.22. 1 Cor. xi.23.
and was designed to succeed into the Place of the Paschal Supper among the
Jews.

Q. Ought this Sacrament to be administered only at the Time of Supper?

A. That is not necessary, any more than that we should be Obliged to Eat our
Own Supper before it; that we should Celebrate it only Once a Year; in an Upper
Room; in an Eating Posture; and the like. Our Savior took that Occasion, and
that Season, for the Institution of it; but he did not intend thereby to Oblige
Us to Celebrate it in all the exact Circumstances of Time, Place, Posture, etc.
that occurred in his Own Administration of it.

Q. Why was the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ordained?

A. For the continual Remembrance of the Sacrifice of the Death of Christ, and
of the Benefits which we receive thereby.

Q. What do you mean by a Continual Remembrance?

2 Cor. xi.26. Comp. Act. i.11.
A. A Remembrance that is not to determine after a certain Time, as the Paschal
Supper did; but is to continue to be kept up by this Holy Sacrament, to the
very End of the World.

Q. Is there any thing more intimated by that Expression?

Act. ii 46. -- xx 7. 1 Cor. xi.26.
A. Yes, there is; namely, that this Sacrament ought not to be Celebrated only
Once in the Year, as the Passover was; but to be Administered from time to time,
so as to keep up a Constant, Lively Remembrance, in our Minds, of the Sacrifice
of the Death of Christ.

Q. Wherefore do you call it the Sacrifice of Christ's Death?

Heb. ix.12, 14, 28. x.10. 1 Pet. ii.21, 24. iii.18.
A. Because Christ, by his Dying, became an an Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins
of Mankind.

Q. Did Christ then suffer Death for the Forgiveness of our Sins?

Romans iv.25. -- v.10. viii.32. 2 Cor. v.21. Col. i.21, 22.
A. He did: He took upon him our Sins, and died for them; that by his Death we
might be freed, both from the Guilt, and Punishment of them.

Q. Was it necessary that Christ should die, in order to his being such a
Sacrifice?

2 Cor. iii.21. Isa. liii.10. Ephesians. v.2. Col. i.20. 1 Jo. ii.1.
A. It was necessary; for without shedding of Blood there is no Remission: Heb.
ix.22. And Death being the Punishment of Sin, he could no Otherwise have freed
us from Death, than by Dying himself in our Stead.

Q. Can Christ any more Suffer, or Die, now, since his Rising from the Dead?

A. No, St. Paul expressly tells us that he cannot; Romans vi.9, 10. Christ being
Raised from the Dead dies no more; Death has no more Dominion over him. For
in that he died, he died unto Sin Once, but in that he lives, he lives unto
God.

Q. How then do those of the Church of Rome say, that he is again Offered for
Us, as a true, and proper Sacrifice in this Holy Sacrament?

A. This Sacrament is not a Renewal, or Repetition, of Christ's Sacrifice; but
only a Solemn Memorial, and Exhibition of it. To talk of an Expiatory Sacrifice
for Sin, without Suffering, is not only contrary to Scripture, but is in the
Nature of the thing its self Absurd, and Unreasonable: Every Sacrifice being
put in the Place of the Person for whom it is offered; and to be treated so, as
that Person, in Rigor, ought to have been, had not God admitted of a Sacrifice
in his stead. And therefore the Apostle, from hence, concludes, Heb. ix 25.26.
that Christ could not be more than Once Offered, because he could but Once
Suffer. But to suppose that Christ, in his present Glorified State, can Suffer,
is such a Contradiction to all the Principles of our Religion, that the Papists
themselves are ashamed to assert it.

Q. What think you of the Sacrifice, as they call it, of the Mass?

A. We do not deny but that, in a large Sense, this Sacrament may be called a
Sacrifice; as the Bread and Wine, may be called the Body and Blood of Christ.
But that this Sacrament should be a true, and proper Sacrifice, as they define
the Sacrifice of the Mass to be, it is altogether False, and Impious to assert.

Q. What was then the Design of our Savior, in this Institution?

A. To leave to his Church a Perpetual, Solemn, and Sacred Memorial of his
Death for Us. That as often as we come to the Lord's Table, 1 Cor. xi.24, 26.
and there join in the Celebration of this Holy Sacrament, we might be moved,
by what is there done, at once both to Call to Our Remembrance all the Passages
of his Passion; (to consider him as there set forth Crucified before our Eyes;)
and to Meditate upon the Love of Christ thus dying for Us, and upon the mighty
Benefits, and Advantages, which have accrued to Us thereby.

SECT. XLVII.
Q. YOU before said, that in Every Sacrament there must be Two Parts, an
Outward, and an Inward: What is therefore the Outward Part, or Sign of the
Lord's Supper?

A. Bread and Wine, which the Lord has Commanded to be Received.

Q. Did Christ Institute this Sacrament in Both these?

A. Yes, He did: He first took Bread, gave Thanks, and Brake it; saying, Take,
Eat, this is my Body which is broken for you, This do in Remembrance of me. And
then; After the same Manner he took the Cup, saying, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood; This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in Remembrance of me.
1 Cor. xi.24, 25.

Q. For what End did Christ appoint these Outward Signs of this Sacrament?

A. The Words of his Institution plainly show it; that those who celebrate this
Sacrament, might Eat of the One, and Drink of the Other, at his Table.

Q. Is it necessary for all those who join in this Holy Sacrament, both to Eat
of that Bread, and to Drink of that Cup?

A. It is so necessary that they cannot, 1. Cor xi 25. Mat. xxvi.27.
without violating our Savior's Institution, come to to the Holy Table, unless
they do it. For Christ appointed Both to be taken; and he who takes not the
Cup, as well as Bread, does not Communicate in Christ's Body, and Blood, at all.

Q. May not a Person who only looks on, and sees the Priest Officiate,
Commemorate Christ's Death, and meditate upon the Benefits of it, as well as if
he received the Elements of Bread, and Wine?

A. I will answer your Question with Another: May not a Person who is not
Baptized, when he sees that Holy Sacrament administered, be truly penitent for
his Sins, and believe in Christ; and desire to be Regenerated, and Adopted into
the Communion of his Church; as fully as if he were himself washed with the
Water of Baptism? But yet the bare looking on, in this Case, would not intitule
such a One to the Grace of Regeneration; nor will it any more intitule the
Other, to the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood. In all these Cases, the
Question is not what we think we might do, but what Christ has commanded us to
do: And we must observe what he Requires, if ever we mean to be made Partakers
of what he Promises. Now that in the present Instance is not idly to look on;
but to do this; i. e. to Eat this Bread, and Drink of this Cup, in Remembrance
of Him.

Q. Do you think it necessary that Every Communicant should Receive this
Sacrament in Both Kinds?

A. I do think it Necessary; for so our Savior has appointed it. Thus he gave
it to his Disciples, and thus they Received it at his Hands.

Q. But his Disciples were Priests, and therefore their Receiving this
Sacrament in both Kinds, does not argue, that it is necessary for the People to
do likewise?

A. Whether all who were then present at the Table with our Savior were
Priests, is very Uncertain. The Blessed Virgin, we are sure, was at that time
at Jerusalem; and, no doubt, did eat the Passover, Exodus xii.3, etc.
according to the Law, with him; yet she was certainly but a Lay Communicant.
And many Others, for ought we know, there might be in the same Circumstances.
But not to insist upon this; Our Savior made no distinction between Priests,
and Lay Communicants, as to the Business of Receiving of this Sacrament in One,
or Both Kinds. He Gave both the Bread, and Wine, himself, to All that were at
the Table; and He has left a General Commandment to Us to do likewise. And his
Words, and his Action together, evidently require this of all of Us: That those
who Administer this Sacrament, should Administer it as Christ did; and those
who Receive it, should Receive it as the Disciples did of Him.

Q. Do you then make no Distinction between the Priests, and the People, in
what concerns this Holy Sacrament?

A. As to the Manner of Receiving it, none at all. When those who are Priests
Receive this Sacrament of another Priest, it is as when they hear the Word
Preached: They do it not as Priests, but as Christians. And therefore at the
Institution of this Sacrament, our Savior Christ alone acted as a Priest: He
resembled the Ministers of his Church; the Disciples represented the Faithful;
who were afterward to Receive the Sacrament from the Ministers of the Church,
after the very same manner that They Received it at Christ's Hands.

Q. But is not this Sacrament as Perfect in One Kind, as in Both?

A. Can a Thing be perfect, which wants one half of what is Required to make it
Perfect?

Q. Yet it cannot be denied, but that he who Receives the Body of Christ, does
therewith Receive the Blood too?

A. Though that be not the Question, yet if not only may be, but, in this Case,
is, absolutely denied by Us; nor indeed can it, without a manifest Absurdity be
affirmed. It was the Design of our Savior Christ in this Sacrament to
Represent his Crucified Body; 1 Cor. xi.24.
his Body as it was Given for Us. Now we know that when He suffered, his Blood
was shed, -- 25, 26.
and let out of his Body; and that to Represent his Blood thus separated from
his Body, the Cup was consecrated apart by Him. And how then can it be
pretended that he who Communicates in Such a Body, must partake of the Blood
together with it? But this is not our Business; The Points which we insist upon
are these: First, Whether Christ having confessedly instituted this Sacrament
in both Kinds, and commanded Us to Do likewise; those do not evidently depart
from his Institution, who Give, and Receive it, only in One? And if they do;
Then, Secondly, Whether They have any Reason to expect to be made Partakers of
the Benefits of this Holy Communion, who do not Receive it after such a Manner,
as Christ has commanded Us to do?

Q. Did the Apostles give the Cup to the Lay Communicants in their Churches?

A. Yes, certainly; or else St. Paul would never have argued with the
Corinthians against Communicating with Idolaters as he does, 1 Cor. x.15, etc.
I speak as to Wise Men, judge ye what I say. The CVP of Blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? -- Ye cannot drink the
CVP of the LORD, and the Cup of Devils. Nor have spoken of this Sacrament, as
he does in the next Chapter: Ver. 26, 27, 28, 29. In every One of which, He
takes notice of their Drinking of the Sacramental CVP, as well as of their
Eating of the Sacramental Bread.

Q. What then do you think of Those of the Church of Rome, who deny the Cup to
the Laity?

A. As of a most presumptuous Sort of Men, who Sacrilegiously deprive the
People of what Christ has given them a Right to.

Q. Do you think this Change so considerable, as to warrant you to break off
Communion with that Church which has made it?

A. No one can with a good Conscience Receive this Holy Sacrament after any
Other Manner, than Christ has ordained it to be Received. If therefore the
Church of Rome shall obstinately Refuse to give it to the Lay Communicant in
Both Kinds, he is bound in Conscience not to Receive it of her Priests at all:
But to go to those who are ready to distribute it to them in the same
Integrity, in which it was first Instituted by our Blessed Lord.

SECT. XLVIII.
Q. WHat is the Inward Part, or Thing Signified, in this Holy Sacrament?

A. The Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily, and indeed, taken and
received by the Faithful in the Lord's Supper.

Q. Are the Body, and Blood of Christ, really distributed to every Communicant,
in this Sacrament?

A. No, they are not; for then every Communicant, howsoever prepared, or not,
for it; would alike Receive Christ's Body, and Blood, as to its Substance,
there. That which is given by the Priest to the Communicant, is, as to its
Nature, the same after Consecration, that it was before; viz. Bread, and Wine:
Only altered as to its Use, and Signification.

Q. If the Body and Blood of Christ, be not really given and distributed by the
Priest, how can they be verily and indeed Taken, and Received, by the Faithful
Communicant?

A. That which is given by the Priest is, as to its Substance, Bread, and Wine:
As to its Sacramental Nature, and Signification, it is the Figure, or
Representation, of Christ's Body, and Blood; which was broken, and shed for Us.
The very Body, and Blood of Christ, as yet, it is not. But being with Faith,
and Piety, Recieved by the Communicant, it becomes to Him, by the Blessing of
God, and the Grace of the Holy Spirit, the very Body, and Blood of Christ: As
to those who come Unworthily to it; it is made Damnation; 1 Cor. xi.29.
that is, it Renders them worthy of it, and, without Repentance, will Certainly
consign them over unto it.

Q. How does the Bread, and Wine, become to the faithful, and worthy
Communicant, the very Body and Blood of Christ?

A. As it intitules him to a Part in the Sacrifice of his Death, and to the
Benefits thereby procured to all his faithful, and obedient Servants.

Q. How does Every such Communicant Take, and Receive, the Body and Blood of
Christ, in this Sacrament?

A. By Faith: And by means whereof he is as truly entitled to a part in
Christ's Sacrifice, by Receiving the Sacramental Bread, and Wine, which is
there delivered to Him; as any Man is entitled to an Estate, by Receiving a
Deed of Conveyance from One who has a Power to surrender it to his Use.

Q. What are the Benefits whereof Those, who thus Receive this Holy Sacrament,
are made Partakers thereby?

A. The strengthening and refreshing of their Souls by the Body and Blood of
Christ, as their Bodies are by the Bread and Wine.

Q. How does such a Receiving of this Holy Sacrament strengthen our Souls?

A. As it adds a New Confirmation to Us, every time we Receive it, of God's
Mercy toward us, through the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ; and thereby Fortifies,
and Corroborates Us, more and more, both in the Discharge of our Duty; and to a
Resistance of all Such Temptations, as may be likely to Draw Us away from it.

Q. Does it Strengthen Us in any Other Respect besides this?

A. Yes, it does: For being thus secured of a Right to Christ's Sacrifice for
Us, we are thereby fortified against all Doubts, and Fears, of our Salvation;
Are confirmed against the Apprehension of any present Dangers, or Sufferings,
which we shall Reckon not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be
Revealed in Us: And, finally, are strengthened against the Fear of Death its
Self, which we are hereby taught to look upon as a Passage only to a Most
Blessed, and Everlasting State.

SECT. XLIX.
Q. IS this the only way in which you suppose Christ's Body, and Blood, to be
Really Present in this Sacrament?

A. It is the only way in which I conceive it possible for them to be present
there. As for his Divine Nature, that being Infinite, he is by virtue thereof
Every where present. But in his Humane Nature, especially his Body, he is in
Heaven only; nor can that be any otherwise present to Us on Earth, than by
Figure, and Representation; or else by such a Communion, as I have before been
speaking of.

Q. Does not Christ expressly say, that the Bread is his Body; the Cup his Blood?

A. He does say of the Bread, and Wine, so taken, blessed, broken, and given,
as they were by Him in that Sacred Action, that This is my Body, etc. and so
they are. The Bread which we break, is not only in Figure, and Similitude, but
by a Real, Spiritual Communion, his Body: The Cup of Blessing which we bless, ^
Cor. x.16.
is, by the same Communion, his Blood. But this does not hinder but that, as to
their own Natural Substances, they may, and indeed do, still continue to be
what they appear to Us, the same Bread, and Wine, that before they were.

Q. What think you of those who believe the very Elements of Bread and Wine,
(by the Words of Christ) to be really changed into the Body and Blood of
Christ; and to have nothing of their own Remaining but the mere Appearance, or
Species, of what they were before?

A. If any Really do believe this, I think they contradict both Sense, Reason,
and Scripture, in so doing.

Q. Do you suppose that we ought to judge of a Thing of this Nature by our
Senses?

A. I know no Other way of judging of Sensible Objects, but by our Senses. And
if I must not believe what I See, and Taste, and Smell, to be Bread, and Wine;
to be truly Bread, and Wine; I must Resolve to turn Sceptick, and not believe
any thing at all.

Q. Is not the Word of God to be more Relied upon, than Our Own Senses?

A. I do not at all doubt but that We ought, without all Controversy, to
believe whatever the Word of God proposes to Us. But where does the Word of God
require me to believe any thing in Opposition to my Senses, which it is the
proper Business of my Senses to judge of?

Q. Does not the Word of God say, This is my Body?

A. It does say so of the Bread, So Blessed, Given, and Received, as it ought
to be, in this Sacrament: And accordingly I believe that it is so. But does the
Word of God any where say, that it is not Bread? Or that I am not to believe it
to be Bread, though my Senses never so evidently assure me that it is?

Q. Can the same Thing be Christ's Body, and Bread, too?

A. I have before shown you not only that it may be so, but that it truly, and
really, is So: Bread, in Substance; The Body of Christ, by Signification; by
Representation; and Spiritual Communication, of his Crucified Body, to every
faithful, and worthy Receiver.

Q. How is Transubstantiation contrary to our Reason?

A. As my Reason tells me it is a Contradiction to say of One and the Same
Natural Body, that it should be in Heaven, and on Earth; at London, and at
Rome, at the same time. That it should be a true Humane Body, and and yet not
have any One Part, or Member, of such a Body: To omit a Hundred Other
Absurdities, that are the necessary Consequences of Such a Belief.

Q. How does the Scripture contradict this Belief?

A. As it tells us, Act. i.9, 11. -- iii.21. Romans vi.9, 10. Heb. ix.26, 28.
that Christ's Body is in Heaven; absent from Us: That there it is to continue
till the Day of Judgment. That he has now a Glorified Body, and is not capable
of Dying any more: Whereas the Body we Receive, in this Holy Sacrament, is his
Crucified Body; his Body given for Us; his Blood shed for Us; which can never
be verified in his present Glorified Body.

Q. Do not those who believe Transubstantiation, believe the Bread and Wine to
be changed into Christ's Mortal, and Passible Body?

A. No, they do not; but into that Body in which He now sits at the Right Hand
of God in Heaven.

Q. How then does their Belief of Transubstantiation contradict the Sense of
the Holy Scriptures, as to what concerns the Nature of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist?

A. Because by Supposing Christ's Glorified Body to be that which we receive in
this Sacrament, they utterly destroy the very Nature of it. 1 Cor. xi.24, 25,
26.
It was the Design of this Sacrament, to exhibit, and communicate to Us, the
Body and Blood of Christ, not any way, but in the State of His Suffering; as He
was given for Us, and became a Sacrifice for our Sins. Now this he neither was,
nor could have been, in his present, Glorified Estate. So that if the Body, and
Blood of Christ, be in this Sacrament, it must be not that which he now has in
Heaven, but that which he then had when he Suffered for Us upon Earth; and they
must not only bring Christ down from above, but must bring him back again to
his mortal, and passible Estate; or they will never be able to make Good any
such Change as they pretend to; and that, I think, is sufficiently contrary to
Scripture, as well as in the Nature of the Thing its self Impossible.

SECT. L.
Q. WHAT have been the Ill Effects of this Error?

A. Chiefly those Two which I before mentioned; that it introduced the
Doctrines of the Mass Sacrifice, and of the Half Communion; to which may be
added, Thirdly, The Adoration of the Host.

Q. What do you call the Host?

A. It is the Wafer which those of the Church of Rome make use of, instead of
Bread, in this Sacrament.

Q. Do those of that Church Adore the Consecrated Wafer?

A. They do, and that as if it were really, what they pretend to believe that
it is; Our Savior Christ himself.

Q. Is there any great harm in such a Worship?

A. Only the Sin of Idolatry: For so it must needs be, to give Divine Worship
to a piece of Bread.

Q. Ought not Christ to be Adored in the Sacrament?

A. Christ is every where to be Adored; and therefore in the Receiving of the
Holy Communion, as well as in all our Other Religious Performances.

Q. How can it then be Sinful for Those who believe the Bread to be changed
into the Body of Christ, upon that Supposition, to Worship the Host?

A. As well as for a Heathen who takes the Sun to be God, upon that
Supposition, to Worship the Sun.

Q. But he intends to Worship Christ, and that can never be justly said to be
Idolatry?

A. And so the Other intends to Worship God: But to put another Case, which may
more easily be understood. If a Man will, in defiance of Sense, and Reason,
believe a Post to be his Father, and, upon that Supposition, ask Blessing of a
Post; does his Opinion, or rather his Madness, alter the Nature of Things, and
make him ever the less ask Blessing of a Post, because he takes it to be his
Father. The Papist will needs have a Piece of Bread to be Christ's Body; and,
upon that Presumption, He pays Divine Honor to it: Does he ever the less Give
Divine Honor to a Piece of Bread, because he fancies that Bread to be the Body
of Christ?

Q. Will not his Intention direct his Action aright?

A. No, it will not: Or if it would, his very Intention it self is wrong. For
his Intention is to adore the Host. It Is true, he Believes it to be Christ's
Body; and therefore Adores it: But still, right or wrong, the Host he adores;
which being in reality no more than Bread, he must needs commit Idolatry in
Adoring of it.

SECT. LI.
Q. WHat is Required of them who Come to the Lord's Supper?

A. To Examine themselves, etc.

Q. When ought such an Examination to be made?

A. It were much to be wished, that Men would be persuaded to live under the
Constant Practice of it; and consider Every Week, or indeed Every Day, how
their Accounts stand toward God. But, at least, if they Neglect it at Other
Times, 1 Cor. xi.28, 30.
yet certainly they ought to do this very nicely, and scrupulously, before they
come to the Holy Communion.

Q. How must this Examination be performed?

A. By a Careful, and Diligent Search into our Lives, and Actions; that so we
may, if possible, know what the true State of our Souls is, in all those
Particulars concerning which we are here directed to Examine our Selves. And
this accompanied with Earnest Prayer to God, for his Assistance in, and
Blessing upon, our Endeavors.

Q. What is the first Point concerning which we are to Examine our Selves?

A. Whether we Repent Us truly of our former Sins, steadfastly purposing to lead
a New Life.

Q. How may we know whether we do this, so effectually as we are here Required
to do?

A. We can only judge by the present Frame, and Disposition, of our Souls. If
we are heartily Sorry for, and Ashamed of our Sins: If we earnestly Desire
God's Forgiveness of them: If we are instant with God in our Prayers for
Pardon; and where we have done any Injury to our Neighbor, are ready to ask
his Forgiveness also, and to make all Reasonable Satisfaction to him; If,
lastly, as far as we can judge of our Selves, we do all this Uprightly, and
Sincerely: If we Reserve no secret Affection for any Sin in our Souls, but
Universally Resolve to forsake All our Evil Ways; and in Every Thing to follow
the Rules of our Duty; We may, I think, justly conclude, that our Repentance,
and Resolutions, are hearty, and without deceit; and, as such, will qualify Us
for the worthy Receiving of this Holy Sacrament.

Q. But what, if after all this, we should Relapse into Sin again?

A. If we do it by Surprise, or Infirmity; if we fall back only into some
lesser Sins, and such as will hardly be altogether to be Avoided by us in this
present Life; we ought not to be discouraged. But, indeed, if after this we
fall into the Commission of some heinous, deliberate, wasting Sin; but
especially should we relapse into a Habit and Course of such Sins; this would
be of a dangerous Consequence to Us; and make our last State worse than our
first.

Q. Would it not therefore be the safest way, rather to abstain altogether from
the Holy Table, than to Run the Hazard of Coming Unworthily to it.

A. Were it a Matter of Indifference whether we Ever Received this Sacrament,
or no, this might the more Reasonably be insisted upon; but as the Case now
stands, is altogether Idle, and Absurd. For, First, To come to the Holy Table
is a Matter of Express Duty; Luke xiv.17, 24. 1 Cor. xi.24, 25.
what Christ has commanded us to do; and it is equally dangerous not to Come at
all, as it is to Come Unworthily, to it. Secondly, By not Coming, we deprive
our Selves of the Grace of God, which this Sacrament was designed to Convey to
Us; and in that, of the Greatest Benefit, as well as Comfort, to our Souls, in
the Course of our Duty, that our Religion has provided for them. To all which,
let me add, Thirdly, That the Shortness, and Uncertainty of our Lives, being
considered, we ought, upon that Account, to make the same Preparation against
the Hour of our Death, that we are Required to do, for Coming to the Holy
Table. And since Men are so very apt to put both the Thoughts of Death, and
their Provision for it so far off; it is an Instance of the Great Mercy and
Concern of our Savior Christ for Us, that by calling us frequently to his
Table, and Requiring so strict a Preparation for it; he has engaged Us to put
our Souls into such a Posture, upon that Account, as will fit them for Dying;
should we chance, e're we are aware, to be surprised by Death.

Q. What is the next Thing wherein we are to Examine our Selves, before we come
to the Holy Communion?

A. Whether we have a lively Faith in God's Mercy through Christ; i. e. do
steadfastly Believe, that if we do truly Repent Us of our Sins, God will not
only most certainly forgive them; but, as an Earnest of it, does here, in this
very Sacrament, Ratify, and Seal anew his Covenant with Us; and make us
Partakers of the Benefit of that Redemption, which our Blessed Savior
purchased for Us, by the Sacrifice of his Own Body and Blood.

Q. What is the next Particular upon which we are to Examine our selves, before
we come to the Holy Communion.

A. Whether we come to it, with a thankful Remembrance of Christ's Death; which
is therein designed to be set forth, and shown by Us. Whether we are
sufficiently Sensible of the Infinite Love of God, and Condescension of Jesus
Christ, hereby declared to Us? Whether we are careful always to keep up in our
Minds, a lively Memory of his Death, and Passion? And do, by the Sincerity of
our Love to God, and the Zeal we have for our Duty, endeavor, in some measure,
to testify how hearty a Sense we have of those unspeakable Mercies which he has
been pleased thereby to favor Us withal.

Q. What is the last Thing concerning which we are to Examine our Selves.

A. Whether we are in Charity with all Men? Whether we do not only freely
Forgive whatsoever Injuries any may Chance to have done Us, but are so entirely
Friends with them, as to be Ready to do them all the Kindness we can; and that
as truly, and heartily, as if they had never Offended Us, or Otherwise done Us
the least Injury.

Q. Is this all that is Required of Us, before we come to the Lord's Supper?

A. Other Exercises there are, which may profitably be made Use of by Us, in
order to our better Performance of those Duties we have before mentioned. Such
are, Some extraordinary Acts of Prayer and Devotion: A Retirement from the
Business, and Conversation, of the World; but especially from the Follies, and
Vanities of it. And these accompanied with some Acts of Prayer, and
Mortification, whilst we are making the Examination of our Selves before
proposed. But these must be governed by the Rules of Prudence; as every Man's
Business; Opportunities; Needs; State of Health, and the like Circumstances,
either Require, or will allow of.

Q. Is such a Preparatory Examination of our Selves, so necessary before we
Come to the Holy Table, that we may, in no Case, presume to Come without it?

A. No, it is not: Those who live in a Strict, and Regular Course of Life, and
have nothing extraordinary happened to. Them, as they always know what their
State toward God is, so are they always Ready to Receive this Holy Sacrament;
and need not be afraid to partake of it, because they had not the Opportunity
of making a particular, previous Preparation of themselves for it. Yet, if even
these should design to go, at a certain Time (before known) to the Communion,
they not only piously may, but in duty Ought, to do somewhat of this kind, in
order to their going with the better Dispositions to it.

Q. What if by this means, a Good Christian should not be able fully to satisfy
himself, concerning his Worthiness to Go to the Holy Table?

A. In that Case he ought to Consider what it is that puts him in doubt of it;
and having so done, let him take the Advice of some Person whom he can Rely
upon, but especially of his Minister, about it: That so being freed from his
Scruples, he may Go with a Quiet Mind, and a full Persuasion of Conscience, to
this Spiritual Feast; and certainly Receive the Benefits of it.

Q. What if it shall appear that He is not in a State of Going worthily to this
Sacrament?

A. He must, for the present, Refrain from it; Mat. v.23, 24. xxii.11, etc.
and make all the haste He can to Remove the Impediment, and Reconcile himself
to God; that so He may be in a Condition both to Come worthily to it; and to be
made Partaker of those Graces, which are thereby Communicated to every Faithful
Receiver of it.

SECT. LII.
Q. IS there Any Thing yet farther Required of Those who Come to the Lord's
Supper?

A. Yes, there is; namely, that they be first CONFIRMED by the Bishop: It being
ordained by the Church, Rubr. at the End of the Confirmation Office.
That none shall be admitted to the Holy Communion until such time as He be
Confirmed, or Ready, and Desirous, to be Confirmed.

Q. What do you mean by Confirmation?

A. I mean the Solemn laying on of the Hands of the Bishop, upon such as have
been Baptized, and are come to Years of Discretion.

Q. How is this performed among Us?

A. It is directed to be done after a very Wise, and Solemn Manner. For, First,
The Bishop having given Notice to the Minister of his Intention to Confirm, and
Appointed a Time for the doing of it; the Minister is to call together such of
his Parish, as are Come to Years of Discretion, and have not yet been
Confirmed; and to Examine them in their Church-Catechism, and to prepare as
many as he can for the Bishop to Confirm. Secondly, Having done this, he is
either to bring, or send in Writing, with his Hand Subscribed thereunto, the
Names of, all such Persons, within his Parish, as he shall think fit to be
presented to the Bishop to be Confirmed. These being Approved of by the Bishop,
are brought openly into the Church, and Required by the Bishop, in the Presence
of God, and the Congregation there Assembled, to Renew the Solemn Vow, and
Promise, which was made in their Names, at their Baptism; and, in their Own
Persons, to Ratify and Confirm the same; acknowledging themselves bound to
believe, and do, all those Things which their Godfathers and Godmothers then
undertook for them. Which having done, the Bishop heartily prays to God for his
Grace to enable them to fulfill this their Vow; and laying his Hand severally on
Every One's Head, Beseeches God to defend this His Servant with his heavenly
Grace, that He may Continue His for Ever; and daily Increase in his Holy Spirit
more and more, until He comes to his Everlasting Kingdom. To all which are
finally added the Joint Prayers both of the Bishop, and the Church, to the same
Effect; and so the Ceremony is ended.

Q. What are the Reasons that chiefly moved the Church of England to Retain
such a Ceremony as this?

A. There may several be assigned, but especially these Four: * Apostolical
Practice; * The Reasonableness of the Thing its self; * The Benefit of it to
the Person who is Confirmed; and * The Satisfaction that arises from hence to
the Church of Christ.

Q. Did the Apostles Practice such an Imposition of Hands?

A. The Apostles did lay their Hands on those who had been Baptized; and by
their Imposition of Hands, such Persons did Receive the Holy Ghost. Acts
viii.17. xix.6.

Q. Does the Bishop give the Holy Ghost now, as the Apostles did, by their
Imposition of Hands?

A. That we do not say; nor did the Apostles themselves do it. They Laid on
their Hands, and God Gave his Holy Spirit to those on whom they Laid them. And
we piously presume, that by the fervent Prayers of the Bishop, and the Church,
those on whom He now Lays his Hands, shall also Receive the Holy Ghost, if they
do but worthily prepare Themselves for it.

Q. Is there any Promise of God on which to build such a Hope?

A. A General One there is, and such as may in this Case, above any, be
depended upon by Us. For, First, We are directed to Pray not only for Our
Selves, but for One Another also. To encourage us hereunto, Christ has promised
Us to Grant whatsoever is piously asked, ^am. v.16. Ephesians. vi.18. 1 Timothy ii.1, 2.
by the joint Suffrages of his Church, of Him. Mat. xviii.19. And particularly,
has declared, That God will Give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him. Luke
xi.9. Add to this, That it has always been accounted a part of the Ministerial
Office, Lev. ix.22, 23. Number. vi.23, 24, 27. Deuteronomy. x.8. 2 Chronicles. xxx.27. 1 Samuel
ii.20. Ephesians. vi.19. Col. iv.3. 1 These* v.25. 2 These iii.1. Heb. xiii.18.
not only to Instruct, but to Pray for, and Bless their People When therefore
the Chief Pastor of the Church, and his Congregation, solemnly join together,
to beg of God the Grace of his Holy Spirit, in behalf of such Persons as these;
(who have just now been dedicating themselves anew, to his Service; and
Ratifying the Covenant made between God, and them, at their Baptism;) how can
we choose but believe, that God will certainly Grant their Request; and Give His
Holy Spirit to those for whom He is thus earnestly, and solemnly, Asked of Him?

Q. From whence does it appear, that such an Imposition of Hands was Reasonable
to have been Ordained, and to be Continued, in the Church?

A. From the Condition of those who are commonly Baptized among Us; and who
being, for the most part, Infants, and so constrained to make Use of Others to
become Sureties for them at their Baptism; it was certainly very Reasonable,
that there should be some Solemn Time appointed, when such Persons (being come
to Years of Discretion) should Themselves Ratify their Baptismal Covenant; and
Acknowledge their Obligation to believe, and do, what their Godfathers, and
Godmothers, had before promised for them.

Q. What are the Benefits of this Institution, to those who are Confirmed?

A. Besides the Benefit of God's Grace, which we reasonably presume to be
hereby procured to such Persons, by the Prayers of the Bishop, and Church, on
their behalf; these Two Advantages do Evidently accrue to Them: That, First,
They are, by this means, secured of the Care of their Godfathers, and
Godmothers, to see that they be duly Instructed in the Principles of their
Christian Religion; and in which, were this Ordinance strictly observed, they
could not be deficient, without being certainly found out, and censured by the
Church for their neglect. And, Secondly, That by being thus Solemnly called
upon to Ratify their Baptismal Vow, and Covenant; They are engaged to begin
betimes, both to Consider their Duty, and to apply themselves to the serious
Discharge of it.

Q. How does this Ordinance give a Satisfaction to the Church of Christ, as to
these Matters?

A As, by this means, Care is taken to have all these Things Openly transacted
before it. The Person, who perhaps was privately Baptized, being Now publicly
Confirmed, in the Face of the Congregation. The Vow, which was made by Others
in his Name; being here Solemnly Renewed, and Ratified, by Himself. The Child,
who was Baptized by some Minister of an Inferior Order, being now Established
in the Communion of the Church, by the Chief Pastor of it. And, lastly, The
Godfathers, and Godmothers, who became Sureties, both for the Good Instruction,
and Education, of the Person, whom they Answered for; being hereby fully
acquitted, and discharged, of their Trust; and declared to have faithfully
Fulfilled, what they had so sacredly Promised, and Undertook to Do.

Q. Do you look upon all Godfathers, and Godmothers, to be Obliged to see, that
Those for whom they Answer, be first duly Instructed in the Principles of their
Religion, and then brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop?

A. They are certainly Obliged, as far as a Solemn Promise, made in the
Presence of God, and in a Matter not only Lawful, but Pious, and Charitable,
can Oblige them. Nor can I imagine, how any One, Who has taken such an
Obligation upon Himself, will ever be Able to answer it, either to God, or his
Own Conscience, if He shall neglect to fulfill what He undertook in that behalf.

Q. What think you of Those who Come to the Lord's Supper, without either being
Confirmed; or having any Desire, or Intention, to be Confirmed?

A. They are doubtless to be blamed: Inasmuch as thereby they not only break
the Orders, and disobey the Command of the Church; which, for such Good Reasons
as we have seen, Requires them to be Confirmed; but seem ashamed to Own their
Christian Profession; and to despise the Prayers of their Bishop for such
Graces, as they certainly ought to Desire; and cannot reasonably Hope, by any
more effectual means, to obtain of God, than by a Pious, and Reverend
Participation, of this Holy Ordinance.

Q. May not the Grace of God be Obtained as well by our Own Prayers, as by the
Bishop's Imposition of Hands upon Us?

A. That is not the Question: We know that God has promised his Holy Spirit to
Every One who faithfully Prays for Him. But the Question is this; First,
Whether if a Man may Obtain this Grace by his Own Prayers alone, He may not
expect more certainly to do it, by adding the Prayers of the Bishop, and the
Church, to them? And, Secondly, Whether He who Carelessly Neglects, or
Presumptuously Despises the Orders of the Church; and the Pious Provision made
by Her, for all Her Members, at their first setting out into the Dangers, and
Temptations, of the World; may not justly fear, lest God should Refuse that
Grace to his Own Solitary Prayers, for which He Neglected, or Despised, the
Prayers of the Bishop, and the Church, on his behalf?

Q. What is Required of Persons to be Confirmed?

A. First, That they be of Years of Discretion: That is to say, Of a Capacity
to understand the Nature of their Baptismal Covenant. What God therein Promises
to Us? And what we are thereby Obliged to Believe, and Do, in Obedience to his
Will? Secondly, That They be not only Capable of this Knowledge; but be
Actually Instructed in these Things. Thirdly, That being hereby brought to a
Clear Sense of what was done for them, by their Godfathers, and Godmothers, at
their Baptism; They be now Ready, and Desirous, in their Own Persons, to
Ratify, and Confirm the same. And, lastly, That in Testimony of their sincere
Resolutions to make Good what they here Promise, and Vow, they do now truly
Repent of All their Sins, and steadfastly Resolve, by the Grace of God, to Go on
in a Constant Obedience to God's Commands, unto their Lives End.

Q. At what Times ought such Persons to be Confirmed?

A. At such Times as the Bishop appoints for this Purpose. Only, if it be
possible, they should endeavor to be Confirmed, and thereby fully take upon
themselves the First Sacrament; before they proceed to the Participation of the
Second.

Q. How often ought any Christian to be Confirmed?

A. The Nature of the Office plainly shows it. Confirmation, as it is
understood, and practiced by Us, is nothing Else but a Solemn Ratification of
our Baptismal Covenant. Now no Man ought to be Baptized more than Once: Nor
will He therefore need any more than Once, to take that Covenant upon Himself.
If after this, He shall fall into any Sins, whereby to put Himself out of a
State of Grace; Or even to be cut off from the Communion of the Church; there
are Other means of Restoring him again to Both, upon his Sincere Repentance for
what He has done Amiss. But our Baptism must not be Repeated* Nor will our
Confirmation therefore need to be, any more, Repeated by Us.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 45. l. 24. for be was, r. was a. P. 115. l. 28. r. Commandment. P. 127.
l. 26. for Tha^ God would, r. Both. P. 130. l. 15. for to Them, r. in Them. P.
151. l. 27. r. don't. P. 159. l. 14. blot out to.

Borks printed for Richard Sare, at Grays Inn Gate in Holborn.
THE Genuine Epistles of St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp,
the Shepherd of Hermas, etc. with a large Preliminary Discourse. 8 vo. A
Practical Discourse against Profane Swearing. 8 vo. The Authority of Christian
Princes over Ecclesiastical Synods, in Answer to a Letter to a Convocation man.
8 vo. An Appeal to all the true Members of the Church of England, on behalf of
the King's Supremacy. 8 vo. A Sermon at the Dorsetshire Feast. 1690. Before the
Queen at Whitehall, May 10. 1691. Before the Lord Mayor, Nov. 26. 1691. At
Grays Inn, on the Death of the Queen. At St. James's, on the Day of
Thanksgiving.
These Nine by the Reverend Dr. Wake.

Fables of Aesop, and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections.
Folio.

Fables and Stories Moralized; (being a Second Part of the Fables of Aesop, and
other Eminent Mythologists, etc.) Folio.

Both by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

Mr. Collier's View of the Stage.

His Defense.

His Essays upon several Moral Subjects.

Maxims and Reflections upon Plays; (in Answer to a Discourse printed before a
Play, called, Beauty in Distress;) written in French by the Bishop of Meaux;
with an Advertisement concerning the Author and Book. By Mr. Collier.

An Answer to all the Excuses and Pretenses that Men ordinarily make, for their
not coming to the Holy Communion. To which is added, A brief Account of the End
and Design of the Holy Communion, the Obligation to Receive it, the Way to
Prepare for it, and the Behavior of our Selves both At, and After it. Price
but 3 d* for the Encouragement of such Persons as are willing to Give them
away, for the Promoting of Piety and Devotion.


