W RR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


WILLIAM R.

WHereas for above a Year last past a Wicked Rebellion has been Carried on and
Maintained against Their Majesty's in Their Kingdom of Ireland, Which has been
Contrived, Encouraged, and chiefly Supported by the French King, designing by
that means to make an absolute Conquest of the said Kingdom, and hold it as a
Province, or else to bring a total Ruin and Destruction upon the same; for
which (amongst other Causes) Their Majesty's have been Obliged to enter into a
Just and Necessary War against the said French King. And whereas His Majesty is
Resolved, by the Assistance of God, Vigorously to Prosecute the said War by Sea
and Land; And so effectually to Reduce that Kingdom to its due Obedience, that
Their Majesty's good Subjects there may not only be Rescued from the present
Force and Violence; but be Secured against all such Aggressions for the Future,
and be Settled in a Firm and Lasting State of Peace, Safety, and Prosperity:
For which purpose His Majesty has determined to make a Royal Voyage and go
thither in Person, putting His Trust in Almighty God (who has by his
mavelous Providence hitherto Preserved and Conducted His Majesty) That he
will vouchsafe a special Blessing on His Righteous Undertaking, and thereby
Consummate the Deliverance of these Kingdoms. Their Majesty's taking the
Premises into Their most Serious Consideration, have thought sit to Appoint,
and do by and with the Advice of Their Privy, Council, hereby Appoint and
Command a General and Public Fast and Humiliation to be Observed throughout
the said Kingdom of Ireland, in most Devout and Solemn manner, for Supplicating
Almighty God for Pardon of Our Sins, and Imploring His Blessing and Protection
in the Preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and Prosperity of His Arms,
to be Religiously Kept and Observed on Wednesday the Five and twentieth day of
June next, throughout the said Kingdom of Ireland, and thenceforward to be
Observed on the Third Wednesday in every Month successively, during the present
War. And for the more Orderly Solemnizing of the said several Fast Days, Their
Majesty's have taken Care to Transmit herewith a Form of Prayers suitable to
this Occasion, to be used in all Churches and Chapels, and other Places of
Public Worship within the said Kingdom; And have given Charge for the
Dispersing thereof through the said Kingdom. And Their Majesty's do most
Expressly Charge and Command that the said Fastings and Prayers be Reverently
and Decently Performed by all Their Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favor
of Almighty God, and upon Pain of such Punishments as Their Majesty's can
Justly Instict upon all such as shall Contemn or Neglect so Religious a Work.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirtieth Day of May, 1690. In the Second
Year of Our Reign.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's, 1690.


