By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For a GENERAL FAST.
William R.

WHereas Their Majesty's have found Themselves obliged, for the necessary
Defense and Safeguard of this Realm, and other Their Dominions, and the
Vindicating and Preserving Their own and Their Subjects Rights, to Declare War
against the French King, and vigorously to Prosecute the same both by Sea and
Land, and to set out and employ Ships of War, and Landforces, for Reducing to
Their Obedience the Kingdom of Ireland, at this time supported in Rebellion
against Their Majesty's by the said French King; Their Majesty's putting Their
Trust in Almighty God (who has mercifully and wonderfully preserved and
blessed Their Majesty's hitherto, and this Kingdom by Their means) That he will
vouchsafe a special Blessing to this Their Righteous Undertaking, Do, by and
with the Advice of Their Privy Council, hereby Appoint and Command a General
and Public Fast and Humiliation to be observed throughout this Kingdom, That
so both Their Majesty's and Their Subjects may humble Themselves before
Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon for Their Sins, and may in most devout
and solemn manner send up Their Prayers and Supplications to him, for Imploring
his Blessing and Assistance on Their Majesty's Arms, and for Restoring and
Perpetuating Peace, Safety, Honor, and Prosperity to all Their Majesty's
Kingdoms and Dominions. And for the more decent and uniform performance
thereof, Their Majesty's do hereby Publish and Declare to all Their Loving
Subjects, and do straightly Charge and Command, That on Wednesday being the Fifth
day of June next ensuing, this Fast be Religiously and Solemnly kept and
observed within the Cities of London and Westminster, and within Ten miles
distance of the same: And that on Wednesday the Nineteenth of the same June the
like Fast be kept and duly observed through the rest of the whole Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, And for the more
orderly Solemnizing thereof, Their Majesty's have given Directions to the
Archbishops and Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayers suitable
to this Occasion, to be used in all Churches and Chapels, and other Places of
Public Worship, and have given Charge for the Dispersing thereof through Their
several Diocesses in the whole Kingdom. And Their Majesty's do expressly Charge
and Command, That the said Fasting and Prayers be soberly, reverently, and
decently performed by all Their Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favor of
Almighty God, and upon Pain of such Punishments as Their Majesty's can justly
inflict upon all such as contemn or neglect so Religious a Work.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court, this 23th Day of May, 1689. In the First
Year of Our Reign.
God save the King and Queen.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


