

Preparation FOR DEATH. Being A Letter sent to a Young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper, of which She died.

Numb. xxiii. 10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my latter end
be like his.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown, in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1687.

Advertisement.
COuld either my desires, or endeavors have prevailed for the suppressing of
the following Letter, it had been buried in the same Grave with her to whom it
was addressed. But being fallen into the Hands of her Relations after her
Death, many Copies were dispersed before my return into England, and thereby a
necessity put upon me either to publish it my self, or to have the
dissatisfaction of seeing others do it, for me.

This being the true account of the Edition of this short Treatise, I shall
need the less Apology, if there seem nothing in it for which it should be
exposed to a public view. It was writ as a private Letter, to a person of more
Piety, than Curiosity; and without any prospect; nay I may add more, upon an
assurance that it should never come to any ones sight but her own. And
therefore it ought not to be wondered if it appear with all the plainness and
freedom, which an Epistolary Style and Character required. For the rest, as I
can sincerely profess that it was no principle of vanity that led me first to
write it, so much less does any such Motive induce me now to publish it. It was
to serve a greater and better end, I both then did, and now do design it: And
if those who shall hereafter peruse it, do it but with the same piety that she
did for whom it was composed, I am persuaded neither they nor I shall have any
cause to repent us of our Labor.

Paris April 25. S. N. 1684.
Madam*
THE Address I here make you, how meanly soever I have performed it; is yet so
suitable to your circumstances, and so well befits* my character; that I make
no doubt but you will accept it with the same charity that I have designed it.
And therefore instead of making Apologies for my undertaking, I will rather
send it to you with my hearty Prayers, that those few directions I have here
put together, may be as truly useful to you, as I do assure you they were
really by me intended for your service.

You are not, Madam, to expect in this short draught any thing but what you
have often already heard, and, I persuade my self, have long practiced.
Religion is none of those things that change with the Fashion, and accommodate
themselves to the mode: And though we have of late met with some who have
endeavored upon the foundations of Christianity to erect a new Scheme of
Court-Divinity, by making the way to Heaven both broader and smoother than it
is: yet both the projectors and those that follow them will sadly find
themselves mistaken in the end; when the one shall perish for betraying their
Master, and the others be condemned for not rejecting their Innovations.

But, Madam, if you find nothing new in the matter, I am sure much less will
you have any thing in the Style and Method, but what is plain and easy. In
such discourses as these, he seems to me to speak most properly, that expresses
himself most clearly. Some things indeed I should have added; others have
changed, and have dressed the whole with greater care; but I had little time,
and much other business, which I am sure you know to be more than pretense. The
rules yet I am confident are sound and useful, and may as they are, serve your
devotion; But if your abundance of better helps frustrate that design, yet at
least you will be pleased to esteem it an undoubted testimony of that sincerity
with which I am,

Madam, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, W. W.

INTRODUCTION.
THERE is nothing has proved more fatal to that due Preparation we ought to
make for another life, than our unhappy mistake of the nature of this. We are
brought into the World, Children, Ignorant* and Impotent; we grow up in vanity
and folly; and when we come to be Men, we are but very little more prudent and
more considerate. The whole of our Reflections terminates in this, what course
we are to take to pass our time; some to get, others to spend their Estates;
and when Interest or Inclination, Friends or Fortune have determined the
choice, we are then entered in, and our remaining business is to pursue this end
to the best advantage, for our present ease and our future establishment. Thus
are our thoughts and our desires wholly tied to this World; we vainly project a
settlement in it, nor look we any farther than the little Interests and
Employments thereof engage us.

2. I AM sure, Madam, I need not say much to convince you, who have had so many
opportunities to settle this Reflection upon your own Experience, and who, I am
persuaded, have so profitably employed them, that this is the just character of
the far greater part of Mankind: And for the unhappy influence of it to the
Decay of Christianity, I think it is not to be doubted that it is the tying of
our affections so much to this World, that above any thing indisposes us to
think of another. Whilst we set up our Hopes and our Establishment here, we
either altogether forget, or at least do not so vigorously consider, That God
has provided another and better place for us, whither we shall in a very little
time be transferred by him, and for which therefore the great affair of our
whole lives now should be to provide.

3. IS IT possible to be imagined that we should see such numbers engage their
lives and Labors, some to heap together A little dirt that shall bury them in
the end; Others to gain an Honor, that at best can be celebrated but by an
inconsiderable part of the World, and is envied and calumniated by more than
it is truly given; Most to pursue the pleasures (as they call them) of their
Natures; which begin in sin, are carried on with Danger, and end in bitterness;
and scarce one that troubles himself about the Blessings of Heaven, or at least
lives as if he did so; would Men seriously persuade themselves that they have
here no abiding place, no City to dwell in: but are only in their passage to
the heavenly Jerusalem, their City which is above, where alone true happiness
is to be found, and upon which therefore their thoughts and their endeavors
ought chiefly to be employed.

4. CAN we behold the vices and debaucheries of many; the carelessness and
irreligion of almost all; and believe that the Christian World is seriously
convinced of those great truths their Religion teaches them of A future life,
and A vast Eternity of rewards and punishments, according as we observe or
neglect the Duties it commands in This?

5. How shall we believe that those Men are persuaded of the true business of
this Life, that it is the time of trial, that God has thrown us into this World
as into A Circle, to exercise our selves in it, and receive the Crown if we
come off with Victory, who so shamefully decline the Combat; and are so far
from obtaining the victory, that we are scarcely to be brought but even to do
any thing toward it.

6. IN a word; were it possible that the thoughts of Eternity, but especially
the near approaches of it, by a mature age, a crasy constitution, or a violent
sickness, should amaze so many as we find it does, make them so unwilling to go
to Christ, and receive the Reward of their Labors; had they ever truly
considered all these things; and not rather with old Simeon sing their Nunc
dimittis, with comfort and assurance; and cry out with S. Paul, Luke 2. 29.
Phil. 1. 21. To me to live is Christ, Phil. 1. 21. 23.
and to dye is gain; and again, v. 23. I have a desire to depart and to be with
Christ.

7. WERE I now, Madam, to deal with any other than your self, these and the
like considerations would engage me, before I entered on the following
prescriptions, to dispose your mind to a reception of them, by showing you the
great interest we have in Eternity; That our Lives are uncertain, to be sure
cannot be long here, and that therefore we ought to hasten all we can, before
it be too late, to examine our Souls, and provide for futurity. That all the
little Objects we now pursue, for which our ease, our conscience, nay our very
Religion it self is sacrificed by us, are but vanities and trifles, neither
worthy in themselves, nor satisfying in their enjoyment; But, Madam, your
virtue, and your prudence, make all such preparations unnecessary formalities,
and instead of opening the way to the following Address by such insinuations, I
ought rather to apologize for my indiscretion in the whole undertaking, which
your piety prevents, and which your daily* practice shows you already to
understand beyond any thing I am able to offer for your assistance.

8. NEVERTHELESS since it has pleased God to an excellent natural disposition
to add yet other Obligations, and by the troubles of this Life to draw you to
himself; to show you worthy of his favor, and I trust more highly to reward
you in the next; be pleased to give me leave this way to congratulate with you
those Evils, which so many are wont to lament, and which no one more sincerely
wishes (if it please God) to see you free from, than my self; and as you have
done me the honor to command my attendance whilst you were with us here,
pardon me if I intrude upon your meditations a few of my most serious
Reflections, to supply my absence; and be a testimony of that real respect
wherewith I honor you now in your retirement.

CHAP. I. Of Contentedness under your Condition.
THOUGH I am infinitely distant from that excellent perfection which made the
Primitive Christians glory in their tribulations, and St. Paul rejoice in that
sting in the flesh which God had given him as a peculiar Blessing from above;
yet is it really some satisfaction to me, that I am not now wholly liable to
that Censure, which is so usually made on these occasions, that it is easy for
any Man when he is well to give advice to them that are not. It has pleased
God, for the rashness perhaps of my usual discourse, to make it at present very
uneasy for me to speak at all. I cannot but acknowledge his Mercy in the
Admonition, and if it please him altogether to silence me, so, That I shall not
only, as now, speak with difficulty, but wholly* be disabled to open my mouth,
to any articulate utterance, yet I hope he will give me grace even in my
thoughts to praise him; To consider the justice of his proceeding with me, and
to implore his pardon of what my sins have justly deserved.

2. IT cannot be denied but that this is an exercise of the most difficult
Nature, and the Apostle himself confesses even where he most exhorts us to an
acquiescence in it, Heb. 12. v. 11.
That no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; Yet
considerations there are that are able to alleviate our greatest miseries, and
make us, if not come up to the character of those who rejoice in Tribulations,
yet at least satisfy the duty I am now recommending, of being patient and
contented under our sufferings.

3. AND the first of these both in our practice and this Discourse ought to be,
To look up to that Hand that inflicts them.

IT is our great unhappiness when any calamities fall upon us, that we are
uneasy and dissatisfied; and our whole business and project is, how to remove
them, not to consider from whence they come. Sometimes indeed, if the cause be
visible, we discourse of it as of a chance or a misfortune, but we stop at the
instrument, and never pass on to him that directed it; the second cause we
know, but trouble our selves no further to recur to the first: whereas, would
we seriously consider, * that the Providence of God orders all the affairs of
the World; * that without his assistance we can no more get quit of our
Affliction, than but by his permission we first fell into it; * that this
unquietness therefore is a murmuring against his justice, a rebellion against
his Providence, upon whom alone we ought to rely; and whose mercy we should by
all imaginable submission implore; We should then acquiesce in his
dispensation, till it pleased his goodness to remove our evils; cry out with
old Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: and as we daily pray that
his will may be done in Earth, so by our submission show that we truly desire
it.

4. LET us to this add, Secondly; That God delights not to afflict, nor ever
willingly grieves the Children of Men.

* IT may be we suffer in our calamity the punishment of our sins, and then let
us not murmur at that which is the just reward of our deservings. * Perhaps God
proves us in this life, that he may the more plenteously reward us in the next;
and how then shall we repine against his mercy, which makes these light
afflictions that are but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; To be sure
if we make that use of them which he intends, if we repent seriously, submit
contentedly, and serve him faithfully, they shall turn to our advantage: though
the passage be troublesome, yet is it secure, and shall in a little time bring
us ease and quiet, and peace at the last.

5. FOR let us not mistake the goodness of God, nor imagine that because he
smites us, therefore we are forsaken by him, but let us consider rather,

Thirdly;

That it is the very Condition of all his promises, through much Tribulation to
bring us to his Kingdom;

That blessed place where all evils shall be removed, Revel. 21. 4.
and there shall be no more any death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain.

We have a full account of this, Heb. 12. A place so satisfactory, that I will
transcribe only one passage, to engage you to recur your self to the rest; My
son despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, v. 5. 6.
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loves he chastneth,
and scourges every son whom he receives. But, Fourthly;

6. Let us look into the Ages that have gone before us;

LET us consult our own experience in the present; we shall find the
observation of our Apostle ever to have been verified, that the best men
generally fall under the severest pressures, Our Savior Christ was our
forerunner in this trial, as well as in the reward that accompanies it: He
began as we ought to follow after, and for the joy which was set before him
endured the cross, Heb. 12. 2.
despising the shame. Which of his holy Apostles escaped this trial; What
numbers of the Primitive Saints were under the perpetual persecution of the
most malicious enemies that Hell could raise against them, for many hundred
Years. They were stoned, they were sawn as under, were slain with the sword,
they wandered up and down in sheeps skins and Goats skins, Heb. 11. 37.
being destitute, afflicted, tormented, and yet were these the Men, of whom the
world was not worthy, -- 38.
whom we ought with comfort to look up unto, and run with patience the race
that is set before us. Heb. 12. 1.


7. THESE considerations, though I have (as I ought) proposed in general terms,
yet I am sure, Madam, you will not fail by a particular application to bring
them home to your own concerns; and for your easier performance I will go on if
you please to make yet a reflection or two that may fortify you in it.

8. IN enquiring into the goods that you have lost, or the evils, you either
fear or suffer; I shall not trouble you with an Enumeration of that which I
know you despise, the flatteries, the courtship, the other vanities of the
World; The very loss of these is a happiness almost equal to what you undergo
for it. And though that Beauty, which yet others, I persuade my self, valued
too more highly than your self, was a Blessing which you owed much to Heaven
for; yet the additional ornaments you have hereby the opportunity of making to
your Soul, will in the end give you a more solid satisfaction, and as much
chain to you the affections of the good and wise, as the other attracted the
eyes of the rest.

9. FOR your present distemper; it is, God be thanked, neither so troublesome
for the present, as to take you off from all satisfaction; nor, I am willing to
persuade my self, shall it prove so dangerous in its consequence, as to deprive
you of all hope of seeing your self again in your former health, only
disciplined and instructed, not utterly cut off by sickness.

10. HOWEVER, let us suppose now, as well as fear the worst; Is there any thing
particular in dying young? Do not thousands every day do it? And have you known
none in health and vigor, who have pitied your condition, and behold they are
themselves gone before you, even since you fell into this Distemper: And what
is the harm then of this? that you have fairer warning than others, who are
unexpectedly cut off, and so have a better opportunity, as well as greater
engagements, to cultivate your Soul, and provide for your latter end? To dye is
no pain, to leave this World is only to get quit of a troublesome place, where
you could never find any ease or quiet, any solid satisfaction and comfort. To
go to Heaven is to be transferred to that Kingdom you have ever longed for; to
enjoy all the glories of eternity, to become company for Saints and Angels, and
behold the Blessed presence of God, in whose presence there is fullness of joy,
and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

11. THE truth is, the greatest part of your misfortune is founded on the
opinion of the World: we fools esteem these things evils, and this makes others
believe they really are so. But the good Christian who considers them only as
necessary passages to a glorious immortality; that through this dark scene of
fansied horror sees a Crown and a Throne, and everlasting blessings prepared
for him; joyfully receives his Summons as he has long impatiently expected it:
goes off out of the World as contentedly as the Actor when the Play is ended
leaves the Stage. His only concern is, whilst he appears upon it, so to demean
himself, that he may have a Plaudite at last; and then it is all one whether his
part ended in the Third Act, or continues on to the very last Scene.

12. SUCH, Madam, are your Obligations to this first Duty, and the performance
of them will especially engage you to these three things;

1. Never despair either of Gods blessings here, or of his reward hereafter;
but go on as you have begun; fulfill your duty as he has commanded; embrace his
promises with Faith and assurance; and for the rest, leave it in his hands; as
in the hands of a most merciful Savior, who himself became Man, and suffered
Death upon the Cross for our sakes, and by that stupendous act of Mercy, has
taught us ever to rely in all things upon his Goodness.

2. Murmur not at your sickness, for thereby you will sin against God's
Providence and Government; but submit with peace to what you suffer, and pray
for your deliverance. I do not say you should affect a rude insensibility:
Sighs and Groans and mournful expressions, this is the sick Man's proper
language; David roared for the disquietness of his soul; Ps. 38. 8.
our blessed Lord himself in his last and sharpest pang of sorrow, cried out
with a loud voice, Matthew xxvii 46.
before he gave up the ghost. There is nothing in this but what is innocent;
and though too much of it may betray your weakness, yet whilst you keep still a
resignation to God's disposal, it cannot be imputed to you for any sin.

3. TAKE heed of that, which is the general fault of sick persons, and which a
long disorder almost unavoidably brings with it, and that is Peevishness. This
will but render you uneasy to your self, and to those about you; it troubles
your repose, without doing you any good; and is equally to be avoided both for
the folly, and for the sin.

13. I SHALL close this reflection with one necessary remark, which I desire
you to apply to all the following; That in speaking thus to you, I am so far
from charging you as guilty in this matter, that I can sincerely say, I believe
the exhortation wholly needless, only it was my duty in so important a concern
to omit nothing that might any way be thought necessary; and it will be your
satisfaction to see how far you are advanced in your duty; and your engagement
to pursue that very little, which you may perhaps find to be still wanting.

CHAP. II. That you ought not to be amazed at the fear of Death.
THERE is nothing in the world more generally dreaded, and yet less to be
feared than Death. Indeed for those unhappy Men, whose hopes terminate in this
life, no wonder if the prospect of another seems terrible and amazing. Hell is
a place which the most resolute Soul cannot but tremble to think of, how much
more to enter into? But for him who has lived well, and who therefore relies on
God's mercies for an eternal Salvation, to show this concern, it betrays either
much weakness or great doubt, and either his faith, or his hopes, or both, are
less firm than they ought to be, HE therefore that will not fear to dye, must
first be careful to live well.

2. THE stroke of death is nothing; Children endure it, and the greatest
Cowards find it no pain: But when to this we shall add the certain apprehension
of its being the gate to an eternal life, then may we presume to say, we have
wholly conquered this King of terrors, and sing the Epinikion of St. Paul, 1
Cor. 15. O death where is thy sting! -- v. 55.
O grave where is thy victory! -- v. 57.
Thanks be to God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly; He must take off his Affections from this world.

3. IT was the reflection of the Son of Sirach Ecclus 4. 1. O death, how bitter
is the remembrance of thee to a Man that lives at rest in his possessions, to
the Man that has nothing to vex him, but has prosperity in all things. Whilst
we please our selves with the vanities we enjoy here, we cannot expect but that
it must needs be a trouble to us to be divorced from them: But let us only
change the scene; instead of these earthly, transient goods; let us raise our
Souls to the Heavenly and Eternal: then shall we begin to think the time long,
that we are divorced from them, and wish for that end, we before feared. Tully
tells us that Cleombrotus was so taken with this speculation, that having only
read in Plato the conjectures of that great Man concerning the state of the
Soul after death, he had not patience to tarry the tedious course of nature,
but by a violent death cut the thread himself, that he might immediately enjoy
what he so infinitely desired.

4. NOR may we fortify our selves much less against the fear of death, Thirdly,

From the Consideration of those evils it frees us from, than of that happiness
it transfers us to.

When the Great Emperor of Persia wept over his Army upon this Consideration,
that within the revolution of a single Age, not a Man of all that innumerable
confluence would be left alive; Artabanus standing by, improved his meditation;
by adding, that yet all of them should meet with so many and great evils, that
every one should wish himself dead long before that. It is the true character
of our lives which Job once gave. Job 14. 1.
Man that is born of a Woman has but a short time to live, and is full of
trouble. It is the great blessing of Heaven that as our lives are very
miserable, so are they very short too, and what we usually complain of as our
misfortune, we ought rather to congratulate as our happiness. Had David died a
little sooner, How much trouble had he escaped which now he endured, in the
rebellion and death of his own Son, and all the miseries of a Civil War that
was raised against him. Let any Man consult his own experience, and say, how
many sorrows he had missed, had God called him to his rest but a few years
before; and therefore whether the promise he has made to deliver the just from
the evils to come, ought not to be made our daily prayer for its
accomplishment, rather than fill our Souls with terror at the apprehension.

But fourthly: Death does not only free us from misery, but sin too.

5. THE life of a Christian is a continual warfare, full of dangerous conflicts
and doubtful consequences: Our lusts solicit us, the World encourages, the
Devil tempts us; we fall often, and are never secure. But Death frees us from
all danger, sets us safely on Shore in our long-expected Canaan, where there
are no temptations, no dangers, no possibility of falling; but eternal purity,
and immortal joys secure our happiness for evermore.

6. THERE is yet an advice which may usefully be added here, and it is this,

That since the time of our dying is uncertain, we should every day expect what
every hour may bring to us:

IT is our great unhappiness in this matter that though we live never so many
years, we are still surprised. We put the evil day far from us, and then it
catches us at unawares, and we tremble at the prospect. But let us stand on our
guard, let us live like those who expect to dye, and then we shall find these
terrors very much lessen, and that we feared Death only because we were
unacquainted with it. Philip King of Macedon had a Page constantly attending in
his Chamber to tell him every morning as soon as he awaked, Remember, O King,
that thou art mortal.

7. BUT to quit you wholly of this fear, and that* I may close this point too
with something particular, give me leave, Madam, to desire you, instead of a
thousand arguments, to recur only to your own experience; you have already
looked death in the face, you are acquainted with it, what have you found so
terrible in it as to disturb the repose of a good Christian, i.e. of such a one
as your self. I cannot without satisfaction remember the calm, the quiet, the
peace you were then in; when every hour seemed to tell you 'twas your last.
Death is an enemy you have already met, and already conquered; you have pulled
out his sting, by the preparation you have made for it, and you know he has
nothing now remaining that can injure or affright you. Only maintain your
conquest, by securing your innocence; and working out your Salvation, and then
you may with confidence undervalue that which so much terrifies the world, and
which yet all, even those who the most dread it, must in a little time meet
whether they will or no.

CHAP. III. That you ought to be careful to provide for another World.
THIS is the great duty of our lives, and ought to be the chief business of us
all every day of them. No Man knows what the next hour may bring forth, and to
put our Salvation, and the hopes of eternity to so dangerous a hazard as we do,
when we procrastinate (though never so little) our working of it out with fear
and trembling, is to show either a very unwarrantable presumption upon God's
goodness, or a very light esteem of our own Souls.

2. OUR lives depend on so many curious parts and organs, so many diseases
assail them every moment, so many accidents may take them from us, that we can
never say the next minute is our own; and that he therefore who neglects his
salvation to day, may without danger put it off to to morrows consideration.
God has told us that his Spirit shall not always strive with Man, but as he
offers to every one a space to repent, so there is a time too (if we omit that
opportunity) when there shall be no longer any space for it.

AND how can any of us tell that this hour is not the last wherein God will
give us his grace for so great a work; so that though we should live to see the
next, yet that then our sentence shall not be found already pronounced, and we
shall not be able to repent, though we never so much desire it.

3. SUCH obligations therefore have we all immediately to consider our ways,
Psalm. 119. 55.
and turn our feet to God's testimonies: But, Madam, it has pleased his great
goodness to lay more than ordinary ties upon you, to do this: He has taken you
off, by a peculiar instance of his Mercy, from the vanities and tempations of
the World: He has disabled you from falling into many sins; and calls upon you
to watch against the rest; He has brought you to an early knowledge of your
self, and of him, at an age when most others are the servants of sin, and
creatures of vanity. He has given you opportunity from the writings and
conversation of the best Men, to understand your duty, your danger, and your
interest: And, Madam, what you ought above all things to bless him for, he has
given you a heart too, to receive instruction, and that is desirous of his
glory; and though after so many better means as you have had of informing your
self how to proceed in this important business; after the knowledge you have
attained, and the progress you have made, there is little need for me to add
any thing on this subject; yet I know I cannot better satisfy your piety, or
discharge my own duty, than by laying before you, in a short view, a prospect
of your labors, through which you have so long been traveling, and are now so
nearly come, to everlasting life.

4. AT the first Creation, when God created Man upon the Earth, he planted in
him a Law teaching him his whole Duty, he gave him besides, a positive Law not
to eat of the fruit of the tree of Knowledge; Genesis 2. 17.
and to perform this, he added a perfect strength and ability whereby he might
for ever have lived without the least sin; had Adam done this, his perfection
(the Knowledge and Ability God created in him) had still continued, and after a
certain period of years, which God should have determined, he had been rewarded
with an assumption to eternal felicity.

5. THIS is that which is usually called THE FIRST COVENANT, which Adam fatally
breaking by his disobedience, soon forfeited; and came short of that Glory
which God had prepared for him: yet it pleased the Lord to enter into a SECOND
with him, the tenor of which was, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the
Serpent's head: Genesis 3. 15.
i. e. That Christ taking our nature upon him, and so becoming the seed of the
Woman, should perform that Covenant of unsinning obedience which Adam broke,
and yet being faultless, undergo a shameful, and ignominious death for him and
his Posterity; and so bruise the Serpent's head; i. e. deliver us from the
power of the Devil, who by this transgression had got the dominion over us.

6. AND this is that Covenant we now live under, the Promises of which are *
pardon of sins through the blood of Christ; * strength and grace to perform the
conditions, * and eternal glory to reward our labors; This is what God on his
part has declared to us; for the requisites on ours, what we must do to obtain
these blessings, that is the great business of us all to know, and the peculiar
design of this place briefly to consider.

7. WHERE, first, I must lay down this for your encouragement, that we are no
longer now tied to the heavy yoke of a perfect, unsinning Obedience; not to
have committed any deliberate sin, nay or even to have persisted in a habit and
course of it; but it is, * a sincere endeavor to perform whatsoever God
enables us; * an unfeigned Obedience to the whole Gospel of Christ: and * a
hearty bewailing of our own infirmities, as often as we come short of it; with
* a real* desire, and * true endeavor of doing better for the future.

8. To enter on a minute consideration of this would engage me to lay before
you a Summary of the whole Gospel of Christ: But, Madam, this were to exceed
the limits of my design, and you have abundant assistances for this Knowledge,
in those excellent books which you have chosen for the companions of your
Travels. Only because certain it is that the very best of us come short of our
duty, and stand in need of God's pardon, and forgiveness; I will briefly lay
before you the method you are to take to obtain this, in the particular
consideration of those two great duties of Faith and Repentance.

Sect. I. Of Faith.
TTHERE is scarce any duty which has been so obscured in the writings of
learned Men as this. I will not enter here into any of their disputes, but
briefly say, what I think fit for your practice and performance of it.

2. FAITH then is an assenting to, or believing * the whole word of God, but
especially of his Gospel, and of the * Commands and * Threats and * Promises
therein contained. This is the nature of that Faith which is required of us,
and it is then perfect when it affords to every one of these that assent which
is proportioned to it, viz. 1. A firm assent to whatever the Gospel has
revealed: 2. an obediential submission to the Commands: 3. An humble fear and
awe of the Threats: and 4. a fiducial relyance on the promises of it.

3. To have the first of these you must in general firmly believe, that
whatever God has said, is infallibly true; and though in particular, there be
many revelations which you cannot it may be understand the possibility of; as
that God became Man, was born of a Mother still remaining a Virgin; that he
suffered and died, and yet lives for ever; yet must you undoubtedly conclude,
that since he has plainly told you these things are so, you ought firmly to
believe him, seem they never so repugnant otherwise to your apprehension.

4. To have the second, you must in general assent to God's commands, that they
are most fitting, just, and righteous; and that all men therefore ought
diligently to fulfill them; and in particular you must resolve that by the
assistance of Heaven you your self will.

5. FOR the third you must believe steadfastly that these threats shall
certainly, as most justly they ought, be executed upon all those impenitent
Sinners against whom they are denounced, and that except you take care to work
out your Reconciliation, and get out of the number of these unhappy creatures,
you shall certainly find your part in them.

6. FOR the last you are infallibly to believe what God has promised;
especially that he will give pardon of sin, and everlasting salvation to all
humble and repenting sinners; and for what refers to your own particular, you
are confidently to rely upon his word, that if you perform your part, Christ
will never fail in his; and that therefore you ought to fulfill those duties,
which he commands, and to which alone this promise of Reward is given.

7. IT is a question which my little experience lets me know does oftentimes
trouble very good Men, that certainly their faith in this last instance is not
right, because they still find it accompanied with fears and doubts of their
own Salvation. But, Madam, you must consider that the faith which God requires
in this matter is only this, That he will certainly reward all those that
believe in him, and obey his Commandments; This we are undoubtedly to assent
to; but now for the particular application of this Faith to our selves, that
deserves no more of our assent, nor can indeed warrantably have it, than what
is founded on the serious consideration of our own performances. Now though our
conscience bearing witness to our sincerity, may give us great cause to hope we
are in a State of Salvation, yet is it no part of any man's Faith undoubtedly
to believe it; Nay rather some degree of fear and trembling mixed with it may be
a good means to secure us in our duty; whilst a confident dependence is very
often ill grounded, and may create such a negligence as will certainly ruin us.

8. LET your endeavor therefore be to fulfill God's commands, to repent as
often as you fail of it, and to hope for pardon and acceptance of him. Infinite
reason you have for all this; and this will be sufficient for your present
comfort, and for your future acceptance. But if still, either * the greatness
of the danger, or * glory of the reward; * either your desires of becoming
better, * or a true and humble sense of your own unworthiness (which is almost
the perpetual case of the best persons) keep your Soul under an awe and a
concern, and will not suffer you to rise up to that confidence, which some Men,
I fear, unwarrantably themselves pretend to, I am sure unwarrantably require of
others; Assure your self, that whilst you firmly acquiesce in the general
belief, That God will reward all them that love him, and doubt of your self
only because you fear whether you do this so well as you ought; this doubting
shall prepare you to receive the reward of your Humility, but never bring you
in danger of any punishment for your infidelity.

Sect. II. Of Repentance.
REPENTANCE is usually defined to be a change of mind, an absolute entire
conversion of our Souls from sin to God. It is not a thing to be done at
certain times, as when we give an Alms, we exercise a particular act of
charity; but it is a state of life, and consists in a continual sincere practice
of all those duties which God has required, and a hearty sorrow, confession,
and resolution of better obedience, as often as we violate any of his commands.

2. THE passage to it is difficult and uneasy; It contains many steps which
the habitual sinner will find it hard to overpass. I shall here consider only
four of the more principal, and which are ever found in that Christian who
truly lives in a State of it.

3. THE first is, To have a true sense of sin, of its Odiousness, and of its
danger.

i.e. YOU must firmly be convinced that every sin you commit, sets you at
enmity with Heaven, and will (if not forsaken) render you incapable of it: That
to persevere in any evil course, is the way to make you unhappy in this Life,
and shall certainly throw you into everlasting torments in the next: Of all
this you must seriously persuade your self, and that not lightly and in
general, deceiving your own Soul; but bringing it home to your particular
concern in it; affecting your mind, and engaging your utmost endeavors to
avoid that evil, which is thus odious to God, and thus dangerous to your
Everlasting Salvation.

THE second step to this Duty, is, To have a hearty sorrow and contrition for
your sin.

4. AND this you must endeavor after, not by being frighted and terrified, and
so upon that account troubled, as often as you reflect on those infinite evils
your sins are like to bring upon you. There is no Man living so wicked, but
would do the same; But, Madam, you must really sorrow that you have ever
sinned; That you have provoked so loving and merciful a Father; That you have
disobeyed so gracious a Redeemer, and all to gratify your passions in some
baser instance, which you ought to abhor upon these grounds alone, though there
were no punishment awaiting your transgressions.

5. NOR must this sorrow and contrition be only for the grosser evils of our
unregenerate estate, but even when we live best we must repeat it as often as
we transgress the divine command; nay we should employ it too, even upon the
weaknesses, the frailties, the pollutions of our natures: our very proneness
and inclination to sin: for however these (unconsented to) are no actual
transgressions; yet are they matter of sorrow and grief to every true
Christian, and therefore ought to be part of his humiliation also.

THE third preparatory to this Duty, is, Confession.

6. AND this so necessary to our pardon, that we have no promise of any
forgiveness without it: To fulfill this you must not satisfy your self to
acknowledge to God Almighty in general, That you are a sinner; but you must
carefully remark, and particularly enumerate also, at least the several kinds
of sin whereof you know your self guilty: You must show your sense of them by
aggravating them with all the unhappy circumstances, and heightning accidents
of them; and for the rest, you must comprise your unknown and lesser sins under
some such general confession as that of the holy David, Who can tell how often he
offends? Psalm. 19. 12.
O cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

7. YOU will, Madam, doubtless expect that I should here add somewhat of
another sort of Confession, which I have sometimes had the honor to discourse
with you about; I then told you that unless some Accident rendered it so, I did
not esteem it absolutely necessary. The expediency of it, I must confess, I
ever much approved, and have often wished others would do so too; and the
reasons I have at large given you may be summed up into these: 1. That St.
James has advised us to confess our faults one to another, Chap. 5. 16. and
pray one for another. 2. If we have injured another, then we ought to go and
confess our fault to him, as ever we mean to obtain the forgiveness of God. 3.
But if our sin belongs only to him, yet to confess to his Minister is in some
sort a fuller satisfaction to his justice; It declares our greater detestation
of that offense, for which we are content to commit this violence upon our
selves. It gives us this comfort too, that thereby we get the opinion of our
Spiritual Guide concerning the state of our Repentance; and his direction and
assistance for the perfecting of it; and if we desire his particular
absolution, we must then make our confession to him before we can obtain it.
What force these motives may have upon you, I cannot tell; but for the present
you are passing into a place where you will have little opportunity to practice
it, and should therefore resolve to supply it, by a more due and careful
performance of it to God Almighty.

THE last thing preparatory to a true Repentance, is, A firm resolution and vow
of a new life.

8. THAT you will immediately quit all your Sins, and all the occasions that
are wont to lead you into those sins; That you will wholly resign your self up
to the guidance of Christ; and perform whatsoever you know to be his will; and
this do truly and sincerely all the days of your life.

9. AND here, Madam, behold in short the duties that are required of you: This
is what you must do to inherit eternal Life; And if you have (as I make no
doubt) already come up thus far, you are then firmly to persevere in it unto
the end; If you fulfill this Resolution, though you * fall sometimes by
infirmity; * are betrayed by Ignorance, * or surprised by some sudden, and
daily incurring temptations; * Nay, though you should be so unhappy as to fall
into some greater Act, even of deliberate sin, which you might have avoided,
and which you presently retract by confession and amendment, you are
nevertheless in a regenerate estate, you live the Life of a Christian here, and
shall inherit the reward that is promised to him, in a glorious Immortality
hereafter.

10. I SHALL close this with my earnest desires, which not any doubts of your
goodness, but my real concern for your welfare, extort from me; that you will
seriously consider your own state as to this affair; Flatter not your self, *
neither a transient sorrow that you have sinned, * nor a wish that you had not,
* neither a faint and general, God be merciful to me a sinner; * nor an
imperfect resolution not to be so any longer; * not an observing, for the rest,
the whole Law, if you indulge your self but in any one habit of sin; * not
praying to God to give you his grace; without your own sincere endeavors of
using it; nothing but a steady resolution brought to practice; God's grace
used, his commandments obeyed as far as your infirmities will permit, and his
pardon begged where you have not; This is that which alone must save your Soul,
and carry you on to that glorious Immortality, which I beseech him to give you
for his Son Jesus Christ's sake.

CHAP. IV. A consideration of some particular duties which I would more
especially recommend to you.
I THOUGHT, Madam, here to have ended your trouble, and referred my self (...)
what may concern your farther practice, to those excellent and useful Treatises
you have so wisely provided for that purpose; But they speak in general, and
though I know the care you take to apply them to your self, yet I cannot but
beg leave to add two or three considerations that may more immediately be
accommodated to your particular circumstances.

First, That you duly implore the blessings of Heaven by your constant Prayers
to God Almighty

I NEED not tell you that you have * many wants to be supplied, * many
blessings to receive, * many sins to be forgiven, and that there is nothing can
obtain all these for you but your prayers* or were you so all-sufficient as not
to need the influences of Providence to support you, yet would sure every day
bring to your remembrance slips and infirmities to be confessed to him, to be
sure blessings and mercies to be gratefully acknowledged, in a perpetual return
of praises and thanksgivings to the great Donor. Upon all which accounts there
can never be any pretense for your neglect of that duty, which so many
continual engagements oblige you to.

2. LET me to this, add the great assistance it will afford you in the
performance of all the rest of your duty; whilst thus you have your
conversation in Heaven, all the little goods here below will seem poor and
inconsiderable in your sight; Phil. 3. 20.
this will strengthen your patience in bearing your calamities, whilst with
faith you contemplate the glorious end to which they lead; It will raise in
your Soul the greatest care of fulfilling the divine will, lest you lose so
excellent a reward; in a word; this exercise will call down the favor of
Heaven upon you, either to remove those afflictions you now labor under, from
you, or you from them; will bring you peace, and comfort, and satisfaction in
this life, and an everlasting peace and repose in the next.

3. IT has been the great discouragement of some Christians in the exercise of
this duty, that they do not find these great Benefits of their devotion: That
they are told indeed of the mighty influences of prayer: and have read how that
by it Joshua changed the order of nature, and made the Sun stand still in the
midst of the Firmament; Elias tied up the Windows of Heaven that it rained not
for three whole years in Israel; Josh. 10. 12. 1 Kings 17.
Hezekias added fifteen years to his life; 2 Kings 20. 6.
The Apostles gave feet to the Lame, Eyes to the Blind; and even life to the
Dead; But themselves are so far from working such miracles, that they cannot so
much as obtain the supply of those ordinary wants they very often labor under.

4. BUT, Madam, we must not for all this think either that the Arm of the Lord
is shortened, that he cannot, or his will altered that he should not hear us, as
well as he did them; indeed for such miraculous effects, we have now no longer
need of them, and it would therefore be a fond presumption in us to expect
them; But for the rest there are two considerations which Men would do well to
reflect on before they charge God foolishly.

1. WHETHER we do not very often receive the benefit of our prayers, when yet
ungratefully we charge Heaven with denying our Petitions.

2. IF our Requests are really denied, whether the fault does not ly at our own
doors that they are so.

5. FOR the former of these we may very easily be mistaken, and I doubt very
often are so: Did we indeed perfectly know the state of our own condition, and
what was most proper and convenient for us, we might then have some reason to
conclude our Prayers were not heard, if our desires were not answered: But now
that such is our ignorance that though we are sensible enough of the evils that
lie upon us, yet we cannot say either whether they are fit to be removed at
all; or when, or by what means; or for what state; we ought to be very wary in
our thoughts of God's Providence, and not rashly pronounce what we can never be
sure of*

6. SHOULD you now, for instance, your self, Madam, pray to God for a recovery
from this sickness; how rash would it be to accuse God of not hearing your
Prayers, because you found your Disease to continue still? * It may be he sees
it has not yet perfectly wrought in you all those good effects he intends; That
if you should at this time recover your health, it might occasion your return
to the sins and follies of your age. * It may be he intends yet longer to prove
your virtue, that so he may afterward more plenteously reward it; * Perhaps he
punishes your sins by it in this Life, that he may spare you in the next. Now
if these or the like are the causes of your affliction, certainly you could not
have a greater injury done you, than the removing of your distemper: and those
Prayers you make for a recovery are to be looked upon as best heard by God, and
best answered for you, if they move him to a longer continuance of your
sickness. Again: * Though God does not answer your requests in the very removal
of your distemper; it may be yet he shows their efficacy in supporting you with
strength and patience to bear it; Infinite are the methods of his Providence,
and impossible it is for us to trace them all, and though we are not able to
point out the very mercy which our devotion has obtained, yet this God has
promised, and we must therefore firmly believe and rely upon it, That if we
ask, we shall, we do, receive.

7. BUT here my other consideration must come in, St. James, speaking of the
ineffectualness of some men's Devotion, tells them, Ye ask, and receive not,
because ye ask amiss; James 4. 3.
and that I fear is too often our condition; And therefore that you may be able
both to know and avoid this, I will beg leave, Madam, to give you only a short
Catalogue of what qualifications seem to me more immediately requisite to
render your Devotion prevalent.

1. TAKE heed that the things you desire be such as are fit for God to give,
and you to receive; Let not any instances of sin defile your requests; and even
in the most innocent matters, rather beg in general the blessings of God which
he knows requisite, whether for your Soul or Body, than descend too much to the
particulars your self, and prescribe to him, who so little understand your own
wants.

Secondly BEFORE you pray, clear your Soul from all those sins which you know
displeasing to God Almighty; for till that be done he regards you as his Enemy;
and you cannot therefore expect that he should reward you as his servant.

Thirdly PREPARE your Soul with all those necessary Graces that are more
immediately requisite to this performance: with Humility and Resignation; with
Faith in his power and Hope of his mercy, with Love and Charity toward God and
toward your Neighbor; All which will infinitely dispose him to give, and
prepare you to receive.

Fourthly, WHEN you pray, let it be with attention, with fervency, with
perseverance; To which end I should think it better that your prayers were
short and frequent, than over long; which only make them tedious and uneasy to
you in your present state, but never the more acceptable to God; who delights
not in men's words, but requires their hearts; and hears the shortest
ejaculation, as certainly as the longest prayer.

Fifthly, IN a word: Having prayed, leave the issue contentedly in his hands:
Let it satisfy you that you have his promise for your security, and that if
thus you make your requests to him, you shall sooner or later most certainly
find that your labor has not been in vain, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
in the Lord.

A SECOND duty, that I must more particularly recommend to you is Charity:

A GRACE That has more promises annexed to it than any other moral or
theological virtue, St. Paul prefers it even to Faith it self, 1 Cor. 13. And
could we have every other virtue which the Gospel enjoins in the highest
perfection, yet he plainly assures us that without this, they would all avail
us nothing.

2. CHARITY taken in its largest extent is nothing else but, The sincere Love
of God and our Neighbor: The former of these requires not only your highest
esteem of him, your desires of going to him, and filling your self with his
goodness; but also a sincere endeavor to please and obey him, to fulfill his
commands, and hate all those things that he dislikes, and may any way set you
at enmity with him.

3. THE latter engages you to a universal love of all Men, even your very
Enemies; to retain no malice nor hatred against any; to be ready to do them all
the kindness you are able, by reproving the Vicious, instructing the ignorant,
relieving the poor; for all which, you have the peculiar promise of God for
your engagement; and shall receive the pardon of your sins, and everlasting
glory for your Reward.

I MUST now hasten to a conclusion, and therefore will presume to add only this
one caution more,

I THIRDLY, that you would take an especial care how you employ your time.

IT is not, Madam, for me to divine what opportunities you may have for this,
nor can I therefore advise you any thing in particular: Only let me beg you to
lose no occasion of doing all the good you can; which whatever the issue of
your present sickness be, is to be sure your duty, and shall prove your
blessing either in this World or another.

2. I NEED not desire you to spend the hours you may have for your friends and
your diversion innocently, but if I may presume to speak my thoughts in a
matter of no great importance, I should persuade you not only to do this, but
even to deny your self somewhat of that full liberty which others do usually
allow themselves; the Wise man has told us, that Mirth is not proper in the
time of sorrow; since it has pleased God to lay his inflictions upon you, You
ought so far (I had almost said in civility to him) to comply with your
circumstances, as to be a little more reserved than otherwise were needful, and
though not to fly* to the other extreme (which, I rather ought to dissuade you
from) yet to keep in such a temper, as may both speak you sensible, as you
ought, of your condition, and yet not discontented at God's dispensations.

3. BUT, Madam, whatever your employs be, let no day pass without some time to
retire into your self, and either by reading, meditating, or some other pious
exercise to feed your zeal, and confirm your devotion.

4. LASTLY, in your most busy occupations, when you are never so much taken up
with other affairs, yet steal now and then a minute to the thoughts of Heaven,
send up an Ejaculation to the God of your Salvation; This is a piece of thrift
that by frequent exercise will do you much good, and yet never injure any other
business. Augustus Caesar is highly commended by the ancient Poet, that in the
midst of his most troublesome occupations he could still find time to look up
to Heaven, and consider the frame, and contemplate the parts and motions of it.
How much more should we always be at leisure to reflect on him that framed both
that and us; to whose Providence we owe every minute of our lives, and whom
therefore we ought, above all other things, incessantly to praise for his
unspeakable Mercies.

CLOSE.
AND now, Madam, that I may close with what I begun, after so long an intrusion
upon your Meditations, with these reflections, which I am confident make a
great part of your daily entertainment; The only thing that can render either
these Papers or their recommendations acceptable unto you; that can secure you
against sin, and endear Virtue and Religion to your practice, will be to raise
your affections above this World, by seriously considering the excellence and
certainty of another life; and how vain and transient, indeed how troublesome
and unsatisfying are the highest felicities of this.

2. I HAVE not here time to delineate to you the glories of God's heavenly
Kingdom, nor indeed could I tell you (if I had) what the happiness of that
place is likely to be, where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and there
shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain;When our Bodies shall
be freed from every disease; our Souls from every trouble; those shall be
changed into incorruptible and immortal substances, these be entertained with
the most comfortable and ravishing objects, and both continue to be thus
unspeakably happy throughout all Eternity, without the least danger of either
losing or lessening their enjoyments.

3. BLESSED God! How contrary is this to our melancholy and uncomfortable
portion here below? a place, where not a day passes, but we eat our Bread with
sorrow and cares; The present troubles us, the future amazes us; and even the
past fills us with grief and anguish. I forbear to mention the particular evils
which every Man best knows by his own experience: If we look abroad upon the
present face of the World, What do we see in the several Kingdoms about us, but
Wars and confusion, all things running to ruin, and destruction, to the
confounding and devouring of each other. If we consider the Church, that holy
Mother of us all, how do her unnatural Children rend and tear her sacred bowels
by their contentions? What Schisms, What Heresies, what Profaneness is there in
it? Only in Sin and Impiety we agree on all sides; here there is neither Jew
nor Gentile; but all are united in a monstrous confederacy against God and our
own Souls.

4. IF we contract our view, and confine it to our own sinful nation; It has
pleased God to preserve us yet in peace, to see if we will repent and
anticipate his Judgments; But alas! his hand is lifted up to strike, and we do
nothing to prevent the blow: and what can we expect but that it should at last
fall upon us to our confusion.

5. PARDON me, Madam, if I freely confess to you my fears, that I tremble to
think what shall be the issue of so great an Impenitence, as we have now these
many years showed under all the various methods of God's Providence to redeem
us.

6. HE has sent the sword, both of civil Troubles and public War amongst us,
and it has been deeply stained in the blood of the best and chiefest of our
strength; Our Princes have been forced into Captivity; Our Church been chased
into the Wilderness; The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord* has
been cut off by the vilest of his Subjects, yet have we not returned, nor
sought our God.

7. THE Fire has consumed our dwellings, the Plague destroyed its Thousands and
ten thousands in our Streets, yet behold we are still incorrigible, we go on as
before in the ways of our own hearts, and speak peace to our souls even in the
midst of all these dangers.

8. GREAT certainly is our sin, and fatal, I fear, shall be the punishment of
it, and what shall we do, (for, Madam, I must here beg leave to join my self in
this reflection) to prevent our part in the common destruction? Let us take
heed that we have no share in their sins, and then by God's mercy we shall have
none in the punishment. Let us live as those who attend such trials, and then
he will either be pleased to take us from the evil to come, or cover us with
his hand in the midst of it: He will to be sure with the danger make a way for
us to escape; and being past through this short storm, will bring us to that
Port where we shall find everlasting Rest, and a consummated felicity; Those
blessings, which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor does it enter into
the Heart of Man to conceive; but which God has prepared for them that love
him: Among which blessed number that you may then be found, as it was the only
intention of these reflections to prepare you, so shall it ever be the hearty
prayer of him who with all imaginable respect and sincerity remains,

Madam, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, W. W.

THE CONTENTS.
* 1. INtroduction to Page 30 That the fatal source of all our evil is, That
our affections are tied to this World, and we do not as we ought, consider
another. * 2. The Letter it self divided into 4. Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of Contentedness. p. 30.
This I. A duty very difficult. n. 2. Yet which we are engaged to, 1. Because
it is God who smites us. n. 3. 2. He always designs our good in it. n. 4. 3. And
by our Afflictions shows that we are his. n. 5. 4. That the best Men have still
had their share. n. 6. 5. Particular considerations. n. 7. to 1^.
This II. Expressed in 3. particulars: 1. Of not despairing; nor, 2. Murmuring;
nor, 3. Being fretful under our Calamities.

CHAP. II. Of the Fear of Death. p. 57
Nothing more generally dreaded. n. 1. Yet this fear may be banished, 1. By
living well. n. 2. 2. By taking off our* Affections from this World. n. 3 3. By
considering the evils it frees us from. n. 4 4. By viewing the sins it
prevents. n. 5 5. By expecting it every day. n. 6 6. Particular considerations.
n. 7

CHAP. III. Of providing for another World. p. 72
This we ought immediately to set about. n. 1, 2, 3. How we ought to do it, 1.
In general. n. 4. to 8. 2. In particular by I. Faith. II. Repentance. I. Faith.
p. 86

What it is. n. 1, 2. The parts of it. n. 4. ib. these fulfilled 1. In a firm
assent to God's truths. n. 3. 2. An obedience to his Commands. n. 4. 3. A fear
of his punishment. n. 5. 4. A hope of his promises. n. 6.
What faith every man is bound to have of his own Salvation. n. 7, 8.
II. Repentance. p. 97 What it is. n. 1. The parts of it. n. 4. 1. A sense of
sin. n. 3. 2. Contrition for it. n. 4, 5. 3. Confession of sin. n. 6, 7. 4.
Resolution against it. n. 8, 9, 10.

CHAP. IV. Of particular Duties. p. 115.
I. Prayer. p. 116 Its necessity. n. 1, 2. Why we do not always perceive the
benefit of it. n. 3, 4. 1. We often receive it when we think we do not. n. 5,
6. 2. If we receive it not, the fault lies at our own doors. n. 7. The
qualifications requisite that we may obtain it.
II. Charity. p. 134 Its Excellence. n. 1. Parts Toward God. n. 2. Toward our
Neighbor. n. 3.
III. Of spending your time well. p. 137 1. Take all occasions of doing good.
n. 1. 2. Live innocently. n. 2. 3. Often return to holy Exercises. n. 3. 4.
Constantly intermix pious ejaculations. n. 4. * The Close. p. 144

FINIS.
Advertisement.
Private Devotions digested into six Litanies, with Directions and Prayers, by
Hen. Valentine.

A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times. Newly published.

Both Printed for Ric. Chiswell.


