WRR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


WILLIAM R.

WHereas it has pleased Almighty God, in his Providence toward Us and Our
People, to manifest his Power and Mercy in giving Us Success and Victory over
Our Enemies and Rebellious Subjects in Ireland; We cannot, upon the due
Consideration hereof, but with all Humility adore the goodness of God therein
signally manifested: And We lock upon it as an Invitation from Heaven, to Us
and all Our People, unto most entire Thankfulness for the same. And to the end
some Solemn Time may be set apart for the Public Performance of this Duty, and
that We and all Our Subjects in England and Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, may pay Our just Tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving to Almighty God, We
do hereby Publish and Declare, and also strictly Charge and Command, That
Sunday the Nineteenth of this Instant October be Observed as a Day of Public
Thanksgiving in all Churches and Chapels, and other Places of Public Worship
throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed. And for the more Orderly Performance thereof, We, by the Advice of Our
Reverend Bishops, have Directed to be Composed, Printed and Published, the
Forms of such Prayers and Public Thanksgivings, as We have thought fit to be
Used in all Churches and Places at these Public Meetings; and have given
Charge to Our Bishops to Disperse the same throughout the whole Kingdom. And We
do also Direct and Appoint, That this Our Proclamation be publicly Read in all
Churches and Chapels on some Lord's Day precedent to the said Day of
Thanksgiving hereby appointed, to the end that Notice may be taken thereof, and
due Thanks and Praise may upon the said Day be offered up unto Almighty God;
and that humble Supplications be poured out before him for his continual
Assistance, and Improvement of this, and all his Mercies, to the Honor of his
great Name, and the Peace and Benefit of Us and Our People: Willing and
strictly Commanding all Persons within Our said Realm and Dominions, with all
Sobriety, Reverence, and Thankfulness, to Observe this Day as becomes so Solemn
an Occasion.

And it is Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That the Monthly Fast appointed by Our
Proclamation of the Twentieth day of February last, be for the present
discontinued, until We shall Give further Order therein.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the First Day of October, 1690. In the Second
Year of Our Reign.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1690.


