W R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King, A PROCLAMATION For Apprehending (...) GRASCOMB.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas upon Examination taken before a Committee of the House of Commons,
touching the Printing, Publishing and Dispersing of a False, Scandalous and
Seditious Pamphlet, Destructive to the Freedom and Liberties of Parliament,
Entitled, An Account of the Proceedings of the House of Commons in Relation to
the Recoining the Clipped Money, and Falling the Price of Guineas, It appeared
that one (...) Grascomb was the Person that brought the Manuscript of the said
Pamphlet to the Printer to be Printed: And whereas the said (...) Grascomb has
Absconded from his usual Place of Abode, and is fled from Justice: And whereas
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled, have humbly
besought Us to Issue Our Royal Proclamation, for Apprehending of the ssaid
(...) Grascomb; We therefore (with the Advice of Our Privy Council) have
thought fit to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby Commanding all Our
Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend the said (...) Grascomb where
ever he may be found, and to Carry him before the next Justice of the Peace, or
Chief Magistrate, who is hereby Required to Commit him to the next Goal, there
to Remain until he shall be thence Delivered by due Course of Law. And We do
hereby Require the said Justice or other Chief Magistrate immediately to give
Notice thereof to Our Privy Council; or to one of Our Principal Secretaries of
State. And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects (as
they will answer the contrary at their Perils) that they do not any ways
Conceal, but Discover, Take and Apprehend the said (...) Grascomb, to the end
he may be Proceeded against according to Law. And We do hereby Promise and
Declare that whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the said Grascomb, and
bring him before such Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate, shall Receive,
as a Reward, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds mentioned in Our late Proclamation,
bearing Date the Fifth Day of November last; which said Sum of Five hundred
Pounds the Commissioners of Our Treasury are hereby Directed to Pay accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Tenth Day of December, 1696. In the
Eighth Year of Our Reign.
LONODN; Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.


