WR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


Marie R.

WHereas Their Majesty's have received Information that the Persons herein
after particularly Named, have Conspired together, and with diverse other
Disaffected Persons, to Disturb and Destroy Their Government, and for that
Purpose have Abetted and Adhered to Their Majesty's Enemies: For which Cause
several Warrants for High Treason have lately been Issued out against them; but
they have Withdrawn themselves from their usual Places of Abode, and are Fled
from Justice. Their Majesty's have therefore thought fit (by the Advice of
Their Privy Council) to Issue this Their Royal Proclamation, and Their
Majesty's do hereby Command and Require all Their Loving Subjects to Discover,
Take and Apprehend Robert Earl of Scarsdale, Edward Henry Earl of Litchfield,
Edward Lord Griffin, Charles Earl of Newburgh, Charles Earl of Middleton,
Charles Earl of Dunmore, (...) Lord Forbes, Eldest Son of the Earl of Granard,
James Griffin, Esquire Sir John Fenwick, Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe, Sir Andrew
Forrester, Colonel Henry Slingsby, James Grahme, Esquire, (...) Orby, Second
Son of Sir Thomas Orby Deceased, Colonel Edward Sackvile, Oliver St George Esquire
Son of Sir Oliver St George, Major Thomas Soaper, Charles Adderley, Esquire David
Lloyd, Esquire George Porter, Esquire Son of Thomas Porter Esquire Deceased, and Edward
Stafford Esquire wherever may be found, and to Carry them before the next Justice
of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, who is hereby Required to Commit them to the
next Goal, there to Remain until they be thence Delivered by due Course of Law.
And Their Majesty's do hereby Require the said Justice, or other Magistrate,
immediately to give Notice thereof to Them, or Their Privy Council. And Their
Majesty's do hereby Publish and Declare to all Persons that shall Conceal the
Persons abovenamed, or any of them, or be Aiding and Assisting in the
Concealing of them, or Furthering their Escape, That they shall be Proceeded
against for such their Offense with the utmost Severity according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Ninth Day of May, 1692. In the Fourth
Year of Our Reign.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1692.


