A Practical DISCOURSE CONCERNING Swearing: ESPECIALLY In the Two Great Points
OF PERJURY AND Common-Swearing.

By William Wake, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Sare, at Gray's- Inn-Gate next Holborn, 1696.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH the Prevalence of those Vices, which the following Treatise is designed
to Correct, might be more than enough to justify the Publication of it; and
the Seasonableness of the Attempt, be a sufficient Apology for the Meanness of
the Performance: Yet having been Induced to Write upon this Subject by such a
Consideration, as, I think, cannot justly be excepted against; it may not be
amiss, before I proceed to what I chiefly aim at in this Preface, to give some
short Account, How I came to be Engaged in it.

IT has been the great, and almost singular, Care of our English Government, to
Provide, by its Municipal Laws, not only against False-Swearing; (a Vice in
which the Interests of Public Society are so apparently concerned, that scarce
any State has suffered it to go unpunished;) but even against Common and
Vain-Swearing too: And which, because it does not so immediately affect Men's
Civil Interests, I cannot tell whether any Laws, besides our own, have thought
it their Business to meddle with it.

HOW prudent such a Provision, as this, is, even with respect to the Public
Welfare, can be doubted by none, who either believe it to be the Concern of
States and Kingdoms to maintain a General Sense of Religion in the Minds of
Men; or have considered what a mighty Influence an Oath, in Particular, has
upon the Affairs of Government; and of what Importance it must therefore be to
it, that Men should be kept under a very Serious and Reverend Esteem of it.
There being nothing more certain, than that if once Men be allowed to Profane
an Oath by Common and Vain Swearing; they will from thence be apt to go on, in
a little while, to a farther Contempt of it: And so, by degrees, arrive to an
Unconcernedness even for Perjury its self; as often as it shall be for their
Interest to Forswear themselves; and they may hope to do it without the danger
of a Present Punishment for their Impiety.

IT must therefore be acknowledged to have been not only a Pious, but Politic
Design too, of those great Men, whosoever they were, who by putting a Restraint
upon Common-Swearing, first endeavored to raise an Oath to a Just Respect
amongst us: And concluded, with our Savior, that the best Way to cut off the
very Ground of False-Swearing, would be to make it Penal for Men to Swear at
all; unless it were upon some great occasion, and when it was either absolutely
necessary, or (at least) very fitting for them so to do.

AND as I think it is for the Honor, as well as Benefit, of our Country; that
our Civil-Laws have taken such Care in a Matter which has been generally
neglected by most others: So I cannot but observe it to the Praise both of our
Religion, and of the Present Government; that of the Two Attempts that have
been made, of this kind, among our selves; the Viz. in 21 Jac. I.
First was since the time of the Reformation; as we know the Latter, and more
Perfect, is owing to the Wisdom and Piety of the Present Establishment.

BUT because the best Laws signify but very little, unless they be, withal,
both generally made known, and duly observed: It has, therefore, been the Care
of our Lawgivers to show their Prudence no less in their Provision for the
Publishing of this Law, than in the Substance of the Law its self. And as in
the Case of Perjury, (in which the Civil Courts are principally concerned;) it
has been ordered that the Sea 5 E. ^iz. c. 9.
Statutes, relating to that Sin, should be solemnly declared at every Assize:
So for this, (which-seems to be more properly Religious) they have appointed
the Publication of it to be made in the 21 Jac. 1. c. 20. And so in this last
Act of K. William to the same purpose.
House of God, and at the Time that Men are Assembled for his Service in it.

I SHALL need say very little to show either how In the Theodosian Code we find
an Ecclesiastical Law of Valentinian, directed to Pope Damasus, and Read in the
Churches of Rome, Anno 370. God. Th. Lib. xvi. leg. 20. But Sulpicius Severus
carries us yet higher; and mentions the Reading of the Emperor's Letter there,
Anno 355. And Gothofred, in his Comments upon that Law, adds several other
Instances of the like Nature. Such were the Law of Theodosius the Younger
against Nestorius; and especially, the Letter of Constantine the Great, in
favor of Athanasius; which he ordered to be published in the Churches of
Alexandria. And that this Custom held still on, the other Instances of that
learned Man plainly show. To which add the Tome of Union set forth by
Constantinus Porphyrogenitus; and published every Year in the Churches, in the
Month of July: Vid. Matthew. Blastar, Lit. T. cap. 14. And it appears from the
Novels, that the Imperial Laws were not only published in the Churches, but
were laid up in their Archives; and fixed upon Tables in the Porches and
Avenues of them; and directed to the Bishops for that end: Novell. viii. c. 14.
Ancient a Custom this has been in all Christian Countries; Or with what good
Reason our own Lawgivers have herein followed the Examples of their
Forefathers, upon the like occasions. For sure if ever Men will be disposed
seriously to consider their Duty, we may justly hope they will then,
especially, be so, when they come together for Divine-Worship. And when it
shall there be shown them, that both their Present, and their Future Welfare
are concerned in this observance; That what the Law enjoins under a Civil
Penalty, is no more than what the Gospel had before required upon Pain of
Eternal Damnation: Either Men must be utterly lost to all Rational Conviction,
or they will be prevailed with, by these Motives, to forsake a Vice; in which
there is so great a Danger, so little Pleasure, and no Advantage.

IT was upon the first Solemn Publication, at which I was present, of this Law
in that Church, in which it has pleased God to call me to Minister, that I
composed the following Discourses; and embraced that Advantage, which the
Public Authority had so happily put into my hands, to lay open the Hainousness
of a Vice, which had not some such Care been taken to Correct; it would, I
fear, have been very difficult for us, by all our other Endeavors, ever to
have put a stop to.

BUT though the Occasion which I took to Write upon this Subject led me no
farther than to Treat of Common and Vain-Swearing; yet having resolved to Write
upon it, I was willing to make a farther Progress in it: And to pursue it in
all the several Parts of it, that our Mat. v.37, etc.
Savior's Method, (the Ground I chose to go upon) should direct to me to do.

AND, first; As he laid the Foundation of his Discourse, upon the State of this
Matter under the Law; so have I here, (but in short, Chap. I.
) endeavored to show, How the Case of Swearing stood, under that Dispensation.
And if in my Account thereof I have adventured to give a more general
Interpretation of the THIRD COMMANDMENT, than some others, of much greater
Knowledge in these Particulars, have done: I shall only say, That, I think, I
have done it for such Reasons, as will abundantly suffice to justify me in it;
and that in forsaking them, I do but close in with many more, neither less
learned, nor less approved of, than they.

HAVING thus laid the Foundation for a Right Understanding of our Savior's
Discourse upon this Subject; I go on, with him, Chap. II.
to the Consideration of that which is, on all hands, allowed to have been
expressly Forbidden to the Jews under the Law, viz. the Sin of Perjury: And have
endeavored to furnish my Reader with such Principles, as may serve to direct
him both how to avoid it; and how to discover, whether he has at any time, or
upon any occasion, unhappily fallen under the guilt of it? And having thus laid
open the Nature of this Sin; I proceed, in the next place, to show the
Malignity of it: And how desperate an Offense is thereby committed, not only
against God; but against the Common Peace and Welfare of Mankind.

THE truth is, Perjury, as it is a Sin of the most Heinous Nature, whether we
consider the Honor of God; or the Interests of Men: So has it always been
pursued not only with the severest Denuntiations of Vengeance in the other
World; but, for the most part, with very shameful and bitter Punishments in
this.

INDEED, among the Cicer. de Offic. Lib. iii.
ancient Romans, though the Censors enquired very scrupulously into it; yet, for
a long time, the Penalty of it, was only a Vid. Commentarium Gothofredi, in
Lib. ii. Cod. Theodos. Tit. ix. Leg. 8.
Public Infamy. And so happy were those Times, that that alone was thought to
have been Punishment enough for it. But as the Manners of Men grew worse, so
both they were forced to Vid. Leg. Citat. Arcad. and Honor. contra Perjuros.
Though Perjury in Judiciary Causes, was before punished with a Civil Penalty.
Vid. Gothofred. ibid.
Increase the Rigor of their Laws as to this Matter: And most Diodor. Sicul.
Lib. 1. page 69.
other Nations proceeded against it with the utmost severity; and thought the
Guilt of it could be expiated with nothing less than the Life of him who fell
under it. And though contrary to what I have now observed of the Roman Law; our
own See 11 H. 7.24 and 25.23 H. 8.3.13 Eliz. 25.
Statutes have, of latter Times, been more favorable to such Offenders: Yet by
our See 6 Assize 7.30 Ass. 24.40 Ass. 20.41 Ass. 18. Glanvil, lib. ii. cap. 19.
Bracton, lib. iv. tract. 5. cap. 5. Fortescue, cap. 26. And the Sum of all is
this; That he who violated his Oath in a Judicial Process, should lose the
Benefit of the Law; his Wife and Children should be turned out of Doors; his
Fields should be ploughed up; his Gardens and Orchards be spoiled; his Goods
and Chattels should be forfeited to the Kings; and himself be condemned to
Perpetual Imprisonment. This was the Law in the Case of a Petty Jury, attained
for a false Verdict: See Coke 1 Instit. lib. iii. cap. 8.. 514. And it seems to
have been taken from the Laws of King Alfred, upon the like occasion: Vid. leg.
Alfred,. 1. But for other Perjury it has been questioned whether there was any
provision made by the Common Law before the 3d of Hen. vii. See Dyer 7 and 8
Eliz. fol. 242. b. And 1 Crook, p. 520, 521. Though yet the Mirror seems to
speak in general of Perjury, and the punishment of it: Chapter iv.. 19. And the Law
of King Alfred, before mentioned, extends even to Promissory Oaths. Vid. l. c.
cap. de Jure-jurando.
Old-Common-Law they were treated with such a Rigor, as though it did not extend
to Death; yet seems to have been more bitter, than even Death its self would
have been.

FROM this Sin of Perjury, by all confessed to have been no less forbidden
under the Law, than under the Gospel; Chap. III.
I go on, to that in which some have thought the Perfection of the Gospel above
the Law to have consisted, as to this Matter; namely, to enquire, Whether it be
Lawful for us Christians to Swear at all?

THAT it were very much to be wished, that Men would Live so Well, and Deal so
Faithfully with one another, as not to need ever to make use of an Oath for the
confirmation of what they say, is not to be questioned. Nor do I doubt but that
they might live so, as to avoid it in many Cases, in which they too easily
indulge themselves in the use of it. But yet still, the present State of the
World considered, I do not see how it is possible, for the Best Christian,
altogether to decline it: Nor is there any reason why Any one should make it a
Matter of Conscience wholly to avoid it.

WE are told, indeed, of Vid. Greg. Presb. in Vit. Greg. Naz. Et Greg. Naz.
carm. de Vit. sua. To. ii. p. 18. A.
Gregory Nazianzen, that upon his Conversion to the Christian Faith, he
resolved, once for all, never to Swear while he lived; and that he did manage
himself in such wise as to keep to his Resolution; and did not Swear to the Day
of his Death. And several of the Basil, in Psalm. xiv^ Chrysostom. Hom. xvii. in
Matthew. Theodoret, Epit. Div. Decret. c. xvi. Epiphan. Haer. lix. Athanas. Sermon.
De Passion. and Crucef. Dom* Tom. I. p. 995.
Ancient Fathers there are, who have spoken, in such Terms, of this Matter; as
if such a Resolution had not been so much the Particular Praise of that Great
Man, as the Common Duty of All Christians. But yet, when all is done, either
the Methods of Government must be wholly changed, and some new Models be set
up, that were never yet practiced in the World: Or were those Fathers now
living, they must set some Bounds to their Expressions; and plainly Restrain
them to that, which I do indeed look upon to have been their True Meaning; viz.
Not to Forbid All Swearing whatsoever, but only That this was the sense of
Greg. Naz. (one of the most eminent Opposers of Swearing in those days) is
evident from that Excellent Discourse of his, which still remains to us,
against those who Swear much. Where first he advises, if it may be, as most
safe, not to Swear at all: But if that cannot be obtained; then in the next
place to Swear only in such Cases as deserve to be confirmed by an Oath; As to
free a Man's self from danger; to vindicate his Reputation, and the like. See
this Subject at large pursued by him, To. ii. Iambic: xx. (...), p. 224.
All Voluntary, and Vain Swearing; and in which they were most certainly in the
right.

IT was a Remarkable Deference that was paid to the Honesty of One heretofore
among the Athenians, Vid. Ciceron. Orat. pro l. Com. Balb. init.
That being called, upon a certain Occasion, to Swear to the Truth of what he
said; and being come to the Altar (as the Manner there was) in order thereunto;
the Judges would by no means allow of it, but thought it a shame that a Person,
of such known Integrity, should not be credited without an Oath. And in some of
the (...), says Photius, Nomoc. Tit. ix. cap. 1. page 953. See also Cod.
Theodos. Lib. 1. Tit. iii. Constable. 25. And the same is affirmed by Matt.
Blastares; viz. That the Civil-laws themselves excused Clergymen from
Swearing. Syntagm. Alphab. Lit. E. cap. 22. And Theodorus Balsamon is of the
same Opinion; at least from the time that the Basilicon was composed: In Phot.
Nomocan, Tit. ix. cap. 27. In the Laws of Lombardy, and in the Capitularies of
Louis the Emperor, the same Exemption was continued. Vid. Not Fabrotii ad
Balsam: Collect. e Lib. 1 Cod. Tit. iii. c. 25. And even in our own Country,
the Council of Berghamstead, Can. 17. confirmed this to the Bishops: And in the
Excerpta of Egbert Archbishop of York, not long after, we find the same
Privilege extended to All Priests: Vid. in Council. Spelmann. To. 1.
Ancient Canons, confirmed (as to this Matter) by the Civil Laws; there was
that Respect paid to the Priestly Function, that he who was admitted into Holy
Orders, was from thenceforth free from All Obligation to Swear, even in those
Cases, in which All Others were expressly required to do it. Only, if need were,
they might be obliged to give some other Caution of their Fidelity, that did
not seem so much to reflect upon the Sacredness of their Character.

BUT still, to Swear upon a just Occasion, was in the general allowed to be not
only Lawful, but Necessary: And those very Exemptions that freed some certain
Persons from it, did but the more confirm the Churches Approbation of it in
Others.

TO enter upon a Particular Examination of the several Passages of the
Primitive Fathers which seem to speak against All Swearing whatsoever; is an
Undertaking neither Proper for this Place, nor otherwise Necessary for the
Vindication of what I have Asserted in the following Discourses. But that the
most Severe among them did allow of Swearing, when duly Required, and
Reverently Performed, is evident from hence; That we find the most Religious
Emperors, and over whom those Fathers, which seem to speak with the greatest
Warmth against it, had a very Powerful Influence; nevertheless both to have
Solemnly See an Instance of this in Constantine the Great: Cod. Theodos. Lib.
ix. Tit. 1. leg. 4. Add. Comment. Gothofred. ib. p. 8. b.
Sworn themselves, and to have continued the Cod. l. ii. Tit. 59. Novell. viii.
c. 7, 14. and ib. xlviii. c. 1. Add. Phot. Nomocan. Tit. xiii. c. 18.
Necessity of others doing likewise. And yet, it does not appear, that ever
they were censured by any of those Fathers upon this Account.

BUT this is not all: They did not only Consent to the Necessity of Men's
Swearing, as Imposed by the Imperial Laws; but they themselves Pursued the same
Method; and by their own Constitutions required it likewise.

IT was a very Solemn, and (which ought yet more to be Remarked) a Voluntary
Oath too, that Apol. ad Constable. To. 1. p. 674. D. Who yet elsewhere speaks as if
All Swearing were Unlawful. Loc. supr. Citat.
Athanasius made, in his Apology to Constantius; to free himself from a certain
Suspicion which that Emperor had, it seems, (without any just Grounds) taken
up against him. St. De verb. Apostol. Sermon. xxviii. cap. 9.
Austin freely tells us what his own Practice, in this particular, was: That he
neither chose to Swear, when he could avoid it; nor refused to Swear, when he
was lawfully required so to do. Even See Balsam. Comment. in Can. xxix. S.
Basilii: Nay he took those into Orders who had rashly Sworn not to accept of
them; Ib. Can. x. And continued others in their Ministry, Ib. Et apud Io.
Antioch. Collect. Can. Tit. 45.
St. Basil himself, than whom none has Written more expressly against All
Swearing; yet, in his Canonical Epistles, not only imposes no Punishment on
those who Swore as they ought to do; but by assigning a suitable See Can. S.
Basil, ib. lxiv, lxxxii. -- Add. Can. Apost. 25, etc.
Penance to those who Swear amiss, did, in effect, acknowledge the Lawfulness
of Swearing, when piously and carefully performed. And a more ancient Father
than he, St. Cyprian, complaining of the Decay of Discipline in the Church; and
that so far as to ascribe the Decian Persecution to the declension of it;
inveighs indeed bitterly against the Iniquity of those Times, Non jurare tantum
Temere, sed adhuc etiam pejerare: De laps. p. 123. Edit. Oxon.
for Swearing falsely, and without a due regard to what they Swore; but says not
a word against the thing its self: Which yet, had he thought all Swearing
whatsoever to have been unlawful, he would hardly have let pass, without
declaring, upon that occasion, his Resentments against it.

IT was much about the same time, that we find Vid. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Lib.
vi. cap. 43. p. 199. D. Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, at the same time, both
allowed of and practiced Swearing. Ib. cap. 40. p. 191. C. And if we would go
yet higher; St. Basil will furnish us with the Example of St. Clement, the
Companion of St. Paul: Lib. de Sp. S. cap. 29. To say nothing of that
Representation which Lucian makes of the common practice of the Christians, as
to this matter, in his Philopat. page 1121.
Another of those Holy Men reflecting, with some warmth, upon Novatian, for
obliging those, to whom he gave the Communion, to Swear to him, that they would
never fall off from his Party. This he represents to us as a most Wicked
Attempt; but without the least Reflection upon the Act of Swearing, as if there
would have been any thing blameworthy in that, had the Substance of their Oath
been lawful, and the Nature of it allowable. Nor can it, indeed, be thought
that Novatian himself, who set up for a more exact Observance of the Discipline
of the Church than any other of his time; and pretended, for that very reason,
to separate from the Communion of the Catholic Bishops, that they did not keep
so strictly, as they ought, to it; would not only have obliged others to Swear
to him, but would have Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. vi. cap. 43. page 198. B.
solemnly sworn himself; (and that whilst he was yet in the height of his
Reputation) had there been any thing in the Act of Swearing contrary to the
Opinion of the most Precise Men in those Days. And if we look yet lower, we
shall meet with whole Councils which have not only consented to the same
Practice, but have been the Authors of forcing Men to submit to it: as the Vid.
G^r. Vossii Hist. Pelag. lib. v. p. 2. page 524.
Council of Ephesus, in the Case of Nestorius, is particularly observed to have
done. And from all which it plainly follows, that the ancient Fathers were not
against All Swearing whatsoever: Nor intended any more by their Expressions to
this purpose, than what several of the Heathen Moralists themselves did, Vid.
Grot. Annot. in Mat. v. 34. Where there are several Instances of each of these.
when they advised their Disciples to abstain, in like manner, from Swearing
altogether; but yet expounded themselves so, as to show, that by Swearing, they
meant only Voluntary Swearing; and that they should forbear even that too, only
where there was no need of it, nor any sufficient Engagement laid upon them to
oblige them to it.

I SHALL conclude these Remarks with that Notable Account which Josephus has
given us of the Essenes; one of the strictest Sects among the Jews, and so
conformable in their Manners to the Rules of the Gospel, that some have
mistaken them for Christians. Now one of the Maxims by which, (if we may credit
that Historian) they governed themselves, was this of our Savior, De Bello
Judaico* lib. ii. c. 12. (...).
Not to Swear at All. And yet to this very Rule (among others) they bound
themselves with an Ib. p. 786. Edit. Gl. (...).
Oath; the better to secure their observance of it. And the only Account that
we can give of which seeming Contradiction, between their Principle and
Practice, is this; That in Matters of this nature, though the Expressions be
general, yet they must still be moderated with such Limitations as both the
Nature of the Thing its self requires, and the general Consent of Mankind
agrees, ought to be put upon them. But especially, when, by so doing, there is
nothing allowed of, but what is both innocent and reasonable: And the denial
whereof would unavoidably run Mankind into endless Mischiefs and
Inconveniences.

AND now, having said thus much in Answer to the Two Great Prejudices which
seemed to lie against the Account which I have given of our Savior's
Prohibition, Swear not at All: The one taken from the Universality of the Words
themselves; the other, from the Opinion, which the most Primitive Fathers, have
been thought to have entertained of this Matter; and shown that some
Temperament must be allowed of in the Exposition of it: I shall say no more in
behalf of that Interpretation which I have given of it, than this; That if the
Principles which I build upon be allowed; (as, I think, I have Chap. III. Sect.
25, etc.
shown they cannot reasonably be denied) then must my Explication be confessed
to be both very Natural in its self, and very Agreeable to that which was
Evidently our Savior's Design in that place; viz. To rescue the Authority of
the Third Commandment, from those Abuses which the Jews had made of it. And
though by this means it will follow, against the Error of Some, that All
Swearing, is not forbidden; yet will it also follow, against the Licentiousness
of Others, That all Vain and Needless Swearing, but especially That of Men's
Common Discourse, is Utterly Wicked and Unjustifiable.

BUT our Savior was not content to restrain Men from the Practice of
Customary-Swearing only; but, if I am not very much mistaken, did also farther
aim at Another Corruption, very frequent among the Jews; and improved by them
to very bad purposes; and that was, of Swearing after some other manner, than
by the Name of God only.

THIS was indeed a very prevailing Practice not only among the Jews, but among
most Homer. Il. A. v. 234. Conf. Virg. Aen. xii. v. 206. Aristoph. Neo. Act. l.
Scen. 3. and Scholiast. ib. Virg. Aen vi. v. 351, 458. Aen. vii. 234. Ammian.
Marcel. Lib. xxiv. cap. 5. Procop. de Bell. Persic. Lib. l. c. 4.
other Nations, in those days. And that which rendered it the more dangerous,
was, that they accounted it a Matter of Piety, to Swear after this Manner: Vid.
Suid. in Socrat. p 780. Servius in Virg. Aen. Lib. ix. v. 300.
And thought that they hereby showed a great respect to their Gods, in that
they did not make use of their Names, upon every ordinary Occasion. And the
Consequence of it was with them, as we are told it was with the Jews; That they
fell, by this means, into a Customary Practice of Vain-Swearing; and often
times accounted it no great Crime, even to forswear themselves.

IT is I know very confidently affirmed by some, That it was no part of our
Savior's Design to Abolish such Swearing; which they are still willing to
favor, as innocent and allowable. But if this Swearing were not only justly to
be See below, Chap. III.. 30.
Reproved in the Jews, but was made use of by them to very ill Purposes too;
And if the Sea below, Chap. III.. 30.
Design of our Savior was to Correct those Abuses which that People had
introduced into this Practice, and to prevent Our falling into the like
Hereafter: then, since this could no way so effectually be done, as by
forbidding this kind of Swearing Altogether, and that his Words Do Naturally
invite Us to such a Construction; I cannot imagine why we should not Rather
Extend them to such a Sense, than put some kind of Violences upon them for the
sake of a Practice, if not plainly That to Swear after the manner of the
Gentiles is Evil, cannot be doubted. Hence it was that the Ancient Canons of
the Church expressly Forbade it: See Council. Trull. can. 94. Conf. Can. Basil.
81. And the Civil Law made such Oaths Void. Basil. lib. xxii. Tit. 5. But the
Canon Law is more General: and forbids Swearing by Any Creature: 22. Q. 1. cap.
7, 8, 9, 10. Yet still they Allowed to Swear Otherwise than by God only. v. g.
P^r Salutem Imp. Basil. ib. By the Eucharist. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. vi. cap.
43. Not to mention any more Particulars. Vid. August. Sermon de Verb. Apost.
xxviii. Greg. Naz. Carm. lamb. xx. Tom. ii. Page 226.
Evil, yet to be sure not Good; nor that can naturally lead to any Wise or Good
End. But I shall insist no longer upon a Point, which, however it be determined
will, either way, meet with a sufficient Resolution, as to what concerns our
Practice; and then it is no Great Matter what becomes of our Speculations
concerning it. And it is Time for Me to Go on from the Consideration of what
our Savior has forbidden us; to Inquire, Chap. iv.
How He has directed us to Behave Our selves, in Our Communication with One
Another.

IN the Prosecution of which Enquiry, I must here Once for All freely Confess,
that I have not kept so Closely, to the Words of our Savior, as in the Other
Particulars I took Care to Do. The Reason of which was, that I was willing,
upon this Occasion, to Consider All the Several Sorts of Confirmation that are
commonly made Use of in Men's Conversation with One Another, Under the Degree of
an Oath: And which being the Only Thing Our Savior was here concerned to
Forbid, I thought that Whatsoever was Short of That, might, at least, be fairly
Reduced to the Design of this Place.

I HAVE, indeed, endeavored in my Reflections upon this Occasion, to show,
that not only the Design of our Savior did Extend to All these; but that his
very Expressions Themselves might be so Interpeted, as to Comprehend the most
of Them. And some very Learned Men there are, who have Accordingly Given us
such an Account of Them. But as I will not make my self a Party in this Debate;
so having fairly Represented the Grounds upon which they Go, and given them all
the Strength that, I Conceive, They are Capable of; I shall leave it to Every
One to Judge as he sees cause to Do. Only as to the Rules of Practice which I
have drawn from my Remarks upon this Point; those, I think, are Plain and
Secure: And may, as such, be followed without any Danger, or Scruple, by Us.

FROM the Direction of our Savior, How we ought to Behave our selves in Our
Conversation with One Another; I pass on to the Reason given by Him, Why we
Ought not to proceed any Farther? Namely, That Whatsoever is more than These,
Comes of Evil. And of this I offer Two Interpretations, Both Good, and Both
indifferently Agreeing with his Words, as they stand in the Original. And I
thought it Better for Me to Take Both, than to Prefer That which our Own
Interpreters seem Rather to have Approved of: That so I might the more clearly
show upon what just Grounds this Assertion of our Savior is founded; and what
Good Reason He had to Require us, to Manage our Conversation, according to
Those Measures he had before Prescribed to Us.

HAVING thus Gone through the Discourse of our Blessed Lord upon this Subject;
Chap. v.
I Conclude all with Two farther Considerations, the better to Improve what I
had before Offered, and to Reduce the Whole to Practice. In the Former of
which, I Enquire into the Causes of that Great Increase which has, in these
latter times, been made of Both the Sins forbidden by our Savior on this
Occasion; viz. Both of False, and of Vain-Swearing: And having done this, I, in
the next place, take Occasion from thence to lay down such General Directions,
as seem to be the most Proper, under Our present Circumstances, to Draw Men off
from the Practice of them Both. And though Here, (as indeed throughout this Whole
Treatise) I have endeavored to bring my Reflections into as Narrow a Compass
as it was possible, without either falling into Obscurity on the One hand; or
Omitting what was fit to be Taken Notice of on the Other: Yet, I hope, I have
laid down such General Rules, as being carefully Applied, may suffice to serve
the Necessities of the Most of those, who shall need either Direction, or
Satisfaction as to these Matters.

AS for the Composure of the following Discourses, it is as Plain as I was Able
to make it; and as the First Design I had in Composing of Them, Required it to
be. But because it May now be expected that I should Answer for the Grounds of
my Assertions; and give some Account upon what Reasons I Built Them: I have
therefore taken Care for the Satisfaction of Those who are more Learned, to add
all Along such Observations, as shall, I trust, he sufficient to Vindicate me
from having, either in my Interpretation of Holy Scripture, or in my Deductions
from it, advanced Any thing without some tolerable Reason; and seldom without
some Good Authority also, for my Doing of it.

IF, after All, it shall be Asked how I come to Publish my Reflections upon
this Subject, I shall only Add thus much to what I have already said; that as I
first Composed these Discourses out of a just Respect to the Public Authority,
and for the Benefit of Those whom God has Committed to my Charge; so being
Persuaded that what was, I Hope, not Un- Usefully Heard Once, may be more
Profitably Read, and Considered again; and Reach many from the Press, whom it
is not Possible for me to Instruct from the Pulpit: And having never met with
any Original Treatise in our Own Language, that had so particularly handled
this Whole Argument; I was willing to Contribute my Part, toward the Reforming
of a Vice, which our Laws had taken so Worthy a Care to suppress.

THIS was the Motive that first led me to the Publishing of These Plain
Discourses; And I hope, through God's Blessing, They may not be Altogether
Unprofitable to this End. Thus much I dare say, in Behalf of them; That to the
Pious and Unprejudiced, they Will offer Reasons enough to Convince them of
their Duty as to these Matters: And for those who are not so; it is in Vain to
Hope by Any Arguments whatsoever to Reclaim Them.

The Genuine Epistles of St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp.
The Shepherd of Hermas, and the Martyrdoms of St. Ignatius and St. Polycarp.
Translated and Published with a large Preliminary Discourse, by W. Wake, D. D.
8o. Sold by R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holbron.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
IN which it is briefly shown, How the Case of Swearing stood with the Jews,
under the Law. Page 1. The meaning of that expression, It has been said by
Them of Old times, briefly hinted at: And an Enquiry made into the Prohibition
of our Savior; Thou shall not Forswear thy self, etc.. 1, 2, 3. The State of
this Matter under the Law, delivered in four Particulars. p. 4. 1. That the
Jews, were (in General) allowed to Swear.. 4, 5. But yet, 2. That they were to
Swear only by God's Name.. 6. etc. 3. Nor by God's Name on every light, or
frivolous Occasion; nor, particularly, in their Common Conversation with One
Anothor,. 10, etc. 4. Much less Falsely, which was the main thing they were
required to have a Care of,. 12.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is considered, What Perjury is; and How many ways it may be Committed?
And some Reflections are offered to show the particular Heinousness and
Malignity of it. p. 13. Oaths are of two kinds; Assertory and Promissory: and
Perjury may be diverse ways committed in Each of Them.. 1. I. In an Assertory
Oath. By Swearing to the Truth of any thing, which at the same Time we either
Certainly Know to be False, or do not Know to be True.. 3. By Prevaricating in
any Considerable Circumstance of what we Swear to: Of which several Instances
are offered.. 5.
II. In a Promissory Oath. p. 17. He forswears himself, who Promises to do that
which at the same time He does not intend to perform.. 7. Or to Do that which
He knows He cannot Perform.. 8. Or which He knows He Ought not to Do.. 10. Or
to Act contrary to what He had before sworn to do.. 12. He Forswears himself,
who having Sworn to do Any thing, afterward neglects to make Good his
Promise.. 14. What things are required, in All Kinds of Oaths, to prevent our
being Perjured, in taking of Them?. 16. He who causes Another to Forswear
himself, is as Guilty of Sin, as if he had done it Himself.. 17. Nor is he
clear, who requires another to swear to that, which He has reason to believe,
will make Him Guilty of perjury.. 18. Of the peculiar Malignity of this Sin. p.
26. 1st. With respect to God.. 21. 2dly. To our Selves.. 27. 3dly. To Other
Men.. 34.


CHAP. III.
Wherein is shown, That All Swearing whatsoever, is not forbidden under the
Gospel: And an Enquiry is made; What that Swearing is which our Savior has
prohibited, as Absolutely Evil, and Unlawful? p. 39. Our Savior's words seem
to Prohibit All Swearing; and have been so Understood by some.. 1. The meaning
of Them shown in the Three following Conclusions. 1. That it was not the
Intention of our Savior to Forbid All Swearing whatsoever; as simply, and
absolutely Unlawful, under the Gospel.. 3. There was no Reason, why He should
do it.. 4. etc. It is Certain He did not intend to do it.. 12. etc.
2. That we are not to Extend the Meaning of such Expressions, to the utmost
sense that the Words are capable of; when it otherwise Appears that We ought
not so to do.. 20. 3. That to know what the true Meaning of our Savior here
was, we must consider, what was Amiss in the Common Practice of the Jews, as to
this Matter; and what our Lord designed to Correct in it.. 24.
The practice of the Jews enquired into.. 25. Our Savior's prohibition from
thence explained.. 27. And shown to Forbid, 1. Common-Swearing.. 27. 2.
Swearing Otherwise than by God only.. 30.
Practical Observations on Each of These: And, 1. As to Common-Swearing. To
swear in our Common Discourse with One Another, is Absolutely Evil and
Unlawful.. 33. No Man should ever choose to Swear in Any Case, where he can
fairly Avoid the doing of it.. 37. But especially, we should have a Care of
entering into Promissory Oaths, as the most dangerous of any to be taken by Us..
41.
2. As to swearing Otherwise than by God only. It is certainly safest never to
use any Oath, but by the Name of God only.. 44. It is Unlawful to swear after
any Other manner, for those Evil Ends that the Jews had, and that Others
commonly have, in the Doing of it.. 47.


CHAP. IV.
Of the several Ways of Confirming what is Spoken or Promised, under the degree
of an Oath: How far they may be made Use of in Men's Private Conversation? And
for what Reason it was not sitting that Men should have been Allowed to Go any
farther? p. 76. The meaning of that passage, let your Communication be yea,
yea; nay, nay; inquired into; and the Account given by some of it Rejected.. 2.
That we may Repeat what we affirm or deny; the better to give Credit to the
Truth of what we say.. 5. That we may Confirm what we say, by adding an
Asseveration to it.. 7. And in some Cases, may go yet higher: and do more to
confirm the truth of what we speak.. 10. Whether it be lawful to Use
Imprecations for this End.. 15. An Enquiry made, into the Reason offered by our
Savior, why we must not go beyond those bounds: viz. That whatsoever is more
than these, Comes of Evil. p. 93. And the Truth of it shown at large, from
several Considerations.. 23. etc.
CHAP. V.
Wherein an Enquiry is made into the Causes both of that Common and
False-swearing which so much abounds in the World: And some directions are
offered for the better Prevention of Both of Them. p. 112. 1st. Of the Causes
of Common, and False-swearing. How Men come to swear so frequently in their
Ordinary conversation.. 4. Whence it is that they are so ready to do it, on
Every little Occasion?. 6. Four Accounts offered of it: to. 16. How Men are
brought so easily to Forswear themselves?. 16. 2dly. Some directions offered
for the Correction of both these Evils. Of Perjury.. 23. Of Common Swearing..
29. etc. The Whole concluded.. 44. etc.


St. Mat. V. 33. * Ye have heard that it has been said by them of Old Time; *
Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the LORD thine Oaths.
34. * But I say unto you swear not at all: Neither by Heaven for it is God's
Throne; nor by the Earth for it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it
is the City of the Great King. Neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because
thou can not make One Hair White or Black. 37. * But let your Communication
be Yea, yea; Nay, nay: * For whatsoever is more than these comes of Evil. A
Practical Discourse Concerning SWEARING.
CHAP. I. In which it is briefly shown, How the Case of Swearing stood with the
Jews, under the Law.
WHATSOEVER be the meaning of that Expression so often repeated in this
Chapter, [Ye have heard, that it has been said by Them of Old Times.]
and made use of by our Savior as an Introduction to the Duty He was here
about to propose to us; Ye have heard, that it has been said BY, or rather So
the Syriac Version renders it, and St. Christ. heretofore understood it: Hom.
xvi. in Mat. Compare Theophyl. on the place. And so indeed the Opposition
between this and the following Verse, requires us to expound it: (...).
TO, Them of Old Times: (Whether in those words He designed to referr to the
Law, as delivered by Moses to the Jews; Or as Expounded, and Corrupted, by the
Glosses of Those who followed after:) Yet this I take to be without all doubt;
that in the Command, or rather Prohibition, before us, there is nothing
proposed to us but what may, if not in Express Terms be found in the Law of
Moses, yet by plain and undoubted Consequence be drawn from the Words of it.

2. IT has been thought by So Grotius in his Annotations on this place; and in
his Explication of the Decalogue, Command. 3d.
Some, that what the Evangelist here renders, Thou shall not Forswear thy self,
was Originally delivered by our Blessed Lord, in the very Words of the Third
Commandment; Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in Vain: Grot.
ib. in Mat. v. 33.
And that what follows in the latter part of this Verse, But shall perform unto
the Lord thine Oaths, was added by him from Numb. xxx.2. as an Exegetical
Explication of that Precept; and to show, that what he was about to deliver
concerning it, was principally to be understood of Promissory Oaths; and to
which he supposes that Commandment was always intended, more Especially, to
referr.

3. WHETHER this Conjecture be Good or no, yet this, at least, we may be
Confident of; That we cannot take a better Course to Understand what our
Savior meant to prescribe to us Christians, as to this point of Swearing; than
to consider How the Case of an Oath stood heretofore under the Law, and What
God proposed to the Jews concerning it.

4. AND here, (1st) It is certain, that it was, in the general, permitted to
Them to Swear; provided that They did it with that Due Care, and after such a
Manner, as I shall presently show God required Them to Do it.

5. THIS, in many Cases, the Exodus xxii.11. Deutron. vi.13. -- x.20. Numb.
v.19, 21.
Law of Moses expressly Obliged them to: Josh. ii.12, 17, etc. -- ix.19, 20. 1 Samuel xx.17. 1 Kings i.13. Ezra x.5.
And their most Holy Men not only did it upon Other Occasions; Nehem. v.12, 19.
-- x.29.
but when they did it, looked upon it as an Honor paid to God, and as a
Service which should not fail to be both Accepted and Rewarded by Him. And to
take away all scruple, as to this particular; GOD himself not only, upon
several Occasions, Swear to them; but declared by his Holy Prophets, That Isai.
xlv.23.
Every Tongue should Swear by him; Psalm. lxiii.11.
And that They who did so should be Commended.

6. IT is certain, therefore, that it was allowed to the Jews to Swear,
whenever a just Occasion required their doing of it. But then (2dly) They were
to Swear ONLY by God's Name, and not by the Name of Any Other.

7. THIS was Implied in the Third Commandment; but was expressly Declared to
Them in several other parts of their Law. So in the VIth of Deuteronomy. verse. 13.
Thou shall Fear the LORD thy God, and Serve Him, and Swear by his Name. And
again, Chap. x.20. Thou shall Fear the LORD thy God; Him shall thou Serve; and
to Him shall thou Cleave, and Swear by His Name. And in the Lth of Isaiah, God
again repeats this Command, and that with a more than Ordinary Vehemence, Verse
23: I have Sworn by my Self, the Word is gone out of my Mouth in Righteousness,
and shall not return; That unto me Every Knee shall Bow, every Tongue shall
Swear. And from all which it is evident, not only, that God reserved This to
himself as his Own peculiar Prerogative; but, withal, for what reason He did
so; Namely, Because this is a Part of that Religious Service which is Due to
Him Only, and which cannot, without Impiety, be applied to Any Other.

8. HENCE we find, that when Joshua, in his last Exhortation to that People,
thought in necessary, above all things, to warn them against Apostatizing from
the Worship of their Own God, to the Gods of the Canaanites, among whom they
dwelt; He thought himself particularly concerned to mention This to them, among
the Other Instances of that Service which they were to pay to God Only: Josh.
xxiii.7. Come not, says He, among These Nations that remain among you, neither
make mention of the Name of Their Gods; nor Cause to Swear by Them, neither
Serve Them. -- But Cleave unto the LORD your God.

9. AND when in process of time They began to break in upon this Caution, and
to Swear by some Other Names; We may observe how grievously God resented this,
almost beyond any Other of their Sins; Amos viii.14. Compare Zeph. i.5. Jer.
v.7.
They that Swear by the Sin of Samaria, and say, Thy God, O Dan! lives; and
the Manner of Beer-shebah lives; Even They shall fall, and never rise up again.

10. BUT this was not yet all: God required the Jews not only, when they did
Swear, to Swear by his Name; but moreover, (3dly) To take care not to Swear by
his Name upon Every Ordinary Occasion, nor without a due Regard to what they
did Swear by it. So the express letter of the Commandment assures us; Exodus
xx.7. Thou shall not take the Name of the LORD thy God in Vain: And in which,
though the Original Word be dubious, and may indifferently signify either what
is Vain, or what is False: Yet, I think, we ought not So to set up One of its
Senses, as to exclude the Other; but should rather suppose, that God therefore
pitched upon a Term which comprehended Both, that so we might, from the
Ambiguity of it, infer, that Both those kinds of Swearing were Unlawful.

11* NOW in this Opinion I am the rather confirmed in that I find the The words
of the Chaldee Paraphrast both in Exodus and Deuteronomy are (...) and (...)
the former of which, not only in the Chaldee, but Syriac and Arabic, denotes
what is to no purpose, for no Gain, or Advantage: the latter, sometimes in
vain, but more properly falsely. Nor can it be supposed, that the Paraphrast
designed by his latter Expression to explain his former (for if so, what need
had he to make use of it?) but being willing to reach the full meaning of the
Original, and knowing the Hebrew word to be capable of both those senses, he
thought good rather to mention both, than to prefer either. But others were not
so cautious: The Jerusalem Targum, and that of Jonathan, both render it (...),
in Vain: The lxx (...): Aquila, (...): And the Latin Versions are unanimous in
the same sense, and that no^ only since St. Hierom's time, but from the
beginning; as is plain from St. Cyprian, Testimon. lib. iii. number. ^2.
Chaldee Paraphrast, the most Authentic, as well as most Ancient Interpreter
of the Old Testament, of the same mind: And for that reason rendering it in One
part of the Command by a Word which properly signifies in Vain; in the Other
part by an Expression, which originally denotes Falsely. And since it cannot be
doubted but that light and vain Swearing is in its Own Nature sinful, and what
must, by Consequence, have always been Forbidden by God as such: I cannot but
wonder what should move Those, who freely Allow this, and acknowledge the words
of the third Commandment to referr indifferently to both the significations
here proposed; yet, after all, to doubt, This Opinion was very ancient:
Theodoret mentions it, Quaest. in Exodus Qu. 41. But Opposes it, as not coming
up sufficiently to the design of the Command, and to the proper signification
of the Words of it. See Grot. in Loc. Dr. Hammond, Pract. Catech. Sect. of
Swearing.
Whether God designed to Prohibit any thing more than Perjury by it.

12. BUT (4thly) and to conclude these Reflections: Though for the Reasons now
mentioned, I am persuaded, that all Vain and Common Swearing does not only fall
within the Design of the Third Commandment, as now Expounded to Us, but was
Originally forbidden in the very Letter of it: Yet as Perjury, or
False-Swearing, is by far the Greater Sin, and more dishonorable to God; so I
do not at all question, but that it was more especially Therein prohibited by
Him.

13. AND so much the words of our Savior, Matthew. v.37. do Undoubtedly imply:
Who for this reason delivered this not only as a Good Sense of the Command, but
as the Allowed Interpretation of it among the Jews; Thou shall not Forswear
they self, but shall Perform unto the LORD thine Oaths. Nor indeed could they
possibly have made any doubt of this, after that express Prohibition which God
had given them to the same purpose, Lev. xix.12. Ye shall not swear by my Name
falsely; Neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God: I am the LORD.

14. SUCH was the Case of Swearing under the Law: And I need not say, that
Christ, Mat. v.17.
(Who came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, and who in the very
Instance before us has effectually done so;) still requires at least the same
Care, as to this matter, of Us now, that God did of the Jews heretofore. But
because this last Point is not only of much the greatest moment of any in this
Case, but taken for Granted by our Savior, as a Thing of which no one could
make any doubt: I shall Therefore begin my Reflections with a particular
Consideration of it; and show, 1st, What it is for a Man to forswear Himself?
And how many ways he may be Capable of so doing? And then, 2dly, Wherein the
peculiar Malignity of this Sin does Consist? And having so done, I shall need
say nothing more to persuade any serious, considering Christian from the
Practice of a Sin, both so Heinous in it self; and so Ruinous, not only to Our
Future Happiness in the Other World; but even to our present Peace and Security
in This.

CHAP. II. Wherein is considered, What Perjury is; and How many Ways it may be
Committed? And some Reflections offered to show the particular Hainousness and
Malignity of it.
1. TO proceed the more clearly on this great Point, [Thou shall not Forswear
thy self; but shall Perform unto the LORD thine Oaths.]
I must first of all Observe, that to Swear, is properly nothing else but to
Call God to Witness; To Appeal to God for the Truth of what we Speak; as the
highest Confirmation We are Capable of giving to it.

2. NOW the Truth which we may be required, by this means, to Confirm; may
relate either to what is Past, or Present; (As when we Affirm a thing to Be, or
not to Be; To have been Done, or not Done; In such a Manner, and with such
Circumstances; Or Otherwise:) Or it may relate to somewhat yet to come; (As
when we Oblige our selves to Do such a thing, or Not to Do it; and that under
such certain Conditions, or without them; as the Nature of our Engagement shall
Chance to be.) The Former of these is usually called, an Assertory; the Latter,
a Promissory Oath. And because a Man may diverse ways Forswear Himself in Each
of These, if he has not a due Care to prevent it; It will be necessary for me
distinctly to Consider, what are the general Ways by which we may be most
likely to Contract such a Guilt in Either of Them.

3. FIRST then, In the Case of an Assertory Oath; He Forswears Himself, who
Swears to the Truth of any Fact, which at the same time He either Certainly
knows to be False, or does not know to be True. As for Example; That such or
such a Thing was Done, by such or such a Person; which, at the same time, He
either Knows that Person did not Do, or has no sufficient Evidence to move him
to believe that he Did Do. For this being a downright Lie in the Assertion,
must needs become a Perjury by the Addition of an Oath to it.

4. AND here it matters not whether a Man certainly knows what he Swears to be
False: It is enough that he does not know it to be True. Nay, or should it
happen to be True; yet if he thought it to have been Otherwise, and yet Swore
to the Truth of it; He Forswore Himself: Nor will his Mistake at all Contribute
to the Excusing of his Perjury before God.

5. AGAIN: A Man may Forswear Himself, not only by Swearing that which is
Altogether Untrue; but by Prevaricating in any the least Circumstance of what
he delivers, and confirms with an Oath. As for Instance; * If He Swears to a
Matter as Certain, of which He has only a Probable Assurance: * If he Affirm
that upon his Own Knowledge, which He has received only upon the Credit of some
Other. * If He Adds any thing to what He Relates; Or willingly Conceals any
thing that may give light, or weight to; or, in any other Circumstance, notably
Affect the Point to which He Swears. In All these, and the like Cases; He who
knowingly and designedly Prevaricates, or otherwise departs, but in the least
Tittle, from the Truth of what He delivers, Forswears Himself; though what He
says should, in the main, be never so True.

6. IN short; He who will Swear with a Good Conscience, in any Oath of this
kind, must first duly Consider what he is about to say; and then must proceed
according to the strictest Measures of Truth and Fidelity in it. He must
neither Add to, nor Diminish from, what he knows to be the Truth. Must deliver
what is Certain, as Certain; What is Doubtful, as Doubtful: What he knows
Himself, as upon his Own Knowledge; What he has Received from Others, as
Received from Them: And in so doing he may be sure that he shall not forswear
himself.

7. AS for the Other kind of Oaths, Secondly; Those which relate to somewhat
yet to come; he is to be accounted, in the first place, to forswear himself,
who promises upon his Oath to do that, which, at the same time, he resolves not
to perform: As for example, That he will meet a Man in a certain place, where
yet he intends not to meet him; Or that he will do him such a kindness, which
he resolves, all the while, not to do for him.

8. AND, because no one can be supposed really to intend to do that, which he
knows, beforehand, he Cannot do: therefore, Secondly; He who Swears to do any
thing which is apparently beyond his Ability, and which he cannot but be
sensible is so, must be reckoned to fall under the same guilt; and to forswear
himself, as effectually, as if he had directly intended not to perform what he
obliged himself to do.

9. THUS if a Trader who is not worth a Hundred Pounds in the World, nor knows
which way to find credit to raise such a Sum; shall yet, to overreach another,
who is a stranger to his Concerns, and to gain some present advantage to
himself by it, Swear, upon a certain day, to pay him Five Hundred; and fail of
fulfilling it: He must be looked upon to have been forsworn, not only after
such his failure, but from the very first Minute that he swore to do that,
which he knew it was not in his power to perform. Nay, though by some lucky
accident, which he did not foresee, he should be enabled to make good his
Promise, and accordingly fulfill it; yet would not this clear him of having
sworn falsely, at the time that he made his Oath: Because, at that time, he had
no prospect that he should be able; nor could by consequence really intend, to
be as good as his word.

10. AND for the same reason it will follow farther, Thirdly; That if a Man
swear to do any thing which he knows it is not Lawful for him to do; he
forswears himself, though, at that time, he should intend to fulfill it. Because
by so doing, he obliges himself to do that which he knows he Ought not to do;
nor, if he means to behave himself like a good Man, must presume to perform.

11. INDEED, as to these two last Instances; If the Promise so sworn to, as I
have supposed, had neither any known Impossibility in it, nor was Unlawful to
be fulfilled, at the time when the Oath was made; but by some following
Accident became either Impossible or Unlawful, before the time in which it
ought to have been accomplished: In this Case, the Person who swore, will have
done nothing amiss; nor be otherwise Obliged by his Oath, for the present, than
to perform what he promised, as far as he is yet Able, and it may be Lawful for
him to do it. But if, in process of time, these Impediments should be removed,
and the Obligation of his Oath still continue in force: Then he will, from
thenceforth, become engaged to a complete performance of his Promise; and
forswear himself, if he shall neglect, or refuse the fulfilling of it.

12. BY consequence, Fourthly; He who Swears to do any thing contrary to what
he had before sworn to do; (his former Oath still continuing to oblige) must
swear falsely; and put himself under an absolute necessity of being forsworn.
Because, in this Case, either he must keep his latter Oath; and then he will be
guilty of Perjury by the breach of his former Obligation: Or he must stand to
his first Engagement; and, by so doing, act contrary to his second Oath.

13. AND this I say, supposing the former Oath still to continue to oblige.
For, otherwise; If the Oath first made, were either in it self unlawful; and,
as such, from the beginning of no force: Or if the Obligation of it were
founded upon such Circumstances, as rendered it valid only for a certain Time,
and under some certain Conditions; and either that Time is passed, or those
Circumstances are altered; and so the Reason, and Foundation of the Oath
Ceasing, the Obligation of it Ceases together with them: In all these Cases,
the latter Oath will be never the less lawful to be taken, for its being
contrary to the Tenor of a former, which either never did oblige at all; or
the Obligation of which was evidently expired, before the taking of the other.

14. BUT, Fifthly: Though a Man should promise nothing, but what he is both Able
to perform, and may Lawfully fulfill; and should truly Intend, when he swears to
it, to Act according to his Oath: Yet, if he shall afterward change his Mind;
Or, by any culpable neglect, omit to make good his Promise, or render himself
incapable of doing it; In all these Cases, he will become perjured by such his
omission: Not indeed from the time that he took the Oath; but from the time
that he should, and, but for his own fault, might have performed it.

15. AND this I say, supposing, that the Oath was neither obtained by any such
force or fraud, as rendered it void from the beginning; and that the Person to
whom it was made, and who was alone concerned in the advantage of it, does
expect, and insist upon, the performance of it. For otherwise, if either the
Oath were void from the beginning, and did never oblige at all; or if he to
whom it was made, and for whose security it was taken, shall think fit to
release it: In this Case the Person who took the Oath will become clear of all
obligation by it; and not be forsworn, though he should neglect to fulfill, what
he had promised to do.

16. IT will, I presume, be needless for me to add, Sixthly; That he who will
keep himself from swearing falsely, must deal clearly, and openly, in all that
he swears unto. * Must intend to be understood, according to the common and
natural import of the words in which he swears. * Must use no Equivocation, no
Mental-Reservation, whereby to impose upon those to whom he swears. But must
account himself obliged to do, according as his Words and Actions declare: And
not think to escape with his Apud Ciceron. de Offic. lib. iii.
Pretense, who swore with his Tongue, but kept his Mind free from being obliged
by it. Because all these are, in truth, such manifest Prevarications, so
opposite to the Fairness and Ingenuity of an Honest Man; that a Man must be
desperately deluded indeed, before he can think that he may escape the guilt of
Perjury, by such means.

17. I WILL rather observe this one thing farther, and which indifferently
respects both the kinds of Oaths I have now mentioned: That as, in all these
Cases, he who neglects to acquit himself according to the true meaning of what
he swears, forswears himself; so if he shall by any means knowingly, and
purposely, seduce, persuade, affright, or otherwise tamper, with any other
person, to forswear himself; he will, by his so doing, become partaker in the
Perjury; and render himself even more guilty, than he who by his encouragement,
or instigation forswears himself.

18. NAY farther: So St. Augustine expressly determins: Sermon. de Verb. Apost.
28. cap. 10. Et ipse qui exigit jurationem, multum interest, si nescit Illum
falsum juraturum, an scit. Si enim nescit, and ideo dicit, Jura mihi ut fides
ei fiat; non audeo dicere non esse peccatum; tamen Humana tentatio est. Si
autem scit eum fecisse, novit fecisse, vidit fecisse, and cogit jurare,
Homicida est. Ille enim suo Perjurio se perimit: sed iste Manum interficientis
and expressit and pressit.
He who exacts an Oath of another, whereby he either certainly knows, or may
reasonably suppose, that the Person of whom he requires it will forswear
himself; does by that means, if not involve himself in an equal guilt, yet
render himself not much less criminal, than he who commits the Perjury: And
must expect to render an Account, not only for the Dishonor which, thereby, is
done to God; but also for his Incharitableness toward his Neighbor's Soul.

19. FROM what has been said, it may appear, What it is for a Man to Forswear
himself? And how many Ways he may be liable so to do? I proceed,

(2dly) To offer some Reflections to show, Wherein the Peculiar Malignity of
this Sin does consist?

20. NOW that will appear from this one plain Observation; and which no one,
who understands what an Oath is, can make any doubt of: Namely, That he who
Forswears himself, does thereby not only in a most desperate manner * Affront
the Majesty of God, and * Wound his own Soul; but does, moreover, * Render
himself criminal toward his Neigbour also; and, as much as in him lies, *
Declare himself a Common Enemy to Mankind.

21. FOR 1st: As to what concerns the Majesty of God; What can strike more
directly at that, than this Sin of Perjury? When a Man shall not only presume
to Lie, and Cheat, and Abuse his Neighbor; but, the better to accomplish all
this Wickedness, shall dare even to Appeal to God for his Integrity: And, by so
doing, endeavor to intitule him, who is Truth its self, to a part in his Sin;
as if he would approve of his Villainy; and become, in some measure, Confederate
with him in his Impiety.

22. THIS is the true Meaning of every Wilful Perjury: And then I need not say,
what a Complication of Guilt and Impudence, there must needs be in it.

23. IF we consider the Nature of this Sin, with respect to Men, the least that
can be said of it is this; That it is a wilful, deliberate, Imposition upon the
Candor and Sincerity of him to whom we swear: Which sure must be one of the
basest, and most dis-ingenuous Practices in the World.

24. AND as for the Design of it; that is, usually, not at all less sinful,
than the Means that are made use of for the accomplishment of it. Whilst the
Person to whom we swear, is not only to be deceived, but, by virtue of that
deceit, is to be injured in his Estate; his Reputation; nay or, it may be, to
the loss of his very Life it self.

25. AND this, God knows, were bad enough, were the Sin to end here. But that
it does not; It proceeds still farther: Whilst for the accomplishment of this
vile purpose, the false swearer does not only not tremble at the thought of the
Divine Justice; but flies in the very face of it; and recurrs to God both for
the countenance of his Treachery, and for the confirmation of the Lie, by which
it is to be brought about.

26. NOW he who can be so hardy as to do this; must either not believe that
there is any God at all; or he must disclaim his knowledge of, and concern for,
what is done here below: Or, if he confesses both these; he must then be
concluded to defy his Vengeance. For I cannot suppose any one to be capable of
so far mistaking the Divine Nature, as to think, that a God of Truth, will
either endure to be made a Party to what is false; or not avenge himself on
that Man, who shall presume so to do.

27. SUCH therefore is the Malignity of this Sin, as it relates to God: Nor is
it, 2dly, any less as it respects our selves.

28. FOR proof whereof I must observe, that in every Oath God is appealed unto,
not only as a Witness of the Truth of what we say; but as a most just and
powerful Judge too, to punish us for our falsehood, if it be not.

29. THIS is so Essential to the Nature of an Oath, that, without it, all the
security of such an Appeal would be quite lost; and the design of Swearing,
overthrown. For what reason would any one have to believe another upon his
Oath, more than upon his Bare Word; but that both he who swears, and he to whom
the Oath is made, do believe, that God is thereby made the Surety of what is
spoken: And will avenge both Himself first, and then the Person whose Trust is,
by this means, deceived; upon that Man, who shall be so presumptuous, as by
swearing falsely, to abuse both?

30. NOW this being granted; and which, without destroying all the Benefit and
Intention of an Oath, cannot be denied; it must follow, That there is hardly
any Sin by which a Man does so directly wound his own Soul, and cut himself off
from all the hopes of Salvation, as by this. Because in this Sin, a Man gives
up all claim to God's Mercy; nay more, desires God so to deal with him as what
he says is true; that is, in other words, to damn him, if it be not. And what
can he who has done this pretend to, or even hope for, at God's hands? Who has
already given Verdict against himself; and with his own Mouth pronounced, or
rather chosen, his own Doom?

31. AND this I take to have been the Ground of that terrible Clause in the
Sanction of the Third Commandment; the like whereof we do not meet with in any
other, nor can we suppose that it was added to this, without some peculiar
design in the doing of it: Thou shall not take the Name of the LORD thy God in
Vain; For the LORD will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. He
will not hold him guiltless, that is, he will not forgive him: Will not treat
him with that Favor he will do other sinners: But will look upon him as a
guilty, condemned Malefactor; one whom his own Mouth has convicted, and will
punish him accordingly.

32. SUCH is the Danger to which every Perjury a Man commits, exposes his
immortal Soul. And if we may estimate the Hainousness of any Sin, by the hatred
which God bears to it; we must then conclude this to be one of the most
grievous of any; as we are sure it is of all others, in a singular manner,
odious to God, and destructive of Our Salvation.

33. I ADD, 3dly: That it is, above any other Sin, the most injurious to
Mankind; as being, in its own nature, directly opposite to the Peace and
Security of the World.

34. I HAVE already observed, that the general Cause which moves any one to
forswear himself, is either to gratify his own Lusts, or to promote his
Interest; though at the Cost of his Neighbors Welfare. And, I believe, whosoever
shall consider the main Instances wherein this Sin is usually committed, will
find that I was not mistaken in my Judgment of it.

35. BUT the Evil does not stop here; but often times affects the Public, as
well as violates Men's Private Rights. Such are all those Perjuries which are
committed in the Public Administration of Justice; and by means of which,
either Honest Men are Condemned; or Evildoers are Acquitted; and the Ministers
of Justice are made the Instruments of Unrighteousness; and all the Ends of
their Institution are rendered not only Useless, but even Hurtful to the
Commonwealth.

36. AND thus far, every single Act of Perjury is an Offense against Man, as
well as a Sin against God. But now, if we shall consider the Nature and
Tendency of such a Practice in the general; and reason upon the proper and
natural Effects of it; we shall find it to be a Common Abuse of Mankind:
Destructive of the very Foundation of Humane Society; and which being allowed
of, must tend to the overthrow of all Peace, and Right, and Property, in the
World.

37. AND that I thus prove: The Foundation of all Society, and without which no
Affairs of Life can be transacted, is that Common Trust and Confidence, which
Men naturally have in one another. Without this, no State, no Community, though
never so small; not a Private Family can subsist. There can be no dealing with,
nor dependence upon, one another. Every Man must become afraid of his
Neighbor; and not account his Goods, or even his Life it self, any longer his
Own, than he can guard them against the Cunning or Force of the next Man he
meets, and who (for ought he knows) may design to rob him of both.

38. WHICH being so, it must follow, That whatsoever does in its own nature
tend to Overthrow this Trust between Man and Man, must be looked upon as a
Crime against Humane Society; because it naturally leads to the destruction of
it.

39. NOW that Perjury, in the most outrageous manner, does: Inasmuch as it
violates the strongest Security, that one Man is capable of giving to Another,
of his Truth and Sincerity. And therefore the false swearer is so far from
deserving any Favor of Men, that were he dealt with, as he ought to be, he
should be accounted to have forfeited all Right to the Benefits of Society:
Should be treated as a kind of Outlaw in the Commonwealth; an Enemy to Truth
and Justice, to Peace and Property; and no longer under the Protection of those
Laws, by which others are preserved in their Rights and Liberties.

40. AND now, when such is the apparent Malignity of this Sin, that it renders
Men not only Obnoxious to God's Vengeance, but even Incapable of his Mercy;
and, as if that were not enough, exposes them to the Resentments of Mankind
too: One would think nothing more could be desired to draw Men off from the
practice of such a Vice, as at once bespeaks them unworthy to live upon the
Earth; and, without a very extraordinary Repentance, will be sure to shut them
out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

41. IT is indeed a Matter of very sad Consideration, to think, that under so
Pure and Holy, so Just and Sincere an Institution, as that of the Gospel; there
should be any need either of laying down any Rules for the Prevention of such a
Sin, or of Using any Arguments, to draw Men off from the Commission of it. But
alas! Experience shows, that there is, at this day, but too much need of Both.
And that after all which either the Commands of God, or the Laws of Men, have
been able to do for the Suppression of it; yet by reason of False-swearing, not
only Men's Souls suffer, but our very Land its self mourns.

42. I SHALL conclude these Reflections with the same Exhortation that the
Prophet Zachary heretofore made to the Jews; under much the same Circumstances
with ours at this day, as to what concerns this Great Evil: Zech. viii.16.
These are the things that ye shall Do: Speak ye Every Man the Truth to his
Neighbor; Execute the Judgment of Truth and Peace in your Gates. And let None
of you imagine Evil in your Hearts against his Neighbor; And Love no
False-Oath: For All These are Things that I Hate, says the LORD.

CHAP. III. Wherein is shown, That All Swearing whatsoever, is not Forbidden
under the Gospel: And an Enquiry is made, What that Swearing is, which Our
Savior has Prohibited, as Absolutely Evil and Unlawful.
1. [ But I say unto you, Swear not at All, etc.]
IT has been the Mistake of Several Passages to this purpose, we find in some
of the Fathers themselves: But the Pelagians held it as their Opinion: See
Hilar. Epist. ad August. T. 2. Ep. 88. Pelag. Epist. ad Demetriad. apud Hieron.
T. 2. Caelestius: apud Eund. T. 4. de Scientia Div. Leg. So did the Waldenses
after them: not to mention those Fanatics of our own times, who do likewise.
some who have attended more to the Words of our Savior, in that Passage of
St. Mat. chapter v.34. I say unto you, Swear not at All; than either to the
Occasion, or Design of them; to Conclude, That All manner of Swearing
Whatsoever is utterly Forbidden to Christians under the Gospel. And indeed not
only the Prohibition of our Blessed Lord in that place; but that Express
Confirmation which we meet with of it, in the vth of St. James, ver. 12. does
seem, at the first sight, to give but too much Countenance to such a Conclusion.

2. TO clear this Difficulty, and to show How far it may still be lawful for a
Christian to Take an Oath; but yet withal, with how great Care and
Circumspection he ought to Do it; I shall now enter upon a particular Enquiry
into this whole Matter: and endeavor with all possible Exactness to discover,
what the Design of our Savior was, in that passage upon which this difficulty
is founded, and by which it must be determined.

3. IN pursuance of which Enquiry, I shall not doubt in the (1st) Place to
Affirm; That How much soever the Words under Debate, if strictly taken, may
seem to favor such an Opinion; yet it was never the Intention of our Lord
utterly to forbid All Swearing whatsoever, as Simply and Absolutely Unlawful,
under the Gospel. And that I Affirm, upon these two Accounts: 1 st. That there
was no Reason Why He should Do so; but rather a Great deal of Reason to the
Contrary. And, 2 dly. That it is Certain He did not Do it: And therefore that
we must put some Restriction, upon that seemingly General Prohibition before
mentioned, Swear not at All.


4. And 1 st. That there was no Reason why our Savior should have Forbidden
all Swearing whatsoever, is Evident from hence; That an Oath being in its Own
Nature nothing else but an Appeal to God for the Truth of what we say, must be
Acknowleged, when Duly and Reverently taken, to have nothing Evil, or otherwise
Irregular in it: but on the contrary, to be an Act of Religious Worship; and by
which the Honor and Authority of God, are eminently advanced. Forasmuch as by
Calling of God to Witness in all Places, and upon all suitable Occasions, We
confess Him to be Every where Present; To Know and Observe all the Affairs of
Men; To be the Searcher of the Heart: In a word, To be most True and Faithful
Himself; and a most Just and Powerful Avenger of all Falsehood and Treachery in
Others. And by all this, We do evidently Declare and Magnify his Divine
Perfections; and show to all the World what a Sense we have of his Goodness and
Greatness.

5. HENCE it is that God Evermore Reserved this as a proper Part of that
Worship which was Due to Himself Only; and might not, without Impiety, be given
to Any Other. He commanded the Jews not more to Deutr. vi.13. -- x.20. Exodus
xxiii.13. Josh. xxiii.7, 8.
Serve him, than to Swear by His Name: And when, in process of time, they began
to Swear by some Other Gods; I have shown you both How grievously He Jer. v.7.
Hos. iv.15. Amos viii.14. Zeph. i.5. See above, Chap. I.
Resented the Affront, and How severely He was pleased to Punish them for it.

6. NOW this being the Case of an Oath, that, when Duly and Reverently taken,
it is so far from having any thing Amiss in it, that it is rather and Act of
Religious Worship; and, as such, Honorable to God, as well as Useful to
Mankind: What Reason can there be given, why our Savior should Aim at the
Utter Abolishing of it? Or what is there to be Assigned in it, Unworthy of that
Religion, which He Came to Establish in the World?

7. BUT if there be therefore no Reason to be given, Why our Savior should
have Forbidden All manner of Swearing; Sure I am there are Reasons enough to be
offered, Why He should not: And those such as will render the Opinion of Those
who pretend He has Done it, very Improbable; which is All I am yet concerned to
Do.

8. FOR, indeed, What Practice is there upon which the Peace, and Welfare, and
Security of Mankind, does more depend, than upon the Serious, and Sacred Use of
an Oath? It is this Unites Men into Society with Each Other: Secures to the
Magistrate, the Obedience, and Help of the People; and to the People the
Careful, and Regular Government of the Magistrate. It is upon This Assurance
that the greatest Affairs of Life are transacted; Men's Fortunes, determined;
and Justice its self Upheld and Maintained. By This, Evildoers are Convicted;
Injuries are Redressed; And Right is Administered. Through This, Men are enabled
to Treat with Those whom they never saw before: Of whose Integrity they can
have no Other Security; nor, Having This, do they desire any Better. In short;
How great a Confusion, How insuperable a Mischief, the utter Abolishing of all
Swearing, must bring to the Affairs of Mankind, this One Consideration may
suffice to show; that, (the Treachery and Distrust of Humane Nature considered)
it would almost utterly destroy all Confidence in One Another; would Dissolve
Society, and lay the Ground of an Eternal Fearfulness and Suspicion between
every Man and his Neighbor: and so bring in, in Good Earnest, that State of
War, which some have fancied Men naturally are Born in; and which, it is
certain, nothing but Mutual Trust and Compacts, can keep them from.

9. AND, if this be so, can it Reasonably be imagined that our Savior Christ,
who was so Great a Lover of Men, and who so well knew of what Use, or rather of
what Necessity, the Religious Practice of Swearing was to the World; would,
without any just Ground for his so doing, have Utterly Forbidden the
Continuance of it?

10. BUT especially, when it shall farther be Considered, that God, under the
Law, did not barely Tolerate this Practice in the Jews, as a Necessary
Condescension to their Infirmities: But upon every fitting Occasion, Himself
Above 70 Instances of this may be taken out of the Old Testament.
Swear to them; and in many Cases, Exodus xxii.11. Numb. v.19.21. -- xxx.10 --
Deuteronomy. xxix.12. 2 Chronicles. vi.22. --
Required them to Do likewise; as has been before observed.

11. NOW this, as it August. de Verb. Apost. Sermon. 28. Si Peccatum esset
Juratio, nec in Veteri Lege diceretur, Non Perjurabis, reddes autem Domino
Jus-jurandum tuum. Non enim peccatum praeciperetur nobis.
plainly shows, that there can be nothing sinful in the Practice of Swearing,
in the General; so does it render it still more Improbable, that our Savior
should not only, without need, have deprived Mankind of so Useful an
Institution; but by doing of it, should also have cast some sort of Reflection
upon the Law of God its self, which not only Allowed, but Required the Using of
it: And that too with Relation to that part of it, of which He tells us,
nevertheless, in this very Chapter; Mat. v.17.
That He came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. And which we ought not
therefore to doubt was what He Intended, in the Third; as we Confess it was
what He Did, in the Other Commandments.

12. I CONCLUDE, therefore, that upon all these Accounts it is, at least, very
Improbable, that our Blessed Savior should have designed Utterly to Forbid all
manner of Swearing as Sinful and Unlawful. I add, 2dly, That whatever that
Passage, we are Here enquiring into, may seem to Offer to the Contrary, it is
Certain He did not do it; as I shall now make Appear.

13. THAT St. Paul has solemnly Sworn in almost every One of his Epistles, is a
It is true St. Augustine tells us, that the Pelagians denied these to be Oaths:
and Held nothing to be Swearing, unless it were put into that express Form; BY
GOD. But He tells us withal, that their only reason for denying this was to
avoid the Example of St. Paul, and the force of our Argument taken from it: And
justly charges them thereupon with an utter Ignorance of what it was to Swear.
See To. 2. Epist. 89. ad Hilar. And yet St. Basil was once Almost of the same
mind: But it was the same Reason that seems to have led him to it. See his
Exposit. in Psalm. xiv.
Truth so Evident, that it must be Impossible for any One who knows what an
Oath is, to be able seriously to doubt of it. God is my Witness, says He, Romans
i.9. I call God for a Record upon my Soul, 2 Cor. i.23. The God and Father of
our LORD Jesus Christ, who is Blessed for Evermore, knows that I lie not, 2
Cor. xi.31. Behold, before God, I lie not, Gal. i.20. And several other
Expressions he elsewhere has of the like nature.

14. NOW in All These, either this Great Apostle was Guilty of Sinning, or he
was not. That he committed any Sin in thus Writing; but especially a Wilful,
Known, and Deliberate Sin; is very hard to suppose: I am sure must never be
allowed by those who believe him to have been acted, by the immediate
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, in what he wrote. And yet supposing our Savior
to have utterly forbidden the Use of Swearing, to All Christians, and upon Any
Occasion; How shall we ever be able to Excuse him, from a Gross, Presumptuous
Contempt of his Commandment?

15. THAT St. Paul should have continued all his Life ignorant of such a
Prohibition, is very strange: Nor has it, that I know of, been Pretended by Any.

16. THAT he had any particular Allowance made to him, to exempt him from the
Obligation of it, and to Authorize him to Act directly Contrary to the Command
of Christ, and to the Common Duty of all other Christians, does not appear; nor
ought, without some very good Grounds to be supposed by us. I conclude,
therefore, So St. August. l. de Mendacio ad Consentium, To. iv. Juravit ipse
Apostolus in Epistolis suis, and sic ostendit, quomodo accipiendum esset quod
Dictum est; Dico Vobis, Non jurate Omnino. -- And a little after: Quia
praecepti Violati reum Paulum, praesertim in Epistolis conscriptis atque Editis
ad Spiritualem Vitam, Salutemque Populorum, nefa^ est dicere; Intelligendum est
illud quod positum est, Omnino, ad hoc positum, ut Quantum in te est non
Affectes, non Ames, non quasi pro Bono, cum aliqua Delectatione, Appetas
Jus-jurandum. --
That had the Use of Swearing been utterly Taken away under the Gospel; neither
would St. Paul have laid so great a Stumbling Block in our way, as he could not
but think his Example might be likely to prove to the Church of Christ: Nor
would the Holy Ghost have given so much Countenance to a Practice, neither very
Commendable in its self; nor, upon any Account, to be Imitated by Those, for
Whose Benefit and Instruction, those very Epistles were Inspired by him.

17. BUT we have not only the Example of St. Paul, though that were enough, to
direct us in this Matter. Our Blessed Savior Himself has done likewise; and
Vid. Coelest. Epist. de Scienti^ Divinae legis: Apud Hieron. T. IV. p. 63. --
that by the Confession of those, who yet will by no means allow of his
Apostles Swearing. It has been thought by So Origin in Mat. Tract. 35. p. 114.
L. Chrysostom. in Heb. Hom. 11. August. in Jo. Tract. 41 Hieron. in Ezekiel. c.xvi. In
Vet. Testamento Dei Juramentum est, Vivo Ego, Dicit Dominus: In Novo autem,
Amen, Amen, dico Vobis. Greg. Nyssen. de Scop. Christian. To. iii. p. 311.
some, that that Form of Speech so often used by our LORD in Confirmation of
what He delivered, Verily, verily, I say unto you; was not merely a Vehement
Asseveration, but rather a Direct and Forman Oath. Though in this, I confess, I
am not so well satisfied, as to be willing to lay any great stress upon it; yet
that he did, truly See Dr. Hammond, on Mat. xxvi. Let. i. Grot. in Mat.
xxvi.63. --
Swear, at his Arraignment before the High Priest, is hardly to be doubted.
When being Adjured by him, (after the Manner used among the Jews) to tell him
Whether he were the Christ, or No: He readily complied with the Obligation that
was laid upon him; and answered plainly, that he was. And in the xth of the
Revelations, St. John puts it beyond all dispute, that the Angel, with whom he
discoursed, did do likewise, and that with great solemnity too; For he lifted
up his hand, and SWEAR, by Him that Lives for Ever and Ever: Ver. 5, 6.

18. I CONCLUDE therefore, That what God both * Prescribed, and * Practiced
under the Law; * What not only St. Paul, but our Savior Christ himself, and an
Angel from Heaven, continued to Use under the Gospel: * What, being duly
performed, is for the Honor of God, and the Benefit of Mankind; but, being *
Utterly Forbidden, must turn very much to the Detriment of the World: As it
cannot be in its self Evil, so neither was it ever intended to have been
Abolished by our Blessed LORD as such.

19. BUT what then shall we say to this Passage of St. Matthew? Swear not at
All. Can any thing be more Express? Or could our Savior have spoken more
plainly, had he designed to have done, what some pretend he has done?

20. TO this I Answer, and it is the next Consideration I have to offer for the
clearing of this Difficulty, (2dly) That it is not enough that the Words of any
Prohibition are General, to oblige us to understand it in the utmost extent
that the Expressions are capable of: But we must withal consider, what it is
reasonable to suppose was designed to have been forbidden by them.

21. FOR Proof of which Remark, Let us look back only to the 21st Verse of this
Chapter; where we meet with a Case not very different from that before us. Ye
have heard, says our Savior, that it has been said by them of old times, Thou
shall not Kill. And in the xxth of Exodus, the Command is Absolute and Express,
Thou shall not Kill. And some, we know, have been so very tender as to imagine,
that it is no less unlawful in any Case, or upon any Pretense, to put a Man to
Death, than others have thought it to be to take an Oath. And yet at the same
time that that Prohibition was delivered to the Jews, God himself established
the Power of Life and Death, in the Civil Magistrate; and in one of the first
Laws that was given to Mankind, declared, Genesis ix.6*
That whosoever shed Man's Blood, by Man should his Blood be shed.

22. TO know therefore how far we are to extend the Force of any Prohibition;
we must consider, not only how General the Letter of the Law is, but what were
the Occasion and Design of Making of it. Now the End of the Sixth Commandment
was to restrain Private Violence; and to tie up Men's Hands from rashly
Assaulting, and Hurting of one another. And therefore to Private Persons, and
in all the Common Circumstances of Life, the Command is Absolute, and admits of
no Restriction; Thou shall not Kill. But in the Public Administration of
Justice; In Defense of a Man's own Life; In a Lawful War, where the Welfare and
Security of our Country are at stake; in these Cases, as the Design of the Law
is not concerned, so neither must the Meaning of it be extended to them.

23. AND so it is in the Point before us: Swear not at All, says our Blessed
Savior. But in what Cases? And after what Manner? Why not on every Slight
Occasion; Nay not on Any Occasion, where, without violating the Bonds of
Justice and Charity, you can avoid the doing of it. And even there where you
cannot, yet Swear not after the Manner that the Jews were wont to do; for whose
Correction our Savior, as I shall presently show, delivered the Prohibition,
of which we are now speaking.

24. AND this brings me to the (3d) and last Thing I have to observe, for the
clear Understanding of the Words before us: And that is this; That if we will
come to a Right Apprehension of our Savior's Intention in them, we must
Examine what there was Amiss in the common Practice of the Jews, as to this
Matter; and by that we shall be able the more easily to judge, what is
forbidden to us in it.

25. NOW the Faults of the Jews, as to this Point of Swearing, were these: 1st.
Vid. Philon. (...): p. 769, 780. -- See Dr. Lightfoot's Exercit. on St. Matthew.
in Loc. p. 148, 149, fol. Insomuch that Aben* Ezra accounted this to have been
one of those sins, for which God delayed the coming of the Messiah. Vid. in
Decalog.
That they allowed themselves to Swear, almost upon any Occasion, though never so
Vain and Impertinent; Provided only that they did not Swear by the Sacred Name
of God; and which indeed, they agreed, was not to be taken into their Mouths
but upon some great Occasion, and with a due Regard had to the Honor of it.
But that which was yet worse, was, 2ly: So St. August. de Sermon. Dom. in mont.
l. 1. c. 17. Lightfoot, Loc. cit. p. 149. And on Mat. 23.16. Muscul in Loc.
Voss. Hist. Pelag. p. 522. Nay in the Talmud its self, Tit. Shebuoth, there is
this express Assertion. Qui Jurat per Coelum and Terram, Liber est; sed qui
jurat per Dei Nomina, tenetur. Hornb. contr. Jud. cap. de Juram: -- And indeed
what strange ways they have at this very day of avoiding the Obligation of an
Oath, is notorious: See to this purpose Fagius on Exodus xxiii. Buxtorf, Lex.
Rabb. in (...): Pug. fid. page 730. from their own Authors. In short, it was
upon both these Accounts that Martial fell so severely upon them in that
Epigram, l.ix 95. And which sufficiently shows, both how ready they were to
Swear, by those lesser Forms here mentioned; and how little they thought
themselves obliged by them.
* That they supposed that by Many of those lesser Oaths, they were not so
strictly obliged to Speak, and Act, according to the Intention of them; but
that they might, without being Forsworn, either Dissemble their Knowledge, or
Neglect their Promises, which they Confirmed only by such Oaths as these.

26. THAT these were the Measures by which the Jews governed themselves, as to
this Matter, both their own ancient Writers tell us; and our See Mat. v.35, 36.
-- xxiii.16. etc. See the foregoing Notes.
Savior himself, in part, declares to us. And I need not say any thing to
show, that the Design of all this was to avoid the Obligation of the Third
Commandment; to the Due Observance whereof, our Savior therefore, in this
place, intended to reduce his Disciples.

27. AND to that end, 1st: That he might the better keep up the Reverence of an
Oath, he expressly forbids that Customary and Familiar Use, which the Jews had
been wont to make of it. I say unto you, Swear not at All; Neither by Heaven,
for it is God's Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; nor by
Jerusalem, for it is the City of the Great King. That is, Swear not at all
after See Heinsius: In Loc. Calvin. Harm. Evang. in Loc.
that Way that the Jews were wont so readily to do; Nor in i. e. Voluntary
Oaths: For in all such as were Imposed by Authority, they were not permitted to
swear otherwise than by the Name of God.
such Cases, in which they therefore made use of these lesser Forms of
Swearing, because they thought it neither Decent, nor Lawful, to Swear by the
Name of God.

28. NOW that which yet more confirms to us the Reasonableness of this
Interpretation, is, that our Savior himself, in the prosecution of this very
Subject, plainly restrains his Discourse to the same Cases, in which the Jews
were wont to use those Forms of Swearing, which he here mentions. But let your
Communication, says he, be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay. That is, in your Private
Discourse and Affairs with one another; let it suffice you, instead of Swearing
after the manner of the Jews here reproved, barely to Affirm or Deny what you
have to say: Or at the most to add some Innocent Asseveration to it, for the
farther satisfaction of him to whom you speak; For whatsoever is more than
this, comes of evil.

29. AND thus far it was undoubtedly the Design of our Savior, to Forbid the
Practice of Swearing Altogether; and to declare it, in such Cases, to be
Utterly Evil and Unlawful. And therefore, as to what concerns this kind of
Swearing; (and to which both the Practice of the Jews here intended to be
Corrected; and the Instances given of the Oaths which they made Use of; and the
Direction of our Savior how to behave our selves on such Occasions, do All
evidently refer;) the Prohibition is Universal, and admits of no Exception; I
say unto you, Swear not at All: no not though what you Swear be never so True, or
you should be never so much Provoked to Swear to it.

30. BUT indeed, I am apt to believe that our Savior intended somewhat more
than this, in his Prohibition as to this Matter: And that, because the Abuses
which the Jews are charged with in this particular, required somewhat more to
be done for the security of that Commandment, which he was here concerned to
restore to its full Force. And that is this: That because such is the Nature of
Mankind, that we are but too apt to trifle with the most Sacred Things; as we
see the Jews, in the Case before us, most notoriously did; who for that reason
set up the lesser kind of Swearing here mentioned, that so they might both the
more freely use it, and the more easily break through the Obligation of it:
Therefore our Savior resolved, at once, to prevent all future Corruption of
this kind, by utterly So Hierome, in Loc. Epiphan. Haer. xix. thus speaks of
this passage: (...). But above any, St. Cyril admirably explains and confirms
this, Lib. vi. de Ador. in Sp. and Ver. p. 212. And affirms it to have been a
great part of our Savior's design in this very passage. For having shown, that
we should avoid all Swearing, as much as may be; he adds, that if we must needs
Swear, (...). And then he goes on to show how contrary to this the Practice of
the Jews was; and how our Savior labored to Correct this Error, p. 213*
(...), etc. (...). And having farther shown the Grounds of this Restraint, he
thus concludes, p. 214. (...).
Forbidding Men to Swear any otherwise, than by the Name of God only.

31. AND if this be allowed, then here we shall again have another good Account
of the Universality of our Savior's Prohibition as to this matter. I say unto
you, Swear not at All; that is, not at all by Heaven, or by the Earth, or by
any other the like Forms: But when you shall find it needful to Swear, Swear
directly by the Name of God; and then you will both the more rarely do it, and
when you shall do it, will be the more likely to Swear truly, and to Perform to
the LORD your Oaths.

32. FROM what has been said, we may now see what that Swearing is, which our
Blessed Lord has forbidden, as Unlawful to us Christians: Namely, First, To
Swear at all in our Common and Private Affairs, with one another; when there is
neither any Suitable Occasion for it; nor any Necessity laid upon us so to do.
And, Secondly, To use those little, affected Modes of Swearing, which Custom
and Design brought in among the Jews, and which are still but too much allowed
of among us at this day. And by Both which, the Majesty of God is profaned;
Perjury is increased; Faith and Confidence are lessened among Men; and their
Immortal Souls are continually exposed to Ruin and Destruction. I shall
therefore make a few Practical Reflections, upon Each of these Kinds of
Swearing; and so conclude this Chapter.

33. AND, First: As to the Case of Light and Customary Swearing, it is certain,
That for a Man to Swear in his Common, Ordinary Conversation; where there is
either no need at all of an Oath, or none that is Proportionable to that
Reverence which ought to be paid to it; is Absolutely Evil, and Unlawful. It is
indeed to Profane the Sacredness, and to Prostitute the Design of an Oath: And
puts such an See this Argument managed by St Athanasius, with great Elegance,
Lib. de Passion. Cruce Dom. To. I. p. 995.
Affront upon God, as we would be ashamed to put upon one of our
Fellow Creatures.

34. AND yet, alas! How ordinary a Practice is this among us? And how often do
we see Men Call God to Witness, not only without need, but with such little
regard too; that I am afraid many times they do not know themselves when they
do so.

35. NAY and well were it for them, if they did this only upon too light
Occasions: But very frequently they do it upon such, as are extremely Indecent,
if not Sinful. To Bear Witness to their Lewdness, their Profaness, and their
Debauchery. To Bind their Obligations of Iniquity upon their Souls: And to
Confirm their Envious, their Malicious, and Covetous Purposes, against their
Neighbor.

36. THESE are, God knows, very terrible Considerations: They make me even
tremble at the remembrance of them. And yet thus is God's Name profaned without
Horror; and we suffer it without Concern.

37. BUT I must go yet farther: For though this be that Swearing which our
Savior seems chiefly to have spoken against in this place; yet I doubt not but
that much more is required of us. And therefore I add, 2dly: That as a Man
ought never to Swear, but up on some Great, and Solemn Occasion; so neither
should he Swear, of Choice, even Then; Nor till he ha^ first endeavored, as
far as is fitting^ to avoid it.

Isocrat. ad Demonicum.
38. IT was the Opinion of ^ Heathen Moralist, that a Good Man ought never to
Swear, but upon On^ of these Two Accounts; Either t^ Serve his Friend, Or to
Vindica^ Himself from some Foul and Scan^dalous Aspersion.

39. THOUGH in this, I think, he was too severe; yet as, I presume, there are not
many Cases in which a Man ought voluntarily to Swear; so, I believe, this one
General Rule may comprehend the most of them: Namely, That we should never do
it, but when it is necessary, either for God's Glory; our Own Justification; or
our Neighbors Good. But as for any other Considerations, I am persuaded, that
it were better a Man should sit down under any tolerable Inconvenience, than
flee to an Oath for the prevention of it.

40. AND this I say as to the Case of Voluntary Oaths: As for those which are
Imposed by Public Authority, the Subjects Rule must be to yield to them in all
Honest and Lawful Matters; and to take such, as he can, with a good Conscience,
take. As for the Reasonableness of Requiring them, that is their business to
consider who oblige us to the taking of them: And who ought to remember, that
they shall assuredly answer to God for it, if by imposing them too often, and
upon too slight Occasions; where neither the Necessity of Government, nor the
Public Peace require the doing of it; they shall cause God's Name to be
profaned; shall burden their Neighbors Conscience; and, by degrees, take off
very much from the Religion and Reverence of Swearing.

41. But, 3dly: and to conclude these first sort of Remarks. As the Commandment
here referred to by our Savior, Thou shall not Forswear thy self; and
expounded by that additional Paraphrase, But shall perform to the LORD thine
Oaths; has ever been looked upon to relate See Grot. in Loc. and Explic. Decal.
Exodus xx. 7.
more especially to Promissory Oaths; in which the Danger of Perjury is much
the greatest, and there will therefore need the greatest Care and
Circumspection to be used, in order to the prevention of it: So am I apt to
think, upon all these Accounts, that we ought to look upon our selves as yet
more concerned to Avoid such kind of Oaths, as far as it may be in our power so
to do, rather than any others.

42. A WISE Man will oblige himself, as seldom as he can, by a bare Promise:
Because he cannot tell what may happen, nor to what Inconveniences he may
expose himself, by the making of it. And surely much less ought a Good Man to
bind a Promise upon himself by an Oath; unless it be upon some urgent Occasion,
and in which he shall account it to be his Duty so to do.

43. AND this may suffice to have been observed, with relation to the First
thing here forbidden; viz. the Frequent, and Unnecessary, and Unworthy Usage of
an Oath. As for the other Case proposed; I mean the Abstaining from those
lesser Modes of Swearing here referred to; and, I believe, forbidden too by our
Savior: It may be considered;

44. 1st: THAT though it should be doubtful whether it be simply, and absolutely
Unlawful, to make use of them; yet it cannot be questioned but that it must be
much Safer, not to do so: Nor can there be any reason given, why a Wise and
Good Man, should ever venture upon the use of them.

45. THAT it must be much Safer to abstain altogether from them, is manifest
from hence, that it is (at least) probable that our Blessed Lord did intend, in
this place, to restrain the use of them: I am sure no one can ever show, upon
any good Grounds, and such as may justify a Man's Conscience in the allowance
of them, that he did not.

46. AND then, for the other part of my Assertion; That there can be no reason
for a Good Man to venture upon the use of them, it is evident; Because, those
things which, in such a Case, a Man swears by, must be considered either as
relating to God, and Terminating the Oath in him; And So our Savior determines
it, Mat. xxiii.16, etc.
then, to swear by them, is the same thing as to swear by God himself; and to
prostitute such Oaths to a Common Usage, is as criminal as to profane the very
Name of God: Or if they are incapable of being thus referred to God, and for
that reason may be thought not to oblige; then is the use of them vain and
delusory; and so either no End at all; or, to be sure, no good one can be
designed by them.

47. BUT, 2dly: Whatever becomes of this Reflection, thus much is certain; That
to use any of these Oaths with the Intention of the Jews, here condemned by our
Savior; that is to say, for the Promotion either of Common and Vain Swearing,
on the one hand; or of Fraudulent and Deceitful Swearing, on the other; or to
recurr to such kind of Oaths in any Case, in which we should not think it
decent, or lawful, to Swear by God himself, is absolutely Unlawful; and
undoubtedly prohibited by Christ, as such.

48. BUT here then I must not be Mis^understood: For though I say that a Good
Christian ought not to Swear by any, but God only; yet I do not pretend that we
must always do it with a direct Mention of his Name; and in those express
Terms, Augustine, T. 2. Epist. 89. ad Hilar. Illi (sc. Pelagiani) quantum
aliquos eorum audivi, quid sit Juramentum prors^s Ignorant. Putant enim se non
Jurare quando in Ore habent scit Deus, etc. Quia non dicitur PER DEUM. Et de
Verb. Apost. Sermon. xxviii. cap. vi. To. x.
which some have vainly thought alone properly to constitute an Oath. Many are
the Forms into which the Substance of an Oath may be cast, and in several of
them the Name of God not at all expressed; and yet the Oath be made by him only.

49. THUS St Paul, though he generally mentioned the very Name of God, yet
sometimes he put his Oath into another Form; and That this was properly an
Oath, St. Augustine stiffly contends, Sermon. de verb. Apost. xxviii. c. 5. And
refers to the propriety of the Original Greek for proof of it. But the Syriac
Version is more express; and puts in, by way of explication, the very word, I
Swear. And yet others doubt of it, and think it to have only the Form of an
Oath, without being really so. See Basil, in Psalm. xiv. To. I. p. 133. E.
Protested by the Rejoicing which he had in Christ Jesus our Lord, 1 Cor. xv.
And when often times we our selves lay our Hand on the Holy Scriptures, and
having first conceived the Substance of the Oath, conclude with this Form, So
help me God, and the Contents of this Book: We as really Swear by God Alone, as
if we had altogether stopped in the former part of our Appeal; or only said
with the Apostle, God is my Witness.

50. IN all these Cases, it is enough that we make it plain that we refer to
God, and to him Only, for the Truth of what we speak: And then howsoever our
Words may run, the Oath will still be understood to terminate in him Alone.

51. I SAY to God ONLY: Because otherwise though we should Swear expressly by God,
yet if we shall join any Other together with him, as the Jews did sometimes
heretofore, and as those of the Church of Rome do notoriously at this day: In
such a Case, our Oath will again be faulty; and we shall, in the very Manner of
our Swearing, be guilty of a Sin, but little less criminal, than that of
Perjury its self.

52. AND thus have I offered to you such Considerations, as seemed necessary to
show, what that Swearing is which our Savior has truly Forbidden under the
Gospel. I shall conclude this Point, with those Words of the Son of Sirach.
Ecclus. xxiii.9. Accustom not thy Mouth to Swearing, neither Use thy self to
the Naming of the Holy One. For as a Servant that is Continually Beaten, shall
not be without a Blew-Mark; so he that Swears, and Names God, Continually,
shall not be Faultless. He that uses much Swearing, shall be filled with
Iniquity, and the Plague shall never depart from his House.

CHAP. IV. Of the several Ways of Confirming what is Spoken, or Promised, under
the Degree of an Oath; How far They may be made Use of in Men's Private
Conversation? And for what Reason it was not fitting That Men should have been
Allowed to Go any Farther?
[ But let your Communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay.]
1. HAVING now shown, from the Words of our Blessed Savior, how careful a Good
Christian ought to be not only Not to Forswear Himself; but, as far as he is
able, Not to Swear at All: It remains, for the final clearing of this Subject,
that we go on, upon the same Principles, to enquire, How we are to behave our
selves, in our Common Discourse, with One Another? And here the Rule proposed
to us is this; Let your Communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay: And this Reason
given, why we ought to confine our selves within the bounds of it; For, says
our Savior, Whatsoever is more than this, comes of Evil. I shall distinctly
consider each part of it; And endeavor, First, To show you, What our Duty,
with relation to this Matter, is: And then, Secondly, To convince you, of the
Reasonableness of that Motive, which our blessed Savior has here made use of,
to oblige us to walk according thereunto.

2. And, First: For what concerns the Rule here laid down; It was the Opinion
of a very learned Man in his Remarks upon this Passage; Grot. Com. in Loc.
That these Words of our Savior, Let your Communication be, Yea, yea; Nay,
nay; are to be expounded by those of St. James, to the same purpose, Jam. v.12.
Let your Yea, be Yea; and your Nay, Nay: And the account he gives of Both of
them is this; That our Actions should be agreeable to our Expressions; and that
whenever we promise any thing, we should be sure to take especial care that
our performance be accordingly.

3. THOUGH this be, no doubt, the Duty, and should be the Care of every good
Christian; yet can I, by no means, think it a proper Account of our Savior's
Meaning in the Words before us: In which it was certainly his Intention to
direct us, How to manage our selves in our (...). Sermo vester.
Discourse, or as we render it, our Communication with one another; and not how
to conform our Performances to our Promises.

4. THAT St. James had a regard to this Passage of our Savior, in that
Exhortation which he gave to the same purpose, I make no doubt: Nor shall I
deny, but that they may possibly have Both of them meant the same thing. But
that either the One, or the Other, intended to restrain the Doctrine here
delivered concerning Swearing, to Promissory Oaths only; or indeed aimed at any
thing more than to show us, How we should behave our selves in our Conversation
with one another, does not appear from either of their Expressions; nor ought,
without Reason, to be supposed by us.

5. AND therefore, 2dly, and to come more closely to the Explication of the
Words before us: As it is plain from the whole Tenor of our Savior's
Discourse in this place, that a good Christian may, without all scruple, Affirm
what is True, or Deny what is False; so the least we can infer from the
Repetition here made of the Yea and Nay, is this; So Dr. Hammond Pract.
Catech.. Of Swearing: And in his Paraphrase on the place.
That if One Assertion or Denial of either should not be sufficient to satisfy
the Person with whom we converse, of the Truth of what we speak, we may renew
our Discourse, and confirm it again and again to him: And by that means move
him the rather to believe us, when he shall find us constantly to persevere in
our Assertion or Denial of it.

6. NOR, indeed, can any Question be reasonably made of the lawfulness of our
doing thus much, to satisfy the Jealousy of our Neighbor, and to justify
our own Fidelity. For if we may innocently declare what we know Once, what harm
can there be in doing it a second time? And if it be requisite that we should
do so, to gain the better credit with our Brother; and to convince him the more
undoubtedly of the truth of what we say: seeing both the End for which we do it
is Innocent, and there is nothing Unlawful in the Act its self; where can the
harm of such a Repetition be?

7. THIS therefore is the least we can suppose our Savior hereby intended to
allow us to do, for the better Confirmation of what we Promise, or Assert. And
I cannot tell but that his Words may fairly be extended a great deal farther;
and be understood, 3dly; To allow us, if need be, not only to re-iterate what
we say, and thereby to fix the belief of it the more firmly in the mind of him
with whom we converse; but that with some kind of So Nich. Fuller, Miscell.
Sacr. l. 1. c. 2.
Earnestness too in the Repetition: With some such Vehemence of Expression as
may serve to add a New Force to our Words; and effectually show that we have
both duly considered, and are very well assured of the Truth of what we Report;
Or of our Resolution to fulfill what we Promise, in them.

8. THIS was the Method which our Blessed Savior himself commonly followed in
his own Conversation: And frequent Instances we meet with of it, in all the
parts of his Gospel. So in this very Chapter, Verse 18. And which though the
learned N. Fuller seems reasonably enough to deny to be a formal Oath; yet he
plainly proves it to be a Vehement Asseveration: especially when doubled, as we
often find it, in our Savior's Discourses to have been. See his Miscell. Sacr.
Lib. I. cap 2.
Verily I say unto you: And again, Verse 26. Verily I say unto thee. And that
this may reasonably be presumed, to have been allowed us in the present
Passage, we may conclude from hence; not only that this is the least degree of
Assurance we can give to the Truth of what we say, above that of a simple
delivery of it; and neither comes of Evil, nor tends to it: but that the
very Expressions themselves which we render Yea, and Nay, do import, not a bare
Affirmation, or Denial; but that with some such Vehemence as this. Insomuch
that in the Holy Scriptures themselves, we find the word which we render (...),
and Amen, are in Scripture indifferently put for each other. So what in Mat.
xxiii.36. is (...): in Luke xi.51. is (...). In Rev. xxii.20. They are joined
together to the same purpose: And so they are again, 2 Cor. i.20. And in the
lxx. what the Hebrew calls (...), In Truth, or Verily, they render (...):
Insomuch that Theophylact, on Mat. v.18. Verily I say unto you, explains it by,
Yea: (...). And Vatabl. here renders it, Certe, Certe.
Yea, made use of instead of an Asseveration; and by our own Interpreters
translated accordingly. See Mat. xi.9. Luke xii.5. Rev. i.7. xvi.7.
And even where it is not so, yet the Discourse its self shows, that there is
somewhat more than a mere Affirmation designed by it; as might easily be made
appear, in several Examples, were it needful to insist upon it.

9. LET us add to this, that in the Style of the Sacred Penmen, the Repetition
of any Word, generally Denotes somewhat of a A plain Instance of which we have
in 2 Kings x.15. where when Jehu asked Jehonadab whether his heart were truly
with him; he answered, (...), It is, and It is. And to this both the Chaldee
and Syriac Versions hold; expressing the Repetition; Though we, with the Greek
and Latin, neglect it. And the design of this take from two persons, very well
versed in those Languages; Duplicatur est, says Munster, ad Majorem Rei
Affirmationem. Geminatione verbi vehementius Affirmat, says Vatablus; q. d.
Proculdubio diligo te ex Animo.
Vehemence designed by it. Hence it is that our Savior does not only commonly
make use of the Asseveration before mentioned; but when he would imprint what
he said, in a more particular manner, upon Men's minds, and engage them to a
more serious Consideration of it; Doubles it too; Verily, Verily, I say unto
you. And from all which put together, we may, I think, very safely conclude,
That we also, after the Example of our Blessed Master, may not only with great
plainness and earnestness Affirm the Truth of what we speak; but may, if need
be, add some such Asseveration to it, as he was wont to do; and even fairly
Interpret the very Words before us, to allow of it.

10. FROM what has been said, it appears; Either that such Asseverations as
those I have now been speaking of, do expressly fall within the Design of the
present Text, (and that some have thought to be the more probable;) Or most
certainly, See Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. vij. Where showing that his (...), or
Perfect Christian, ought not to Swear, he thus shows (from the present Text)
how he should Behave himself: (...). Page 729. B.
are not repugnant to it. But now, 4thly: and to advance yet one step higher:
What shall we say to another sort of Confirmation, frequently made use of
heretofore, and not uncommon with us at this day; whereby to convince Men of
the Truth of what we say; and that is, by Pledging (as it were) somewhat which
is very valuable to us, for the certainty of it.

11. THIS is that kind of Confirmation, which, as distinguished from the
foregoing, is usually called See Saunders, de Juram. Oblig. Prael. v.. 4.
Obtestation: And it differs from an Oath in this; That an Oath has always a
respect to God, and either expressly, or by construction, denotes an Appeal to
Him for the truth of what we utter: Whereas, in the Way I am now speaking of,
we only interpose the Authority of somewhat, which is either Evidently Certain,
or Apparently Dear to Us; to bespeak our Sincerity in what we Deliver under the
Caution of it.

12. SUCH a Ratification as this is that which we meet with so commonly in the
Old Testament, 1 Samuel i.26. -- xvii.55.
As thy Soul lives. And it has been thought by some, that Joseph really did no
more than this, when he seemed to Vid. Saunders: de Jur. Oblig. Prael. v.. 7.
Of which Opinion also was St. Basil, in Psalm. 14.
Swear to his Brethren, by the Life of Pharaoh, Genesis xlii.15. And as for the
New Testament; See below.
What if that Form of Speech made use of by St. Paul, 1 Cor. xv.31. and which
some, as we have seen, will have to be an Oath, was indeed no more than an
Obtestation: I Protest By your Rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our LORD.
At least I cannot but think, that Those Vid. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 32. It Is true
he there says expressly, Juramus -- per salutem; but then he afterward speaks
more precisely* Pro magno Juramento id Habemus. And Athanasius, mentioning the
Oath of Syrianus to Constantius the Emperor, says not that he Swore, but
Confirmed his Promise to the Alexandrians, (...), Apol. ad Constant. To. l. p.
689. But St. Basil is express to this purpose, in Psalm. xiv. To. I. (...), etc.
p. 133.
Primitive Christians, of whom Tertullian speaks, meant no more; who refused to
Swear by the Fortune, or Genius, of their Emperors; lest they should seem to
Appeal to the Deities of the Heathen: But yet freely gave Assurance of their
Fidelity to them, by their Health and Safety, which (as he expresses it) was
very dear to them; and equal, in their account, with the greatest Oath.

13. THAT such kind of Confirmations as these, of the Truth of what we speak,
may (upon occasion) not only Innocently, but Commendably, be made use of; for
the better prevention of downright Swearing, is, I think, not to be doubted:
But yet I cannot tell, whether they may be reckoned to fall within the direct
allowance of the present Text, though they are certainly So St. Basil, loc. cit.
who therefore excuses St. Paul, as not contradicting our Savior Christ.
consistent with the design of it. And therefore, I do suppose that next to
Formal-Swearing, these kind of Obtestations ought the most rarely, and with the
greatest caution, to be made use of by us.

14. BUT if the Matter be weighty; and if it be needful to do somewhat more
than ordinary to convince the Person with whom we discourse, of the Truth of
what we speak: And if such a lesser Ratification of it, will prevent our
recurring to the last and highest, I mean, that of an Oath: I cannot see why we
should not rather choose to pledge our own Honesty or Truth; Or to corroborate
what we say, by comparing the certainty of it, with somewhat of which there can
be no doubt; such as our own, or his Life with whom we converse; rather than
accustom our selves to Call God to Witness in any Case, in which it may lie in
our power to avoid it.

15. AND thus have I done with the several kinds of Confirmation of what we
affirm, below the Degree of an Oath. I cannot tell whether it may be needful
for me to take notice of yet another Method, which has but too much obtained in
the World, to the same purpose: And that is, 5thly, When to Assert the Truth of
what they speak, Men flee to some Curse or Imprecation upon themselves, if they
Prevaricate in it. But as every Oath does in its Nature imply an Appeal to the
Justice of God, as well as to his Knowledge; and, by consequence, does infer a
Plutarch, (...). Vol. I. p. 491. (...).
Tacit Imprecation of his Vengeance upon us, if we deal falsely with our
Neighbor: So thus much we may be sure of, that were such Imprecations,
otherwise, never so lawful, in order to this end; yet they ought not to be used
at any time, or upon any occasion, in which we may not lawfully take an Oath.
And therefore that both out of Charity to our Selves, and out of Reverence to
God's Judgments; we ought to lay aside the Practice of such Curses altogether:
Seeing they can neither be ever made without Horror; nor may be made in any
Case, wherein we may not give our Oath, not only with an Equal Satisfaction to
our Neighbor, but with greater Decency and Conformity to the Principles of
Christianity.

16. AND now, to lay together, in short, the several Rules, by which we are to
Govern our selves in our Communication with one another; according as I have
hitherto been more largely stating of them to you.

17. IF what we say be a Matter of mere indifference; so that it is of no great
consequence, either to our selves, or any other, whether we are believed or no:
In that Case it may suffice * barely to relate what we know of it; without
troubling our selves, by any of the Ways I have now been speaking of, to give
any farther Confirmation to it.

18. IF our Discourse be of such a nature, that it may concern our Neighbor to
give credit to it; or it may, perhaps, upon our own account, be convenient that
he should do so: We may then confirm* the Truth of what we assert, either by a
* repeated Assurance of it; or, if that will not suffice, by adding such an *
Asseveration as may show that we speak very seriously, and with a well-grounded
Confidence of what we say: such as Verily, or Indeed, or In-Truth you may
Believe me; or by some other Expressions of the like nature.

19. IF this does not yet satisfy the Mind of our Neighbor, and the Subject
of our Discourse be so important as to demand a still higher Conviction of the
Truth of it; then, Thirdly, I conceive we may proceed to a yet higher and more
forcible confirmation of what we say, by that more weighty kind of Assurance,
which, if not comprehended under the Expressions of the present Passage, is yet
certainly within the Reason, and may be built upon the Grounds of it. Such are
those * Obtestations so usual among our selves, Upon my Word; If I am Alive; As
I am an Honest Man, and the like. And such was that of St. Paul heretofore, 2
Cor. xi.10. As the Truth of Christ is in Me. Only as these are still greater
Corroborations of the Truth of what we speak than the Other; so ought they to
be used more seldom, and with greater care, and upon more weighty occasions;
when it is very highly expedient that we should be believed in what we say.

20. AND here we must stop in our Communication with one another. For the next
Degree of Assurance, above this, is an Oath: And that I have already shown you,
must very rarely be made use of; indeed never but when we either cannot, by any
means, avoid it, or the Matter is such that we ought not to decline it.

21. WHICH being thus resolved, [ For whatsoever is more than these comes of
Evil.]
in answer to the first thing I proposed to consider; Let us go on, in the next
place, to see, what the Import of that Motive is which our Savior here
proposes to us, to engage us to keep within these Bounds, in our common Affairs
with one another; and that is, That whatsoever is more than these comes of
Evil.

22. IT has been doubted by Some whether what we render Comes of Evil, might
not more properly have been translated, So Castalio: Episcopius, etc.
Comes of the Evil-One. But as the Original is certainly capable of either of
these Senses; so the Assertion of our Savior will hold good in both of them:
The Custom of Vain-Swearing being altogether wicked and unreasonable; and not
only proceeding from an Evil Principle, but in its nature, tending to an Evil
End too; and upon all these Accounts Coming from the EVIL ONE.

23. AND First; Whatsoever is more than these Comes of Evil. And that whether
we respect * Ou^ Selves, or * Others; * The Custom o^ Making, or the * Cause of
Requiring an Oath, for the Confirmation of what we say.

24. IF we consider the Grounds of Common-Swearing with respect to *
Our-Selves: It must proceed either from an * Evil-Custom, or from an *
Evil-Principle; and upon both those Accounts, be utterly Wicked and
Vnjustifiable.

25. FOR (1st:) As to the * Custom of such Swearing; We know that every Sin is
by so much the more heinous in its self, and more dangerous to our Souls; by
how much the Habit of it is the more deeply rooted in us. Insomuch that it is
from this that a Man takes his Denomination; and is looked upon to be either a
Good, or a Bad Man, according as the Common Practice of his Life bespeaks him
to be.

26. THE Best Christian may be tempted, and fall into Sin; and sometimes do
that which he ought not to do. But yet whilst this is not his Custom; whilst
the General Bent not only of his Desires, and Endeavors, but of his Actions,
and Conversation too, lie toward his Duty; neither will God exact every such
Sin of him, nor ought Men to censure him too severely for them. For this is the
Misfortune of our Present State, and while we are in this World, will always be
so; Jam. iii.2.
that in Many Things we shall Offend All.

27. BUT when once any Sin becomes habitual, and Men make a common, or rather a
constant, Practice of it: the very custom of it renders such a Sin both
unpardonable by God, and justly censurable by all good Men.

28. SO that supposing then that Common and Vain-Swearing are sinful; as both
our Savior here warrants us, and I have before shown, we ought to account it:
The Custom of such Swearing must be yet more Evil; and the Sin not the less,
but the greater for proceeding from it.

29. BUT indeed before Men can arrive to such a Custom, there must be in them
some Evil Principle or other to give Birth to it: And such Swearing must, upon
this account also, Come of Evil, that it must be derived from some Source that
most certainly is so.

30. FOR since such Swearing is not only plainly Forbidden in the Gospel, but
is withal, in its own nature, so Indecent, and Unfitting; that it is impossible
for any Man who has either any true Value for God, or has ever seriously
considered the Meaning of an Oath, to approve of it: Certain it is, that that
Man must be either very negligent of Himself, and very unsensible of his Duty;
or he must be become altogether wicked and profane, who allows himself in the
customary practice of it. And from which soever of all these Principles his
Swearing does proceed, what our Savior here tells us of it will still remain
true, That it Comes of Evil.

31. NOR will this Usage be found to fall any less under the same Character, if
we shall consider it with respect to those who require such Oaths of Others,
and prompt Men on to the Practice of them.

32. See Chap. II.. 18. Add. Isidor. Pelusiot. Epist. 155. Lib. I.
FOR since to encourage another to Sin, but much more to require what is Evil
of him, must be highly criminal; as being not only contrary to the Duty which
we owe to God, but also to that Charity which we ought to have for our
Neighbor's Soul: Certain it is, that no one who looks upon it to be unlawful
to Swear vainly can, without Sin, allow, much les^ encourage and oblige another
so to do. And therefore it must remain that upon this Account also, as well as
upon those I have already mentioned, this Practice must be confessed to Come of
Evil.

33. BUT, indeed, were it not for the Evil, that is to say, the Wickedness of
Men; there would be neither any Need of Swearing at all, nor any Temptation to
it. And this will yet more Verify our Savior's Assertion; and show that the
very Ground and Foundation not only of False and Vain-Swearing, but of all
Swearing whatsoever, Comes of Evil.

34. NOW that I thus make out. The only Solid Reason that can be given why Men
should ever Swear at all, is upon the account of its Usefulness, or rather
Necessity, for the Confirmation of what they say. But now were it not for the
Corruption of our Nature, and that Falseness and Insincerity, which so much
abounds in the World; and for those Jealousies and Suspicions, which Men have
entertained of one another upon the account of it; Where would be the Need of
any such Confirmation? Were there no such thing as Malice, or Envy; Interest,
or Design; Covetousness, or Injustice; Lying, or Dissimulation, known among us.
But, on the contrary, every one was Honest and Ingenuous; and might securely be
trusted by his Neighbor, as such. In short, were our Condition so happy, that
Men reckoned their Word, as Sacred as their Oath; And would be as careful of
what they Said, as of what they Swore?

35. BUT because, God knows, the Case is much otherwise with us; and Men are so
full of Tricks and Cheats, are so Subtle and Deceitful, so Vain and Unconstant,
that we know not where to have them, or when to rely upon them; and it is hard
to find out any Bond that is sufficient to assure us that they act sincerely;
therefore it has been found necessary to recur to this Obligation: That if
there be any Fear of God, or any Sense of Goodness remaining to them, they may
by this means, at least, be engaged to deal uprightly; and not presume to Call
God to Witness, but when they are resolved to Speak and Act, as they ought to
do.

36. AND now when such is the Ground of our Appealing to God at all; when it is
the Wickedness and Falseness of Mankind that has given occasion to the Use of
an Oath; and without which there would never have been any need of it: Well may
our Savior give this for his Reason why all Honest and Good Men should decline
Swearing, as much as they can, That it comes of Evil; that is, was found out
as a Remedy to the Evil of our Natures, and to Secure the Truth of False and
Insincere Men. See this Consideration urged by Phot. Epist. I. p. 34. And St.
Basil thus uses the same Argument: (...). In Psalm. xiv. To. I. p. 133. D.
For sure a better, or more sensible Motive cannot be offered to engage such
Persons to abstain from it, than this; that it is an Affront to their Honesty, a
Scandal upon their Integrity: At least that it is a Tie which was never
intended for Men of their Character; nor can be allowed by them, without
seeming to own, that they are not so faithful and ingenuous as they would be
thought to be.

37. BUT, Secondly: As the Practice of Swearing, especially in our Common
Dealing, and Conversation with one another, howsoever it be considered, Comes
of Evil; so, to complete the Iniquity of it, will it be found to Tend also unto
Evil: And upon that Account, as well as upon those already mentioned, to come
from the Evil One. And that especially in these (3.) Respects: As it is apt,
(1.) To give an Evil Example to Others. (2.) To take off from the Reverence of
an Oath; and from that Due Regard which ought to be had to it. And, (3.) In the
Consequence thereof, to lead Men into a General Profaness; into an
Vnconcernedness for, if not into a Contempt of, whatsoever is Sacred.


38. AND (1st.) The Common Practice of Swearing, Tends to Evil; Inasmuch as
it is Apt to give an Ill Example to Others.

For though this be a Sin which has neither any Pleasure, nor Profit, to
recommend it; nor should Men therefore, one would think, be apt to be tempted
to it: Yet alas! Experience shows us, that even Custom its self is alone
sufficient to propagate an Evil Practice; and to prompt Men to do that
themselves, which they see others do before them.

39. THIS is so just a Reflection, that it is, perhaps, the Only Account that
can be given, How Men Come to Swear so Ordinarily, and upon such little
Occasions, as they do: In such Cases, where there is neither any manner of need
of an Oath for the confirmation of what they speak; nor have they, often times,
any such design in it. But it is a fashionable way of Adorning, or rather of
Profaning their Discourse; the Practice of it is become almost Epidemical: And
they have, insensibly, accustomed their Tongues to it, till at last they
neither know how to avoid it, nor are themselves sensible when they do it.

40. SO easily are Men brought to Profane the Name of God! And such a
Mischievous Influence has the Practice of Common-Swearing, begun at first by a
few Profligate Men, had, to spread a General Contempt of the Divine Majesty
over the Face of the Earth; and to weaken One of the most Sacred Bonds of Truth
and Fidelity, that was ever given to Mankind.

41. AND this brings me to the next Ill-Effect, which this Customary Swearing
has had, in Consequence of the Foregoing: And that is,

(2dly.) To take off from the Reverence of an Oath, and from that due Regard
which ought to be had to it.

42. THAT Perjury is a Sin both too lightly Considered, and too commonly
Practiced among Us; is too plainly seen, and has, I believe, been too sensibly
felt likewise, by many of us, to suffer us to make any doubt of it. And how far
the Prevalence of Common, and Vain-Swearing, may have contributed to this Evil,
I shall leave it to every serious Christian to consider.

43. IN the mean time, thus much is evident; That an Oath, from being one of
the most Sacred and Sure Bands of Faith between Man and Man, is now become of
very little Benefit or Security to us. Men take them without fear, and too
often without considering what they do: And when they have taken them, they
many times show as little Regard to them in their Practice, as they at first
did Reverence in Approaching to Them.

44. AND, indeed, how should we expect that he who puts no Value upon an Oath
in his Common Talk, should be much more Concerned for it, only by the Addition
of a little more Solemnity to it? Or be afraid to Break his Promise, or to
Dissemble the Truth, which he Ratifies by an Appeal to God, when Imposed upon
him; who has no Regard to Either, though he Swears to them an Hundred Times of
his Own Accord. Alas! An Oath is only terrible to a Young Beginner: To him who
Considers what it is; and who has the Fear of God's Knowledge and Justice,
still Vigorous upon his Mind. But to him who Swears every Hour that he lives;
who Trafficks with it, and could not tell how to carry on his Business without
it: Who Swears with as little Concern as he Talks; and Values an Oath, no more
than he does a Common Lie: What can we expect but that as such a One's Regard
to this Sacred Tie is very small; so his Care to answer the End of it should be
proportionably small too.

45. TO such a terrible Height of Wickedness is Common-Swearing apt to bring
Men at the last. Nor does the Evil of it stop here; but,

(3dly) and lastly; From the Particular Contempt of an Oath, carries Men on, by
Degrees, to a General Profaneness; to an Vnconcernedness for, if not a Neglect
of, whatsoever is Sacred.

46. AND this is still but the Natural Progression of this Sin; and the Next
Step to that I before mentioned. For since the Honor of God, and his Power and
Justice, are all despised, and that in a most outrageous manner, by the Sin of
Perjury; so that a Man must have laid aside all Regard to These, before he can
harden himself to the Practice of That: What should hinder him who is become so
great a Proficient in Wickedness as to be able to trample under foot the
Honor, the Power, the Justice, and even the Vengeance of God too, in One Great
Instance; from proceeding, if need be, to do it as readily in any Other?

47. THAT to Swear is not only truly an Act of Religion, but one of the most
Solemn Acts of it; and most apt to stir up in our Minds a Fear of God, and
Reverence of his Name, is not to be denied;

48. THAT to do this Lightly, and Unadvisedly; but especially to do it Falsely;
only to carry on our Own Designs, or to promote our Own Interests, at the
Expense of God's Glory: must be not only horridly to profane the Sacredness of
an Oath, but to flee directly in the Face of God, and to bid defiance to
Damnation; the necessary Importance of an Oath, will not suffer us to doubt.

49. NOW when once Men are become so deeply rooted in Impiety as to be able to
do this, what is there left to restrain them from a General State of
Profaneness and Irreligion? It is but proceeding upon the same Principles, and
doing that in the Other Instances of Religion, which they do in This: And why
they should not do so, if ever their Passions or their Interests should prompt
them to it, I cannot see; and we need not question but that they will go on
accordingly.

50. IF therefore we have any Regard to God's Glory; if any Concern for our Own
Souls; let both these persuade us not to allow our selves in a Practice so
offensive to the one, so dangerous to the other.

51. LET those despise the Sanctity of an Oath, and Prostitute it to a Common
and Profane Usage; who know not how Sacred a Thing it is, and how dangerous to
indulge the Customary Practice of it. But let it suffice us to take that
liberty which our blessed Lord has left to us, not only as the most safe; but
as (in the General Affairs of Life,) sufficient too. And let us so much the
rather content our selves with it, by how much the more plainly it appears from
all those Considerations I have now been offering to you, That whatsoever is
More than That, Comes of Evil.

CHAP. V. Wherein an Enquiry is made into the Causes Both of that Common, and
False-Swearing, which so much Abounds in the World: And some Directions are
Offered for the better Prevention of Both of Them.
1. I HAVE now done with our Savior's Discourse, relating to the Point of
Swearing; and might with that, have reasonably enough concluded my Reflections
upon This Subject. But because there are some things which I could not so well
refer to any of those Heads I have before treated of; which yet, I conceive,
may usefully be observed by us upon this Occasion: I shall choose rather to put
them together, a little out of place, than wholly to pass them by.

2. NOW the Sum of what I would farther propose, for finishing of this whole
Subject, may be Reduced to these two General Heads:

Is It. I will consider, How it comes to pass, that Men are so Forward to Swear,
almost upon Every Occasion; and too often Venture, even to Forswear themselves.

And having given such an Account as may be necessary of this Matter, I will go
on,

IIdly, To Offer some particular Directions, for the better Correction and
Prevention of Both those Evils.

3. AND, 1st. Let us consider, How it comes to pass, that after all our Savior
has said to the contrary; yet we see Men, nevertheless, not only so Forward to
Swear, almost upon every Occasion; but too often Venturing even to Forswear
Themselves.

4. IN the Prosecution of which Enquiry, it is not my Intention to make any
laborious Search into the Causes of that Common-Swearing which has so
Universally, almost, Obtained in the World; and makes up a Great part of Men's
Ordinary Discourse with one another. For though that be, without Controversy, a
very Grievous Sin, yet is it withal a very Unaccountable One too. A Sin which
Men commit to Serve no End; to Gratify no Lust; to Carry on no Business by.
Without Profit; without Pleasure; I had almost said, and without Temptation
too. In short; A Sin by which they Dishonor God, and Ruin their own Souls, to
no purpose: but do the Work of the Devil, without that Common-Encouragement
which, in most other Cases, he allows wicked Men, to reward their doing of it.
So that for ought I know, the Best Account that can be given, why Men ever fall
into this Sin at all, is; That they have slipped into the Habit of it, they
know not how: and Custom has made it a Fashionable Vice. They look upon it as a
Modish Way of Discourse; and think it would bring an Imputation upon their
Breeding, if they should altogether Forbear it: And render their Conversation
Flat, and Insipid; for want of that Profaneness, which indeed is, many times,
the only thing that is remarkable in it.

5. BUT this is not that Swearing I am now concerned for: Nor do we find that
our Savior has had any regard for such Sinners as these. If Men will run into
Evil Habits without Need, it is but fitting they should Perish without Pity:
And not expect to be argued out of a Vice, which is so far from having any Show
of Reason to Justify it; that it has not so much as any Temptation, that may
serve to make an Excuse for it. The Swearing, I am now speaking of, is of
another nature, and practiced by a better sort of Men. By such as acknowledge
the Obligation, though they do not sufficiently consider the Sacredness of an
Oath: And for that reason allow themselves, on every little Occasion, to flee
to the Use of it; as long as they do but take care not to confirm any thing,
but what is true, by it. And whence it comes to pass, that so many, even among
the higher rank of Christians, are yet thus forward to Swear; is the first
thing I proposed to Enquire.

6. AND here (1st.) It may be considered, that every one, who has any sense of
Probity remaining in him, desires to be Believed; especially in what he
seriously Affirms or Denies: And cannot but think it very hard to be suspected
of any Falseness and Untruth in his Discourse. Besides that, often times, it
may be of Concern to him that he should be Believed: And to leave his Veracity
in doubt, may prove not only to his Disgrace, but to his Damage also.

7. NOW Interest and Reputation, are Two of the Dearest Things in the World to
most Men; and the Love of which they can the most hardly overcome. And
therefore when these shall prompt a Man rather to confirm the truth of what he
speaks with an Oath, than to run the hazard of suffering in one, or, it may be,
in both of them; there had need be a deep sense of Religion, and a very awful
dread of an Oath indeed, rooted in a Man's Heart, to keep him from so doing.

8. LET us add to this, (2dly) That unreasonable Jealousy which abounds in
Mankind toward each other; and moves them upon the least appearance of Reason;
nay, and oftentimes without any; to suspect one another. Hence it is that if a
Matter be but of never so little importance; if it be for a Man's advantage, or
disadvantage; for his pleasure, or trouble, to be thoroughly convinced of it:
It is seldom known that they will be satisfied with the bare Word of him who
reports it unto them; or with any thing less, than his Swearing to the Truth of
what he says. And if, out of Conscience to his Duty, and being unwilling to
break in upon the Sacredness of an Oath, he should chance to refuse so to do;
it is great odds but he shall be urged and provoked to it: And hardly avoid the
censure of speaking falsely from those, who having no respect for an Oath
themselves, will not easily be persuaded that another should have any higher
regard to it; or refuse to Swear upon any other account than this, that he is
conscious to himself that what he says is false; and therefore he dares not
Swear to the Truth of it. And many there are, even among the better sort of
Men, who by this means are betrayed into an undue Usage of an Oath: And choose
rather to Swear, when otherwise they would not do it, than to bear the
Reproaches of those to whom they speak, by a peremptory refusal of it.

9. AGAIN (3dly) To Men who have either no true sense at all of Religion upon
their Minds; or have not sufficiently considered the Nature of an Oath, and
convinced themselves thereby how much the Honor of God is concerned in our
using of it; and how cautious we, therefore, ought to be, upon what Occasions
we do Swear: The customary forwardness which we complain of in most Men to
recur to this way of confirming what they say, may be, and (I believe) has
been, a great inducement, to the over-easie practice of it.

10. THERE are few Christians so ignorant as not to know, that Perjury is a
very heinous Sin, and such as may not be committed, without the Peril of
Salvation. But yet there may be many who are still to learn, that to Swear upon
a small occasion, though a Man swears nothing but the truth, is of its self
criminal; and, as such, forbidden in the Gospel. Now such Persons as these,
being sensible how usual it is for Men to do this, look no farther; but follow
on as they see others go before them; nor feel any Remorse of Conscience for
doing that, which they never understood had any great harm in it.

11. AND that which may possibly have contributed to confirm them in this
practice is; that they see themselves called upon to Swear, so very often, not
only in their own Private Concerns, but even by Public Authority. For since
Charity, as well as Duty, obliges us to think that nothing is done by that but
upon the most mature deliberation; and we know how great a number of wise and
good Men must concur to the making of a Law with us; whose Wisdom we cannot,
and whose Piety we ought not to doubt of: It is but reasonable to conclude,
that they had certainly a due Regard to the Honor of God in all their
Constitutions; and would never require us to Swear on any occasion, in which
they esteemed it either unlawful, or unseemly for us to do it.

12. HOW far such Reasoning as this may have disposed some unwary Persons to
Swear more frequently, and upon lesser occasions than they ought to do, I
cannot tell: But I think it may deserve to be considered, Whether the Multitude
of Cases wherein not our Laws only, but those of all other Countries, do
oblige, or, at least, allow Men to Swear; may not have somewhat contributed to
that forwardness of doing it, which we see and complain of in them, upon other
occasions: And have disposed them to be more ready, than they ought to be, to
recur to an Oath in such Cases, wherein there is neither any Command of Man,
nor any Excuse before God, for their doing of it.

13. I SHALL offer but one Account more of this Unwarrantable Readiness of Men
to Swear; And that is (4thly) From the Refusal which some, of late, have made
of All Swearing whatsoever: And in opposition to whose Error, some may
possibly have been so unwary as to run into the contrary Extreme; and to have
concluded, that so far is it from being unlawful to Swear in any Case, that,
rather, there is none so small in which they may not freely do it.

14. IT is the Infirmity of many, of more Warmth than Judgment, that they are
always in Extremes: And think the only way to secure themselves from Error, is
to fly as far from it as they can. Not considering that there may be as little
Reason in one Extreme, as in another; and that, according to the old Remark,
Truth, as well as Virtue, is seldom found in either.

15. THUS some out of an over-eager Opposition to Popery, have cast off
Episcopacy; and for fear of Superstition, would have all Decency thrown out of
the Church. And I verily believe we had not seen at this day so much
Profaneness and Irreligion among us, had not the detestation of some Men's
Hypocritical Pretenses to Godliness, first prompted on others to fly out into a
Looseness of Living, and from thence into a Neglect of every thing that is
Sacred. And how far this Vice of Common-Swearing may have gotten Grounds by the
same Means, and have been improved too among the rest; I shall leave it to
those who have considered, from what Time it has begun more especially to
prevail among us, to determine.

16. SUCH therefore may, I suppose, have been the Causes of that Readiness
which we find in Men to Swear, even upon the most common, and unjustifiable
Occasions. But now, as for the other Sin proposed, that of Perjury; I can
scarcely tell to what Cause to ascribe the little Concern which many show of
falling into that; because, indeed, I can scarcely tell what Cause should be
sufficient to harden their Consciences against it.

17. THAT the Frequency of Swearing, and the little Occasions on which Men
sometimes allow themselves in the Practice of it, may have very much taken off
from their Reverence of an Oath, I can easily believe; and by that means have
disposed them to Swear more carelessly, and with lesser consideration than they
ought to do.

18. THAT by their often and careless Swearing, they may probably sometimes
have incurred the Guilt of Perjury, unawares; and by that means have been
unhappily made acquainted with it; I do not doubt.

19. BUT yet still, to Swear falsely, where a Man knows what he does; and
deliberately Designs so to do; this adds so much not only to Common-Swearing,
but even to an Unwilling Perjury also; that a Man ought to become a great
Proficient in Wickedness, before he can bring his Mind to it.

20. THIS therefore is a Sin which I can ascribe to no other Cause than that of
a Profane Heart, and a Hardened Conscience. Whether it be that a Man falls into
it through an absolute Infidelity; or that by a long, habitual Continuance in
Sin, he is at last become deprived of God's Grace, and is given up to be led
Captive by Satan at his Will. For otherwise, Perjury is a Crime of so
detestable a Nature, and which has so much of the falseness of the Devil in it;
that were there but any Spark of Piety remaining in the Soul, it were
impossible a Man should ever be persuaded to commit it: Or having once
committed it, should be able to endure his own Torments; much less should ever
return to the Commission of it again.

21. I SHALL therefore seek no farther for the Cause of this Sin; but shall
confidently conclude, that the Habit of it can proceed from nothing less than
an Utter Dereliction of God, and an Extinction of All Sense of Good and Evil in
the Soul.

22. WHICH being thus resolved; Let us now go on,

IIdly, To Consider, What Directions may be offered for the Correction of these
Great Evils.

23. AND, 1st: For what concerns the Point of Perjury; As I have now shown,
that a Man must be arrived to an Extraordinary Pitch of Wickedness, before he
can allow himself in the commission of it; so I know no way there is to draw
Men off from that, but only to awaken their Consciences, if it may be, to a
serious Consideration of their Sins; and by that Means to bring them to a
sincere Conversion from them.

24. INDEED could even Charity its self warrant us to think, that it were
possible for Men to be so far deluded, as not to know False-Swearing, I do not
say to be a Sin, but to be a most heinous and damnable Offense; such a Sin for
which God has no Pity; and it may almost be questioned whether he will afford
Men his Grace for Repentance of it; there might then be also some hope, that by
a better Information of their Judgments, as to this Matter, they might perhaps
be reclaimed from it.

25. BUT when such is the Notoriousness of this Crime, that it is impossible any
one should fall into it without knowing that he does at the same time Defy
God, and make a Mock of Damnation; we must conclude that it is in vain to hope
by any particular Applications to Correct this Evil: And that we must resolve
either to reduce such a Person to a general sense of Piety and Virtue; or to
leave him in the guilt of this, as well as under the power of his other sins.

26. AND this, I say, as to what concerns the Point of Moral Conviction and
Persuasion. For, otherwise, one Method there is, and it is the only one I can
imagine, by which a stop may be put to the Practice of this, without meddling
with a Man's other Sins; And that is, by a strict Execution of Humane Justice
upon him: And which out of Charity to our Neighbor's Soul, as well as out of
Duty to God, and with Regard to the Public Welfare; it is great pity but all
Magistrates should, with all possible Vigor and Severity, do.

27. HOW much the Welfare of Mankind is concerned in the Suppression of
False-Swearing, I need not say: And what Provision our Own See the Stat. V.
Eliz. chapter 9.
Laws have made for the better effecting of it, cannot be unknown to those who
are entrusted with the Administration of them, and who are especially concerned
to take notice of it. Let me only beg leave earnestly to Recommend it to all
such, so far to consider the great Trust which is Reposed in them; and what an
Interest every honest Member of the Commonwealth has to demand their Care in
this, more than in any other Sin committed to their Censure; as not to admit of
any Excuses, nor to show any Favor, to such Malefactors: Who if, by this
means, they shall be brought to a true Sense of their Sin, and to Repentance
for it; will then think themselves Gainers by their Prosecution: And if they
shall not, I am sure cannot, by our Laws, be too severely punished for it.

28. BUT, 2dly: As for the other sort of Swearing forbidden by our Savior, yet
too easily Indulged by many Christians: Whether it be that of their Common
Discourse, where there is no Need at all of it; Or in the Prosecution of their
Ordinary Affairs, in which there is no Sufficient Occasion for it: Many are the
Directions that may be offered for the Prevention of such a Practice,
proportionable to the several Principles upon which Men may be prompted to
allow themselves in the Use of it.

29. FOR (1st.) Should they chance to go on in such Swearing, for want of being
Convinced of the Danger and Unreasonableness of it; The surest Way, in this
Case, to draw them off from their Practice of it, will be to show them how
expressly it has been Forbidden by our Savior? What an Affront it puts upon the
Majesty of God? And how Indecent a Thing it is, (were there nothing else to be
said against it) to Call the Great Lord of Heaven and Earth to Witness, on such
Silly and Trivial Occasions, as such Persons cannot but acknowledge, they very
often do.

30. BUT (2dly.) Though possibly Men may know, in the General, that thus to Swear
is not convenient; yet still they may neglect to take all that Care and Pains
with themselves, that is necessary for the entire avoiding of it, because they
are not sufficiently persuaded, how great the Sinfulness of it is. This is, I
believe, the real Case with very many: And if so, then it is plain that here
again the Best Way to draw them off from this Evil Custom, will be to Convince
them of the mighty Danger and Malignity of it. To show them, that thus to
Swear, is not, as they may imagine, some light and ordinary Offense; nor will
be passed over by God, as such. That to Swear, is to Appeal to God* And if that
be done without great care, and a suitable occasion for it, we shall put such
an Affront upon Him, as we would be ashamed to put upon one of our Fellow
Creatures, and would not endure that any should put upon our selves.

31. THESE and the like Considerations, if plainly urged, and seriously laid to
Heart; can hardly fail of convincing any rational person of the sinfulness of
this Practice. And having done that, they must, in the consequence of it,
oblige him to Correct it too; if he be truly such an one as we now suppose him
to be, viz. an honest and upright Christian.

32. BUT (3dly.) Should not this be the Case; but the Person who is engaged in
this Evil Habit should be one who pursues this Swearing not so much out of any
particular ignorance of, or unconcernedness for, the Sacredness of an Oath; as
out of a general levity of Mind and insensibility of his Duty: Then it will not
be sufficient to argue with him, concerning the Nature and Importance of an
Oath, and with what Care and Circumspection we ought to approach to the taking
of it: But we must proceed with such a one in a more General Way; and bring him
to Reverence an Oath, by teaching him to be more considerate; and to have a
greater value for all the other Acts of Religion.

33. SUCH a Person as this, as he does not Profane God's Name out of any
particular dis-regard which he has for an Oath, more than for any other thing
of the like nature, so neither must he be brought off from the doing of it, by
any particular Considerations relating to the Sacredness of an Oath; but must
be persuaded, in the general, to become Serious and Devout; to honor God, and
to pay a due Respect to every thing that relates to him: And this will Compose
his Thoughts, and Influence his Affections in all the Offices of Religion; and
in this Particular among the rest.

34. BUT now (4thly.) and to go yet higher: What if the Person who thus Swears,
should not only be more careless and inconsiderate, than he ought to be, in the
Business of Religion; but should, by Principle, be become a despiser of it?
What if he be one who Believes not in any God at all; but Laughs at all our
Talk either of a Providence here, or of a Judgment hereafter?

35. THOUGH in this Case, as in the foregoing, the best way to Reclaim such a
one's Common Swearing would be to Convince him of his Errors; and, by so doing,
to cut off the first Cause of this Irregularity: Yet till that shall be done,
somewhat, I think, may fairly be offered, upon his own Principles, to Restrain
this Vice, without meddling with any of his others.

36. FOR, indeed, how foolish and ridiculous a thing must it be for such a one,
(if he be in good earnest,) by Swearing, to Appeal to God, who professes to
Believe None; or at least None that has any Concern for, or Knowledge of, what
we do here Below? How absurd, for him to refer himself to the Censure of a
Future Judgment, who would be thought not to own any State at all after this in
which we now live; nor, by consequence, to revere any such Final Inquest.

37. OR if in all this he only acts a part; How base and dis-ingenuous must he
then show himself to be; to offer an Oath for the confirmation of what he
promises or asserts; Who neither believes any Obligation to be thereby laid
upon him to deal ever the more sincerely for it; Nor can have any design in
Swearing, but only to impose upon the Credulity, and to ridicule the Religion
of his Neighbor?

38. WHETHER therefore Men acknowledge the Principles of Religion or no, yet
certainly Common Justice and Honesty; nay, or even Honor its self, (which with
some Men is of greater Authority than both;) should make them ashamed to Swear,
in any Matter, for the Confirmation of the Truth of what they Speak: Because
they know, in their own Hearts, that they do but impose thereby upon those with
whom they deal by the show of an Obligation; which, how great-soever it may be
to others, yet to them is of no force; nor lays any restraint at all upon them.
And, as for their Ordinary-Conversation; since to Swear in that, is to Profane
the Name of a God, whom other Men do believe in, though they themselves do not;
and which they cannot therefore but think must be very ungrateful and offensive
to them: Methinks even Civility and Good-Manners should teach them to forbear
such Oaths, if not for the perpetual Contradiction which they thereby run into,
as to their own Principles, yet at least for that Affront which they know they
put upon other Men's.

39. THESE then are the Ways by which Men are to be drawn off from their
Customary and Profane-Swearing, upon the Principles of Reason and Religion.
There is yet (5thly.) Another Method, which the Care and Piety of our Laws has
set before us, and which it is to be hoped shall now, at length, be made use of
in order to this end; and that is, by a strict Exaction of that Penalty, which
they have ordered to be inflicted upon such Offenders, for the restraining of
their Profaness: And which how small soever it may seem to be, and in truth is,
in comparison of the Sin of taking God's Name in vain; yet, being duly
required, might go very far toward the prevention of it.

40. IT is true there was somewhat of this kind See the Stat. of 21 Jac. I. chapter
20.
long before attempted; and which one would have hoped should have kept this
Sin from becoming so Common, or rather so Universal, as it is, among us. But
alas! What can the best Laws do, if they are never put in Execution? And how
little that Law has, of late Years, been either Published, or Executed, as it
ought to have been; is a Reflection that may deserve the Consideration of many
among us.

41. IN the mean time we all now know how that Ancient, and almost Antiquated
Law, is not only Revived, but Improved too, in order to this End: And such Care
taken, that if we would but heartily set our selves to it, I cannot but think
we should soon put an end to a great part of that Profane Swearing that has of
late so scandalously prevailed among us.

42. AND to engage us so to do, give me leave to say but this one thing; that
for any of us to neglect our Duty in this Particular; is, in effect, to consent
to every such Act, as we refuse to bring to light. It is to abet the taking of
God's Name in vain: And then let us fear lest we share in the Punishment, as we
do partake in the Guilt of it.

43. BUT (6thly.) and to conclude these Reflections: As it is certain that
nothing has more contributed to the Practice both of False-Swearing, and of
Common-Swearing, among us, than the Want of that due Reverence Men ought to
have of an Oath; so I know no way more likely to reclaim Men from the Practice
of both, than to Endeavor, as far as may be, to Restore the Use of an Oath to
its just Veneration; and to bring Men, if it be possible, to a more Sacred
Esteem of it. And in order thereunto, as it is certainly the Duty of Private
Persons, never to Swear at all, but when some more than ordinary Occasion shall
require their doing of it; so were it much to be wished, that the Necessities
of Government would permit, that an Oath should never be imposed upon, nor
required of any, but upon some greater Exigence; to be sure, more seldom than
now it is. And that when it is required, such Care should be taken in
Administering of it, as to Raise in Men's Minds a serious Consideration of what
they are about: At least that it should be so done, as not to prompt them to a
Dis-esteem of it; through an overhasty, and irreverent Dispensing of this
great Obligation.

44. AND thus have I shown, by what Means, if by any, not only Perjury, but
Common and Profane-Swearing, may be most like to be Corrected and Suppressed.
And for Engagements to move every one of us to use our best Endeavor in the
Accomplishment of so good and profitable a Design; I shall only add thus much,
to what I have already offered, in the Prosecution of this Subject; That if we
have any Regard to God's Honor; If any Concern for our own Souls; If any Zeal
for the Public Good; All these call upon us to do, what in us lies, to reform
both our selves, and others, as to this Matter.

45. THAT by Common and Customary, but especially by False-Swearing; God's
Majesty is abused, and his Wrath and Vengeance very eminently provoked; the
necessary relation which every Oath has to him, sufficiently speaks.

46. THAT therefore by such Practices, Men's Souls must be greatly endangered;
both the Mal. iii.5. Zech. v.3, 4.
Denuntiations of God against such Offenders, and the Quality of the Sins
themselves, effectually assure us. But especially by the Sin of Perjury; which,
it may be, is of all others a Sin the most hard to be forgiven, because it is
the most hard for any one, according to the Principles of Christianity,
sufficiently to repent of it.

47. INDEED were a bare Conversion toward God, enough to wash away the Guilt
of it; a Man might, by God's Grace, be brought to such a deep sense of his Sin,
and to so hearty a Contrition for it, as to deliver himself from the Danger of
it. But if by our Perjury we should chance not only to have abused the Majesty
of God, but to have ruined our Neighbor too: Should we have Robbed him of his
Estate, his Reputation, or even of his very Life its self; and in none of all
which we can make him any tolerable Compensation: How can we ever hope that God
will be reconciled to us; whilst we lie under such an utter Incapacity of ever
making an amends to our Neighbor?

48. AND then, lastly; For the Interest which the Public has in the
Suppression of such Swearing; I have already shown that Truth and Fidelity, are
the great Bases on which all Society is founded; and without which there could
be no Peace, no Security, no Right or Property in the World. And therefore,
whatsoever is in any wise apt to undermine these; (as Perjury directly does,
and as Common-Swearing naturally tends to do;) ought to be avoided, and
discouraged by all who either love their Own Welfare, or have any regard to the
Public Good.

I shall conclude this whole Discourse with that Exhortation of St. James,
which I have so often referred to in it; James, v.12. Above all things, my
Brethren, Swear not: Neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth; neither by Any
Other Oath: But let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; lest ye fall into
Condemnation.

FINIS.

