THE VANITY OF CHILDHOOD and YOUTH, WHEREIN The Depraved Nature of Young People
is represented, and Means for their Reformation proposed.

BEING SOME SERMONS PREACHED In Hand-Alley, at the Request of several Young Men.

To which is added A CATECHISM For YOUTH.

By DANIEL WILLIAMS.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey. MDCXCI.

To the Children and Young People who were Hearers of the following SERMONS.
THE Design of these Sermons was to regulate and improve the state of your
Souls. The Blessing of God having made them successful to several of you,
inclined me to publish them at your importunity; tho I do often refuse a
Compliance with many judicious Friends, in desires of the same kind, even when
the Subjects are more persuading.

Having overcome the Discouragement which I suggested to my self, from the
plainness of these Discourses, I dare not make an Apology for the commonness of
the Style or Matter. It had been a Profanation of an Ordinance, when desired to
preach to Youth, to propose any Subject below what tends to their Salvation,
from that Sin and Wrath they are naturally under. It had been folly to treat of
such a Subject for Edification before Children and Apprentices, in words unapt
to inform or persuade them. I thank God I could rather bear the dislike of a
few less serious wits, than neglect the eternal Concerns of so many less
intelligent Hearers. On the same account, I am now afraid to raise the Style,
or omit the very repeated Appeals and Pleadings with Children, being resolved
to approve my self to the weakest Reader, and leave the judicious to what is
more fitted to their improvement.

My Prayer and Hopes be, That God will accompany this Book with powerful
effects on your Souls, and not leave you to that obstinacy, as will render it a
farther aggravation of your sin and punishment; you cannot pretend that God
never informed you of your Disease, nor directed you to a Cure: You dare not,
after reading this Book, say, My Danger was concealed from me, and Rules for my
Safety were not prescribed. God will severely witness, that he condescended to
argue matters with thy Soul; he disswades thee from the Sins that will condemn
thee at last, however thou now flatterest thy self. He uses many Arguments to
incline thee to Duties which his very Gospel cannot dispense with the want of,
in any person whom he will save.

Let me then acquaint thee, oh young Man! that God addresseth himself to thee,
as by Name. Thou by nature art brutish and devilish, and as long as thou
followest the imaginations of thy vain mind, thy case becomes more desperate,
thy Lusts by indulgeuce grow more violent, and Conscience still less concerned
to vindicate the Affronts thou offerest to Gods Dominion, or to represent the
injury thou do to thy own Soul; yet be assured, whether thou mindest it or
not, there is a God, whose right it is to govern thee, and will be sure to
judge thee: Thou art born his Subject, tho unwilling to obey, and forward to
rebel against him; thou have an immortal Soul, how little soever thou
providest for its future State; yea, how much soever thou actest to expose it
to endless misery, and this for a short and fading Pleasure. Thou art naturally
depraved, and thereby under that Condemnation which was passed by the Law of
Innocence against man, in the least sinful.

Oh, then do not fancy that Baptism did regenerate thee whiles thou find the
want of every Grace, and carnal Inclinations are thy governing Law. Do not
conceit that Baptism delivered thee from thy cursed State, when thy Unbelief
and Enmity against holiness, do both express it, and further expose thee to it.
It Is true, there is a way of Salvation for lost man published in the Gospel;
but that can benefit none who continues to reject Christ, and refuse the terms
of Peace. Thou art the dedicated Child of believing Parents, but their Faith
cannot save thee now that thou art capable of consenting to the Covenant, and
refusest it; yea, thy early Dedication adds Perjury and Falsehood to thy
Profaneness. Plead not thy Christian Name, whiles thou art a Reproach to it.
Boast not of religious helps, when they have not that good effect on thee, as
the light of Nature has on mere Pagans; which may convince us, that where the
Gospel fails to convert its Hearers, Satan often governs more powerfully, than if
the Gospel had never been preached to them. We live in an Age of wonders, among
which it is not the least strange or awful, that professed Christians are viler
than Heathens, and most of our baptized Youths scorn the plainest Rules of
Christianity. Ah, wretched Age! wherein Gospel Light cannot convince of that
wickedness which even Nature condemns! what Conceptions have they of God, who
think he can approve of such Enormities as they commit, or be satisfied with
those heartless and trifling Regards to which they confine all the Homage which
they afford him?

Surely England's Calamities are like to be terrible, when this jealous God
arises to force men to juster Thoughts both of his Nature and his Laws.

I must allow that this Treatise is intended to convince thee of the great Evil
of such things as most esteem indifferent, and practice as allowable; yea, so
far does their blindness prevail, that Sobriety (much more Godliness) is
ridiculed as Folly. But know that the feeling of endless Torments will soon
convince such as dare mock at Divine Revelations. The Perfections that render
God able to endure their Affronts now, will oblige him to vindicate his
Government and Honor then. Poor Wretches that would not be ruled by means
suited to their Natures, as rational, shall without their Consent undergo the
inflicted Evils, which, whiles only threatened, did not move them. Therefore,
young Man, be not affrighted from true Wisdom by the Clamours of the worst of
Fools, whatever Wit they pretend to. Undo not thy self for the sake of a Crowd,
for it is better be religious with the lesser number now, than be damned
hereafter with the multitude: Sure thou must be an Atheist, and wholly
disbelieve unseen things, if the Contempt or Persuasions of enslaved Factors
for the Devil can incline thee to choose Hell, by resolving the Course that
infallibly tends to it.

I must acquaint you, That in the last Sermon I add no Particular to the Notes
one of your selves took from me when I preached, and supplied me since with, to
help the defect of my own Papers; yet I have added many of the Directions for
avoiding the eight particular sins I dissuaded you from in my first Sermon. I
have also thought fit to subjoyn a short Catechism in the end, wherein you may
learn the Essentials of Practical Religion in familiar Terms, if you think fit
to learn it, consult the Proofs.

The good Lord prosper all to you. Could I but see young ones generally
inclined to serious Religion, I would hope that God has a mercy in reserve for
England, and the Vengeance that hangs over it because of the last thirty years
too successful Contrivances to debauch the Nation, in order to Slavery and
Popery, might be diverted, or at least confined to such as are too far engaged,
or obstinate to admit a Reformation.

That every Child and Youth who shall read this Book, may (as many of you
already do) thus contribute to my Hopes and Share in the Benefit thereof, shall
be the Prayer of

Your Compassionate Friend, Daniel Williams.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Context explained, to Page 5. Vanity considered as its natural Frailty, p.
7, 8, 9. Vanity in a moral sense in General, 10, 11, 12.
Particularly, as to eight Sins to which Youth is prone,
1. The folly of Youth in the Concerns of Eternity explained and demonstrated,
from p. 13. to 17. Directions against Folly, from p. 18, to 21. 2. The
Inconsiderateness of Youth, with Directions against it, from p. 21. to 24. 3.
The Obstinacy of Youth described, dissuaded from, with Directions against it,
from p. 25, to 33. 4. Anger, and violent Passions of youth described, dissuaded
from, with Directions, from p. 33, to 37. 5. Youths idleness and mispence of
time described, dissuaded from, with Directions, from p. 37, to 43. 6. The
Levity and inordinate Mirth of young people described, dissuaded from, with
directions to get Sobriety, from page 43, to 51. 7. The sin of Lying described,
dissuaded from, with Directions against it, from p. 51, to 55. 8. Fleshly
Lusts, viz. Drunkenness, Gluttony, and Uncleanness described, and dissuaded
from, from p. 55, to 57. Directions against Gluttony and Drunkenness, from p.
58, to 61. Directions against Uncleanness, from p. 61, to 67. The Vanity of
Youth, as it consists in their living to no valuable purposes, demonstrated,
from p. 68, to 74. The Vanity of Youth, as it lives to destructive purposes,
from p. 74, to 77. An Account how Childhood and Youth became vain, where
Original Sin is treated of, from p. 77, to 82. An Enquiry why Youth continues
vain; where also the possibility of their healing is spoken to, from p. 82, to
90. The Reasons why many young people do grow more vain daily, from p. 90, to
92.
Inferences from the whole Doctrine.
1. The dismal Aspect of the World, p. 92, 93. 2. Parents and Masters care and
pains in the Education of youth, urged and directed suitably to the Disease of
youth, from p. 94, to 97. 3. The reasonableness of youths subjection to the
Rebukes and Restraints of Superiors, p. 97, 98. 4. Attentiveness to Advice
needful and fit, p. 98, 99.
Exhortations.
1. A serious Examination of the present state of youth, whether they are still
vain or no, urged, p. 99, 100 2. They are called to admit Directions answerable
to their present Condition. 1. A Call to young people still vain, with
Directions and Arguments for their present casting off their Vanity, from p.
100, to 110. 2. Advice proper for such young Ones as are serious, from p. 110,
to 121. A plain youths Catechism, from p. 110, to the end.
Ecclesiast. chapter 11. v. 10. last clause.
Childhood and Youth are Vanity.
THis present Meeting is for the spiritual advantage of you Children and young
People: Your good we Ministers must intend, and its your Interest and Duty to
regard, and improve these helps, as well as elder Persons, for your Souls are
are as Immortal as the Aged; God has a right to govern you, being you are his
Creatures. He has given you a Rule of Life, he observes your Hearts and
Carriage with concern. Young Ones shall be arraigned at Gods Tribunal, and
judged by the Rule contained in his Word, according to what they have been and
done. Heaven and Hell are before you, one of them will be the eternal dwelling
of the youngest in this Assembly; and considering, that most of Mankind dye
when young, Heaven and Hell are fuller of Young People, than of such as arrived
to a greater Age.

Do such Considerations affect you? ought they not to make me serious, and
importunate with your Souls? And with yours especially, because Youth is under
great indispositions to all that is serious and saving.

Oh let us look earnestly for a blessing to him, who is the God of the Spirits
of all Flesh, Numb. 16. 23. and therefore is able to impress and manage your
Spirits though unruly and vain.

The Author of this Book is Solomon; will you regard what a Great Man says? He
was King of Israel in its most prosperous State: Are a wise Man's dictates to be
heeded? He was the wisest of mere Men. But above that, this Book was the result
of great Experience; he speaks his feeling as well as his Judgment; yea, he
records these things as a Penitent after great offenses, and therefore must
represent things according to their truth and importance, especially since he
was inspired by the Infallible Spirit in what he here delivers.

I shall not look further than the 11th. verse, to lead you to my Text.

1. There he does by a sharp Sarcasm reprove the sensual delights of Young
People, rejoice O Young Man, etc. its such a saying as Christ's to his
Disciples, Sleep on and take your rest, Mar. 14. 41. It Is not said by way of
approbation, but he exposes the Sensualist by disdain, which may affect some
People more than a direct Reproof; and God for our good condescends to try all
ways. Surely you that think sensual pleasure the greatest happiness you are
capable of, will suspect that it is not what it appears to your foolish minds,
whon God by the Wisest Man does thus Ironically brand it: he loads you with
scorn, while you fondly please your selves with these poor delights, as your
only Paradise. God keep me from that as my Portion, which God accounts my
reproach.

Obj. But may not a Young Man rejoice?

Answ. Yes no doubt, thou ought to delight thy self in the Lord, Psalm. 37.
4. yea, thou may delight moderately and holily in Objects of sense; but
that is not the rejoicing here exposed. The following words explain the nature
of this forbidden joy, it is that evil pleasure which thou take in walking in
the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. q. d. Oh vile Creature!
how base art thou become, that confinest thy pleasures to, and resolvedly
wallowest in the delights that come by following the vain imaginations of thy
carnal heart, and mere gratifying thy senses. What a bruit art thou, that
sportest thy self in a disregard of God and unseen things, and valuest the time
of Youth only as it fits thee to execute what is sinful, and relish what is
sensual! Is this rejoicing becoming thee as a reasonable Creature, made for and
suited to things of so far a higher nature? Is thy correspondence to the
Objects of Faith quite gone? art thou so sunk and buried in flesh? Is there no
spiritual light or love to govern thy desires, and pleasures? If this be the
merry Young Man, what an object of contempt is he in all his mirth? even in his
jollity he is to be scorned, as well as pityed.

2. He allarms this brutish Sensualist with a prospect of Judgment. God
addresseth himself to thee as one stupidly ignorant, but know thou: it is what
thou art little acquainted with, or thoughtful about; for all these things he
will bring thee into judgment, a sore thorn in thy gay Clothes; a great cooler
to thy lusts, mere gall in thy Cups, and a sad disturbance to thy airy
conceits: God will bring thee into judgment for all these things. Tho thou
despise his Laws, thou shall not escape his Sentence: he will not leave it to
thee, whether thou shall be miserable; though he referred it to thy choice,
whether thou would be serious: he will compel thee to feel his wrath, though
he would not force thee to refrain thy voluptuousness. Yea, Oh thou that
sportest thy self in thy brutish delights! thou shall account for all, thou
shall suffer for each. Thy punishment shall be proportioned to thy sins, and to
thy pleasures thou did take in sinning, and do thou never consider how
great that is like to be?

3. He then annexeth a serious Caution against two evils, to which Young
Persons are obnoxious, v. 10. Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart; that is
anger, as the word may be rendered, or all those heart lusts which will end in
sorrow of heart. Thou art afraid of seriousness, thou seem to prevent sorrow
by thy carnal mirth: but alas, thou art making way for the deepest groans by
thy seeming cure; thou bring on sorrow by a pretended driving it away. But
Young Man, God seeing thou take a wrong course, condescends to warn thee
against the anguish which thou preparest by thy vicious inclination.

2. And put away evil from thy flesh; that is, fleshly pollutions, to which
Youth is prone, or the bodily punishments which vile courses expose to: If you
take the first sense, then, as in forbidding heart lusts, he stops a course of
sin at the Springhead, without which all the attempts for Reformation will be
too feeble; so in forbidding fleshly pollutions, he would restrain the acting
of sin: q. d. Tho Lust is conceived in the Heart, yet let it not break forth in
thy practice: for abstinence from wicked acts will conduce to change thy
temper, and abate thy guilt. If you take the latter sense, then he argues from
that misery, which brutish Youth is most likely to be affected by, q. d. That
Body which thou so indulgest, that flesh whereof thou art so tender, is like to
feel the woeful effects of thy folly: Therefore as thou love thy very flesh,
kindle not the flames which are to devour it in Hell; bring not down those
Judgments, which may torment thy Body on this side the Grave.

The wise Man introduces these advices by a Motive referring to v. 9.
Therefore, etc. as if he had said, because God will bring thee to judgment,
avoid these sins, for which thou shall certainly be arraigned, and prevent the
miseries which the sentence will include, and which the Judge must execute
according to the sanction of that Law whereby thou shall be judged. Then, then,
O Young Man! thou shall know by the punishment felt, that thy Lawgivers
threatenings were not vain, though during temptations they appeared so.

My Text is a further Motive, and as such is here inserted: For Childhood and
Youth are Vanity, q. d. To these sins your young years are prone, they have
room in your temper, and without great care and labor cannot be removed, or
put away; therefore be intent and vigorous to put away evil from your flesh, to
remove sorrow from thy heart.

Having thus described the Coherence of the words, I shall lay them down for a
Doctrine, as they be in my Text.

Doct. Childhood and Youth are Vanity.

I shall explain this Doctrine, and insist on that sense of the words, which
will most conduce to the advantage of Young Persons.

(1.) Childhood and Youth may be taken for that time of Humane Life, which is
short of Manhood.

If you take it thus, then the whole clause may be thus expressed: Though you
are very apt to boast of these years, as most conducive to happiness, though
now your Spirits are vigorous, your Bodies healthy and strong, your Senses
quick, the Cares and Maladies of Old Age are far from you; yet all this will
not make you happy. This time of Youth it self is vanity, it is insufficient to
make thee a Blessed Creature; yea, though thou did enjoy all sensible things
that can minister to its satisfaction, it is but vanity; a poor thing, a short
and empty matter, which leaves its admirers deceived, yea, undone, if they have
no better provision. A serious Old Man disdains those years, and would not live
them over again; yea, few live long that wish not much of that time expunged
out of their life, and remember it with a blush.

(2.) Childhood and Youth note Persons of those Years or age, viz. Children and
Young People.

I shall consider these words in this sense, and of such of you the Spirit of
God proclaims vanity, as your proper Epithet.

Quest. What is meant by Vanity, as it predicates of these Young People?

Answ. Vanity is either natural or moral, and then it is the same as to say,

1. Young People are frail and mortal. All flesh is grass, and the goodliness
thereof as the flower of the Field, Isa. 40. 6. The robust Youth has his
breath in his Nostrils; by the Course of Nature he may live longer than Old
men, yet by the Frailty of Nature he may die before the oldest man. Thou
reckonest upon long Life, but thou may dye tomorrow: Oh young man! thou have
the seeds of Death in thee, thou can not resist any Messenger of Death; Heb.
9. 17. the Sentence lies against thee, and sin the cause of Death cleaves to
thy early Age, Romans 8. 10. What variety of accidents art thou subject to every
moment? It Is by Gods power you Children are alive till now, as well as the Man
of eighty: Oh young Folk! that think of many years, before Death and you can
meet; how many younger than you are already rotten in their graves? there may
be many Children in this place, whose death your Fathers, yea, Grandfathers may
live to mourn for: it is a brittle house your very Souls inhabit.

Exh. I cannot omit this Exhortation. Do and forbear all you ought to do and
forbear in order to Eternity, as Persons within a step of Death. I hope the
youngest here are assured, that there is no working in the grave, Eccl. 9. 10.
What is to be done for Eternity must be done while you live; the state of trial
lasts no longer than Life: whatever is beyond the Grave, is unchangeable reward
or punishment.

Will thou lay to Heart these things? 1. I have much to do for Eternity. 2.
Work for Eternity is hard to do. 3. This work as hard as it is must be done, or
I perish for ever. 4. How short a while may I, as young as I am, have to do all
this hard work in, which is the point I am on: Young Man, if Death overtake
thee, thou can not put it off till thou set about the work thou have
neglected: all the cries in the Word will avail nothing. Bethink thee then, if
Ahijah had not been good betimes, he must have been eternally undone; so it may
be thy Case, O Child of ten years old! if thou do not get Grace before thou
art a Year older, or it may be a Month or Week older, thou must dye graceless.
Does not the Word tell thee of some who dye in youth, and their life is among
the unclean, Job 6. 14.: Shall that be thy Case? can thou bear it? be
persuaded now to fix thy thoughts on such things as these: Shall I Lie or Swear
now, who may be dead within a Month? Dare I profane this Sabbath, who may be
dead within a Week? yea, my next sin may be the last act of my Life. How can I
live without Christ a day longer, when I may dye to Night? shall I delay to
know, and love, and fear my God, who must do it soon or never? I am sure if I
do not fear God before I dye, Hell will be my place; and I am not sure of a
Week to attain this Fear of God. Did the youngest of you know your frailty, you
would tremble at delays, you would not dare to sin, you would blush at your
slothfulness in any good Work. Oh then hear this Sermon as one that may never
hear another! Pray the next time as one that may never Pray again. When thou
art next tempted, ask thy self, Would I yield to this if I were to dye to
morrow? Will you believe this, and walk as them that believe it? even Youth is
too uncertain for any wise one to venture to sin, or neglect his Salvation, as
if sure of time to repent, and repair his neglects.

2. Vanity is taken in a moral sense, viz. as it regards the minds and manners;
thus Ephesians. 4. 17. the Spirit of God warns us against walking in the Vanity of
the Mind. Vanity is often put for all sins, 2 Kings 17. 15. several sins are
expressly called Vanity; and this Name is applied, partly with respect to the
Nature of some sins, but chiefly from the tendency and consequence of every
sinful course. Every way of sin is vain; and sin deserves the Name of Vanity
from this consideration, that it is committed to no valuable purpose; yea, it
ends in what is destructive, and far worse than merely unprofitable.

In this sense I shall improve the Text, and it includes these things:

1. Young people are prone to many sins that are notoriously vain. 2. Young
People are apt to live to very low and unprofitable purposes, which is Vanity.
3. Young People are apt to live to evil and destructive purposes, which is the
height of Vanity.
Before I enter on these things, let me ask you young Folk, Is not this a true
Charge? and is it not as awful a description of your State as true?

Obj. But how comes this to be laid so universally, that all young People are
thus vain?

Ans. 1. Because the generality of young People are vain: For one that is
sober, how many are wild? for one that is pious, there be many profane. A
religious Child is become a wonder. Godliness in youthful years is very rare:
The body of your ordinary young People is sottish; the generality of witty
Youths are atheistical and irreligious. When the Disease is so common, the
charge is proper as against the whole.

Ans. 2. All young Persons are inclined to be vain: Vanity is the Temptation of
that Age; your Constitution and want of Experience do especially expose you to
this mischief, though Grace may deliver some of you from the power of Vanity
yet it has not cleansed you from all disposition to Vanity; it hangs about
you, and lives, though restrained: Your stumbles will be at this stone, and
your Faults will be under this head of youthful Vanity.

Young People! you see why the Charge is so common: Will you then apply what I
shall say to your selves? When I describe the Disease, say, This is my Disease:
When I propose the Remedy, speak to thy Soul, This is proper for my Case, this
is necessary to my Condition. Thou Child, say, I am a Child, and therefore apt
to be vain. Thou young Man! say, I am a young Man, and therefore I am apt to be
vain. I must deny my Age, or own this Charge. Nay further, reason awfully with
your selves, Most young People are under the power of Vanity: The wicked Youths
are a hundred to one that is pious. Oh my Soul what is my Condition! is not
there more danger that I am one of those hundred wicked ones, than that I am
that One pious young one.

I shall now return to consider the three particulars, under which I included
the Moral Vanity of young People.

1. Young People are prone to many sins that are notoriously Vain.

There be some particular sins that in their Nature argue more Vanity than
other sins; they infer a very vain mind in the Persons committing them. Young
ones have many of these sins, and Lusts strongly prompting thereto.

I shall reduce your sins to eight particulars, and give you some Directions
under each, to help you against that particular sin: But remember each of these
are sins; every sin defiles thy Soul, and binds thee to undergo the
Punishment threatened, if it be not repented of and mortified: Nor can thou
hope that these sins will be put away, unless thou follow the Methods which God
has directed for that end: He will not Convert thee as a Bruit that regards
nothing, tho he must consider thy weakness as a Sinner, and therefore exert his
Power by the Means thou attendest.

1. Young People are subject to Folly.

The Spirit brands our tender years with this Crime: Prove. 22. 15. Folly is
bound up in the Heart of a Child: Is this limited to Children? No, A young Man
void of understanding is too often seen, Prove. 7. 7. This fault is not a want
of that Wisdom which is unexpected from your Age: But it is such Folly as in
your Years might have been healed; and it is made up of blindness and mistakes
against that light which God has afforded you.

God has given you reason to govern your selves by, you are under the Means of
Wisdom, whereby you may know your true end, and the proper means to that end:
Nevertheless most young Persons are Fools. Do not thou place thy Interest in
things which are vain and destructive? Do not thou think Jollity thy only
Heaven, and the pleasing thy Lusts the only real Paradise? What is enjoying
God, or glorifying God to thee? these are things thou art unacquainted with,
and unconcerned for.

Obj. Perhaps thou will say, I desire to be saved, and I do something toward
it, how then do I mistake my end or means.

Ans. 1. I fear thou do not know what it is to be saved: Salvation with thee
is only being kept out of Hell, as a place of Torment, when thou have sinned thy
fill; but there is little more to commend Heaven to thee. If there be not vain
sports, Revelling, and the like carnal Enjoyments; thou can not tell how
Heaven should be a happy State, tho better than Hell: But is not this the
grossest Folly? What, to think that Salvation, which contains no Vision of God,
no perfect Holiness of Heart, no full Conformity to Christ, no ravishing sense
or Communications of the Divine Love, no hand in God's Praises? Foolish Youth!
there is no Heaven but what principally includes these; that is not Salvation
which wants any of these. Let me ask thee, art not thou foolish, if thou
judge Salvation to be what it is not? art thou not foolish to think it to be
another thing than God describes it to be? art thou not a Fool, that fanciest
that cannot be a happy State, unless it wants what all good Men account to be
Happiness? and unless it includes such wicked and brutish things as Heaven
must keep and cleanse us from? Oh poor Creature! thus foolish do thy Notions of
eternal Life discover thee to be.

Ans. 2. Thy Folly appears, in that thou fanciest thou can be saved in
another way, than that which leads to it. To convince thee of this, consider
that,

1. Christ is the principal Way to Life, Ioh. 14. 8. He as a Priest by offering
up himself, merited Life for such as repent, believe, and obey him: He as a
Prophet teaches Men the Author, Means, and Nature of the Terms of Life: He as
King applies his Purchase by the Spirit, subdues Impediments, fits the Soul
for, and judicially admits it into Glory. Now Child! do thou hope to live for
ever, and neglect Christ? is it not Folly to expect Life and despise a Savior,
yea, trample his Blood under thy Feet? is it not Folly to hope to be saved by
Christ, and yet believe the Devil rather than him, and prefer the Dominion of
others before his Government?

2. Faith, Repentance and Holiness, are a way to Heaven, subordinate to Christ:
I say, subordinate to Christ, for they could not save thee but for a Christ;
Sinners had never obtained them, but by a Christ; and they tend to save as they
refer to Christ, whose atonement is the only purchasing Price.

But yet they are a way to Life: No Man shall ever get to Heaven without them.
Christ has resolved without Faith, no Man shall have Pardon by his Merits, and
therefore all the savingly enlightened do believe, that they may be justified,
Gal. 2. 16.

He appoints us to repent, that our sins may be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come, Act. 3. 19. and limits the number of the saved to such
as obey him, Heb. 5. 9.

Now young Man, is it not Folly in thee to expect Heaven, when thou have
nothing which Christ has instituted as a means of that Glory? Does he as our
Lawgiver declare that he will and must suspend thy Salvation 'till thou
believe; and will thou madly say, he will save me, though I do not believe?
do thou know what he will do better than himself?

Yea, your Folly is greater, in that Christ has not only suspended Life on
these Conditions, but he has expressly declared, that they shall for ever
perish, that do not in these things submit to him; and yet thou art confident.

What greater Folly than for an unholy one to look for Glory, when God says,
Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. and All the wicked
shall be turned into Hell, Psalm. 9. 17. is it not Folly to remain impenitent,
and yet be in hopes of Heaven? when Christ says, Except you repent you shall
all likewise perish, Luk* 13. 3. Will not you own your Madness, that looked for
Life in your Disobedience, when you shall hear our Lord saying, Slay these mine
Enemies, that would not that I should reign over them, Luke 19. 27. Is it not
an established Rule under the Gospel, He that believes not shall be damned,
Mar. 16. 16. Unbelief and Hell are certainly connected, as Faith and Heaven.

3. Thy Folly appears yet more, in that thou fanciest thou can be saved in a
way contrary to Salvation, and certainly leading to Hell.

Would not thou judge him a Fool that intending for Dover, yet chooses the
Road to York? are not they Fools who desiring Health, refuse Physic, and take
nothing but Poison? Thy behavior exceeds the grossest of these Instances.

What bars any one from Heaven, but the dominion of sin? and that Conscience
justly charge thee with: Does not God declare, that to be carnally minded is
death, Romans 8. 6? thou art so minded, and yet expectest life: Is not God
express, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean Person, nor covetous, has any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of God, Ephesians. 5. 5? And also that the abominable, and
all Liars shall have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone, Rev. 21? Is he not as positive, that no Fornicator, Reviler, Thief,
or Drunkard can be saved? 1 Cor. 6. What can be plainer, than that in being
such as these thou destroyest thy self? These Vices lead to destruction, and
God warns thee against foolish self-deceit, by hoping for a better issue than
Ruin by such a Course: Oh sottish Youth! will Theft, Drunkenness, Swearing,
Profaneness, think you, lead to Heaven, after all these discoveries of God's
resolves? what will damn thee, if such Vices will not? who can be damned if
thou be saved? will a provoked God lie for thy sake? No, no, his Threats will
take hold of thee, notwithstanding thy silly dreams.

Children, you see I have described the Folly of all Young Ones, who are
wicked. I have chosen this great Instance, viz. They mistake their true
Happiness, and the Way to it.

I might open this great sore beyond this: Alas! Young People are generally
ignorant of God, and themselves; they know neither good nor evil aright; they
commend what they ought to dispraise; they choose what they should reject; they
make a mock of the greatest Mischiefs, as Sin and Hell; they rarely understand
Men, or know how to carry it aright for this World, or for Eternity; they
mistake Truth for Error, are governed by appearances rather than realities.
Where shall I stop if I intend a full attempt of the Folly of Youth?

Quest. What shall I that am Young do to heal me of my Folly?

Answ. 1. Beg Wisdom of God by fervent Prayer; Iam. 1. 5. If any of you lack
Wisdom, let him ask it of God, etc. Thou want Wisdom, thou art bid to ask
it: Thou art encouraged to ask, for he gives it to such as ask, yea, he gives
liberally, and he will not upbraid thee with thy past Folly, when thou set
thy self to get Wisdom. Nothing will heal thy Folly but wisdom, and a
prayerless creature is never like to obtain it: Therefore press thy Soul with
the sense of it is want, and with the loveliness and necessity of Wisdom: This
will help thee to strong desires, which are fervent Prayers. Oh Child! will thou be a Fool for want of praying? Shall God say, Here Is a Youth void of
Wisdom, because he would not ask it?

2. Study and believe the Scriptures. If thy Judgment bedirected by the Word,
it will be sound, that gives understanding unto the simple, Psalm. 119. 130. Be
sure you learn to read, and when you can read, read the Scriptures most; there
you must learn to think aright of God: they will teach thee what the Will of
God is; the way of Salvation is there discovered; from them thou have the
truest account of Sin, and Holiness. In the written Promises thou will know
what to hope for, in the Threatenings what thou should fear, in the
Commandments what thou must do, in the revealed Doctrines what thou should
believe. Come Children, you are allowed to learn the Scriptures; Timothy is
commended for knowing the Scriptures from a Child, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study you
these, there is nothing needful for a Christian which is not contained
therein: Every thing as to Salvation is doubtful, which is not deduced from
these.

3. Suspect thy first thoughts, and never be governed by thy Fancy. If thy
sudden imaginations be right, they will bear enquiry; if they be wrong, they
need amendment. Ordinarily the first dictates proceed from Vanity, and shall
that prescribe when Life and Death depend on thy Resolves? nay, how know
thou but that they be Satan's whispers which thou executest, when Fancy is thy
Guide? for he speaks to the Soul by impressing the Imagination.

4. Converse with the Godly Wise, and strictly observe and lay up their Sayings
and Examples. The Word tells us, He that walks with wise men shall be wise,
but the Companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. Their Speeches
will instruct, their practice will allure imitation; whereas ill Company will
debauch thy Mind, and nourish thy Lusts. Prudent Persons will judge thy temper
by thy associates, well knowing, thou art already, or wilt certainly be what
thy chosen Companions are.

5. Design all knowledge in order to practice, and live up to the light thou
receivest. He that in Sacred things takes up with Notions for notions sake, is
as truly a Fool as if he knew nothing. It Is a practical Judgment that makes us
spiritually wise, when other knowledge will aggravate our sin and woe.

Oh Young Man! will thou say unto Wisdom, Thou art my Sister? Prove. 7. 4. will thou cast off Folly with Indignation as thy great Disease? should you be fond
of that which sin introduced, and will obstruct your healing whiles it
prevails? Folly is the bane of intellectual Beings, and that is of the worst
sort which guides our practice. Folly is the root of all your other Sins: Were
thou spiritually wise, thy work were more than half done; and methinks thou
should not be hardly persuaded to get Wisdom. Child! would thou be willing
to be an Idiot? Surely no: every one pitieth such a one, and is too apt to
laugh at him. But I tell thee, to be a Fool as to Eternal things, is much worse
than to be an Idiot: The Idiot has few, if any actual Sins to answer for, but
thou have many. There may be hopes of an Idiots Salvation, especially if he be
the Child of a Believer: but if thou remain spiritually a Fool, there is no hope
of thee, though both thy Parents were the best of People. All Folly is the
blemish of Humane Nature, but Spiritual Folly most of any.

2. Young People are subject to Inconsiderateness and rashness. How hard is it
to make you think, or lay the greatest things to heart? neither Danger nor
Duty, do Young Ones apply to themselves. Would not the Consciences of most of
you agree with my accusation, if I tell thee Child, and thee Young Man or
Woman, Thou art under God's Wrath, but wilt not consider it? Thou do not
meditate on the way of recovery, tho it be at great expense provided: Christ
dyed for thee, but thou have not spent one hour in the Contemplation of him.
Thou art loath to think what thy ways are, whether good or bad; nor thy State,
whether safe or dangerous. How few Young Ones here have seriously asked
themselves; Am I born again or no? what will my sins bring me to? what evil is
there in my Sins? when I must stand at Gods Tribunal to be judged, what shall I
answer? what is like to be the issue? how shall I dwell with everlasting
burnings? It Is too commonly with others as it was with that Young Man, He goes
after her straightway, (or suddenly) as an Ox goes to the slaughter, till a
dart strike through his Liver: As a Bird hastes to the snare, and knows not
that it is for his life. Prove. 7. 22, 23. He took not time to think what would
be the issue of Sin? unavoibable Torment gives the first prospect of his
danger; when consideration would have represented this Misery, as a guard
against Sin, even whiles Temptation solicited.

Quest. What shall I a Young one do, to deliliver me from this
inconsiderateness?

Answ. In general, strive to consider, and bind thy mind to suitable and fixed
Thoughts. To this end,

1. Do not at any time allow thy Thoughts to wander unaccountably. It Is hard to
confine them at any time, when they usually rove. It Is a great help for this
World, and for another, to have our thoughts manageable; and our Souls capable
of being easily fixed in their Contemplations. When ever thou think, be able
to say, What I think of, it is worth a thought.

2. Awe thy Soul with the importance of the things thou ought to consider.
If they be Soul-matters, they be of the highest nature, and they be of greatest
concern to thee: Tell thy self, Life and Death depends on these: If Sin have
dominion over me, I shall dye: If I am not born again, I cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5. And shall I lightly think of these? what is all the
World to me, if I perish for ever? Things Divine, things on which Eternity
depends, must be considered. Oh my Soul! wilt, yea dare thou refuse to dwell
on these, which thou were made for, which thou must shortly converse with, as
the only realities, whether thou will or no.

3. Get so much Knowledge of what thou should consider, as that thou may be
able to represent it to thy Mind in some evidence. It Is hard to consider long
of what we little know; if it be of God, be not unacquainted with his Nature;
if it be of Sin, be not ignorant of arguments to dissuade from it, and a sense
of what aggravates it, etc.

4. Learn to discourse with thy self, and to urge things upon thy Heart: This
will fix thy thoughts, and bring things with some due impression on the Heart.
If thou can not debate the matters inwardly, speak outwardly with thy Tongue,
as if two Persons were in talk together: What, shall I lose my Soul for a Lust?
Must not I, if Gods Word be true, rue my present Course? It Is Gods charge that
you commune with your own hearts, Psalm. 4. 4. he can neither be true nor
profitable to himself, who seldom speaks to himself.

5. Take fit time and place to debate, and apply things of most concern, and
bring things to a good conclusion. Great things must not be determined by a few
thoughts, for so thou will neither pass a right judgment, nor yet be duly
affected. Neither are serious matters becomingly considered in a Crowd, or when
thou art unfit to think: And to consider, without coming to a conclusion,
cannot fix thy Judgment, or govern thy Will and Practice. Therefore if the
matter thought of be a Doubt, press it to a resolution; if it be a Duty,
consider all arguments 'till thy Will be fixedly determined to do it; if it be
a Sin which thou layest to Heart, cease not representing the evil and danger of
it, before thou feel thy self resolved against it, and a strong indignation
kindled to support that resolve.

Will you resolve to follow these Rules? will you strive to manage your
thoughts, and show your selves willing to be considerate? I am sure thou will
not refuse, if thou have a mind to choose aright, to walk safely, or to have the
benefit of what God has afforded by natural Light, Revelation, or Providence
to govern Mankind by. Yea, Young Man, it is impossible to be truly Religious, or
to answer the great ends of Religion, without considering. Oh then ponder the
path of thy feet, maturely deliberate on things that thy thoughts are due to.

3. Young People are subject to be obstinate and heady. This is one of your
diseases; you break through restraints, and are regardless of advice,
entreaties avail little: Yea Children, though you be compared to tender Twigs,
do not you discover much stubbornness: Parents command, but you are
disobedient; they correct, but you remain obstinate; they persuade and entreat
you to be sober, but you are still vain: Masters reprove, you are still the
same; Ministers importunately call thee (Oh Young Man) from thy destructive
Course, but thou passest on, and shuttest thy Ears against the Word. Conscience
often speaks, and represents thy guilt, but thou seem resolved on thy own
ruin: Yea, God stands in thy way, as the Angel with a drawn Sword; but thou
art fearless, and seem to say, I will sin still, let come what will of it:
Job 15. 26. Let guilt grow, let God strike, let my Soul perish, all these shall
not alter me.

Oh poor Stripling! Disswasive from Obstinacy.
how soon can God undo thee! how soon will Hell Torments break thy Stomach! and
will thou still be like the wild Ass which snuffeth up the wind, and in her
occasion, who can turn her away? Jer. 2. 24. How can thou, Child, endure to
hear thy Parents groan: I persuade my Child to be good, but I cannot prevail! I
would instruct him, but he is unteachable: Woe is me, I have brought forth for
the Destroyer, when this my Child was born: I see him running Hell-ward, and
cannot restrain him: I tremble to think from his setting out, what he is like
to come to: Oh that the fruit of my Body should dishonor God, as he is like to
do! that he should do the Mischiefs, I foresee he will! If God change not his
Heart, he may come to an* untimely end, and is sure to be damned for ever! Oh
that I had been written Childless! can thou be unmoved, and still perverse?

Quest. How shall a Young Person be cured of this Obstinateness?

1. Get thy Heart possessed of a holy Fear: Beg of God a Heart that is in awe
of him; a Heart that reverenceth thy Parents and Superiors; a Heart afraid of
Sin, and trembling at Hell, and all other punishments due to Sin. Fearlesness
is a great ground of obstinacy: Young Man, these deserve fear; God has put
this Passion into thy Nature, to make thee governable. What horrid madness is
it, not to fear a God who is a Consuming Fire? Heb. 12. 29. Not to fear Hell
and Misery, which will force thee to weep and wail, and gnash thy teeth for
ever? Mat. 22. 13. What a confusion and disorder is it among Mankind, that
Inferiors are wholly fearless of their Superiors, especially sinful Worms of a
dreadful God?

2. Believe the kindness of these, against whom thou art obstinate, and stir up
some grateful returns of love to rhem. Thy perverseness implies, that thou
love not thy advisers; nor think that they have any love to thee, when
they advise thee. But young Boy, I would mind thee to day, that it is from Love
all these opposed Admonitions do proceed. Does not God love thee, who made
thee, who put such Bowels in thy Parents toward thee? Does he not love thee,
who gives thee all the good thou enjoyest, who spares thee, and entreats thee
month after month, when he might have sent thee to Hell at first, without any
loss to himself?

Does not Christ love thee, Oh Child, who gave his Life for thee, when thou
were an undone Enemy to him; who sent his Spirit to strive with thee, his
Gospel to offer Mercy to thee, his Ministers and others to teach thee, as soon
as thou could understand any thing? must not he love thee, young Man, who
pleads with God ready to cut thee down, Lord, let him alone this year longer?
Luke 13. 8. Does not he love thee, that weeps over thee, when he finds thee
unperswadable, and this becaufe he knows the woeful anguish thy contempt will
end in?

Do not thy Parents love thee? Oh think at what care and pains thy Father is at
for thy livelihood: Think of the tender bowels of thy Mother, what sorrow she
has selt, what fears she is in, when thou art in danger; what tears she
pours forth when thou art sick, and how it goes to her Heart to correct
thee? I might show all others love thee who advise thee to be good.

Well young Body! can thou choose but think that the reproofs of these must
proceed from love? and art thou such a Brute as not to love them at all? what
not love thy God who is so good to thee? Not love thy Christ, who bled out his
Soul in love to thee? what, not love thy Father and Mother, to whom thou art so
indebted? would thou be so requited, when thou have Children?

Obj. I hope I do love God, Christ, and my Parents. I am not such a Devil, and
I think they love me.

Answ. What, love them, and be obstinate against their entreaties? Love them,
and be disobedient in things they most insist on: God and Christ account them
Enemies, Luke 19. 27. that are Rebels, and puts thee plainly to it, If you love
me, keep my Commandments, Joh. 14. 15. As if he should say, Never fancy or talk
that you love me, unless you will obey me. Thy Parents if they be pious, will
reduce thy love to the same instances: Thus thy Mother bespeaks thee; What my
Son, and the Son of my Womb, and what the Son of my vows! Give not thy strength
to Women, Prove. 31, 2, 3. and so she v. 4, 5. forbids Drunkenness. Thy Father
charges thee, My Child, hear the instruction of a Father: Let thy heart retain
my words, keep my Commandments, and live; get wisdom, etc. Prove. 4. 1, 4. They
will both entreat thee; Child, if thou have any love for us, keep from sin,
save thy self from Hell; we are most concerned to see thee a real Saint, and
eternally glorious; we'll bear any thing rather than sin; we are afraid for
nothing as much as thy Soul, if thou destroy that, thou show the greatest
hatred, and art as cruel as thou can be unto us.

Can thou think thou love them, and be thus perverse? Nay, if thou think
they love thee, that must cause some relentings: How can I run so cross to my
God and to my Parents, who so dearly love my Soul, and are so solicitous for
its weal? my hardened Heart begins to yield, and I cannot continue obstinate; my
Love to them, and my sense of their Love to me, do overpower my stubborn
spirit.

3. Be persuaded of thy own ignorance and unfitness to direct thy self.

A proud conceit that you know better than any, what is for your good or harm,
is included in an obstinate frame. Do not thou think, that if thou were
convinced that God bids thee do nothing, but what were for thy good, nor
forbids thee any thing but what is for thy harm, thou would do what he
commanded, and cease from what he forbids? and would it not be the same as to
thy Parents and others? Let me then reason with thee, Young Man! Do thou
think thy God would deceive thee, or thy Parents and Ministers would lie to
thee; when they dissuade thee from sin, and persuade thee to serious Piety, and
are so earnest in it? thou must conclude they think as they say: If they be not
mistaken, they would encourage me to do as I do, but if I be mistaken, I ought,
and would do as they advise.

Then young People, the Matter is brought to this; thou art obstinate against
Counsel, because thou art in the right, and they that give thee Counsel are in
the wrong: They as thou think, advise thee to thy loss, and all things set
together, thou consultest thy own true Interest better than they do.

But is not this a very vain Conceit and capital Error? Oh Child! sure thou art
not wiser than thy holy Parents! they know more than thou, they have
experienced what thou have not; they and thy Masters are forced to teach thee
the little things of this Life; thou would soon spoil and kill thy self, if
they left thee to thy own management.

Oh young Men and Women! are not you sordidly foolish? can you imagine you know
what God will do with you better than he knows it? do you know what you must
lose by sin, and suffer for sin, better than God knows? you judge by a short
moment, but he sees what Eternity is: You conclude from what your Body now
feels, but he knows what thy Soul is, and what himself is to the Soul, whether
in Wrath or Love: He knows what the Glory of Heaven and Terrors of Hell amount
to: Thou concludest by thy Fancy, but he passes a just Judgment, which every
one will soon submit to; therefore I do beg thee to distrust thy self, as ever
thou would save thy self. Consider, all the good Men in the World were
Conceited as thou art now, but they have repented, and owned their Folly: when
they came to their right minds, then they came to be of God's mind. Yea, all
the Wicked will be convinced of their Mistake; why else will they wail and
mourn for ever? if it be best to be in Hell, why should they always Complain
there? The Prodigal thought he was wise when he rioted, Luke 15. 17, 18. but
Repentance assured him that he had been mad.

Young Folk, have you never seen resolved Sinners even in Sickness and Poverty,
roar out, and mourn at the last, saying, How have I hated Instruction? Prove. 5.
12.

Consider how unlikely is it, that thy Opinion is truer than thy holy Master,
or Minister? thy Lusts darken thy mind, they have all the wise part of the
World on their side. Thou can remember thou were as confident of other
things, which now thou see to be false, as they told thee then. Thou
sometimes now condemnest thy self for thy course, when thy sinful Inclinations
are calmed. When thou were sick, thou did own that thy loose way, thy
irreligious way was thy Folly: And after all these will thou bear it out? must
that be thy Character, The Fool rages, and is confident, whiles thou know
not at what thou stumblest, Prove. 14. 16. Must this be written on thy
Gravestone? He shall dye without Instruction, and in the greatness of his
folly he went astray, Prove. 5. 23.

4. Acknowledge thou art one under Dominion, and not at thy own disposal.
People refuse to be subject, from a Conceit that they have a right to govern
themselves. Is not this your Case? Our lips are our own, who is Lord over us?
Psalm. 12. 4. therefore I will Lie, Swear, talk frothily, let who will
contradict.

But Child, thou can tell who made thee, it was God; and should not he that
made thee govern thee? ought not the Creature to observe the Laws which his
Creator gives him? Nothing thou have is so much thine as thou art his: Christ
bought thee with his Blood, and additionally founded his Dominion in his
Purchase: He therefore dyed, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living,
Romans 14. 9. Thou art therefore the most unjust of Rebels, if thou art an
obstinate Sinner.

Thy Parents, thy Masters, thy Ministers, have an Authority over thee, and
disobeying their just Commands and Calls, is a renouncing an Authority thou
should own, and usurping a power, to which thou have no claim. A Masterless
Child, a masterless Youth is a Slave under pretense of Liberty; and doubleth
his yoke, while he seeks to break it. Therefore know, young Folk, you will find
God a terrible Judge, whom you rejected as a Lawgiver: He Will vindicate his
own Authority, and the deputed Authority of your Parents, by the sorest
Vengeance. Eternal Chains shall hold that Youth, which would break God's easy
bands.

If any of you say, I do own God to be my Ruler and Master, consider God's
challenge, If I be a Master, where is my fear, says the Lord God of Hosts?
Mal. 1. 8.

To finish this, how many sturdy resolute Young People are here? will none of
your knees tremble; will love melt no Heart, will a sense of Gods skill to
direct, and authority to Command, bend no stubborn will this day? Dare any
Child or Young Person go hence, and say, I have been stiff-necked, and wll be
so; nor will I follow these Rules to become more perswadeable. If thou have the
impudence to do thus, I have God's warrant to tell thee, Thou shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29. 1.

4. Young People are subject to Anger and violent Passions.

Children are apt to be peevish and cross: Young Men to be full of rage; the
Verse before the Text may be rendered, Oh young man, put away anger from thy
heart: How soon is the fire kindled, how fervently does it blaze? Young Persons
are often angry with their best Friends, even for what they should be thankful;
they are incensed too freqneutly without a cause, and are so hasty, as not to
search the reason. Sleighty Matters are with them great provocations; and
moderation in their resentments they disdain: And no wonder, for thy Reason is
darkened from seeing the fatal consequences of thy Fury. Lasting Enmities,
Quarrels, Murders, are too frequently the effects of this inordinate fervor.

Young Man! Disswasive from Anger.
is this a thing allowable? Consider with thy self, anger is a short madness.
Thou losest the management of thy own Soul; whence our Lord Commands, in
patience possess your Soul, Luke 21. 19. An overheated Spirit is void of
Prudence, and sure to procure bitterness to its self. God says, he that is
soon angry deals foolishly; and truly, he that is very angry is next to mad;
he looks, he speaks, he acts too near a Lunatic. A Passionate Man is at the
mercy of any designing Foe; and by indulging his Anger becomes his own
Tormentor: how uneasy to his Family, how dangerous to himself; how unfit for
Counsel, how troublesome to his Friends, how ensnaring and infecting to
Society, is a Passionate Man? May not I hope, you young Ones will be out of
love with Anger; it unmans you, though it seems brave: It makes you
contemptible with the wise; 1 Timothy 6. 11. but above all, argue with your
selves, This my God forbids me, Let all bitterness, wrath and anger be put
away, Ephesians. 4. 31. This will unfit me for the visits of the Spirit, who loves a
calm Temper, 1 Timothy 2. 8. and therefore appoints meekness, Jam. 1. 21. as a
qualification for communion with him in his Ordinances. How lovely is patience,
it is the height of fortitude? Yea, God says, He that rules his Spirit, is
better than he that takes a City: and he that is slow to anger, than the
mighty, Prove. 16. 32. In a word, a meek and quiet Spirit is an Ornament, and
describes one Blessed, Mat. 5. 5. How amiable is a patient Child! he is more
beloved by all than a froward one! How excellent is that Young Man, who is
Master of his passion! He is armed against sudden assaults; he is fit for great
services and sufferings; he is fit to use the knowledge he has attained in the
most dangerous passages of his Life.

Quest. What shall a Young Person do to be healed of Anger, and unruly passions?

Answ. 1. In general, get the Grace of patience, and delightfully accustom thy
self to the exercise of it as thy Glory, and no way a Reproach: But more
particularly,

2. Get thy Heart filled with Love to God and Man: Love to God will incline
thee to imitate him, who is long-suffering, slow to anger, full of Love, and
good to all, Luke 16. 35. Love to Man will incline thee to interpret all to the
best, afraid to hurt him, willing to benefit and forgive him; and not prone to
those dislikes, which are unsuitable to thy fellow Creature; especially if the
Image of Christ be enstamped on him, as you see 1 Cor. 13. 45, 7.

3. Often present to thy Soul the Example of thy Savior, and strive to imitate
him: he was humble, meek, lowly, and patient under the greatest provocations.
He calls thee to learn of him, Mat. 11, 29. If thou have any part in him, he
has formed thy Soul to some degree of imitation, and to endeavor after more,
1 Ioh. 4. 17.

4. Reckon on provocations, and be still armed against them. Thy own Carriage
is not so inoffensive, nor are thy Acquaintance so innocent, but that thou
ought to expect some Trials; to expect them, and be unguarded, is Folly;
neither is it possible to prevent anger when wholly unprepared: Therefore awe
thy Soul against Passion, and accustom thy Mind to such Considerations as are
fit to restrain thy Spirit.

5. Be humbly convinced how mean, sinful, and ill-deserving a Creature thou
art. Contention is from Pride, Prove. 13. 10. and he is fondly conceited of
himself, who thinks he ought to bear nothing; whereas a due sense of thy own
nothingness, and offensiveness to God, will make thee fit to endure much;
especially considering, thy provocations from Men may be the humbling rebukes
of thy God, who must forgive thee great things, if he cast thee not into Hell
it self: yet whose Decree it is, if you do not forgive, neither will he forgive
your trespasses, Mar. 11. 26.

6. Allow not thy froward Spirit a liberty, even where thou have most power and
freedom. He that is not pettish at home, will not be passionate abroad; whereas
anger indulged among Servants, and in trifles, will expose thee to its power,
when more dangerous and indecent.

7. When thou feel Anger begin to kindle, forbear to do or say any thing,
till thou have well considered. The cause of thy resentments, if just, will
abide the thoughts of a Calm Temper, and the ways of thy vindication are far
likelier to be due; whereas, if the Cause in it self is too sleighty, or thy
sudden purposes are too severe to be approved, how dare thou take blind
passion for thy Guide? Thou must believe, that the discretion of a man
deferreth his anger, Pro. 19. 11.

5. Young People are subject to Idleness and waste of time. It Is a while before
you are fit to learn, or do any thing; but when you are capable, how commonly
are you remiss and sloathful? Were you left to your selves, what would you do
besides eating, drinking, sleeping, and playing? Thou art put to learn, and
thou art idle at thy Book, not learning in a week what thou might learn in a
day if diligent. Thou art a Servant or Apprentice, having work to do, but art
thou not a Waster of that time, which is thy Masters, and not thy own; and
loath to do the business incumbent on thee? How little do most of our Youth for
this World, or for Eternity? Sports and Idleness eat up that season, which is
the best opportunity of Life, and the character of most young People is to
spend their time in doing nothing, or next to nothing, or worse than nothing.
You are idle in the Duties of Religion, and waste that time you pretend to
employ with God: You are idle in your particular Callings, as if you had no
business as Inhabitants of this lower World.

Oh Young People! A Disswasive from the idle mispending of Time.
how precious is that time you do mispend! and how sad an account are you able
to give of those hours, that are not to be recalled! Will it be comfortable in
this World to reflect on wasted Time? Grown years will be full of these
reflections; I might have been a Scholar, my Knowledge had been improved, I had
now been fit to serve my Country, and benefit my self and Family, had I been
studious in my Youth: I might have understood my Trade, been encouraged in my
Calling by others, and laid up for my subsistence, had I been diligent and
industrious in my Youth. But those years are spent in Folly, and now I am
unteachable: my Credit is gone, ignorance, contempt and poverty are my
companions: Oh foolish I!

But, Oh thou Child! Oh thou Youth! how much more uncomfortable on a Deathbed,
and in Eternity, will thy idleness, and misspent seasons be, as they referr to
thy Soul! I had a teachable time, but I dye in ignorance of God and Christ, woe
is me! The seasons of Grace I enjoyed are my torment now, because I improved
them not! I hardened my Heart by neglects in my tender years: How have I
trifled when I heard Sermons! How have I mocked God by my sleepy Prayers! How
have I undone my own Soul, by a foolish remissness in all my seeming labors
for it! What can I show for all the years I have lived? To what a case have my
Sports, my Idleness and Vanity reduced me! Oh that I could recall my precious
Time! but that is impossible. Oh that I had profitably employed those misspent
seasons! that is as vain a wish: Oh then that I had never lived those days which
I did not live; but sinned away as a sleep, or dead in pleasures! 1 Timothy 5. 6.

Dare thou, O young Body, for a little present indulgence to thy fleshly
sloth, entertain thy self hereafter with such Heartpiercing thoughts as these?

Quest. How shall a Young Person be healed of Idleness and waste of time?

Answ. 1. In general, abhor sloth, and redeem time, Prove. 19. 15. Ephesians. 5. 16.

Sloth is a wicked unaptness for action, and very unsuitable to an active
Soul. Time not redeemed is misspent, and when it is not applied to it is proper
work, it passes away to no advantage.

2. Enquire what is thy present work, and be assured that what thou art about,
is what God would have thee do, Col. 3. 23.

Every hour has it is business; if what thou art about be not that business,
meddle not with it, but find out what it is thou ought to be employed in at
that time: Conviction of duty is a spur to diligence.

3. Still remember, that God who is thy Owner has given thee thy Abilities,
and that time to do thy present work. God calls thee as by Name, Use my Talents
to this, which I have made thy present work; in this thou improvest the stock I
lent thee, in this I will bless thee, and protect thee as one pleasing to me;
for this thou shall not fail of a Reward, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7.

4. Excite thy self to do what thou art about with vigor.

Engage thy strength, call up the powers of thy Soul to activity, for the
sloathful is brother to the waster, Prove. 18. 9. Idleness is a degree of
omission in the affairs both of Soul and Body, for there is much undone that
might have been done.

5. To this end consider, God will call thee to a strict account, how thy work
has been performed in that time which God affords thee.

Tell thy self, there is a time of reckoning for this that I am now a doing, or
a neglecting. The sloathful Servant is in Gods esteem a wicked Servant, Mat.
25. 26: and he that hid his Talent must perish, as well as he that mispends it.
The more good that might have been done in such a day, will be observed, as
well as what little has been done in that day. Oh never forget, that vacant
hours, and loytred moments are recorded with him, who will not inspect
dreamingly, what thy slothful Spirit makes no account of.

6. Remember that all thy works preparatory for Heaven, need an intense Spirit,
and are confined to a short season.

It Is proper Advice, What thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no working in the Grave, whither thou art going. Time is posting, and
we had need redeem it, because our business is difficult, and the consequences
great. There are great things to be acquired and done before we are meet for
Glory. There be great oppositions in our Nature, and from our Tempers, to every
degree of that meetness. A vile Heart is not easily renewed, darling sins are
not soon nor easily mortified; the necessary Faith, Knowledge, Love, Strength,
and Joy are hardly come by; and the expected services in our generation are
slowly proceeded in. Haste and eagerness are absolutely needful to such things.
He that idleth can hope for little, and trifling in such matters is little
better than downright neglects, especially when giving diligence, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
is as much a Duty, as doing any thing. He is not upright in the matters of
Religion, whose deep concern does not make him industrious, because his
Judgment never determined for these things as the greatest; nor has his Will
resolved the pursuit of them above all others, whose idleness declares his
indifferency. Therefore often tell thy remiss Soul, This day is past, that week
is over, and shortly time will be at an end, and shall I idle as I do? How
little work is done in past years! Dare I loyter still, and be surprised whiles
my works are so imperfect? or can I reckon on greater improvements in the same
number of days, if I be no more intent and industrious than I have been in
those. To thee is that directed, Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit,
serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11. resolve to obey it.

7. Be able to give a good account to thy Conscience of the time that is laid
out in sleep, and Recreations.

These are the common wasters of Time, by a disregard to their just bounds.
Many do almost divide their hours between Sleep, and recreating Sports, Visits,
and Talk; which three fall under this Head of Recreteion. It Is an awful
Consideration, that what are appointed only to fit Men for business, should
become with many their only business: as if they had little else to employ
themselves about. But know thou, Young Man, that he who sleeps longer than
Health requires, is a Sluggard, Prove. 6. 9. And he that lays out more hours in
diversions than prepares him for the better discharge of Duty, is a mispender
of Time. Thy Reason should tell thee, God would never have given me a Soul
endowed with such Abilities for service, he had never placed me in a World full
of opportunities and calls to Employment: He had never so strictly charged me
to be diligent and useful; if I am able with Comfort to plead my Sleep, and
Pleasures as the greatest part of my Exercise whiles I lived.

Attend to these Rules with Care, and from this moment Gird up the loins of thy
mind, as one determined to run thy Christian Race with intenseness and haste, 1
Pet. 1. 13.

6. Young People are subject to Levity, and inordinate Mirth.

This is a common distemper; your talk is frothy and unsavory. How far from
grave are you in your Carriage, or Dress! Vain Books thou love to read, idle
Tales thou likest to hear, foolish Sights thou art best pleased with, foolish
Songs thou greedily learnest: what airy Conceits is thy Imagination filled
with! These thou indulgest till they become the Guides of thy practice, and
chief Object of thy thoughts and Discourse: To say nothing of thy Instability,
excessive Laughter, vain Jestings, Merriments. etc.

Oh young ones! Disswasive from Levity.
is this a Temper to be allowed? it is condemned by all prudence, it is contrary
to all that is serious, and obstructs all improvement in wisdom. How odious is
the character of a vain Fellow! 2 Samuel 6. 20. How do God and Angels despise
thee! How do the Good and Wise compassionate thee! Yea, can thou refuse to be
angry with thy self? Reason a little with thy own Soul: Have I not better
things to think of, than these silly matters, which tend to no good for Soul or
Body? Do not these antique gestures make me ridiculous? What hurt to others,
what a wound to my self comes by this frothy talk! Is not my mind grossly vain,
that I can relish such fooleries? Can it ever be bettered, whiles I employ my
self in nothing but what is foolish? Do not thou find, that this lightness is
even risen to profaneness? Thou can ridicule the Scriptures, sport with the
Divinest Subjects, and turn the most serious matters into Fuel to thy childish
Conceits: Poor Wretch! God will force thee to be ferious by the Torments he will
shortly inflict: Thou will be convinced, that thy Atheistick thoughts have not
put God out of his Throne, though they cast thee out of his Favor: Thy
ridiculing of Religion has not made it less real, or necessary; though it has
excluded thee from all the blessings of it. Thy making a mock of sin, Prove. 14.
9. has not a jot lessened its evil, but exposed thee more to the Vengeaance
due to it. Thy jocular temper shall not delay the awful recompense of that
Contempt wherewith thou have treated the gravest Matters: What is more fit to
make a serious Heart bleed, than to see thee jest and fool thy self into
eternal Flames? how surprising will those Torments be to a poor Creature, that
always disdained a sober thought, Luke 12. 46.

Q. How shall a young Person be healed of this Levity and inordinate Mirth?

Ans. In general, follow after Sobriety and Discretion, 1 Pet. 4. 7.

The want of these is evident in thy frothy Behavior, and a total want of them
is unbecoming thee in the early exercise of thy Reason, much more in improved
Age. The gravity of an old Man cannot be expected in a Child, but a degree of
it is necessary to the youngest, that is capable of acting by the notices of a
discerning mind. What is thy Reason for, but to discern what is meet, direct
thee to what is fit, and govern thee in thy Carriage according to the Rules of
thy Condition? Discretion will tell thee, a godly Book is more profitable than
a Play-Book; the Soul deserves more Care than a perishing Body that will
shortly be Meat for Worms; that silly Tales edify not as wise Discourses.
Sobriety will direct thee to endeavor a demeanor becoming a Man rather than
an Ape; it will check thee in those Jests which discovers thy Vanity, as well
as expose a Christian Name; it will urge thee to refrain matter of future
sorrow, for the sake of that contemptible pleasure which thou take in
indulging a light Fancy, whiles more important things are not regarded.

To this end,

1. Often represent to thy self thy Condition in this life.

Sure it must conduce to seriousness, when thy mind is accustomed to such
thoughts, as thy present State suggest. Oh young Man! thou art born a Child of
Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. thy Nature is vicious, the condemning Sentence was passed on
thee by the Law of Innocence, Romans 5. 18. Death is justly fearful, thou art in
a state of Trial, and on thy good Behavior for an endless Joy or Misery. Thou
have contracted much guilt by thy actual Enormities and Omissions: Satan, the
World, and thy own Lusts, are active to fix the Curse, and prevent thy
reconciliation with God, by keeping thee in a state of Infidelity, Impenitency,
and Disobedience to the Gospel. Thy Exercies as a Christian are difficult, if
thou art saved, it must be scarcely, 1 Pet. 4. 18. and many endeavors for
Salvation do prove ineffectual, because a perseverance in so many things are
essential to determine thy State. Alas! of many called how few are chosen!
multitudes of Professors miscarry, seemingly strong hopes are often delusive: The
Heart is above all things deceitful, and so desperately wicked, that it may
well be asked, who can know it? Jer. 17. 9. These and the like things may call
thee to mind thy self, and lay that froth which argues small sense of thy
bleeding Wounds, slippery Paths, disadvantages and dangers attending thy Case
in this Life, as it leads to Eternity.

2. Deliberately propose a becoming End in all thy Words and Actions, and let
them be conducive to that end. To speak or act thou know not why, is a
reproach to thy Prudence; and so it is to speak or do things to an end which
they are not fit to serve: Neither is it becoming a serious Person, to intend
that which will put him to the blush, whiles he deliberates of it. I can hardly
think thou dare say to thy self in thy Closet, I Will spend so many hours to
day in showing my own Folly, or gratifying another Madness; I Will lay out my
Pains to divert my own mind or another from all that is serious, to make my
Heart vainer than it is, to furnish my self with those false Notions of things,
which I must with trouble unlearn before I be wise; and to strengthen that
levity, to which I am already too prone. Can thou resolve, I will spend this
week in trimming a poor Carcass, and neglect my Soul; let this shift for it
self as to any care of mine, unless it be to add to its hurt by the snares
which my vain conversation shall expose it to.

But if thy design be what is edifying, thou can not imagine a course of
Foolery will ever accomplish that design. Yea, this very fixing on warrantable
Purposes, will gradually dispose thee to seriousness.

3. Remember thou art still under the observation of such, as should awe thee
to Sobriety, and make thee ashamed and afraid of a frothy behavior.

Thou would be ashamed, that a wise Friend were acquainted with all thy light
Francies and talk but one day. Oh! forget not that God tries the reins, and
knows all thy thoughts, Isa. 66. 18. Poor Youth! is not the Eye of thy God and
Judge more than all the World? Holy Angels are not always strangers to thy
Carriage, and Discourses; and may not thou blush at their Remarks? Devils do
often impress thy Fancy, and put those things into thee, which thou think and
talkest of; these Enemies of thine do gladly behold thee unmanning thy self,
wounding thy Soul, and corrupting others with thy foolish Speeches and Actions.
Thy silly Companions observe thee, and receive the Contagion to which their own
Inclinations make them apt: And is it nothing with thee, that thou conversest
with People ready to be diverted from seriousness, and forward to be vain by
thy Example? Alas! thou becomest accessory to all the evil they shall
propagate; and wilt be condemned in their thoughts, if God give them
Repentance, or cursed by them in Hell if they dye impenitent. Thy ungrave
Deportment sometimes is seen by such as are wise and good, those despise thee,
and pity thy Madness, when thou please thy self as being airy and witty.

4. Be not an unconcerned Stranger to the State of the World, where enough
daily occurrs to make thee serious.

Can thou be light and altogether vain in a World so full of Sin and Misery?
how many dismal Objects do thou see and hear of! what Cruelty in one Man to
another! how often is the Church oppressed! what Judgments and Calamities are thy
Neighbors under! what dangers is the Land of thy Nativity exposed to! Most of
the Earth lies in Ignorance, Idolatry, and subject to the Devil's Empire, 1
Ioh. 5. 19. how many Souls are bemoaning their own sins, and ready to despond
under Doubts and Fears! where is there a Family but groaneth under some
disaster? and can thou play the Buffoon, as if Childish toys diverted thee
from all sense of these things?

5. Awe thy Soul with the importance of sacred things, so as not to dare to
entertain a light thought concerning them, much less to speak jestingly of them.

Every Scripture truth is a beam of Divine Light, it is revealed by the eternal
Spirit to Mankind, for to direct their Faith and Practice, 2 Timothy 3. 16. and
dare a poor Worm that shall be judged thereby, affront Heaven by ridiculing its
Discoveries? Young Man! they cannot be matter of Jest, which the holy and wise
God is intent on, and the Hearts of all devout Persons are deeply exercised
with. Are such things to be sported with by Man, which the very Devils tremble
at? Can thou choose but be seriously affected with the Matters of Religion, if
thou believe, these are the things the Incarnation, Sufferings, Death and
Testimony of the Son of God referr to? These are the things which great
Miracles have attested: These are the things which the various Operations of
the Holy Ghost on Souls design, and the Ministry of Angels subserve: These are
the things which the Devil is so industrious to oppose: These are the things a
Gospel Ministry is established for, and about which all pious Ministers are so
intent and importunate: These are the things which most affect, and govern all
such who are freed from the Dominion of their Lusts, and can dye with hopes:
These are the things which if totally disregarded expose Mankind to all
brutish Villainies in this World, and endless Tortures in another?

6. Abstain the Society of light Persons, and observe the danger of excessive
Mirth.

There Is that levity in thy temper which inferrs danger by vain Persons; and
thou art inconsiderate if the latter does not force thee to say of Laughter it
is mad, and of Mirth, what does it? Eccl. 2. 2. Yea, sorrow is better than
laughter, for by the sorrow of the Countenance the Heart is made better, Eccl.
7. 3.

7. Acquaint thy self with those purer and higher Joys which a serious Temper
lead to. There be delights of a higher Nature than what thou pursuest; they
would soon render these unsuituble to thy taste, as well as contemptible to thy
judgment: No holy young Man would exchange the feast of his heavenly Father,
for thy Swinish husks; Luke 15. 16, 23. there is no present emptiness, nor
following bitterness in Spiritual Delights. The sense of Gods Love, Peace of
Conscience, the lively hopes of Glory, the satisfaction of well-doing, the
serenity of a composed Soul, the ease of a rectified Nature, as far as the
Faculties are delivered from Sin, and healed by Grace, do constitute a delight
so real, and refined, as if thou once taste, will make thee reflect on thy past
Joys with shame and disdain. See Psalm. 4. 6. Cant. 2. 3, 4.

7. Young People are prone to lie: This Sin appears in Childhood, and then
such a habit is contracted, as they hardly are delivered from. It Is now true of
many, They go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies, Ps. 58. 3. You lie
to your Parents, to excuse your Faults; You lie to God, in breaking your
Baptismal Vow. You lie to your Equals for pleasure, or gain: You speak falsely,
to revenge your selves on such as you are angry with. Oh how often do you speak
otherwise than you think, and contrary to what you know, deceiving them to whom
you speak!

Consider thou Child, A Disswasive from Lying.
lay to Heart O young Man, that Lying is a horrid Sin: Herein thou imitatest
the Devil, who is the Father of a Lie, and the first Liar, John 8. 44. Thou art
contrary to God, who is a God of Truth; to him lying Lips are an abomination,
Prove. 12. 22. He is so incensed by this Sin, that he allots every Liar his
Portion among the worst of Sinners, Rev. 22. 15. Oh Child! would thou get to
Heaven? then thou must not lie: Art thou afraid of burning in Hell for ever?
then fear a Lie: Would thou be a Child of God? He tells thee, his Children
are such as will not lie, Isa. 63. 8. It Is the Charge of God to thee; Put away
lying, and speak the truth, Ephesians. 4. 25. Dare thou say, I will not regard what
the Lord says to me! Alas! he will punish thee for a lie, worse than thy
Father or Master can punish thee for any Fault.

Young Men, allow not your selves in this Iniquity; let no Master force you to
lie in your Trade, much less do you use it in your Discourse; it is a mean
thing, it is destructive to Humane Society, and the bane of Conversation. What
is a greater Reproach than to be a Liar? What is esteemed a worse Affront, than
to say thou lie? Great are the mischiefs to Men's Repute, Estates, Peace, by a
false Tongue; and in vain be all pretenses to Religion, if the Tongue be not
bridled, as to this fault, Iam. 1. 26. How hateful is it to debase so noble a
thing as Speech, in deluding thy Brother in thy Communication with him!

Quest. How shall a Young Man avoid Lying?

Answ. 1. Love Truth, and despise what would allure thee to quit it in thy
Speech. It Is the Character of him that shall inhabit God's Temple, He speaks
the Truth in his heart, Psalm. 15. 2. To speak the Truth argues a plain Man, an
honest Man, an Heroic Man, and generally a Godly Man. Therefore, like it in
thy self, as thou must do in another: In order to this, get rid of slavish
fear, which induces to lying excuses. Hate Pride and vain Glory, whence all
Lies for ostentation proceed; trample on love of filthy lucre, and thou will
not lie for gain: Abborr a hurtful envious Spirit, which will prevent those
lies that are framed to the damage of thy Neighbor.

2. Be wary and thoughtful of what thou art about to speak. He that speaks
hastily is in danger to speak falsely; and having uttered one lie in haste, is
too apt to back it with more; whereas he that is sparing in his words, does not
easily betray truth; and he that considers, dare hardly utter a false thing.
Who will venture to lie, that says within himself, God hears what I am going to
say, and he will judge me by my words? This restraint on thy Speech is so
needful, that thou should pray, Set a watch, O Lord! before my mouth, keep
the door of my lips, Psalm. 141. 3.

3. Let the lies thou have uttered at any time be to thee matter of deep
humbling. Repenting sorrow for what is past, will be a strong caution against
the same fault; thy grief for it will make thee earnestly pray with David,
(whose fault this was) Remove from me the way of lying, Psalm. 119. 29. They
slightly confess a lie who can persist in it.

4. Take heed of Equivocation, which is ordinarily downright Lying. What is
blamed in Jesuits is too usual among Protestants: as if a poor Artifice would
compensate truth. To conceal thy meaning where thou do not owe a discovery of
it, is warrantable; but to impose delusion under pretense of truth, is
intolerable, especially where Rules of Justice are violated. How sad is it! to
observe the liberty some take in deceiving their Friends with ambiguous words,
which they hope will be interpreted contrary to what they know to be true.

5. Do not be encouraged by Reports, to publish what thou have not just reason
to believe: What false slanders do some utter on incredible evidence! Report,
say they, and we will report it, Jer. 20. 10. as not daring to invent the lie,
yet not scrupling to repeat what they more than suspect to be false: But learn
thou, never to say any thing of thy Enemy upon worse testimony than thou
would believe it of thy Friend.

6. You that are subject to correction, be watchful and innocent in your
Carriage, that you may not need to lie. Do nothing that thou need be afraid
to own. This will prevent falsehood; and thy fear of being put to lie, may guard
thee against many irregularities.

Here I would advise Parents and Masters to encourage truth, by abating
somewhat of severities for Faults, that are plainly confessed. And I wish,
Buyers by their backwardness to give a just price, would not tempt the Sellers
to lie, in bargainings for their goods.

8. Young People are subject to fleshly Lusts, especially Uncleanness. This
Head concerns Persons past Childhood, and therefore I direct it to Young Men.
You are not ignorant that your Appetites are unruly, and your Inclinations too
lascivious. In eating, you are prone to Gluttony: Excessive drinking is too
common a fault; there be many Drunkards short of twenty years old: and
Voluptuousness seems the Idol. whom our Striplings worship above the living God.

Uncleanness is thy raging Disease: What immodest Dalliance, what filthy
Thoughts, what obscene Speeches, what wanton Looks, Self-pollution; yea, actual
Fornication, does Conscience charge some of you with! How few possess their
Vessels in honor, 1 These. 4. 4. or arrive at Manhood without a forfeiture of
Chastity!

Thou that art apt to Drunkenness, A Disswasive from Fleshly Lusts.
or Gluttony, ought to consider, what these Vices are, and how vile thou
rendrest thy self, by indulging thy self therein: Sure thou forgettest thou art
an imbodied Soul, whiles thou art led by thy brutish Lusts. The Name of
Christian ill becomes thee, Whose God is thy Belly, Phil. 3. 19. Where is thy
Reason, that thy Appetite should thus rule thee? What is thy Conscience, that
fails to terrify thee out of sins, so undoubted, and dangerous. Shall God put
thee off with a portion that becomes a Beast, and when thou ask Heaven,
reproach thee with faring sumptuously every day, and receiving thy good things
in this life? Luke 16. 19, 25.

Oh Drunkard! how odious art thou to all that behold thee! how subject to do
and suffer the worst of Mischiefs! Thy Enemies have an advantage to betray
thee; Satan may easily persuade thee to the greatest of Sins, when thy Soul is
in no case to see the Temptation, or the consequences of it. What secret art
thou able to keep? what business art thou fit to do? how do reproach and penury
wait thy persisting in this Course? But above all, do thou lay to Heart, that
God is incensed against thee? He left it a rule to Israel, that Young Man
should stoned, against whom his Parents witnessed, that he was a Glutton and a
Drunkard, Deuteronomy. 21. 20. It is the sanction under the Gospel, that Drunkards
shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Is thy pleasure worth
the pains thou must endure, or the loss thou shall sustain?

Oh Unclean Person! how dismal is thy case! This Lust blinds thy Judgment,
and seareth thy Conscience, so that Misery becomes unavoidable by a stupidness
in Sin: How dare thou worship a holy God, whiles thou wallowest in thy
pollution? Does not thy filthiness make God a terror to thee in every Duty, as
well as defile the Duty by the wanderings of a vile Imagination? The Holy Spirit
is quenched by lustful motions, and cannot dwell in a Heart so unclean, 1 Cor.
6. 19. Thou professest to belong to Christ's Body; hear the Apostles
expostulation, Shall I take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of
a Harlot? God forbid: 1 Cor. 6. 15. How often, O Young Man, has the Spirit of
God reproved thee? How often has Conscience bitterly warned thee? and dare
thou waste thy Body, debauch thy Mind, ruin thy Estate, deface all hopeful
impressions on thy Soul, renounce a Christ for a base Lust, defy God to avenge
the Affronts, and for ever undo thy self, and them whom thou allurest to
partake in thy Lasciviousness? Then admit that as a holy resolve, Let us walk
honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, but put ye on the Lord Jesus, Romans 13. 13, 14. and take heed least
God give thee up to vile affections, Romans 1. 26.

Quest. How shall a Young Person be delivered from Gluttony and Drunkenness?

Answ. Set thy self to get the mastery of thy Appetite. Reason with thy Soul,
and cry earnestly to God, that this may not be thy Ruler: None would be a
Glutton or Drunkard, but that his Appetite has more power than his Reason; and
Conscience is too weak to resist the cravings of his Lust: most young People
are pleased that the Beast should rule the Man; they quietly yield up
themselves to the Empire of this brutal part; they can bear no check to it,
they are afraid it should come under restraints. But, Oh young Man! thou art
carnal or spiritual, as thy Appetite or sanctified Reason govern thee; much of
a Christians Warfare consists in the struggle between these; the inordinate
appetite is a great part of that Flesh which lusts against the Spirit, and is
contrary to it, Gal. 5. 17. Is it not high time thou should set thy self to
contend with this Enemy, and attempt to bring it into subjection? This is
Temperance, when thou can restrain its irregular motions, and deny its
cravings: Oh then, daily quench this fire, and press after that Sobriety, which
implies a moderation of Soul to the objects of sense, and a Government of our
Life by the Will of God, and not by fleshly desires. Let it then be thy
business in every duty to weaken this Tyrant, and the scope of thy Life to
deliver thy self from the power of thy Appetite.

2. Make no provision for the Flesh to fulfill it is Lusts, Romans 13. 14. It Is
afflictive to behold some Persons contriving for their Bellies, as if careful
for nothing else; it is the design of their labors, and the thing that makes
Riches valuable with them, is, that they may pamper the Flesh, and fulfill it is
desires. But resolve with thy self, thou will not minister to this flame, nor
live as if catering for the Flesh were thy principal employment in this World.
Prepare what is meet for thy Body; it is a mercy in our Pilgrimage to have the
conveniences of Life; but excesses are fittest for them who dare brutishly
say, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die, 1 Cor. 15. 32. Poor Worms! is
there nothing after Death, that they should live in preparation for? yea, is
not Life it self as bad as Death, whiles it serves to no higher an end? nay,
these voluptuous Courses do often so enfeeble Nature, and multiply Diseases,
that Life is a burden, and some beginning of Hell in bodily Torments.

3. Avoid Temptations according to thy weakness to resist them. He that is prone
to slip, ought the more carefully to look to his ways: Is Gluttony thy Crime?
be afraid of Feasts; Art thou apt to be Drunk? look not at the Wine when it
sparkles; refrain the Company in compliance with whom thou have so often
offended. Know thou not, that the companion of riotous persons shameth his
Father? Prove. 28. 7. It Is in vain to pretend, I will not be drunk, though I do
associate with them that will persuade me to it. How often have thou resolved,
and yet complied! Nay, thy delight in the Sin is plain in the choice of such
Associates, and thy Lust is strong enough to prevail when the Temptation
offers, if it be able thus before hand to lead thee into the occasion.

4. Force thy self to an abstinence from just liberty for some time, when the
strength of thy Lust is found to abuse what is otherwise lawful. Some People
are so exorbitant, that if they drink any Wine, they must drink to excess; if
they go into a Tavern at all, they cannot forbear Drunkenness; if that be thy
case, do not despise it as below Virtue, for a while to drink no Wine at all,
or wholly to forbear a Tavern or Alehouse; it is thy misery, that what is to
another Man lawful, is to thee a snare: but it is thy Duty and Wisdom to manage
thy self with a regard to thy weakness, that thou may by degrees get rid of
thy wickedness.

5. Be content by watchfulness and hard struggles to oppose thy Lusts, till
time and frequent repulses abate their power. An appetite long indulged is not
soon brought under the power of the Soul; it will be importunate and uneasy,
even after it is dominion is removed; much more whiles the contest for
Superiority between it and Grace is undecided. Therefore sink not, as if it
were in vain to strive; nor let the uneasiness of the struggle tempt thee to
give it over; for as yielding to the flesh makes it more impetuous, so frequent
denying it will abate the strength of its motions. Many Drunkards after a while
become rid of all Inclinations to be drunk; and Sobriety grows so habitual to
them, as if excess had never been their Temper. Oh Children! never make your
Cure hard by beginning a wicked Custom: Oh young men that are ensnared! grieve
not to be at due pains, nor patiently to wait the stopping the Course of sin,
which thou have strengthened by frequent compliances. Thou must cease to be a
Drunkard, or thou art miserable for ever: And thou must be at all the labor,
and be willing to continue it till thou art reformed, or a Drunkard thou will
be still.

2. Quest. How shall a young Man be delivered from Uncleanness?

The former Directions are proper to this Case; I shall apply somewhat of them,
and add some more Rules.

1. Awe thy Soul with the Purity and Perfection of Gods Law, as it referrs to
this Sin. It Is a great snare to mistake a Precept, and confine it below God's
explication of it, or intention in it: yet how many Young People allow
themselves in degrees of Uncleanness as innocent, not seeing, that these things
are comprehended in that Precept, Thou shall not commit Adultery: Therefore
Young Man! examine the Word more strictly, and thou will find that God has
provided against every degree of uncleanness, and against all that leads
thereto. Are thy hidden thoughts and motions free? No; the thought of
foolishness is sin, Prove. 24. 9. And our Lord reproves the Pharisees as
Hypocrites, because their hearts were full of uncleanness, Mat. 23. 27. Evil
concupiscence, inordinate affections, etc. are to be mortified, Col. 3. 5. Are
thy lustful Gazings on a Woman allowed? No; our Savior expressly says, He
that looks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her
already in his heart, Matthew. 5. 28. May thou talk Obscenely? No; Neither
filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, are convenient, nor to be once
named among Christians, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4. If the Command of God reach to these
lesser degrees, sure thou art not so stupid, as not to see that all grosser
acts are forbidden, as more abominable. And if Marriage be the remedy against
Incontinence, thou dare not think that God allows thee other ways to
gratify thy lust, and so frustrate the great ends of that Ordinance, and the
aptitude of humane Nature for it.

2. Be watchful against all occasions of Uncleanness. Nourish not Lust by an
intemperate Diet. He had need be free from fleshly Inclinations, who dare
strengthen the assaults of the Flesh against his Chastity. The Spirit of God
tells thee, that if Wine prevail, thine eyes shall behold strange women, Pr.
23. 32, 33. Be not in the reach of a Woman that will entice thee. Joseph
escaped the snare by flying from his Mistress, and refusing to be with her,
Genesis 39. 10. Whereas the Young man that admitted the Speeches of the immodest
Woman was soon ensnared, Prove. 7. 21. Venture not on thy own strength too far,
God may justly leave thee, when thou temptest him; and stronger than thee have
sadly rued the power of Occasions. Play Houses, mixed Dancings, etc. have been
the ruin of many a Youth.

3. Guard thy Senses. These are inlets of evil, by them. Objects ensnare and
kindle those Lusts which lay asleep. David's Eye betrayed him into Adultery.
Job is to thee a good Example, Job. 31. 1. I have made a Covenant with my Eyes.
Listen not to immodest Songs, or lewd Discourse, which insensibly stir up those
Inclinations, which tend to the vilest Acts.

4. Stifle the first workings of Lust. First motions are weakest, and so more
easily conquered; the longer they are entertained, the more violent they grow;
and the Soul less apt to oppose them. Filthy Contemplations allowed, darken the
Mind, and abate that dread and abhorrence which are a great part of thy
security against sin: Oh then crush the first appearance. If thou ask me, how?
I Will tell thee, Banish these evil thoughts out of thy Mind, plead God's
Command, and seek his help; represent to thy self the Threats and Punishments
of God against this Sin; consider that these Motions unrestrained, may end in
the grossest Action: and resolve not to speak a word, glance one look, or use
one gesture, in compliance with that sinful motion.

5. Avoid Idleness, as that which tempts the Devil to tempt thee. Young Man!
it is a great Mercy to the World that we have business to follow; and he that
has no Employment, will wish hereafter he had never had an Estate to prevent a
Calling; therefore be sure thou have work, and attend it. Sin easily intangleth
the Idlers, who will be doing wickedly for want of Business: But the Diligent
is not at leisure for vain thoughts, he needs not ensnaring Company to divert
him; yea, labor substracts matter from Lusts, and renders the Body less
disturbing to the Soul. Leisure hours are the young Man's danger, be not
desirous of too many such, and double thy Watch in thy spending of them; for
Satan observes thee then, and will suggest vain thoughts to thy Mind, excite
fleshly motions, and prepare ensnaring opportunities.

6. Attentively regard, and yield up thy self to the motions of the holy
Spirit. The Spirit will warn thee against these Defilements, and direct thee to
that purity of Heart and Life, as will prevent the advantages the unclean
Spirit finds in thy youthful Age. A reverential regard to the presence of the
Spirit, will call the mind from base Employs, and excite thee to what is
approved by him: The more his Fruits abound, and express themselves in thy
temper and carriage, the more effectually will thou be cleansed from all thy
fleshly pollutions. To this we are directed, Gal. 5. 16. Walk in the Spirit,
and you shall not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh. Yea, the aids and influence
of this holy one are necessary to a saving abstinence from, and dominion over
Lusts, as you see in Romans 8. 13. But if ye through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the Body, ye shall live.

7. Keep thy thoughts well employed. This will prevent those vain Imaginations,
which are the incendiaries of Lust, and by which, the Judgment is blinded or
bribed to persuade the Will; Let the Word dwell richly in thee, by filling thy
Mind. Contemplate God in his Perfections, behold him present with thee when in
greatest secrecy; he makes a third, when thou and thy Paramour are most
retired: In this case he testifies, Ier. 29. 23. Even I know, and I am witness,
says the Lord. Represent to thy Soul the Torments following these Lusts, if
gratified: Hellfire is enough to quench these lustful Flames; and who dare
wish the pleasure so dearly bought? Attend to such Scriptures, as, Whoremongers
and Adulterers God will judge, etc. Heb. 13. 4. Oh Young Man! can thou think
of this believingly, and cast off restraints, or give a Carnal Mind it is scope?

9. Resolve before thou compliest with the most urgent Temptation, to put up a
serious Prayer to God in Christ. Lay thy self under this Law, I will not
consent before I look to God; it must be a dreadful evil, that will not admit
an Address to Christ; if it be a sin, I have need of strength from him, who
came on this errand, to put away sin, to cleanse me from Iniqtity, and destroy
the works of the Devil, Heb. 9. 26. Ephesians. 5. 26. 1 John 3. 8.

Prayer may deaden the Temptation when strongest, it may recover thy baffled
power, for Christ is able to inspire thee with that light and vigor, as may
support thee when almost gone. St. Paul thrice prayed when grieved with a thorn
in the flesh, and the Grace of Christ proved sufficient for him, 1 Cor. 12, 8,
9. The Devil, the Flesh, and an enticing Object are too hard for any Man, that
calls not in the help of Christ by Prayer. Satan desires no more, than to
engage thee single, and without frequent supplications, thou art like to be so:
On the other hand, Prayer will drive Satan to some more subtle Assault, than
so gross a wickedness as Uncleanness must appear to every one, that beholds
Christ when calling on him. Therefore, I do again entreat thee, even when thy
Lusts seem to have most advantage, that thou will not forget to present thy
case to him, who is concerned for thy good, and able to foyl the Enemies of thy
Soul, when in greatest prospect of success.

Thus I have represented to young People some of the sins, to which your Age is
most subject. All are not named, alas! there is Swearing, which is a profane
Villainy, that has neither pleasure nor profit to allure; there is Theft, which
is a violation of Justice, and a discontent with what God has thought fit to
give you; there is Pride, (one instance whereof I shall hereafter speak to)
which among you Children and Youth is generally on very fordid accounts; you
are proud of a little Beauty, which the Small Pox may spoil, and no Body is
truly the better for; you are proud of your fine Clothes, and from Pride desire
them; but what trifles are these, none but Fools esteem them, or value thee the
more for them.

Though I cannot insist on these, yet if God is pleased to deliver thee from
such sins as I have mentioned, all others will be reformed: Oh then set thy
self against them! let the youngest be warned against these, as what they will
feel temptations to. And be all resolved, faithfully to observe the Directions
given; that if possible, you may arrive to middle Age, free from the
corruptions of Youth and Childhood, and not be forced to cry out with bitter
reflections, Thou make me to possess the Iniquities of my Youth, Job 13. 16.
What would an aged Saint give, that he had been innocent of all these Crimes
whiles he was young? Learn wisdom by such now, whiles thou have opportunity and
warnings.

I now proceed to the second head of the Vanity of Childhood and Youth, viz.

2. Children and young People are apt to live to no valuable purpose, which is
Vanity. Thou will easily allow, that to spend ones strength and time for
nothing, or for what is as good as nothing, is vain. Is not he a vain body,
that thinks much, talks much, and does much, to no purpose? Common opinion will
grant this, we brand Caius Caligula as vain, for bringing a great Army to the
Seashore, and gathering Cockle-shells, when he pretended a great attempt. The
Spirit of God justly accuses those Persons, Isa, 41. 29. Behold they are all
vanity, their works are nothing. Solomon does frequently mean this in his Book
of Ecclesiastes, when he says, This is also Vanity; that is, it is to no
valuable purpose; it is not worth the labor and concern a man is at: One had
as good let it alone, and be unemployed, as reap no other fruit.

Young People! this is your very Case: Most of you live, and busy your selves
for naught.

1. You are apt to design nothing at all in your living. It Is long before thou
ask thy self, What do I live for? What end shall I pursue? are not most of
thy actions performed, thou know not why? Most of you are hurried by a
foolish Temper, allowing no deliberate design to govern you. A vain mind, or
Devilish suggestions determine the actings of most Young People. Is not this a
reproach to thee, if thou happen to do any good, it is more by chance than by
thy choice? If thou receivest any real advantage, it is by a merciful
Providence, and not by thy Intention? If God should ask thee at the Church
Door, wherefore come thou hither? May not some of you say, I do not know, or
it was from a fancy I had to hear, or from custom. But how few can say, I had a
design to get some help to grapple with my youthful lusts, I proposed to meet
with God in his Word for my Souls improvement. When you intend so little in an
Ordinance, what purposes must govern you in the ordinary affairs of Life?

2. Your Youth is spent to no considerable purpose. May not I tell most here,
thy time past is lost, and the time to come is like to be lost: For,

1. Thou have lived in vain as to thy self. What have thou gotten by the ten
years thou have lived, Oh Child of ten years old? What have thou improved by
the fifteen years thou have lived, Oh Youth of fifteen years old? yea may not I
as justly ask the Young Man of twenty, What have thou done? what use have thou
made of thy twenty years? Must not Conscience answer, Oh! I had as good been
just now born, for any good I have gotten?

That I may fasten this Conviction, I call every Soul to answer me; what art
thou nearer God to this day? how much is Sin mortified? what Grace have thou
attained to this very time? Oh youth! have thon yet got an Interest in Christ?
what Treasure have thou laid up in Heaven? If thou must own, I am further from
God, and not nearer: Sin is stronger, and not weakened; then sure thou will own
thou have lived in vain to thy self.

2. But yet farther, how many others may lay to thee the charge of
unprofitableness? Thou live in vain as to God: He may say, This young Body
never served nor praised me: I had as good there had not been such a Youth in
the World. Thou live in vain to thy Friends, thy Parent may say, It is an
unprofitable Child to me, I have yet had no comfort by him. Thy Relations may
cry, He never gave us good Counsel or Example. Thou live in vain to thy
Master; he has got little advantage by thy care, or labor. Thy Minister may
cry, This young body brings me little joy as yet: I have striven to little
purpose with him; he seems as if I had labored wholly in vain, 1 These. 3. 5.
Thou have lived in vain to the Church; what increase or Glory has it reaped by
thee? Thou have lived in vain to the Nation; thou have not helped to make it
more innocent by thy Life, more flourishing by thy industry, or more safe by
thy Prayers. So that now, Young man! is it not a true Charge, which I lay to
thee? may thou not cry out, Oh useless I! I have lived for naught, I have
been an useless shadow, I have cumbered the ground, and God may justly cut me
off as an unfruitful one? Luke 13. 7.

Obj. I foresee some Young one will be ready to evade this Charge, and say, I
do live to some purpose that is valuable: I gratify my senses, I live
pleasantly, I begin to look after the world, etc.

Answ. Alas poor Creature! is living to the Flesh valuable? Is living barely to
this World valuable? Is living to the Devil valuable? Methinks thy Reason
should tell thee, It Is better not to live at all, than live to these: An
intelligent Spirit to live to the Flesh, is base; an immortal Soul to live
barely to this World, is madness: A Creature of God, redeemed by the Lord
Jesus, to live to the Devil, is self-destructive, and foolish. What! live to
him, who has undone thee in the Fall, and is so studious to prevent thy
recovery by Christ! Live to him who has blinded, blemished, and debased thee,
as he has done! Live to him, who tho he hates thy God, cannot escape his own
misery! Live to him, who envieth thy good, desires thy woe, opposes all that
is the benefit of Mankind, and contributes to all the miseries and disorders
which the World is distressed by. Oh young man! can thou justify this course
of living?

But this will more appear, if upon a due reflection on thy Life, thou will
answer me these Questions.

1. Does thy Life answer Gods End and Purpose, in giving thee a Being?

The wisdom of God may assure thee, he had an end becoming himself in thy
creation: he tells thee, all things were created by him, and for him, Col. 1.
10. The blessed God had an Eye to himself, and a regard to Christ the Redeemer,
in giving thee an Existence. He exerted his Power in thy Being, that thou
might serve and honor him; do thou answer this End, by living as thou
do? have thou ever aimed at this? does thy behavior contribute to this at
all? Thy way of Life would be a Reproach to thy Maker to have proposed to
himself in thy Creation.

2. Are there not greater Purposes, to which thy Nature and Abilities are
suited?

He lives to an unvaluable purpose, that neglects to live to the highest
Purposes he is capable of. Little things are a reproach to him, that is adapted
to great things. Have not you Faculties, to know, and love your God? and do
your childish or wicked employments answer them? You are capable to serve, and
glorify the blessed God, and is the gratifying thy lusts equal to these? You
are receptive of divine Joys, and are thy carnal merriments answerable to
these? Oh young Body! what use art thou fit for to others? What benefit may
thou yield to thy self? how can thou seem to answer these, by a trifling
diversion, or a perishing advantage? Sure, thy Capacity is thy shame: the very
Beast, that lives to the utmost of his Powers, will witness against thee, who
behavest thy self so much below thine. It would have been thy Mercy whose
Exercises have been so low, that thy abilities had been less. Hence,

3. Wilt not thou shortly acknowledge with shame and grief, that thou have
lived to unvaluable Purposes?

No Ministers rebukes will be so sharp as thy own, when Grace renews thee, or
endless Torments overtake thee. If the Spirit ever enlighten thy Mind, and
alter thy Will, we may ask thee, What fruit had you of those things whereof you
are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21. With a grieving blush thou will answer, Nothing I
dare boast of, nothing I can justify: I am ashamed of my Reward as well as my
Labor: What I reaped by Sin is my shame, as well as sin it self; it was a
Fools Diversion wherewith I pleased my self; it was my Blemish wherein I
gloried; it was my Loss whereby I valued my self: What are they now to me? they
are Dogs meat ((...)) to what I now taste, Phil. 3. 8. I am astonished, that I
could relish these unsavory things, or derive the least Contentment from them,
when my chief Good was unsecure. Young Man! if Grace do not awaken thee, Hell
will; the never-dying Worm will be Convictions of the emptiness of what thou
have pursued; and the base Purposes thou have lived to. How will they tear thy
Soul with such Thoughts as these! where is the Pleasure now! where is the
Satisfaction to which my Endeavors were confined! oh, that I had been but a
Beast, who have lived to designs so brutish! Oh, that I had had no intellectual
Nature, being I studied not to know my God, and the way of Life! Oh, that I had
been void of rational Powers, since I did not govern my self accordingly! Oh,
that ever I had natural Abilities to love and fear, being I have not loved my
God, nor so revered him, as to abstain from Vanity! Woe is me, that I had a
Capacity for any Service, seeing I have lived so uselesly to God, to my
Friends, and to my self! Alas, where is the Fruit of my labonr! what now do I
enjoy, that deserved one hour of my life, or answers the least of my Abilities!
These, these, oh, Child! will be the Effects of thy present way.

3. Children and young People are apt to live to destructive purposes, which is
the height of Vanity.

The last Head is convincing, that it were as well thou had never lived; but
by this it were far better for thee, thou had remained mere nothing to this
day: to live to hurtful Ends, is worse than not living at all; yet this is thy
Condition, you dishonor God, you provoke the Eyes of his Glory, you trample
the blood of Christ under your Feet with Contempt. How many young People serve
the Devil with their strength, are a Snare and Infection to all they can
influence? One young body spoils many others, and leads them to that Villainy
they had never thought of.

You often break your Parents Hearts, and they by thy means feel, that a foolish
Son is the heaviness of his Mother, Prove. 10. 1. You frequently destroy your
Master's Estate: To the serious you are a Grief, to the City and Kingdom a
Plague, as helping on its Sin, hastening its Punishment, and obstructing its
Good: How many may complain of Harm on thy account! But whatever Hurt you bring
to others, sure you avoid Mischief to your selves? No, no: Young men live most
to their own Hurt, and seem to take great pains to make their Misery sure and
great. Oh, vain Youth! thou daily make thy self more the Child of Wrath by
thy sinful Practices; thy wicked Habits grow more strong; by idleness and
frequent opposition, hopeful Principles are more baffled and expelled;
Conscience by thy Affronts, is less concerned, and capable to admonish thee.
Thy ill treatment of Gods Spirit, makes him withdraw, and his Visits are more
seldom; so that he is ready to say of thee, Let him alone, Hos. 4. 17.

Believe it, careless Youth! thy ways tend to more sin, and less hopefulness of
Grace and Glory: Oh, wretched Life! to live only to be more guilty, and to be
exposed to greater Punishments; thou runnest Hell-ward, thy Thoughts tend
there, thy Words lead there, thy vile Actions heap the greater store of eternal
Flames. Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, are the things thou
workest for, Romans 2. 8, 9. Thou labourest for these Wages, thou live thy self
daily to a greater obnoxiousness to these Woes, as if thou were afraid thou
should not be miserable enough.

Oh Soul to be pitied! not to be born had been thy mercy, as well as Judas,
unless thou change thy living, is it not to thee those words are proper,
Behold, you are worse than nothing, (...) Isa. 4. 24. Had thou not lived at
all, thou had not done the mischief thou now art doing, thou could not have
felt the hurt thou must shortly endure. How may most young Folk bemoan the day
of their Birth! their Life is a misery, which might have capacitated them for
the Bliss of Angels, had they well employed it. The Lord grant you be not found
thus foolish and cruel to your selves; yet to this you are more proner than to
a more profitable Course.

The next Work is to show you, 1. How Childhood and Youth became thus vain. 2.
Why they continue so. 3. How most young People grow still vainer.

1. Quest. How comes it to pass that Childhood and Youth are vain?

Ans. Childhood and Youth became vain by Original Sin.

There Is the Spring of the Disease, thou did not come out of God's Hand thus
prone to sin, and thus averse to himself. But a depraved Nature descends to
thee from Adam by the Line of thy Ancestors: Thou were born under the Infection
common to Mankind, generated in the ordinary manner; the very quickened Embrio
in the Womb, has all the Seeds of those sins, which time ripens, and
opportunity brings forth; our Constitution is become sinful, and all corrupt
Effects are next to natural.

I shall not trouble you with Disputes, but merely inform you, 1. How our
Nature became corrupt: 2. How it descends thus corrupted to thee.

1. Our Nature became corrupt or vain by the entrance of Sin, whereby the
Divine Image was expelled as well as forfeited.

A Rational Soul cannot be void of moral Qualities and Dispositions, as it is a
Subject of God's moral Government; there must be Wisdom or sinful Ignorance in
the Mind; there must be Love or Enmity to what is good, and Aversion or
Inclination to what is evil, in the Will; for Man is not considered in Gods Law
merely as an Agent, with respect to what he occasionally acts, but he is
considered also as to his temper, what he is; what are his governing
Principles, and prevailing Disposition; those are necessary to the denominating
him a godly or ungodly Man, as well as influential into the ordinary course of
his Actings, which will be answerable to his inclinations and light.

Adam was created after Gods Image, which consisted in Knowledge,
Righteousness, and true Holiness, Genesis 1. 27. Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 10. This
was his Constitution, though not so fixed, as to prevent the possibility of
sinning. And whiles Adam sinned not, our Nature was impressed with that holy
Power, Light, and Love, which answered the Law, and capacitated us for that
exact Obedience enjoined by it. These divine Qualities were inconsistent with
their Contraries, by the Law of Innocence; though they are not incompatible by
the Law of Grace; for that Law insisted on Perfection, and entire Innocence;
and fixed a Forfeiture of all holy Gifts, by man considered in any degree
sinful; yea, besides this Forfeiture of these Gifts by the penal Sanction of
the Law, Man was not entitled to those Aids of the Spirit, whereby Divine
Qualities might subsist in the same Soul with contrary sinful Dispositions (as
they do under the Law of Grace) no snch influences of the Spirit were provided
in the Law of Creation; and therefore as the least sin in the Soul brought down
our Holiness below perfect, and thereby made it cease to be Holiness by the
Rule of Innocence; for Love was not Love by that Law, if there was any mixture
of Enmity against God: So sin would prevail to extinguish that Purity, and
expel those holy Dispositions at first implanted, if once it entered into the
Soul.

Adam did subsist a while happy under this Law, but at last he sinned, his
Heart turned from God to the Creature, which implies Ignorance in the Mind, and
Aversation and Enmity to God in the Will. The entrance of these did of Course
deprave the Soul of Adam; Knowledge was expelled by Darkness, corruption
removed his original Purity. The Disease invaded the whole Man, the Poison
operated to the extinction of his glorious Excellencies; there was no need for
God to take any good out of the Humane Nature, it necessarily died by the force
of sin. And it is by a new grant, that there be any Remains of God in lapsed
man. It is not from any thing in Man, or in the first Covenant, that there be
any moral Virtues, or good Nature in any; God in mercy bestows these, and
restrains the growing Contagion of sin, that we become not more devilish.

When holy Light and Love were expelled by Sin, the appetite (of course) became
Master of our Reason, and all disorders hence ensue. The Soul being clothed
with Flesh, does for want of holy Principles become subject to sensible
Inclinations, which through the presence of agreeable objects, hurry poor Man
into all that is Flesh-pleasing: whiles the proper concerns of the soul are
forgotten, and its intercourse with unseen things is cut off, for want of that
Light which should perceive them, and that holy Love which might relish and
desire them. A Soul thus debased and entangled, becomes little better than an
active Power to contrive Fuel for our various Lusts, and receive the little
delights which are ministered by Sense and Fancy. Oh wretched state! especially
when Error and Enmity against God and Holiness help to complete its
depravedness.

2. Thy Nature thus corrupted descended to thee, as propagated by the appointed
Law of natural Generation.

Adam was not only the common Head of Mankind, as representing all mere Men,
but also he was the Original of all men in order to propagation. As
Representative, he was capable to forfeit much good: As he was the common
Parent, he must transmit the Nature which he had with its Impurities: he was to
propagate his Kind; Genesis 5. 4. he begat Seth in his own likeness; this is
opposed to the likeness of God, wherein Adam was made, v. 1. Though Seth was the
Father of the holier part of the World, and a good man; yet he was not begotten
after Gods likeness, or with a nature in its Original purity, but with a Nature
as depraved in fallen Adam. Lapsed corrupted Nature cannot propagate a holy
Nature. Can a clean thing come out of an unclean? Job 24. 4. How can he be pure
who is born of a woman? Job 25. 4. A Person naturally sinful, cannot generate
a Child free from that sinfulness: if the Father be naturally void of spiritual
Wisdom, the Son in the course of nature will be so; and if we are born void of
Wisdom and Holiness, we must be vain, foolish and ungodly; for humane Nature
must be unholy, if it be not holy. This made David own, I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, Psalm. 51. 5. This is so fixed a
Rule, that our blessed Lord must have an extraordinary generation, to escape
the Pollution of humane Nature. Mary was found with Child of the holy Ghost,
Act. 1. 18, 20. The Spirit overshadowed her; and this Christ is the only One
born holy, Luke 1. 35. Others are made holy by Grace; some, it may be, are
renewed in the Womb, but none are naturally so, or by Generation; therefore if
thou should ask, Why do not good Men naturally beget good Children? I answer,
Their goodness is superadded to their Natures, it comes by another Law than
that of nature; their Grace is from Christ for the Salvation of their own
Persons, but not to propagate to their Offspring by Generation.

Oh young Man! thou see how thou groanest under Adam's Fall, and labourest
under the depravedness of humane nature, as propagated from Adam by thy
Ancestors down to thee! And is there ever a Child here, but is a living Witness
to this Corruption? Are you not all proner to sin, than holiness? Is it not
easier to make you vile, than to make you gracious? Do not fewer and weaker
Arguments incline you to be wicked, than to be godly? Is there not that in
thee, which serves instead of a Tempter to evil, tho there were no ill example,
or Solicitation from without? Were thou ever sensible of this, oh, Child? have
thou been yet truly humbled for Original Sin? Thou were wicked whiles an
Infant, as to the temper of thy Soul; the corrupt Nature thou then had, is
the Spring of all thy Vanity: Thy nature is to be foolish, to lie, to be
unclean, and what else is vile. That nature whiles unrenewed, will express its
unholiness and enmity against God, one way or another: it is true, the power of
one Contrary Lust, thy bodily Constitution, God's Restraints, Education, etc.
may prevent the raging of some Lusts, but the malignity continues, and cannot
fail to govern, till the Grace of Christ do alter thee.

Quest. 2. Why do Childhood and Youth continue vain?

Answ. Childhood and Youth continue vain for want of a due use of means
appointed for their healing. O young People, here are three things in this that
are very fit to move you.

1. First, here is Comfort, that the Vanity of Youth is healable; thy case is
sad, but it is not desperate; there is hope in Israel concerning the Recovery of
Sinners in their Youth: The Devils became wicked, and never can be recovered;
they may grow viler, but they can never grow better; but blessed be God, this
is not thy case; the Wound though sad, is yet curable: There have been many
young Folk made pious and serious. Isaac was good betimes, Timothy and John
were Old Disciples, before they could call Man. Iosiah's tender years were
impressed with Grace. I have known undoubted Evidence of Grace before ten year
old: Oh then you need not resolve to be vile, because it is in vain to attempt
to be good; no, no: No young Persons in this Assembly need to say so, or need
think so. God has not resolved against Young Persons, that they shall never be
recovered; nay, he has determined, that out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings
he will ordain praise, Psalm. 8. 2. Children! Our Lord Jesus has never said, he
will have nothing to do with such as you, I Will neither wash you, nor heal you,
nor teach you: Nay, he has said quite otherwise, Suffer little Children to come
unto me, and forbid them not, etc. Mat. 19. 14. The Spirit of God never
resolved, I will convince no wicked Children, I will sanctify no profane
Youth; nay, instead of that, to you he speaks, in Psalm. 34. 11. Come ye
Children, hearken to me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. The Spirit
has a Mind to be the Teacher of Children, and the Instructor of Youth, he has a
mind to train up the Young Generation for Heaven, as well as the Old ones: So
that Young ones may say to Day, Why though I am wicked, yet there is hope, and
though I have a vile Nature, yet there is hope. I may be recovered even though
my whole frame seems thus set for Villainy, and appears thus desperately
disposed.

There Is the first point, and that is a great matter, and under the power of
that, I preach to Young Ones, and under the hopes of that you Young Ones should
regard what I say, and urge; for the case of Youth is healable.

2. Secondly, Here Is a loud Call to you, that God uses means to heal Young Ones
of their Vanity. This confirms the former: Is God at pains with Youth to make
them better? then there is hope of Youth, for God would not be at this labor if
it were wholly useless: O my Friends! God has sent his Son to dye for young
Children, as well as old Men, even Young ones receive forgiveness by his Blood;
My little Children to whom I write, for your sins are forgiven, 1 Ioh. 2. 12.
The Spirit of God strives with many Young ones, as soon as they can understand
any thing; he bids early for your compliance. I do believe there is not a Child
of six years old under the Gospel Means, but the Spirit of God has been
striving with: This holy One can truly say, I have been dealing with this Child
to make it happy.

Pray let us a little consider: Thou Child or Youth, have thou had no sense of
Hells misery ever upon thy Heart? have thou never been convinced that 'twas ill
to Lie or Swear? Have thou never found pressing motions to be good, and to
resolve against evil? have no good desires stirred in thy Soul? Why, all these
were the workings of the Spirit of God on thy poor Soul. God has been laboring
with every young Body in this Congregation: He has been laboring with thee, by
the advice of thy Parents, when they taught thee to read, or taught thee thy
Catechism, or instructed thee to pray, it was God by them taking pains with
thee.

We Preachers preach to you Young Ones, as well as to the Old; nay, we preach
to you with more hopes, expecting that you are not hardened as old Persons are.
Young People! have not the Mercies of God, have not the preservations of God
toward you, been so many Teachers? What has been the Language of every Mercy
to thee Child, to you young ones, but this? Oh Children! don't you provoke this
God; don't make me your Enemy, for you see I would fain do you good, I would
fain be merciful, and not a Destroyer of you: Nay, have not Afflictions been
the pains of God with you? Is there ever a Young one here, that has not been
sick at one time or other? Why the Lord sent that Sickness to thee, and spoke
in this manner thereby, I will warn this Young one to be Religious, lest he
should dye before he be converted; all the Corrections of thy Parents, and
Master, for thy Sin, they have all been the Calls of God, and his Language in
them all has been, I would fain imbitter Sin to this poor Young one, by
something short of Hell: I would gladly restrain the Wickedness of this Youth,
before I must damn him. You see, you had need look to it, for God has used
means toward your recovery; think not, God does not mean me in his Word; don't
say, God did not intend my cure in the helps I enjoy; alas, he intends thee
as well as any other. It Is thy enlightening, Oh Young Man! he intends by all
his teachings: It Is thy Conversion, O Young Woman! that he designs by all his
Calls, all these have been directed upon this very design; and least you should
doubt it, the Spirit of God does particularly name you: O Young Men and Maids!
praise you the Lord, Psalm. 148. Young Men be sober, Tit. 2. 6. Nay, Christ
himself tells us, in Prove. 1. 4. that his great design there, is to give
discretion to the simple young ones: Therefore I beg, that not one young body
in this place may forget what I say now, that they frustrate God's hopes, if
they be not Good; and disappoint him of all his labor, if they be not
gracious, all the pains that have been taken with them, are lost upon them; and
will God bear this? will he always bear this? what will become of you, if you
proceed this way?

3. Thirdly, Here Is an awful Charge, That you young Men continue vain, because
you don't rightly use the means for your healing. Ah, sad Charge! the case of
young ones is curable, but why is it not altered before now? Why, O Conscience
speak! Children you have Consciences; Young Ones, you have Consciences; Can you
say it is long of God I am vile still? it is long of the want of means that I am
vile still? Ah, Friend! Father, Son, and Spirit can all say, it is not my Fault
that this Child is bad still; it is not my Fault this young Man and Woman is
wicked so long; it is not long of me. May not the Spirit of God say, I have
taken more pains with this Child, and spoken oftener to this young person, than
I have done with thousands in the World: Alas! so it is concerning every one of
you. Children of Pagans in all their days never had thy helps. Consider a
little with your selves, God may this day say, I begin early with this young
one: I have still pleaded after many a repulse, I have followed him and her
from day to day, and from sin to sin: Oh, how earnest have I been with this
young Stripling, that I could propose very little good by; yet have I taken
pains and labor with him. Come young People, is it now to begin? that God has
cried to you, Turn unto me, why will you die? Ezekiel. 33. 11. Is now the first
time that he has said unto you, When will you be made clean? when shall it once
be? Jer. 13. 27. Has Christ never said unto thee, O look to me, and be saved?
Look to me for help, for there is help no where else. Thy distress makes me
needful, and pity makes me willing. Lay these things to Heart, and I will defy
any young body in this place, to go away, and say; I have lived up to what I
know, I have improved all that God has afforded me, but he denied to give me
more: I am miserable and wicked still, because God has refused to help me, when
I have sought it of him. -- Is there any that can talk at this rate? No, not
one: Not one? Why then whence is it that we have so many young People bad
still? Why still so fatal to thy self? why a Slave to base Lusts? O Friends!
God knows the cause, and thou know the cause; thou did not use that
knowledge thou had; thou did not improve thy opportunity; does not
Conscience witness thy Ear has not been opened, thy Heart has not been
attentive, thou did not frame to turn unto the Lord. Hos. 5. 4. God can say
this day, this poor Creature might have been in a good case, he would have been
serious before now, if he would but have yielded to my pleadings, if he had
turned at my Reproofs. This young body would have been an eminent Christian
before now, had all my Impressions been retained, and all my Calls complied
with; he had known me better, had he been but teachable in my ways, as he was
in other things, Prove. 2. 15.

Oh then, young People! Consider with your selves what has been your case; you
have told God plainly, I will not come to thee that I might have Life. Where Is
the young body that has not practically given God a denial? And every time thou
were under Conviction of sin, and did not leave it, thou did tell God,
Lord, I would be thine, but I love my sin better: I would be happy for ever,
but I will not, unless I may be wicked in this World. The youngest here has
the great hand in his own ruin; he that is but of ten Years old, if he perish,
he is his own Destroyer: (I think it is true of many younger.)

Children! you were born vain, and you have wilfully chosen to remain so: You
may be ready to accuse Adam, by whom you became wicked, but it is your own
fault that you continue wicked, since God has provided a Remedy; its your sin,
that you are no better for Mercies, no better for Affliction, no better for
Means; wicked before, and wicked still.

O therefore! what will you be able to answer? how sad is it! that any young
body here should be forced to say, Lord, it is my fault that I am no better for
a Christ, and no better for the Gospel; my Misery is of my own choosing; God
has taken pains with me, but it is all lost through the obstinacy of my Will.

These three things are plain under that second Head wherein you see why Young
people remain vile and vain.

3. Thirdly, Youth becomes yet more vain by evil Customs, and indulging carnal
self: vanity unhealed is of an improving nature; and there is no bad Child, but
grows worse: Sin is not a Stream that grows empty, or a Root that dies by mere
time. God knows, we have had experience of that. Alas, how does Villainy grow
with Years! the Child that began with few sins, grows up to many sins; insomuch
that we have some young men before eigthteeen, have committed as great sins as
the man of eighty. Youth enters with lesser sins, and proceeds to grosser sins:
We have many young People that seem to abound in wickedness, as they improve in
age; as if they grew older only that they may grow viler. Oh, what a mercy
would it have been for those to have died in the Womb! or any one year before
another! Now, Sirs, whence is it? how can it be, that young people should grow
vainer and vainer, instead of better and better?

I tell you, one sin brings on another, by the lesser thou art fitted for a
greater. Sinful Habits are strengthened by sinful Acts: and fear and shame for
sin wear off, yea, are even extinguished by a course of sin. O poor Soul! Satan
has got the faster hold: The Spirit has been provoked, and given over striving;
and it may be thy Parents through Despair, have almost given over praying.
Conscience that warned thee, is seared and silenced, and so the wicked Creature
has his whole Scope, 2 Timothy 4. 2. God says of him, Let this poor Creature
alone, I Will strive with him no more, Genesis 6. 3. O young Folks! you may be
hardened before you grow old; Lust may be strongly rooted before old Age; and I
fear it is so with abundance of Youth: Is it not so with some of you? Did not
some of you blush at a little sin, and now thou can mock at great ones! Are
there not some amongst you that once dared not to tell a small Lie, and now you
can lie all sorts? Are there none here that trembled when they swore a little
Oath, and now can swear at the bloodiest rate, and add Blasphemy and Cursing to
their Oaths! Sirs, did not some of you feel a check for a light act, and now
you can commit Fornication and Uncleanness, without any inward Rebuke! It was
hard to bring thee to pilfer a Penny, and now thou can steal Shillings and
Pounds: It was much ado that thou could endure to be drunk in the Night, but
now thou can do it openly, and glory in it. Thou durst not formerly have
neglected a Sermon, and thou must pray by thy self, but now, alas, poor
Creature! thou can play away a whole Sabbath, and spend Weeks without Prayer,
without one serious Prayer. My Friends, what is the matter! is sin grown a less
evil? by no means? Is God, and Heaven, and Hell, less certain! No, no, Sirs,
you will feel it to your Cost: Is thy poor Soul less precious, and less
valuable? No, this is not it neither, but the reason of it is this; Wickedness
is grown by Wickedness; committing sin has made it easy, the Current of sin
running, has made the Channel wider, and the opposition less. O, therefore for
the Lords sake, begin this day to consider, the Devil is grown more impetuous
by thy Consent: And I can tell thee to day, and let the youngest of you observe
it, That if thou continuest wicked, thou will be yet more and more so. And thou
would now blush to think what Wickedness thou will hereafter come to: As
Hazael, when it was foretold him by the Prophet what Cruelties he should
commit, cries out, Is thy Servant a Dog? 2 King. 8. 13. etc. Thus I have
finished what I intended in the Explication, I now come to the Use.

First, by way of Inference; the Lord set it home. Some owned great good on
this day twelvemonth, may more receive good to day. The Inferences then are
these.

Inf. 1. How dismal a sight does this Truth afford us of this World! Childhood
and Youth is Vanity: Ah, Lord! how true then is it, that even the whole World
lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. the greater part does so; for Young People
are many more than old ones. The chief part of Age is Vanity; the best part of
Time is Vanity; Childhood is the time fittest to learn in; Youth is the time
fittest to act in, and yet both these are Vanity. Oh, how little are heavenly
Designs carried on by Young Ones! Oh, how little is God worshipped and served
by Young ones! How few of them are engaged in their own true Concerns!
Dreadful! that in Youth we will do nothing, and in Age we can do nothing! Oh,
who loves God, and is not grieved! who loves Souls, and is not melted! All men
come sick into the World, and most men grow more diseased by their stay there.
All come miserable, and most help on each others Ruin, and increase their own.
Oh, how many go off the Stage, and have reason to wish, would to God I had
perished before I saw the light! So like Hell is this present State, that i'ts
a wonder we are able to take any Delight therein. God is serious with pleople
in their younger Years, and they heed it not: Ministers are earnest with young
People, and they regard it not: Ah, poor Wretches! they think we have nothing
to do with them. Oh, Young Ones! help us to mourn to day, for I am calling on
Men to mourn for you, who in your Youth yield your selves up to your Lusts, and
thereby are injurious to Christ, and cruel to your own Souls, and will you be
unmoved?

Inf. 2. What Care is incumbent on Parents and Masters, in the managing of
Young Persons! Youth is vain, and that bespeaks a suitable carriage. O Parents,
you don't beget Angels, but sinful Children; you breed up corrupt ones, and not
perfect ones: Few are sanctified in the Womb, and therefore you should deal
with Children as with depraved and corrupt Persons, as with them whose
Childhood and Youth is Vanity. The very Distemper directs Parents and Masters
in their duty and carriage toward their Children: I shall especially name
Parents in my Directions.

1. Children are Ignorant: Oh therefore take you occasion to instruct them.
Alas! can thou let thy Children be unacquainted with God, and insensible of
their own Misery! or the way of their escape! What must thy Child be inspired,
or it must perish for want of knowledge? If it must know, pray who is fittest
to teach it? Upon whom does it lie in point of Duty, as it does upon you? And
who has the Advantage of doing it as thou have? Who is so like to prevail with
thy Child as thy self? None faithfully dedicates his Child to God in Infancy,
that will not carefully instruct him when of age to learn.

2. Youth have unruly Appetites, and therefore don't indulge them. Oh that
every Parent here had but his Heart open to what I say: and I speak it out of
pity to the Souls of Young ones. It Is an ill practice in Parents to feed their
Child by the cravings of i'ts Lust, and not by their own Judgment. I will tell
you the Mischief of it, besides the laying a foundation of distemper in Age; it
gives the Appetite an ungovernable force. Children being always indulged in
what they crave, they cannot deny themselves any thing they desire; and by the
same rule, that they must now eat what and when, and drink what and when they
will, while they are under thy care; they will be drunk and Whore, etc. when
they grow in years; their Reason cannot bridle it then, as thine (which ought
to guide them) neglects to do it now. Oh dreadful thing! that any Childrens
Appetites should come from under their Parents tuition unbridled: I look on
nothing a greater Reproach to Parents. And what is the ground of all Wickedness
in the World, more than an Inordinate Appetite? yet how few Parents do help to
cure it while cureable! whereas an Appetite curbed in Childhood, would endure a
denial in Age.

3. Youth have violent Humors, and Selfishness, and therefore don't foolishly
gratify them. A Child left to himself, brings his Mother to shame. Pr. 29. 15.
Oh what a Devilish Sight! how pleasing to Satan! to see Children cocquer'd, and
Youth indulged! It Is peevish, then all must be done to please it; it is
obstinate, and it must have it is will; it is revengeful, and it must not be
checked; this is the way of most Parents. And it is just with God that Child
should break your Hearts, whose Will you never broke. How many poor Creatures
will have cause in Hell to curse their Parents! Dreadful! that they prove the
worst Enemies to their Children under a pretense of fondness.

4. Youth have many Lusts, and are prone to sin, therefore be afraid for them,
and prevent all Occasions. Job knew this, Job 1. 5. He went and offered
Sacrifice, lest his Children should have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts.
Oh that Parents would consider what brittle Vessels Children be! what dried
tinder Youth is: Occasions though small, overruled Young Persons: What then? Oh
then be persuaded to choose the Company of your Children for them, see that it
be of their own Sex, and Virtuous. Put them to Trades, and such Trades as have
the least Snares; set them in Families where most Good is to be got, and least
evil to be caught. Find them business, and fullness of Employ, and cut out
their time for them. Parents, learn this Wisdom, that your Children have no
time for Idleness. Marry them as soon as convenient, if so be you are not very
certain of their Sobriety.

5. The Vanity of Youth is deeply rooted; therefore be importunate pleaders,
and sharp Correctors. If advice prevail not; it is not an easy thing to cure a
Child of it is Vanity, or Youth of it is Folly. Foolishness is bound up in the
heart of a Child, the Rod of Correction will drive it far from him, Prove. 22.
15. And withhold not correction from thy Child, and he shall not dye, Prove. 23.
13. I look on it as a sad sign of growing Villainy in the next Age, that
correction is become unfashonable: The Lord pity us. Let me tell you once for
all, Sirs, Youth is governed chiefly by fear, and they that lose the benefit of
that passion, lose the greatest advantage which Youth have to be managed or
improved by. People may talk of love, but God's injoining the Rod so often,
discovers that it will prevail but with very few. Wisdom must be exercised in
this matter, as the end may be best attained: But be assured, the Blood of that
Child lies at the Parents door, who might have been reformed by Corrections,
and was not. Can Parents forget God's severe Judgment against Eli for his
indulgence to his Sons? or do you think that Children are now so harmless, that
they need not to be corrected? I should have called you to give them good
Examples, as being powerful to incline them, who strictly observe, and are
prone to imitate you; they are apter to evil than good; deny them no help to
their holy improvements, and create them no hindrances: But time prevents me.

Inf. 3. How should Young Ones bear the Rebukes and Restraints of Superiors in
sense of their own Vanity! Here I call to Young Ones again: Parents and Masters
know what will harm you better than you do your selves; they know how weak you
are to resist Temptations; they know what is sinful and destructive better than
you. Oh therefore thank God, and thank them that are over you, who endeavor
your healing, and don't suffer sin to lie upon you; Lev. 19. 17. If you be good
your selves, you will do the same for your Children when you have them; therefore
don't take that ill which is your necessary cure; but reckon, Am I vain! Oh
then! though I have not the Liberty I would, and have not the Allowance I
desire, matters are better ordered for me, for I cannot bear those other things.

Inf. 4. How Attentive ought you to be to all Advices and Pleadings of your
Relations, being designed to heal you! O! for thy Souls sake, Young One, never
let the Advice of thy Parents be lost; never let thy Friends Counsel and
Reproof be lost, because it is all designed to remove this Disease: Thou do
not see the Hell thou art just running into; thou do not see the Heaven thou
art flying from; thou do not see the God thou have provoked; thou do not
know the Misery thou art under; thou art ignorant what Grace, what Wisdom thou
want; how much must thou learn and attain before thou art wise, or good;
thou art ignorant of many snares, and sins; thy folly hides thy folly from
thee. O therefore! be heartily intent to all their Advices, and say to thy
self, Lord, is this for my cure, and shall I neglect it? Is this Reproof for my
good, and shall I make light of it? Is all this pains to heal my poor diseased
Soul, and shall I cast it behind my back? God forbid!

Inf. 5. How great a Wonder of Grace is a young Convert! and how thankfully
should such acknowledge it! O the power that makes the vain Prodigal come to
himself! Luke 15. 17. How near does God come to the Soul, to tame it, when it is
like a wild Asses Colt! How efficacious is Grace, that overcomes Lust in it is
greatest rage! and that deadens Temptations when they strike on Youth, so prone
to relish the offer, and yield to it! O Blessed work! that inclines us to fear
that God whom in our Youth, we are so apt to despise.

Having laid these things before you, I offer two General Uses of Exhortation.

Exh. 1. Reflect on your selves, whether you are under this Vanity, or
delivered from it. Young Folks, I speak mostly to you, and therefore I entreat
you for the Lords sake to lay to heart what I am saying. Your case is dismal,
you are born vain, and prone to be vain; are you still so or not? It Is a great
work that goes to the healing you; is that work passed on thee? It Is a great
deal of God goes to the making a Youth good, and serious, have I felt that?
Pray ask your selves, Am I vain, or am I not? Is my Heart a Spring of Divine
Motions, or Beastly Inclinations? Young People, how is it with you? Try your
mayes, are they under the Government of Grace or of Lust? are they under the
Conduct of Wisdom or Folly? Ask your selves, Do my ways profit or hurt People?
Is it not time to ask? What Sirs! are the years you have spent unfit to be
enquired after? or is thy Sin not worth being concerned about? Oh ask your
selves often, What am I doing? whither am I going? Does my walk please God, or
provoke him? Do I walk with him, or do I forsake him? Try and judge
impartially; it is thy greatest concern; thou may deceive thy self, thou
can not delude thy God, who will judge as the matter truly stands with thee.
How is it with you, O Young ones? There Is none here but ought to be concerned
how it is with them. You will be concerned, nay within a while you must be
concerned: therefore enquire this to day, and never rest till it be determined.

Exh. 2. Receive Directions suitable to your case: And here I must divide this
whole Assembly into two parts: First, Such as are under the power of Vanity.
Secondly, Such as are by Grace delivered from it. One of these two is every one
in this Assembly; Young and Old you are still under the power of Vanity, or you
are delivered from it: There is a great difference in your Case, I Will speak to
each. 1. Those of you that are yet under the power of this Vanity. Poor Souls!
would you be delivered? or have you a mind to continue what you are? Come
Children, dare you be still blind! and still obstinate? shall thy Soul that was
made for God, be a Cage of unclean Birds? Shall thy Tongue which is his Glory,
be employed to his Dshonour? O Young body! shall not Christ heal thee of that
Nature, which the Devil introduced? Will thou live a Bruit and a Devil still?
shall Satan serve himself of thy parts, and of thy strength, and of thy
opportunities? shall the Devil say of thee, Here Is a Child, I hope, will do me
a great deal of Drudgery? Here Is a young Person will do my Work while he lives,
and be damned with me when he dies? Young Folks, Satan stands by, and seems to
speak thus of you: And must Christ all this while weep over thee, and say,
Here Is a young thing that is my Creature, but he will rebel against me as long
as I spare him? here is a Youth fit to serve me, but he will bring on me all the
Dishonor that he can, and obstruct my Interests as far as he is able: Here Is a
Stripling that I bought with my Blood, a young Girl or Boy, but he serves Satan
before me, and will not be saved, unless against his Will? For the Lords sake
lay these things to heart to day! What say you, Child, to this? what say you
Young People? I hope some of you will be ready to answer, O Sir, help me, give
me some counsel, for I am weary of this present Condition, and would be in a
better; if so, take these few Advices, and resolve to follow them in earnest.

1. Believe how had thou art by nature, and bewail it before God. Oh, it is thy
Picture I have been drawing, as bad as it is! Come poor young Folks, you that
pride your selves when you look in the Glass, could you but see your Souls with
a right Eye, you would abhor your selves: Young People, will you believe God
speaking of you? Does not he say you are vain and vile? will you believe all
the wise People that know you? and will they not all agree in this, That thou
art a sinful wretched Creature? Does not thy own experience convince thee? Oh
Friend! own it, and go away mourning; and how can thou but do so, when thon
consider'st, My Heart is filthy, my Affections disordered, the powers of my
Soul poor and wounded, the Image of God lost, Satan's nature is visible upon
me; what a Reproach does every title fasten! what can be said worse of thee,
than that thou art thus? Is this a Case to be rested in? is this a state to be
quiet in? yet this is thy Case, O young Person, by Nature! thou art full of
what is hateful to God, and hurtful to others; thou art intent on thy own Ruin.
Oh, Sirs, the most innocent young Sinner here, is fuller of Poison than a Toad,
and filthier than a Swine: All of you are thus by Nature, and yet thou
remainest so.

2. Consider often how miserable thou art, whilst thou continuest thus vain.
Danger will affright some, whom Sin will not. But, O how unable am I to
represent the Horror of this to you! Young People! you are Children of wrath as
well as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. Every Lust is a killing Wound, every step is on the
brink of Hell; there is not a wicked Child in this Congregation, but I can stand
over it, and say, Here Is a Child with whom God's angry every day; here is a
young Body, for whom God reserves his wrath, Nah. 1. 2. and sees his time a
coming. Young People! sure you will be afraid to go home, and say, I am a
Sinner, and I am an impenitent Sinner, and therefore an unpardoned Sinner; a
Sinner for whom everlasting Wrath is reserved. Once for all, you resolve to be
wicked, and God cannot but be just: You will not be born again, and God must
keep you out of his Kingdom then, Ioh. 3. 3. You will live after the flesh, ay,
and God is as resolved you shall die in your sins, Romans 8. 13. Come, Young
People, God will be as peremptory as you, and his Will shall stand; therefore
tremble to go out of this Congregation, unless in a founder Mind than you came.

3. Be convinced that nothing short of renewing Grace can savingly heal thee.
Morality may polish thee; Fear and Shame may restrain and conceal a Sinner, but
it is only Grace can truly alter a Sinner. O, my Friends! it must be a new
Heart, or it will always be a vain Heart. Vain Inclinations will govern, till
God writes his Law there, Heb. 8. 10. The youngest must be a new Creature, or
natural Corruption will baffle all pretensions, Gal. 6. 15.

4. Be assured, Grace cannot be had but from God, through Christ, by the
Operations of his Spirit. Don't think it an easy thing to attain Grace, tho it
be necessary to have it. Young Folks, God must open his Treasures anew, or thou will for ever want it. Christ must plead for thee, or thy Disease is incurable;
he must act toward thee, as Redeemer, and not merely as Creator, unless he
pass by thee as one rejected. He seeks the lost sheep, Mat. 18. 12. he makes
the stubborn willing; Faith is his Gift, Consent is his Purchase, as well as
the Blessings annexed to it; there is no other Name by which we can be saved,
Act. 4. 12. there is no other Fountain of Grace or Help. Know also, it is the
Spirit must give of Christ's fullness, Ioh. 16. 14. he must enlighten thee, O
Child, or thou will go blind to thy Grave; he must renew thee, or thou will die
in thy Uncleanness. Christ made the Atonement, but the Spirit makes us capable
of its Application. Christ has acquired a fullness of Grace and Blessings; it is
by the Spirit he imparts thereof to Man. Men cannot renew thee, means of
themselves are too weak to alter thee. Oh, then look upwards! wait on God;
direct thy Eye to Christ, depend on the Holy Spirit, as able to conquer thy
Reluctance, and ready to work by the means to which his Presence is promised.

5. Observe, that the more thou sinnest, and the longer thou art graceless, the
more opposition thou layest in the way of Grace: think serioully of this; the
hopes of the Soul are upon the Spirit's working, and the disposedness of the
Heart to yield unto them. Oh, my Friends! will you go on in sin? then the
Spirit of God will leave you, he will not always strive, Genesis 6. 3. The more
you sin, the more you quench the Spirit. Will you go on in sin? then your Heart
will be hardened the more, Heb. 3. 8. Will thou go on delaying? then to morrow
it will be harder to prevail with thee than to day. Oh, therefore be alarmed
to day. More sin will strengthen your Lusts, and further prejudice your Soul
against Christ. Is not Conversion difficult enough already? is there need to
make it next to impossible? for the Lords sake consider! greater Offenses may
make God and Men say of thee, This Wretch is resolved against Grace, he arms
himself against Hope.

6. Resolve within thy self, that thou will follow after Christ, and throw off
thy Vanity without delay. Oh, that I could but get this Consent from you all
this day! That all the young People in this Congregation would say, O Lord,
Amen, Amen. Come, poor Sinners! put it to your selves this moment: Say, For
this I will pray, that I may cease to be vain; I will meditate for this, I will
hear for this. O young Folks, that are yet in a state of sin, you have work
enough for your time! sometimes you know not how to pass away your time: what,
spiritually blind, and not know how to pass away time! what, dead and
graceless, and not know how to pass away time! a Sinner wild in his frame, and
have no Work! Oh, be entreated this day to be earnest with God, and never be
quiet till he has given thee Wisdom instead of Folly; till he has given thee
Sobriety instead of Rashness; Humility instead of Conceit; Calmness instead of
Passion; Truth instead of Falsehood: Yea, never be satisfied till God has
brought thee to live to the best and highest purposes. And, oh, that every Soul
would say Amen; how would Satan be disappointed! how would Heaven rejoice! it
would be thy best day, and the entrance of eternal Life.

Obj. But I believe some here are ready to say, Sir, must I now change? must I
now stop my Vanity? surely it is too soon: Sure I might be vain a little longer;
there is no danger in it, I hope.

Answ. My Address to you is, for this Instant, even to day harden not your
Hearts, Heb. 4. 7. Oh Child! just now cease to be vain; it is late enough with
the youngest of you; it is not too soon to stop a wicked Course, now, now thou
should yield to Christ: If you ask, Why now? I tell you:

1. Because young Peoples Souls shall be saved or damned by the same Rules as
the old ones, if they be past Infancy. Oh, if you die to night, God will judge
you by the Gospel! Romans 2. 16. and that is the lowest Rule God can judge you by:
Youth must be judged as well as Men, Eccl. 11. 10. Young ones that obey not the
Gospel, shall not escape the Vengeance, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9.

2. God is concerned at, and provoked by the Vanity of Children: Pray consider,
you think, it may be, that God takes no more notice of what you say or do, than
you do your selves. Alas! you are deceived: don't you think God was angry with
the Children whom he slew by the Bears, for deriding the Prophet? 2 King. 2.
24. God notes what you do: Young Ones, God does not rule old Men, and leave
Children to their own Wills; his Laws are prescribed to young Men under the
same Threats, as to the old; and it is not indifferent to him what you do: God
observes what you do as much as any other person; for you are his Subjects, you
were made for his Glory: you serve him, or his Enemy the Devil, and what you do
is good or evil.

3. The youngest of you are under Vows to God against Vanity; I suppose you
were entered into Gods Covenant by your Parents, as Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12. Was not a
holy Heart, and a serious godly Life engaged in that Covenant, in opposition to
Sin and Satan? You are dedicated to God in your Infancy; you are his, and not
your own. Young Children! what, will you lie to God now? will you be perjured
now? O, God forbid! Dare any young Person here say, I was given to God in my
Infancy, but I now retract it; I was sworn to be the Lords, but I will not keep
to him: Baptism will sink those Children of Believers, who perform not their
Vows, and practically renounce their God.

4. Let me tell you, if you remain vile all your Youth, a thousand to one but
you will be ever so: You may die before you are old, and then you are undone;
but if you live, and are not converted when young, it is improbable that ever
you should. O, it is ill dealing with old Sinners, they are conceited, full of
Prejudices, immersed in worldly Cares; the Calls and Threatenings of God, are
grown familiar to them, and their Souls stupid and void of Affections. God
makes now and then an Instance of Grace in them, but it is rare; the last Hour
Converts are next to Miracles; most feel that, he that hardens his heart, being
often reproved, shall die without Remedy, Prove. 29. 1.

5. Again; Oh, what service may thou do for God, when thou ceasest to be vain
betimes! Come, my Friends, what a heap will every days little come to in time!
if Young persons would but now begin to be holy, tho they act but a little for
God every day, it will at length amount to much: As we say, he that begins with
the Sun, will make a long days Journey. Oh, how much do Young People do for the
Devil, in a state of sin, when they live long! how large is the Roll of their
Transgressions! and how much might they do for God in a state of Grace! how
many may bless God for thee! what a public blessing may thou prove! thou
may well be an eminent Saint, much improved for Heaven, and abundant in the
fruits of Righteousness.

6. Our Youth will be the Plague or Hope of this Land in this great Crysis.
Great things are before us, the rapid motion of Providence hints no common
matters: There have of late been many ways taken to debauch Young People in
their Manners, to prejudice them against Holiness and Sobriety. Nevertheless
the holy God has seasoned some Young Ones; there are many looking Heavenward,
and God seems designed to reform the rest. Well, whether of these two prevail,
does determine England's lot. Oh, if our Youth grow yet more profligate, God's
about to leave us! if he recover our Youth, we may hope he will yet continue
amongst us. Young Ones, I would be earnest with you, for God indicates his mind
to England by you. Oh, be you all ready to say, Can I help to save a Nation! by
the Grace of God I will be one of these that will do it; let Satan, and the
World, and the Flesh struggle with me as they can.

7. This youthful Vanity continued in, will be the grief, and wounding of Age,
tho thou should be converted then. Little do you now know what youthful sins
may cost you in old Age: Thou make me to possess the sins of my youth, says
Job, chapter 13. 16. Oh, how bitter will the remembrance of past Villainies be! oh,
how will thou tremble to think thou have helped any one in the way to Hell,
when thou thy self art got out of that road! How will it grieve thee to think
thou have been a means to damn any Soul! can it be a little thing to thee? the
Joy of late Converts is abated by the thoughts of youthful Sins. Paul carried
it to the Grave with him, that he was a Persecutor in his Youth. Believe me,
Sirs, the Evidence of our Conversion, when late, is more than made up by the
Innocence of our Lives, when converted young: And they are to blame, who seem
to complain that gross Villainies have not made their Change more remarkable.
Thus I have done with the first Use; God grant it be to such purpose, that none
may go out of this place unwearied and unresolved; unwearied with his Vanity,
and unresolved to put an end to it.

Exhort. 2. To such as through Grace are delivered from this Vanity.

Before I enter on this, I must declare you are our Joy, and our Crown; I would
I could speak it of every one here to day: Oh, that every Young One in this
place, were of this Number! You are our Comfort, that God has some to propagate
Religion when we are dead and gone. How lovely is Gods Image in your tender
Years! Your Grace is less questionable now than it would be, if you were aged.
I say your Conversion's more evident now; for you are now in your Health and
Heat; you are now under the force of Temptation; you are not decripid, and
aged, and under the government of Fear, as old Folks be. Oh, my Friends! what
but Grace can win thy Consent to Christ, now when the Devil and the World are
strongly bidding for it? You are like to reap the largest Harvest, because you
have the longest Seed-time. You young ones that do fear the Lord betimes, you
are like to be the more remarkable in the Heavens. All the Blessings that
belong to the oldest Saint, belong to you; and Christ as truly loves you: The
youngest Believer in this place may rejoice in all the fullness of Christ, as
his Storehouse and Security; he may read over all the greatest Promises of the
Gospel with Comfort, as his own. We bless God for you, bless God for your
selves, that has adopted you for his so soon, and thereby prevented much Sin,
and made you early Blessings: for your sake we hope the Gospel will not be
removed from England; how happy are each of you! your Parents can die
comfortably now that you are in Christ: Your Friends look with joy upon you, as
secure in your better part. Oh the comfortable Aspect that every such Soul
affords! I will give you a few words of Advice.

Directions to such as are Converted in Youth.
1. Be watchful over your selves, because some Vanity remains in the best,
while here. Satan would more gladly overcome you than others; and he knows
there is matter for temptation to work on in thee. Youthful years are subject to
youthful Lusts: Young Timothy himself was warned of them by wise Paul, 2 Timothy
2. 22. Therefore don't venture on Occasions of Vanity; don't venture into
temptations to sin: Nothing but perfect Grace perfectly heals the Sin of your
Constitution. Young ones, you don't think you are perfect! you are not
thoroughly clean, therefore walk carefully, walk watchfully; take care of
Voluptuousness, for there is some unruliness in thy Appetite still. Take care
of wanton Dalliance, for there is some Disposition to Uncleanness, 1 Timothy 5. 2.
Still take care of evil Company; Youth may be ensnared, tho they are good:
Avoid all frothy Society, for Youth is apt to be persuaded to loss of Time and
Levity: Therefore walk with watchfulness in whatever you are doing: You are not
in Heaven, tho in a State of Grace; you are not perfect, tho upright; therefore
keep a jealous Eye while your green years continue.

2. Keep humble and modest as to your Opinions; for Truth admits the
Disquisitions of Age and a long Study. Young People think every Notion they
have gotten is infallible, and every plausible Reason is with them
unanswerable. But let me tell you, you will change your judgments it may be
before you dye: And too much confidence in Youth leads a Man to Skepticism in
Age; Be not wise in your own conceits, Prove. 3. 7. You are subject to error, in
deep things your knowledge can be but superficial; if you live long you will
blush at your present confidence: And therefore don't presently take up
Notions; determine not hastily difficult points, make no noise about singular
Opinions, and do not rashly censure men that are wise and aged, whose deep
thoughts are preferrable to a voluble Tongue, or luxuriant Fancy.

3. Design and furnish your selves for great service for God in the World. I
would earnestly bespeak a mercy for the next Age; resolve an eminency in
Holiness: I would have every young Convert here, resolve to be one of the
highest Saints: Resolve to do much for God's Name and Gospel; and if you have
hopeful Abilities, resolve to be great Blessings to your Country: Side with
the best Cause, and best Men. You may live to have greater Opportunities to
serve God than we have had: you may do so, and I hope you will do so. The Lord
furnish our Youth with Abilities transcendant to ours, as their work is like to
be above ours. O my Friends, I would have you therefore prepare your selves;
get your Heads well enlightened, get your Hearts well enflamed with Love to God
and Men. Labor to be industrious in your Calling, that you may have Estates to
do good withal; for Idleness and waste make Persons too poor to do great
Service; whence they live as Shrubs though planted young. Study good
Catechisms, as a guard against Errors. Lay up rules of Prudence for your
Conversation, but beware of crastiness and little base designs. Observe your
Constitution, that sickliness may not prevent your Use. Get such an Elocution
as may advantage what you speak, etc.

4. Admit the helps, and put your selves under all the instituted Engagements
of Christ's Members. Admit the helps, -- Sirs, we have good Books, carefully
peruse them. Read the Scriptures: Ay, and labor to be well furnished, and
skilld in them from your Youth, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Set your selves to hear Sermons;
especially put your selves under the Labors and Conduct of the best Ministers.
Contrive every one of you to sit under that Ministry; that truly understands,
and plainly and powerfully urges the great things of the Gospel, viz. The
Mysteries, Promises, and Laws of our Redeemer. I tell you why I say this; Young
ones are apt to like the Preacher that has Fancy rather then Weight; strong
Affections rather than Judgment; that has vain Gingles rather than solid Truth;
and that is earnest for small matters above essentials: Oh take it from me to
Day, all Hearers savor of their Pastor: Give me therefore a Pastor that is
likest to ripen for a Heavenly Life, and not to amuse me with little fine-spun
Notions, where light carries not it is Evidence. Prefer moderate Pastors above
others; Men who are more intent on the great things of the Gospel, than lesser
matters: Men who allow for different Conceptions in others, knowing themselves
are imperfect: Men who insist on no terms of, or bars to Communion, but what
Christ has made. If God do not deliver the growing Age from a Contentious,
Dividing, Uncharitable Temper, I shall say the next fiery struggles will hazard
the Life of Religion, and sacrifice Love (the very Heart of Religion) to every
trifle, and disputable Notions which has sorely wounded us. Value Moderate
Men, wise Men are always such. Your furious dividing Bigott is unacquainted
with himself, incapable of taking up the body of Divine Truths, as they stand
in their order and place. Hence one thing fills his mind, and that commonly the
least, and all his Zeal is laid out in that, while he confounds Truth and
Error. Few Men have heads clear enough to distinguish Truth; Truth and Error
lie often so near, that the Man that has not the clearest judgment, and the
conduct of the Spirit, will easily fail; much more such whose parts are low,
and whose uncharitable Temper exclude the assistances of the Spirit.

Further, I call you Young ones to attend to the Lords Supper. You are
dedicated to God by Baptism, in the right of your Parents; that was not thy
act, but theirs for thee; that was not in thy own right, but in thy Parents
right. The first solemnizing of thy own Profession is at the Lords Table, or in
order to it; therefore I call you to make Conscience of that. Young People, I
say make conscience of it. I tremble to think how we differ from the Church in
former Ages; that People now should be so backward to attend the Lords Supper.

Obj. But some may object, Pray how old must we be that come to the Table of
the Lord.

Answ. I answer, He is old enough that can give evidence of his consent to be
the Lords, and when he can act the Graces that belong to a Sacrament, and
improve the matter contained therein, whenever they can do this, age is no
obstacle. I would not scruple one of fourteen no more than I would one of
fifty, where there is a credible Profession of Grace, and a competent knowledge
of the great Essentials of Religion, and a Conversation suited to it:
Therefore, my Friends, make Conscience of this great Duty; for I am afraid our
young Professors remain giddy, for want of this and of Pastoral Conduct. I fear
you want strength for want of this, and comfort for want of this; and Satan has
great advantage against our young Professors, because they are not more
established and steady than they be. Therefore if thon have given up thy self
to be the Lords; and if God has enlightened thy Mind to understand the great
things of the Covenant, thou have a claim, and thou ought to make it; sure
thou art old enough to consent to be Christ's, when thou art fit to give thy
self in Marriage.

5. Dispose of your selves to the greatest Safety, and most Usefulness. You
that are Servants, choose no Family where God is not worshipped, for a curse and
a snare is there; besides the want of those daily helps which you stand in need
of. You that are changing your dwellings, go to no place where the Gospel is
not, live not in a Country where Christ is a Stranger as to his Institutions.
You young ones that are about Marrying! be sure that Grace be the first thing
that you provide for, 1 Cor. 7. 39. for God kuows how much easier it is to
stifle good beginnings, than to conquer riveted custom; and it is much easier to
be overcome by a bad Wife, than a bad Wife to be converted by a good Husband.
Know this my Friends, he that does not wisely contrive for his Soul as a Man in
Danger, will rue it sooner or later. God is not bound to help us when we run
out of his way.

6. Reckon upon a world of Troubles, and Snares, and be still preparing for
them. Oh young People, be every day arming your selves, for you may be every
day attacqued; don't promise too serene a State on this side Heaven, In the
world you shall have trouble, John 16. 33. Thy Work is a Warfare, and holds for
Life; temptations will assault, disappointments and scandals will try; the best
Men may be a stumbling block: Be fit for every thing, and resolved to hold on
thy way; it is hard work, but Christ has undertaken to assist thee, and Heaven
is worth thy labor. Oh don't think and act as if you were to have your resting
place here, where Satan has so much power, and Sin so great an interest.

7. Still grow in Grace, and usefulness with age. Though thou art good for thy
time, thou art not so good as thou may be, nor ought to be, much less so
good as you should resolve to be: Oh let not age's dullness be reproached by the
vigor of your espousals, Jer. 2. 2. Take care that time adds to thy Light, to
thy Love, to thy strength and Fruit. Move Heavenward as days are prolonged.

8. Familiarize the Word as your Instructor and Monitor. Which way should a
Young Man cleanse his way, but by taking heed to the Word? Psalm. 119. 9. Let
the Word be the Man of thy Council; take the Scripture for thy Rule, and
resolve to live by it. Oh Servants, look what God makes your Duty in Scripture,
will that allow you to be idle, insolent, or wastefull? Col. 3. 22. Children,
see what God makes your Duty to your Parents, Ephesians. 6. 1. and to your other
Relations; may you be rebellious, unkind, etc? the Word is the true measure and
light: Alas! the oldest of us are sure to stumble without the Word; what then
can young ones do? Therefore study the Scriptures more, search them, and labor
in every thing to manage your selves by them. Sirs, I would have no one here
ignorant of a rule proper to most of the Exigences of his Life, and let that be
still before thy eyes. I will give you Young People one Advice, that may do you
good all your days, and that is this: I would have you all consider what
Temptations you are like to meet with, and what are the Duties you are like to
be called to; always have an apt Scripture lodged in thy Mind, suitable to
each of these; and resolve to do nothing, nor to purpose nothing before thou
have first consulted that Scripture in thy Mind; this would be a stated way of
avoiding much sin. Young people! you that are in Christ, labor to live to
these Rules. I shall now conclude: I have been plainly telling all of you,
Childhood and Youth is Vanity. You all come such into the World, etc. are you
altered, or are you not? do you still grow more vain, or more serious? should
God come this day, and divide this Assembly, and set the Vain on the right
hand, and the Serious on the left; O Child, O Young Man, on which side would
thou be found?

O put it to your selves; what answer can thou return? will thou go away and
resolve to be as Vain as ever, after all that has been said? If that be thy
resolve, would to God thou had not been here; this Sermon will be a Thorn in
thy side for ever: But if from what has been said, you go away resolving
through Grace to be faithful in the practice of all these Directions, given you
for the Cure of your Vanity: If so, then thou will have cause for ever to bless
God for the 25th. of December, 1690.

FINIS.
A Youths Catechism.
Quest. WHat art thou?

Answ. I am a Child endued with Reason, who must be in Heaven or in Hell for
ever, Romans 2. 9, 10.

Q. Who made thee?

A. God made me; by whose Power every Creature was made, Is. 45. 12.

Q. What is the God that made thee?

A. God is a Spirit perfectly good, great, wise, holy, present every where, and
without beginning or ending.

Q. How many Gods be there?

A. There is but one true God, Father, Son, and Spirit, 1 Cor. 8. 6. 1 Ioh. 5.
7.

Q. What did God make thee for?

A. God made me to bring him Glory, and to be happy in him, Romans 11. 3.

Q. Where may you know how to bring Glory to God, and to be happy in him!

A. In my Bible, where he declares his Nature, and his Will, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

Q. What Condition was Mankind created in?

A. God made all of us holy and happy in Adam, our first Father, and common
Head, Eccl. 7. 29. Genesis 1. 27.

Q. By what Rule did God govern all men in Adam?

A. God required sinless Obedience, as a Condition of Life, and denounced
Death, if Man should in any thing break his Law, Genesis 2. 17. Gal. 3. 10.

Q. Did Mankind continue holy and happy, by a perfect Obedience to this Law of
Innocence?

A. No: Adam sinned against God, and thereby he corrupted the Humane Nature,
and became subject to all the Misery which the Law threatened against sin, Romans
5. 12, 18, 19.

Q. What Condition were thou born in?

A. I was born in a very miserable and sinful Condition, Ephesians. 2. 3. Ps. 51. 5.

Q. How came thou to be born in this Condition?

A. I must be miserable, if sinful, and I could not but be born sinful, because
my Nature was depraved in Adam, from whom it descends so to me by the Line of
my Forefathers, Job 14. 4. and 25. 4.

Q. Why must thou be sinful, because thy Nature was at first depraved?

A. God enacted this as the Law of Generation, that Adam should beget his
Children in natural likeness, Genesis 5. 3.

Q. What if thou should die in that Condition wherein thou were born by
nature?

A. I should be undone, and be with the Devils in Hell for ever, Ioh. 3. 5, 36.

Q. Does the Law of Innocence provide no way for thy deliverance out of that
misery?

A. The Law of Innocence provides no way for my Deliverance out of this Misery,
as great and dreadful as it is, Romans 3. 19, 20. Gal. 3. 21, 22.

Q. Why do thou think so?

A. Because the Law of Innocence admits no pardon, but condemns for one sin;
and I daily find that I have many sins, Romans 3. 23. Iam. 3. 2.

Q. Is there no way then for to avoid that Sin and Misery thou were born in?

A. Yes: there is, by the rich mercy of God, a way to save lost Sinners, 1 Timothy
1. 15. Act. 16, 17.

Q. What is the way which God has contrived to save lost Sinners?

A. The way of Pardon and Reconciliation revealed in the Gospel, Romans 4. 7. 2.
Tim. 1. 10.

Q. How did God appoint a way of Pardon and Reconciliation?

A. The Father appointed his Son to be the Savior of Sinners, and Christ
accepted of that Work under certain terms agreed on between them both, Zech. 6.
13. Ioh. 17. 3, 20, 21, 25.

Q. What was appointed to, and undertaken by Christ as Savior or Mediator?

A. Christ was to assume our Nature, and therein to fulfill all Righteousness,
and die a Sacrifice for our Sins, and to save all the Elect committed to him,
Is. 53. 5. Ioh. 10. 15, 16.

Q. What was promised to Christ, as the Reward of his Undertaking?

A. There was promised to Christ, besides the Glory of his Person, as God-Man,
that his Obedience and Sufferings should be accepted as an effectual Price for
the Reconciliation of all such Sinners to whom it was applied, Is. 53. 10, 11,
12.

Q. Was there nothing else promised to Christ, with respect to the Elect?

A. All the absolute Promises of Grace in order to the Application of his
Blood, were made to Christ, Gal. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 20.

Q. Did our Lord Jesus fulfill all Righteousness, and make his Soul an Offering
for sin?

A. He did, and thereby honored the Law, and vindicated the Government of our
Creator, notwithstanding his gracious dealings with Sinners, Matthew. 3. 15. Ioh.
19. 30. Is. 42. 21. Heb. 9. 14, 28.

Q. When Christ had thus made atonement, was he sufficient to be a Savior?

A. Yes: for 1. He has the Spirit, and a fullness of Grace, with a right to
give thereof to men. 2. All Judgment is committed to him, whereby he is the
Lawgiver to a sinful World. 3. By the fullness of his Merits he has Pardon,
Peace, and eternal Life to dispose of, notwithstanding we had forfeited all
into the hands of our Creator, Ioh. 16. 14. Ioh. 1. 15. Ioh. 5. 22. Heb. 5. 9.
Heb. 7. 25.

Q. What more is necessary to restore the happiness of lost Man?

A. The Application of the Effects of Christ's fullness to their Persons, that
they may be regenerated, pardoned and saved, Romans 5. 11. Act. 2. 38.

Q. What way does Christ take to apply his merits for the Salvation of Sinners?

A. He enacteth and publishes a Law of Grace, wherein he promises Pardon and
Life to such sinners as will accept of him as a Savior on the terms of the
Gospel, Heb. 11. 6. Ioh. 3. 16, 17, 18. Romans 3. 27.

Q. What are the terms of the Gospel?

A. True Repentance, Faith in Christ, and sincere Obedience, Act. 3. 19. Act.
16. 31. and Chapter 20. 21. Heb. 5. 9.

Q. What is Repentance?

A. A Sorrow for, and the separation of the Heart from sin, as the greatest
evil, Ier. 31. 18.

Q. What is Faith in general?

A. Such a sight of things revealed in the Word, as powerfully affects the
Heart sutably to the nature of them, Heb. 11. 1.

Q. What is Faith in Christ?

A. Such a sight of, and regard to Christ, as causes the humbled Soul to
accept of, and come to him as our Prophet, Priest, and King, John 1. 12. Mat.
11. 28.

Q. What is it to come to Christ as a Prophet?

A. To yield up our selves to his teachings, believing him infallible, Ioh. 6.
68, 69.

Q. What is it to come to Christ as our Priest?

A. Under a Conviction of our guilt and the fullness of his Merits to rely on
him, as the only atonement for Sin, and purchaser of all good for Sinners, Gal.
2. 16. Romans 3. 25.

Q. What is it to come to Chrlst as King?

A. To acknowledge his sole authority, submit to all his Laws, unfeignedly
resolving to obey him in every one of his appointments, Acts 9. 6. Luke 19. 14.
27. Isa. 50. 10.

Q What else does the Gospel contain?

A. It contains a Prophetic Account of what God decreed, and a transcript of
what was promised to Christ, with respect to the Elect, to say nothing of
Doctrinal Mysteries, Rules of a Christians walk, conditional Promises, the
danger of Sinners that reject Christ, etc.

Q. When did this Gospel Rule of Life begin?

A. In the first promise to Adam after his Fall, though the fullest discoveries
of it were reserved till Christ came in the Flesh, Genesis 3. 15. Gal. 3. 8. 2
Pet. 2. 5.

Q. Did God ever since the Fall propose any way of Salvation, besides this Law
of Grace?

A. No. And every saved Sinner was saved by this Rule, according to the measure
of its discovery that obtained in every Age, 1 Cor. 10. 4.

Q. How far are all Sinners that live under this Gospel concerned in it?

A. Life through Christ is freely offered sincerely to every Sinner that will
repent, and believe; if they do thus, the want of perfection shall not condemn
them, Act. 3. 19. chapter 10. 43. Acts 16. 30. 31. Romans 3. 22.

Q. What if thou do not accept of Christ?

A. I shall be more miserable than if Christ had never dyed, 1 Pet. 2. 8. Mat.
11. 24.

Q. Is the mere enacting and publishing the Gospel all that Christ has done
toward the application of his Merits to Elect Sinners?

A. Besides that, he has appointed his Spirit to incline, and effectually
enable them to obey those terms which the Gospel requires, 1 These. 1. 4, 5, 6.
1 Cor. 2. 10. Gal. 3. 14.

Q. And does the Spirit thus concur to apply Redemption, and enable them to
obey the Gospel?

A. Yes, and not only strive with them, as he does with others, 2 Cor. 3. 3. 1
Pet. 1. 2. 2 These. 2. 13.

Q. By what means does this Spirit work upon Souls?

A. Principally and most usually he works by the Gospel it is self, putting
forth his power thereby, as a seed of Life, Gal. 3. 2. Iam. 1. 18. Romans 10. 14.

Q. By what part of the Gospel does the Spirit usually work?

A. He is confined to no part; he works by the Precepts, by the account of
Christ's Death, by the Promises, Threats, or the great Rewards; yet which ever
of these he works by, it is pursuant to, and in accomplishment of the absolute
Promises of Grace which were made to Christ, Act. 16. 30, 31. Gal. 3. 29. Gal.
4. 28.

Q. How do thou expect to be made willing and able to accept of Christ?

A. Not by any natural power of my own, who am dead in sin; but by the Grace of
Christ expressing it self in the operations of the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 1. Acts 5.
31. Tit. 3. 5.

Q. How does the Spirit cause the Sinner to accept of Christ?

A. By enlightening the Mind, and changing the Heart in Regeneration; whence
there is an Inclination, Will, and Ability to accept of Christ, Acts 26. 18.
Tit. 3. 5.

Q. Does the Spirit nothing in order to the making the Soul earnest and willing
to this?

A. He awakens the Soul to a concern for Salvation, and a deep sense of its
present misery without Christ, Acts 2. 37. Luke 15. 17.

Q. What ought thou to do on thy part in order to get this Grace?

A. I must not be idle, but I must, 1. Diligently hear the Word. 2. Pray
fervently to Christ for the Spirit's Operations. 3. Consider and bewail my
Condition. 4. Put a stop to all ways of sin to my utmost. 5. Carefully
entertain, and improve every motion of the Spirit. 6. Strive with my Heart, and
urge it with all Gospel Arguments to obey the Call of Christ, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5.
Mat. 13. 19.

Q. What may a Sinner expect when he accepts of Christ?

A. He may expect, 1. To be united to Christ in the nearest Relation. 2. To be
admitted into a State of Pardon and Peace. 3. To be adopted, and made still
more conformable to Christ in Grace and Holiness. 4. To be supported with
strength for service, and Perseverance. 5. And when he dies to be Partaker of
the Glory of Christ in the highest Heavens, Ephesians. 5. 30. Gal. 2. 16. John 1. 12.
Col. 1. 11. 1 John 3. 2.

Q. What is the condition of every Sinner till he do accept of Christ?

A. He abides under the wrath of God, and has no personal title to Pardon,
Peace, or Glory, Ioh. 3. 36.

Q. Is this the condition of the Elect while they abide in Unbelief?

A. Yes: For tho God has decreed, and Christ has purchased Faith and Life for
them, yet God has determined by the Law of Faith, that all are under
condemnation until they do believe, Mar. 16. 16. Luke 13. 3. hence Romans 5. 1.
c. 8. 30. c. 4. 24.

Q. Is not a Believer pardoned before he can put forth any other acts of
Obedience?

A. Tho true Faith is a certain Principle of Obedience, yet as soon as we
believe we are pardoned, even before there can be any time to put forth any
other acts of obedience, Gal. 5. 6.

Q. Do Repentance or Faith any way make satisfaction to justice?

A. No. That is only Christ's work; but God has appointed that that Soul shall
repent and believe, on whom pardon for Christ's sake shall be bestowed; and he
has solemnly declared he will forgive no man till then, Mark 16. 16. Romans 11.
20, 23. Heb. 4. 6. Ioh. 8. 24. Romans 10. 13, 16. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. hence Gal. 2.
16.

Q. What assurance have thou that God will forgive and save thee if thou
believe?

A. I have Gods Testimony, and Promise; and the Seals of the Covenant, viz.
Baptism and the Lords Supper, 1 John 5. 9, 10. Acts 22. 16. Luke 22. 20. Romans
4. 11.

Q. Art thou engaged to accept of, and submit to Christ according to the Gospel?

A. Yes, I am strongly engaged to submit to Christ, because he bought me with
his blood, my Parents dedicated me to him in Baptism, and love to my own Soul
requires it, Rom, 14. 9. Mal. 28. 19. Ezekiel. 33. 11.

Q. On what account were thou baptized?

A. My believing Parents were allowed, and engaged to dedicate me to God as
their Child, and God graciously admitting the Infant seed of Believers into
Covenant, as part of themselves; he did seal to me those blessings which my
Infant state needed, and was capable of, Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12. Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2.
39. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Q. What does the Covenant bind thee to?

A. To be the Lords, in a sincere care to know, love, believe, obey, worship
and serve him all my days, and to depend on God through Christ for all happiness,
Ezekiel. 16. 8. Romans 12. 1. Romans 6. 4.

Q. What did thou engage against?

A. I engaged against being governed by Satan, or the Flesh as my Rulers, and
against taking up with the worlds Goods as my portion, and against the customs
of the Men of this World as my guide, Romans 6. 14, 15.

Q. When ought a Child to know, consider, and agree to this Covenant?

A. As soon as he is capable to use his Reason, and judge of good or evil,
which many are fit to do about seven years old, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Psalm. 34. 11.

Q. What if a Child through the love of sin, or vanity of mind, will not agree
to this Covenant when he is capable?

A. He then rejects Christ our Savior, and renounceth the blessings of the
Gospel, 2 Pet. 2. 1.

Q. Is it a great sin to refuse to agree to the Covenant, to which thy Baptism
engaged thee?

A. It Is the damning Sin, and the heart of all sin; for, 1. It Is rebellion
continued against my Maker. 2. It Is ingratitude and perjury to my Redeemer. 3.
It Is gross injustice to my Parents. 4. It Is an affront to all the Godly. 5.
It Is self-killing Cruelty to my own Soul, Psalm. 2. 3, etc.

Q. When will thou personally consent to this Covenant as the only way of life
to Sinners?

A. I will truly with my whole Soul consent now, and live expressing my
consent. And as soon as I understand how to improve the Lords Supper, I will by
Christ's help solemnly renew it there.

Q. Ought you upon every fault question your Interest in this Covenant?

A. Though I ought to bewail every sin, and seek pardon by Faith in Christ's
Blood; yet I should not doubt my Covenant Interest unless my fault be such as
gives just cause to question whether my consent was ever sincere, Psalm. 32. 5.
Mat. 6. 12. Psalm. 18. 21, 22, 23.

Q. What is the best joy and pleasure in this life?

A. The deep sense of Gods Love, and the lively hopes of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

Q. What should thou be most afraid of in this world?

A. Of sin; because that provokes my God, and is the cause of all misery, Romans
6. 23. Heb. 12. 15.

Q. What must thou do to keep from sin?

A. 1. I must believe every thing to be a sin, which is against the Word of
God. 2. I must humbly look to Christ for strength. 3. I must avoid all
occasions which lead to sin. 4. I must, when I am tempted, consider what a
dangerous and evil thing sin is, and resolve against it, 1 John. 3. 4. 2 Cor.
12. 6. Genesis 39. 9, 10.

Q. What is the sin that most hinders the good of Souls, except Unbelief?

A. A carnal selfishness, which I ought to deny and mortify, Matt. 16. 24.

Q. When is one carnally selfish?

A. 1. When one is governed by his fleshly Appetite, Humor, or Self-will. 2.
When he inordinately pursues the things of a present Life. 3. When he loves
carnal self above God, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 2 Pet. 2. 10. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 4. Iam. 4. 4.

Q. What be the sins which professing Christians are most subject to?

A. Hypocrisy, Formality, Censoriousness, and Divisions, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Rev. 3.
1. Mat. 15. 8. Romans 14. 3, 10. 1 Cor. 11. 18.

Q. Who are Hypocrites?

A. They whose Hearts are not truly changed by Grace, and allow themselves in
any known sin, or are seemingly religious from some carnal end, Rev. 3. 1. Mat.
23. 25, 27. Mat. 6. 5.

Q. What is Formality?

A. To be satisfied with the bare outward doing of the duties of Religion,
whiles the heart is not answerably affected, or employed, Hos. 7. 14. Mal. 1.
8, 13.

Q. Wherein lies the life and power of Religion?

A. 1. In mortifying sin. 2. Exercising Grace for more Communion with God. 3.
In love to God, which is holiness. 4. And love to Men, which will keep from
hurting them, and incline us to seek their good, Col. 3. 5. 1 Timothy 4. 7. 1 Cor.
13. 3, 6.

Q. Who are the happiest persons in the world?

A. They that have most grace, and do most good.

Q. Who are the hopefullest Children?

A. They that are most afraid of sinning, and are most industrious to know and
love God, and become like to Christ.

Q. What Graces most adorn Children?

A. Humility, meekness, and teachableness.

Q. What must thou do when thou want any good?

A. I must in the Name of Christ pray earnestly to God, who is ready to give
whatever good thing I need, Phil. 4. 6. Ioh. 14. 13. Mat. 7. 11.

Q. From whom do thou receive all good things?

A. From God my Father who graciously bestows whatever I have for Soul or Body,
Iam. 1. 17.

Q. What do thou owe to God for his daily mercies?

A. 1. I must love him more. 2. Heartily praise him for his goodness. 3. I must
be carefuller to please God. 4. And I must use his gifts to his Glory; that so
I may be able to give a good account of my Talents, Luke 16. 2.

Q. By what signs may thou try the state of thy Soul, whether thou art a true
Christian or no?

A. I must faithfully and often examine my heart and ways by these things:

1. Do I love God above all things, and delight in the thoughts of him? Mat.
10. 37. 1 Cor. 8. 3. Psalm. 104. 34.

2. Do I unfeignedly accept of, and submit to the Lord Jesus, as my full and
only Redeemer, John 1. 12. Psalm. 103. 3.

3. Is there no sin which I live under the dominion of, Rsm. 6. 18. Iam. 2. 10.
2 Samuel 22. 24.

4. Have I a sincere regard to every command of Christ? Luke 1. 8. Psalm. 18. 22.

5. Are my affections more set on Heaven than on this World? Luke 12. 34.

6. Are the thoughts of Heaven sweet to me, as it is a state of perfect
holiness, and Communion with God and Christ, Ephesians. 5. 27. 1 Cor. 13. 10. 1 These.
4. 17, 18.

7. Am I thankful for the worst affliction, if I find I am better, and liker to
Christ by it, Psalm. 119. 71. Heb. 12. 11.

8. Do I find Soul renewing power in the Truths and duties of Religion? Psalm.
119. 50. 1 Pet. 2. 2. 1 Cor. 3. 18.

9. Is it the scope of my life and aims, to please and honor God, and be meet
for Glory? Acts 24. 16. Luke 12. 43.

10. Do I love the Image of Christ wherever I see it, and do good Men please me
best, when they most express the Life of Christ in their Speech and Carriage? 1
John 3. 14. Psalm. 69. 32. 3 Ep. of John 2. 4.

11. Am I more thankful for an interest in Christ, than any temproal good; and
am I most concerned to keep this Interest unquestionable? Col. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 9.
27. Heb. 4. 1. Psalm. 139. 23.

12. Do I find every holy attainment makes me still hunger and press after
more, longing to be perfect, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. Mat. 5. 6.

13. Do I carefully approve my self to God in what I am, and in what I do,
despising the opinion of men in comparison therewith? 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. 2 Cor.
10. 17, 18.

Q. When thy Conscience is helped by the Spirit to see these signs in thee,
what may thou then do?

A. 1. I may safely rejoice in all the Perfections of God, and in the fullness
of Christ, as what do secure my happiness, 2 Timothy 1. 12. 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31.

2. I may comfortably apply to my self all the Promises made in the Gospel to
Believers, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 4.

3. I may admit a Holy Joy, and expect Death without fear, Romans 5. 2, 5. 1 Cor.
15. 55, 57.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.
PRactical Discourses of Sickness and Recovery, in several Sermons, as they
were lately Preached in a Congregation in London. By Timothy Rogers, M. A.
after his Recovery from a Sickness of near two years continuance.

Mr. Shower's Sermon at Madam Ann Barnardiston's Funeral.

The Young Man's Claim unto the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, entered by
him into a Church of Christ, received and accepted by the Pastor, and its other
Officers: By John Quick, Minister of the Gospel.

Casuistical Morning Exercises, the Fourth Vollume: By several Ministers in and
about London, Preached in October, 1689.


