THE CASE OF Lay-Communion WITH THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND CONSIDERED; And the
Lawfulness of it showed from the Testimony of above an hundred eminent
Non-Conformists of several Persuasions. Published for the satisfaction of the
scrupulous, and to prevent the sufferings which such needlessly expose
themselves to.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry. 1683.

TO THE DISSENTERS FROM THE Church of England.
Dear Brethren,
YOU being at this time called upon by Authority to join in Communion with the
Church, and the Laws ordered to be put in Execution against such as refuse it;
its both your Duty and Interest to enquire into the grounds upon which you deny
Obedience to the Laws, Communion with a Church of God, and thereby expose our
Religion to danger, and your selves to suffering. In which, unless the cause be
good, Mr. Mede's Farewell Sermon. on 1 Cor. 1.3.
the call clear, and the end right, it cannot bring Peace to your selves, or be
acceptable to God. Not bring Peace to your selves; For we cannot suffer
joyfully the spoiling of our Goods, Mr. Read 's Case, p. 4.
the confinement of our Persons, the ruin of our Families, unless Conscience
be able truly to say, I would have done any thing but sin against God, that I
might have avoided these sufferings from men. Not be acceptable to God,
Continuat. of Morn. Exer. Ser. 4. p. 92.
to whom all are accountable for what portion he has instrusted them with of
the things of this life, and are not to throw away without sufficient reason;
and who has made it our duty to do what we can without Sin in Obedience to that
Authority which he has set over us, Read, Ibid.
(as you are told by some in the same condition with your selves.)

To assist persons in this enquiry, I have observed that of late several of the
Church of England have undertaken the most material points that you do
question, and have handled them with that Candor and Calmness which becomes
their profession, and the gravity of the Arguments, and which may the better
invite those that are willing to be satisfied, to peruse and consider them. But
because Truth and Reason do too often suffer by the prejudices we have against
particular persons; to remove, as much as may be, that obstruction, I have in
this Treatise showed that these Authors are not alone, but have the concurrent
Testimony of the most eminent Non-Conformists for them, who do generally grant
that there is nothing required in the Parochial Communion of the Church of
England, that can be a sufficient reason for Separation from it. The sense of
many of these I have here collected, and for one hundred I could easily have
produced two, if the Cause were to go by the Pole; so that if Reason or
Authority will prevail, I hope that yet your satisfaction and recovery to the
Communion of the Church is not to be despaired of: Which God of his infinite
mercy grant for your own and the Churches sake. Amen.

THE CONTENTS.
THE difference betwixt Ministerial and Lay-Communion page 1 The Dissenters
grant the Church of England to be a true Church p. 4 That they are not totally
to separate from it p. 12 That they are to comply with it as far as lawfully
they can p. 16 That defects in Worship, if not essential, are no just reason
for Separation p. 23 That the expectation of better edification is no
sufficient reason to withold Communion p. 39 The badness of Ministers will
not justify Separation p. 48 The neglect or want of Discipline no sufficient
reason to separate p. 59 The opinion which the Nonconformists have of the
several practices of those of the Church of England, which its Lay-Members are
concerned in p. 64 That Forms of Prayer are lawful, and do not stint the Spirit
ibid. That public prescribed Forms may lawfully be joined with p. 66 That the
Liturgy, or Common Prayer, is for its matter sound and good, and for its Form
tolerable, if not useful p. 69 That kneeling at the Sacrament is not
idolatrous, nor unlawful, and no sufficient reason to separate from that
Ordinance p. 71, 72 That standing up at the Creed and Gospel, is lawful p. 73
The Conclusion ibid.
THE NON-CONFORMISTS PLEA FOR Lay-Communion With the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
THE Christian World is divided into two Ranks, Ecclesiastical and Civil,
usually known by the names of Clergy and Laity, Ministers and People. The
Clergy, besides the things essentially belonging to their Office, are by the
Laws of all well-ordered Churches in the World, strictly obliged by
Declarations or Subscriptions, or both, to own and maintain the Doctrine,
Discipline and Constitution of the Church into which they are admitted. Thus in
the Church of England They do subscribe to the truth of the Doctrine more
especially contained in the Thirty Nine Articles, and declare that they will
use the Forms and Rites contained in the Liturgy, and promise to submit to the
Government in its Orders. The design of all which is to preserve the Peace of
the Church, and the Unity of Christians, which does much depend upon that of
its Officers and Teachers.

But the Laity are under no such Obligations, there being no Declarations or
Subscriptions required of them, nor any thing more than to attend upon, and
join with the Worship practiced and allowed in the Church. Thus it is in the
Church of England, as it is acknowledged by a worthy Person, Mr. Baxter's
Defense of the Cure, part 2. p. 29.
to whom when it was objected that many Errors in Doctrine and Life were
imposed as Conditions of Communion, he replies, What is imposed on you as a
Condition to your Communion in the Doctrine and Prayers of the Parish-Churches,
but your actual Communion it self? In discoursing therefore about the
lawfulness of Communion with a Church, the difference betwixt these two must be
carefully observed, lest the things required only of one Order of Men should be
thought to belong to all. A Book licensed by Mr Cranfo^d.
It Is observed by one, That the original of all our mischiefs sprung from men's
confounding the terms of Ministerial Conformity with those of Lay-Communion
with the Parochial Assemblies; there being much more required of Ministers than
of the People: private persons having much less to say for themselves in
absenting from the Public Worship of God, though performed by the Liturgy,
than the Pastor has for not taking Oaths, etc. Certainly, if this difference
was but observed, and the Case of Lay-Communion truly stated and understood,
Baxter's Cure, p. 311.
the people would not be far more averse to Communion with the Parish-Churches
than the Nonconforming Ministers are, as one complains; and whatsoever they
might think of the Conformity of Ministers, Continuat. Morning Exercise, Sermon
4. p. 89.
because of the previous terms required of them, they would judge what is
required of the people to be lawful, as some of them do. And as the Ministers
by bringing their Case to the Peoples may see Communion then to be lawful, and
find themselves obliged to maintain it in a private capacity; so the People by
perceiving their Case not to be that of the Ministers, but widely different
from it, would be induced to hold Communion with the Church, and to join with
those of their Ministers that think it their Duty so to do; and are therein of
the opinion of the old Non-Conformists that did not act Rathband's Epistle to
the Reader, prefixed to the grave and modest Confutation, etc.
, as if there was no middle between separation from the Church and true Worship
thereof, and subscription unto, or practice or approbation of all the
corruptions of the same. For Nichol's Plea for the Puritans.
though they would not subscribe to the Ceremonies, yet they were against
separation from Gods Public Worship, as one of them in the name of the rest
does declare. So that as great a difference as there is betwixt presence and
Consent, betwixt bare Communion and approbation, betwixt the Office of the
Minister and the attendance of a private person, so much is there betwixt the
Case of Ministerial and Lay-Communion: And therefore when we consider the Case
of Lay-Communion, we are only to respect what is required of the people, what
part they are to have and exercise in Communion with the Church. Now what they
are concerned in, are either, The Forms that are imposed, the Gestures they are
to use, and the Times they are to observe, for the Celebration of Divine
Worship; or, The Ministration, which they may be remotely supposed also to be
concerned in.

The lawfulness of all which, and of all things required in Lay-Communion
amongst us, I shall not undertake to prove and maintain by Arguments taken from
those that already are in full Communion with the Church of England, and so are
obliged to justify it; but from those that in some things do dissent from it,
who may therefore be supposed to be impartial and whose Reasons may be the more
heeded as coming from themselves, and from such that are as forward in other
respects to own the miscarriages of the Church; as those that wholly separate
from it.

For the better understanding of the Case, and of their Judgment in it, I shall
consider,

1. What opinion the most eminent and sober Non-Conformists have had of the
Church of England.

2. What opinion they have had of Communion with that Church.

3. What opinion they he had of such practices and usages in that Church, as
Laymen are concerned in.

1. What opinion the most eminent and sober Non-Conformists have had of the
Church of England. And that will appear in these two things, First, That they
own her to be a true Church; Secondly, To be a Church in the main very
valuable.

First, They own her to be a true Church. Thus an Eminent Person says of the
old Non-Conformists, Bayly's Disswasive, c. 2. p. 21.
They did always plead against the Corruptions of the Church of England, but
never against the truth of her Being, or the comfort of her Communion, Corbet's
Discourse of the Religion of England, p. 33.
And as much is affirmed of the present, by a grave and sober Person amongst
them, The Presbyterians generally hold the Church of England to be a true
Church, though defective in its Order and Discipline. And thus it is
acknowledged in the name of the rest by one that undertakes their Defense, and
would defend them in their Separation, Non-Conformists no Schismatics, p. 13.
We acknowledge the Church of England to be a true Church, and that we are
Members of the same visible Church with them. And this they do not only barely
assert, but do undertake to prove: This is done by the old Non-Conformists, in
their Confutation of the Brownists, who thus begin, A grave and sober Confut.
p. 1. etc. p. 57.
That the Church of England is a true Church of Christ, and such an one, as
from which whosoever wittingly and willingly separateth himself, cutteth
himself off from Christ, we doubt not but the indifferent Reader may be
persuaded by these Reasons following:

1. We enjoy and join together in the use of those outward means, which God
has ordained in his Word for the gathering of a visible Church, and have been
effectual to the unfeigned conversion of many, as may appear both by the other
fruits of Faith, and by the Martyrdom which sundry have endured that were
Members of our Church, etc.

2. Our whole Church makes profession of the true Faith. The Confession of our
Church, together with the Apology thereof, and those Articles of Religion which
were agreed upon in the Convocation-House, An. 1562. (whereunto every Minister
of the Land is bound to subscribe) so far forth as they contain the Confession
of Faith and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, do prove this evidently, etc.

So Mr. Ball: Friendly Trial of the grounds of Separat c. 13. p. 306.
Wheresoever we see the Word of God truly taught and professed in Points
fundamental, and the Sacraments for substance rightly administered, there is the
true Church of Christ, though the health and soundness of it may be crazed by
many errors in Doctrine, corruptions in the Worship of God, and evils in the
life and manners of men. A Letter of many ministers in Old England to others in
New England. p. 24.
As much as this is also affirmed in the Letters passed betwixt the Ministers
of Old England and New England, It is simply necessary to the being of a Church
that it be laid upon Christ the foundation, which being done, the remaining of
what is forbidden, or the want of what is commanded cannot put the Society from
the Title or Right of a true Church.

And if we enquire into the judgment of the present Non-Conformists, we shall
find them likewise arguing for it: Jerubbaal; Or, the Pleader Impleaded, p. 18.
and 27.
Thus the Author of Jerubbaal, The Essentials constitutive of a true Church, a
re, 1. The Head; 2. The Body; 3. The Union that is between them: Which three
concurring in the Church of England, Christ being the professed Head, She being
Christ's professed Body, and the Catholic Faith being the Union-band whereby
they are coupled together, She cannot in justice be denied a true (though God
knows far from a pure) Church.

If we should proceed in this Argument, and consider the Particulars, I might
fill a Volume with Testimonies of this kind. The Doctrine of the Church is
universally held to be true and sound, even the Brownists owned it of old in
their calm mood, who declare, Brownists Apol. p, 7. An. 1604.
We testify to all men by these Presents, That we have not forsaken any one
Point of the true, ancient, Apostolic Faith professed in our Land, but hold
the same grounds of Christian Religion with them. See more in Bayly's
Disswasive, c. 2. p. 20.33. and Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of
Separation, part 1.. 9. p. 31. The Presbyterians (if I may so call them for
distinction sake) do own it. Discourse,. 21. p. 43.
So Mr Corbet, The Doctrine of Faith and Sacraments by Law established is
heartily received by the Non-Conformists. Preface to 5. Disp. p. 6.
So Mr Baxter, As for the Doctrine of the Church of England, the Bishops and
their Followers from the first Reformation begun by Edward the VI, were found
in Doctrine, adhering to the Augustan method expressed now in the Articles and
Homilies, they differed not in any considerable Point from those whom they
called Puritans. The like is affirmed by the Independents, Peace Offering, p.
12. See Mr. Baxter's Defense of his Cure, part 1. p. 64. and part 2. p. 3. and
Wadsworth in his Separation, yet no Schism, p. 60, 62. Mr. Troughton's Apology
for the Non-Conformists, c. 3. p. 106.


The Confession of the Church of England, declared in the Articles of Religion,
and herein what is purely Doctrinal, we fully embrace As to the Worship, they
own it for the matter and substance to be good, and for Edification. So the
old Non-Conformists, Letter 26. on John, p. 121.
as Mr Hildersham, There is nothing in our Assemblies, but we may receive
profit by it, etc. And again, There is nothing done in God's Public Worship
among us, but what is done by the Institution, Ordinance and Commandment of the
Lord. So among the present, it is owned by both Presbyterians and Independents;
Morning-Exercise, Sermon 4. p. 91.
by the former in the Morning-Exercise, Why may it not be supposeable, that
Christians may be moved by reasonable considerations to attend the Public
Forms, the substantial parts of them being thought agreeable to a Divine
Institution, though in some Circumstantials too disagreeable. So it is
acknowledged, T^^^ghton's Apol. p. 104.
That in private Meetings the same Doctrine and Worship is used as in the
Parish Churches, only some Circumstances and Ceremonies omitted. By the latter,
Peace Offering, p. 17.
We know full well that we differ in nothing from the whole form of Religion
established in England, but only in some few things in outward Worship. But I
shall have further occasion to treat of this under the third General. As for
the Ministry of the Church, 1. It is acknowledged to be true, and for substance
the same which Christ has established. So Mr Bradshaw, I affirm,
Unreasonableness of the Separation, p. 16.
That the Ministry of our Church Assemblies (howsoever it may in some
particular parts of the execution happily be defective in some places) is for
the substance thereof that very same Ministry which Christ has set in his
Church. This he speaks, as he says, of those that do subscribe and conform
according to the Laws of the State.

2. That they have all things necessarily belonging to their Office; so the
grave and modest Confutation maintains, Grave and modest Confutat. p. 28.
The preaching of the whole truth of God's Word, and nothing but it; the
administration of the Sacraments and of public Prayer, as they are all parts
of the Ministers Office prescribed in the Word, so they are all appointed to
our Ministers by the Law.

3. They own, That all the defects in it, whether in their Call or
Administration, do not nullify the Office. Thus much Mr Bradshaw does contend
for, Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 27.37.
So many of our Ministers (who in the Book of Ordination are called Priests and
Deacons) as in all Points concerning the substance of their Ministry, are
qualified according to the intent of the Laws, have their Offices, Callings,
Administration and maintenance, for the substance thereof ordained by Christ.
And yet I deny not, but there may be some accidental defects, or superfluities
in or about them all; yet such as do not, or cannot be proved to destroy the
nature and substance of any of them. This is maintained at large in the Letter
of the Ministers in Old England, Apologet. Narration, p. 6.
etc. p. 86, 87.

And the like is also affirmed even by those of the Congregational way, so the
Brethren in their Apology, The unwarrantable power in Church Governors did
never work in any of us any other thought, much less opinion, but that the
Ministry thereof [of the English Churches] was a true Ministry. Cotton's Infant
Baptism, p. 181.
So Mr Cotton, The power whereby the Ministers in England do administer the
Word and Sacraments, is either spiritual and proper, essential to their
Calling, or adventitious and accidental. The former they have received from
Christ, etc. The latter from the Patron who presents, or the Bishop who
ordains, etc. Whoever has a mind to see their Ordination defended may consult
Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici, part 2. p. 12, 16, 17, 25, etc. Jus Divinum
R^gim. Eccles. p. 264, etc. Cawdry's Independency a great Schism, p. 116. and
his Defense of it, p. 35, 37.

Thus far therefore we see how far it is agreed, that the Church of England is
a true Church in its Doctrine, Worship and Ministry. But when we come to
consider what the Church is they own thus to be true, there we shall find that
they do differ. The Presbyterians generally own a National Church, and have
writ much in the behalf of it, as may be seen in the Books quoted in the Margin
Jus Divinam Minist. Evang. p. 12. etc. Brinsly's Church remedy, p. 41, 42.
Cawdry Independ. a great Schism, p. 60, 89, 172
: others look upon it as a prudential thing, and what may lawfully be complied
with; So Mr. Tombs Theodu^ia, or just defense*. 15, 16. Preface, etc. 9.. 3.
It is no more against the Gospel to term the believers of England the Church
of England, than it is to term believers throughout the World the Cahtholick
Church; nor is it more unfit for us, to term our selves Members of the
Catholic Church; nor is there need to show any institution of our Lord, more
for the one than the other.

But those that will not own it to be a true Church in respect of such a
constitution, or that speak doubtfully of it, do yet assert as much of the
Parish Churches. Its acknowledged by all, that the distribution into Parishes
is not of divine but humane institution; but withal, its thought by some
Croston's reformation not separation, p. 10. and Bethshemesh clouded, p. 101.
etc. Cawdrey's Independ* a great Schism, p. 132. etc. Church-Reformation, p. 42.
agreeable to the reason of the thing, and somewhat favored by Scripture, and
by experience has been found to be of such convenience, advantage, and security
to Religion, that a person of great eminence has more than once said Mr.
Baxter's Plea for Peace, Epist. Sermon. on Gal. 6.10. p. 24. Defense p. 21. part
1. p. 36.
; I doubt not but he that will preserve Religion here in its due advantages,
must endeavor to preserve the soundness, concord and honor of the Parish
Churches. And another very worthy person says Mr. Corbit's account of the
Principles, etc. of several Non-conformists, p. 25.
, that the nullifying and treading down the Parish Churches is a Popish Design.
But whatever opinion others may have of that Form, yet all of one sort and
another, agree that the Churches so called, are or may be true Churches.
Troughton's Apol. p. 103.
This was the general opinion of the old Non-Conformists. Thus says a late
Writer, who, though he is unwilling to grant that they did own the National
Church to be a true Church, yet does admit (as he needs must at least) that
they did own the several Parishes or Congregations in England to be true
Churches, both in respect of their constitution, and also in respect of their
doctrine and worship, and that there were in them no such intolerable
corruptions, as that all Christians should fly from them. And even those that
were in other respects opposite enough to the Church, did so declare; Defense
of his Cure, part 2. p. 178.
It was, says Mr. Baxter, the Parish Churches that had the Liturgy, V. Letter
of Ministers of Old England to New, p. 49.
which Mr. H. Jacob the Father of the Congregational party wrote for communion
with, against Fr. Johnson, and in respect to which be called them Separatists
against whom he wrote. The same I may say of Mr. Bradshaw, Dr. Ames, and other
Non-Conformists, whom the Congregational Brethren think were favorable to
their way.

And if we will hearken to the abovesaid Author, he says again and again,
Apol. c. 4. p. 117.
that the general sense of the present Non-Conformists both Ministers and
People, is, that the Parishes of England generally are true Churches, both as
to the matter of them, the people being Christians; and as to the form, their
Ministers being true Ministers, such as for their doctrine and manners deserve
not to be degraded. But left he should be thought to incline to one side, I
shall produce the testimony of such as are of the Congregational way. As for
those of New England, Defense of his Cure, part 2. p. 177.
Mr. Baxter does say, that their own expressions signify that they take the
English Parishes that have godly Ministers for true Churches though faulty. Wav
cleared, p. 8.
Mr. Cotton professes that Robinson's denial of the Parishional Churches to be
true Churches, was never received into any heart amongst them; and otherwhere
says, His Letter, p. 3. printed 1641.
we dare not deny to bless the womb that bare us, and the paps that gave us
suck.

V. Hooker's Survey, Preface, and part 1. p. 47.
The five Dissenting Brethren do declare, We have this sincere profession to
make before God and the World, that all the conscience of the defilements in
the Church of England, etc. did never work in us any other thought, much less
opinion, but that multitudes of the Assemblies and Parochial Congregation
thereof, were the true Churches and Body of Christ. To come nearer, On the
Ephesians. p. 487, 488, 489.
Dr. T. Goodwin does condemn it as an error in those who hold particular
Churches (those you call Parish-Churches) to be no true Churches of Christ, and
their Ministers to be no true Ministers, and upon that ground forbear all
Church Communion with them in hearing, or in any other Ordinance, etc. and
says, I acquitted myself [before] from this, and my Brethren in the Ministry.

But the Church of England is not only thus acknowledged a true Church, but
has been also looked upon as the most valuable in the World; whether we
consider the Church it self, or those that minister in it. The Church it self,
of which the Authors of the grave and modest confutation thus write; Page 6.
All the known Churches in the world acknowledge our Church for their sister,
and give unto us the right hand of fellowship, Ibid.
etc Dr. Goodwin says, If we should not acknowledge these Churches so stated
[i. e. Parish-Churches] to be the true Churches of Christ, and their Ministers
true Ministers, and their order such, and bold Communion with them too in the
sense spoken of, we must acknowledge no Church in all the Reformed Churches,
etc, for they are all as full of mixture as ours. And Mr. J. Goodwin says,
Sion College visited.
that there was more of the truth and power of Religion in England, under the
late Prelatical Government, than in all the Reformed Churches in the World
besides. If we would have a Character of the Ministry of the Church of England,
as it was then, Unreasonableness of the Separation, p. 97.
Mr. Bradshaw gives it, Our Churches are not inferior for number of able men,
yea and painful Ministers, to any of the reformed Churches of Christ in foreign
parts, etc. And certainly the number of such is much advanced since his time.
But I cannot say more of this subject than I find in a page or two of an Author
I must frequently use, Mr. Baxter's Cure of Church Divisions, Dir. 56. p. 263.
to which I refer the Reader.

Before I proceed, I shall only make this inference from what has been said,
that if the Church of England be a true Church, the Churches true Churches, the
Ministry a true Ministry, the Doctrine found and Orthodox, the worship in the
main good and allowable, and the defects such as render not the Ordinances
unacceptable to God, and ineffectual to us; I think there is much said toward
the proving Communion with that Church lawful, and to justify those that do
join in it? which brings to the second general, which is to consider,

2. What opinion the sober and eminent Non-Conformists have of Communion with
the Church of England? And they generally hold,

1. That they are not totally to separate from it; this follows from the
former, and must be owned by all them that hold she is a true Church; for to
own it to be such, and yet to separate totally from it would be to own and
disown it at the same time: So say the members of the Assembly of Divines,
Papers for accommodation, p. 47.
Thus to depart from true Churches, is not to hold Communion with them as such,
but rather by departing to declare them not to be such. Reasons for the
Christian Religion, p. 464.
And says Mr. Baxter, nothing will warrant us to separate from a Church as no
Church [which yet is the case in total separation] but the want of something
essential to a Church: But if the Church have all things essential to it, it is
a true Church, V. Annotations on the Apologet. Narrat. p. 17.
and not to be separated from. When the Church of Rome is called a true Church,
its understood in a metaphysical or natural sense, as a thief is a true man,
and the Devil himself, though the Father of lies, is a true spirit: But withal
she is a false Church (as Mr Brinsly says from Bishop Hall) an Heretical,
Apostatical, Antichristian Synagogue: Arraignment of Schim, p. 26.
And so to separate from her is a duty. But when the Church of England is said
to be a true Church, or the Parochial Churches true Churches, its in a moral
sense, as they are found Churches, which may safely be communicated with.
Dwelling with God, Sermon. 6. p. 289, 291.
Thus does Dr Bryan make the opposition, The Church of Rome, is a part of the
universal visible Church of Christians, so far as they profess Christianity,
and acknowledge Christ their head; but it is the visible society of Traitorous
Usurpers, so far as they profess the Pope to be their Head, etc. From this
Church therefore which is Spiritual Babylon, God's people are bound to
separate, etc. but not from Churches which have made separation from Rome, as
the reformed Protestant Churches in France, and these of Great Britain have
done, in whose Congregations is found truth of Doctrine, a lawful Ministry,
and a people professing the true Religion, submitting to, and joining together
in the true Worship of God. Such a separation would (as has been said) unchurch
it. This would be deny Christ holds Communion with it, or to deny Communion
with a Church with which Christ holds Communion, contrary to a principle that
is, I think, universally maintained, The error of these men says Mr.
Brightman On Rev. c. 2. V. Jenkin on Jude, v. 19. Allen Vindiciae Pietatis,
second part p. 123. Vindication of Presbyterian Government, p. 130. Cotton on
John, p. 156.
, is full of evil, who do in such a manner make a departure from this Church
[by total separation] as if Christ were quite banished from hence, and that
there could be no hope of salvation to those that abide there. Let these men
consider, that Christ is here feasting with his members; will they be ashamed
to sit at meat there, where Christ is not ashamed to sit? Further, this would
be a notorious Schism, so the old Non-Conformists Conformists conclude Grave
confut. p. 57. Cawdrey's Independency further proved, p. 136.
, because we have a true Church, consisting of a lawful Ministry, and a
faithful people, therefore they cannot separate themselves from us, but they
must needs incur the most shameful and odious reproach of manifest Schism; for
what is that, says another Brinsly's Arraignment, p. 15, 24, 44.
, but a total separation from a true Church? This lastly, would not diminish,
but much increase the fault of the separation, as another says Baily's
disswasive, c. 6. p. 104.
; For it is a greater sin to depart from a Church, which I profess to be true,
and whose ministry I acknowledge to be saving, than from a Church which I
conceive to be false, and whose ministers I take to have no calling from God,
nor any blessing from his hand. This therefore is their avowed principle, that
total separation from the Church is unlawful: And this the old Non-Conformists
did generally hold and maintain against the Brownists Ames's Puritanismus Angl.
V. Parker on the Cross, part 2. c. 91.. 21. Bax. Def. p. 55.
; and the Dissenting Brethren did declare on their part Apologet Nar. p. 6.
, We have always professed, and that in those times when the Churches of
England were the most, either actually overspread with defilements, or in the
greatest danger thereof, etc. that we both did and would hold Communion with
them as the Church of Christ. And among the present Non-Conformists, several
have writ for Communion with the Church against those that separate from it,
and have in Print declared it to be their duty and their practice. So Mr Baxter
Sac. il. desert. p. 76.
, I constantly join in my Parish Church in Liturgy and Sacraments. Its said of
Mr Joseph Allen The Life of Mr. J. Allen, p. 111.
, That he as frequently attended on the public worship, as his opportunities
and strength permitted The Doctrine of Schism, p. 64.
: Of Mr. Brinsley, that he ordinarily attended on the Public Worship. Dr.
Collins says as much of himself Reasonable account, etc.
. Mr. Lie in his Farewell Sermon does advise his People to attend the Public
Worship of God, to hear the best they could, and not to separate, but to do as
the old Puritans did thirty years before. Mr. Cradacot in his farewell Sermon
professes, That if that Pulpit was his dying Bed, he would earnestly persuade
them to have a care of total separation from the Public Worship of God. Mr.
Hickman freely declares, Bonasus vapulans, p. 113.
I profess wherever I come, I make it my business to reconcile people to the
public Assemblies, my conscience would fly in my face if I should do
otherwise. And Mr. Corbet as he did hold Communion with the Church of England
Account of the Principles of the Non-Conformists, p. 26.
, so says, That the Presbyterians generally frequent the Worship of God in the
Public Assemblies Discourse of the Religion, etc. p. 33. V. Mr. Read's Case,
p. 15. Non-conformists Plea for Lay-Communion, p. 1.
. Its evident then that it is their principle, and we may charitably believe it
is their practice in Conformity to it. Thus Mr. Corbet declares for himself, I
own Parish-Churches, having a competent Minister, and a number of credible
Professors of Christianity, for true Churches, and the Worship therein
performed, as well in Common Prayer as in the Preaching of the Word, to be in
the main sound, and good for the substance or matter thereof: And I may not
disown the same in my practice by a total neglect thereof, for my judgment and
practice ought to be concordant. And if these two, judgment and practice, be
not concordant, it would be impossible to convince men that they are in
earnest, or that they do believe themselves while they declare against
separation and yet do keep it up. Non-Conformists Plea for Peace,. 17. p. 240.
Those good men therefore were aware of this, who met a little after the Plague
and Fire to consider (says Mr. Baxter) whether our actual forbearance to join
with the Parish-Churches in the Sacrament [and much more if it was total] might
not tend to deceive men, and make them believe that we were for separation from
them, and took their Communion to be unlawful: And upon the reasons given in,
they agreed such Communion to be lawful and meet, when it would not do more
harm than good; that is, they agreed that it was lawful in it self.

2. They hold that they are not to separate further from such a true Church,
than the things that they separate for are unlawful, or are conceived so to be;
that is, that they ought to go as far as they can, and do what lawfully they
may toward Communion with it. For they declare B^rroughs Irenicum, p. 182.
, That to join in nothing, because they cannot join in all things, is a
dividing practice, and not to do what they can do in that case is Schism, for
then the separation is rash and unjust Vindication of Presbyt. Govern. Brinsly
Arraignment, p. 16.32. Corbet's Plea for Lay-Communion, etc. p. 2.
. If therefore the Ministerial Communion be thought unlawful, and the
Lay-Communion lawful, the unlawfulness of the former does not bar a person from
joining in the latter. The denying of assent and consent to all and every thing
contained in the Book of Common Prayer, does not gainsay the lawfulness of
partaking in that Worship, it being found for the substance in the main, etc.
as a judicious person has observed. This was the case generally of the old
Non-Conformists, Irenicum, by Discipulus de tempore, Junior, alias M. Newcomen,
Epist. to Reader.
who notwithstanding their exclusion from their Public Ministry, held full
Communion with the Church of England. We are told by a good hand, That as
heretofore Mr Parker, Mr Knewstubs, Mr Vdal, etc. and the many Scores suspended
in Queen Elizabeth, and King James's Reign; so also of later times, Mr Dod, Mr
Cleaver, etc. were utterly against even Semi-Separation; Friendly Trial, c. 7.
p. 121.
i. e. against absenting themselves from the Prayers and the Lord's Supper. So
its affirmed of them by Mr Ball, They have evermore condemned voluntary
Separation from the Congregations and Assemblies, or negligent frequenting of
those Public Prayers. Hildersham Lect. on John. R. Rogers's 7. Treatises. Tr.
7. c. 4. p. 224.
And some of them earnestly press the People to prefer the public service
before the private, and to come to the beginning of the Prayers, as an help to
stir up Gods Graces, etc. And others did both receive the Sacrament, and exhort
others so to do, as I shall afterward show. Again, if in Lay-Communion any
thing is thought to be unlawful, that is no reason against the things that are
lawful; This was the case of many of the godly and learned Non-Conformists in
the last age, as we are told, That were persuaded in their Consciences,
Vindicat. of the Presbyt. Gov. p. 135.
that they could not hold Communion with the Church of England, in receiving
the Sacrament kneeling without Sin; yet did they not separate from her. Indeed
in that particular act they withdrew, but yet so, as they held Communion with
her in the rest. And thus much is owned by those of the present age, as one
declares; The Church of England being a true Church (so that a total separation
from her is unwarrantable) therefore Communion with her in all parts of real
solemn Worship, Jerubbaal p. 28.30.
wherein I may join with her, without either let or sin, is a duty. Troughton's
Apol. p. 107.
So another says of them; They are ready and desirous to return to a full
union with the Parishes when ever the obstacles shall be removed. And again,
They hold Communion with the Parishes, not only in Faith and Doctrine, but also
in acts of worship, where they think they can lawfully do it. This those of the
Congregational way do also accord to, that they ought in all lawful things to
communicate with the Churches of England; Mr. Nye's Case of great and present
use, p. 4. and 5. Mr. Read's Case, p. 14.
not only in obedience to the Magistrate (in which case they also acknowledge
it to be their duty as well as others) but also as they are true Churches; and
therefore plead for the lawfulness of hearing the established Ministry, and
undertake to answer the objections brought against it, whether taken from the
Ministers ordination Burrough's Irenicum, p. 183.
or lives, or the Church in which they are Ministers, etc. as you may find them
in Mr. Robinson's Plea for it of old; Lawfulness Hearing the Public Ministers
of the Church of England. Nye's Case, p. 24, 25.
and Mr. Nye's of late, as they are Printed together. Upon the consideration of
which the latter of these thus concludes, In most of the misperswasions of
these latter times, by which men's minds have been corrupted, I find, in
whatsoever they differ one from another, yet in this they agree, That it is
unlawful to hear in public; which I am persuaded is one constant design of
Satan in the variety of ways of Religion he has set on foot by Jesuits amongst
us. Let us therefore be the more aware of whatsoever tends that way. Theodulia;
Or, A just Defense of Hearing, etc. c. 10.. 15. p. 369. c. 9.. 8. p. 319.
Of this Opinion also is Mr Tombs (though he continued an Anabaptist) who has
writ a whole Book to defend the Hearing of the present Ministers of England,
and toward the Close of the Work has given forty additional Reasons for it,
and in opposition to those he writes against does affirm, Sure, if the Church
be called Mount Sion from the preaching of the Gospel, the Assemblies of
England may be called Sion, Christ's Candlesticks and Garden, as well as any
Christians in the World. Treatise of the lawfulness of Hearing, etc. p. ult.
I shall conclude this with what Mr Robinson says in this Case; viz. For my
self thus I believe with my heart before God, and profess with my tongue, and
have before the World, that I have one and the same Faith, Spirit, Baptism and
Lord, which I had in the Church of England, and none other; that I esteem so
many in that Church, of what state or Order soever, as are truly Partakers of
that Faith (as I account thousands to be) for my Christian Brethren, and my
self a Fellow-member with them, of that one Mystical Body of Christ, scattered
far and wide throughout the World: that I have always in spirit and affection,
all Christian Fellowship and Communion with them, and am most ready in all
outward Actions and Exercises of Religion, lawful and lawfully done, to express
the same: And withal, that I am persuaded the hearing of the Word of God there
preached in the manner and upon the grounds formerly mentioned, both lawful,
and upon occasion necessary for me and all true Christians, withdrawing from
that Hierarchical Order of Church Government and Ministry, and the uniting in
the Order and Ordinances instituted by Christ. Thus far He.

From what has been said upon this Head we may observe, that though these
Reverend Persons do go upon different Reasons, according to the Principles they
espouse, though they agree not in the Constitution of Churches, etc. yet they
all agree that the Parochial Churches are or may be (as I have observed before)
true Churches of Christ, that Communion with such Churches is lawful, and that
we are to go as far as we can toward Communion with them. Though they differ
about the Notion of Hearing, as whether it be an Act of Communion, and about
the Call of those they hear, yet they all agree in the lawfulness of it. And
therefore to separate wholly in this Ordinance, and from the Parochial Churches
as no Churches, are equally condemned by all.

3. They hold, that they are not to separate from a Church for unlawful things,
if the things accounted unlawful are not of so heinous a nature as to unchurch
a Church, and affect the Vitals of Religion; or are not imposed as necessary
terms of Communion.

1. If the Corruptions are such as do not unchurch a Church, or affect the
vital parts of Religion. So says Mr Tombs, Not every, not many Corruptions of
some kind do un-church, Theodulia. Answer to Preface. 23. p. 47, 48. Vid.
Blake's Vindiciae Foed. c. 31. p. 229, etc.
there being many in Faith, Worship and Conversation in the Churches of
Corinth, and some of the Seven Churches of Asia, who yet were Golden
Candlesticks, amidst whom Christ did walk. But such general, avowed, unrepented
of errors in Faith, as overthrow the foundation of Christian Faith, to wit,
Christ the only Mediator betwixt God and man, and salvation by him, Corruptions
of Worship by Idolatry, in Life by evil manners, as are utterly inconsistent
with Christianity, till which in whole or in part they are not unchurched. For
till then the Corruptions are tolerable, and so afford no just reason to
dissolve the Church, or to depart from it. Arraignment of Schism, p. 50.
So Mr Brinsley, Suppose some just grievances may be found among us, yet are
they tolerable? If so, then is Separation on this ground intolerable,
unwarrantable: in as much as it ought not to be, but upon a very great and
weighty cause, and that when there is no remedy. Temple measured, p. 78.
So Mr Noyes, Private Brethren may not separate from Churches or
Church-Ordinances, which are not fundamentally defective, neither in Doctrine
or Manners, Heresy or Profaneness. To all which add the Testimony of Dr Owen and
Mr Cotton. The former asserts, Evangelical Love, p. 76.
That many errors in Doctrine, disorders in sacred Administrations, irregular
walking in Conversation, with neglect and abuse of Discipline in Rulers, may
fall out in some Churches, and yet not evacuate their Church State, or give
sufficient warrant to leave their Communion, and separate from them. Expos. on
1 Epist. John, p. 156.
The latter says, Unless you find in the Church Blasphemy, or Idolatry, or
Persecution [that is, such as is intolerable] there is no just ground of
separation. This is universally owned: But if any one should yet continue
unconvinced, let him but peruse the Catalogue of the faults of nine Churches in
Scripture, collected by Mr Baxter, and I persuade my self he will think the
Conclusion inferred from it to be just and reasonable. Observe, Cure of
Church-Divisions, Dir. 5. p. 40. etc.
says he, that no one member is in all these Scriptures, or any other,
commanded to come out and separate from any of all these Churches, as if their
Communion in Worship were unlawful. And therefore before you separate from any
as judging Communion with them unlawful, be sure that you bring greater reasons
for it than any of these recited were.

2. They are not to separate, if the Corruptions are not so made the Conditions
of Communion, that they must necessarily and unavoidably communicate in them.
On the Sacrament, p. 239.
Mr Vines speaks plainly to both of these, The Church may be corrupted many
ways, in Doctrine, Ordinances, Worship, etc. And there are degrees of this
Corruption, the Doctrine in some remote Points, the Worship in some Rituals of
man's invention or custom. How many Churches do we find thus corrupted, and yet
no Separation of Christ from the Jewish Church, nor any Commandment to the
Godly of Corinth, etc. to separate. I must in such a Case avoid the Corruption,
hold the Communion -- But if Corruptions invade the Fundamentals, the
foundation of Doctrine is destroyed, the Worship is become idolatrous; and what
is above all, if the Church impose such Laws of her Communion as there is a
necessity of doing or approving things unlawful, in that Case, Come out of
Babylon. The Churches of Protestants so separated from Rome.

But if the things be not of so heinous a nature, nor thus strictly required,
then Communion with a Church under defects is lawful, and may be a Duty. So
says Mr Corbet in the name of the present Non-Conformists, Account of the
Principles of N. C. p. 8. and Discourse of Religion,. 16. p 33.
We hold not our selves obliged to forsake a true Church as no Church for the
corruptions and disorders found therein, or to separate from its Worship for
the tolerable faults thereof, while our personal profession of some error, or
practice of some evil is not required as the terms of our Communion. Irenicum,
c. 23. p. 162, 163.
And Mr Buroughs himself does grant as much and more; for he says, Where
these Causes are not [ viz. the being constrained to profess, believe or
practice contrary to the Rule of Faith, or being deprived of means altogether
necessary, or most expedient to salvation] but men may communicate without sin,
professing the truth, and enjoy all Ordinances, as the Freemen of Christ; Men
must not separate from a Church, though there be corruption in it, to gather
into a new Church, which may be more pure, and in some respects more
comfortable. And as though such corruptions should be imposed as terms of
Communion, yet if not actually imposed upon us, our communicating in the true
part of God's Worship is never the worse for the said imposition, as long as we
do not communicate in those corruptions, The Unreasonableness of the
Separation, p. 107.
as Mr Bradshaw does argue: So though they should be imposed and be unavoidable
to all that are in Communion, that is not a sufficient reason for a total
separation, as it is also owned; for says one, J^^^^baal, p. 12.
When the corruptions of a Church are such as that one cannot communicate with
her without sin unavoidably, that seems to me to be a just ground, though not
of a positive yet of a negative, though not of a total yet of a partial
separation; it may be a just ground for the lesser, but is not so for the
greater.

Supposing then the corruptions in a Church not to be of an heinous nature, not
respecting the Fundamentals of Religion; supposing again they are not
necessarily imposed and unavoidable, then Separation for the sake of such is
unwarrantable. But to make this the more uncontroulably evident, I shall
consider the Corruptions as they respect Worship, or Discipline. In Worship, I
shall consider the defects of it, in it self, in the Ministration, the
Ministers and those that join with it, and show that these do not disoblige
from Communion in it, and attendance upon it.

1. The defects of Worship, if not essential, are Apo* p. 7.
This the Brownists did acknowledge with some qualification, Neither count we
it lawful for any member to forsake the Fellowship of the Church, for blemishes
and imperfections, which every one, according to his Calling, should studiously
seek to cure, etc. So Mr Cotton, Expos. on 1 Epi^t. Joh. p. 157.
Suppose there were and are sundry abuses in the Church, yet it was no safe
ground of Separation. When the Sons of Eli corrupted the Sacrifices of God,
their sin was great, yet it was the sin of the people to separate and abhor.
England's Remembrancer, Sermon. 2. p. 38.
Thus a Reverend Person in his Farewell Sermon does rightly instruct his
Auditors, A means to hold fast what you have received, is diligent attendance
on the public Ordinances and Worship of God, if and when you can enjoy them in
any measure according to God's Will, though not altogether in the manner you
desire, and they should be administered in, etc. Though I dare not advise you to
join in any thing that is in it self, or in your judgment evil, till you be
satisfied about it; yet I must advise you to take heed of Separation from the
Church, or from what is good, and God's own Ordinance, etc. For the fuller
proof of which, it may not be amiss to produce the several Arguments used by
them in confirmation of this Truth. As,

Arg. 1.
First, To break off Communion, or to refuse it for such defects, would be to
look after a greater perfection than this present state will admit of.
Confession of Faith, Art. 36.
So the Brownists do declare, None is to separate from a Church rightly
gathered and established for faults and corruptions which may, and, so long as
the Church consists of mortal men, will fall out and arise among them. And Mr
Jenkin argues upon this Principle, Comment on J^^^, ver. 19.
Must not he who will forbear Communion with a Church till it be altogether
freed from mixtures, tarry till the day of Judgment, till when we have no
promise that Christ will gather out of his Church whatsoever does offend? This
was it that amongst other reasons conquered the prejudices of that Good Man Mr
J. Allen, His Life, p. 111.
and kept him from Separation, of which we have this Account, He knew of how
great moment it was that the public Worship of God should be maintained, and
that its Assemblies should not be relinquished, though some of its
Administrations did not clearly approve themselves unto him; because upon the
account of some imperfections and pollutions in them, supposed or real, to
withdraw Communion, is evidently to suppose our selves joined before our time
to the heavenly Assembly, or to have found such an one upon Earth exempt from
all mixtures and imperfections of Worshippers and Worship. The want of this
prudent consideration makes many to expect more than can be expected, and to
look upon every defect or corruption as intolerable; to prevent which therefore
Mr Baxter does give this Advice to his Brethren, Sacrileg. Desert. p. 96.
Teach them to know that all men are imperfect and faulty, and so is all men's
Worship of God; and that he that will not communicate with faulty Worship must
renounce Communion with all the World, and all with him.

Secondly, They argue, Arg. 2.
our Savior and the Apostles did not separate from defective Churches and
Worship, but communicated in it notwithstanding the corruptions, and therefore
its not unlawful for others so to do. No doubt it was written for our
instruction, says a Reverend Person, Englands Remembrancer, Sermon. 4. p. 94, 95.
our Lord Jesus Christ (who was as zealous for purity in God's Worship, as much
against corrupt mixtures of men's inventions therein as any can pretend to be)
used to attend on the public Worship in his time, notwithstanding the many
corruptions brought into it. That he went into their Assemblies not to join in
any Worship, but only to bear witness against their corruptions, is no where
written; but rather the contrary is held forth in Scripture, when he
acknowledges himself a member of the Church of the Jews, approves of and
justifies their Worship, as right for substance, that salvation might be
attained therein, which he denies to be attainable in any other Worship, John
4.22. we know (including himself amongst those that worshipped God aright) what
we worship, for salvation is of the Jews. This is sufficiently proved by many
Ball's Trial, p. 132.
, that Christ did communicate with the Jewish Church, and is granted as well by
those of the Congregational as The platform of Discipline in New England, c.
14.. 8.
Presbyterial way: And yet Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship were much
corrupted, of which Mr Hildersham does give a specimen Lect. 35. on John, p.
165, 166.
, but especially Dr Bryan Dwelling with God, p. 294.
; There were many great corruptions in the Church of the Jews in Christ's time,
the Priests and Teachers were ignorant and wicked, and had a corrupt and
unlawful entrance into their calling; and the People were like to the Priest,
generally notoriously and obstinately ungodly; and the Worship used in that
Church was woefully corrupt, many superstitious Ceremonies, the observation
whereof were more strictly urged, than the Commandments and Ordinances of God,
the Temple made a Den of Thieves, the Discipline and censures shamefully
abused, the Doctrine was corrupt in many points; yet the word tells you, Christ
(whose example it binds you to follow, and you profess your selves followers of
him in all imitable things) made no separation from this Church, professed
himself a Member of it, was by Circumcision incorporated a Member, received
Baptism in a Congregation of that People, was a hearer of their common Service
and their Teachers, allowing and commanding his Disciples to hear them,
communicated in the Passover with the People and the Priest; no more did his
Apostles make separation from this Church after his Ascension, till their day
had its Period, etc. By their example it appears, that till God has forsaken a
Church, no man may forsake it, etc. So that we may conclude from hence with Mr
Hildersham, Ibid.
Those Assemblies that enjoy the Word and Doctrine of Salvation, though they
have many corruptions remaining in them, are to be acknowledged as true
Churches of God, and such as none of the faithful may make Separation from. We
shall need no further proof of this Doctrine than the example of our Savior
himself, etc. For why should our Savior use it if it was unlawful; The
Unreasonableness of S^paration, p. 104.
or why should it be a Sin in us, who have not such Eyes to pierce into the
impiety of man's Traditions as he had, as Mr Bradshaw argues.

The same measures were observed also by the Apostles after the establishment
of the Christian Church; This is not to be gainsaid, and is therefore granted
by one, Non-Conformists no Schismatics, p. 15.
in other things rigid more than enough; I do not say that every corruption in
a true Church, is sufficient ground of Separation from it: The unsoundness of
many in the Church of Corinth, touching the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and
in Galatia touching the Doctrine of Circumcision, and the necessity of keeping
the Ceremonial Law, were not sufficient ground of Separation from them; for the
Apostles held Communion with them, notwithstanding these corruptions. Now by
parity of reason it will follow, that if Separation was not to be allowed from
those corrupted Churches, then surely not from such as are not so corrupted as
they; Independ. a great Schism, p. 195.
So Mr Cawdrey pleads, Corinth had (we suppose) greater disorders in it than
are to be found (blessed be God) in many of our Congregations; why then do they
fly and separate from us? And if our Savior and his Apostles did not separate
from such Churches, much less should we, who may without doubt safely follow
the advice given by an Author above-quoted; Englands Remembrancer, Sermon. 4. p.
111.
When you are at a stand think how Christ would have carried, what he would
have done in the like case with yours, and we may thereby be concluded.

Thirdly, They further argue, Arg. 3.
that Christ does still hold Communion with defective Churches, and not reject
the Worship for tolerable corruptions in it, and so neither ought we. It is
supposed by a worthy person, Dr. Owen's discourse of Evangel. Love, c. 3. p. 81.
that there is no such society of Christians in the World, whose Assemblies, as
to instituted Worship, are so rejected by Christ, as to have a Bill of Divorce
given unto them, until they are utterly as it were extirpate by the Providence
of God, etc. For we do judge, that wherever the Name of Jesus Christ is
called upon, there is Salvation to be obtained; however the ways of it may be
obstructed unto the most by their own sins and errors. And if this may be said
of Churches, though fundamentally erroneous in Worship, then, Troughton's Apol.
p. 110.
who shall dare, as another says, to judge when Christ has forsaken a People
who still profess his Name, and keep up his Worship for substance according to
his word, though they do or are supposed to fail in circumstances or lesser
parts of duty? Now, this granted, the other will follow, that then we are not
to separate from such Churches. Lect. 35. on John, p. 165, 166. and Lect. 82.
p. 384.
Thus Mr Hildersham concluded of old from the practice of Christ, and observes,
1. So long as God continues his word and the Doctrine of Salvation to a
People, so long it is evident that God dwells among them, and has not forsaken
them, V. Dr. Bryan's dwelling with God, p. 293.
etc. And till God has forsaken a Church, no man may forsake it. 2. No
Separation may be made from those Assemblies, where men may be assured to find
and attain Salvation, but men may be sure to find and attain Salvation in such
Assemblies, where the Ministry of his word, and the Doctrine of Salvation is
contained. So Mr Vines on the Sacrament, p. 242. Croston's hard way to Heaven,
p. 36. Noye's Temple measured, p. 79. Jenkin on Jude v. 19. Davenport's Apol.
reply, p. 281. Ball's Trial, p. 159, etc.
, The Argument, says he, of Mr Brightman is considerable, if God afford his
Communion with a Church by his own Ordinances, Grace and Spirit, it would be
unnatural and peevish in a Child to forsake his Mother, while his Father owns
her for his Wife. I might heap up Authorities of this kind, but shall content
my self with a considerable one from Mr Cotton Com. on 1 Epist. John p. 156.
, who reasons after this manner; The practice of the Brownists is blameworthy,
because they separate where Christ keeps fellowship, Rev. 1.18. And that he
walks with us we argue, because he is still pleased to dispense to us the word
of life, and edifies many Souls thereby, and therefore surely Christ has
fellowship with us; and shall man be more pure than his Maker? where Christ
vouchsafes fellowship shall man renounce it?

Upon this are grounded the wholesome exhortations of many eminent
Non-Conformists, as that of Mr Calamy; Godly Man's Ark, Epist. Ded.
You must hold Communion with all those Churches with which Christ holds
Communion; you must separate from the sins of Christians, but not from the
Ordinances of Christ. Of Mr R. Allein; Godly Man's portion, p. 122.
Excommunicate not them from you, excommunicate not your selves from them with
whom Christ holds Communion. V. Bains on the Ephesians. c. 2.15. p. 297. Englands
Remembrancer, Sermon. 16. p. 455.
Judge not that Christ withdraws from all those who are not in every thing of
your mind and way. Methinks, says a Reverend Person in his Farewell Sermon,
where a Church as to the main, keeps the form of sound words, and the
substantials of that Worship which is Christ's, some adjudged defects in order
cannot justify separation. I dare not dismember my self from that Church that
holds the head. I think whilst Doctrine is for the main sound, Christ stays
with a Church; and it is good staying where he stays: I would follow him and
not lead him, or go before the Lamb. To such we find a severe rebuke given very
lately by a Reverend Person; Continuat. of Morn. Exer. Sermon. 16. p. 459.
Proud conceited Christians are not contented to come out and separate from the
unbelieving idolatrous World, but they will separate also from the true Church
of Christ, and cast off all Communion with them who hold Communion with him.

Fourthly, They argue, Arg. 4.
that to separate for such defects and corruptions would destroy all Communion.
If this should be, Unreas. of the Separat. p. 103.
says Mr Bradshaw then no man can present himself with a good Conscience, at
any public Worship of God wheresoever; because (except it should be stinted
and prescribed) he can have no assurance, but that some errors in matter and
form will be committed. So Mr Ball; One man is of opinion, Trial of the grounds
of Separat. c. 137, 13^*
that a prescribed Form is better than another; another that a prescribed Form
is unlawful, etc. In these cases, if the least error do stain the Prayers to
others, that they may not lawfully join together, with whom shall the faithful
join at all? Is not this to fill the Conscience with scruples, and the Church
with rents? Sacrileg desert. p. 95.
Such as these must, if they will be true to their own Principles, renounce
Communion with all the World, Defense of his Cure, part 1. p. 47.
and be like those that Mr Baxter tell us he knows, that never Communicate with
any Church, nor ever publicly hear, or pray, or Worship God at all, because
they think all your ways [which he directs to Mr Bagshaw and other
Non-Conformists] of Worship to be bad.

With this there can be no continuance in any Communion, Iren. c 23. p. 163.
so much Mr Buroughs does maintain; There would be no continuance in
Church Fellowship if this [a separation from a Church for corruptions in it]
were admitted; for what Church is so pure, and has all things so comfortable,
but within a while another Church will be more pure, and some things will be
more comfortable there? Upon the mischievous consequence of this did Mr R.
Allein ground his last advice to his Parishioners; Godly Man's portion, p. 124.
Destroy not, says he, all Communion by seeking after a purer Church, than in
this imperfect estate we shall ever attain. According to this principle [no
Communion at all, if not in all] where shall we rest? In all society something
will offend.

With this, lastly, there can be no Order, Union, or Peace in the Church; Com.
on Ephesians. c. 2.15. p. 297.
so Mr Bains, a Person of great experience; This [seeking the Peace of Sion]
reproves such as make a seression or departure from the Church of God, our
visible Assemblies, either upon dislike of some disorders in administration
Ecclesiastical, or disallowed Forms, and manner of procuring things, which the
Communion of Saints for full complement and perfection requires. This is not,
in my conceit, so much to reform as to deform, to massacre the Body and divide
the Head, Morton's Memorial, p. 78. etc. Mr. Baxter's Def. of Cure, part 2. p.
171.
etc. and will end in the dissolution of all Church Communion (if it be
followed) as is notoriously evident in the case of Mr R. Williams of New
England, that for the sake of greater purity separated so long, that he owned
no Church nor Ordinances of God in the World; and at his motion, the people
that were in Communion with him dissolved themselves, as we have the account
from thence. This therefore is one of the Doctrines we are to avoid, according
to the prudent advice in a Book above cited; Englands Remembrancer, Ser. 14. p.
371.
Doctrines crying up purity to the ruin of unity, reject; for the Gospel calls
for unity as well as purity.

Fifthly. They argue, Arg. 5.
that to separate upon such an account is not at all warranted in Scripture.
Thus Mr Cawdrey; It is no duty of Christ's imposing, Independ. a Schism, p. 192.
no privilege of his purchasing* either to deprive a man's self of his
Ordinances for other men's sins, or to set up a new Church in opposition to a
true Church, as no Church rightly constituted, for want of some reformation in
lighter matters. Says Mr. Blake, Vindiciae soed. c. 31. p. 228.
We read not of Separation in this way [for the sake of abuses and corruptions]
approved, nor any presidents to go before us in it; we read a heavy brand laid
upon it, Jude 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, not having
the Spirit. So the Congregations in New England declare; Platform of Discipline
in New England, c. 14.. 8.
The faithful in the Church of Corinth, wherein were many unworthy persons and
practices, are never commanded to absent themselves from the Sacrament because
of the same; therefore the godly in like causes are not presently to separate.
It should rather have been inferred, are not to separate, for so much must be
concluded from the premises, if any thing at all. This is accordingly inferred
by Mr. Noyes; Temple measured, p. 78.
For Brethren to separate from Churches and Church-Ordinances, which are not
fundamentally defective, neither in Doctrine or Manners, in Heresy or
Profaneness is contrary to the Doctrine and Practice both of Christ and his
Apostles. Unto whom I shall add the testimony of Mr. Tombs; Theodulia Ans. to
Pres.. 25. p. 48.
Separation from a Church somewhat erroneous or corrupt in Worship or
Conversation, etc. is utterly dissonant from any of the rules or examples,
which either of old the Prophets, or holy men, or Christ and his Apostles have
prescribed, is for the most part the fault of Pride or bitter Zeal, and tends
to strife and confusion and every evil work.

Sixthly, Arg. 6.
They argue, that there is no necessity for Separation for the sake of such
corruptions, because a Person may Communicate in the Worship without partaking
in those corruptions. It was the opinion of the Presbyterian Brethren at the
Savoy-Conference, Confer. Savoy, p. 12, 13. Mr. Baxters's Defense of the Cure,
p. 34, 35.
that not only the hearing, but the reading a defective Liturgy was lawful to
him, that by violence is necessitated to offer up that or none. And if there
was a possibility of thus separating the substance from the circumstantial
defects in the Ministerial use of such Worship, much more may this be supposed
to be done by those that only attend upon it, and are not obliged by any act of
their own to give an explicit consent to all and every thing used in it. 1.
This separation of the good from the bad in Divine Worship they grant possible.
Trial of the grounds, etc. p. 308.
So Mr. Ball, If some things humane be mixed with Divine, a sound Christian
must separate the one from the other, and not cast away what is of God as a
nullity, fruitless, unprofitable, defiled, because somewhat of men is annexed
unto them. In the Body we can distinguish betwixt the substance and the
sickness which cleaves unto it; betwixt the substance of a part or member, and
some bunch or swelling, which is a deformity, but destroys not the nature of
that part or member, etc. So Mr Calamy; Door of Truth opened, p. 7.
Its one thing to keep our selves pure from pollution, another to gather
Churches out of Churches. 2. They grant, that what is faulty and a sin in
Worship is no sin to us, when we do not consent to it: So Mr Corbet;
Non-Conformists Plea, etc. p. 6.
My partaking in any Divine Worship, which is holy and good for the matter, and
allowable or passable in the mode for the main, does not involve me in the
blame of some sinful defects therein to which I consent not, and which I cannot
redress. Englands Remembrancer, Sermon. 4. p. 94,
So another Reverend Person in his Farewell Sermon; While all necessary
fundamental Truth is publicly professed and maintained in a Church, is taught
and held forth in public Assemblies, and the corruptions there (though great
yet) are not such as make the Worship cease to be Gods Worship, nor of
necessity to be swallowed down, if one would communicate in that Worship, while
any Christian (that is watchful over his own heart and carriage, as all ought
ever to be) may partake in the one, without being active in or approving the
other; there God is yet present, there he may be spiritually worshipped, served
acceptably, and really enjoyed. 3. They grant, that the being present at Divine
Worship is no consent to the corruptions in it. Thus Mr Robinson; Lawfulness of
hearing, etc. p. 19, 23.
He that partakes with the Church in the upholding any evil, has his part in
the evil also. But I deny, as a most vain imagination, that every one that
partakes with a Church in things lawful, joins with it in upholding the things
unlawful to be found in it. Christ our Lord joined with the Jewish Church in
things lawful, and yet upheld nothing unlawful in it. So Mr Nigh; Case of great
and present use, p. 16. 18. Cure dir. 35. p. 196, etc. Defense, p. 96.
Approbation is an act of the mind, it is not showed until it be expressed
outwardly by my words and gestures. This Mr Baxter undertakes to prove by
several Arguments, as that no man can in reason and justice take that for my
profession, which I never made by word or deed. That the profession made by
Church Communion is totally distinct from this. That this opinion would make it
unlawful to join with any Pastor or Church on Earth, since every one mixeth Sin
with their Prayers. 4. They say, that corruptions, Letter of Ministers in Old
England to the Brethren in New England, p. 12, 13, 16.
though foreknown, do not yet make those that are present guilty of them. Thus
the old Non-Conformists declare; It is all one to the People, whether the fault
be personal (as some distinguish) or otherwise known beforehand, or not known:
For if simple presence defile, whether it was known beforehand or not, all
presence is faulty. And if simple presence defile not, our presence is not
condemned, by reason of the corruptions known, whereof we stand not guilty. If
the error be such as may be tolerated, and I am called to be present, by such
fault I am not defiled though known before. Cure, p. 200.
Mr Baxter replys to those of a contrary opinion after this manner; Take heed
that thus [by affirming that foreknowing faults in Worship makes them ours] you
make not God the greatest sinner and the worst Being in all the World. For God
foreknoweth all men's sins, and is present when they commit them, and he has
Communion with all the Prayers of the faithful in the World; what faults soever
be in the words or forms, he does not reject them for any such failings. Will
you say therefore that God approves or consents to all these sins? I know
beforehand that every man will sin that prays (by defect of desire, etc.)
But how does all this make it mine, etc. And he otherwhere adds; Christian
Direct. p. 748.
It is another man's fault or error that you foreknow, and not your own. 5. Its
granted that the fault of another in the ministration of Divine Worship is none
of ours, nor a sufficient reason to absent from it, Cure, p. 197. V. Jerubbaal
justified, p. 16, etc. 22, 34.
or to deprive our selves of it. Thus Mr Baxter; The wording of the public
Prayers is the Pastors work and none of mine, etc. And why should any hold me
guilty of another man's fault, which I neither can help, nor belongs to any
office of mine to help any farther than to admonish him. And that the faults of
him that Ministers are no sufficient reason to debar our selves of Communion in
the worship. Case of great and present use, p. 10.
Mr. Nigh affirms and proves by this Argument; If I may not omit a duty in
respect to the evil mixed with it, which is my own, much less may I thus leave
an ordinance for the evil that is another man's, no way mine, or to be charged
upon me, This were to make another man's sins or infirmities more mine than my
own. Thus is the case resolved with respect to the Cross in Baptism; Of Scandal
a discourse, p. 65.
I may not only, says one, do that which I judge to be inconvenient, but
suffer another to do that which I judge to be unlawful, rather than be deprived
of a necessary ordinance, e. g. If either I must have my Child baptized with
the sign of the Cross, or not baptized at all; I may suffer it to be done in
that way, though I judge it an unlawful addition, because the manner concerns
him that does it, not me (at least not so much) so long as there is all the
essence. He must be responsible for every irregularity, not I. V. Croston's
reformat. no separat. p. 24.
Thus Jacob took Laban's Oath though by his Idols, etc. After the same manner
does Mr. Baxter resolve the case in his Christian Directory, p. 49.

Seventhly, They grant, Arg. 7.
that it is a duty to join with a defective and faulty Worship where we can
have no better. Thus the Presbyterian Brethren at the Savoy; Confer. at Savoy,
p. 3, 12, 13.
An inconvenient mode of Worship is a sin in the Imposer, and in the chuser and
voluntary user, that may offer God better and will not: And yet it may not be
only lawful, but a duty to him, that by violence is necessitated to offer up
that or none. Separat. yet no Schism, p. 64.
This is acknowledged by an Author that is far from being favorable to
Communion with the Church; If the word of God could be no where heard, or
Communion in Sacraments no where enjoyed, but only in such Churches that were
so corrupt as yours is conceived to be; it might be lawful, yea and a duty to
join with you so far as possibly Christians could without sin. Def. of Cure,
part 1. p. 78.
Accordingly Mr. Baxter declares, that it is a duty to hold Communion
constantly with any of the Parish Churches amongst us, that have honest
competent Pastors when we can have no better, and professes for his own part;
part 2. p. 176. and Cure p. 265. q. 6.
Were I, says he, in Armenia, Abassia, or among the Greeks, I would join in a
much more defective Form than our Liturgy rather than none. And he adds, That
this is the judgment of many New England Ministers (to join with the English
Liturgy rather than have no Church Worship) I have reason to conjecture from
the defense of the Synod, Defense of Synod. Pref. p. 4, 5.
etc. Now in what cases this is to be presumed, that we can have no better, he
shows, Def. of Cure, part 1. p. 78. n. 6. p. 96. n. 5.
1. When it is so by a necessity arising from Divine Providence. 2. A necessity
proceeding from humane Laws which forbid it. 3. A necessity from the injury
done to the public. And 4. When it is to our own greater hinderance than help,
as when we must use none or do worse. In these and the like cases it becomes a
duty, and what is otherwise lawful, is thereby made necessary. And he that
cannot join with a purer Worship, than what is publicly established without
the breach of humane Laws, or the disturbance of the public Peace, or dividing
the Church of God, or the bringing danger upon himself, is as much, where any
of these or the like reasons are, restrained from so doing, as if it did
proceed from a natural or providential necessity, that is, the one he cannot do
Physically and naturally, the other he cannot do morally, honestly, and
prudently. Having thus far stated the case, and showed that its universally
owned by those that dissent from the Church of England, that Communion in a
Worship not essentially defective and corrupted is lawful; and that its a
received opinion, that where better is not to be had, its a duty; and that
better is not to be had, where it is not to be had lawfully. I might freely
pass on, but because there is a common objection against what has been said,
taken from Malac. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver, etc. that voweth and
sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing; I shall briefly return their answer to
it and proceed. To this the old Non-Conformists reply; Letter of the Minist. in
Old Engl. to those in New Engl. p. 14.
1. No Argument can be brought from this place to the purpose, but by analogy,
which is a kind of arguing of all other most ready at hand, but liable to most
exceptions, and apt to draw aside, if care be not had (which in this case we
find not) to take the proportion in every material point just and true. Ball's
Trial of the grounds, p. 74.
2. The corrupt sacrifice is that which the deceiver brings voluntarily and
out of neglect, having a male in his flock, but the faithful brings himself
and his godly desires according to the will of God; and as for corruptions
whether respecting matter or form, they are none of his, they cleave not to his
sacrifice to stain or pollute it, etc. 3. He offers not a corrupt thing who
offers the best he has. 4. It is to be considered, Trial of the grounds, etc.
c. 4. p. 78.
says Mr Ball, that what is simply best, is not best in relation to this or
that circumstance or end; what is best in a time free is not best in a time not
free. Def. of Cure, p. 85.
It is granted, says Mr Baxter, that we must offer God the best that we can
do, but not the best which we cannot do. V. Burrough's Iren. c. 12. p. 86.
And many things must concur (and especially a respect to the public good) to
know which is the best. So that before this Text can be opposed to what has
been said, it must be proved, 1. That the things in question are corruptions as
much prohibited as the blind and lame under the Law. 2. That they are such as a
person does choose, and it is in his power to help, and offers it when he has a
male in his flock. 3. That such a corruption as affects not the substance of
Worship, does yet alter the nature of it, and makes the whole to be a corrupt
thing, and abominable to God. If these things are not, the objection reaches
not the case, and there is no ground from that place for this objection.

Platform of Discipline, c. 13.. 5.
I shall conclude this head with a remarkable saying of the Ministers of New
England; To separate from a Church for some evil only conceived, or indeed in
the Church, which might and should be tolerated and healed with a spirit of
meekness, and of which the Church is not yet convinced, though perhaps himself
be, for this or the like reasons to withdraw from public Communion in word,
seals, or censures, is unlawful and sinful.

But supposing it may be unlawful to separate from a Church for a defective and
faulty Worship; yet it may be supposed, that it may be lawful when it is for
better edification, and that we may choose what is for our edification before
what is not, and what is more for our edification before what is less. For the
decision of which case I shall show from them,

2. That as defects and faults in worship, so neither is the pretense of better
edification a sufficient reason against Communion with a Church. Sometimes they
say it is no better than a mere pretense and imaginary, a seeming contentment
of mind, as one calls it. Methermeneut. p. 71. On John 4. Lect. 58.
This Mr Hildersham takes notice of; Some prefer others before their own
Pastor, only because they show more zeal in their voice and gesture, and phrase
of speech and manner of delivery, though happily the Doctrine it self be
nothing so wholesome or powerful, or fit to edify their Consciences, as the
Doctrine of their own Pastor is, of such he says, we may wish them more
knowledge and judgment. Mr Baxter observes the same, Cure of Divis. p. 359.
One thinks that this is the best way, and another that the other is best --
And commonly appearance, and a taking tone and voice do more with them than
solid evidence of truth. Therefore its fit to have a right notion of
edification, which, says a Reverend Person, Continuat. of Morn. Exer. Sermon. 4.
p. 95.
lies more in the informing of our judgments, and confirming our resolutions,
than in the gusts and relishes of affection. These, as he says, are indeed of
great use to the other, but without them are far from making a Person better,
and leaving him truly edifyed. Again, it may be, and it is no better than a mere
pretense, when the fault is in themselves that complain they do not edify.
Lect. 28. p. 129. and Lect. 58.
Mr Hildersham charges it upon such; Thou might receive profit (if the fault
be not in thy self) by the meanest of us that preach. And he thus freely again
declares himself; I am persuaded, there is never a Minister that is of the most
excellent gifts (if he have a Godly heart) but he can truly say, he never heard
any faithful Minister in his life that was so mean, but he could discern some
gift in him that was wanting in himself, and could receive some profit by him.
And therefore they advise to cure the fault before they make use of this plea.
So the pious Person abovesaid argues; How should thou profit by his
Ministry, if thou come with prejudice, without any reverence or delight unto
it, nor do scarce acknowledge Gods Ordinance in it? Com. on Jude, v. 19.
So Mr Jenkin directs; Labor for experimental benefit by the Ordinances. Men
separate to those Churches which they account better, because they never found
those where they were before (to them) good -- Find the setting up Christ in
your hearts by the Ministry, and then you will not dare to account it
Antichristian. Englands Remembrancer, Sermon. 16. p. 456.
Thus a Reverend Person in his Farewell Sermon, speaking of supposed defects in
the Church, does advise his Auditors; Enlarge your care and pains in your
preparations; a right stomach makes good nourishment of an indifferent meal;
you may be warm (though in a colder air and room than you have formerly been)
if you will put on more cloths before you come: Watch your hearts more
narrowly, and speak things to your hearts m^re than you have done, Eccles.
10.10 if the iron be blunt, then must he put to more strength.

But supposing it be really for edification, yet this they declare is no
sufficient reason for Separation. So Mr Buroughs; Iren. c. 12. p. 85.
If you be joined to a Pastor, so as you believe he is set over you by Christ,
to be a Pastor to you; though this man has meaner gifts than others; and it
would be more comfortable for you to have another Pastor, yet this is not
enough to cause you to desert him whom Christ has set over you. Platform, c.
13.. 5.
And so the Ministers in New England deliver their minds; To separate from a
Church for greater enlargements, with just grief to the Church, is unlawful and
sinful. So when this Question was put, Continuat. of Morn. Exer. Sermon. 4. p. 91.
Are they not at all times obliged to use the means which are most edifying?
Its answered by a Reverend Person, They may say at all times, when they have
nothing to outweigh their own edification. So that edification may be
outweighed, and then it can be no standing and sufficient reason. Iren. c. 12.
p. 85, 86.
So Mr Buroughs declares in this case; Men must consider not only what the
thing is in its own nature, but what it is to them, how it stands in reference
to their relations -- It is not enough to say the thing is in it self better,
but is it better in all the references I have and it has? Is it better in
regard of others, in regard of the public, for the helping me in all my
relations? may it not help one way and hinder many ways? Defense, part 1. p. 85.
Of the same opinion is Mr Baxter; Many things, says he, must concur (and
especially a respect to the public good) to know which is the best. So that
edification is not to be judged of alone, our own improvement is not to
determine us in our actions, and especially not with respect to
Church Communion, for then other reasons do give Law to it and overruled it.
This we see those that dissent from the Church in other things agree with her
in: And they give several reasons and arguments for it.

First, If we were sure we could not profit, Arg. 1.
yet we must come to do homage to God, Lect. 28. p. 129, and 309.
and show reverence to his Ordinance. This is Mr Hildersham's opinion.

Secondly, The leaving a Church for better edification, Arg. 2.
is built upon a false and dangerous principle, which is that we must always
choose the best. Iren. c. 12. p. 84, 87.
So Mr Buroughs; To hold what in its self best must be chosen and done, not
weighing circumstances or references is a dividing principle. And afterward he
says, a Christian without comparing one thing with another, will hack and hew,
and disturb himself and others in the ways of Religion. I believe some of you
have known those who, whatsoever they have conceived to be better than other,
they have presently followed with all eagerness, never considering
circumstances, references or consequences, but the thing is good, Of this V.
Ball's Trial, c. 4. p. 75, 76, 78.
it must be done; yet being wearied with this they have after grown loose, in
as great an excess the other way.

Thirdly, Arg. 3.
This principle of better edification if followed, would bring in confusion.
Lect. 66.
So Mr Hildersham; This factious disposition of the hearers of Gods Word, has
in all ages been the cause of much confusion in the Church of God, and greatly
hindered the fruit of the Gospel of Christ. Arraignment of Schism, p. 48.
This, says Mr Brinsley, the moderate Author of the late Irenicum [Mr
Burroughs] will by no means allow, but condemns as the direct way to bring in
all kind of disorder and confusion into the Church; and I think none who are
judicious, but will therein subscribe to him. Iren. c. 12. p. 85.
It will not be amiss to transcribe his own words; It is in it self a better
thing to enjoy a Ministry of the most eminent gifts and graces than one of
lower; but if this should be made a rule, that a man who is under a Pastor who
is faithful, and in some good measure gifted, upon another man's coming into the
Country that is more eminent, he should forsake his Pastor and join to the
other; and if after this, still a more eminent man comes, he should leave the
former and join to him; and by the same Law a Pastor who has a good People,
yet if others be more likely to receive more good, he may leave his own People
and go to them, Platform Pref. p. 7. and c. 13.. 1. Independ. a Schism. p. 50.
what confusion and disorder would there be continually in the Church; This is
condemned also by the New England Ministers. This Mr Cawdrey does expose; If a
man may lawfully separate from a true Church, etc. only with a good mind to
serve God in Church-institutions, true or conceited by his own light, all the
Secretaries and Separists, Donatists, Brownists in the World may be justified.
This, says another, Methermeneut, p. 72, 74.
speaking of hearing for this reason, is a Church-destroying Principle; sure if
one member be not fixed, then not another, nor another, etc. and then not the
Pastor, nor Teacher, and so farewell Churches.

Fourthly, This will be endless: So Mr Buroughs; Arg. 4.
Men must not separate from a Church, Iren. c. 23. p. 163.
though there be corruptions in it, to gather into a new Church which may be
more pure, and in some respects more comfortable. First, Because we never find
the Saints in Scripture separating or raising Churches in such a case. And
Secondly, There would be no continuance in Church Fellowship if this were
admitted; for what Church is so pure, and has all things so comfortable, but
within a while another Church will be more pure, and some things will be more
comfortable there? And he concludes with this prudent maxim; The general peace
of the Church should be more regarded than some comfortable accommodations to
our selves. Defense, part 1. p. 85.
So Mr Baxter; What if twenty Ministers be one abler than another in their
several degrees, does it follow that only the ablest of all these may be joined
with, because that all the rest do worse? And yet this must be, if edification
be always to be consulted, and is to determine us in our choice of Ministers,
Churches, and Ordinances.

Fifthly, They say, Arg. 5.
edification does not depend so much upon the external administration of
Worship, as Gods Blessing, and that we are not to break the Order, Peace* and
Union of the Church for the sake of it. Lect. 54. p. 254, and Lect. 58.
The former is asserted by Mr Hildersham; Its our sin and shame, and is just
cause of humbling to us, if we cannot profit by the meanest Minister God has
sent. The power of the Ministry depends not on the excellency of the Teachers
gift, but Gods blessing. The latter is maintained by Mr Vines; On the
Sacrament, p. 246.
Its said, order in an Army kills no Body, yet without it the Army is but a
rout, neither able to offend or defend: So happily order in the Church converts
no body, yet without it I see not how the Church can attain her end, or
preserve themselves in begetting or breeding up Souls to God. Therefore is the
advice of Mr. Baxter; In his Farewell Sermon.
Do not think to prosper by breaking over the hedge, under pretense of any
right of Holiness [so of edification] whatsoever, following any party that
would draw you to Separation. The mischief of which is represented by Dr.
Tuckney; Experience, Sermon. at Paul's on Acts 9.31.
says he, has taught us that the Church of God has been poorly edifyed by
those who have daubed up their Babel with untempered mortar, etc. when the
Church is rent by Schisms and Factions, and one Congregation is turned into
many Conventicles, falsely now called Churches, this does diminish, weaken, and
ruin.

Lastly, When they do grant that edification may serve to guide us, and that we
may hear where we can most profit, its with such limitations and cautions as
these; it must be seldom, in a great case, without offense and contempt. Lect.
54. p. 2^3.
Thus Mr. Hildersham; I dare not condemn such Christians, as having Pastors in
the places where they live of meaner gifts, do desire (so they do it without
open breach or contempt of the Churches order) to enjoy the Ministry of such as
have better gifts, etc. so they do it without contempt of their own Pastors,
and without scandal and offense to them and their People. So again; Lect. 58.
You ought not to leave your own Pastor at anytime with contempt of his
Ministry, as when you say or think, alas! he is no body; a good honest man, but
he has no gifts, I cannot profit by him. And as if he could not be too
cautious in the case, he lays down this as the Character of one that does this
innocently; He only makes right use of the benefit of hearing such as have more
excellent gifts than his own Pastors, and learns thereby to like his own Pastor
the better, and to profit more by him. That this is to be but seldom, we have
the concurrent testimony of the Provincial Assembly of London, who upon this
Question; Jus Divi^^m Minist. Evangil. p. 11, 12.
Would you have a man keep constantly to the Minister under whom he lives? do
answer, We are not so rigid as to tie up People from hearing other Ministers
occasionally, even upon the Lords Day. But yet we believe it is most agreeable to
Gospel order upon the grounds forementioned. Thus it is resolved also by one of
a more rigid way, Methermeneut, p. 72.
who puts this Question; Whether members of particular Churches may hear
indifferently elsewhere? and returns this answer; God will have mercy and not
sacrifice, as distance of habitation, handling such a point. But most certainly
members of Churches ought mostly to be with their own Churches -- The imagined
content in hearing others, is rather a temptation than motion of the Spirit.

From all which we may conclude, that the pretense of better edification is no
sufficient reason for Separation from a Church, Worship, or Ministry, without
there be other reasons that do accompany it; and then it is not for this reason
so much as those it is in conjunction with.

But admitting this, yet it will hardly be granted to be a reason for
Separation from the Church of England, if the testimony of many worthy persons
be of any consideration. Lect. 29. p. 131.
Thus Mr Hildersham declares, when he is reproving such as make no conscience
to come to the beginning of Gods public Worship, and to stay to the end of it;
he thus proceeds, Because I see many of them that have most knowledge, and are
forwardest professors offend in this way, I will manifest the sin of these men.
1. They sin against themselves in the profit they might receive by the Worship
of God -- There is no part of Gods service, (not the Confession not the
Prayers, not the Psalm, not the Blessing) but it concerns every one, and every
one may receive edification by it. Lect. 28. p. 129.
This he otherwhere repeats and says, By the Confession, and all other Prayers
used in the Congregation, a man may receive more profit than by many other. Of
this opinion, as to the most of the Prayers in our Liturgy, Letter of the
Minist. in Old England to the Brethren in New England, p. 13.
were the old Non-Conformists; We are persuaded, that not only some few select
Prayers, but many Prayers and other exhortations may lawfully be used, with
fruit and edification to Gods People.

Case of great ^e, p. 3.
As for the word preached amongst us, Mr Nigh says, that there is a sum of
doctrinal truths, which in the enlargement and application, are sufficient both
for conversion and edification, to which the Preachers are to assent. And that
the word of God interpreted and applied by preaching in this way, is a choice
mercy and gift wherewith God has blessed this Nation for many Years, to the
conversion and edification of many thousands. And he afterward ascribes the
want of edification to the prejudices of People. Page 25,
Such reasonings, says he, against hearing, though they convince not the
unlawfulness of it, yet they leave such prejudices in the minds of them which
are tender, as perplex and render hearing less profitable and edifying, even to
those that are perswaed of its lawfulness. Theodulia, c. 9.. 8. p. 317.
This Mr Tombs declares himself freely in; If we look to experience of former
times, there is now ground to expect a blessing from conforming Preachers, as
well, or rather more, than from Preachers of the separated Churches. Sure the
conversion, consolation, strengthening, establishing of Souls in the truth, has
been more in England from Preachers, who were Enemies to Separation, whether
Nonconformist to Ceremonies or Conformists, Presbyterial or Episcopal, even
from Bishops themselves, than from the best of the Separatists. I think all
that are acquainted with the History of things in the last age, will
acknowledge that more good has been to the Souls of men, by the Preaching of
Usher, Potter, Abbot, Jewel, and some other Bishops; by Preston, Sibbs, Tailor,
Whately, Hildersham, Ball, Perkins, Dod, Stock, and many thousands, Adversaries
to the separated Churches, than ever was done by Ainsworth, Johnson, Robinson,
rigid Separatists, or Cotton, Tho. Hooker, and others (though men of precious
memory) promoters of the way of the Churches Congregational. And therefore if
the Bishops and conforming Preachers now apply themselves (as we hope when the
heat of contention is more allayed, they will) to the profitable way of
preaching against Popery and Profaneness, exciting Auditors to the life of
faith in Christ, etc. there may be as good ground, if not better (considering
how much the Spirits of Separatists are for their party, and the speaking of
the truth in love, and edifying in love, is necessary to the growth of the
Body, Ephesians. 4.15.) to expect by them a blessing in promoting the power of
Godliness, than from the Separatists. So that whether we consider the Worship
or Doctrine, or the preaching of it, the Church of England in their
apprehension does not want a sufficiency of means for the conversion and
edification of Souls: And consequently the argument taken from edification, in
justification of forsaking the Communion of it, is inconclusive and of no
force. But this branch of it will be further confirmed under the third general.

But however, this will not be so easily quitted, for supposing the Doctrine
good, and those that teach it capable (as far as learning and parts are
requisite) to improve it to the conversion and edification of others; yet if
they themselves are loose and scandalous, it may give just offense, and be
thought a sufficient cause to separate from the Worship in which such do
officiate.

3. Therefore I shall show, that the badness of the Ministers is of it self no
sufficient reason to forsake the Communion of a Church, or to separate from the
Worship administered in it. Seven Treatises, Tract 3. c. 4. p. 223.
What holy Mr Rogers says is a great truth; It is not to be denied, but that
the example of ignorant and unreformed, especially notorious Persons in the
Ministry, has done and does much harm; and if either they cannot be convicted,
or if their crimes be such as cannot remove them out of their places, there is
just cause of grief that such should have any thing to do in Gods matters,
which are so weighty and to be dealt withal in high reverence.

But yet before the objection is admitted, it is to be premised, 1. That if
there be such in the Church, it does not proceed from their Conformity to it.
For good and pious men of this sort always were and still are in the Church.
What there were formerly may be read in Mr Baxter, Defense, part 1. p. 57.
who thus delivers himself; When I think what learned, holy, incomparable men,
abundance of the old Conformists were, my heart rises against the thoughts of
separating from them; such as Mr Bolton, Mr Whately, Mr Fenner, etc. and
abundance other such; yea such as Bishop Jewel, Bishop Grindal, Bishop Hall,
etc. yea and the Martyrs too, as Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper himself, etc. What
there are now in the Church, he also tells us; Ibid. p. 12.
I believe there are many hundred Godly Ministers in the Parish-Churches of
England. And of his own knowledge, says, Ibid. p. 11.
I profess to know those of them, whom I take to be much better than my self; I
will say a greater word, that I know those of them whom I think as Godly and
humble Ministers, as most of the Non-Conformists whom I know. So says Dr
Bryan; Dwelling with God, Sermon. 6. p. 313.
In some Countries I am sure there are many Sober, Godly, Orthodox, able
Preachers yet in possession of the public places.

2. It is to be premised, that this argument, if of any, yet is of no farther
force than against the Congregations where such are, and so is of none against
the Church it self where are good as well as bad, nor against Parochial
Communion where such are not. Defense, part 1. p. 11.
So Mr Baxter argues; I doubt not but there are many hundred Parish Ministers,
who preach holily, and live holily, though I could wish that they were more.
And what reason have you to charge any other men's sins on them, etc. or to
think it unlawful to join with the good for the sake of the bad? this is to
condemn the sound for the sake of the infected.

Having premised this, we shall reassume the case. and consider how it is
stated and resolved by them.

1. Its granted, that it is not unlawful to join with bad Ministers in some
cases where they may have better. Tract. 3. p. 223.
So Mr Rogers; As it is far from me to be a Patron of such, or to justify
them; so yet, while we may enjoy the Ministry of better, I would not refuse to
be partaker of the Prayers which are offered by them.

2. Its granted, that its lawful and a duty to hear and join with such where a
better cannot be had; that it is lawful, so Mr Rogers; Who can blame him, who
desires to pray with better than they be? And yet better to join with them
sometime, than to leave the public Assemblies altogether. Cure Dir. 17. p. 114.
So Mr Baxter; No People should choose and prefer an ungodly Minister before a
better; but they should rather submit to such than have none, when a better by
them cannot be had. That its a duty, so the old Non-Conformists; Letter of the
Minist. in Old England to the Brethren in New England, p. 11.
The Scripture teaches evidently, that the People must and ought to join with
them [unworthy Ministers] in the Worship of God, and in separating from the
Ordinance they shall sin against God. For the Worship is of God, and the
Ministry is of God; the Person unworthily executing his place, is neither set
up by some few private Christians, nor can by them be removed: And warrant to
withdraw themselves from the Worship of God, because such as ought not, are
suffered to intermeddle with holy things, they have none from God. Trial of the
grounds, c. 13 p. 311. V. To^^^. (...), p. 17.
So Mr Ball; To communicate with Ministers no better than Pharisees in the true
Worship of God, is to worship God aright, to reverence his Ordinances, to rely
upon his Grace, to hearken unto his voice, and submit unto his good pleasure.
This they maintain by several arguments. As,

Arg. 1.
First, Such were always in the Church, and Communion must never have been held
with the Church, if no Communion was to be where such were. So the old
Non-Conformists argue; Letter of the Minist. in Old Engl. etc. p 10.
If the Minister make it unlawful, then all Communion in any part of Gods
Worship with such Ministers is unlawful, and so the Church in all ages of the
World, the Prophets, our Savior Christ, the Apostles, V. Ball's Trial, p. 310.
and the faithful in the Primitive Churches sinned, in holding Communion with
such, when the Priests were dumb Dogs that could not bark, and greedy Dogs that
could never have enough; when the Prophets prophesied lies, when the Priests
bought and sold Doves in the Temple, etc. when they were such and did such
things, they were ungodly Ministers; but we never find that the Prophets, our
Savior, and the Apostles, did either forbear themselves, or warn the faithful
not to communicate with such in the Ordinance of Worship. So much Mr Nigh does
grant; Case of great use, p. 14.
More cannot be objected against our Ministers that Conform, than might against
the Scribes and Pharisees in Christ's time; either in respect of their Doctrine;
which was laden with Traditions; their standing, which was not according to
Law; their lives, which were vicious; yet Christ not only permits, but requires
us to attend the truths they deliver.

Secondly, Arg. 2.
They plead that our Savior himself did Communicate where such did Officiate.
So Dr Bryan; In some Countries, Dwelling with God, p. 313.
I am sure there are many Sober, Godly, Orthodox, able Preachers, etc. And if
you know any Country where it is worse, consider if Christ himself did not join
with worse. Englands Remembrancer, Sermon. 4. p. 94.
This is attested by another Reverend Person; Our Savior Christ used to attend
on the public Worship in his time, notwithstanding such formalists and
superstitious ones, as the Scribes and Pharisees did officiate in it.

Arg. 3.
Thirdly, They say that the sin of the Minister is not theirs, nor does bring
any detriment to them, though they Communicate with him. Christian Directory,
p. 747. and Cure, p. 113, 114.
So Mr Baxter; A Ministers personal faults may damn himself, and must be matter
of lamentation to the Church, who ought to do their best to reform them, or get
better by any lawful means; but in case they cannot, his sin is none of theirs,
nor does it make his administration null or ineffectual, nor will it allow you
to separate from the Worship which he administreth. Account given to the
Parliment, p. 27.
So the Ministers sent to Oxford do assert; Some evil men may and always have
de facto been Officers and Ministers in the Church, etc. and the wickedness of
such men did not null or evacuate their Ministerial Acts, for our Savior would
have the Scribes and Pharisees heard while they sat in Moses Chair, etc. And
that the Ministrations in such a case are not invalid, and that the People
suffer not by it they further prove: 1. Because they officiate not in their own
name. So the Old Non-Conformists; Letter of the Ministers, p. 11.
It has evermore been held for a truth in the Church of God, that although
sometimes the evil has chief authority in the Ministration of the Word and
Sacraments; yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name but in
Christ's, and minister by his commission and authority, we may use their
Ministry both in hearing the Word and receiving the Sacraments; neither is the
effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their wickedness. 2. The virtue of
the Ordinance does not depend upon their goodness but Gods promise. Tract 3. p.
223.
So Mr Rogers says of Prayer; If this burden [of bad Ministers] must be born,
I ask, if among many sweet liberties we enjoy, we may not join in Prayer with
them, if we can pray in faith, seeing their unworthiness cannot withhold the
fruit of Gods promise from us which is to one kind of Prayer as well as
another. So says Mr Cradacot of the Word; Farewell Sermons, Vol. 3. p. 22, 23.
Take heed, says he, of being leavened with prejudice against the Ministry of
the Word, because of the misdemeanors or miscarriage of the Minister. It is the
word of the Lord which converts, not the Person of the dispenser or speaker.
Hence it was that the Ministry of the Scribes and Pharisees was not to be
rejected but to be esteemed, so long as they failed not in the substance
thereof, etc. I conceive its a rare thing for unconverted Ministers to convert,
and yet we must remember not to tie the efficacy of the Word and Sacraments to
the goodness or badness of a Ministers Person. Case of great* use, p. 14.
So when its objected; How can we expect a blessing upon the labors of such
though they preach truth? Mr. Nigh replys. Answ. 1. The mixtures in Sermons are
nearest, the irregularities of their calling next, the sins of their
conversations furthest from their Doctrine, and therefore have less efficacy at
such a distance to prejudice it. Answ. 2. Its Gods word and not their own they
preach, etc. 3. That if Persons themselves do believe and are sincere, they
are, notwithstanding such a Ministry, accepted. The sacrifice of a faithful
Elkanah, says one, Englands Remembrancer, Sermon. 4. p. 94.
was pleasing to God, even when Hophni and Phineas were Priests. From all which
we find some declaring, that notwithstanding this they would Communicate. So a
Reverend Person; Bonasus Vap^lans, p. 133.
The Peoples prejudices against the Liturgy, are grounded for the most part
upon the wicked lives of those that are the most constant readers and
frequenters of it [doubtless the Author if he had considered this, would rather
have said that they are grounded upon the wicked lives of some of those that
read and frequent it.] I shall never upon that account cease to join in Prayers
and to hear Sermons. Others we find exhorting their Auditors to attend even
upon such. So Mr R. Fairclough in his Farewell Sermons; (...) Legacy, p. 125.
Get all good from, show all duty* to him that follows -- If he should be weak,
or evil, yet while he preaches truths, while he sits in Moses Chair, hear him
seriously, and carry your selves toward him as becomes a People to their
Minister.

I have thus far considered the case of scandalous Ministers, because many make
it an objection, as well those that are not concerned as those that are.
Otherwise it must be acknowledged, that England was never better provided with
a learned and pious Ministry than at present; Non-Conformists Plea for
Conformists, p. 12. and 23.
who have as good understanding, preach as good Doctrine, do as much good by
their Preaching as any others, as a late writer does confess. But though many
Congregations are well supplied with a Pious, Able, and Industrious Ministry,
yet there are few or none but what have some, more or less amongst the Laity,
that are (as it may be supposed) not fit to be received into Communion with a
Church, or to be communicated with. This brings me to the next thing in
Worship, which is,

On the Sacrament, p. 235.
4. The case of mixed Communion. This is a plea, says Mr. Vines, that is
plausible to easy capacities, because it pretends to set up holiness of
Ordinances and People, but what the eminent Dissenters do utterly disclaim; Mr.
Vines says it is Donatistical, and others, as Mr. Brinsley and Mr. Jenkin,
Brinsley's Arraignment, p. 37, 38.
that its the common plea or pretense which for the moct part has been taken
up by all Schismatics in defense of their separation from the Church; Jenk. on
Jude, v. 19.
and therefore that it is necessary the People should be untaught it, Baily's
disswasive, p. 22.
as Mr. Baxter does advise. And as they do disclaim it, Sacril. desert. p. 97.
so they declare that those that separate upon this account do it very unjustly
Cawdrey's Reformation promoted, p. 131.
; that the scandals of professors are ground of mourning, but not of separation
Manton on Jude, p. 496.
; that there may be a sufficient cause to cast out obstinate sinners, and yet
not sufficient cause for one to leave the Church, though such be not cast ^ut
Vines on Sacrament, p. 242.
. That the suffering of profane and scandalous livers to continue in the
Church, Platform c. 14.. 8.
and partake in the Sacrament, is doubtless a great sin; V. Cotton's Holiness
of Church Members, p. 2.
yet the godly are not presently to separate from it. There is, says Mr
Buroughs, an error on both sides; Gospel Worship, Sermon. 11. p. 242.
either those that think it concerns them not at all with whom they come to the
Sacrament, or those that if they do what they can to keep the scandalous away,
and yet they should be suffered to come, that they themselves may not come to
partake of it. This both the Presbyterians and Independents so far agree in;
and for this their opinion they urge several Arguments.

First, Its no where commanded, Arg. 1.
but is a vain pretending to holiness above rule and example, On Sacrament, p.
246. p. 31.
says Mr Vines. Its no duty, as he elsewhere says, because there is no
command; its no duty, and therefore we read not this word, come forth, in any
of the Epistles written to the seven Churches, against which Christ says he
has such and such things. They that lived in the impurer are not called forth
into the purer, but there are promises made to them that keep themselves pure,
and duties enjoined them toward the impurer part. For we may not make every
Disease the Plague. Shall the Sons of God, the Angels, forsake the Lords
presence, because Satan came also amongst them, etc. The Provincial Assembly of
London does affirm; Vindicat. of Presbyt. Govern. p. 134.
In the Church of Corinth was such a profane mixture at the Sacrament, as we
believe few, Brinsl^y's Arraign. p. 47.
if any of our Congregations can be charged withal: And yet the Apostle does
not persuade the godly party to separate, Firmin's Separation examined, p. 40.
much less to gather a Church out of a Church. From which consideration Mr.
Tombs concludes; Cawdrey's Church Reformat p. 71.
Sure it can be no sin in any Person to join in the true Worship and service of
God with any, Theodulia, p. 74.
if he have no command to withdraw himself from that service because of their
presence, nor power to exclude them, and yet is bound to the duties there
performed.

Nay, they do not only plead that its not commanded, but that its forbidden and
unlawful. So Mr Hooker; Survey of Discipline, Pref. A. 3.
To separate from a Church because of the sin of some Worshippers is unlawful.
So the New England Ministers do declare; Platform, c. 14.. 9.
As separation from a Church, wherein profane and scandalous livers are
tolerated, is not presently necessary: So for the Members thereof, otherwise
worthy, hereupon to abstain from Communion with such a Church, in the
participation of the Sacraments, is unlawful.

Arg. 2.
Secondly, They plead, that the communicating in Gods service with open
sinners, whom the Godly in some of our Assemblies are enforced to communicate
with, Grave confut. part 3. p. 53.
is not sufficient to make such profane, or to pollute to them the holy things
of God: So the old Non-Conformists. On the Sacrament, p. 242. and p. 31, 32.
So Mr Vines; The presence of wicked men at Gods Ordinances, pollutes not them
that are neither accessory to their sin, nor yet to their presence there.
Gospel Worship, Sermon. 11. p. 236, 237.
This Mr Buroughs disclaims; You are not defiled by the mere presence of
wicked men in the Sacrament (for that is a mere deceit and gull, that some
would put upon men that differ from them) but thus are you defiled if you do
not your duty, and the uttermost you are able, to purge them out. But if this
be done according to the power and capacity Persons are in, its universally
granted that the Innocent shall not suffer for the Nocent. So Mr. Ball; Trial,
c. 10. p. 191, 205.
The precept of debarring scandalous offenders binds them to whom God has
given this power, V. Jeans discourse on the Lords Supper. Rutherford right of
Presbyt.
and them only so far as God has put it in their power. But God regularly does
not leave that power in the hand of one single Steward, or some few private
Christians -- And if the Steward, or one or few private Christians, cannot
debar the unworthy from the Lords Table, it is manifest the Ordinance of God is
not defiled to them by the presence of the wicked, whom they desire to reform
or expel, but cannot, because power is not in their hand to do it lawfully.

This they confirm, 1. From the examples of the Prophets and good men, Grave
confut. part 3. p. 53. and 55.
who of old joined with many that were notoriously stained with gross sins;
from the practice of our Savior that communicated with such in the public
service of God; Ball's Trial, p. 211.
from the practice of Christians in Apostolical times, Platform, c. 14.. 8.
all which the old Non-Conformists do insist upon. Blake Vindic. p. 235.
This is also pleaded by those of New England and others.

This would make all the sins of the Congregation to be ours. So Mr Baxter;
Christian Directory, p. 747.
If you be wanting in your duty to reform it, it is your sin; V.
Non-Conformists no Schismatics, p. 16.
but if bare presence made their sin to be ours, it would also make all the
sins of the Assembly ours.

From all which it appears that their sense is, that scandalous Members are no
sufficient reason for Separation; for that must be, either be cause its
commanded in Scripture, or that those that do communicate with such, are in so
doing corrupted also; but if neither of these be, then we may safely
Communicate with such, or in a Church where such are without sin.

Thirdly, To separate upon this ground, Arg. 3.
Vines on the Sacrament, p. 244.
is to maintain a Principle destructive to the Communion of the Church visible,
which consists of good and bad. This Mr Cotton is peremptory in;
Infant Baptism, p. 102.
It is utterly untrue to say that Christ admits not of any dead Plants to be
set in his Vineyard, V. Bains on the (...) c. 1. v. 1. p 5.
or that he takes not to himself a compounded body of living and dead Members,
or that the Church of God is not a mixed Company, etc. From the ill effects of
which, In Proverb. Edwards Apol.
Mr Cartwright used to call this Separation, upon pretense of greater purity,
the white Devil.

And because there are some Scriptures that seem to look this way, and are made
use of by those that make mixed Communion an argument for Separation; therefore
they have taken off the force of them.

Object. 1.
If a Brother be a Fornicator, etc. the Apostle exhorts not to eat with him. 1
Cor. 5.11.


To this they answer,

Ans. 1.
That if it be meant of excluding such an one from Church Communion, Defense,
part 2. p. 27.
it must be done by the Church and not a private person. Cawdrey's Church
Reformat. p. 126.
But you are not commanded to separate from the Church, if they exclude him
not; So Mr Baxter, etc.

Ans. 2.
That it concerns not religious but civil Communion, and that not all civil
society or commerce, but familiar only. For which they produce several reasons,
1. They argue from the notion of eating bread, which is a token of love and
friendship in phrase of Scripture, Ball's Trial, p. 200.
Brinsley's Arraignment, p. 45.
not to partake of or to be shut from the Table, is a sign of familiarity
broken off. So Mr. Ball, etc. 2. Jenk. on Jude, v. 19.
The eating which is here forbidden is allowed to be with an Heathen, Tombs's
Theodulia, p. 210.
but its the civil eating which is only allowed to be with an Heathen;
therefore its the civil eating which is forbidden to be with a Brother. So Mr
Jenkin, etc. 3. The eating here forbidden is for the punishment of the nocent
not of the innocent. To these there are added others by the old
Non-Conformists. Grave Confut. part 4. p. 57.


As for other objections they are also undertaken by the same hands, Tomb's
Theodulia, p. 167.
and to which Mr Baxter's answer is sufficient; If you m^^k all the Texts in
the Gospel, Cawdrey's Reformat. p. 75.
you shall find that all the separation which is commanded in such cases
(besides our separation from the Infidels and Idolatrous World, Cure Dir. 9. P.
81.
or Antichristian and Heretical Confederacies, and No-Churches) is but one of
these two sorts, 1. Either that the Church cast out the impenitent by the power
of the Keys. Or, 2. That private men avoid all private familiarity with them;
but that the private Members should separate from the Church, because such
persons are not cast out of it, show me one Text to prove it if you can. This,
says Mr Vines, On the Sacrament, p. 246.
has not a syllable of Scripture to allow or countenance it. Tomb's Theod. p.
128.


But supposing it be allowed that we ought not to separate from a Church, where
corrupt Members are tolerated or connived at under some present circumstances
(as for want of due proof, or through particular favor) yet it seems to be
allowable where there is no Discipline exercised, or taken care of. For then we
are without an Ordinance. To avoid this objection, I shall consider,

2. The case with respect to Discipline, and shall England.

The former of these they do own and prove.

First, Arg 1.
As Discipline is not necessary to the being of a Church. T. C's. Letter to
Harrison against Separation in the Defense of the Admonit. p. 98, 99.
This was of old maintained by Mr Cartwright, who thus argues; That Church
Assemblies are builded by Faith only on Christ the Foundation, the which Faith
so being, whatsoever is wanting of that which is commanded, or remaining of
that which is forbidden, is not able to put that Assembly from the right and
title of so being the Church of Christ -- For though there be many things
necessary for every Assembly, yet they be necessary to the comely and stable
being, and not simply to the being of the Church. And afterward he gives an
instance in the Dutch Assemblies (or Lutheran Churches) which, P. 106.
he says, are maimed in Discipline. Com. on the Ephesians. p. 487, 488.
So Dr T. Goodwin; Whereas now in some of the Parishes of this Kingdom, there
are many Godly Men that do constantly give themselves up to the Worship of God
in public, etc. These notwithstanding their mixture and want of Discipline, I
never thought for my part, but that they were true Churches of Christ, and
Sister Churches, and so ought to be acknowledged. So that if Discipline be not
essential to a true Church, and a true Church is not to be separated from (as
has been proved above) then the want of Discipline is no sufficient reason for
Separation.

Arg. 2.
Secondly, This they further prove by an induction of particulars. Vindiciae c.
31. p. 236, 238.
This way Mr. Blake proceeds in; Discipline was neglected in the Church of
Israel, yet none of the Prophets or men of God ever made attempt of getting up
purer select Churches, V. Grave Confut. part 1. p. 18.
or made separation from that which was in this sort faulty. All was not right
in the exercise of Discipline in the Churches planted by the Apostles, some are
censured as foully faulty, etc. yet nothing heard by way of advice for any to
make Separation, nor any one instance of a Separatist given.

Vines on Sacrament, c. 19. p. 226.
To come lower, we are told by a learned person, that the Helvetian or
Switzerland Churches claim to be Churches, and have the Notes, Word, and
Sacraments, though the order of Discipline be not settled among them, V.
Gillespie's Ni ^il r^spondes, p. 33.
and I am not he that shall blot out their name. To come nearer home, it was so
in the late times when this was wanting, as was acknowledged Knutton's seven
Queries. Brinsley's Arraign. p. 48.
, and of which Mr. Vines says On Sacram. p. 219.
, we know rather the name than the thing. And if we shall look into the several
Church Assemblies amongst the Dissenters, we shall find, Troughton's Apol. p.
65.
that there are many Preachers without full pastoral charge, as it is
acknowleded, and that have little authority over their flocks in this kind,
that have not so much as the name of Discipline amongst them. And so they have
little reason to justify themselves in a Separation by such an argument, that
will as well wound themselves as those they bend it against; and they that do
so are guilty of Sin. So Mr. Baxter; Cure Dir. 47. p. 231.
Many that observe the pollution of the Church by the great neglect of holy
Discipline, avoid this error by turning to a sinful Separation. I shall
conclude this with that grave advice of Dr. Owen; Evangel. Love, c. 3. p. 77.
When any Church, whereof a man is by his own consent antecedently a Member,
does fall in part or in whole from any of those Truths which it has professed,
or when it is overtaken with a neglect of Discipline or Irregularities in its
Administration; such a one is to consider, that he is placed in his present
state by Divine Providence, that he may orderly therein endeavor to put a stop
unto such defections, and to exercise his Charity, Love, and Forbearance
toward the persons of them whose miscarriages at present he cannot remedy. In
such cases there is a large and spacious Field for Wisdom* Patience, Love and
prudent Zeal to exercise themselves. And it is a most erverse imagination, that
Separation is the only cure for Church disorders. If this advice be good in one
case, it is so in another; and if it were well understood, and faithfully
followed, this argument would be of little or no force.

2. I shall show how little this plea of the Defective Discipline reaches the
case. Its granted that there is such a Power and Authority of Ecclesiastical
Discipline resident in the Church of England, that if open and scandalous
persons are not cast out, the fault is in the Governors, for the Law takes
order they shall be, V. Grave Confut. part 1. p. 17.
as Dr Bryan says Dwelling with God, Sermon. 6. p. 301.
. And the power of suspension put thereby into the Ministers hands is so
evident, Firmin Separation examined, p. 28.
that after Dr Collins had proved it from the Rubricks, Canons, etc. he
concludes Provocator provocatus, p. 151. and 154.
its plain that the judgment and practice of the Church of England in all
times, ever since it was a Church, has been to suspend some from the Table of
the Lord. So that if there be defects, V. Vines on Sacrament, c. 19. p. 233.
through some past and present obstructions in the exercise of Discipline, yet
cannot the Church properly stand charged with them, Brinsley's Arraign. p. 40.
as is acknowledged Brinsley's Arraign. p. 48.
; Cawdrey's Church Reformat. p. 122.
or whatever may be charged upon the Church, there can be no sufficient cause
from a defect, remisness or corruption therein, for a Separation from it. This
was the constant judgment of the old Non-Conformists, Jenk. on Jude v. 19.
which I shall transcribe from a grave Author; Those, says he, that for many
Years together, Blake's Vindiciae, c. 31. p. 236.
during the Reign of the three last Princes, denied to come up to a full
Conformity to this Church, had a low opinion of the Discipline then exercised
(of which they have left behind them large evidences) yet how tender were they
of the Churches honor to keep Christians in Communion? how zealous were they
against Separation? as may appear in the labors of Mr Parker, Mr Paget, Mr
Ball. Mr Brightman laid us low enough, when he did not only parallel us with
lukewarm Laodicea, but made that Church the Type and we the Antitype, by
reason of our Discipline; yet how zealous is he against Separation from these
Assemblers, and breaks out in these words; Therefore their error is wicked and
blasphemous, who so forsake the Church, as if Christ were altogether banished
thence.

Having thus far considered what opinion the graver sort of the Non-Conformists
have of Communion with a Church, and what rules they do lay down about it, and
showed that according to those rules, Separation from the Church is unlawful. I
shall close all with the last advice given by a Reverend Person to his
Parishioners in a Farewell Sermon in these words; Englands Remembrancer, Sermon.
16. p. 454.
Take heed of extremes. It is the ordinary Temptation in a time of differences,
to think we cannot run too far from them we differ from, and so whilst we
decline one Rock we split upon another. Remember the old Non-Conformists were
equal Enemies to Superstition and Separation. Maintain (I beseech you) sober
Principles, such as these are, that every defective Ministry is not a false
Ministry; that sinful super-additions do not nullify Divine institutions; that
sinful defects in Ordinances do not hinder the saving effects of them. That
there is a difference betwixt directing a Worship, prescribing things simply
evil and manifestly idolatrous, and directing about Worship, things doubtfully
good being enjoined, but the unquestionable substance of Worship being
maintained. This latter does not justify Separation.

And that the supposed corruptions in the Church of England are of that nature,
as do not affect the substance of it, nor are such but what may be safely
communicated in, I shall now proceed to show from them.

3. Genera l.

Letter of the Minist. of Old Engl. p 12, 13. Bryan's Dwelling with God, p 311.


3. I shall consider what opinion the eminent Non-Conformists have had of the
several practices in the Church of England that are enjoined upon those that
hold Lay-Communion with it, which respect Forms, Gestures, Time, etc. In
general they acknowledge that they are things tolerable, T^^^'s Theod. p. 230.
and what no Church is without more or less d. Tr^^ghton's Apol c. ^ p. 68.
2. That they are not sufficient to hinder Communion. 3. That they are but few
Owen's Peace-Offer. p. 17. Mischief of Impositions, Epist. Dedic.
.

First, Forms, and so its required of the Members of the Church that they join
in the use of Liturgy or Common Prayer. For the better understanding their
judgment in this matter, I shall show what their opinion is of Forms of Prayer,
of public Forms, of Forms prescribed, and of that particular Form of Divine
Service used in this Church.

1. The use of Forms is declared by them to be a thing lawful in it self, and
what God has left us at liberty to use or not to use as we see occasion. So
Mr. Ball; Trial, c. 2. p. 36. etc. 8. p. 131.
The word of God does not prescribe any particular Form, stinted or not
stinted, as necessary, but does warrant both as allowable; for where nothing is
in particular commanded touching the external Form of Words and Order, in which
our Petitions should be presented to the Lord, Cure of Church Divis. p. 175.
there we are left at liberty. And to put Religion in reading or uttering Words
in a stinted or conceived Form, Tomb's Theod. p. 137.
what is it less than Superstition? Of the same mind is Mr. Baxter and others
Sacril. deser^. p. 98, 99.
. And even Dr. Owen, though he does disallow the composing Forms of Prayer for
our own private use, V. Dissenting Brethren in 32 Quests, p. 55.
yet at the same time declares Discourse of the Work of the Spirit in Prayer,
p. 220, 235.
, that he does not argue against Forms of Prayer as unlawful to be used. And he
adds a little after; If they appear not contrary unto, or inconsistent with, or
are not used in a way exclusive of that work of the Holy Spirit in prayer,
which we have described from Scripture, etc. I shall not contend with any about
them.

But they do not only assert, but they also undertake to prove the lawfulness
of Forms Ball's Trial, c. 2.
, R^gers Tr. 223.
Bryan's Dwelling with God, p 307.
from the nature, use, and ends of prayer, and charge the contrary opinion with
Enthusiasm Grave confut. Ep. to Reader. Continuat. of Morn. Exer. p. 1006.
, and Novelty Freion Sermon. on Jo. 1.16.
.

Secondly, As to Forms in public, they declare, 1. That it is lawful to use
them, and that this was the Tenent of all our best and most judicious Divines
Clark's Lives of 10 Divines, p. 255.
This Dr. Owen is cautious of denying, who says, Supposing that those who make
use of, and plead for Forms of prayer, especially in public, do in a due
manner prepare themselves for it by holy meditation, etc. I do not judge that
there is any such evil in them as that God will not communicate his spirit to
any in the use of them. Ball's Trial, p. 11.
2 They do not only grant it lawful to use them, Owen's Disc. of Prayer, p. 231.
but that it is expedient. So Mr. Egerton declares, Pract. of Christianity, c.
11. p 691. Edit 5.
As for the public Congregation, special care must be had that nothing be done
in Praying, Preaching or Administering the Sacraments, but what is decent and
orderly, because there many Eyes do see us, and many Ears hear us; and upon
this account, it is expedient for the most part to keep a constant Form both of
matter and words. Life of Mr. W. Brad^haw, in Mr Clark's Collection in Fol. p.
6^.
Mr. Bradshaw pleads for it (as Mr. Gataker informs us in his life) for the
avoiding hesitation, which in Prayer is more offensive than in other discourse.
Continuat. of Morn. Exer. Sermon. 31. p. 1006.
And when in a late collection of Sermons we find it complained of, that in our
days some have such Schismatical Phrases, Notions, and Doctrines in Preaching,
Praying, and Praising, that a sober Christian cannot say, Amen; it renders a
Form so much the more considerable. Collection of the Lives of 10 Divines, p.
255. Life of M. Cap^l.
3. They declare that public Forms were universally used. So Mr. Clark says,
That set Forms of Prayer are according to the practice of all Churches, even
the best Reformed; yea, and Mr. Smith himself says, upon the Lords Prayer
(though as then he was warping, and afterward wandered far in the ways of
Separation) that it was the practice of the ancient Church, and of all the
Reformed Churches in Christendom, of the Churches immediately after the
Apostles; nay (says he) of the Church in the time of the Apostles, as may be
probably gathered out of 1 Cor. 14.26. This has also been the practice of the
best Lights that ever were set up in the Churches of Christ. 4. Accordingly
this was the practice of the old Non-Conformists. So Mr. Clark; Ibid.
It is very well known that the flower of our own Divines went on in this way,
when they might have done otherwise, if they had pleased, in their Prayers
before Sermons. This we are told of Mr. Bradshaw and Mr. Cartwright Bradshaw's
Life published by Mr. Clark in Fol. p. 67.
. And we find Mr. Hildersham's Prayer before Sermon Printed His Doctrine of
Fasting and Prayer, An. 1633.
, and others. This was so universally and constantly practiced, that Mr. Clark
tells us Collection of 10 Lives, 4o. p. 38.
, that the first man who brought conceived Prayer into use in those parts where
he lived, was Mr. Sam. Crook, who dyed but in the Year 1649.

Thirdly, As to prescribed Forms and Liturgies, of this Mr. Ball says; Trial,
Epist. to Reader.
I have showed the use of a stinted Liturgy lawful and allowable by the Word of
God, of ancient use in the Churches of Christ, approved by all Reformed
Churches, which is a very convenient method for the consideration of their
judgment in the case. 1. They grant that they are lawful, its contrary to no
precept or commandment directly or by lawful consequence, Trial, c. 1. p. 5. c.
3. p. 23.
says Mr. Ball. So Mr. Norton of New England does determine; Answ. to
Apollonius, c. 13.
Such things being observed as are to be observed, it may be lawful to use
Forms of Prayers, etc. prescribed in the Church; neither are the Churches which
use them guilty of Superstition, Will Worship, and violating the second
Commandment. Discourse of Prayer, p. 222. and 235.
And Dr. Owen himself complys with it, who yields, That Men or Churches may
agree upon a prescribed Form by common consent, as judging and avowing it best
for their own edification; and only argues against prescribing such Forms of
Prayer universally, in opposition, and unto the exclusion of free Prayer. 2.
They grant that they are not only lawful, but that there are footsteps of this
way of Worship both in the Old and New Testament, as Mr. Tombs and others have
showed, Ba^. Cure, p. 176.
Ball's Trial, p. 1^8, 129.
and Mr. Ainsworth himself (that did otherwise argue against them) does confess
Tombs's T^eod^^ia, p. 221.
. 3. They grant that they are very ancient in the Christian Church: Grave
Confut. p. 12, 13.
Ainsworth's Annot. on Ex. 12.8.
The Christian Churches of ancient times for the space of this 1400 Years at
least, if not from the Apostles time have had their stinted Liturgies, says Mr
Ball Trial, p. 96, 106, 11^, 138. and p 8^.
: And they answer Objections to the contrary Tomb's Theodulia. p. 222.
. 4 They grant that in the best Reformed, nay in all Reformed Churches, they
are not only used and tolerated, but also useful and expedient. Ball's Trial,
p. 108, etc.
5 That those amongst us, Rogers's Treatises, p. 224.
to whom the use of the Common Prayer has been thought most burdensome, have
from time to time professed their liking and approbation of a stinted Liturgy,
Tomb's Theod. p. 224.
as Mr. Ball assures us. Ball's Trial, p. 96, 106, 120.
Trial, p. 121.
6. That they thought it altogether unlawful to separate from a Church for the
sake of stinted Forms and Liturgies. This is not only frequently affirmed by
Mr. Ball Trial, p. 121, 129, 140, 156.
, but little less even by Mr. Norton Resp. ad Apoll. c. 13.
, who says, It is lawful to embrace Communion with Churches, where such Forms
in public Worship are in use; neither does it lie as a duty on a Believer,
that he disjoyn and separate himself from such a Church: And they give this
reason for it, that then they must separate from all Churches. Sacril. desert.
p. 102.
So Mr Baxter, etc. Is it not a high degree of Pride to conclude, Defense, part
2. p. 65.
that almost all Christ's Churches in the World for these thirteen hundred Years
at least to this day, Ball's Trial, p. 138.
have offered such Worship unto God, Rogers's 7 Tr. p. 224.
as that you are obliged to avoid it; and that almost all the Catholic Church
on Earth this day is below your Communion for using Forms; and that even Calvin
and the Presbyterians, Cartwright, Hildersham, and the old Non-Conformists were
unworthy your Communion. I know there are several Objections against Forms of
Prayer, but I know also that these are answered by them. But since the most
common is, that of quenching and stinting the Spirit; I shall briefly give
their sense of it. They say,

Rogers's 7 Tr. Tr. 3. c. 4. p. 223.
1. To say that persons should use no set Form, but pray as moved by the Spirit,
is a fond error.

Ball's Trial, c. 5. p. 83.
2. They say, that the Spirit instructs us what to ask, not in what phrase of
speech. It stirs up in us holy desires, but gives not ability suddenly and
without help to express and lay open our hearts in fit method and significant
Words -- Ability of speech is a common gift of the Spirit, which the Lord
bestows upon good and bad, etc.

Ibid. p. 91.
3. That the measure of the Spirit stands not in Words and Forms, but in
fervent sighs and groans.

Rogers, Ibid.
4. That there is nothing lets, but that in such Forms the hearers hearts may
profitably go with the same both to humble, to quicken, and to comfort. And Dr
Owen cannot deny but that they may be for edification, Disc. of Prayer, p. 222,
231, 232.
and that persons in the use of them may have Communion with God.

5. They say that the Scriptures insisted upon in this case are grounded upon
mistakes, and are misapplyed, as Mr Tombs in particular has clearly
manifested. Theodulia, p. 164, 238.


Fourthly, I shall consider what their opinion is as to the English Liturgy or
Common Prayer, both as to the Liturgy it self and Communion in it. As to the
Liturgy it self, its acknowledged,

1. That the matter for the most part is good, Bryan's Dwelling with God, Sermon.
6. p 312.
sound and divine, and that there is not any doctrinal passage in any of the
Prayers, Baxt. Def. part 1. p. 29, 59.
that may not bear a good construction, and so Amen may be said to it,
Croston's Refor. no Separ. p. 25.
as Dr Bryan with others do maintain.

2. That as no Church for this 1400 Years has been without its public Forms,
T.D. Jeru^baal p. 35.
so ours is the best. So the old Non-Conformists; Compare the Doctrines, Letter
of the Minist. in Old Engl. p. 12.
Prayers, Rites at those times [throughout] in use in the Churches with ours,
and in all these (blessed be the name of the Lord) we are more pure than they
And its not much short that we find in Mr Baxter in the name of the present
Non-Conformists. Second Plea for Peace, p. 101.


3. That which is accounted faulty is tolerable, and hinders not but that its
acceptable to God, and edifying to pious and well-disposed Persons.

Tolerable. So Mr Corbet; Plea for Lay-Communion, p. 2.
The Worship contained in the Liturgy may lawfully be partaked in, it being
found for substance in the main, V. Ball's Trial, c. 9. p. 158.
and the mode thereof being laudable in diverse Forms and Orders, and passable
in the most, though in some offensive, inconvenient, or less perfect.

Acceptable to God. So the old Non-Conformists; Letter of Ministers in Old
Engl. p. 13.
In them that join with the Prayers, according to Christ's command (and liberty
of absence from Christ has not been showed) notwithstanding the corruptions,
we hold the Prayers to be an holy acceptable Sacrifice to God, etc.

Edifying to well-disposed Persons. To this purpose Mr Hildersham, Treat. 3. c.
4. p. 224.
Mr Rogers, etc.

And accordingly Mr Corbet professes his own experience; Plea, p. 1.
Though I judge their Form of Worship to be in many respects less perfect than
is desired, yet I have found my heart spiritually affected and raised toward
God therein, and more especially in receiving the Lords Supper. I judge this
Form may be use formally by the formal, Sacril desert. p. 105.
and spiritually by those that are spiritual. It is my part to make the best of
it, being the established Form. As to Communion in the Liturgy, it is granted,
1. That there is no cause to renounce it, or the Communion of the Church for it
Corbet's Plea, p. 3.
, and that so to do is a Sin Gifford's plain Declaration. Ball's Trial, c. 7.
p. 121.
. 2. That all the Reformed Churches in Christendom, do commonly profess to hold
Communion with the English Churches in the Liturgy, if they come among us where
it is used Mr. Baxter's Def. of Cure, p. 68.
. Mr. Hamphry's Healing Paper, p. 5.
3. Its declared on the part of the old Non-Conformists, Mr. Baxter's Disp. 4.
of Church Gover. p 364.
That they ordinarily and constantly used the Communion-Book in their public
Ministrations Ball's Trial, p. 121. c. 8. p. 155.
; and that the People generally were in their days satisfied in it Letter of
Ministers of Old Engl. p. 14.
. And for the present its declared, We can lawfully not only hear
Common Prayer, Mr. S. Faircl^ugh's Life, p. 157.
but read it our selves Mr. Read's Case p. 7.
.

Trial. c. 8. p. 152.
I shall not trouble the Reader with the several Objections against the Liturgy,
and the answers returned to them by the old and present Non-Conformists, but
shall content my self with that, which it seems was much insisted upon in the
days of Mr Ball, and their reply to it.

Object.
The Liturgy in the whole matter and Form thereof is too like unto the
Mass Book.

Answ.
If the Liturgy be Antichristian, it is so either in respect of the matter or
of the Form. Not of the matter; for that which properly belonged to Antichrist,
the foul and gross errors, is purged out. Not of the Form; for Order and Phrase
of speech is not properly Antichristian.

2. That the English Liturgy is gathered according to the Ancients, the purest
of them, P. 155.
V. Letter of the Minist. in Old Engl. p. 14.
and is not a collection out of the Mass Book, but a refining of that Liturgy
which heretofore had been stained with the Mass, Dr. Bryan's Dwelling with God,
p. 309, 310.
etc. and is not a translation of the Mass, but a restitution of the ancient
Liturgy. Mr. Baxter's Cure p. 281.


Thus says that Learned Person and much more, to whom many others do likewise
consent. And in this Mr. Tombs is so zealous, that he concludes; Theodulia, p.
102.
I cannot but judge that either much ignorance, or much malice it is that makes
any traduce the English Common Prayer Book, as if it were the Popish Mass Book,
or as bad as it, and to deter men from joining with those Prayers and Services
therein, which are good, as if it were joining with Antichrist the Pope, (when
they can hardly be ignorant that the Martyrs in Queen Mary' s days were burnt
for it) is impudent falsehood.

Having thus far considered the Forms, I shall now

As to Kneeling,

1. Its granted that the posture in the Sacrament is not determined. So Mr.
Baxter; Christ. Direct. p. 616.
I never yet heard anything to prove Kneeling unlawful, there is no Word of God
for or against any gesture.

2. It is granted whatever the gesture of our Savior in it was, yet that does
not oblige. V. Faldo's Dialogue 'twixt a Minister and a Quaker.
This Mr Tombs has undertaken to show, 1. Because this gesture seems not to
have been of choice used by Christ. Noye's Temple measured, p. 81.
2. Because St Paul omits the gesture, which he would not have done, if it had
been binding. Theod. p. 168.
3. He mentions the night, and calls it the Lords Supper, and if the time be
not necessary, much less the gesture. 4. If the gesture does oblige, then
Christians must use the self same that Christ used.

3. It is granted that the nature of the ordinance does not forbid kneeling.
Christian Letters, Let. 24. p. 201.
So Mr Bains, kneeling is not unbeseeming a Feaster, when our joy must be
mingled with reverent trembling. Direct. p. 616.
So Mr Baxter, The nature of the ordinance is mixed. And if it be lawful to
take a pardon from the King upon our knees, I know not what can make it
unlawful to take a sealed pardon from Christ by his Ambassador upon our Knee.
Disswasive, c. 2 p. 30 etc. 6 p. 121, 122.
Hence Mr Bayley reckons it as an error of some Independents, that they
accounted sitting necessary as a rite significant of fellowship with Christ, V.
Johnson's Christian Plea, Treat. 3. c 10. p. 285.
and a part of our imitation of him, and for both these reasons, declared it
necessary to keep on their hats at the time of participation.

Lettters, Ibid.
4. It is granted not to be idolatrous. So Mr Bains. Kneeling is neither an
occasion, nor by participation Idolatry: V Baxt. Christ. Direct. p. 616.
kneeling never bred Bread-worship. And our doctrine of the Sacrament, known to
all the world, does free us from suspicion of adoration in it.

Theodulia, p. 256, etc.
To these Mr Tombs adds, 1. that the Papists adore not the bread at putting into
their mouths, but at the elevation. It being inconsistent with their principles
to worship that which is not above them. 2. That the worship of God not
directed to a creature, V. T. D. Jerubbaal, p. 41. and Mr. Croston's Answ. p.
28.
but before it, as an occasional object of adoration to God is not Idolatry. 3.
That yet in the Church of England the Elements are not occasionally so, V.
Ames's Fresh Sult, c. 4. 4. p. 382.
but the benefits of Christ in the Lords Supper; and 4. Kneeling is not to the
Bread, but as the signification of an humble and grateful mind, Perkins's cases.
as he shows from the Rubric.

5 thly, Those that do account it inconvenient, yet account it not to be
unlawful. Thus Mr Cartwright, Evangel. Harm. on Luke 22. v. 14, etc.
Kneeling in receiving the Sacrament, being incommodious in its own nature,
Second reply, p. 262.
and made far more incommodious by Popish superstition, is not therefore so to
be rejected, that we should abstain from the Sacrament (if we cannot otherwise
be partakers of it) because the thing is not in its own nature unlawful. So its
said of the old Nonconformists, Troughton's Apol. p. 90.
Kneeling at the Sacrament was disliked by all, but yet thought tolerable, and
that it might be submitted to by some of the most learned.

From all which we may conclude with Mr. Vines, On the Sacrament, p. 102.
that the posture being a circumstance of action, as well as the time and
place, is not of the Freehold of the ordinance; and with Mr. Baxter, Sacril.
desert. p. 19.
that those that think they must not receive, kneeling, think erroneously. As
for standing up at the Creed, etc. Christ. Direct. p. 858.
Mr. Baxter says, his judgment is for it, where it is required, Sacril.
desert. p. 96.
and where not doing it would be divisive and scandalous. Nay elsewhere he
says, that it is a convenient praising gesture, etc.

Thus I have considered the most material points, in which the Lay-members of
the Church of England are concerned, and showed that the lawfulness of the
things enjoined upon such, is declared and justified by the suffrage and
judgment of as eminent Nonconformists as have lived in the several ages since
that unhappy controversy was first set on foot amongst us. And now what
remains, but that every one concerned set himself seriously and impartially to
consider it; and it becomes such so to do when they go against the stream of
the most experienced writers of their own party, who might pretend to
understand the case as well, if not better than any that were conversant in it.
It becomes such, when they bury that under the condemnation of false worship,
which the Lord, the author of all truth, Ball's Trial, Epist. to Reader.
does allow in his service. When they forsake the prayers of the Congregation,
and depart from the Table of the Lord, and break off society and communion with
the Churches of Christ, etc. when they expose Religion to contempt, and the
truth of God to reproach, by the rents and divisions in the Church, as Mr Ball
does represent it.

Defense. p. 17, 52.
It becomes them, when our division gratifieth the Papists, and greatly
hazardeth the Protestant Religion, and by it we may lose all which the several
parties contend about, as Mr. Baxter has proved.

It becomes them when the Church of England is the bulwark of the Protestant
Religion amongst us at home, and that according to the noted saying of Mr.
Egerton, The withdrawing totally from it, would more effectually introduce
Popery, than all the works of Bellarmine.

It becomes them when this is the Bulwark of it abroad, and all the reformed
Churches in the world have a venture in this Bottom, Brinsley's Healing of
Isreal's Breaches, p. 62.
which if compared to a Fleet, the Church of England must be acknowledged to be
the Admiral. And if it go ill with this Church so as that miscarry, there is
none of the Churches of Christ this day under Heaven, but are like to feel it;
as Mr Brinsley discourses.

Lastly, It becomes them when divisions and separations draw down the
displeasure of God and lay us open to his Judgments. Dwelling with God, Sermon.
6. p. 313, 314.
Therefore Dr. Bryan after he has largely insisted upon the Argument and the
present case amongst us does thus apply himself, O that I could prevail with
you, to lay sadly to heart the greatness of the sin of divisions, and the
grievousness of the punishment threatened against it, and has been executed for
it; and that the Leaders and encouragers of private Christians to make this
sinful separation, would read often, and me ditate upon St Jude's Epistle to v.
20. and that the multitudes that are willing to be led by them would follow the
prescription of the means here to preserve or recover themselves from this
seduction, v. 20, 21. And that both would leave off their reviling the
Government Ecclesiastical, and the Ministers that conform, and submissively
behave themselves by the example of Michael, etc.

I shall conclude the whole with the peaceable and pious advice of Mr. Bains.
On the Ephesians. c. 2. p. 297, 298.
Let every man walk within the compass of his Calling. Whatsoever lies not in
us to reform, it shall be our zeal and piety to tolerate, and with patience to
forbear, especially in things of this nature, which concern not so much the
outward Communion with God or man essentially required in a visible state, as
the due ordering of business in the said Communion, wherein there be many
superfluities and defects, silva tamen Ecclesia; yea and such a Church
notwithstanding, as wherein the best and truest Members (circumstances
considered) may have more cause to rejoice than to grieve.

ERRATA.
PAGE 5. l. 25. r. soundness. p. 7. marg. l. 3. continuat. p. 7. marg. l. 1.
Lecture. p. 13. l. 2. Schism. p. 49. l. 32. (,) p. 57. l. 28. because. l 32
^^^h are, without. p. 61. l. 8. that as there. l. 11. so that have. l. 33.
pe^ve^se. p. 67. marg. l. 28. dele, Trial, p. 121. p. 70. marg. l. 3 dele,
Plea, p. 1.


