EIGHT SERMONS DEDICATED TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS GRACE The Lord Duke of
Ormond, AND To the most Honorable of Ladies, the Duchess of Ormond her Grace.

Most of them preached before his Grace, and the Parliament, in Dublin.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, Griffith, Lord Bishop of Ossory.

The Contents and particulars whereof are set down in the next Page.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, Anno Dom. 1664.

Imprimatur.

Geor. Stradling S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Episc. Land. a Sac.
Domestic.
Ex Aed. Sab. Jul. 1. 1663.
THE DESCRIPTION AND THE PRACTICE Of the four most admirable BEASTS; Explained
in four SERMONS, Upon REVEL. 4.8.

Whereof the first three were preached before the Right Honorable, JAMES Duke
of ORMOND, And Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND his Grace, And the two Houses of
Parliament, and others, very Honorable Persons.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, Gr. Lord Bishop of OSSORY.

London, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, for Philemon Stephens, and are to be sold at
the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1663.

The particular Sermons, and Contents of the whole Book.
THe description and the practice of the four most admirable Beasts, upon
Revel. 4.8. In four Sermons.

The only Way to the Kingdom of Heaven, upon Matthew. 6.33. In one Sermon.

The Saving Serpent, upon John 3. In one Sermon.

The only Way to preserve Life, upon Amos 5.6. In one Sermon.

The ejection, or destruction, of Devils, upon Mat. 17.21. In one Sermon, but
prevented to be finished.

Whereunto is added, The persecution and oppression of two right Reverend
Bishops of Ossory.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Duke of ORMOND His GRACE.
WHen the Parliament, out of their love to Christ, and respect to the Reverend
Bishops his Servants, humbly moved his Majesty for some augmentation to be made
to the means of diverse of them; and had omitted the Bishop of Ossory out of
their List, as a man that either needed it not, or cared not for it, seeing he
never moved any man, as some others did, to seek for any augmentation for him:
Your Grace was the only Advocate to put his Majesty in mind of the Bishop of
Ossory, and to add four hundred pounds per annum for his augmentation, to the
perpetual Obligation of the present and succeeding Bishops of that See, to your
Grace, and to all your succeeding Family.

But what your Grace has then so graciously begun, I humbly beg your Grace
would be pleased, as graciously now to finish and perfect that pious work which
you have so religiously begun; not so much in regard of my self, who, (after I
was cast down to the dust, and there lay wallowing a long while, and was at
last, beyond my desert, and any certainty of expectation, lifted up again to
mine Office, and restored to mine Honor and Dignity) have vowed and resolved
to spend what God has restored to me, for the Honor of God, and the service
of the Church of Christ, that is, besides my necessities, to repair his Church,
to relieve the distressed, to punish perjurers and such high Malefactors, Which
is equal to the relieving of the distressed
and to do my best to hinder any man that fought against that most Excellent
pious King, Charles the First, under the Standard of the Beast, to carry away,
and enjoy any part of the inheritance of the Church of Christ for his reward,
for that transcendent wickedness.

And therefore I spent already about four hundred pounds in repairing the
ruinous Cathedral, and above three hundred pounds more in seeking the right of
the Church out of the hands of Hucksters, and the Adversaries of King Charles
the First: And I do profess, that having food and raiment, and to defray my
necessary occasions, I weigh not one straw, either of mine augmentation, or of
any other supportation that I have: I dare take my oath, I am not, to this day,
one penny the richer for my Bishopric: When as the reparation of the Church
and Bishops house, the Suits in Law to recover the revenues of the Bishopric,
and the printing of my Books, for the service of the Church, and the good of
Gods people, has consumed all that I received.
God is, El Shaddai, a God all-suficient for me, as he has been hitherto.

But I beg this of your Grace, in respect of the poor See of Ossory, and the
succeeding Bishops, that perhaps shall not pass through so many storms as I
have done, and therefore shall not be so well able to abide the weather, and to
endure the wants that I did, but will be most willing to do God that good
service, which God and such good men as the King and your Grace will enable
them to do.

And I doubt not, but as your Grace has always been so sweet a Friend, and so
bountiful a Benefactor and Patron, both to my self, and many more of the
Servants of Christ; so your Grace, without any motion of mine, will do far
better things, and things far better then I can prescribe or imagine.

And therefore, craving pardon for my presumption, I rest,

Your Graces daily Orator, Gr. Ossory.

TO THE Most virtuous and the most honorable of Ladies, THE LADY ELIZABETH,
Duchess of ORMOND Her Grace.
Elect Lady,
YOur daily Orator, that formerly has written Books and Epistles to mighty
Kings and most honorable Princes, does now beg leave to dedicate these ensuing
Sermons unto your Graces view. I know many Scholars expecting their preferment,
will not be wanting to express the noble Acts, unparaleld Fidelity, and most
justly deserved Honors and Praises of the thrice honorable your dear Husband,
the Duke of Ormond's Grace; but my age bids me expect my dissolution, and not
worldly promotion: and therefore only challenges that presumption to dedicate
these few Sermons unto your Graces view, not as some others use to do, to beg
for any patronage or defense, for any thing that I have said therein; (for what
is good will justify it self, and what is amiss, let it be justly blamed, I
will never protect it) but to show unto the world how highly I do honor your
Grace, and would needs find out, by what ways I should propagate and
perpetuate your Graces Worth, Piety, and Virtue to the indelible view and
remembrance of all your Offspring, for their glory and the glory of all their
Posterities, for their example throughout all the remainder of these last Ages
of the World: for I believe that I may truly say it, without error, that
neither Gorgonia, nor Trasilla, nor any other of those glorious Stars, that in
their times shined in the Firmament of the Church, and which are registered to
Posterities for their everlasting praise by Saint Nazianzen, Saint Jerome, and
other Fathers of the Church were comparably so blessed in the choicest of the
blessings of this life, Id est, in their Husbands and Children.
nor were they so patient in their afflictions, so pious in their conversation,
so humble and so meek in their demeanor toward the worthiest of Gods
Ministers, as your Grace has always showed your self to be unto all even the
meanest of Gods servants, and especially to me, when in a very mean condition,
I came to wait upon your Grace in Donmore, before the King came into the
Kingdom; and I must pass over your wise, discreet, and most prudent carriage
of great affairs, and in such desperate times, to the benefit and preservation
of many good men and faithful Subjects to his Majesty, in the midst of a
froward, subtle, and perverse Generation, without which they had been utterly
destroyed: And I pass over these things and many other most eminent virtues and
endowments of your Ladyship; because I am not sufficiently able to characterize
and delineate the same, so sweetly and so commendably as your Grace has
showed, to the full measure of your deservings: but though mine ability
reaches not to express your worth, yet this my devotion shall never be wanting
to show my desires with the best of my prayers, and all the faculties of my
soul, to be your Orator unto God, and to make your name and memorial in the
World, like the remembrance of Josias, fair as the Lilly, and sweet as the
precious ointment that is made by the art of the Apothecary: So I rest,

Most honorable Lady Your Graces most faithful Orator and Servant while I am
Gr. Ossory.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
My dear Brother,
MY only aim and desire has always been, to promote the glory of God, the
honor of my King, the benefit of the Church of Christ, and the good of all my
Neighbors: To those ends I have labored, I have preached, I have printed many
books. And the best way, that I conceived to do good unto my Neighbors, was,
to teach them to observe, and never to depart from the society and practice of
Justice, Obedience, and Charity; Justice among themselves, and toward all men;
Obedience to their King; and to all their superior Governors; and Charity or
mercy to the poor and oppressed. These were the main marks I always shot at;
and to further these exercises, I thought my self obliged to do it with all my
might, without either fear or flattery. And therefore let neither Kings,
Princes, nor Magistrates frown at me, when I reprove them, if they be unjust;
for the great men do the more usually, as being the more able, commit the acts
of injustice: and let not the rebellious Subjects, nor the seditious Sectaries
rail at me for painting out the ugly shapes and loathsome visages of their
Treasons and Wickednesses against their Kings and Governors, whom God has set
over them, and commanded them to obey: neither let the rich, covetous, and
wretched worldlings, whose hearts are as hard as stones from yielding any the
least drop of relief unto the poor and needy, and those that are ready to
starve in the streets, blame me, if for these unmerciful cruelties, and cruel
neglect of mercies, I shall thunder out God's judgments, and pour forth the
vials of God's wrath, that are prepared against them; for as Nehemiah said,
when his friends persuaded him to fly away for fear of his enemies, that sought
to destroy him, Is it fit that such a man as I should fly? Neh. 6.11.
So I conceive, it is not fit, that such a man as I, (that am a Bishop, and an
aged man, ready for my dissolution, and no other translation, but to be
translated unto my fathers) should now flatter any person, or be afraid to
speak the truth, or to reprove sins, worthy to be reproved, for fear of the
frowns, threats, or malice of any man. And therefore, as the Poet says, Me,
me, adsum qui feci, in me convertite ferrum. And as I said with Pilat, in the
first Sermon that ever I printed, (...), what I have written, I have written,
Nec poterit abolere vetustas.

Jehovae Liberatori.
The Description and the Practice of the four most admirable Beasts.
REVEL. 4.8. And the four Beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they
were full of eyes within, and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.


I Have begun to treat of these words in this place long ago; and let no man
marvel, that I intend by Gods help to prosecute the explication thereof at this
time; because this Text seems to me, like the Ocean sea, so large, that it
cannot be measured, and so deep, that it cannot be fathomed by any humane wit;
the same being omnia in omnibus, all in all: For.

First, Here is God the Creator of all things, and all that is knowable or may
be known concerning God; as that ineffable mystery of the Trinity, or three
persons in the one only Essence of the Deity; and therefore appointed to be
read for the Epistle on Trinity Sunday; and all the chiefest Attributes of God,
as

1. His Purity and sanctity in the words (...) three times repeated, to show
the three persons of the Deity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

2. His Power, authority and dominion, in the word (...) that is set down in
the singular number, to show the Unity of the Godhead.

3. His Wisdom, knowledge and providence, in the word (...), which is derived
(...), because he sees all things, and all things are patent to his eyes, and
attingit a fine usque ad finem, and disponit omnia suaviter.

4. His Omnipotency, in the word (...), Almighty, quia voluntas ejus potestas
ejus, because he can do whatsoever he would do, he needs but say the word and
it is done.

5. His Eternity, in the words, (...), which crowns all the rest of Gods
Attributes, that otherwise would be of no such value, if it were not for this
Eternity, that makes him to be whatsoever he is for ever.

Secondly, Here are the creatures of God, and the chief of all Gods creatures;
as

1. The Lion, which is the King of all the Beasts of the field.

2. The Calf or the Ox, which is the most painful and most useful creature for
the service of man, and the most acceptable in the sacrifices of God.

3. The Eagle which is the Lord and Master of all the Fowls of the Air; and,

4. Man which is the Prince and Ruler of all those, and of all the Beasts of
the field, the Fowls of the air, the Fishes of the sea, and whatsoever walks
through the paths of the seas.

Thirdly, Here is Religion, and the best of all Religions, the Christian
Religion, most amply, though enigmatically and mystically, set forth unto us;
for,

1. Here is both the natures and the offices of Christ, and the chiefest things
that he did, and that we are to understand and believe for our salvation; they
are all here expressed unto us; as,

1. His divine nature, under the notion of the Eagle and her lofty flight.

2. His humane nature is noted unto us, by him that had the face and appearance
of a man.

And as his natures and the quality of his person are here thus mystically
expressed; so his offices, that he was to discharge, are here likewise in the
same manner, of the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, set forth unto us; as,

1. His Regal and Kingly office, whereby he was to rule and govern his Church,
is here to be understood by the Lion, which is the King of all the Beasts.

2. His Priestly office, whereby he was to teach and to instruct his people,
and to offer sacrifice unto God, to appease his wrath and so to take away the
sin of the world, is here most aptly expressed by the Ox or Calfe, that was
deemed the most acceptable sacrifice, that could be offered unto God: Number. 23.1.
as you may see by the sacrifice of Balaam.

And, as his natures and his offices are here thus to be understood; so the
chiefest things that he was to do, and the chiefest points that we are to
believe, are likewise here fairly expressed under what is signified by these four
Beasts; as, 1. His Incarnation, by him that had the face of a man. 2. His
Passion, by the Ox, or Calf. 3. His Resurrection, by the Lion. 4. His
Ascension, by the flying Eagles.


Fourthly and lastly, not only the foresaid particulars concerning Christ and
these main points of Christian Religion are hereby to be observed, but also all
the whole duty of man, and the chiefest points that every Christian ought to
discharge, if he looks for eternal happiness, are here expressed unto us, under
the qualities, conditions, description, and practice of these Beasts, as
hereafter I shall more fully declare unto you.

And so you see, here is sententia brevis, a short speech, but materia
uberrima, an Ocean of matter to sail over. And do you think that I can pass
through such a world of most weighty points within the compass of one inch of
time, less then one little hour? that cannot be, by a far better head then
mine.

Therefore I must crave leave only to go as far as I can, until I shall have
your Grace and this honorable audience leave to proceed at some other time
unto the rest of these points.

And for our more orderly proceeding at this time, I shall humbly desire you to
observe these three points: 1. The number of these Beasts. 2. The description
of these Beasts. 3. The practice of these Beasts.


1. The number of the Beasts four, Genesis 31.7.
1. For their number, it is said they were four Beasts. And you must remember,
that sometimes a certain number is put for an uncertain, as when Jacob said
unto Laban, Thou have changed my wages ten times; that is, several times. But
here I take this number to be as it is set down, to signify four Beasts, and
neither more nor less.

2. The description of the Beasts.
2. The description of these Beasts is twofold; 1. Particular and proper to
each one. 2. General and common to them all.


1. The proper and particular description of the Beasts.
1. Touching their particular description: we are to consider.

1. Who and what they are that are thus expressed by these Beasts.

2. Why each one of them is so expressed, as they are here described unto us.

Aug. de civit. Dei l. 8. c. 3.
For the first, I may truly say with St. Aug. Alii atque alii aliud atque aliud
opinati sunt, several men have had their several interpretations of them; and I
find four expositions of them to be most of all respected, 1. Of the Papists.
2. Of the Puritans. 3. Of some latter Writers of the Protestants. 4. Of the
Ancient Fathers.


1. The Papists, interpreting this vision of the Militant Church, do understand
the same by Heaven; and by the seat that was set therein, they understand the
authority of the Church of Rome: by the Lamb or him that sat on the seat,
their universal Bishop the Pope: and by these four Beasts, they would have us
to understand the 4. Patriarchships, 1. Of Antioch. 2. Of Ephesus. 3. Of
Jerusalem. 4. Of Alexandria.
Which have always had the greatest power and chiefest authority next after the
Church of Rome. And by the 24. Elders, that sat upon the 24. seats, they
understand the six Archbishops that were in every Patriarchship, as 1. in
Antioch. The Archbishop, 1. of Mesopotamia, 2. of Ninivee, 3. of Babylon, 4.
of Assyria, 5. of Parthia, 6. of Media.

2. In Ephesus. The Archbishop, 1. of Smyrna, 2. of Pergamus, 3. of Thyatira,
4. of Philadelphia, 5. of Sardis, 6. of Laodicea.

And so the rest of Jerusalem and of Alexandria. But this exposition seems
furthest from the truth.

I. Because they interpret it of the Priesthood, Church and Government
thereof, altogether externally. Whereas indeed the Kingdom and Priesthood of
Christ is altogether spiritual, Chrysostom. hom. 82. in c. 18. Johan.
Non quod hoc etiam temporaliter non possideat sed quod in coelis habeat
imperium, as St. Chrysostom. says.

II. For that the Church of Rome was not as then Empress and chief Lady of all
other Churches, nor afterward, till the time of the Emperor Phocas, In
Regist. ejusdem Gregorii.
as it appears by the Epistles of Gregory Bishop of Rome unto the Emperor
Mauritius.

III. Because that if this exposition were true, the Arch-Bishopricks of Italy,
Spain, France, Britany, Germany, and the like, should be excluded, which were
too great a wrong from this vision; or they could not tell under which
Patriarchship they should be comprehended.

2. Exposition.
The second Exposition is of Brightman and his followers, that say, these four
Beasts do signify the fourfold state, quality, and condition of the Ministers
of the Church of Christ, from the time of our Saviors Ascension to his coming
to judgment. As,

1. Age.
1. In the infancy of the Church they were bold and stout like Lions to preach
the Gospel of Christ, so that although, as Eusebius says, Alii flammis exusti,
alii ferro perempti, alii patibulo cruciati, Eusebius. l. 8. c. 11 and 12.
and alii flagris verberati, Some were burned to ashes, some slain with the
sword, Some hanged, and others whipped to death; yet they ceased not to publish
the truth of Jesus Christ, because they knew, that as S. Bern. says, Vere tuta
pro Christo and cum Christo pugna, in qua nec vulneratus, nec occisus
fraudaberis a victoria; To fight for Christ and with Christ is very safe, when
neither wounded nor killed, we should not be deprived of the victory.

2. Age.
2. In the next age of the Church, after Constant. the Great, that closed up the
days of Persecution, the Ministers of Christ were as painful and laborious in
their vocation of Preaching the Gospel of God, as the Oxen are in tilling our
ground or treading out the Corn for us. And so their voluminous works and pious
devotions left behind them, do sufficiently testify what pains they took: so
much, that it made the Emperor Maximinus to wonder, to see how sedulous they
were in doing good, and propagating the Gospel of God.

3. In the third age of the Church, 3. Age.
and this last Century of years, they are said to have faces like men, because
that now since the time of Wiclef, Luther, Melancton, and the rest of our
protestant Writers, the people, and diverse of the Priests that formerly (by
reason of the Latin Liturgy) understood no more what they prayed, or what was
said unto them, then Balaams Ass understood her own voice, were now made to
become like men, so rational, that they understand both the Sermons and the
Service of the Church.

4. In the last age of the Church, 4. Age.
the Ministers of the fifth Monarchy so much dreamed of by the Phanatick
Sectaries of our time, are expounded by them to be here understood by this
flying Eagle; because that by reason of their swift, extemporary and undigested
sudden Meditations and Sermons; they will most speedily pour out their words
into all Lands, as Lucilius did his Verses, Horat. Sermon. l. 1. p. 212. And send
forth their voices to the ends of the World for the converting of the dispersed
Jews, and all other Pagans and worldlings to the faith of Christ, and to bring
them back again out of Scythia into Palestina; which is easier said then done,
and is far enough from the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this place, as I have
fully and amply showed the vanity of this fiction in the sixth Book of my true
Church. Therefore to proceed, 3. Exposition.
I find the third exposition to be of some of the best Protestant writers,
whereof notwithstanding each several one has his several exposition: as some
interpret them to signify the four Elements, others, the four special
faculties of the soul; others, as Bullinger interprets them, to signify the
four great Monarchies of the world; and others, Bullinger in Loc.
as Baconthorp and Albertus apud Balaum, by these four Beasts, do understand
the four great Prophets, Esaias, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel.

But Aretius and Maier do with Rupertus interpret them to signify the four
greatest Mysteries of our Christian Religion. As,

I. The Incarnation. II. The Passion. III. 1. Incarnation.
The Resurrection. And IV. The Ascension of our Savior Christ: and it cannot
be contradicted but that these things are thereby signified. As,

I, His Incarnation which is the assuming of the nature of man unto the person
of God, and that, as Nazianzen speaks, Fermanendo quod erat, and assumendo
quod non erat, by still remaining what he was, and taking upon him what he was
not, is here understood by him that had his face like a man.

2. The Passion.
II, His Passion is signified by the Calf; because all the Sacrifices, that were
offered unto God, were either 1. Zebach, which they properly termed Sacrifices,
or, 2. Mincha, which they called Oblations.
And the first sort was of living Creatures, and the second sort was of dead
things, as the first fruits of Corn, Wine, Oil, and the like.

And the first sort also, was either 1. Of the Herds, or, 2. Of the Flocks.


And of the Herds were offered, 1. Oxen. 2. Cows. 3. Calves.
and of these, The Calves were most usually offered, both among the Jews and
Gentiles; Heb. 9.19. Virgil. Eclog. 3.
for Moses took the blood of calves and sprinkled both the book and the people:
and Virgil says, Cum faciam vitula pro frugibus ipse venito. And therefore
Christ, being to offer up himself a sweet smelling Sacrifice for our sins, his
Death and Passion could not be better signified by any thing, then by the Calf.

3. The Resurrection.
III, His Resurrection is understood by the Lion; because that he, Qui agnus
extiterat in passione, Bern. De resurrectione.
factus est leo in resurrectione. For though by Esay's Prophecy, he should be
led as a sheep to the slaughter; yet by Jacob's Prophecy, he should come from
the spoil like a Lions whelp, and so declare himself mightily to be the son of
God by his resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.4.


IV, His Ascension is understood by the flying Eagle, IV, The Ascension.
which mounteth up on high; according as the Prophet says of Christ, Thou art
gone up on high, thou have led Captivity captive, and received gifts for men.

The fourth Exposition is of the ancient Fathers, as Irenaeus, 4. Exposition.
Venerable Bede, St. Hierome, St. Augustine, St. Gregory, Lyra, and almost all
of them did agree, Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
that by these four Beasts are understood the four Evangelists, St. Matthew,
St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. John. Beda in hunc loc.


But to reconcile all or most of these Interpreters, I say, that,

1. The reconciling of the Interpreters.
Primarily we may and ought to understand the four Evangelists by these four
Beasts.

2. All the Magistrates of the Commonwealth, and all the Ministers of the
Church and Preachers of God's word.

3. And lastly, All Christians whatsoever they be, ought to be like unto these
four Beasts, both in their description and in their practice.

First then, I say, that by these four Beasts we are to understand the four
Evangelists.

1. Saint Matthew by the Lion, though Saint Gregory would have Saint Mark
understood by it.

2. Saint Luke by the Calf.

3. Saint Mark by him that had the face of a man.

4. Saint John by the flying Eagle. For,

I find two special things that may well confirm and make good this
Exposition; as first, the manner of their description; and secondly, the
general practice of the four. For if you mark it, they are described two manner
of ways. 1. Generally. 2. Particularly.


And first in their general and common description, they are all alike; for
they had all six wings about them, and they were all full of eyes. And secondly
in their Practice, they all sung the same song, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God Almighty, which was, which is, and which is to come.

But in their particular or proper description, each one of them differs from
the other, as you see. The first was like a lion, the second like a calf, etc.

So the four Evangelists in general aimed at the same thing, to set forth the
life and death of the Messiah, and to bring us all to believe, that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, the Savior of the world; and that in believing on
him, we shall have eternal life.

But if we look into their more special end and aim, we shall find, that each
one of them differs very much from the others. For,

1. St. Matthew proves Christ to be a King.
1. St. Matthew seems principally to aim at the declaration of the Regal or
Kingrick office of Christ, and to prove him to be that Lion of Judah which the
Jews long expected for to come to be their King, to sit upon the Throne of
David, and to govern the people of God: and this he proves by many Arguments.
As,

1 Argument from his Pedigree. Ambrosius in Luc. 3.
1. A Frosapia, from his Progenitors; for he deriveth him lineally from King
David, and he reckons fourteen Kings in his Pedigree: and after that, he
brings him from Zorobabel in the blood royal unto Joseph. Whereupon Saint
Ambrose says, that St. Matthew deriving his generation by and from Solomon,
and St. Luke by Nathan, they seem to show, Alteram regalem, alteram
sacerdotalem Christi familiam, the one family to be from the Kings, and the
other from the Priests; Quia fuit vere and secundum carnem regalis and
sacerdotalis familiae, because he was both of the Royal and of the Priestly
family: Et sic Rex ex Regibus, and Sacerdos ex Sacerdotibus, and so both a King
and a Priest.

2. 2 Argument from the doings of the Magi. Numb. 24.
Saint Matthew proves him to be a King ab adoratione Magorum, from the doings
of the Wisemen; for the Star of the Messiah being prophesied of by Balaam, and
left as a Tradition among the Gentiles by Zorcastres King of the Bactrians,
(that was excellent in all learning) that it should appear to show the birth of
this King of Kings; though Virgil flatteringly and falsely applied it to
Augustus, saying, Ecce Dionaei pracessit Caesaris astrum. Yet these Magi being,
as St. Chrysostom writes, upon the Mountain Victorialis, worshipping their
God, a Star did appear unto them in the likeness of a little child, Fulgent.
fol. 657. in sermon. de Epiphan.
and they rejoicing thereat, conceived that, as Fulgentius says, Puer natus,
novam stellam fabricavit, the long-expected child being now born, did create
this fore-prophesied star, to testify his birth unto the world; and therefore
they did forthwith begin their journey to Jerusalem.

And how they came so great a journey in thirteen days after his nativity,
Rhemigius answers, Puer, How the Magi came so speedily to Jerusalem.
ad quem properaverunt, potuit eos in tam brevi spatio temporis ad se adducere,
The child, to whom they hastened, was able to help them in so short a space to
come unto him: and St. Augustine says, that Tres Magi iter unius anni in
tredecim diebus peregerunt, They performed in thirteen days the journey that
might well require a whole year to finish it; especially if you consider, that
these Magi were Kings themselves, Cypr. in sermon. de Baptismo. Chrysostom. hom. 6.
in Matthew. 2. Ps 72.10.
as St. Cyprian delivers from the tradition of the Church, and St. Chrysostom,
dissenteth not much from his opinion: when as the Prophet David says to
intimate the same thing, The Kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts

And now, when these Magi, these three Kings, had found out this King, they
fell down and worshipped him; for though, as St. Chrysostom. says, Viderunt
puerum hominem, They saw this child to be a man; yet Agnoverunt redemptorem,
they acknowledged him to be their Redeemer. What the Magi did.
And though he was, In gremio pauperis matris positus, and pannis vilibus
involutus, and nullum regiae dignitatis humanae signum habens, lying in the lap
of his poor mother, and wrapped in vile clouts, and without any sign of royal
Majesty; yet, as both Chrysostom and Fulgentius say, Ex stella didicerunt eum
esse regem, They were taught by the Star, to understand that he was a King: and
therefore they did homage to him as to the king of kings, and they offered to
him gold, myrrh, and frankincense, the gold, to show his regal dignity, the
frankincense, his deity, quia thus ad honorem divinum concrematur, and myrrh,
to show his mortality, because they use to put myrrh to the bodies of the dead.

And so by this their action, they showed,

1. Their humility, quia preciderunt, because they fell down.

2. Their Faith, quia adoraverunt, because they worshipped him. And

3. Their Charity, quia munera obtulerunt, because they offered these their
gifts unto him.

Why the Magi do neglect Herod and adore Christ.
But how comes this to pass, quod volunt adorare regem nuper natum, and
infantem lactantem, and non adorant regem ante annos aliquot ordinatum and
populos imperantem? That they will worship the King newly born, and an infant
sucking on his mothers breasts, and worship not the King that was ordained long
before, and was ruling and commanding all the people? What is this, quod ille
natus in palatio contemnitur, and iste natus in diversorio quaritur? that he
which is born in the palace, and laid in a bed of silver is neglected, and he
that is born in the stable, and laid in the manger is enquired after and adored?

It is answered, because that this child which is but parvus in praesepio est
immensus in caelo, small in the cratch is great and immeasurable in heaven; and
he whom these Magi call King of the Jews, is the Lord and Creator of the
Angels. And so you see how Saint Matthew by the testimony of these Magi, and
the worship that they do unto him, does prove him to be a King.

The third Argument that he uses to prove him to be a King is drawn ab Herodis
timore, from the fear of Herod; 3 Argument From the fear of Herod.
for when the Magi came near unto Jerusalem, abscondita est stella, says
Saint Chrysostom, and quod ante apparuit, rarsus disparuit, and that which
appeared before was vanished again, says Saint Basil. And that for three
special reasons.

1. That the Star being hid, they should be forced to enquire concerning
Christ: that as they were first moved to seek him by a celestial sign, so
secondly, they should be confirmed by the prophetical saying, and the answer of
the Hebrew Doctors, says Saint Chrysostom. Chrysostom. supra M^^. Basil. Se m.
de humana Christi generatione fol. 138.


2. That the testimonies of Christ's enemies might be, long praestantiora
fideque digniora, says Saint Basil, received without question.

3. That they, (that is, the Magi enquiring after him, that they might first
honor him) the Jews should be justly condemned, qui illum cruci affixerunt,
quem alieni adoraverunt. Strange that his own Countrymen should crucify him,
when these strangers came to adore him. Therefore the Star was obscured, and
they enquired, where is he that is born King of the Jews?

Whereupon Herod, though it should have moved him to cast his Crown at his
feet, yet was he vexed with grief at the heart, and troubled with horrible fear
which the Magi brought to this King of the Jews, by their enquiring after
another late-born King of the Jews. And therefore being full of fear, least
this spiritual King should take away his temporal Kingdom, as he had formerly
slain Hyrcanus, Joseph. l. 15. c. 9. and 11.
Aristobulus and his three Sons in his furious rage: so now, being more
incensed with ire, through this Frantique fear, he put to death his own wise
Mariamne, his mother Alexandra, and forty of his chiefest noble men of the
tribe of Juda, and he slew all the great Sanhed^im, that is, the 72 Senators of
the Jews, and fourteen thousand infants in and about Bethlehem (as some do
think) and among the rest he slew his own infant born of a Jewish woman, as
Philo writes, which made Augustus say, Philo Judaeus in l. de tempore
That he had rather be his pig then his son; And all this he did in hope to
root out and destroy all the royal blood of Juda, least this King and Lion of
Juda should deprive him of his Kingdom. And what insanable, incurable madness
is this? and how vain is the thought? For this King, which is now born,
Iunaniter ergo invidendo timuisti successorem, quem credendo debuisti quarere
S^lvatorem. Fulgeni. Sermon. de Epiph. fol. 652.
does not come, says Fulgentius, reges pugnando superare, sed moriendo
mirabiliter subjugare, not to overcome them by fighting, but wonderfully to
subdue them by dying; and therefore he is not born, ut tibi succedat, sed ut in
eum mundus fideliter credat, That he should succeed thee, but that thou and all
the World should believe in him, and so be saved by him.

And therefore it was but a vain thing for Herod to fear where no fear was, and
to foster fear where he should have faith: but this fire of anger and this fear
of heart, does sufficiently show that Herod knew the Messiah should be a King,
though he understood not what manner of King he should be, and so Saint Matthew
sets down this his fear and cruelty for the third argument, to prove the
kingrick office of Christ, and Christ to be a King.

4 Argument. From Chists riding to Jerusalem upon the ass.
The fourth argument that Saint Matthew uses to prove Christ to be a King is,
from his riding to Jerusalem upon an ass; and he tells us plainly, that
Christ did this, to show that he was the King of the Jews; for he says, that
all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
saying, Tell ye the daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes unto thee meek
and sitting upon an ass, Matthew. 21.4, 5. Chrysostom. hom. 67. in Matt.
and ask the Jews, says Saint Chrysostom, quis na^ regum asina vectus
Hierosolymam intravit, which of all their Kings entered Jerusalem upon an ass,
and they shall never be able to name any other besides Christ. For the other
Kings rode in Chariots, to show their pomp, and this King only rode upon an
ass, to show his humility, Beda lib. 5. in Luc.
and yet, neque amittit divinitatem, nec regiam dignitatem, cum nos docet
humilitatem, by teaching us humility, he neither loses his divinity, nor
abateth any thing of his royal dignity: when as clemency and humility in
Majesty do shine like a precious diamond well set in the purest gold. And Saint
Ambrose says, that when Christ rode to Jerusalem upon an ass, the people that
followed him, What the people did.
did three special things. 1. They repeated the Prophecy, to show that they
were not deceived. 2. They acknowledged his Deity, in saying, Hosanna, Salvum
fac: save Lord. 3. They called him their King, because he was the Son of David.


And all was to show, that this meek and humble King was the promised Messiah,
the glory of Israel, and the expectation of the Gentiles.

The fifth Argument that Saint Matthew uses to prove Christ to be a King is
from the marriage of the kings son; 5 Argument. Matthew. 22.1, 2. From the
marriage of the kings son.
for venerable Bede demands who is the Kings son, but he, of whom the Prophet
speaks, homo est and quis cognoscit eum? And the marriage of this son is the
union, and joining together of the Godhead with our humane nature in uno
supposito, in one person. The servants that he sent to invite the guests, were
the Prophets and Preachers of the Gospel: Beda super Luc. l 4.
those that were first invited were the Jews: the three sorts of refusers are.

I. Rich Worldlings that say villam emi, Who we^e the refusers to come to the
Wedding^
and do love the things of this World better then the things of God.

II. Sensual men, that have 5 yoke of Oxen, and do follow the lusts of their 5
Senses: the lusts of the eyes and pride of life.

III. Lascivious wanton men, that cry uxorem duxi, and are led away with carnal
pleasures

Or as Saint Ambrose says, we may understand.

I. The Gentiles, by him that said villam emi, I bought a farm.

II. The Jews, by him that said, I bought 5 yoke of Oxen, because they were
under the heavy yoke of the Law, and the 5 books of Moses, that were such a
yoke as that neither they nor their fathers could bear it; and therefore they
cried out, Psalm. 2.
dirumpamus vincula, let us break these bonds asunder, and cast away these
cords from us. And

III. The Heretics, Schismatics, and the like Fanatique Sectaries, that are
wedded to their own obstinate and foolish opinions, which like Eva tempts
them, and as another Dalilah destroys them, may be understood by him that had
married a wife, and therefore neither could nor would obey the truth, and so
come unto the marriage of this King, which is h re showed unto us by the
Evangelist, but tell us flatly, they neither can nor will do it: their wife
(which is their obstinate opinion) will not suffer them.

The sixth Argument that Saint Matthew produces to prove Christ to be a King,
6 Argument.
is, from the inscription of Pilate, Jesus of Nazareth, Beda in L^c
King of the Jews. Whereupon Beda says, that because he was both King and
Priest together, when he offered up that invaluable sacrifice of his flesh upon
the Altar of his cross unto God his Father, he fitly challenged (and it was
rightly given unto him) the title of his royalty, which did belong and was so
due unto him, and that title was written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which
were and are the three most special languages of the World, that all the World
might read it, and believe it, that Christ by his cross non perdiderat sed
potius confirmavit and corroboravit imperium, has not lost, but rather
strengthened his right unto his kingdom: So that although God suffered them to
take away his life, yet they could not take away his kingdom from him, but when
he was dead upon the cross, yet still the title remained, that he was Jesus of
Nazareth king of the Jews. And it was written in Hebrew in respect of the Jews,
that gloryed in their Law, and in Greek, in respect of the Gentiles, that
boasted of their wisdom, and in Latin in respect of the Romans, which then
ruled and domineered over most and almost all the Nations of the World; that
the Jews, will they, nill they, may see, that omne mundi regnum, omnis mundana
sapientia, and omnia divinae legis sacramenta testantur, quia Jesus est Rex,
every kingdom of the earth, all the wisdom of the World, and all the sacraments
of the divine law, do bear witness, that Christ is King, and this Lion here
spoken of in this Text. And the difference betwixt this Lion and all other
Lions, is, that, as Franciscus Vallesius de sacra Philosophia, c. 55. says,
Mos Leonis est sibi tantum pradam capere, and non Leaenae; but Christ took the
prey for his Church, and not for himself.

And we find that his kingdom by three special prerogatives excels all
other kingdoms of the world; that is, 1. Pre-eminence of Christ's kingdom
threefold.
1. Eternity; 2. Purity; 3. Largity;


1. The Prophet says, thy Throne, O God, Psalm. 110.
is for ever and ever, and thy Dominion shall endure throughout all Ages: but
transibit gloria mundi, all other Kings within so many years shall not govern,
and after so many days they shall not be; for death spares none, but sceptra
ligonibus aequat. And as Nazianzen says, Constantinus Imperator and famulus
meus, ossa Agamemnonis and Thyrsitis, death makes no difference betwixt the
bones of King Agamemnon and base Thyrsites, the Emperor Constantine and my
servant; but when their race is run and their glass is out, we may say of each
of them, as Horace says of his Friend Torquatus.

Non Torquate genus, non te facundia, non te Horat.

Restituet pietas. --
But this King has a prerogative above them all, for he was, Rex a seculo, a
King from everlasting, and he shall be a King in secula seculorum world without
end; Luke 1.33.
for so the Angel Gabriel testifies, that of his kingdom there shall be no
end.

And this should batter down the pride of Tyrants, that say with
Nebuchadnezzar, Is not this great Babel that I have built? For mean, mean,
tekel, peers, their glory is but as the grass of the field; or otherwise, if
they were immortal, they were intolerable. And this should teach us to labor,
to become the Subjects of this King, in whose kingdom there shall be, Aug. l.
1 c. 10. de Trinitate.
as Saint Augustine says, requies sempiterna, and gaudium quod nunquam
anferetur a nobis, An everlasting rest, and joy that shall never be taken from
us.

2. Pre-eminence.
The second pre-eminence of his kingdom is purity; for of this King the Prophet
speaks, thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, and the scepter of
thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness. For this King is not like Ahab,
that would take away Naboths Vineyard, nor like Rehoboam, that would oppress
his Subjects with over-grievous Taxes, but he is a righteous King, and a most
just Judge, far unlike some Judges of former days, that for a word have made a
man a transgressour, and for a syllable or one letter, have quite overthrown a
man's cause and right, and so have made the Laws a nose of wax, to bend and turn
as they pleased, and to be rete Vulcanium, like Vulcans iron net, to catch the
poor and friendless: but tela aranea, like the spiders web, so easy for the
rich and powerful to pass through it. But blessed be God for it, we have few
such now, and we hope we shall not provoke God so far, as to send such amongst
us for if you suffer oppression and wrongs, when as the Poet says, Mensuraque
juris vis erit. Then surely, peaceable men shall not be able to live in the
Commonwealth. But the equity and justice of this King should persuade all
other Kings to follow his Example, and as the wise man says, Sep. 1.1.
to love righteousness, all they that are Judges of the earth.

3. Pre-eminence.
The third pre-eminence of his kingdom is, that God anointed this King with the
oil of gladness in all things above his fellows; for their time has an end,
their dominion a limitation, but his time is not limited, and his rule has no
marches: but exivit in omnem terram, it has gone forth into all Lands, because
he is the King of all the earth: and when as all other Kings are but Reges
Gentium, Kings of some few Nations, he is Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium,
the King of all other Kings, and the Lord of all Lords.

And therefore Eusebius says, that the distinction or difference betwixt this
true Christ and the other imaginary Christ's, that were anointed Kings before
him, may truly and very easily be discerned; Eusebius. l. 1. c. 1. Eccl. Histor.
quia illi priores Christi nulli pene nisi genti propriae cogniti sunt, those
former Kings were scarce known to any, but to their own proper people: but not
only the name, but also the rule, power and kingdom of this true King is
extended over all Nations, and per universum orbem terrae, and through the
compass of the round world.

And though, when the Jews would have crowned him King, Rex fieri noluit, he
refused the same; yet to show that this Dominus Angelorum, was also Rex
Judaeorum, Beda l. 5. in c. 19. Luc.
as Beda speaks, when he rid to Jerusalem upon the Ass, he willingly
permitted the people to cry Hosanna, and to entitle him King of the Jews, and
he confessed as much himself unto Pilat, that he was a King.

And what means this, says the Venerable Bede, that he now willingly
embraces, quod prius fugicudo declinavit? that which before he declined, and
fled from it; and the kingdom, that while as yet he lived in the world, he
would not accept, he now denies not to take it, when he is by and by ready to
go out of the world.

He answers, that he formerly refused it, Beda l. 3. in c. 11. S. Mar.
because of the gross imagination of the Jews, that conceited him to be a
temporal King like unto others; but he does now accept it, to show, quod non
temporalis and terreni, sed aeterni in coelis Rex esset imperii; that his
kingdom was not of this world, as himself said unto Pilate, but as the King of
Heaven he ruled all the world.

Well then, What we may learn from this Doctrine, that Christ is our King.
seeing Saint Matthew does by so many inanswerable arguments prove Christ to be
a King, and that he is a perpetual, universal and principal King, and here
expressed by the Lion in this Text, we may collect and draw matter both of
comfort and fear, both of joy and of grief. For

1. Seeing Christ is King, then, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 97.1.
exultet terra, let the earth rejoice; for if we will obey him, and be ruled by
him, he will appoint over us such Viceroyes and under-rulers, that will lead
us, sicut oves, gently and lovingly, like sheep, as he did the Israelites by
the hands of Moses and Aaron. And

Psalm. 99.1.
2. Seeing Christ is King, then as the same Prophet says, contremiscat populus,
let the people tremble; for if they fall to be unruly, as we were of late, let
them be never so impatient, this King can as easily gather unto himself the
spirit of his under-Princes, as we can slip a cluster of Grapes from a Vine,
and he can send them a Rehoboam without Wisdom, or a Jeroboam without
Religion, or Ashur a Stranger, an Usurper, as we have had, to be our King, or
nullum Regem, no King at all, but a disordered Anarchy, which is the worst of
all; Psalm. 10.4.
and all this, quia non timuerunt Jehovam, because they cared not for God,
neither was God in all their thoughts.

But to end this Point, seeing Christ our King is this Lion here mentioned, we
need not fear our spiritual enemies; for though he be a Lion, and a roaring
Lion, that is against us; yet you see we have a Lion with us; and as Saint John
says, he that is in us is greater then he that is in the world, 1 John 4.
and is stronger then the strong man armed, and able, as the Apostle says,
Romans 16.20. Vide the abridgment of the Gospel, fol. 26. and 27.
to tread and bruise Satan under our feet; and therefore we ought to stand fast
in the Lord without fear, because as Saint Chrysostom well says, non debet
timere hostem fortem, qui habet Regem fortiorem, he need not fear the strongest
enemy that has a stronger King: as our King is, blessed be God for it.

2. Saint Luke is understod by the Calf.
2. as Saint Matthew is here understood by the Lion, ( quia solet res quae
significat ejus rei nomine quam significat nuncupari, as the bread, that
signifies the body of Christ, is termed the body of Christ) because he proves
Christ to be the King of the Jews, and that Lion of Juda, which was so long
expected to come into the world: so, for the like reason, Saint Luke is here to
be understood by the Calf, because he principally aimed to prove Christ, that
is signified by the Calf, to be that Priest, of whom the Lord swear, thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck.

For I told you before, that of all the sacrifices of the four footed Beasts of
the Herds, which the Hebrews called bakar, that is, majores hostias, the
greater sacrifices, the Calf was most acceptable unto God, as the Prophet
shows, Psalm. 51.19. Heb. 9.19. Exodus 24 8. Esaias. 11.6, 7.
when they offered young bullocks, id est, goodly Calves upon his altar. And the
reason is, because the Calf is meeker and more gentle then either of the rest;
in regard of which meekness, the quiet and peaceable man is metaphorically
called a Calf.

And therefore by the Calf is here signified the Priestly office of Christ,
whereby he offered up himself as a meek and immaculate Calf unto God, that by
the blood of this Calf, we might be sprinkled and purged from all our sins;
because that without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.22.
as the Apostle speaks.

And of all the rest of the Evangelists, Saint Luke only does most specially
aim to prove Christ to be a Priest, and to show his Priestly office; for both
the Alpha and Omega of his Gospel is concerning the Temple and the sacrifices
thereof, when as he begins the same with the Priesthood of Zacharias and his
sacrifice of incense, and ends the same with the sacrifice of the Christians
that were continually in the Temple praising and blessing God. Luc. 24.53,


For though that before the birth of this Priest, the other Priests were to
burn incense in the Temple of the Lord, as Zacharias did; yet this Priest being
now born, and ascended up to heaven, the sacrifice that the Christians are to
offer unto God, is to be continually praising and landing God in the Temple, as
Saint Luke says the Apostles did. For the true propitiatory sacrifice being
exhibited, the Types and Figures thereof must now cease and be abolished, and
in the place thereof, the gratulatory sacrifice must be established. And
therefore Saint Luke begins his Gospel with the propitiatory sacrifice of
Za^harias, because Christ was not as yet incarnate: John 1.
but he ends the same with the gratulatory sacrifice of the Apostles, because
that now the word was made flesh, and Christ had ascended into Heaven.

S. Luke proves Christ to be a Priest by 3 special Arguments.
And lest this should not be sufficient to demonstrate Christ to be a Priest, he
proceeds to prove him to be that Priest which was after the order of
Melchisedech, by three other special Arguments. 1. A Prosapia, from his
Pedigree. 2. From the true qualities and properties of a Priest. 3. From the
performance of the duties and office of a Priest.


1 Argument from his Pedigree.
1. In that St. Luke deriveth his Genealogy by Nathan, S. Ambrose says, it was
to show his Priestly office; and Venerable Bede says, that because Saint
Matthew intended to show the Regal office of Christ, and St. Luke his Priestly
office, therefore St. Matthew derives his person from King Solomon, Beda l. 1.
in c. 3. Luc.
and St. Luke from Nathan: and so, says he, in the Chariot of the Cherubims,
the Lion which is the strongest of all Beasts, designs his Kingly office; and
the Calf, which was the sacrifice of the Priest, denotates his Priestly
function: and says he, Eandem uterque sui operis intentionem in genealogia
quoque salvatoris texenda observavit, And both the Evangelists in like manner
observed the same intention of their work in setting down the genealogy of our
Savior. And then immediately he adds two excellent Observations to confirm
the same point. As,

1 Observation.
1. That in the manner of setting down his genealogy S. Matthew descended from
Abraham to Joseph, Beda ibid.
to note his Kingly office, and to show that he partaked with us of our
mortality: but S. Luke by ascending from Joseph unto Adam, and so to God, does
rather design his Priestly office in expiating our sins, and so bringing us to
immortality. And therefore, in the descending generations of S. Matthew, the
taking upon Christ our sins is signified; but in the ascending genealogies of
S. Luke, the abolition of our sins is noted unto us. For so the Apostle says,
God sent his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, there is the acception and
the taking of our sins upon him; and for sin, or by the sacrifice for sin, Romans
8.3.
condemned sin in the flesh; there is the expiation of our sins. And,

2. To the same purpose he observes, 2 Observation.
that S. Matthew in his genealogy descended from David by Solomon, with whose
mother David sinned: but S. Luke ascended by Nathan unto David, by a Prophet of
which name God absolved him from his sin.

The second Argument, 2 Argument from the quality of a Priest which should be
1. knowledge. 2. uprightness. Ps. 72.1.
whereby S. Luke proves Christ to be a Priest, is from the quality of a
Priest, what manner of man he should be; and that is, to be endued with
knowledge and uprightness, or judgment and righteousness: for which cause the
Prophet prays, Give the King thy judgment, O God, and thy righteousness unto
the Kings son: For who is this King, and this Kings son, but this Priest, the
Messiah of the world? And so Moses prays in like manner, Let thy Vrim and thy
Thummim be with thy holy One, Deuteronomy. 33.8.
or as some read it, upon the man of thy mercy: for who is this holy One, or
this man of his mercy, but this our true high Priest, called the man of his
mercy,

1. Because he is the man that is full of mercy.

2. Because that God out of his mere mercy did give this man unto us.

3. Because by this man only and none else, we obtain mercy.

And according to these two men's prayer for those two things to be given unto
the high Priest, God gave them most amp^y, without measure, unto the Messiah,
that is, Esaias. 42.1. Jer. 23.5.
our high Priest: For, I have put my Spirit upon him, says the Lord, there is
knowledge; and he shall bring forth judgment unto the Gentiles, there is
uprightness.

And S. Luke shows, that Christ had Vrim and Thummim, 1. Christ his
knowledge. Luke 11.49.
knowledge and uprightness without measure. For,

In regard of the first, he plainly calls him, the wisdom of God. And his
wisdom appeared,

1. In his wise, unreprovable and unrepliable answers to Satan, that subtle
Serpent; to the Herodians, that feigned themselves to be just men, and were
sent to entrap him in his speech; and to the chiefest Doctors of the Jews, to
whom he did so wisely answer, Luke 20.7.
that they durst not ask him any thing at all: and if he asked them any
question, they answered, They could not tell how to answer him.

2. In his heavenly teaching of his followers, so truly expounding the
Prophecyes of the Prophets, so profoundly speaking to them in parables, so
plainly delivering the Law unto them, and so sweetly comforting all that came
unto him, that the eyes of all were fastened upon him, Luke 4.20, 22.
and they wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth. And,

2 His uprightness. Mark 7.37. 1 Pet. 2.22.
In regard of the second, that is, his uprightness, S. Mark says, that the
people testified he did all things well. And S. Peter says, There was no guile
found in his mouth. And S. Luke confirms the same throughout his whole Gospel.

3 Argument from the office of a Priest, threefold.
The third Argument whereby S. Luke proves Christ to be a Priest, is from the
duty and office of a Priest, which is specially threefold: 1. To expound the
Law. 2. To pray for the people. 3. To offer sacrifice for their sins.


1. The Prophet Malachy says, The Priests lips should keep knowledge, Mal. 2.7.
and the people should seek the law at his mouth. And S. Hierom says, It is
the duty of the Priest, to answer all that ask him concerning the Law; and
therefore if he be the Priest of the Lord, Hieron. super Hagg.
let him know the law of the Lord: or if he be ignorant of the law, he is no
Priest of the Lord.

And therefore S. Luke shows, That Christ taught the people most diligently,
expounded the Law most truly, and answered all questions that were asked of
him, most readily. And,

Luke 22.32.
2. He shows, That he prayed for S. Peter, that his faith should not fail: And
S. John shows, how he prayed for all those whom his father gave him; and for
all them also, which should believe on him through the word. And, John 17.11.
and 20.


3. How, as a Priest, he offered sacrifice for the sins of the people (which he
did both in the Garden and upon the Cross.) S. Luke shows it more amply then
any of all the Evangelists; for though S. Matthew and S. Mark do tell us that
he was in heaviness, or exceeding sorrowful, Matthew. 26.38. Mar: 14.35.
Aristotle sect: 11. probl. 30. et Basil. in c. 17. Isaia.
when he came to the garden: yet S. Luke expresses the matter more fully and
more lively then both of them: for he faith, that he fell into a sweating
agony, that is, a perplexed fear of one that is entering into a grievous
conflict, as both Aristotle and Saint Basil testify. And such a perplexed fear
is a most acceptable Sacrifice in the sight of God, as the Prophet says, Ps.
51.17.
The Sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, a broken and a contrite heart O God
shall thou not despise; and such a broken heart was the heart of this Priest at
this time, for here is both (...) and (...), a combat and a Sacrifice, a
troubled Spirit and a fresh bleeding Sacrifice,

1. 1. He offered up his soul in prayer. Leo Sermon. 7. de pass. The quality of
Christ his prayer. Brevis oration penetrat coelum.
He offered up his soul while he was in the Garden in a fervent Prayer to God,
and that Prayer, says Pope Leo, was in omnibus perfecta, in all things
perfect, and for all men. And it consisted like a faithful Prayer plus
gemitibus quam sermonibus, rather in sighs then in words; for it was says
Saint Augustine, very short, but very pithy, few words but full of fervency,
and therein his intention was earnest, for he went a stones cast from his
Disciples; his love was great, for he often ingeminated, Father, Father; his
faith was steadfast, for he said my father; his affection was vehement, for he
cried, O my father; his humility was unfaigned, for he kneeled down, and with
great reverence he fell grovelling upon his face, as Saint Matthew. witnesses;
his constancy was apparent, for he prayed three times; his obedience was
unreprovable, for he said, Not my will but thy will be fulfilled; and his
fervency was admirable, for every word drew drops of blood: and therefore this
prayer was directed as an incense in the sight of his father, and the lifting
up of his hands as an evening sacrifice. Ps. 14.2.
And as the Apostle says, he was heard in that which he feared; and he had all
that he desired; for whereas S. Bernard demands, Quid oras domine, quid
sudas, and quid sitis? for what do thou pray O Lord, and why do thou sweat?
Saint Hilary answers, Hilarious l. 10. de l^in^t.
Pro nobis oration, pro nobis sudor est, his prayer and his sweat, and his
thirst and all, was for us, and he obtained all for us. And then,

2. As he thus offered up his soul in a fervent prayer for us; so, Esaias 53.10.
when it pleased the Lord to bruise him, as the Prophet says, he offered up
his blood in a sweating fervor, and his body to be broken for our sins; 2. He
offered up his body to be broken, and his blood to be shed for our sins. Levit.
17.11. Heb, 9.22.
and as the Angel whose name was secret, kindled the fire upon the Altar, and
at length the flame increasing, himself also ascended in the same: so here in
this agony of Christ, our Savior kindled the fire of his love, and then as a
faithful high Priest he offered up himself, as a sweet smelling sacrifice unto
God. And seeing blood must make an atonement for the soul, and as the Apostle
says, without shedding of blood there is no remission; therefore this our
Priest shed his own blood, to procure the forgiveness of our sins: the blood of
his head when he was crowned with thorns, the blood of his heart when he was
pierced with a spear, the blood of all parts when he was whipped, and the
blood of his whole body when he sweat the drops of blood, not a watery dew, but
nimbus sanguinis, a bloody shower, when as totus sudore defluit, it passed
through and through his garment and trickled down to the ground, Ps. 130.7.
as Saint Luke testifies; that there might be, as the Psalm. says, plenteous
redemption. And as Eleazar the high Priest was to take the blood of the heyfer
with his finger, and sprinkle of her blood directly before the Tabernacle of
the Congregation seven times; Number. 19.4. Levit. 8.11.
so Christ our Priest shed his blood seven times to purge away our sins.

1. In his Circumcision, 2. In the Garden, 3. When he was crowned with thorns,
4. When he was whipped, 5. That Christ shed his blood seven times to cleanse us
of our sins.
When his hands were nailed, 6 When his feet were fastened to the Cross, 7. When
his side was pierced with a spear. And then as the sin of man was maledictio
terrae, the curse of the earth; so this blood of Christ is medicina terra, the
medicine of the world. And therefore the Apostle faith, Heb. 12.24.
that the blood of Christ speaks better things then the blood of Abel; for by
the shedding of Abels blood, Gods wrath was kindled, but by the shedding of
Christ's blood, Gods wrath was appeased; the blood of Abel gave life only to
himself, but the blood of Christ gives life to all beleivers; the blood of Abel
cried for vengeance against his brother, but the blood of Christ cries for
mercy unto his enemies, and the blood of Abel cried a while, and then ceased,
and then it was no more availeable, but the blood of Christ still cries and
never cease, and is available for us for ever.

And so you see how Saint Luke proves Christ to be the Priest, which is to be
the Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck, and therefore he is here
understood by the calf, that was the chiefest sacrifice of the Priests.

3. By him that had the face of a man, 3. St. Mark is understood by him that
had the face of a man. Mark. 6.3. John 10.33.
the fathers do understand Saint Mark, because his principal aim was to show
that Christ was a true and perfect man, the son of a poor Carpenter, and in all
things like unto us, sin only excepted. And this truth was so manifest that
his very enemies confessed it, and would have stoned him because that he being a
man made himself a God: for their eyes saw that he had flesh and blood like
other men, and that he did hunger and thirst and was weary, and touched with
all the blameless passions and affections of other men, and therefore Saint
Mark is very short in his Gospel, not above sixteen Chapters in all; because he
needed not to use many Arguments, when as all that saw him did readily confess
it.

4. 4. Saint John understood by the flying Eagle.
By the flying Eagle all the old Interpreters do understand Saint John, because
that when Ebion and Cerinthus, two Jewish Proselites, denied the Deity of
Christ, he purposely wrote his Gospel for that main end, to confute that
damnable error, as Eusebius and others testify; and therefore in the very
Frontispiece of his work, he mounteth up like an Eagle, and says, in the
beginning was the word, John 1.1.
and the word was with God, and the word was God: and so throughout his whole
Gospel you may easily perceive his chiefest aim is to prove that the son of
Mary is the son of the eternal God, coeternal and coequal with his father, and
especially because he proves him,

1. To be the Creator of all things, c. 1.

2. To be (...), the knower and searcher of the secrets of our hearts, c. 2.25.

3. To be the worker of such miracles, as the raising up of L^zarus, and the
like, which none could do but God

And it was requisite that the mediator betwixt God and man, should be God and
man; Man, because man had sinned, and therefore meet that man should make
satisfaction, and not Ziba make the fault, and Mephibosheth bear the
punishment, which should be very unjust; and God, because our nature should,
but could not bear the burden which was the weight of Gods wrath for our sins.
But God, as God, could, but ought not; and therefore, seeing the one ought but
could not, and the other could but ought not, God and man must be joined
together in one person, that man might do what he ought to do, and suffer what
he ought to suffer; and so go thorough the work of our redemption.

And therefore, as Saint Mark had proved Christ to be a man: so Saint John
proves him to be the true and eternal God. And so you see that by these four
Beasts we are primarily to understand the four Evangelists.

Secondly, all the good Magistrates and Ministers are understood to be like
these four beasts. 1. Like the Lion. Jos. 1.7.
Secondly, As the four Evangelists are in the first place to be understood by
these four Beasts, for the reasons before showed; so likewise all Magistrates
and all Ministers ought to be like these four Beast. As,

1. Like the Lion for courage, without fear, Confidens ut leo absque terrore;
for so the Lord commanded Joshua to be strong and of a good courage, saying,
Only be thou strong and of a most valiant courage: and so Jethro tells Moses,
That his Judges should be men of courage and undaunted, Quia timiditas Judicis
est calamitas innocentis. So when the Jews told Pilat, if thou let this man
go, Thou art none of Caesar's friend, he was afraid; and through that fear he
condemned the Son of God. And so does fear cause many others to wrong the
Innocents. And therefore to you that are the Judges, to settle the disturbed
Estates of this Kingdom, I say, that it cannot be, but that many, and many
great men will frett and chafe, and be discontented at your doings, though you
do never so justly: but it is your duty to do that which is just; and in
doubtful cases, when evidences on both sides are in aequilibrio, to incline to
that which tends to the service of God's Church, and the honor of the King's
Majesty: Sap. 1.1.
and you ought always to remember what the Wiseman says, Love righteousness
ye that be Judges of the Earth; for righteousness exalts a Nation. Proverb.
And this righteousness you cannot preserve, unless you be like Lions, without
fear, either of threatenings or of dangers.

And as the Magistrates, so the Ministers and Preachers of God's word should be
like Lions, to do their duties without fear; for so the Lord says unto
Ezechiel, I send thee to a rebellious Nation, but thou son of man, Ezech. 2.6.
be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, nor dismayed at their
looks, Quia timiditas Predicantis est calamitas Audientis, Because the fear of
the Preacher is the calamity of the Hearer, when the fear of reproving men's
sins hardens them in their sins, and encourages them to sin more and more.
And therefore I say, that we should remember what the Lord commands us, Cry
aloud, and spare not, Esaias 57.1.
lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and
the house of Jacob their sins. And if the great men of the world threaten us to
rob us of our lands, or deprive us of our liberties, let us look what the Lord
says, I, Esaias 51.12, 13.
even I am he that comfort you; and who art thou, that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the son of man which shall be made as
grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that has stretched forth the
heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and have feared continually
every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy?

And it is well that he says, I, even I am he that comfort you, seeing it
is with us as it was with Ezechiel, Ezech. 2.3, 4.
that Briars and thorns are with us, and we dwell among scorpions, a rebellious
Nation, that are impudent and stiff-hearted; for I must humbly crave leave to
tell you a story of truth and no fiction. When I came first to lie in the
Bishops house in Kilkeny, I dreamed, that the Bishops Court was full of people,
Citizens, Soldiers, and Gentlemen, with Drumms, Swords and Muskets, and being
affrighted with the sight of them, before they had entered the house, or done
any hurt, I presently awaked, and looking out at the window for them, I saw
none: then for many days I often mused, what this meant, at last I sound that
the Citizens of Kilkeny on the one side, the Soldiers on the other side, and
the Knights and Gentlemen round about, came about me like Bees, to rob God of
his honor, and the Church of her right, by dividing her Revenues amongst
themselves, as the Soldiers did the Garments of Christ. And I neither fear nor
care what any man thinks of what I say, my duty telling me what I should say.

But though they threaten to be my ruin, and to cause me to spend what I
intended to the repair of the flat-fallen Church, to preserve the Revenues of
the Bishopric, yet seeing the Lord says, I, even I am he that comfort
thee, and that have delivered thee from so many dangers, and so many times from
the hands of most mercyless Rebels, and bids me not to fear, I must not be
dismayed; but as Elias told Ahab, and J. Baptist told Herod of their faults
without fear: so I, and all others, that are God's Ministers, ought to be bold
as Lions, to reprove the sins of the people, and especially those sins, that
are most frequently committed, and are most prejudicial to the service of God,
and most pernicious to their souls; least as Lucian says, (...), by escaping
the smoke of man's anger we shall fall into the fire of God's fury, when we fear
men more then God. And therefore, my dear brethren, I had rather you should
blame me for my boldness, then that God should punish me for my fearfulness;
and I know, that as the Drunkard cannot endure to be told of his drunkeness, or
the proud man of his pride, or the Rebel of his rebellion: so no more can these
sacrilegious persons abide to hear of their sacrilege. And must we therefore
hold our peace, for fear of their sayings, jeeres, or threats? By no means.

2. As we should be bold as Lions without fear; so we should be diligent and
painful in our places, like the Oxen, without laziness, to pray continually,
and to preach constantly, and as the Apostle says, in season and out of
season; that is, not so frequently, as our late Fanatiques would have us, to
preach Sermons full of words without substance: but as St. Augustine expounds
it, Volentibus and nolentibus, For to the willing hearers it comes in season,
and to the unwilling it comes out of season, whenever it comes.

And when we do this, then, 2. That the Magistrates and Minist. should be like
the Ox, painful and diligent to do their duties.
as the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn should not be muzzled, so
ought not we to be molested, nor detained and held with vexatious suits, to
hinder us, to discharge our necessary duties: lest the punishment of our
neglect should fall upon the heads of them that cause it. For we are sure, that
our God is so just, that he will not punish any one for not doing that, which
he is not suffered to do; as, for not going into his Church, when the ways
are so stopped, that he cannot possibly pass it,

3. We should be, not like the horse and mule, 3. The Magistrates should be
like men, sober and rational, and not voluptuous, like Beasts.
that have no understanding, and whose mouths must be holden with bitt and
bridle, lest they fall upon thee; but we should be endued with reason, like
unto rational men, that, as Cicero says, Agere quicquam nunquam debent, cujus
non possunt rationem probabilem reddere, ought never to do any thing, whereof
they could not yield a very probable reason. And God knows, how many things we
do, for which we can yield no reason at all. For what reason had we to wax
weary of our peace and of our happiness, and to rebel against a most gracious
King to destroy our selves? And what reason have we to expect God's blessing,
and yet to continue sacrilegious to rob God of his dues? Or is there any
reason, that any Commonwealth should keep Soldiers to protect them, and not
regard them, nor countenance them, nor pay them their wages? Surely they are
very necessary to preserve our peace, and they ought not to be slighted; and
John Baptist says, They should be content with their wages: but they should
therefore have their wages: and how should they have their wages if the
Superior officers defraud the inferior Soldiers, or the close-handed people
detain their taxes? I know not where the fault is, if there be any; but I know
his Majesty and his Immediate Governors, would have all things done with
uprightness, and according to the Dictate of right reason.

But to leave these and the like unreasonable men, that do these and the like
things without reason.

4. They should be endued with the properties of the Eagle.
4. We should all be like the flying Eagle, and the chiefest properties of the
Eagle are, 1. A sharp sight. 2. A lofty flight.
And both these are expressed in the Book of the Righteous, Job. 39.32.
where the Lord demands of Job, Does the Eagle mount up at thy command, and
make her nest on high? She dwells and abides en the Rock, 1 The sharp sight
of the Eagle.
upon the crag of the Rock and the strong place, there is her lofty flight;
then he proceeds, and says, From thence she seeks the prey, and her eyes
behold afar off, there is her sharp sight: and of this sharpness of sight,
Saint Augustine says, How sharp our sight should be in spiritual things.
that, being aloft in the clouds, she can discern, Sub frutice leporem, and sub
fluctibus piscem, Under the shrubs an hare, and under the waves a fish.

Even so should we that profess Religion, especially we that are the Ministers
of God, should have Eagles eyes, to see the Majesty of God in a bramble-bush,
Exodus 3.2.
like Moses; to discern the presence of Christ with us in the fiery furnace,
Dan. 3.25.
like Abednego; to behold an Army of Angels ready to defend us in our
straightest siege, 2 Reg. 6.17.
like Elizaus; and to consider the assistance of God to help us when we are
molested and compassed with the greatest heaps of afflictions, Romans 8.18.
like the holy Apostle St. Paul.

The worldly man's quick sight.
But this the children of this Generation cannot do; for though the
understanding of the worldly man, which Nazianzen calls, (...), the eyes and
lamp of reason, be pi^rcing, sharp, and cunning enough to make a large shekel
and a small Epha; Amos 8.5. Luke 12.56.
and very well able to discern the alterations of the skies, as our Savior
witnesses; yea, and to enter, like Aristotle, into the secrets of nature, and
the deepness of Satan, to find out the plots and practices of his craftyest
instruments: yet being but a mere natural man, he cannot perceive the things
that be of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
as the Apostle shows, neither can his understanding reach any further then
(...), such things, as may be manifested by demonstration, as St. Clement
says. For,

If you talk of Christ's conception in the womb of a pure Virgin, without the
help of a man, then the Heathen, His dimness and blindeness in spiritual things.
like Sarah, laugheth at it; and the wise Philosopher, as being in darkness,
stumbleth at it, and cannot conceive how this thing can be. If you talk of
Christ's death, and say, that our God should dye, and by his death procure to
us eternal life, then the Jews will storm at our folly, and the Grecians count
it a mere madness, and a great reproach to our Religion. And if you talk of his
glory and power, that being dead and buried, he should raise himself again, and
now reign as a King of Kings in Heaven, then the children of infidelity deem it
(...), a feigned thing. The reason of the worldly man's blindeness.
And the reason thereof is rendered by St. Augustine, that as the eye of man, if
it be either blind or purblinde, cannot thereby discern the clearest object;
even so says he, animus pollutus, aut men's turbata, a soul defiled with sin,
or a mind disturbed with worldly cares, can neither see God, that is present
with him, nor understand the things of God, that belong unto him.

Yet the spiritual man, that has the Eagles eyes, The spiritual man's quick
sight.
which Philo calls fidem oculatam, faith enlightened by Gods spirit, can
discern all the deep things of God, even the most excellent mystery of
godliness, which is, as the Apostle says, God manifested in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, 1 Timothy 3.16.
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
glory. For in the unspeakable birth of Christ the Eagles eye does behold a
divine miracle, in his accursed death it sees a glorious victory, and in his
return from death it conceives an assured hope of everlasting life.

2. The lofty flight of the Eagle.
2. The next Property of the Eagle is her lofty flight, for the Poets feign,
that the Eagle fled up to Heaven, and laid there her eggs in Jupiter's lap; and
the Prophet Esaias alludeth to her lofty flight, when he says, that those which
wait upon God shall renew their strength, Esaias. 40. ult.
and shall lift up their wings as the Eagles; Jerem. 49.16.
but Jeremiah goes on further and says, that the Eagles do build their nests
on high: and yet Ezechiel goes beyond them both, for he says, that the great
Eagle with great wings, long-winged, full of feathers, which had diverse
colors, came unto Lebanon, Ezech. 17.3.
and took the highest branch of the Cedar, where you see, she takes first the
highest tree, and then the highest branch of that tree. I know it was a Vision
that showed the state of Jerusalem; but yet you may see thereby the lofty
flight of the Eagle. So St. John flew as high as Heaven to begin his Gospel;
and so we, considere debemus in coelis, ought to have our minds set, not on
the fooleries and vanities of this world, Ephesians. 2.6.
but on heavenly things and heavenly places, that, Esaias 58.14.
being mounted up, super altitudines terrae, above all the high places of the
earth, as the Prophet speaks, we may behold all the things of this world to
be tanquam muscas, but as gnats and flies; or like the spiders web, that though
it be never so curiously woven, yet will it make no garment for us; and so all
the titles of honor to be, but folia venti, the windy blasts of a fleshly pair
of bellows, too weak an air to carry up a noble Eagle; How to deem of all
worldly things.
all the pleasures of this world to be, but lilia agri, like the lilies of the
field, that are more delectable in show then durable for continuance, and all
the allectives under heaven to be but vanity of vanities, and altogether
vanities. For thus by a contemplation and continual consideration of heavenly
things, it would appear unto us, quam abjecta sunt, que jam alta videntur, how
base are all the things of this world, in our judgments rightly informed,
which now seem so precious in our imaginations, being corrupted.

What the spiritual men that are like the noble Eagle should do.
And therefore if we would be like the noble Eagles, mounting up to Heaven;
then, as Moses builded his tent without the host, and far from the host: so
should we build our habitation out of this world, and far above the world; and
as Elias when he journeyed toward Heaven in his fiery Chariot, and was flying
up in a whirlwinde, bestript himself of his mantle, and threw it down to the
earth, lest the weight of it should press him downward, and so hinder his
ascent to Heaven: even so, if we desire to ascend to Heaven, we must bestrip
our selves of all worldly impediments, that are as heavy as a talent of lead,
and do not only hinder us from ascending upwards, but do press many men down
to the bottomless pit. And as the Prophet David, in all distresses, comforted
himself with that pious meditation, saying. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
what is there on earth that I desire in comparison of thee? so do all those,
that make their unum necessarium, their chiefest purpose and design to go to
Christ to have an everlasting house and lands, satisfy themselves with the
hope of obtaining their desire.

And this is the reason, that seeing God has given them all that they have,
they weigh not a straw if they be driven to spend all that they have, for the
benefit and good of the Church of Christ, and to promote the service of God.
And if the wise men of the world laugh at our folly, and say, we shall spend
ten times more then we shall ever get. We may answer, that for our losses and
expenses they are but as feathers, and that shall never trouble us; but our
hope is, that we shall attain unto our desire, which is, to mount up with the
rest of God's Eagles unto the Kingdom of Heaven, and that will countervail all
our losses. And so much for the peculiar and proper Description of these Beasts.

THE SECOND SERMON.
REVEL. 4.8. And the four Beasts had each of them six wings about him, etc.


2. FOR their general and common description, 2. Their general and common
description.
it is said, they had each one of them six wings about him, and they were all
full of eyes. Touching which you must observe.

1. Some things about their wings.

2. Some things about their eyes. And,

1. Of their wings.
1. About their wings. These two things are to be noted; 1. What are these six
wings. 2. To what end they had these wings, or what use they made of them.


1. What they are.
1. Rupertus and others say, these six wings are the six works of mercy, visito,
poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo fratres, that is, as our Savior sets them
down, to give meat unto the h^ngry, Matthew. 25.35.
drink unto the thirsty, lodging to the stranger, cloathe to the naked, and to
visit the sick, and those that are in prison: others understand hereby the six
spiritual works of piety and mercy, which are to correct the offender, to
instruct and consell the ignorant, to comfort the afflicted, to bear patiently
all injuries, to forgive all trespasses, and to pray for our enemies and
persecutors: but Balaeus and Lambert say, that these six wings are faith, h^pe,
charity, justice, mercy and truth; and I think they come nearest unto the
truth, for by those six we shall be able to shun and fly away from all the
mischeifs of the world; and these six wings are able to mount us up unto our
father in Heaven. And they that have not these six wings are rightly said to be
like the Ostrich, which often spreads her wings but seldom flies.

But they that have these six wings are most happy, and need not fear the
greatest dangers, nor the malice of their greatest enemies. For,

1. Faith is radix omnium virtutum, the root of all virtues; and you know what
mighty things Saint Paul sets down, to have been done through faith.

2. Spes alit afflictos, hope preserves the afflicted, and makes not ashamed,
says the Apostle.

3. Charity covers a multitude of sins; and of all the three divine graces,
(...), the greatest of them all is charity

4. Justice is such a cardinal virtue that Theognis a Heathen says, (...),
justice comprehends all virtues.

5. Our Savior says, blessed are the merciful, for that they are sure to
obtain mercy. And,

6. Truth as Zorob. proves, is so great, that it will prevail against all
oppositions, for though that by the tricks and delays of sutle heads, it may
be clouded for a time, yet at last it will bud forth and appear.

But I fear the Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants of this Land,
because as the Prophet says, there is no truth, nor mercy, I may add, nor
justice, nor knowledge of God in the Land; or if these be, then I am sure you
will not build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, because the
Lord loves neither House nor Lands that are unjustly obtained. I cannot stand
to examine it, or to handle the particulars that might be said concerning these
six points; for that might require six hours to do it at least: but I will
proceed and say,

2. If you would know to what end they had these wings, 2. What use they made
of their wings.
or what use they made of them, the Prophet Esaias tells you in the practice of
the Seraphims, that it was for these three special ends: That is, 1. To cover
their faces. 2. To cover their feet. 3. To fly about.
For he says, that with two of their wings they covered their faces, and with
two they covered their feet, Esaias. 6.2.
and with two they did fly.

And this they did for these three ends: That is, 1. To check our curiosity. 2.
To show our misery. 3. To teach us industry.


1. It is the nature, and the foolish disposition of man to be always prying
and searching into every thing, the secrets of God, the mysteries of state, and
the obscurities of nature. And yet the Seraphims that stand in the presence of
God are fain to cover their faces, not to hide their sins which they had not,
but because they are not able to behold the brightness of Gods glorious
Majesty; and if the Angels hid their faces from the brightness of Gods Glory,
how dares sinful man pry into it? because, as the Apostle says, he dwells in
the light light that no man can attain unto it, 1 Timothy 6.16. Exodus 34.20.
and the Lord says himself, that no man could see his face and live; for
though we walk in the cheerful light of the Sun, yet we are not able fully and
directly to look upon the Sun when he shines in his full strength and
brightness, but it will dazzle our eyes, and make them to see a thousand
colors. And as a pure crystal glass cannot endure the strong working of the
fire, but it will break all to pieces; even so the weakness of man's mortal
nature, though it lives by the enjoying of Gods presence, yet it cannot bear,
nor comprehend the glory and brightness of Gods Majesty; but that, in looking
upon so clear an object, the eyes of his understanding shall be dazzled, and he
shall fall and be swallowed up into a thousand errors. For seeing, as the
Apostle speaks, our knowledge of God in this life is but in part, 1 Cor.
13.12.
like the beholding of a man suddenly passing by us, when we can look upon
nothing but only his back parts, it is impossible for any man in this
mortality to know perfectly and exactly the being and ways of the most highest.

And therefore this checketh the curiosity, and reproves the boldness of those
men that like Phaeton will fly and mount up too high to search into the
Heavenly mysteries: for as the wise man says, who can number the sand of the
sea, the drops of rain, Ecclas. 1.2.
and the days of time? who can measure the height of Heaven, the breadth of
the Earth, and the depth of the Sea? Who can find out the wisdom of God which
has been before all things? For if we consider either the nature and essence
of God, or if we look into the counsels and works of God, we shall easily
perceive that they are all incomprehensible. Danaeus. Isag.
Et si quid facit Deus naturae nobis assuetae repugnans, nihil tamen facit
rationi repugnans, And if God does any thing that seems repugnant to our
accustomed nature; yet we may be sure he does nothing that is repugnant to
reason. And though all that God does be exceeding good, yet we cannot always
perceive many of them to be good; and yet this makes them not to be unjust,
Gregor. in Job. c. 9.
because we understand them not to be just: for as St. Gregory says, Qui in
factis Dei rationem non videt, He that sees not the reason of Gods doings, let
him consider his own infirmity and blindness, and rationem videat cur non
videt, and he shall soon see the reason, why he sees it not: and if we seek to
know more then we are able to understand, we shall understand less then we do:
And therefore Solomon gives good counsel to these Gnostics, saying, Eccles.
7.18
be not thou just overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise. For the mystery of
the Lords commanding Adam, that he should not eat of the tree of knowledge, was
very great, because the knowledge that he should get thereby, would not only
cause his present fall, That we ought not to be too curious to search into
divine mysteries. Genesis 3.5. V. 7.
but also make both him and all his sons for evermore to fall.

And therefore the subtle Serpent that aimed at the readiest way to destroy
them, promised unto Eva (and he kept his promise) that if they would eat of the
tree of knowledge, their eyes should be opened and they should be as Gods,
knowing good and evil, and so it was; for the text says, that their eyes were
opened, and they had the knowledge both of good and evil, the good that they
had lost, and the evil that they had fallen into; for they knew that they were
naked.

And so this knowledge did but direct them a way to run away from God, and
teach them the art to sow fig leaves together, to cover their shame, and to
hide their wickedness and themselves from the sight of God, which they could
never do: And therefore happy Adam had thou been if thou never had had this
knowledge, for this knowledge made thee to full; and so the Prophet Esaias says
of Babylon, Esaias 47.10.
thy wisdom and thy knowledge have caused thee to rebel, or to turn away; and
so Ovid says of himself. Ingenio perii qui miser ipse meo.

My wit and my knowledge has undone me. And I fear that many other men will
cry out, that their too greedy a desire inconcessae scientiae, of unlawful
knowledge, and prying too far into hidden mysteries has hurried them into most
desperate conclusions; for though it be very true, that no other creature upon
earth has reason and understanding but only man: yet it is as true, that no
other creature goes so far from reason as man alone. And therefore I do not
say, happy are the beasts that want reason; but I say unhappy is that man, qui
cum ratione insanit, that runs mad with the reason that God has given him,
and by aspiring to get unlawful knowledge, does fall into unavoidable mischief.

And therefore the Devil could wish that all his servants were as knowing as
Berengarius, and as subtle as Dun^ Scotus; because he has more excellent
execrable service from one of them, then he can have from a thousand others:
for it is a true saying, That inferior conceits have inferior sins, and non
nisi ex magnis ingeniis magni errores, and the great errors never came but from
great wits, such as Arius, Pelagius, and the rest of the great Heretics had.
And as it was the Giants and Lucifer that highly rebelled and warred against
God, and as it was the Princes and the Kings of the earth, that stood up and
took counsel against the Lord and against his Anointed; So it is the great
Lords that were the great rebels, and the mean men that were infirmiores in
exercitu, are but as the tail of the Dragon which the great men drew after
them. And so it is the curious wits, the pryers and searchers after
unsearchable knowledge and secret mysteries, that hatch the cockatrice eggs,
and produce the most desperate errors.

And therefore, seeing the ambitious desires of attaining more knowledge then
beseems us, and the knowledge of those secret things, Deuteronomy, 29, 29.
that as Moses says belong unto the Lord our God, are the Devil's splendida
peccata, his glistering sins, and generosa scelera, his noble projects, his
jewels, and most honorable stratagems which have caused many men not only to
fall away, The Seminary Priests and Presbyterians, the most dangerous people in
the Church of God.
but also to run away from God, we ought to take the counsel of Saint Augustine,
Magis metuere cum in intellectu habitat diabolus quaem cum in affectionibus, to
fear more when the Devil dwells in the understanding then when he corrupts
our affections, when as a Pestilent Heretic, or a Seminary Priest, or a
Fanatique Nonconformist, does more mischief then either a dissolute drunkard,
or a covetous merchant. And when we can not comprehend the Majesty of God, we
should say with our selves, it is no marvel; because he dwells in the Light,
that none can attain unto it: so when we can not understand his ways, nor dive
into the depth of his counsels, and his decrees of election and reprobation and
the like, we should say with the Prophet David, Ps. 77.19.
thy way is in the sea, thy patches in the great waters, and thy foot steps are
not known. And so when we can not see the reason of his judgments, why this man
prospers, and that man is punished, and as Homer says (...). Homer Iliad p.

Annuit hoc illi divum pater, abnuit illud.
Why he gives this thing, and denies that thing, why he raises this man,
throws down that man, we should cry out with the Apostle, O the deepness of
the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his way^ past finding out?

And therefore, least (as they say) Pliny burnt himself in Mount Aetna by
searching too far into the cause of its continual burning, and Aristotle
drowned himself in the sea of Oseria, by diving too deep into the causes of its
extraordinary flowing; So our eyes should be dazzled wi h the brightness of Gods
presence, and our selves swallowed up in his bottomless counsels, we should not
presume to look too fully upon so glorious a Majesty, we should not dive too
far into the depth of those bottomless mysteries: but, as these heavenly
beasts, and the holy Cherubims did cover their faces with two of their wings,
So should we; because we are no ways able to dive into the depth of them.

But as the Poet can say to every boy Mitte arcana Dei caelumque inquirere quid
sit; That the secrets of State ought not to be pried into by the vulgar people.
So you must know, that besides arcana Dei, there are also mysteria imperii,
secrets of State, which we must not search into but with these beasts cover our
faces with two of our wings; for if there were no government both in the Church
and Commonwealth, but Anarchy, and as the Poet says Totaque discors:
All things in confusion;
We were in a worse condition then the bruit beasts. For they are governed by
the law of strength, when the weakest must yield and obey the stronger, as all
the beasts unto the Lion, the fowls unto the Eagle, and the fishes unto the
Whale: But God ordered that men, indeed with reason should be guided and
governed by Laws, not only those that he delivered himself, but also those
that are made by the wisest of men, as Moses, Solon, Lycurgus, and the like,
Kings and Princes; and their under-Magistrates to rule and to govern the people
according to their Laws: and this government is a matter of great weight and
moment. And therefore the Prophet says, that Christ his government is upon his
shoulders, Esaias 9.6.
not in his hand, or at the arms end, but upon his shoulders, which are the
bearing members of all heavy things: and government requires not only strength
and strong shoulders to bear it, but also wisdom, and a good head, to guide
it; because it is ars artium gubernare populum, it is one of the hardest things
in the World, and the chiefest of all arts, to govern the people, especially
when turba begins to be turbata multitudo, that is, wayward and froward. And
therefore the Prophet David compares the government of the unruly people, to
the appeasing of the raging seas, saying unto God, Thou stillest the rage of
the sea, How hard a thing it is to gove n the unruly people.
and the noise of his waves, and the madness of the people.

And this madness of the people requires grave Judges, and wise Lawyers, that
can truly interpret the Laws, and judge all differences according to Law, which
otherwise would be made like a nose of wax, to be turned which way you will.

And least their madness should stop the current both of the Law and Religion
too, and so destroy both the learned Lawyers that preserve our right, and
without whom we were not able to live in the Commonwealth; and the Preachers
of the Gospel that maintain Religion, without with we were most miserable (as
of late years they intended to do) The Kings and Princes that are the
governors of the people, must maintain soldiers and Captains to suppress
their madness, and to ^^eserve peace and religion both in the Church and
Commonwealth. And therefore the soldiers as I showed not long since, are not
to be slighted, but to be cherished and satisfied for their wages, that, as
John Baptist says, they may be contented therewith, and not forced through
want to oppress the people.

And seeing all these things and abundance more of like sort, that are
requisite for the government of the people, can not be done without a great
deal of counsel, and wisdom, and policy, and strength, and power, and the
like; it is not for the common vulgars to steal fire out of Heaven, to search
out the reasons, and to pry into the causes and all the actions of their
Superiors: but as the maxim of all wise men is, curabit praelia Conon, let
the secrets of the Prince be to the Prince; and as the Medes said to Deioces,
when they chose him to be their King, do thou what thou will about the
government of us; both in war and peace, and we will obey thy commands and
follow our husbandry, our trades, and our occasions; Josh. 1.16.
and as the Jews likewise said to Joshua, All that thou command as we will
do, and whither soever thou sendest us we will go, and wh^soever he be that
does rebel against thy commandment in all that thou command him, he shall be
put to death: so should we and all other people, study to be quiet, as the
Apostle speaks, and to follow their vocation, and to learn obedience, which
is better then sacrifice, and never to be so curious and censorious, as to pry
into the secrets, and to condemn the actions of their Governors, but rather
with the Cherubims, and these Beasts to cover their faces with two of their
wings.

And as they ought to do this about the secrets of State, The Church affairs
ought to be le^t to the disposal of Aaron and the Priests.
so they should do the like about the Church affairs, which they should leave
to Aaron and the Priests to dispose of; and not with the men of Beth-shemesh to
pry into the Ark of the Lord: 1 Samuel 6.19.
lest they suffer as they did, when the Lord smote fifty thousand, threescore
and ten men for their curiosity in prying into the secrets of the Church. For
what have Laymen to do with the ordering of holy things, that the Lord God
has committed unto the Priests? Ne Suitor ultra crepidam. said Apelles The
Shoemaker must not touch the thigh
Unless his art does reach so high,
And will they order things in the Church of God, that have so much disorder in
their own house, and can not tell how to mend it: therefore they ought rather
to hide their faces with two of their wings, then to pry into the Government
of the Church.

For as I told you even now, that the Government of the Commonwealth was a
matter of great moment, and to be borne upon the shoulders, which are the best
able to bear it: so the Ark of God, wherein all the Government of the Church
was included, 1 Chronicles. 15.15.
was to he carried upon the shoulders of the Levites, 1 Chronicles. 15.15. To show
that this Government of the Church is no ways of less moment, 1 Chronicles. 13, 10.
then the Government of the civil State.

Therefore when this Arc was put, not upon the shoulders of the Priests,
Numbers 4.15.
according to the first institution, but to be carried upon a new cart, the
Lord made a breach upon his people, and smote Vzza that he died; and so they
may well fear the anger of the Lord will be kindled against those that take
this Ark of God from the shoulders of the Priest^, and put it, as it was of
late, into the hands of those that had nothing to do with it.

Secondly, As the Cherubims and these Beasts did cover their faces with two of
their wings, 2. Why they covered their feet.
to check our curiosity, because we are not able, and therefore ought not to
pry into secret mysteries: so they covered their feet with two of their wings,
to show our misery, because we have defiled our selves and fouled our feet by
our walking in the wicked ways and the dirty paths of sin and iniquity. And
so we are no ways able to stand and to justify our selves in the sight of
God: for we are all become abominable, and there is none that does good, no not
one, But in all men there is corruption, in the best men there is defection,
What the best of all our actions are.
and in the Angels unfaithfulness has been found.

And therefore God has shut up all in unbelief, that every mouth should be
stopped, and all the world culpable before God; for if you look into the best
of all our actions, and the choicest ways that we walk in, you shall find that
the righteousness which we have by nature, is but justitia Gentilium, splendida
peccata, as Saint Augustine calls them: or the wisdom of the flesh, not
sanctified by faith, as Saint Paul calls it. The righteousness that we have by
the Law is but justitia Pharisaeorum, which as Saint Chrysostom says, was in
ostentatione non in rectitudine intentionis, in locutione non in opere, in
corporis afflictione non in mandatorum observatione, and so it was but sceria
obducta, sin gilded and unprofitable, because never perfectly performed, no
not by the strictest Pharisee. And the righteousness which we have by grace, is
but justicia viatorum, inchoated and imperfect, and at the best but as
menstruous clothes full of stains; but Jehova justitia nostra, the Lord is
that righteousness which must save us.

And therefore we should never exalt our selves with high conceits of our own
worth, like the proud Pharisee; but rather fall down upon our knees with the
humble Publican, and say, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner: and to cry out
with the Prodigal Child, we have sinned against Heaven and against thee, and we
are no more worthy to be called thy Sons. For if God should enter into
judgment, and be extreme to mark what we do amiss, O Lord, who could abide it?
For no flesh living could be justified. That we ought not to hide and cover our
sins.
And therefore we should not stand to justify our selves and our ways before
God, but rather with these Beasts and those holy Cherubims to cover our feet
with two of their wings.

But by this cov^ring of our feet, we must not understand the hiding and
covering of our sins, as most of us use to do; for Solomon tells you plainly
that he which hides his sins shall not prosper, Prove. 28.13.
but who so confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy; and Saint John
says if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves and the truth is not in
us: 1 John 1.8.
but if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

And therefore though we ought to cover our feet, that is, not to justify our
ways before God: yet we must not cover our sins, but confess them with an
humble, lowly, penitent and obedient heart, if ever we look to obtain
forgiveness of the same.

3. Why they did fly.
3. As they covered their feet with two of their wings, so with the other two
wings they did fly; and that was to show the readiness of their obedience to
do the service of God, and to teach all others to be industrious and diligent
to do their duties: for here you see the Cherubims, and these holy Evangelists
do not only go or run, but fly very swiftly to do the work of God, and to
execute his will; and therefore the Prophet says, How ready and diligent we
should be to do the works of God.
he rode upon Cherub and did fly, he came flying upon the wings of the wind,
that is, his Messengers, that he sent to perform his commands, were as ready
and as swift as the wind. He needed no more but say to this man go and he
goes, and to another come and he comes, and says, in me mora non erit ulla,
Lucan. Phars. lib. 1.
as Curio said unto Caesar.

So we should all be swift to hear, and diligent to do our duties; not lazily
to go about them, like the Snaile, of whom the Poets fain, that when Jupiter
invited his Creatures unto his Feast, the Snail came last of all, which
admonishes us, says Alciat.

-- Sectanda gradu convivia tardo, To come slowly to revellings and pleasures,
but to the Lords Table, and to other holy exercises we should not be like the
Snail, or the sluggard that cries, yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of the hands to sleep, but we should go nimbly like those that
have wings to fly to do their business, because as Saint Chrysostom says,
sicut in unoquoque matter est diligentia, ita universae doctrinae and
disciplinae noverca est negligentia: diligence is the mother of every good act,
and sloth or negligence is the stepmother or fetters that entangle and choke
all learning and discipline.

And as we ought to use diligence in all that we take in hand; Sloth and
negligence the hinderance of all good things. Cantic. 8.14.
so we ought more specially to use it in the service of God, and to go to our
Savior Christ, that bids his Church and every member of his Church to make
have, or to fly away, as the original word imports, and to be like to a Roe,
or to a young Heart upon the mountains of spices, where she runs and
skippeth for very haste to get away: so Abraham made haste to make provision
for the Angels that came unto him; and so David says, O God, thou art my God,
early will I seek thee: and so the women that sought Christ came early, while
it was yet dark, unto the Sepulcher.

And so all worldlings are diligent enough, and have wings like Pegasus to fly
about the affairs of this world, -- Currit mercator ad Indos: The Merchant runs
to get Commodities unto the Indians and the Oppressors are most greedy to rob
both God and man, and the malicious man has his feet swift to shed blood, and
the Fanatic schismatic flies about, and compasses Sea and Land to make a
Proselyte; and yet we that profess to journey toward Heaven, do walk as it
were upon leaden feet.

For you may see the Citizens of this World, how diligent they are and spare no
cost to repair and beautify their own houses in the fairest manner; and how
slow they are, and how backward to do any thing to set up the houses of God
upon their feet. But are like the Dog in the manger, that will neither eat hay
himself, nor suffer the Ox to eat it; so they will neither raise the Church
themselves, 1 Chronicles. 29.1, 2, 3.
nor suffer those that would, to enjoy the Revenues of the Church to raise the
same.

But you know how heavily the Lord complains of those that dwell in sieled
houses themselves, Hag. 1.4.
and suffer the house of God to lie waste; and that use their wings to fly
about their own worldly affairs, and have scarce any feet to walk in Gods ways.

How diligent the worldlings are about their own affairs.
And therefore our Savior tells us, that the children of this World are wiser in
their generation then the children of light; because they omit no opportunity
to gain their wicked ends; and we neglect all the furtherances that may help us
forward to the Kingdom of Heaven.

For so you see how Judas watched and walked unto the High Priests, and from
the High Priests to the Garden, and from the Garden to the High Priests again,
and from the Highpriests to the gallows, and most of this while Saint Peter
and the rest of the Disciples slumbered and slept.

But the reason why we are so slow in our flight toward heaven, is, because
our wings that should carry us, are birdlim'd and entangled with abundance of
cares about worldly wealth, or drowned in the vain delights of sinful
pleasures, or pressed down with the weight of those vanities, whereof the least
is heavy enough to sink a ship; that being burdened with such hindrances, and
hindered with such burdens, we cannot serve God with that readiness as we ought
to do. For is it not strange to consider, how many men's hearts are filled with
the cares of this World, and their heads loaded with a world of vanities? and
how should they fly about Gods service, that are thus fettered with such
obstacles?

What hinders our readiness to serve God, and our diligence in his service.
And therefore, as we see the birds that fly, will carry no more weight upon
their backs, but what necessity does require: And as the runners of a race,
will ease themselves of all heavy burdens; so we being to fly up to Heaven,
and to run our race toward the spiritual Canaan, should cast away both
deliciarum putredinem and curarum magnitudinem, our worldly cares and our
sinful delights, and all other things that may hinder us to run readily to do
the Lords service, and to fly with the Cherubims and these Beasts, about the
Lords affairs.

Which if we do, we shall be crowned not with a garland of flowers, as the
Romans used, but with a crown of eternal glory, as the Apostle speaks. And if
this cannot allure us to be ready and diligent in Gods service, but still to
load our selves with the garbages of the earth; then I must turn from the
Apostles promise to the Prophets threatening, and say, Jerem. 48.10.
Cursed shall all those be that do the work of the Lord negligently: cursed in
this life, and cursed in the life to come, cursed for a time, and cursed for
ever.

And therefore if we desire to avoid this curse, let us with these beasts use
two of our wings to fly about the service of God with all readiness, and
rather strive to be the first in the Church of God then the last; for so we
shall gain the blessing for ever. And so much for the wings of these beasts,
and the use that they made of them.

2. 2 The next part of their description is, that they were full of eyes.
You must observe about the next part of their general description (which is
common to each one of them) that they are said, First, To be full of eyes. And
Secondly, More particularly, that they were full of eyes.
1. Within. v. 8. 2. Before. v. 6. 3. Behind. v. 6.
For so it is in the 6. v. that they were full of eyes before and behind, and
here in this verse, that they were full of eyes within.

First then you see, that they were full of eyes, which shows their
illumination, that they could see like Argos every way; and our Savior says,
that the light of the body is the eye; and those beasts being full of eyes,
Matthew. 6, 22 c. 5.14.
they are rightly said to be the light of the World.

And here I might Philosophically dilate unto you the nature, quality, and
excellency of this little part of the body, which is, the eye, and the
inestimable benefit of our sight, which is the chiefest of all the five senses,
but to explain all these, my time will not permit me.

And therefore I will only say, that as these beasts were full of eyes, to see
all things and to enlighten all others: so should all Christians be like unto
them, full of eyes; and especially, 1 All Magistrates. 2 All Ministers.


1 That all the Magistrates and Ministers of justice should be full of eyes.
All the Magistrates and all the Judges of the earth should be full of eyes;
because they are not only to look unto themselves, and to see to their own
ways, but they are also to guide and to lead many others. And if they be blind,
and yet undertake to lead the blind, the blind Magistrates to lead the blind
people, they both shall fall into the ditch, as of late amongst us both have
done; because both wanted their eyes, and so both were blind, and he is blind,
says Saint Chrysostom, that has not both his eyes in his head.

And these two eyes in a Magistrate and a Judge are, What are the two eyes of
the Magistrate.
1. The eye of Knowledge and understanding of the Law, and of all cases and
causes that shall come before them. 2. The eye of doing justice and executing
judgment according to the truth and merit of every cause.
And for the first point, 1 The eye of knowledge and understanding the truth of
the cause that is brought before them in every circumstance thereof.
the understanding of all things aright, one eye will scarce serve the turn;
but they must be like these beasts full of eyes: one eye to look to the
Complainants charge, another to mark the Defendants answer, and another to
observe the quircks and subtleties of the Pleaders: and all this they must
behold and see, not without a great deal of patience, and a great deal of
circumspection; for as Seneca says. Qui part judicat inaudita altera, aequum
licet statuerit, ipse haud aequas est.

And therefore though the cry of Sodom and Gomorrha was great, and their sin
very grievous; yet the Lord would not destroy them, but he says, I will go
down now and see whether they have done according to the cry of it: and if not,
I will know. Genesis 18.21.
So there is another cry amongst us, that the power and privilege of
Parliament does many ways wrong men, and against many poor men stop the current
of justice. It were well to do as God did, to see whether it be altogether
according to the cry of it; for you may be sure, that privilege is accursed,
and woe be to that power that maintains wrong, and stops justice: and it will
be a great deal more for your honor to lay aside that power, and to suppress
such a privilege then to support it. And I think few but such as never were in
power before would use it.

So when the report came, that the men of any City became Idolatrous and the
seducers of the people to idolatry, as now our Anabaptists and Quakers withdraw
their neighbors to their faction and rebellion, the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 13.14.
then shall thou enquire, and make search, ask diligently and behold if it be
truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought: Then for the
second point, If thou find it true, V. 15,
that thou see they have done it, thou shall surely smite the inhabitants of
that City with the edge of the sword, and destroy it utterly. For, 2 The eye of
doing justice, that offenses should not be suffered to go unpunished. Aug.
Epist. 182. ad Bonifac.


2 when with these eyes they do see the offense, they should not let the
offender escape, quia impunitas delicti inuitat homines ad malignandum, because
the leaving of sin unpunished is the chiefest encouragement to invite other men
to sin; for by favoring one, you hearten many: and as Saint Augustine says,
Illicita non prohibere consensus erroris est, not to restrain sin when you see
it, is to maintain sin in them that do it; and he that suffers it, which
should hinder it, is as culpable as he that commits it. And Solomon says, He
that justifies the wicked, or says unto him, thou art righteous, and so let
him go unpunished, and quasheth all that shall be proved against him, him shall
the people curse, and Nations shall abhor him; and such a Judge deserves very
well to be accursed. Prove. 24.24.


And it is most certain, that the suffering of oppressors, intruders, and the
like malefactors to pass away unpunished, will bring the curse of God upon any
Nation, and especially upon them that should hinder it and will not do it. For,
nil doctores nisi ductores, the Ministers of mercy can do no good though we
preach never so well, except the Ministers of Justice will maintain that good,
because we can but forbid the corruption of the heart, and they must prohibit
the wickedness of the hand; when as we only have the words of exhortation, and
they only have the sword of correction.

And therefore seeing the eye of Justice should not wink, and connive with the
transgressors, the false-hearted subjects and traitors, the oppressors and
plunderers of their brethren, be they of what Nation you will, Jew or Gentile,
and of what condition you will, high or low, which might think it favor enough
to have their wickedness pardoned, though they be not honored and magnified,
when the same deserves rather to be severely punished, then any wages to be
connived at; but I will pass from this point, that is too hot to be held long
in my hand. And yet I must tell you that this should no ways countenance the
condemning of any man that is innocent; for the Scripture is very plain, that
justum and innocentem non condemnabis, neither is it any justice to punish
Mephibosheth for Ziba's fault, but as every horse should bear his own burden,
so should every man suffer for his own faults: so let the rebels that were
murderers and traitors suffer and spare them not, but let the innocent go free.

2. I say, that as the Magistrates and Judges should be like these Beasts, full
of eyes; so should the Ministers and Preachers of Gods word be likewise full of
eyes: For otherwise it were to no purpose either for the Judge and the
Magistrate, or for the Preacher and Minister to be like Lions, full of courage,
unless they were also full of eyes, and their eyes should be sharp and
quick-sighted like the Eagles eyes: for the blind Lion may soon fall into the
snare or ditch, and then his strength and courage will avail him nothing. And
therefore as well the Minister as the Magistrate should be like unto these
Beasts, full of eyes, and especially to have two eyes at the least. 1. The one
of famous learning and knowledge. And, 2. The other of a blameless life and
conversation. 2. That the Ministers and Preachers should be full of eyes.



And if the Minister wants either of these, he is but monoculus, an one-ey'd
Priest, not fit by the Law of God to serve at Gods Altar, that would have his
Priests without blemish.

1. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge; 1. The eye of Learning. The eye
often signifies the understanding.
and the eye by the idiome and customary phrase of the Hebrews is often put
for the whole mind and understanding of a man, quia oculi sunt pracipui mentis
indices, because the eye is the most principal index and declarer of the mind;
so impudicus ocolus impudici cordis est nuntius, an unchaste eye is the witness
of an unchaste heart, says St. Hierom, and a pitiful eye is the testimony of a
good merciful man.

Therefore the eye put for the mind and signifying the understanding, the
Ministers that ought to be full of eyes, ought to be full of knowledge and
understanding; for if they want knowledge, how shall the people get the
knowledge of Gods Laws from them that know nothing themselves? The people must
needs perish, and they shall be liable for their destruction; for when they
perish through the Preachers fault, I will require their blood at the Preachers
hand, says the Lord. Ezech. 3.20.
And therefore those Ministers that have taken upon them the charge of souls,
and do either want the eye of learning and the light of understanding, or else
keep it in themselves like the fire that is in the flint stone, and warmes no
man, or the candle that is put under a bushel, and lights no part of the house,
are in a fearful case, because that as our Savior says, Matthew. 5.13.
when the salt has lost his savor, it is thenceforth good for nothing but to
be cast out and to be trodden under foot; The desperate condition of ignorant
and negligent Ministers.
so when the crier has lost his voice by being choked with junkates, and the
watchman has lost his eyes by too much sweating after worldly wealth, and the
Minister cannot preach either through ignorance or negligence, they are
thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and thrown into the bottomless
pit. But,

2. 2. The eye of a blameless life.
As the Ministers of Christ should have the quick sighted eye of learning and
knowledge, so they should have the clear eye of a blameless life and
conversation; otherwise as Penelope to delude her woers, is said to untwist in
the night what she spun in the day: so by the darkness of their evil life, they
pull down all that they built by the light of their preaching.

The Lord says, that the Priest shall not go up by steps unto his Altar, Exodus
20.26.
that his nakedness be not discovered thereon: and Saint Bernard says, there
are four things necessary for every Priest ne quid nuditatis appareat, that his
nakedness may not appear. And they are,

1. Capiti velamentum, a veil for his head; and that is prudent discretion
which covers all his folly and imbecility, Four things necessary for every
Priest.
and is not only a virtue but the guider and moderatrix of all virtues.

2. Corpori vestimentum, a garment for the body; and that is fervent devotion,
because it is the office and duty of the Minister to pray for all; 1. For the
good men, that they may continue good and not fall. 2. For the evil men, that
they may rise from their fall. And prayer without devotion, is like the body
without a soul.


3. Manibus munimentum, a covering for the hands, and that is good works;
because that as our works are strengthened through our prayers, Hieron. in
Lament. c. 3.
so our prayers are available through our works, says Saint Jerome.

4. Pedibus fulcimentum, propps and shoes or sandals for the feet; and that is
a pure and an upright life and conversation, because bad Ministers do not
dispensare but dissipare bona Domini, and rather dishonor then honor their
Lord and Master Christ: And therefore the Heathen Priests at their sacrifical
solemnities, were wont to say, Innocui veniant, procul hinc, procul impius esto;
Casta placent superis, pura cum mente venite.
And as the Magistrates and Ministers should be full of eyes, That all good
Christians should be full of eyes.
so all Christians in like manner should be full of eyes, to look unto
themselves and to their ways; for though, as the Apostle speaks, they were
once darkness, while God winked at the time of their ignorance: yet now they
are light in the Lord, even as the Prophet showed they should be, The people
that walked in darkness have seen great light, Esaias. 9.2
and they that dwell in the Land of the shadow of death, upon them has the
light shined, because it cannot be denied but that as Daniel says, knowledge
is increased, and as our Savior says, light is come into the world.

And therefore the people should take heed that they love not darkness more
then light, or that they be not like the fool Harpaste that was as blind as a
beetle, and yet would not be persuaded, as Seneca says, that she was blind
but that the room was dark. For I fear that we have too many men that think
they want no eyes, but that the house of God is dark and wants light; but that
is because they are bleere-ey'd like L^ah, and look a squint and cannot see the
truth.

There be many others that are full of eyes, Many are full of eyes, yet not
like these beasts, but of all evil eyes.
but their eyes are oculi nequam evil eyes, such as Saint Peter speaks of; and
others have eyes far worse. My time will not give me leave to discover them.

But if the Lord should say unto me, as he said to his Prophet Amos, what see
thou: I must answer, Amos. 8.2.
I dare not tell what I see: and if the Lord replies, should they that are to
be like Lions become as fearful as the Hares, that run away from the noise of
the Hounds? Have I not often delivered thee as I did Elisha after he had
delivered his message unto Jehu, when he presently shut the door and fled? 2
Reg. 9.3 and v. ^0.
therefore I command thee to tell me, what see thou.

Why then, if thou command me, I must tell; and I must say with the Prophet,
that I have seen unrighteousness and strife in the City; moreover I saw the
place of judgment, and wickedn^ss was there; Eccles 3 16.
and the place of righteousness, and iniqui-qu^ty was there. and I saw the
tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comfort because power was on
the side of their oppressors. c. 4. 1.
And worse then the parable of Menenius Agrippa, when all the members conspired
against the stomach, I have seen a monstrous ill-shap'd body cutting off his
own most excellent and unreprovable head; and the worst Parliament that ever
England saw, rebelling and warring, and doing far worse to the best King that
ever England had. And I have seen the Commons-house of that Parliament
encroaching by little and little upon the rights and privileges of the Lords,
as the Plebeians did upon the nobility of Rome, till at last they had quite
supplanted them: felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, I hope, O Lord,
that I shall never see the like again.

Yet I see one thing more that troubles me much, many men that say (excepting
the conscience of their religion, that should not undo them) they are innocent
from any offense done either against their King or against their neighbors, and
yet to be driven out of house and home, and those that were known to be rebels
and to have fought against their King to enjoy their Lands and Livings, and to
become great men, and to hold in their fingers the Lands of Innocents, of the
King, of the Church, and of God himself, which can as hardly be plucked out of
their fingers, as it was to pluck the club out of Hercules's hands; for they
have got possession of them, and possession being as they say eleven points of
the Law, twelve Juries cannot dispossess them.

But for the trial of the truth hereof, his Majesty has most graciously
appointed, and his Grace here does most favorably countenance these wise and
religious men that shall justly and religiously determine these things. And I
am confident that being wise men as they are, they will show themselves men of
courage, bold as the Lion to do justly, and to stand for the right Interest, be
it of the Jew or of the Gentile, without fear of the greatest, and not caring
what the meanest or the vulgar say of them; quia nec meliores si laudaverint,
nec deteriores si vituperaverint, because their praise makes them never a whit
the better if they do unjustly, nor their dispraise one jot the worse when they
do right, which is the only thing that all men ought to do without fear. And
by their just and unpartial dealing betwixt party and party, I doubt not but
they will as they have hitherto, show themselves to be full of eyes to see to
every thing, to search into every ca^^e, and to find out the truth of every
matter and every cha ge that shall be brought before them.

THE THIRD SERMON.
REVEL. 4.8. And the four Beasts had each of them six wings about them, and
they were full of eyes within, etc.


2. AFTER that they are said to be full of eyes, 2. The distribution of their
eyes.
the Evangelist tells us more particularly that they were full of eyes within;
and in the precedent 6. v. 6.
v. it is said, that they were full of eyes before and behind, so they were

Full of eyes, 1. Within. 2. Before. 3. Behind.


1. They were full of eyes within, 1. Why these beasts were full of eyes
within. Jer. 17.9.
and that was to look into their own hearts and consciences, for the heart of
man is deceitful above all things: It is but a little member, vix ad unius
milvi refectionem sufficere possit, scarce sufficient to serve one Kite for his
breakfast; and yet as Hugo says, magna cupit, Hugo l. 3. de anima.
and totus mundus ei non sufficit, it affects great things, and as Juvenal
says of Alexander, the whole World will not suffice that Pellaean youth.

And it is very true, that In omni creatura, quae sub sole vanit^tibus mund^nis
occupatur, nihil humano cord sublimius, nihil nobilius, nihilque Deo similius
reperitur; quapropter nihil aliud quaerit a te Deus nisi cor tuum. In all the
creature which under the sun is occupied in these worldly vanities, there is
nothing more sublime then man's heart, nothing more noble, and nothing more like
to God himself; and therefore God requires nothing of thee but thy heart, when
he says, My son, Pro. 23.26.
give me thy heart.

But then the heart must be pure and sincere, free from all vanities, and void
of all iniquity; for otherwise, qui de suo partem faciunt Deo, and partem
diabolo, iratus Deus quia sit ibi pars diab^lo, discedet, and totum diabolus
possidet; They that give part of their hearts to God, and part to the Devil,
God being angry that any part is left for the Devil, departs and leaves all
unto the Devil, S. Aug. in Johan. Matthew. 5.8.
as St. Augustine speaks.

And therefore the Scripture says, blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God; quia Deus non exterioribus oculis sed puro cord videtur, says
Saint Augustine, because God is not seen with our outward eyes, but with a pure
and upright heart. But Vae duplici cord, woe to him that has a double heart,
Quod ingratum est ad beneficia, infidum ad consilia, saevum ad judicia,
inverecundum ad turpia and imp^vidum ad pericula. Bernard l. 5. de considerat.
which says one thing with his tongue, and thinks otherwise in his heart; and
woe to him that has a wicked heart, which speaks friendly unto his
neighbor, but means mischief in his heart; and woe to him indeed, which has
a hard heart, which as St Bernard says, nec compunctione scin^itur, nec
pietate mollitur, nec precibus movetur, which is neither broken with
compunction, nor mollified with piety, nor moved with prayers, nor terrified
with threatenings, nor yet yielding with any judgments: but is unthankful for
all benefits, regardless of all counsel, and senseless of all dangers, and so
still growing worse and worse, until like Pharaoh, he be quite destroyed.

And yet how many men have we that are double hearted and false hearted, and
more deceitful then the wily Greeks that lurked in the belly of the Trojan
Horse, or the subtle Serpent that beguiled Eve? And that which is worst of all,
which do deceive and betray their own souls? For as of all murders felo de se
is most impardonable, so of all deceits, he that deceives his own soul is most
desperate, and in the most woeful condition. And yet as Apollodorus the tyrant
dreamed that he was taken and flead by the Scythians, and his heart thrown into
a boiling Caldron, should say unto him, I am the cause of all this my self,
because I have deceived thee in all thy ways, and in all thy plots and
projects: so how many simple, foolish, and beguiled souls are in the world,
that in all their wicked plots and practices, and in all their covetous designs
and mercyless oppressions of the poor, John, 16.2.
do beguile themselves and betray their souls unto the Devil? When, as our
Savior says, they shall put his servants out of the Synagogues, out of their
places and offices, as they have done of late, and out of their means and
maintenance, as you do still amongst us, and shall kill them and put them to
death, and think that they do God good service, and believe that they have the
Eagles wi^gs to mount up the readyest way to Heaven, when as indeed they ride
Post upon Pegasus the broad way to Hell.

And therefore, seeing the heart of man is so deceitful, as many times to
persuade him he holds God by the hand, when the Devil has him fast fettered by
the heels, it is requisite that we should be like these Beasts full of eyes
within, to look into our own hearts, that they do not deceive us, and to
examine our own ways, that we be not mistaken in them; lest, while we aim to
go to Jerusalem the City of God, we shall with the Army of the King of Syria,
that he sent to Dotham to fetch Elisha, 2 Reg. 6.19.
be carried blindefold into the midst of Samaria, the City of our greatest
Enemy; for so the Prophet David says, he did commune with his own heart, Ps.
77.5.
and his spirit made a diligent search, that is, into his actions, lest his own
heart should deceive him: and so he advises us to do the like, Ps. 4.4.
saying, Stand in awe and sin not, commune with your own heart, that is, to
examine diligently, whether the things that you do be sins or not: and do not
trust the suggestions and suppositions of your hearts, until you make a search,
and a diligent inquisition into the true nature of them, because many men do
think, they do not sin at all, when they do most highly offend the Lord.

Why men deceive themselves.
And the reason is, because they have no eyes within, to look into their own
hearts, and to examine their own actions; but they are only full of eyes
without, to pry into the doings, and to censure all the acts of all others,
which is the humor of them, that take delight to spy out the least mote that
they see in the eyes of others, but never look into the beam that is in their
own eyes, those horrible sins that lurk in their own hearts.

And this multiplicity of eyes without, and the want of all eyes within, when
those that should be within are turned out, is the cause that there are so many
reformers of our Church, and censurers of our State, Etiam opifices quorum res
fidesque in manibus sitae sunt, Yea, that even mere Mechanics,
Handicrafts-men, and Ploughmen, whose credit, wealth, and wit lies in their
hands, as Salust speaks of the seditious Plebeians of Rome, do so impudently
prate and censure the Government both of the Church and Commonwealth.

But as our Savior said to St. Peter, when he would needs know what should
become of St. John, Quid ad te? What is that to thee? Do thou follow me: so I
say to these men, Quid ad vos? What have you to do with the mysteries of
State, or the matters of the Church? It becomes you to do as the Apostle
advises you, To study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own business; 1
These. 4.11.
and, as my Text says, to be full of eyes with^n, to look unto your own
actions, and not immittere falcem in alienam messem, and to do as many
Gentlemen use to do, that is, to travel over France, Italy, and Spain, to
understand the customs and fashions of other Countries, and to be altogether
ignorant of the Laws, customs, and conditions of their own Country. But,

2. These Beasts are not only said to be full of eyes within, 2. Why these
beasts were full o^ eyes behind.
but in the sixth verse they are also said to be full of eyes before and
behind. And that was to this end.

1. They were full of eyes behind, to look backward, and to behold the times
and things that are past.

2. They were full of eyes before.

1. To consider the times and things that are present. 2. To foresee the
things, and to provide for the times that are to come.
And Moses, the man of God, that was faithful in all God's house, thought that
this threefold sight and consideration of the times past, present, and to come,
would surely make the children of Israel to fear the Lord their God, and to
walk in his ways; or if these things would not do it, he knew nothing in the
world that could do it: and therefore a little before his death, in his last
farewell, and in the chiefest and most affectionate Sermon that ever be made
unto this people, this is the chiefest wish that ever I found expressed therein,
O utinam saperent and intelligerent, ac novissima providerent! Deuteronomy, 32.29.
O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end! that is, Vtinam saperent praeterita, intelligerent
praesentia, and providerent futura, I would to God, that this people did
remember and call to mind the things that are past, that they understood the
things that are present, and that they would consider the things that are to
come, and shall inevitably fall upon them.

And as Moses, so do I wish to Almighty God, that all and every one that
hears me this day, would do as Moses here desires, and would be, as these
Beasts are here described, that they might do what is here required. And that
is,

1. To be full of eyes behind, to behold the times, and to consider the things
that are past; for the want of this sight and consideration is a main cause of
so much wickedness among the people, and so much ignorance and impudency in our
late Fanatique Leaders of their seduced followers: for if they would have done,
Deuteronomy. 32.
as Moses advises us, To remember the days of old, and read the
Ecclesiastical Histories, Councils, and Canons of the Church, and other
Histories, the Records of time, both of the Greeks and Latins, I persuade my
self they would never have been so disloyal and rebellious against their Civil
Governors, and so averse and refractory to the Prelates of our Church, Quia
ignorantia matter inobedientiae.

And therefore with Moses, we have great reason to wish that our men were, like
these Beasts, full of eyes behind them, to behold the times and things that
are past; and especially; for I will name no more at this time, but, 1. God's
dealing toward man. 2. Man's requital unto God.


1. It is a true saying of St. Augustine, Antequam conditi essemus, nihil boni
merebamur, Before man was made he could deserve no good, he could merit no
favor; and yet if sinful man had any eyes behind him, to see what great
things God has done for him, he should find cause enough to cry out with the
Psalmist, What God did for Adam in Paradise.
O God, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, and so exceeding
gracious unto him? for thou made him a man, when thou might have made him
a beast: and he made him in his own image, and after his own likeness, in
righteousness and true holiness, and he placed him in Paradise, the sweetest
place of all the world, in a garden of God's own making, and an orchard of his
own planting, that brought all manner of fruits, and all kind of pleasant
flowers, at all times of the year: and he made him Lord and Master over all his
creatures, the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, the fishes of the
sea, and whatsoever walks through the paths of the seas: and these he needed
not to run after them, and take pains to tame them as we do, but they were to
come unto him, and to be obedient to him of their own accord. And because that
among all these there was not a mate found meet for man, God made him an helper
fit for him, a Lady more excellent then Helen, whom he loved, and delighted in
her at first sight.

And were not these, Beneficia nimis copiosa, multa and magna, privata and
positiva? Blessings and benefits, for number beyond number, and for excellency
beyond expression; for as the Psalmist says, Who can express the noble works
of the Lord, and show forth all his praise?

But how did man requite all these benefits? How Adam requited God.
God gave him but unum breve, leve, and utile mandatum, one short, easy, and
most profitable Precept if he had observed it; no positive injunction of any
hard work, but that which is far easier to be kept, a negative inhibition, that
he should not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, this was all, and
no great matter, how easily might he have done it? Yet this man sold his God,
that had done such great things for him, and brake his Commandment for an
Apple. What moved Adam and Evah to offend God? Ambition.
And what moved him to do this, but that which moves all his children ever
since, to destroy themselves and all the Kingdoms of the earth, Ambition? That
he might be as Lucifer desired to be before him, similis Altissimo, like Gods,
knowing good and evil.

And this infernal weed, that first took life in Lucifer's breast, has
poisoned all his Posterity ever since, and especially all the great men of this
world, that desire to be greater, and affect and contend for honor and
greatness above measure. For as Eudoxus the Philosopher desired of the Gods,
that he might behold the Sun very near, to comprehend the form, greatness, and
beauty thereof, and afterward be burnt of it, as the Poets say Phaeton was: so
Ambition is the boldest and the most disorderly passion of all those desires,
which trouble men's minds, and fills their heads with an unsatiable greediness
of obtaining those things, which they should no ways desire; and by that
means, as Adam did, they undo themselves and many thousands more: for so Mar.
Crassus, the richest man in Rome, M. Crassus.
burning with ambition and an excessive desire of new triumphs, presumed at
sixty years of age to undertake the war against Arsaces, King of the
Parthians, and therein his whole Army was discomfited, himself miserably slain,
twenty thousand of his men killed, C. Marius.
and ten thousand taken Prisoners: So Caius Marius weakened with old age, but
strengthened by Ambition to continue in sovereign authority, would undertake
the war against Mithridates King of Pontus; and thereby he was the cause of
his own utter overthrow, and of that great slaughter, which imbrued all Italy
and Spain with the deluge of blood, that Sylla, by his extreme cruelty, brought
upon them.

Spurius Melius. Marc. Manlius. Hen. 5.
And the like may be said of Spurius Melius the Roman Senator, of Marc. Manlius,
of Henry the Fifth, whose ambition deprived his own father from the Empire, and
caused him to dye miserably in Prison; and indeed of those threescore and
thirteen Emperors, that, within the space of one hundred years, dyed all of
them (excepting three that dyed of sickness in their beds) by violent deaths.
And as the ambition of the Triumvirate Octav. Antonius, and Lepidus, had
wellnigh ruinated the Roman Empire; Pet. de la Primauday. fr. accad. page 223.
so Peter de la Primauday says, that the ambition of the Dukes of Orleans and
Burgundy had almost utterly consumed the Kingdom of France, and was the
occasion, that more then four thousand men were slain within Paris in one day:
and so I may say, that this wild plant and bitter root of Ambition, that first
sprang up in Paradise, and afterward grew worse and worse in the accursed
earth, was the cause that moved the late Usurper, and many others of those
Traitors and Rebels that followed him, to bring all the calamities, that we
have both seen and felt in these Dominions.

And therefore we ought to detest this cursed Plant, that brought forth such
bitter fruits of undutifulness, unthankfulness, and rebellion to be rendered
unto God for all the great good that he had done for man.

But now, after that man had fallen, and thus disloyally sinned against God,
Non dignus est peccator panc quo vescitur, nec lumine coeli quo illuminatur,
The sinner, even the best of us all that are Adam's seed, is not worthy of the
bread that he eats, or the light of the Sun that shines unto him; for if
before his being, he deserved no good; how much evil does he now deserve, when
he has so foully defiled himself, and so highly offended his God?

And yet, Vtinam saperent, How graciously God dealt with Adam, after he had
sinned.
I would to God we would cast our eyes behind us, to behold and see the
goodness of God, and what wonders he has done for the children of men; for he
pittyed Adam when he was naked, and made them coats of skin to hide and cover
their nakedness, and to preserve their bodies from the storms of winter, and
the scorching heat of summer. And when all the World had corrupted their ways
before God, he saved Noah and his family, And with the seed of Adam.
when the deluge destroyed all other flesh: and afterward he snatched away
Abraham out of the very flames of Idolatry, that was begun to be kindled in his
father Terah's house, and then he delivered him out of Egypt, and preserved him
out of all his troubles: And for the seed of Abraham, The Israelites.
the children of Israel, Moses tells you what God has done for them; for, when
he divided to the Nations their inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
he took Jacob for the lot of his own inheritance; and though he found him in a
desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness, yet he led him about, he
instructed him, and kept him as the apple of his eye, and he made him ride on
the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields, and
he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock,
butter of kinc, and milk of sheep, fat of lambs, and ramms of the breed of
Basan, and goats with the fat of kidneys, of wheat, and to drink the pure blood
of the grape.

And the Prophet Ezekiel does amplify the great goodness of God toward this
people more at large, saying, that their birth and their nativity was of the
land of Canaan, their father was an Amorite and their mother an Hittite, (i.
e.) an accursed people; and in the day that thou wast born, thy navel was not
cut, neither wast thou washed in water, nor salted, nor swadled at all, no eye
pittyed thee to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open
field to the loathing of thy person: and when I saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, I said unto thee, live; and I washed thee with water, and anointed thee
with oil, I clothed thee also with broydered work, and shod thee with badgers
skin, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk, I
decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thine hands, and a
chain on thy neck, even as our fine Ladies have in these days, and I have put
a jewel on the forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful Crown
upon thy head, and thou did eat fine flower, Ezech. 16.3. ad v. 15.
and honey, and oil, and thou becamest exceeding beautiful and perfect through
my comeliness which I had put upon thee, says the Lord God.

How unthankful and undutiful they were to God.
And what reward did this people render unto God, and what requital have they
made unto him for all these great benefits, that this good God had done unto
them? First Moses tells you, They waxed fat, and then they kicked, as we lately
did, and forsook God that made them, and lightly esteemed the rock of their
salvation; They provoked him to jealousy with strange Gods, and moved him to
anger with their abominations: They sacrificed to Devils and not to God, to
Gods that they knew not, that came newly up, whom their fathers feared not,
which was and is the fruit of every new Religion, as of late days we have
fully seen amongst us.

And then, as they forsook God that formed them, so presently they rebelled
against his servants, they muttered and murmured and rejected all their
Governors; and as the Psalmist says, They angered Moses in their tents, and
Aaron the Saint of the Lord: for these two, to forsake God, and to rebel
against their Governors, do always go together. And if you look into the
foresaid sixteenth Chapter of Ezekiel, you shall see how the Prophet shows
their wickedness, and how they have multiplied their abominations above
measure, and as many of us, over-wickedly and unjustly seeking to make our
children great in this world, do bring them unto the Devil in the world to
come; Ezech. 16.21.
so did they slay their children, and cause them to pass through the fire, and
as the Psalmist says, Ps. 106.37,
They offered their sons and their daughters unto Devils: and the Lord himself
assures us, that Sodom had not done so wickedly as they had done, Ezekiel.
16.48.51.
and Samaria had not committed half of their sins.

And what an intolerable ingratitude was this? The most monstrous thing that
ever was; not possibly to be described, quia dixeris maledicta cuncta, cum
ingratum hominem dixeris; because thou say all the evils that can be said,
when thou namest an ungrateful man; especially to God, that has done such
great things for us.

For we read of many bruit beasts, that for small benefits, have been very
thankful unto men, as of the Dog, that for a piece of bread, will follow and be
ready to die for his Master, and the Lion that for pulling a thorn out of his
foot, preserved the slave that did it, from all the beasts of the forest, and
afterward his life on the Theater in Rome; and Primauday tells us of an
Arabian infidel, that, being taken prisoner, and afterward set at liberty by
Baldwin King of Jerusalem, in token of his thankfulness for that favor, Pet.
Prim. c. 40. p. 431.
he went to him by night, into a Town where he was retired, after he had lost
the field, and declared to him the purpose of his companions, and conducted
him, until he had brought him out of all danger.

And when bruit beasts and Pagans are thus thankful unto us, shall man be
unthankful unto God? No, no: He should be truly thankful.

And Seneca says there be four special conditions of true thankfulness. 1.
Grate accipere; to receive it thankfully. 2. Nunquam oblivisci; Never to forget
it, for he can never be thankful that has forgotten the benefit. 3. Ingenue
fateri per quem profecerimus: Four conditions of true thankfulness.
ingeniously to acknowledge by whom we are profited. 4. Pro virili retribuere:
to requite the benefit received in the best manner that we are able.


But this people scarce observed any one of them, I am sure not the second, and
therefore not possibly the third and fourth; for the Prophet David tells us
plainly, that after the Lord had showed his tokens among them, and his wonders
in the land of Ham, and had brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen
with gladness, and had given them the lands of the Heathen, Is. 105.42, 43,
so that they did as many have done amongst us, to take the labors of the
people in possession; Ps. 106.13.
Yet, within a while, they did as we do, forget his works, and would not abide
his counsel: V. 21.
yea, they forgot God their Savior, which had done so great things in Egypt,
wondrous things in the land of Ham, and fearful things by the Red Sea.

But to let this people pass, that were destroyed for their unthankfulness, let
us look unto our selves and have our eyes behind us, to behold and see. First,
What God has done for us. And, What God did for us, the people of these
dominions. Amos 3.2,
Secondly, What we have done for the honor and service of God. And,


First, As the Lord said of the Jews, You only have I chosen of all the
families of the earth: so I believe the Lord may justly say of our Kings
dominions, that he showed more love and favor unto them, then he did to any
other Kingdom of the World; for whatsoever good he did to others, he did the
same to us. And he showed two more signal favors to us, then he did to any
other Kingdom of all Christendom; As

I. He raised the good Emperor Constantine, the Son of Helen out of Britain,
to close up the days of persecution, and shut the doors of the Idol-Temples.

II. When the mysts of ignorance, and errors, and superstition had covered and
overshadowed almost all the Church of Christ, God sent successively no less
then five such excellent Protestant Princes, King Edward the sixth, Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the I. and II. (as no other Kingdom had
the like) to protest against all the Popish errors and superstition, and to
make such a perfect reformation of Religion, that, both for Doctrine and
Discipline, no Church in Christendom is so purely and so perfectly established,
as these Churches of our Kings dominions are; such love and such mercies of God
to us, as exceeded all the blessings of the earth, and showed to no other
Nation of the world in such a measure, but to this.

And what reward, I pray you, What requital have we rendered unto God.
have we and our people rendered un^o God for those great unparalleled benefits
that he has done unto us? I do profess I have been a man ever faithful to my
King, and ever fearless of all the dangers of the world; and therefore, I must
say the truth, as Saint Steven told the Jews, though I should fare as Saint
Steven did, that as they were a stiff-necked people, that have always resisted
the Holy Ghost, and persecuted the Prophets, and been the traitors and
murderers of Christ: so have the major part of us showed themselves a
rebellious Nation, that confederated to assist the Devil, to requite Gods
extraordinary signal favor to us, with extraordinary signal contempt of Gods
service, and signal malice to all his servants above any other nation of the
World, by raising out of us, and bringing in amongst us, the great Antichrist,
that is, the great enemies of Christ, you know whom, The Long Parliament.
to slay the two witnesses of Jesus Christ, which were Cohors Magistratuum, and
Chorus Prophetarum, 1. the best and blessed King Charles the First, that like a
goodly Oak, or the Cedar of Lebanon, was cut down with all his boughs and
branches of Magistracy; and 2. all the Seers, that were the eyes, the light,
Those were the 2 witnesses
and the reverend Governors of Gods Church: and instead of them to bring in
the wild-bore out of the wood, the great Usurper, to destroy the vineyard of
Christ; and Gebal and Ammon, and Amalec, the Philistims, with them that dwell
at Tire, Ps. 83.7.
the whole rabble of Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, Quakers, and
other sects, which are the false Prophet, to devour the revenues of the Church,
and to destroy all the houses of God in the land: and so to corrupt the whole
Service of that good God that had so graciously done such great things for us,
as I have fully showed it heretofore, and will hereafter be manifested for
truth, every day more and more.

And if these things be a good requital, or a just thankfulness to God for all
the benefits that he has done unto us, judge you.

What God has done for every one of us in particular. 1 What good things he
has bestowed on (...).
But to leave these monsters of men for their imparalell'd ingratitude, let us
return to our selves here present, and see what God has done for every one of
us; for he made thee a man or a woman, when he might have made thee a beast;
and he gave thee all thy limbs, thy sight, and thy senses, when thou might
have been born, like him that was so, blind from his mothers womb. I am sure
thou would be very thankful to that Surgeon that would but preserve thy
finger; and what thanks owe thou to him, that gave thee all thy members, and
whatsoever else thou have? good wit, larg memory, strong body, comely
proportion, loving wife, sweet children, riches, honor, favor, preferment,
and all that thou have; all is from God. And that which is far better then all
these; for herein, Dedit te tibi Deus, He did but only give thee unto thy
self, and those temporal blessings that are momentary: but he redeemed thee
from the pit wherein there is no water, and in this thy redemption, Dedit se
tibi Deus, God gave himself unto thee, and his only Son to die for thee, he
sends his servants to teach thee, and his Holy Spirit to work all the good
gifts that are in thee to make thee a good Christian here, that thou may be
for ever blessed hereafter. And

2 From how many evils he has preserved us.
2. If thou had these eyes, to look behind thee, thou might see, not only
how much good the Lord God has bestowed upon thee, but also from how many
evils he has preserved thee: for Satan, like a roaring Lion would have
devoured thee, thine enemies that rose up against thee would have undone thee,
if the Lord himself had not been on thy side; Ps. 124.1, 2.
and, as the Psalmist says, they would have swallowed thee up quick, when they
were so wrathfully displeased at thee; yea thine own self many times, by thy
desperate riding, running, jumping, or the like, might perhaps have broken
thy bones, thy limbs, or thy neck, if thy good God had not reached his hand to
save thee from falling, as he did to Saint Peter to preserve him from sinking.

And are not these things blessings worthy to be remembered?

O that we would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men? And that we would sometimes cast
our eyes behind us, to see what requital we have rendered unto God for all
those benefits that he has done for us; and especially for bringing our
Gracious King unto us, and restoring both the Church to her purity, to her
rights, and service of God, and the Commonwealth to its peace and tranquillity.

For as the Prophet David says, I called mine own ways to remembrance: So
should every one do, call his ways to remembrance; that, if he finds, he
has been careful in God's service and a faithful Steward in God's house, it
may be a comfort unto his Conscience, Quia immensa est laetitia de memoria
transactae virtutis, because the remembrance of former virtues, and of our
Service and thankfulness unto God, will bring a great deal of joy and comfort
unto our selves; or if he has blasphemed Gods Name, neglected his Word, robbed
his Church, and offended his Majesty, he may repent, and as Job says, abhor
himself in dust and ashes.

But that I may the better and the sooner persuade you to fear God, and to
serve him, Two things to be considered to move us to serve God.
and to do that which is just and honest in his sight, I shall with Moses
desire you to remember the days of old, and consider the years of many
generations, and therein to observe but these two things. First, How God
blessed those that walked in his ways. Secondly, How he plagued those that
neglected his service, and transgressed his commands.


1. How God blessed those that served him.
1. Enoch walked with God, and God took him to himself: Noah was a just man, and
God preserved him from the deluge: Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph feared the
Lord, and the Lord blessed them in all that they took in hand: and the Prophet
David generally says, Psalm. 112.1, 2, 3.
blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that has great delight in his
commandments, his seed shall be mighty upon earth, riches and plenteousness
shall be in his house, Proverb 10.7. etc. 20.7.
and his righteousness endures for ever: and Solomon says the like, that the
memorial of the just is blessed, and his children are blessed after him. And
therefore if thou love thy children, and would have them to grow great and
to prosper in the world, be just in all that thou do, and neither rob God of
his right, nor oppress, cozen, or defraud thy poor neighbor; which not done
are the chiefest, if not the only things, that will bring the curse of God
upon thee and thy Posterity. For,

2. How God plagued those that transgressed his commandments and neglected his
service.
2. Do but cast thine eyes behind thee, and consider how God plagued the
unrighteous Generations; and you shall find, that when the old world corrupted
their ways, the Lord swept them all away with the deluge; when the cry of
Sodom and Gomorrha came to the ears of God, God destroyed them with fire and
brimstone: so when the cry of the innocent servants of Christ shall not be
heard to have justice done unto them, because of the great friends and power of
their oppressors, then as the Psalmist says, The Lord will hear their cry and
will help them.

And here to terrify offenders from their wickedness, I could willingly
enlarge my discourse, to show the fearful examples of Gods judgment against
many sorts of Malefactors; but my short allowance of time will scarce permit me
to give you the sight of some few judgments against and upon these four
predominant sins, that are so rise amongst us, and so pernicious unto us. 1.
Rebellion, 2. Perjury, The four usual sins of these days.
3. Injustice, 4. Sacrilege.


1. For Rebellion, this our last Age, 1. Rebellion.
and the many Plots and Practices of wicked and fanatic Rebels now peeping
forth amongst us, do sufficiently show how apt we are to fall into it, though
it be as bad as the sin of witchcraft, which is the giving of our souls by a
Contract unto the Devil: but the dreadful vengeance of God for the Rebellion of
Corah, Dathan and Abiram against their Governors, when the earth opened her
mouth and swallowed them down quick to Hell, and the heavy judgment of God
upon Absolon for rebelling against King David, which followed him hard at the
heels, until he came to the bough where he was hanged, and the shameful yet
most justly deserved death of our late Rebels, and of many more the like
Villains, that I could quote to you out of Histories, should deter them from
this unnatural sin of Rebellion, and keep them within the bounds of their
obedience to their Governors, which is more acceptable in the sight of God
then any sacrifice that we can offer him: or if this can not do it, then may
they look for the like end, as those that committed the like sins.

2. For Perjury, it is so pernicious a sin, and yet so general, 2. Perjury.
that I know not how to express the hainousness thereof. But I find this
perjury to be like the three headed Cerberus.

1. Of those Inferiors, that either for bribes and reward, 1. Of Inferiors.
or for fear of their Landlords or other great men, will most falsely swear
before Judge or Jury to the taking away of the goods, lands, or life of many
innocent men, 2. Of Superiors.
which is a sin worthy to be punished by the Judges, as being the utter ruin
of many men, fatherless and widows.

2. Of Superiors which break their faith and oaths that they make unto their
Inferiors. And such a forsworn wretch was Lysander the Admiral of the
Lacedaemonians, Lysander.
and Tissaphernes that brake his oath which he made with the Grecians,
Tissaphernes. Cleomenes.
and Cleomenes King of Lacedemon that did the like with the Argians, but he was
sufficiently plagued by the just judgment of God for his perfidiousness and
perjury, when the women of Argos overthrew the greatest part of his Army, and
he with a knife killed himself. And many more Tyrants and Commanders I could
name of this kind, that neither feared God, nor regarded their faith with men;
and therefore were plagued by the just judgments of God.

3. Of the middle sort.
3. The other sort of perjurers are of a middle size, and great men, that either
through discentent or hope to be made greater, Eccles. 8.2.
do break their faith, and falsify the oath of God, as Solomon calls it; and
so prove Rebels and Traitors unto their Kings and Governors.

1. How Neclas served Duringus for his treachery to the Son of Vratislas.
But how does the just God reward these perfidious and perjured Villains? And
how do most wise men deem and deal with them? but as Neclas did with
Duringus, who to secure Neclas, as he said, in his Throne, falsified his faith
to his Prince, and killed the Son of Vratislas, that was the next Heir unto the
Crown; hoping that for his good service he should be much favored and well
rewarded of Neclas: but the wise Prince abhorring such perfidiousness, said
unto him, that perjury and treachery could not be mitigated and wiped away by
any good turns or after-service; and therefore whereas he expected a reward for
his good service done unto him, he should have it according to his merit. For
of three things he should choose which he would. 1. To kill himself with a
poinyard; Aenaeas Sylv Hist. Bobem. c. 11.
or, 2. Hang himself with an halter; or, 3. Cast himself down from the Rock of
Visgrade: and he hanged himself upon an Elder tree, which while it stood, was
called Duringus tree, as Aenaeas Sylvius writes.

2. How Selim used Ladislas, Kerezin. Camerar. Hist. Meditat. l 1. page 20. c.
7. Johan^ Menarius Histor. Turc. l. 4. c. 22.
And though Ladislas Kerezin did a very good turn to Selim, in yielding up to
him the strong place of Hinla; yet for his perjury and perfidiousness he caused
him to be brought to a most miserable death, which you may see in Camerar. And
the same Selim did the like to a Jewish Physician, whom after the good service
he had done unto him, he caused to be beheaded for his treachery against his
Father, saying, that upon the least discontent or hope of reward, he would not
stick to do to him as he did to his Father; and therefore he had no reason to
let him live, because commonly Traitors are double Traitors, and as unfaithful
to him whom they serve, as to him whom they have betrayed And so Soliman his
Son promised his Daughter with a very great dowry to a certain Traitor for
yielding unto him the Isle of Rhodes; and when he got the Island, 3. How Soliman
used the Traitor that yielded to him the I Will of Rhodes.
he brought his Daughter in a magnifical pomp unto him, and said, thou see I
am a man of my word; but forasmuch as you are a Christian, and thy Wife a
Mahumetan, and I am loath to have a Son in Law, that is not a Musulman;
therefore it is not satisfactory to me, that in hope of favor and gain thou
turn thy coat for fashion sake: Camerar. l. 1. c. 7. p. 21.
but thou must also put off thy skin which is baptized and uncircumcised, and
so he caused him to be flead alive. And the same Solomon used the betrayers of
Nadast that defended the Castle of Buda in like manner.

And the King of Henetia having promised Marriage to Romilda the Wife of Prince
Sigulphus, 4. How the King of Henetia served Romilda the Wife of Sigulphus.
Aventinus l. 3. Annal. Bavar.
which had fallen in love with him, as Potiphars Wife did with Joseph, so soon
as she delivered unto him the City of Friol, did after her marriage and one
nights lodging with her, cause her to be set, and married to a sharp stake, as
a worthy punishment of her treachery.

And the Emperor Aurelian did not much better use the Traitor Heraclemon, nor
Brennus Demonica, 5. How Aurelian served Heraclemon.
that betrayed into his hands the City of Ephesus, as Titus Live. says the
Daughter of Sp. Tarpeius betrayed the City of Rome unto the Sabines, and for
her reward lost her life on the Tarpeian Hill.

But though I could produce to you very many more examples of this kind, 6.
How Mahomet served John Justinian.
yet I will close up this point with what Mahomet did to John Justinian of
Genua, who promised to deliver Constantinople into the Emperors hands, so he
would make him King of such a place that he desired. And Mahomet yielded and
assured him that he would do it; and so he did; Pet. Primanday c. 39. page 423.
for as soon as ever the said Justinian had betrayed the City into his hands,
he presently made him King for that good service which he had done unto him;
but for a reward of his treachery to his Lord and Master Augustulus, he cut off
his head within three days after.

And so all the wise men that I have read of, do conceive that no good service
done to succeeding Kings, can merit the blotting out of the perjury and
perfidiousness of Traitors to their former Kings and Masters; but that after
they be rewarded for their good turns done to the latter, they should likewise
receive the merit of their perfidiousness to the former.

Theodorus in Collect. l. 2. The reasons why perfidiousness should not be
pardoned.
And the reason is rendered by the foresaid Sages.

1. Because that as Theodoric the Arian said, when he cut off the head of an
Orthodox Deacon whom he loved, because he revolted, (to please Theodoric, as he
thought) to Arianism, they that keep not their oaths and faith to God, can
never be faithful to any mortal man.

Flav. Vopisc. in vita Aurelian.
2. Because that as Aurelian said, when he suffered Heraclemon, which had done
him so good service, to be slain, he could not believe that he which would
betray his Country, and prove faithless to his own Prince, could ever continue
faithful unto him; but that upon the like discontent or hope of a greater gain,
such Traitors as will turn the leaf, and sail with every wind, will become as
treacherous to their latter benefactors, as they have been unto their former
Masters. And therefore though we should forgive them as Christians; yet it is
neither wisdom nor policy to believe them as friends, because not only the
Fable of the Snake, but the Son of Syrach also teaches us, what little credit
is to be given to reconciled friends, Eccles. 10.12. And the wise heathen bids
us, semper diffidere, to suspect such faithless men continually.

Pardons unto the Traitors for some special service done unto them: Can they
afterward punish them for their precedent offenses unto others?

I answer, that as Cicero says, Sol.
every man is bound (and much more it is for the honor of a Prince) to keep
his word and promises inviolable; though upon some exigent necessity, he may be
constrained to make the same to his prejudice, and against his will: and it was
well said, that the bare word of a Prince should be of as great force as the
oath of a private man.

But though Kings and Princes should inviolably observe their words in their
Pardons granted unto Rebels and Traitors and other Malefactors; Not to
countenance and favor those that have been Traitors: and why.
yet as Philip King of Macedon answered Lasthenes, that betrayed the City of
Olynthum, and Augustus Caesar said to Rymetalces King of Thracia, that had
forsaken Antonius, to join with him, that he loved the treason that did him
good, but he could not endure the Traitor that betrayed his Master. And
Alexander Severus was of the same mind, but that he joined cruelty with his
hatred unto the Traitors; for when he had enticed many Captains of Piscennius
Niger, his Competitor of the Empire, to disclose their Masters secrets, and had
served his turn of them, and settled his affairs, he made all those Traitors,
Herod. l. 3
and their children also to be put to death, as Herodian writes. So the wisest
men conceived that they ought not to countenance and favor those that had been
Traitors unto other Princes; though they had done good service unto them: and
that for these three reasons.

1. For that he which has turned one leaf can turn another; and he that has
betrayed my Father, may upon the like hopes and surmises betray me likewise;
and he that has been a Rebel, knows the way to become a Rebel.

2. For that this honoring and magnifying of Rebels and Traitors to former
Princes, for their good service done to latter Masters, may prove to be an
encouragement for others to become Rebels and Traitors in like manner against
their Kings. For when amongst many thousands of Rebels, they see but few
punished, the rest pardoned, and many of them favored and preferred, why may
not the seditions think, that they shall either prevail; or if miss of their
enterprise, they may escape the fortune of those few that shall be punished,
and be magnified like those that they do see thus rewarded?

3. For that this favoring and countenancing of those that have been Rebels
and false, is a great offense and discouragement to those that have ever
continued faithful and loyal, especially if they see themselves postponed and
neglected.

And therefore the Kings and Princes that I told you of, thought it neither
wisdom nor policy to regard and favor those, whom they pardoned for their
treachery to their former Princes, though they had done never so good service
unto themselves; and if all Kings did so, I believe fewer Traitors would spring
up among the people.

And this appears plainly by our new Plotters of Rebellions and Treasons now
amongst us in this Kingdom of Ireland; for who and what are they that do thus
murmur and mutter against both God and his Anointed, the King and his
Lieutenant, the Church and Commonwealth? But those that have been members of
the Beast, and limbs of the great Antichrist, the Rebels and Traitors that
rose and warred, and some no doubt, but had their hands or fingers dipped deep
in the blood of that blessed Saint and glorious Martyr, our late most gracious
King Charles the First: and having escaped their just deserved shame and death,
and being so highly rewarded by their Grand Masters for their great wickedness,
with the lands of the Irish, without distinction, whether they were bloody
Murderers and Rebels against their King, or innocent Papists, that were both
loyal unto their King, and succourers of the Protestants, and now seeing the
touchstone of truth and justice, rendering to every one his own, according to
his merit, either of nocency or innocence, they stamp and stare, and being
moved with madness, like boys at blind manbu^^, they let fly their Arrows,
even bitter words; nay, false scandalous, rebellious, and treacherous words
against the King, against his Lieutenant, and against the peace and happiness
of this whole Kingdom: they care not whom they traduce, so they may stir up the
coals of contention, and move the discontented to a new Rebellion.

And what ways do they take for this, but the very same which they had learned
and practiced before in England under the Long-Parliament.

1. To tax and to traduce the good King for doing that they know not, nor ever
shall be able to prove that he did; but the Scots say that he did: and so they
do say a thousand things more then I believe to be true: and they should
believe nothing, especially what they know not, against their King, when as all
other men, that are both wise and honest, can sufficiently answer and justify
all that ever his now Majesty did. And I, that am not worthy to be of his
counsel, and to know the reasons of his actions; yet could show you very just
and sufficient reasons for every thing that ever I heard his Majesty did: and I
would do it, but that Himself and his Council, I know, can justify all his
actions, with many far deeper reasons then I can dive into.

Therefore these very firebrands of sedition, knowing this, would a little
excuse his Majesty, by laying the faults upon his Counselors, that seduced
him. And who are they? They speak in general, and in universalibus latet error;
so did the long Parliament against our late King: there they learned their
lesson, and they walk in the same paths. But the former Parliaments could name
their names, the Duke of Buckingham: so can these men name the Duke of Ormond.
And what has he done? I observe two things that they charge him with.

1. To testify what he knew to be truth, and these men conceived to be
otherwise; A mighty fault! because they had not their eyes open to see the
truth, his Grace offended to testify the truth.

2. In obeying his Majesty's gracious goodness, by relieving those that were
necessitous, and perhaps, for ought that they know, had done his Majesty very
good service, and, for ought that we know, had done no injury to any of our
men; and this is a sin unpardonable with these uncharitable men. I, but they
will say, by relieving these he lets the Army starve: and I demand, what
Subject ever did pawn his own lands, melt his own plate, lay out his own moneys
to relieve the King's Armies, and to show himself, I will not say more
faithful, but I say, near so faithful to his King, and so bountiful a
benefactor and friend to all the King's loyal Subjects, as the Duke of Ormond
has always been? I must, and ever will, with all thankfulness acknowledge it;
when the long Parliament and their whelps had robbed me of all that I had, all
the relief and subsistence, which I had from all the friends in the world, was
that bountiful gift, which this noble Duke sent me by Sir George Lane: And I
could name the many many more, to whom his Grace did the like; And are these
things, faults worthy to be reproved? And I am sure he hated the Rebellion, and
disowned the Rebels of this Nation as much or more then any man: and would you
have him to be an enemy to the postnati, and a stranger to the innocent? God
has made him a more honorable, and a more gracious man.

I, but we are not yet come to the quick the English interest, by the favor of
the Duke unto the Irish and the Judges of the Court of Claim, is much shaken,
and is like to be dismembered and left inanimate.

But would you have the English interest to continue, be it right or wrong? or
would you have it so to continue, that God might bless it, and it to prosper?
If so, then let it be rooted in justice and established in truth; or otherwise,
the breath of the Lord will scatter it, and the wrath of God will soon destroy
it; and instead of blessing, will, as Jacob said, bring the curse of God upon
you and your Posterity. And you might see if you had your eyes open, the great
care of my L Duke, and the great pains and diligence of the Court of Claim, to
search out the truth of every cause, that the innocent should not be made
guilty, nor the nocent carry away the victory. And what more would you have
done?

Yet, as I said before, they that have learned the way to be Rebels, do know
the way to be rebellious still.

But especially because Rebels and Traitors have had their Presidents and
examples to chalk and tread out the desperate paths of treachery and rebellion
unto them; because, as the Poet says; Nullum caruit exemplo nefas, You cannot
easily name the wickedness, that I can not parallel with the like example, as,
If Alexander and Holophernes were drunk, so was Noah long before them; If
Oedipus committed incest with Jocasta, so did Lot commit incest with his own
daughters, and if Polynices killed his own brother Eteocles; so did Alexander
Caracalla kill his own brother Getha, Romulus killed Remus, and Cain his only
brother Abel.

And so the men that became Rebels and Traitors unto their King, and murderers
of their Brethren here amongst us, may allege, they are not the first that
rebelled; but they can name enough that murdered their oppressors, which they
only intended to do: and they can cite you great Massacres, and the rooting
out of many Potentates, that Lorded and domineered over the poor people; as the
massacres in France, the Cicilian Vespers, the treachery of Mithridates, and
the subjects of Pontus, that conspired together, to destroy all the Romans,
that were dispersed over all the Kingdom of Pontus; so the Saxons became
treacherous, and the murderers of all the British Lords, on Salisburie-plain:
and they say the Irish did the like, to eradicate the Daues out of this
Kingdom: and they have done no more unto their Oppressors.

But to answer these subtle Pleaders; for the defense, or lessening of their
sinful mischief, by the example of others wickedness, I say,

1. That no example can any ways excuse wickedness, but rather aggravates the
sin; that the sight of others falling into the ditch, should teach us to beware
of the like fall; yea, though we should have never so many examples of any
evil-doing, yet we ought not to follow them; because the Lord tells us plainly,
We ought not to follow a multitude to do evil; and it is our duty, not to do
what others do, but what God commands us, and all others to do.

2. I say, that herein, hic hic caruit exemplo nefas, those two fold treachery
and rebellion, 1. Of the late English-Scotizing Rebels, And, 2. Of the bloody
Irish murderers,
can not be fitted with any Presidents. nor paralleled out of any Histories.

I do assure you, that I have read as many English, Greek, and Latin Histories,
as well I could; yet in all the Histories that I have read, I do profess unto
you, I never found so much cruel subtlety, and such infernal impiety, as I saw
in the English Rebels; nor so much ingratitude, inhumanity, and cruelty, as we
read in Sir John Temples Book, was acted in the Irish Insurrection, if you will
afford it no worser name; for,

1. Touching the English and Scottish Rebellions; first for their subtlety; the
subtle serpent devised not so many lies to deceive our forefathers, as they
most impudently forged to destroy their own most Pious King, and all their
Spiritual Fathers; so that all the Kings Declarations, all the Protestations of
his friends and Council, and all the Preaching of the most faithful and
Orthodox Preachers, could not undeceive the seduced giddie-headed people. And,

2. For their impiety; it is most certain, and beyond comparison, that there
was not ever a greater wickedness committed, then the crucifying of the Son of
God; but besides the many parallels, betwixt those Jews, and these Rebels,
exceeding all impiety; the malicious prosecution, and the violent persecution
of these rebels against our late King, and the hellish manner of compassing his
death, and killing him, went beyond all the wickedness of those wicked Jews.
For.

1. The Jews knew him not, 1 Resp. Act. 13.27.17.
nor yet the voices of the Prophets, as the Apostles testify in many places;
and Christ himself says, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do:
and they knew him not to be their King; for the Romans had long reigned over
them, and he had refused to be made King; but the long Parliament knew Charles
the first, and knew him well enough to be their own indubitable, just, and
lawful King. And therefore they fought for the King and Parliament, such a
cheat, and such a riddle as you never read the like; and yet a very true one,
as true as Samsons riddle, if you understand it right; for they fought for the
King to destroy him, that i^, for the Kings destruction; and they fought for
the Parliament, to make them absolute Lords, to reign and rule as Kings. The
Jews never had such wit.

2. 2. Resp.
The Jews put Christ to death more for fear then for hate; for, Venient Romani,
was the spur that pricked them forward to destroy Christ, lest the Romans
should come, and take away their rule, and destroy their religion; but not the
fear of any strange Nations coming to reign and rule over them; but inveterate
malice to the King, and the height of ambition to rule, and to become as Kings
themselves, made the late Rebels to destroy the Viceroy of Christ.

3. The Jews dismembered not our Savior; for, 3 Resp.
not a bone of him was broken, not the least limb of him was taken away; but
those Butchers brake, and cut off the head of him, that was their head, and the
head of us all; and they did so many other such tragick-acts, that, while I was
writing the great Antichrist, I often conceived, that if Beelzebub, out of all
the choicest Varlets, and most transcendent Villains, that from the beginning
of the World he had collected to be his own cabinet-companions, he had picked
out a pack of rebels, and had sent them unto us, they would have become short
of those bloody murderers of our late gracious King: because, that as Satan
himself, so the Instruments of Satan, by experience, and the length of time, do
grow subtler and subtler, and are still better and better enabled, to commit
the greater wickedness.

And how a greater wickedness could be committed, then that so good, so pious,
and so excellent a Prince as King Charles the first, should be withstood,
rebelled against, betrayed, deserted by his English, Scottish, and Irish
subjects, (excepting a few noble Lords, and others) that stuck unto him, and so
cruelly bemangled him to death, it makes me silent and dumb, that I know not
what to say, but to pray to God that this great wickedness be not yet laid to
our charge.

And Secondly; For the Irish Rebellion, it was beyond example; I say, that in
many particulars their ingratitude was beyond all parallel; for other Nations,
as the subjects of the King of Pontus, and the like, that rebelled and murdered
all the Romans in their dominions, and those Irish that rooted out the Danes,
had some kind of color to do the same; because their domineering Lords were
aliens, and oppressed them beyond measure, as the Philistines did the
Israelites, and kept them as slaves under them; but the late Irish Rebels were
Peers, and as the chief Lords of the kingdom, and such interchange of
marriages, betwixt the English, British, and Irish, and such mutual pledges of
love, amity, and familiarity betwixt them, that there could not be the least
suspicion of the least distaste amongst them.

And besides all this, though there were some penal Statutes made against them;
yet they were for the most part suffered to lie asleep, and covered over with
many kindnesses: and they themselves permitted, as God said of Adam, to become
as one of us, and as Q. Dido said of the Trojans, Tros, Tyriusque mihi nullo
discrimine agetur. We made no difference of any privilege amongst us. And
therefore,

What a horrible ingratitude was it then for such men to rise, and to rebel,
and so maliciously to intend, so inhumanely, so barbarously, and so cruelly to
root out, and to destroy their Neighbors, Friends, and Allies?

And especially, to plot such a mischievous act, as they intended so subtly, so
secretly, and so universally as they did? For what created power under heaven
is able to dissolve that villainy, and to evade that mischief, which subtlety,
power; and cruelty have combined and confederated to bring to pass? Surely we
may most justly take up the words of the Psalmist, and say, If the Lord himself
had not been on our side, now may England say, Ps. 124.1.
If the Lord himself had not been on our side, when these men rose up against
us, it had not failed, but that they had swallowed us up quick, and we had been
utterly destroyed, when they were so wrathfully displeased at us.

And this his being on our side, is not to be understood of an ordinary manner,
and common providence, which rules and disposes all things wisely, but of a
special providence in an extraordinary manner, and a signal favor toward us;
which the Lord has showed three special times in our days, and to our people,
As,

1. In the reveiling of the Gunpowder-plot, when as flos and medulla regni, the
King and all his Peers, the flower and marrow of the kingdom should have been
blown up, and all destroyed, uno ictu, in one twinkling of an eye.

2. In the discovery of this Irish machination, and desperate intention of
these Rebels, which had got into this City; and had gotten their ends, had not
our good God set a hook in their nostrils, and said unto them, as he says unto
the Sea, Hitherto shall thou go and no further, here shall thou stay thy proud
waves; and out of his special providence, sent one, in a strange manner, out of
themselves, to discover them unto our Governors.

3. In the dividing and scattering both of the English, and the Irish Rebels,
and the bringing in of our most gracious King unto us, so peaceably, so
quietly, and in a manner so miraculously, sine sanguine, sine strepitu, to the
joy and comfort of us all. For these things above all the rest of Gods mercies,
are special acts of Gods providence, and such as any one, that, like these
Beasts, has his eyes behind him, might see, and say, Digitus Dei erat hic,
here, Why God brought things thus to pass.
in all these things, no humane art, but the very hand of God brought them all
to pass.

And God brought them thus to pass, for these two special ends.

1. For the deliverance of his servants, and all faithful people, to incite
them for ever, to become thankful unto him, for such unspeakable and
extraordinary favors.

And truly, if God commanded the Israelites to observe the feast of Passover in
remembrance of their Deliverance from Pharaohs bondage, and their passage
through the red sea, and does so exceedingly blame them, that they had so soon
forgot his works, and were not mindful of his covenant but had forgot God
their Savior, that had wrought such great things in Egypt, wondrous things in
the land of Ham, and fearful things by the red sea; and if the Jews upon the
command of Hester and Mordechai did, throughout all their generations, Hes^er
^.27.31
observe the feast of Purim, the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month
Adar; and Christ himself observed the same, in remembrance of their deliverance
from the treachery of Haman, then certainly we have great reason to observe
this twenty third day of October, in remembrance of our great deliverance, and
to show our thankefulness unto God throughout all generations, for that
deliverance from those bloody massacres that were intended against us, and it
should be a day of rejoicing, and of feasting, and of relieving the poor, as
were the days of Purim, and especially, seeing it cannot be imagined what
miseries and calamities might have succeeded, if they had prevailed.

2. God discovered these secret Plots, and Treacheries of the Rebels, and
effected these wonderful things, not only, for our sakes, or only to get
thanks and praise for the deliverance of us his servants; but also to get
honor and glory unto himself, as he faith of Pharaoh, by the punishment and
destruction of his Adversaries. And that the punishment and rootingout of
Rebels, and Traitors, might be a preservative to deterr all others from
plotting rebellions, and treason against their King, or any other mischief
against their Neighbors.

And therefore, if men will needs be seditious and rebellions, I would they
were like these beasts full of eyes behind them, that they might see, and
seriously consider, how the just God does reward, and punish, and plague these
perfidious, and perjured Villains, and how most wise men deem and deal with
them, no otherwise, but as Neclas did with Duringus, and the other wise Kings
and Princes did with those perfidious, and perjured Rebels, that I told you of
before.

And the reason why they did so, was, because they found it unanswerably true,
that the best way to secure their peace, and to establish them in their
dominions, is to destroy, and to root out rebels, and traitors out of their
territories. 1 Samuel 6.5. and 19.23. 1 Reg. 1.19.
For you may read how Shimei became a rebel against King David, and how King
David pardoned him: Yet he bids King Solomon to bring his hoary-head to the
grave with blood, and says For thou art a wise man, and know what thou
ought to do unto him; and was not David so? Yes, and it was wisdom and mercy
in David, at that time, to spare him; but now he tells Solomon, That when time
serves, it should be neither wisdom nor policy in him to spare him; but his
wisdom should teach him to destroy him; because it is an old Axiom, that, Qui
malus est, in eodem genere mali, semper praesumitur esse malus; and experience
has very often found it to be very true, that an oppressor, drunkard, or
rebel, can as hardly leave his drunkenness, or rebellion, as an Ethiopian can
change his black skin, or a leopard his spots that are upon his back, as says
the Prophet Jeremy.

Therefore Solomon tells him, that whenever he goes out of Jerusalem, he
shall die: And at the end of three years, two of his servants ran away to Gath,
and he, like an ass, sadleth his ass, and follows after them; then Solomon
tells him of his wickedness against King David, V. 44.
and commands Benaiah the son of Jchoiada, which fell upon him that he died.

V. 46.
And then it is added in the text, And the Kingdom was established in the hand
of Solomon. And was it not established before? yes, three full years at least:
but never so absolutely, and so surely, as now this old rebel is taken away:
For though he was the first that submitted himself to King David, yet it was
very likely, or at least suspicious, that his malice and rebellistill lurked in
his heart, as fire under the ashes, till they found opportunity to break out;
and so it may be with all others the like rebels whatsoever.

And therefore if men will be rebellious, it is wisdom and policy, 1 Reg. 2.12.
for the establishment of Kingdoms, to keep Soldiers, and Garrisons, to keep
them under, in ore gladii, till all the old rebels be quite destroyed and
extinguished.

And if men complain of burdens and taxes, and impositions; let them blame
themselves, and those rebels that caused them, and the rebellions dispositions
of them, that may be justly suspected to be the obstacles of peace, and
tranquillity.

But if they will needs charge our good King and the Duke's Grace for any
fault, let them do it for their being too merciful and mild, in suffering
them and others that are like them, to live, that had so justly deserved to
dye; and especially if they would suffer them to enjoy the Lands of the Church,
and the Possessions of them that are innocent.

3. The next reigning sin, that spreads it self amongst men, 3 Injustice.
is injustice: and I wish we would cast our eyes behind us, to see how God
hates, and has plagued this monstrous vice, which brings forth so many
pernicious effects, and destroys all the duties of honesty. The wise Solomon
says, That oppression makes a wise man mad; Prove. 7.7.
and oppression is but one branch of injustice: and therefore injustice is far
worse then any oppression. For if justice be such a general virtue, as
Aristotle says, that he which has it, has all other virtues; then certainly,
he that is unjust must be filled with an huge heap of vices, when as this is
such a cardinal sin, as never walks alone. And therefore as Justice exalts a
Nation; so Injustice translateth a Kingdom from one Nation to another people,
as it did the Monarchy of the Assyrians unto the Medes, and that of the Medes
and Persians unto the Grecians. And it pulls down the wrath and vengeance of
God, not only upon the person that is unjust, and does injustice; but also
upon the heads, many times, of all his posterity: as, for the Injustice done to
Naboth, God destroyed Ahab, Ahab.
and rooted out his whole off spring. And I could spend my whole hour in
examples of this kind, but I will content my self with two or three. As,

1. Of Ferdinando the fourth King of Casti^e, Ferdinando.
who did most unjustly condemn two Knights to death; and one of them cried, "O
thou unjust Judge, we do cite thee to appear within thirty days before the
Tribunal of Jesus Christ, to receive judgment for thine injustice; and so upon
the last of those days he dyed, to receive his sentence according to his
summons. And one Lapparel, a Provost of Paris, Lapparel.
caused a poor man, that was prisoner in the Chastilet, to be executed by
giving him the name of a rich man, who being guilty and condemned, was set at
liberty in the place of the poor man: but the just judgment of God discovered
his injustice, and being accused and condemned, he was hanged for his labor;
and so Philip King of Macedon was killed by Pausanias a mean Gentleman, Philip
Macedo. Demetrius.
because he denied to do him justice against Antipater that had wronged him;
and Demetrius for throwing the petitions of his subjects into the River, and
denying to do them justice they all forsook him, and Pyrrhus took away his
Kingdom. And many other men I could name to you, that their injustice has
undone them.

And therefore all men should take heed of committing this horrible sin of
injustice, either by doing wrong, or denying right unto others.

The injustice of some Judges.
And yet I am ashamed to speak it, though I shall not be afraid to write it,
how gravely some Judges have sat upon the seat of judgment to pronounce
unrighteous judgments, and think to cover all their iniquity with the
fig leaves of the formalities of their Laws to overthrow the reality of
justice.

Oh beloved, Monstrum horrendum ingens est, it is a most horrible thing to have
injustice done from the seat, and from the Ministers of justice; when a man is
apparently wronged, oppressed, and expulsed out of house and home, and shall
with a deal of travel and a great deal of expenses come to a Court of justice
to be righted, and instead of being redressed, he shall see there scelus
sceleribus tectum, his former wrongs finely handled and loaded with far greater
wrongs. Do you think that this is well pleasing unto God, or that such
injustice shall escape unpunished? no, no; for they shall find that there is a
God which judges the earth, and that his judgment will be according to truth,
without partiality, either to Jew or Gentile, which here among men I see is not
so.

But as I read that Diogenes seeing some petty thieves led to the place of
execution laughed exceedingly, and being demanded why he laughed? he answered
to see the great thieves lead the little thieves to the Gallows: so if he
should see men forcibly expelled out of their possessions, and the forcible
entrers legally acquitted; or if he should see the poor Irish Catholics driven
out of house and home, either because they were Irish rebels which justly
deserved it, or because they were Romish Catholics, which should not therefore
be destroyed; and should see the great English Sectaries (that had been greater
rebels) countenanced and magnified, and to enjoy the others Lands and Livings:
would he not laugh at this justice? which is just like that which we read of in
l. 1. of Philip Commines when Charelois lost the Field, and his Captains, and
their Troopers fled away, he gave the offices and places of them that fled ten
leagues to those that had fled twenty leagues beyond them.

Therefore I say to you, whom God and the King have made Judges of these things
for the settlement of this Kingdom; As you have done hitherto, so still ride
on with your honor and have no respect of Persons, nor of Nation, nor of
Religion: but do that which is just and righteous in the sight of God, and as
God has blessed you and preserved you hitherto, so he will still bless you and
preserve you for evermore.

And for the preservation of better justice then I see in many places, I shall
speak more of it in another place, and after another manner; for you may be
sure, that Kingdom shall never be happy, where oppression is frequently used,
and iniquity protected by injustice, and especially by the Courts of Justice.
And therefore to the end that true justice might be truly observed, I could
wish the Parliament would make some Acts and Laws against many abuses
practiced by some cunning Lawyers in the very Courts of Justice; The abuse of
some cunning Lawyers in quashing of Indictments.
and especially against the frequent and abusive quashing of Indictments, which
is a sin of no slender malignity. ^or when a poor man far from the fountain is
by violence oppressed, and he indicts his oppressors, then presently comes a
Certiorari and removes it to the Kings Bench, and there the Lawyers are so
skillful in the tricks and quiddities of the Law and the Cases of John A-Nokes
and John A-Stiles, that they say there can hardly be any indictment framed, but
they are able to find a flaw to quash it, which I was told by great Lawyers.
And what a wrong is this to his Majesty in his fines? what an injury to the
poor men that are oppressed, and what encouragement to all those wicked men
that are so ready to offer all violence unto their neighbors which are not
able to indict the same offenders three or four times over, till they shall
find a man able to draw a faultless indictment.

And if this be not a grievous greivance worthy to be redressed, if you desire
the preservation of justice, judge you. And therefore it were good that some
better way were devised for the framing of Indictments or the not quashing of
them so easily and so frequently as they are reported to be.

4. Sacrilege.
4. The last frequent sin that I shall at this time desire you to cast your eyes
behind you, to behold Gods detestation of it, and his punishments that he
pours out upon the offenders, is sacrilege, which is the taking away and
withholding of those Revenues which God has appointed, and godly men have
dedicated for the maintenance of Gods service, and the religion of Jesus
Christ, and so the robbing of God himself, both of his honor and service: a
sin so general, that the custom of it has quite taken away the sense of it,
and men think it to be no sin at all.

But I know what some may here say, that now I plead mine own cause.

1 Samuel 12.3.
I will briefly answer as Samuel did unto the people, and I say, that I sued
indeed for the Church right: but I testify before the Lord, and your Grace,
and you All, that I did it not to enrich my self; for I thank God I have enough
both for my self and my relation, wife, children and friends: but I did it for
the right of the Church, and I resolved and vowed that whatsoever I recovered,
I would by the grace of God wholly bestow it upon the reparation of the Church;
so that recovering it I should be not one penny the richer, and loosing it, not
one penny the poorer. And I desired nothing but what I conceived to be the
right of the Church, because I know God loves not to be honored with unjustly
gotten goods.

But now finding that as the Prophet says, I have labored in vain, and I have
spent my strength for naught; and seeing the partiality and injustice of men, I
will with patience submit my self to that strength which is beyond my ability
to oppose, and study to serve my God another way: because I see that as David
says, the sons of Zervia are too strong for me, because we that were faithful
to our King were fleeced and bareshorne, and left poor and beggarly, and they
that served the Beast and adheared to the long Parliament, and were arrant
rebels against our late good King, have got all our Lands and our Moneys to
make friends withal, and to keep us still under hatches: and so though nos
fuimus Troes, yet now they are the men, and without envy, let then enjoy their
prosperity, so they forsake their iniquity, and repent them of their former
impiety.

And so desiring you to bear with this my just defense, I shall proceed in this
discourse, for none other end but to discharge mine own duty, and for the good
of your souls, to avoid the just wrath of God for a sin so highly displeasing
unto God; and to that purpose I shall desire you to read the 2 Mac. c. 3. where
you shall find how that when Simon the mutinous traitor both to God and his
Country, had informed Seleucus King of Asia, of the riches and the treasure of
the Church of Jerusalem, and incited him to seize upon it, and he had sent
Heliodorus his treasurer to fetch it, and Heliodorus came like a Fox,
pretending it was to visit and to reform the disorders of Phoenice and
Caelosyria, but Onias the high Priest perceiving that the goods of the Church
was his errand, his countenance was quite cast down, and the people not
enduring sacrilege, ran some to the Temple, some to the City Gates, and some
gadded up and down the streets as frantic men, like Bacchus froes, and all
lifted up their hands and eyes and voices unto God for the defense of his
Church, and God heard their cry and did help them. For,

Heliodorus was no sooner entered into the treasury, to take away the spoil,
but there appeared to him a terrible man in complete armor of gold, mounted
upon a barbed horse that ran very fiercely at the Kings Treasurer, and trampled
him under-foot; and withal, there appeared two other men of most excellent
beauty and strength, whipping him so, that he was carried out of the place
speechless, and without any hope of life, until God restored him upon the
earnest prayer of the Priest and people.

And to let you see how dangerous a sin is sacrilege to rob the Church, Act.
5.5.
the end of Ananias and Sapphira can bear witness; for though their death was
the punishment of their lying: yet all must grant they were drawn to that sin
by the cord of sacrilege. And if a greedy desire of withholding that from the
Church which themselves had given, was sufficient to open such a window unto
the Devil that he came presently to cast them as a prey to the Jaws of Hell;
how many foul sins do they commit, and how many grievous plagues may they fear
to fall upon their heads, which take away from the Church, that which they
never gave?

Genesis 47.22. and v. 26.
And you may remember, that when Egypt in the time of Joseph felt so extreme a
famine, that the fifth part of the Land was sold to relieve the Land; yet the
Patriarch in all the care that he had both of the Country and of the King, to
succor the one and to enrich the other, never attempted the sale of the Lands
of the Priests, nor once to diminish any jot thereof. And if the holy man in so
great an extremity, never ventured to take away the possessions of the
Idolatrous Priests, though it were to the releif of a whole Kingdom, I wonder
with what face dares any man in the world curtal the maintenance of Gods
Church, and take away those Lands and houses that by religious Princes and
other pious men have been consecrated to Gods service. But, Foelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum. You might be happy, if you would cast your eyes behind
you, and by the examples of Gods judgments upon other sacrilegious persons
learn to escape the punishments of sacrilege, because they are all written for
our instruction. And we read that Celce, the Constable of Gertrund King of
Burgundy, having, under the authority of the King his Master, enriched himself,
and enlarged his Territories with the Goods and Lands of the Church, and being
one day in the Church at his Devotion, and hearing the words of the Prophet,
that proclaimed a woe to them that join house to house, and land to land, he
suddenly shricked in the Congregation, and cried out, This is spoken to me,
and this curse is upon me and upon my Posterity; and so afterward died most
miserably. And we read in the Annals of France, that although Lewis the Sixth,
surn^med the Great, was once the Protector of the Church, and had caused the
Count de Claremont, the Lord de Roussi and other great men, that had pillaged
the Bishoprics, to restore their robberies unto the Church again; yet in his
old age when he began to pull the Church, he was sufficiently punished for it,
by the sudden death of his Eldest Son, which was indeed the very staff of his
age, though he was urged unto it with extreme necessity: They that would see
more examples of this kind, let them look into my Declaration against
Sacrilege, and Doctor Saravia's vindiciae sacrae, translated into English by
James Martyn.

And if for all this, men will needs have the portion of Gods Church, let them
eat it with that sauce, which God has prescribed in Psalm. 83. and which like
the Ieprosie of Gehezi, will stick to them and their Posterity for evermore.

3. 3. Why these beasts were full of eyes before.
As you heard that these Beasts were full of eyes within and behind; so they
were full of eyes before: and so should we be. And that is to behold and see.
1. Praesentia, the things that are present. 2. Futura, the things that are to
come and must come.


1. 1. To behold the things that are present. As, 1. The vanity of all things.
For the present things I shall only leave to your consideration, 1. The
vanities of this life. And, 2. The uncertainty of our state.


And touching the first, Saint Augustine says most truly, Si quid arrisisset
prosperum, taedebat apprehendere; quia priusquam pene teneretur, avolabat, if
any prosperous thing in this world did seem to smile and offer it self unto me,
I was loath to take it, because that before I could scarce enjoy it, it was
presently snatched from me. For,

1. Friends are like the waters of Tenia sliding away, and turning as the
wheel of your fortune turns.

2. Riches, says the wise man, betake themselves to their wings as an Eagle,
and the sea can drown it, fire consume it, servants waste it, and thieves
bereave us of it.

Prove. 23.5.
3. Honor is but Virtues shadow, a wind that makes fools to swell, but
cannot satisfy any wise man.

4. Beauty is such a thing, as the Daughters of Vanity can tell you that the
Sun will tanne it, a scarr will blemish it, sickness waste it, and age consume
it away, as we read fair Helen wept when she saw the wrinckles of her old face,
which all your black patches cannot make young.

5. And for our Health, which is the greatest happiness in this life, we see
man's body is subject to a thousand diseases, fraught with frailties within,
wrapped in miseries without, uncertain of life, and sure of death.

And so all the things of this world are but like the Apples of Sodom,
pleasant to the eyes, and provoking to the appetite; but vanishing into smoke
when they are touched with the teeth.

And therefore our whole life is but painted over, as some Ladies do their
faces, with vain semblances of Beauty and Pleasure; and it is attended on the
one side with whole troops of sorrows, sicknesses, wants and discontents; and
on the other side with uncertainty of continuance and certainty of dissolution.
And,

2. The uncertainty of our state. Romans 9.21.
2. For our state, all is in the hand of God, as the clay is in the hand of the
Potter, who can of the same lump make one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor; and the Heathens conceived all was at the disposing of fortune,
which they according to their ignorance, took for God, and said, -- Te facimus
fortuna Deam. When they saw that, as the Poet says, Vna eademque manus vulnus
opemque tulit: The same hand that has cast us down can raise us up: and the
same God that raised us to honor, can bring us down to the dust; and can
either prolong our days, or cut them off at his pleasure.

And who then would not serve such a Master, and be afraid to offend such a
Lord, as has our life, our wealth, and our woe in his own hands and at his own
disposing? O consider this all you that forget God, and think of it, lest he
take you away, and tear you all to pieces: or if this cannot move you to fear
God. Then,

2. Cast your eyes before you, 2. To look unto the things that are to come.
to look unto the things that are to come, and must fall upon the world: and
they are many, but especially and inevitably these four. 1. Death. 2.
Judgment. 3. Heaven. 4. Hell.


And these are quatuor novissima and terribilissima, the four last things, and
the most terrible things that can be to all wicked men to think of them; and
they may serve as four excellent Preachers, to dissuade and terrify all men
from evil, and to call them continually to the service of God. For the Son of
Syrach says, Whatsoever thou take in hand, Eccles. 7.36.
remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss. And,

1. Death makes an end of our life, 1. Of death.
and before it shuts the eyes of our bodies, it commonly opens the eyes of
our consciences. And then every man shall see his own state, though he seldom
or never thought of the same before. For,

1. The state of the wicked Revel. 12.12.
1. The wicked man shall see all his sins set before his face, and Satan will
now bestir himself to gain his soul; for he knows that his turn is short, and
therefore he will tell him, that if he would have entered into life, Romans 2.13.
he should have kept the commandments, that not the hearers, but the doers of
the Law shall be justified, that if the just shall scarce be saved, where shall
he, being such a wicked wretch as he is, appear? when as the Apostle tells him
plainly, that neither adulterer, nor fornicator, nor covetous person, nor the
like, Traitor, Rebel, Perjurer, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
or such other, shall inherit the kingdom of God: and so what the Preachers of
God now cannot beat into the thoughts of these careless men, this damned spirit
will then irremovably settle in their deepest considerations.

O then what agonies and perplexities will tear the woeful hearts of these
wicked men? In that day (says the Lord) I will cause the Sun to go down at
noon, Amos 8.9, 10.
and I will darken the earth in the clear day, I will turn their feasts into
mournings, and their songs into lamentations, that is, I will make all those
things that were wont most sweetly to delight them, now most of all to torment
them; for now that pleasure which they had of sin, shall turn to be as bitter
as gall, when they do see, that as the Father says, transit jucunditas non
reditura, and manet anxietas non peritura, and now they must die, and live they
can no longer; and Satan, whose will they did, and whose ways they followed
all their life, will not forsake them at their death, but will say, Me you have
served, and from me you must expect your wages.

For so we read, that the Devil assailed some of the best Saints, as Saint
Martin, Saint Bernard, Ignatius, Eusebius, and others; and if these things be
done in a green tree, what shall be done in a withered, says our Savior? If
he be so busy about the Saints, what will he do to sinners? And this is the
state of a wicked man at his dying day. 2. The state of the godly.
But,

2. In the death of the godly it is not so; for having served God all his life,
he has hope in his death: and he knows not whom he needs to fear, Prove.
14.32. 2 Timothy 1.12.
because he knows whom he has believed: and when his body is weakest his
faith is strongest: and therefore with Saint Paul, he desires to be dissolved,
and he longs for death, that he may be with him which was dead, and is alive,
and lives for evermore: and he is well contented, that his body shall go to
the grave, that his soul may go to glory: and that his flesh shall sleep in the
dust, that his spirit may rejoice in heaven. And this is the state of the godly
man at the day of his death.

And therefore, if men would seriously consider this before they come to this,
then certainly the fear of the most fearful death of the wicked, and the love
of the most comfortable death of the godly, would make them to have some care
of a Godly life, and to repent them of their wickedness. And therefore well did
Moses, and we with Moses, wish, that men would consider their latter end. And
yet this is not the end of all; for after death comes judgment. And so,

Secondly, 2 Judgment and that two sold.
This judgment is either 1 Particular, or 2 General


1. As soon as ever the soul is parted from the body, 1. Particular.
before the body is laid in the grave, the soul of the wicked is fetched by the
Devils, and carried into the place of torments, and the soul of the godly is
received by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22, 23.
as our Savior shows most plainly in the story of Dives and Lazarus. And

2 Because the whole world, 2. General.
both of men and Angels might see and approve the just judgment of God; and
that the whole man, both body and soul might receive the full reward of their
due deserts, the Lord has appointed a day, says the Apostle, in the which he
will judge the world in righteousness, Act. 17 31.
that is, by Jesus Christ.

And this is that day, which Christ and his Apostles, and all the faithful
preachers of Gods word, would have all men always to remember, and to set it
before their eyes. For so Saint Hierom says, Whatsoever I do, whether I eat
or drink or whatsoever else I am about, me thinks I hear that doleful voice of
the Archangel sounding in mine ears, and saying, surgite mortui and venite ad
judicium, arise you dead, and come to judgment, says the Holy Father, I
tremble all my body over; and so Felix, though he was but a Heathen, trembled,
Act. 24.25.
as Saint Paul reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come.
And so indeed, it should make any heart to tremble, that would seriously
consider but these two things. Two things to be considered concerning this
judgment.
1 The manner of Christ his coming For, 2 The terror of his proceeding For,


First in that day, there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in
the Stars, The Sun shall be darkened, the Moon shall not give her light, the
Stars shall fall from the skies, and all the powers of heaven shall be moved,
the Elements shall be dissolved with heat, and the earth shall be consumed with
fire.

Whereby you may see, what a dreadful thing is sin; for what have these
senseless creatures deserved, that they should be thus severely punished, and
thus travel in sorrow and pain, but because they rose not up against us, when
we rose up against God? He will therefore fight against them, because they did
not fight against us, when we do fight against him. And what a fearful
contagion of sin is this, that subjecteth the very heavens unto vanity? And
therefore most wretched are we, in whom dwells nothing else but heaps of sin
and iniquity. But to go on.

The distress of Nations how great.
Then the distress of nations shall be great, and men shall wither away for fear
(says our Savior) for when destruction shall be dispatched as a whirlwind,
and God shall burn the earth, as Holophernes did the Country of Damascus, what
fears think you, shall then affright the hearts of men, and what heaps of
perturbations shall run upon the damned sort, when they shall see all these
things playing their last act upon the fiery stage of this world.

And then they shall see the son of man clothed with the clouds, as with a
garment, riding upon the heavens, The glorious manner of Christ his coming.
as upon an horse, and coming flying, as upon the wings of the wind, in the
glory of his father with his Angels; and what manner of glory is that?

Moses tells you, that the Lord our God, is a God of Gods, Deuteronomy. 10.
and a Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty and terrible, that accepts no
person, nor takes reward: and Daniel describing the great Majesty of God,
says, that his garments were as white as snow, the hairs of his head like the
purest wool, his throne like the fiery flame, and his wheels like burning
fire: Dan. 7.9, 10.
and there issued forth a fiery stream and went out from before him; a thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before
him. And it is recorded of the Angels, that one of them slew all the firstborn
of Egypt in one night, and that another of them made such a havoc in the army
of the Assyrians, that, a hundred fourscore and five thousand of them were all
slain in one night, and were laid on the ground, as corn by a sickle.

And if one Angel could do such Tragic feats, The great power (...) the
Angels.
what shall become of the enemies of God, and wicked men when Christ like a man
of war shall buckle his harness unto his side, and come in the glory of his
Father, with so many myriads of heavenly Angels attending him?

Eusebius Emysenus demands, Si talis and tantus sit terror venientis, quis
poterit terrorem sustinere judicantis? if his coming be such and so terrible,
who shall be able to endure the terror of his judgment? And if the Israelites
durst not abide his Majesty, when he came to deliver the Law, how shall the
wicked abide and stand before him, when he comes to render vengeance unto
them, for transgressing his Laws?

And yet they must endure it, And it will be very terrible unto them. For

2. In that day (says our Savior) He, i. e. God shall send his Angels with
the sound of Trumpets, and with a mighty cry, to raise the dead, and to gather
together the Elect from the four winds, and from the one end of the world to
the other, and to bring all men before the judgment seat of Christ; for I have
sworn by my self, says the Lord, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, Esaias. 45.23.
and shall not return, that every knee shall bow unto me, and not one man shall
be hidden from my presence. Alas beloved, if all the bodies of one Army did lie
naked upon one heap, what a ruthful sight would it make? And what a spectacle
then will that be, when so many myriads of men, like the sand of the Sea, shall
stand quaking and trembling before the face of Christ? For,

Then their eyes shall be opened; and what shall the wicked see, but all things
crying vengeance against them, for above them shall be an angry Judge, beneath
them Hell like a boiling furnace, ready to receive them, on the right hand
their sins accusing them, How the wicked shall be encompassed with miseries.
on the left hand the devils ready to torment them, within them a guilty
conscience like Prometheus vulture, continually gnawing them, without them all
damned souls bewailing, and on every side the world burning.

O good God, what will these wicked wretched sinners do, being thus enclosed
with such miseries? how can their hearts sustain these anguishes? Our Savior
tells us that they shall cry to the Mountains, that they would fall upon them,
and so hide them from the face of Christ, but that cannot be; for then Satan
will begin to play his part, How Satan will now play his part.
and say, not bone Deus, O good God, to move him to clemency, but just Judex,
O just Judge, to sharpen him to severity: though these wretched men were thine
by creation, yet now they are mine by transgression, and though thou have
suffered for them, yet I have beguiled them, for they have forsaken sacramenta
tua, thy holy sacraments, and they have followed blandimenta mea, my wicked
allurements, they would not be persuaded by thy Preachers, but they would needs
follow their own pleasures.

And therefore, O thou just Judge, seeing they belong unto me, let them even be
condemned with me. So he that before seemed to be an Angel of light, is now
become a Devil of darkness; he that enticed them to all vanities, will now
bring them to all miseries; and he that in paradise would make them like Gods,
does now prove that he made them like devils: And so now he shows himself to
be a devil indeed, and never so much a devil as now, or rather he seems now
to become a Saint, because now he calls for justice.

Then the Lord will look upon them; How wrathfully Christ will look upon the
wicked.
but how shall they be able to endure his looks? for fire is kindled in his
wrath, and it shall burn to the bottom of Hell; out of his mouth go lamps,
and sparks of fire leap out; out of his nostrils comes smoke, as out of a
boiling Caldron; his countenance will be so grim, his lips so burning, and his
face so full of indignation, Job. 14.13.
that the very Saints will be afraid of his looks, and holy Job cries out, who
shall hide me until the anger of God passes over? or as our last Translation
has it, O that thou would hide me in the grave, that thou would keep me
secret until thy wrath be past? Malach. 3.2.
and the Prophet Malachy demands, who may abide the day of his coming, and
who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a refiners fire which is the
quintessence of fire, and like a Fullers soap which scoureth all things to the
uttermost, and leaves no filth behind it: and therefore how shall the wicked
abide his looks? and if not his looks, how shall they abide his words? For now
they shall hear that fearful sentence pronounced against them, I lictor, liga
manus, go Satan thou executioner, bind those Kings in fetters, and those
Nobles with links of iron, Ps. 149.8.
and go ye all, or depart ye accursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
devil and his angels, and then they shall be adjudged to be cast into utter
darkness, Matthew. 25.41.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. This is the doom of the ungodly.

But upon the righteous, and those godly men that served him, he will look with
such an amiable and cheerful countenance that the very sight of it will banish
away their fear, and replenish their hearts with joy and gladness; and he will
say unto them, come ye blessed of my father, you have walked in my ways, you
were careful of my service, How Christ will look upon the righteous men that
served him.
you have suffered for my sake, and you have relieved and comforted my poor
members; therefore be you clothed in white robes, and receive the Kingdom
which was prepared for you before the beginning of the world. And this is the
sentence of their absolution,

Well then, if we were like these Beasts full of eyes before, to look, and to
consider of these things now, before they come to pass, would it no whit move
us to seek for the ways of godliness? if not, I would they that regard it not,
would look a little further and behold Gehinnon, the place where they shall be
carried to be tormented. For,

3. The torments of the wicked in Hell.
3. The wicked being as I told you before, adjudged by God to receive their doom
according to their desert, they shall be forthwith carried by the devils into a
Lake or darksome Vault that is in the midst of the earth, and which burns
with fire and brimstone for evermore. And there in that Lake their music shall
be horrors and howlings, their meat shall be balls of fire, their drink shall
be fountains of tears distilling down always from their eyes, their torments
shall be intolerable, their time endless, and their companions devils: for as
Saint Augustine says, In inferno nec tortores deficient, nec torti miseri
morientur, Aug. de tempore sermon. 55.
sed per millia millia annorum cruciandi, nec tamen in secula liberandi, In
Hell the tormentors shall never fail, nor faint to punish, nor the miserable
wretches ever die, but for thousand thousands of years punished and never to be
delivered; quia ibi erit semper velle quod nunquam erit, Isidorus de summo
bono, The perpetuity of their miseries.
and semper nolle quod nunquam non erit, for there shall be a will never
satisfied, and a nill never gratified; never enjoying the ease they would, and
ever suffering the pains they would not And if you dive into the depth of that
doleful Tragedy of miserable Dives, you shall see this truth more fully
confirmed. But,

4. The joys of Heaven.
4. On the other side, if you cast your eyes on the joys of Heaven, you shall
find that neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart of man can conceive
how inestimable and unexpressable it is: for there our bodies shall be freed
from all sorrows, and all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes: and our
minds shall be satisfied with all the good that can be desired; for if thou
would have riches, riches and plenteousness are in his house; if thou would
have pleasure, in his presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand there
is pleasure for evermore; if thou would have life, he gives thee a long
life, even for ever and ever; and in brief, there is a freedom from all evil,
and a full fruition of all good things. Most happy are they that shall be there.

And so you have heard of the four things that are before us, and that are so
imminent, hanging over our heads, that we do not know how soon they may fall
upon us. And therefore we should be full of eyes before us, that we might
always look for the coming of them before they come, that when they come, they
may come to our comfort; for either the continual consideration of these things
will keep us from the ways of wickedness, or we are past all hope of true
happiness, and we may be pitied but not helped.

And therefore let us all most earnestly and humbly pray to God to grant us
these eyes with these beasts, continually to behold and to consider all these
things, that we may escape the dreadful doom of the wicked, and attain to
everlasting happiness through Jesus Christ our blessed Lord and only Savior,
to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be ascribed all honor and glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

THE FOURTH SERMON.
REVEL. 4.8. And they rest not, or, ceased not day and night, saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.


AFTER that the holy Evangelist had described these Beasts, he sets down their
practice, and the exercise that they used. Touching which, we are to consider,
1. Their Constancy, They ceased not, or rest not day and night. 2. Their
Harmony, saying, Holy, holy, holy, etc.
The which Harmony consists of six special parts. That is, 1. The mystery of
the Trinity of persons, in the Unity or one essence of the Deity. 2. The
sanctity, purity, and equity of God, in the word (...). 3. The power,
authority, and dominion of God, in the word (...). 4. The knowledge, sight, and
providence of God, in the word (...). 5. The strength and omnipotence of God,
in the word (...). 6. The continuance and eternity of God, in the words (...).


And these six Points cannot well and fully be explained by any humane wit;
they all and every one of them being, as God is, ineffable and incomprehensible.

And therefore (as Synefius says) as the Geographers use to draw the great
Universe and Compass of the world in a little Map; so I can speak and express
but very little of these great and unspeakable Attributes of the great God.

1. For their constancy in the service of God, it is said, they ceased not day
nor night to sing this heavenly harmony, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God,
etc. and it was not wearisome unto them continually to praise his glorious
Names, but it was rather their whole joy and felicity to glorify their God,
and to magnify him for ever; for they are so satisfied with the sight of his
presence, the beatical Vision of God, and so ravished with the love of his
Majesty, that they can never leave to praise him.

And this should teach all the Saints of God to be like these beasts, and to do
the like; to be never weary of well doing, but to be like King Therons Horses,
that, as Pindarus says, were never weary of running; so should the Servants of
God be never weary of serving God, but to continue constant in the performance
of the duties of their profession, night and day without ceasing; because, as
St. Bernard says, Bern. Epist. 129.
Absque perseverantia, nec qui pugnat victoriam, nec victores palmam
consequuntur, without perseverance and continuance in well doing; neither can
they that fight obtain the victory, nor the Victors get the Garland of honor
for to triumph: And St. Augustine says, He does not truly believe in Christ
that does not continue constant in his profession unto the end; Quia credere
vere, Aug. tract. 106. in Joh.
est credere inconcusse, firm, stabiliter, fortiter, ut jam ad propria non
redeas and clam relinquas: because that to believe truly is to believe without
wavering, firmly and strongly, so that you return not to your carnal and
worldly desires, and leave the things of Jesus Christ.

And therefore the Prophet David, describing the blessed man, Psalm. 1.1, 2.
says, He will not only withhold himself from walking in the counsel of the
ungodly, and from standing in the way of sinners, and from sitting in the seat
of the scornful; but his delight is also in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
will he exercise himself both day and night; and so the Lord says unto Joshua,
Let not this Book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein both
day and night, that thou may observe and do all according to that is written
therein.

Whereby you may see, that perseverance and continuance in Gods service, and
preferring the duties of our calling, is not to be done by fits, but always,
and especially without ceasing, Alexand. Hal. secund. 2. in tract. de apostat
without apostasy; which is Temerarius a statu fidei vel religionis recessus, a
starting aside like a broken bow from that faith, obedience and profession,
that we have formerly made.

How men relapse from their duties.
And such a one was Ammonius Alexandrinus the Master of Origin, that being bred
a Christian from his childhood, and applying himself wholly to Philosophy, did
quite forsake the orthodoxal Faith. And so Ecebelius at the first was a zealous
Christian, and in the reign of Julian a great persecutor of the Christians, and
after his death he became a Christian again, and for his apostasy cried out,
and casting himself to the ground at the Church Porch, Socrat. l. 3. c. 13.
said, Calcate me salem insipidum: O tread upon me as upon unsavory salt.

And how many men have we, that, like Ecebolius, were very loyal and faithful
Subjects and good Protestants in the time of Charles the first: and when they
saw the power of the Parliament increasing, they became arrant Rebels and
Traitors against their King, and amphibolous in their Religion; and within a
while, when God did cut in pieces that g^rdian knot, and scattered those Rebels
like a summers Cloud, Who seem more faithful to Charles the second then these
Scholars of Ecebolius, that ever whirled with the strongest wind? and yet they
do not with Ecebolius fall down to the earth, and cry out with him in true
repentance, Calcute nos salem insipidum: but most of them jet it up and down in
pride, and show themselves rather like the Borussians, that being persuaded by
Boleslaus Crispus King of Poland, to embrace the Christian faith, What the
Borus^ians did Cromerus lib. 6.
within a while after renounced the same, and told their Prince, Se omnia ejus
imperata, excepta religione, facturos, they would be obedient to him in all
things, but only in the profession of his Religion: for so these men profess
themselves now, to be good Subjects, but they cannot endure our Ecclesiastical
discipline, and our Church service.

And therefore seeing many men do relapse with the Borussians from the true
profession of faith, or serve God by fits, like those that are taken with the
fits of an Ague, or be like the Laodiceans, neither hot nor cold: and that we
ought to be like these beasts, serving God, and discharging our duries without
ceasing; it behooves us to preach in season and out of season, and to do as we
are required by the Lord himself, Cry aloud, and ne cesses, and give not over,
but lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgressions,
Esaias 58.1.
and the house of Jacob their sins; that is, as well the great sins of the
great men, and the nobility of the house of Jacob, as the ordinary sins and
transgressions of the common people.

And because I know no sins that are greater, Which are the great sins, that do
most mischief.
and more pernicious to the public good, and so destructive both to the Church
and Commonwealth, as Rebellion, Sacrilege, and Injustice; for that Rebellion,
Turbabit faedera mundi, shakes the foundations, and ruinates whole Kingdoms;
and Sacrilege is the destruction of all Religion: when as the props and
pillars of Job's house, Job 1.19. Judges 16.29. and 30.
and so of the Philistines also, being taken away, the houses presently fell;
so the maintenance of Religion, and the revenues of the Church, being the only
outward props and pillars of Religion, Sublatis his religio perit, when you
take away these, you may shake hands with your Religion, and your Churches
shall be, as they are in most places here in Ireland, weeping and wailing for
want of roofs, which is the fruit of Sacrilege; of which I may truly say, as
St. Hierom does against Vigilant. Fatebor dolorem meum, sacrilegium tantum
patienter audire non possum, in Epist. 53. ad Riparium: And Injustice,
especially when it proceeds from the Seat, and from the Courts of Justice,
and the Judges of the Law, destroys all the duties of honesty, and
overthrows all civil Societies, and causes Kingdoms to be translated from
one Nation to another People; as that of the Assyrians was to the Medes and
Persians; that of the Persians unto the Grecians; that of the Grecians unto the
Romans; and that of the Romans unto the Goths and Vandals, when their Judges
became corrupt, and the companions of thieves, as the Prophet Esaias speaks.

The Authors resolution.
And therefore as I hate and abhor these sins above all other public sins
whatsoever, so for Sion sake I will not hold my peace; I cannot choose, nor
cease to cry out against all Rebels, and Church-robbers, and unjust Judges,
until they do cease to commit these sins, or my mouth be filled with dust; but
while I am able to utter forth my voice, or have means to prosecute my purpose,
I will never desist, but do the uttermost of my power to hinder any man that
has been a Rebel, and fought under the great Antichrist, and the grand Usurper
Cromwell, against that gracious King whom they have murdered, to hold the
Revenues of the Church, and to obstruct the Service of Jesus Christ; because,
How to serve God day and night may be two ways interpreted.
like these beasts, we ought to be as Lions, and to do our duties without fear,
without ceasing, and to do it, as my Text says these beasts did it, day and
night. And this phrase may admit a double exposition; and that is,

1. 1. Interpretation.
In the sunshine of knowledge and the glorious light of the Gospel, signified
by the day; or in the glimmering light of the Moon, and darksome ignorance of
superstition, signified by the night, they ceased not, and gave not over to
praise God, and to serve him to the utmost of their abilities.

And they that do so, Faithful ignorance preferred before proud and fruitless
knowledge.
God will accept of their faithful service and praises of him in their
invincible ignorance, and the night time of superstition, far better then the
proud contempt and careless neglect of our duties in the height of our
knowledge, and the clear daylight of the Gospel, when men know their Masters
will and do it not: in which case St. Augustines judgment is most certain,
that Melior est fidelis ignorantia quam temeraria scientia, their zealous
ignorance will find more favor at the hands of God, then the others careless
and fruitless knowledge, unless it be the fruits of sin and iniquity. And
therefore I doubt not, but our Forefathers, that lived in the days of
ignorance and superstition, and in their zeal built the Churches of God, and
endowed them with maintenance for Gods service, will rise in judgment against
our Gnostics, that in the abundance of knowledge do overthrow the Churches,
and suppress the service of God, and withal rob Christ of his garment, to give
it, you know to whom the Evangelist says it fell by lot, I hope we will not do
the like.

2. This their not ceasing to praise God day and night, 2. Interpretation.
may be understood of their constancy and perseverance in the faith and the
service of God, both in prosperity and adversity; the Day signifying the joyous
time of our prosperity, and the Night signifying the sad and grievous times of
our adversity.

And there have been always too too many men, How many men use to serve God.
John 6.26. Psalm. 4 8. Job 1.10.
that as the Jews followed Christ, not because they saw his miracles, but
because they did eat of the loaves and were filled, so do they freely praise
God, while their Corn, and Wine, and Oil increases: and, as the Devil falsely
said of Job, while God does make an hedge about them, and about their houses,
and about all that they have on every side, and blesses the work of their
hands, and their substance is increased in the land; they will serve the Lord;
and yet, as the Lord complains of them, In tempore tribulationis recedunt a
me, when God puts forth his hand and touches all that they have, to try
them, as he tried Abraham; then will they start aside like a broken bow, deny
their faith, and be ready to curse God to his face.

Our Presbyterians like the Apostata's under the first persecutions.
And such were the Apostata's in the time of the first ten persecutions, and our
Presbyterians in the time of our late King Charles: for while they enjoyed
their livings, they were right Episcopal men, but when deprivation and
persecution came, they will have none of that, but will rather change both
their Coat and their Calling, then serve God rightly in that adversity, and
that is to serve him and praise him in the day of our fullness, and not in the
night that is full of dangers.

But all the true Saints of God will with these beasts never cease to serve him
and praise him as well in the night of adversity as in the best days of their
prosperity; Heb. 11.37.
yea, though they should be driven to wander like those spoken of by the
Apostle, in sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted and
tormented; for they are resolved, as the same Apostle speaks, Romans 8.35.
that neither tribulation, nor distress, nor persecution, nor famine, nor
nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, nor any other creature, shall separate them
from the love of Christ, or cause them to cease from the service of God day or
night; and such is the resolution of all Gods faithful servants, which makes
them to be as bold as lions, to fear no man and no danger.

And so much for the first part of the practice of these beasts, which is their
constancy in the service of God day and night.

2. Of the harmony of these beasts.
2. For the harmony of these beasts, I told you that it consisted of six parts,
whereof the first is concerning the mystery of the Trinity.

Touching which, before I proceed any further, I must say with St. Augustine,
Vbi trinitas unitatis and unitas trinitatis, Aug. de Trin. lib. 1. Of the true
knowledge of the mystery of the blessed Trinity.
Patris, Filii and Spiritus sancti quaeritur, nec periculosius alieubi erratur,
nec laboriosius aliquid quaeritur, nec fructuosius aliquid invenitur; we cannot
any where err more dangerously, we cannot seek for any thing more laboriously,
neither can we find any thing more profitable then the knowledge of this holy
mystery; and therefore, as he says, Non pigebit me sicubi haesito quaerere,
nec pigebit me sicubi erro discere, it irketh me not to inquire where I
stumble, neither will I be ashamed to retract and to learn where I err. And so
to proceed.

The holy Evangelist in this harmony of these beasts sets down these two
principal things. Two things set down.
1. 1 Of the Trinity of Persons.
The Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Gods Essence. 2. The Unity of Gods
Essence in the Trinity of Persons.


For the first, To declare the Trinity of persons, the Evangelist says, these
beasts cry three times, Holy, holy, holy, as if they should have said, Holy
Father, holy Son, and holy Spirit; and yet they say not, holy Gods, but holy
God; and to show the same truth, the very phrase and loquution, or the like
manner of expressing this mystery, is used in diverse places of the holy
Scripture; as where Moses says, Creavit Elohim coelum et terram, God created
the heaven and the earth; where the Verb singular creavit, does manifestly
declare the unity of Gods Essence, and the Noun plural Elohim, does as plainly
show the Trinity of persons. And again, where he says, Faciamus hominem ad
imaginem nostram, let us make man in our Image; where the Verb plural faci^mus,
declares the plurality of the Persons, and the Pronoun singular, nostram
shows the unity of the Essence: even so here, the word sanctus three times
repeated does manifestly declare the Trinity of persons; and the word Deus, God
in the singular number, does as plainly show the unity of Gods Essence And so
the whole sum of all is, 1. Quod Deus sit unus quoad essentiam, that God is
one, That God is but one Essence and three persons.
and but one, in respect of his Essence. 2. Quod Deus sit trinus, quoad
subsistentiam, that in the Unity of that Essence there are three Persons in
respect of their subsistence or manner of being.


And this will appear most evidently, if you do compare together the 6. Deuteronomy.
6.4. Matthew. 28, 29.
of Deuteronomy. and the 4. ver. and the 28. of St. Matthew and the 19. ver. For in
the former place it is said, Dominus Deus tuus Deus unus est, the Lord thy God
is one God; and in the later place, our Savior commands his Disciples to go
and to baptize all Nations, in the Name (and not in the names) of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; therefore there is a Trinity of persons,
that is, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost in the divine Nature, Et una
est numero essentia, and yet there is but one Essence; because no diversity can
be given, whereby these persons differ in regard of the Essence.

And therefore in regard of this identity and unity of essence in the three
Persons, our Savior said, Ego sum in patre, et Pater est in me, I am in the
Father, and the Father is in me; and yet, as St. Cyril says, Non est dicendum,
Pater est a filio, vel in filio continetur, we may not say, the Father is from
the Son, or contained in the Son, Nec est filius in patre, ut nos in Deo esse
et vivere dicimur, Neither is the Son in the Father, as we are said to be, and
to live in God: Quia de ejus essentia nos non sumus, because we are not of the
essence of God, but in and by the virtue, grace and power of God.

But here it may be some will demand, from whence have we the name of Trinity,
About the name of Trinity.
when as we cannot find the same in all the Scripture?

I answer, that we have the word three from whence the word Trinity is derived,
for St. John says, There be three that bear witness in heaven; and therefore
as unity is derived, ab uno, from one, so Trinity may as justly be derived from
three; and the Church of God, Penes quam usus et forma loquendi, to whom the
phrases and forms of speech are committed, has power to use such words as may
best express the Truth, and confute the Heretics, so the same be not contrary
to the sense and meaning of the holy Scriptures.

Now the difference between essence and person, is this, The difference betwixt
the Essence of God and the Persons in the Godhead.
that the essence is the nature, which is indivisible and common to the three
Persons: but a person, Est subsistentia in natura divina, as the Schools speak,
a subsistence, or the manner of the persons subsisting, in the divine Nature;
when the one person is distinguished from the others: distinguished; I say, and
not divided, because there is no division in the divine Nature.

And the difference betwixt each Person is twofold. The difference betwixt each
Person and the others twofold. 1. Difference internal.


1. Internal: and 2. External.

1. The internal difference between the Persons is and consists in their
internal operations and proprieties, whereof the Divines say, that Opera
Trinitatis ad intra sunt divisa, The internal operations of the Trinity are
severed and divided; because, as St. Augustine says, Hoc est proprium patris
quod solus est pater, et quod ab alio non est nisi a seipso, It is proper to
the Father, that he only is Father, and that he is not from any other but from
himself: Et hoc est proprium filii, quod do patre genitus est, solus a solo,
coaeternus et consubstantialis genitori, And it is the property of the Son,
that he is begotten of the Father, the Son alone from the Father only,
coeternal and consubstantial to his begetter, Et proprium est Spiritus sancti,
quod nec genitus nec ingenitus est, sed a patre et filio aequaliter procedens,
It is proper to the holy Ghost, that he is neither begotten nor created, but
equally proceeding both from the Father and the Son.

And this difference is not essential, because the Essence of all three is the
same and all one, but personal, and yet real and incomprehensible.

2. 2. Difference external.
The external difference is taken from the external works and operations of
these three Persons, as that the Father sent the Son, the Son is sent to be our
Redeemer, and the holy Ghost sent to be our Sanctifier and Comforter; and as in
the Apostles Creed the Father is discerned from the Son, by ascribing unto him
the creation of Heaven and Earth; and the Son is discerned from the Father, by
ascribing unto him his Incarnation of the Virgin Mary; and the holy Ghost is
discerned from them both by working that Conception of him in the Virgins Womb,
and afterward by his appearing in form of a Dove, Matthew. 3.16. Act. 2.3.
and like cloven Tongues of fire.

A special observation about the outward works of the Persons.
And here you must observe, that although these operations are thus ascribed to
each of the three Persons of the Deity, yet the self-same God did work all and
each one of these works: because, as the Schools say most truly, Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa; the outward works of the Trinity cannot be
separated from any one of the three Persons, but are common unto all three; and
may be ascribed to each one of them; for the Son is the Creator of all things
as well as the Father, John 1.3.
for All things were made by him, says the Evangelist, and both the Father and
the Son sanctify us, and are our Comforters as well as the holy Ghost: And
therefore it is most truly said by Nazianzen, that in these operations, Non
possum unum cogitare, quin trium fulgore confundar, nec tria possum discernere,
quin subito ad nuum referar; I cannot think of one of these three Persons, but
I am dazzled with the brightness of all three: neither can I discern the three,
but presently I shall be referred and carried to one.

That the persons are distinguished two ways.
And it is further observed by the Divines, that the Persons are distinguished
in the Trinity two ways. 1. By the Relations of the Persons. 2. By the
Properties, 1. Of their Effects: Effectorum. 2. Of their Offices: Officiorum.



1. By the relation of the Persons.
1. The incommunicable Relation of the three Persons are the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost proceeding; for the Father is not the name of the Essence,
but of relation unto the person of the Son; so the Son is not the name of the
Essence, but of relation to the person of the Father; and so the holy Ghost
proceeding is not the name of the Essence, but of relation both to the Father
and the Son, from whom he does proceed.

2. They are distinguished by the proprieties of the persons, 2. By the
proprieties of the Persons.
as

1. By the effects, that is, by the form of speech, 1. The effects.
which the Scripture uses, as when it speaks of the Father, it says
commonly, 1. A quo, velut a principio rerum omnium, and 2. Ad quem, velut ad
finem omnium. (...).

That is, Of whom, as of the beginning of all things; and, 1 Cor. 8.6. Romans
11.36.
To whom, as unto the end of all things. And when it speaks of the Son, it
says, commonly, 1. Per quem, tanquam per Mediatorem et dispositorem omnium: 2.
In quo, velut in materia, omnia sunt. (...).

That is, Through whom, as through the Mediator and disposer of all things;
and, In whom all things are contained and do subsist, as in the proper place
and matter. And when it speaks of the holy Ghost, it says, commonly, 1. Ex
quo, tanquam ex motore et agente, and 2. Quo, velut sustinente, fovente, et
efficiente rerum omnium causa.
That is, From whom, as from the mover and doer of all things; and, By whom, as
by the sustainer, cherisher, and efficient cause of all things: As when Moses
says, That the Spirit of God moved upon the waters, that is, to sustain it,
and to preserve the same together. Genesis 1.2.


2. By the Offices of the Persons, that is, in the work of Creation and
Redemption: 2. Their Offices.
for though the Son creates all things, as well as the Father, for, By the Word
all things were made and without it nothing was made that was made; John 1.3.
yet properly it is attributed unto the Father, as it is set down in the
Apostles Creed; and though the Father redeemed us as well as the Son, yet
properly it is attributed unto the Son; and though the Father and Son do
comfort us, and sanctify us as well as the Holy Ghost; yet properly, it is
ascribed to the Holy Ghost, to be our comforter; and therefore the Father is
commonly described by the Name and Title of Creator, the Son by the name of
Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost; by the name of Sanctifier and Comforter.

Whereby it comes to pass, that although there be an unity in the Essence of
the three Persons, yet in the works of our redemption, each one of them has
his proper operation, which is not communicable unto the others; for the
Trinity (or three Persons) was not born of a Virgin, it was not crucified, it
was not buried, but only the Son, the second person of the Trinity; so that it
is the proper office of the Son to be made man, to suffer death, and to rise
again for our redemption; and not of the Father, or of the Holy Ghost: so the
Trinity said not, Matthew. 3.17. and c. 17.5. Luke 1.35.
Tu es filius meus dilectus, Thou art my well beloved Son, but the Father only
said it; and so the Trinity did not overshadow the blessed Virgin, but the Holy
Ghost alone overshadowed her.

And yet we must observe, that, as the Trinity of persons is infinite and
inseparable, so he works communiter, that is, both equally, The outward works
of the Godhead.
and inseparably in all the works which are called opera ad extra; and
therefore both the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, do the same things,
ratione effecti operis, in respect of the work done, but they do it not eodem
modo, after the same manner; so that here, in their operations, there is a
distinction, but no diversity. And so much shall serve for the distinction of
the Persons, both in respect of their relation, and proprieties. And now,

2. Of the unity of the Essence of the Trinity of Persons.
2 Having showed unto you, that for their works ad extra, the Trinity, in all
and every thing equally and together, always works in community: and
especially having set down, for distinction sake, how his own proper operation
is ascribed to each person, it rests that I should declare the Unity of the
Essence of this blessed Trinity, to which I must say with S. Augustine, that,
In summa Trinitate tantum est una, quantum tres simul sunt, in the holy
Trinity, one is as much as are all the three Persons, nec plus aliquid sunt
duae quam una res, and in se infinita sunt; neither are two any thing more then
one thing, and in themselves are infinite; Ita and singuli sunt in singulis,
and etiam omnia in singulis, and singula in omnibus, and omnia in omnibus, and
unum omnia; and so each of them are in each one, and also all in each of them,
and each of them in all, and all in all of them, and one is all: and again, de
verbis Domini, he says, Videmus Solemn in Coelo currentem, fulgentem, and
calentem, We see the Sun in Heaven, running, shining, and warming us: and so in
like manner, the Fire, says he, has three things in it, motum, lucem, and
fervorem, motion, light, and heat, Divide ergo si potes, Arriane, Solemn, vel
ignem, and tunc divide Trinitatem; and therefore if thou can, O thou Arrian,
divide the Sun, or the fire, then at length divide the Trinity: And S. Gregory
says, Tunc aperte videbimus quomodo and unum indivisibiliter tria sunt, and
indivisibiliter tria unum; When we shall be so happy, as to attain to the
kingdom of Heaven, we shall then plainly see (what we now believe) how the one
(that is, Essence) is indivisibly three (that is, Persons;) and the three (that
is, Persons) is indivisibly one, that is, Essence.

And as for the eternity of these three Persons, That the three Persons are
coetenal.
none is be- before nor after the other, but all are coeternal; for seeing the
Son is (...), as S. John calls him, the Word and Speech of God, and (...), the
Wisdom of God, Luke 2.49.
as S. Luke calls him; it follows, that, aut Pater fuit absque Sapientia,
aut nunquam fuit absque Filio; either the Father was sometimes without his
Speech, or without his Wisdom, or he was never without his Son: and seeing the
Holy Ghost is amor, nexus, and unitas Patris and Filii, the love, connection,
and unity of the Father and the Son; it must needs follow, that either the
Father and the Son were without love, and unity betwixt them, or else they were
never without the Holy Ghost.

That the three Persons are coequal.
And so for the equality of these Persons, there is none greater, nor lesser
then the other; but as they are coeternal, so they are coequal. And therefore
they are deceived that think the Father is greater then the Son, ratione
nominis, in that he is called the Father, because the name of the Son in the
blessed Trinity signifies not a subjection, but a relation, and not such a
relation as it signifies among men, but for our better notion and apprehension
of these holy Persons, that in regard of our weak understanding were so
graciously pleased, to condescend, to make themseves known unto us by those
Names, Titles, and Epithetes as we could best understand, when as otherwise
both the Essence and the Persons in themselves, are every other ways
incomprehensible. And thus much of the Mystery of the blessed Trinity: Now
follows some special Attributes of the divine Essence; and here are five of
them.

Certain Rules to be observed concerning the divine attributes.
But touching these, and the other Attributes of God, before we proceed any
further to treat of the particulars, some certain Rules are to be observed. For,

An Attribute is the Propriety of the Divine Nature, which cannot be separated
from the same, because it is of the Essence of God, when as Quicquid in Deo
est, Deus est, Whatsoever is in God, is God; and therefore the Divines say:

1 That we must consider, Eas proprietates, non esse qualitates, 1. Rule and
Observation. Gods attributes are no qualities in him. James 1.17.
sed ipsam Essentiam Dei, Those properties not to be any qualities in God, but
the very Essence of God; because the nature of God is most simple, and
admits nothing of the predicaments, when as nothing can be added unto it,
nothing can be taken from it: but, as S. James says, With him there is no
mutation, no change, nor shadow of turning; for in God there is nothing either
by way of composition, or by way of accident, or by way of matter and form; and
therefore God is not called holy, and just, as a man is so called; for holiness
and justice in a man are qualities, but in God they are his Essence; from
whence it comes to pass, that God is holy, just, and good, without quality;
and he is infinite, and immeasureable without quantity: but neither Man, nor
Angel can be said to be holy, just, good, or great without quality and
quantity: Even so, God is present every where without moving, Et sempiternus
sine tempore, and he is everlasting and eternal, without time, as being from
all eternity before all times, and so continuing for ever and ever, when there
shall be no time. He that would see more of this point, let him look into S.
Bernard, Sermon. 80. in Cant. and S. Augustine, lib. 5. c. 1. de Trinit.

2. We must consider, that all the proprieties of God are in him most
perfectly, most equally and most incommutable: 2. Rule and Observation. Gods
attributes are all perfect and equal in him.
but in Men and Angels, they are inchoated, measured, and comprehended within
certain bounds and degrees, and they are mutable and imperfect: so that to the
holiness, purity, and justice of God, the blessed Angels are neither holy nor
pure, nor just; and to the goodness of God, neither men, nor Angels are good,
as both Job and our Savior shows, when he says, There is none good but God,
that is, perfectly, simply, and absolutely good, the Angels being not pure in
his sight, Job 15.15. Job 4.18.


From hence it comes to pass, that these proprieties in God cannot suscipere
magis aut minus, Matthew. 19 16. Vide S. Aug. Enchirid.
that is grow greater or lesser, or be augmented, which they may do, and do, in
any and every man.

And as these proprieties are most perfectly in God, so they are most equally
in him; for neither is his mercy greater then his justice, nor his justice any
less then his mercy because he makes not the wicked innocent, Exodus 34.7.
Ezekiel. 18.24.
nor calls evil good nor good evil; so neither is his wisdom greater then his
power, nor his power any less then his wisdom, because his power can do
whatsoever his wisdom thinks fit and good to be done.

Yet I say, that we, by reason of our infirmities cannot perceive them to be
equally in him; but we perceive his mercy to be far greater then his justice,
though in God, the one is neither greater nor lesser, or better then the other.
And therefore the Lord is called Very merciful, Exodus 34.6. Ephesians. 2.4.
and abundant in goodness and truth; and again, rich in mercy, rather then in
justice, only in regard of us, and not in regard of God himself; because now
we perceive and find more effect^ of his mercy and goodness, and of his love,
favor and benignity, then we do of his severity and justice, which
notwithstanding are equally in God, as they shall find that abuse his mercy,
and despise his patience and long-sufferance.

3. Rule and observation: Gods attributes and proprieties are not contrary one
to another. Ambrose de obitu Theodosii. August. de tempore Ser. 102. James 1.17.
3. We must observe that the proprieties of God are not contrary in God, that
is, that there are no contrary proprieties in God; for his mercy does no ways
hinder or oppose his justice, and his justice hinders not his mercy; but his
mercy is justice in him, and his justice is to show mercy, as St. Ambrose
shows: because, as St. Augustine says Sermon. 102. de tempore, There are
nothing of those things in the Divine nature, which are capable of
contrarieties, lest God should seem to be changeable, who is ever the same,
without any shadow of turning; and therefore, all the proprieties of God being
of the Essence of God, and the Essence of God being not contrary to it self,
nor any ways capable of contrarieties, it must needs follow that these
proprieties of God cannot be contrary the one to the other.

Yet these proprieties may be diversely considered quoad nos, in regard of the
creatures; because they tend to diverse ends: as his mercy tends to another
end, then his justice does; for, Basilius Contra Eunomium.
as St. Basil says, among moral virtues, frugality is different from
liberality: for frugality does honestly keep those things that are necessary,
and does not wastfully spend them, and liberality does honestly bestow those
things that necessity requires to be given, and not niggardly deny them) yet
frugality is not contrary to liberality, Virtues do preserve and not destroy
one another, and so do the attributes of God.
but may well stand together in the same subject, when the same man may be and
is, both frugal and liberal: so no more is Gods mercy contrary to his justice;
for in contraries, the one does take away and destroy the other; as prodigality
destroys frugality, and ebriety destroys sobriety, but virtues do preserve,
and mutually keep each other, as frugality gives place to liberality, and is
the means to preserve it; so the justice of God is the cause that there is a
place for Gods mercies; for if God were not just to punish us, we should have
no need of mercy to spare us. And therefore these proprieties of God are not
contraries, though in regard of us they are, as they seem, diverse, and to be
diversely considered.

Again, it is manifest, Contraries cannot be in the self-same subject at the
self-same time without destroying one annother.
that two contraries cannot be in the self-same subject at one and the
self-same time, but that the one of them will destroy the other, as heat will
destroy the cold, or the cold suppress the heat; but in the one and the
self-same good man and his works, both frugality and liberality may well stand,
and be together, without any prejudice of the one by the other: even so in the
one and the self-same God, both Justice and Mercy, at one and the self-same
time, and at all times, are and do stand together, without any the least
prejudice, of the one to the other; and therefore we do find, that in the
self-same place, and at the self-same time, the self-same God is called both,
punitor and salvator, the punisher and the savior, for I kill and give life,
Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I wound and I make whole; and, as Hannah speaks, 1 Samuel 2.7.
he brings down to the ground and raises up, he makes poor and makes rich,
he brings low and exalts:

And therefore, contrary to the opinion and sentence of Marcion, that affirmed
the Justice of God to be contrary to Mercy, you see, that one propriety of God
cannot be contrary to another; because all and every one of his proprieties do,
at all times, and at the self-same time, reside and subsist in him together.

4. 4. Rule and observation.
We must observe that between the Attributes and properties of God, there is no
real distinction, but only notionis and rationis, in respect of notion and our
apprehension, Basilius l. 1. contra Eunomium. 5. Rule and observation: Some
Attributes may, and others may not, be communicated to the creature.
as St. Basil teaches.

5. And lastly, we are to observe that some certain of Gods Attributes may be,
and are communicated to the creatures, and certain others cannot be
communicated to any creature; as in that he is called Holy, Just, Merciful and
Good, and the like, these Attributes are and may, in some respects, be com-
communicated to the creatures; but in that he is styled and said to be
Infinite, Eternal, and Almighty, and the like, these cannot be communicated to
any creature, no not to the very Angels of God.

And here you must further note, that these Attributes of God, which are
communicated to the creatures, are not really communicated to any of his
creatures, Nota, that not the very Attributes, but the effects of Gods
Attributes are communicated to the creatures.
but only the effects of these Attributes; for, as I said before, the Goodness,
Holiness and Justice of God, is God; but the Goodness, Sanctity, Justice, and
the like, that are either in Men or Angels, are but the effects of those
Attributes of God, and are wrought in the creatures, by the power and goodness
of God.

And now to speak of these particular Attributes here expressed.

1. Attribute is Gods holiness.
The 1. is the Sanctity, and Purity of God, in the word (...). Holy, and this
word (...) is derived of the privative article a and the word (...) which
signifies the Earth, as if it were a separation from all earthly things: and
so it signifies that which is Pure and Clean, and free from the least stain of
iniquity, or the least shadow of injustice. And thus God only is of himself,
and of his own Nature simply and absolutely Holy; and so our Church in her
highest strain of Devotion, immediately after the receiving of the Blessed
Sacrament, sings unto God, Thou only art Holy, that is, simply and in all
respects Essentially Holy.

And so the Blessed Virgin, speaking of God, says, Holy is his name; and
therefore in that Golden Plate, which was to adorn Aaron's Forehead, Moses
commanded, there should be Engraven (...) as the Septuagint translates it, that
is, Sanctitas Jehovae, as Tremelius, or, Sanctum Domino, as the Vulgar Latin
has it; all Holiness or Sanctity is to be ascribed to the Lord, and does only
proceed from the Lord: and the glorious Seraphims, which Esaias saw, and these
wonderful Beasts in my Text, repeat this Attribute three several times, saying,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty, which we do not read of any other
Attribute of God; the Spirit of God, to whom this Attribute is specially
appropriated, by the name of the Holy Ghost, having a special regard to
preserve this Attribute, of all his Attributes, inviolable; because he foresaw
that, through the malice of Satan against God, and the froward disposition of
corrupt men, this Attribute of all Gods Attributes, should be most of all
contradicted, murmured against, and traduced; as if God were not so pure, just,
upright and holy. Especially, 1. In the election of his Servants. 2. In the
distribution of his Graces. 3. In the remuneration of our Deserts.
For

1. If he has created the wicked for the day of wrath, Proverb 16 4. Job 21.30.
and for this cause has raised up Pharaoh, and hardened his heart to make his
power known, and has from all eternity by his irrespective Decree, before the
Children had done either good or evil, loved Jacob and hated Esau, and
determined the preterition of those whom he reprobateth, How can the Reprobates
otherwise choose but walk in the paths that leads them to destruction? when the
Apostle tells us plainly, It is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy: and God by his unchangeable purpose to
pass by them, and to deny that mercy unto them whereby they should will to
answer when he calls, and to lay hold of his Grace when he offers it: How
can he be so holy, so pure, and so free from accepting of persons, and of being
some ways the Author of the damnation of all Reprobates, that, as he says of
Pharaoh, both his Justice and his power might be known?

To those rigid Presbyterians that make this indirect Objection, to the great
dishonor of God, and the wounding of his chiefest Attribute, we say, That
although God has, Jus absolutum in Creaturas, an absolute power over all his
Creatures, so that he may do with them what he will; Romans 9.13.
Even as the Potter has power over the clay to make a vessel either to honor
or dishonor, as the Apostle speaks: Yet because it seems to be cruelty, to
make a Creature purposely for his own pleasure to be miserable, and especially
eternally miserable; God does not use this his power, nor Preparare filios ad
patibulum; Sap. 1.13. and 14.6.
for he made not Death, neither temporal nor eternal, but he made all things
that they might have their Being; and he takes no pleasure in the destruction
of the living; but, through the malice of the Devil, and man's own wilful
frowardness, death and damnation came upon us: And Gods Decree of Preterition
is but the just punishment of our transgression: for God, that had decreed our
creation, foresaw our transgression, and the frowardness of the one, and the
readiness of the other, that is, of the elect and reprobate, to recede from
that condition, and both of them, being alike wrapped in the mass of
corruption, which came so by Adams transgression, and neither of them could
challenge any thing at the hand of God, from whom both of them had alike
receded, God shows mercy upon whom he will, and whom he will he leaves still
in that state wherein he was, not created by him, nor intruded by his means,
but, most miserably fallen in the loins of Adam: and this he does most justly
too, because he foreseeth, that when he calls, he will not answer: and though
he should stretch forth his hand all the day long, yet this froward wilful man
will not regard it.

And therefore certainly, Culpa non est vocantis sed renuentis, there cannot be
laid the least blame on God, that in the election of the one, whom he foreseeth
will answer when he calls, he shows, Indebitam misericordiam, more then
deserved mercy; and in the preterition of the other, whom he foreseeth will
refuse his mercy, he does nothing else but render unto him, debitam justitiam,
what he most justly deserves.

And whereas the Scripture says, That God hardened the heart of Pharaoh; and
that it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs; and that the
vessels of wrath are fitted for destruction, and the like: some of them are not
rightly understood, when they are spoken in one sense, and are applied by our
Presbyterians to another sense; as those that are fitted or prepared for
destruction are not so fitted and made up by God for that end, but by their own
sins, that do fit them for their damnation: some other speeches are spoken of
God, ad captum nostrum, not properly to be understood as they are spoken, but
in that sense which the holy Ghost means; as, God swear in his wrath, when as
God says, In me non est furor: and he that touches you touches the apple of
mine eye, when as God has neither feet, nor hands, nor eyes: So when it is
said, Whom he will he hardens, it is not meant, that he hardens any man,
Efficiendo duritiem, by working any hardness or stubbornness in him, but Non
molliendo per gratiam, by not softening it by his Grace, which he justly
denies unto him, when, like Pharaoh, he does stubbornly refuse to obey his
Voice.

And therefore seeing that in the proper sense God hardens no man, and
rejects or reprobateth no man but for his sins and wickedness, but
professes, As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner. And
again, Perditio tua ex te, Thy destruction is from thy self, and not from me.
If men will rob God, kill their Brethren, oppress their Neighbors, and so damn
themselves; let them thank themselves, and not lay the blame on God, who is
most just in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

2. For the unequal distributing of his Graces we say, that this inequality, as
of glory in the Stars, and the Orders of Angels, and so of all other Creatures,
makes the better harmony, and shows more of the Wisdom and Power of God,
then if all of them were equal; Matthew. 25.15.
and though he gives to one five Talents, to others but one, and to some none
at all, and that he exalts some, and make them rich, and Lords, and pulls
down others, to make them poor and Beggars, and so distributes all his gifts
and graces diversely; yet herein we say there is no ataxie, no disorder, nor
injustice in Gods doing, nor any wrong done to him that has but one gift, or
to him that has none at all; Quia non tenetur Creator creaturae, because God
is debtor to none, and he is not bound to give any thing to any one; and
therefore he may lawfully and justly do what he will with his own, as our
Savior shows most excellently in the Parable of the Laborers, Matthew. 20.15.
hired into his Vineyard.

3. For the remuneration of deserts we say, that in giving unto them, which by
continuance in well doing seek glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal
life, he shows himself most gracious and merciful, in bestowing upon them
what they could not challenge from him; and in rendering vengeance to them that
obey not God, and in plaguing them both in this life and in the life to come,
he does but what is most just and upright: and therefore the Prophet Esaias,
after he had set down many of Gods Judgments against the wicked, adds, That
the Lord of Hosts should be exalted in judgment, Esaias 5.16.
and the holy God should be sanctified in justice, that is, that he should be
acknowledged by all men to be most pure, and holy, and commended for his
justice, in punishing the wicked according to their deserts. And this doctrine
of Gods holiness and purity should put us in mind of our duty, to be, not as
the Devil, corrupt and unjust, but, as God commands us, to be holy as he is
holy, and to be as he is, if we desire to be where he is, where no impure thing
shall ever come. And so much for the first Attribute here expressed.

2. Attribute is, Gods rule and authority.
2. The next Attribute is (...), Lord, and he is said to be the lord of any
thing, Qui jus, autoritatem, and dominium habet in aliquam rem, which has
right, authority and rule over any thing, and whose own proper thing is that,
of which he is said to be lord; for (...) is derived (...), which signifies
Authority, Zanc. de nasura dei l. 1. c. 17.
says Pasor; and the Latin word, Dominus, dicitur a domo, says Zanchius;
because the Master of the house was wont to be called the Lord of it.

And this name Lord, says he, in the Writings of the Apostles is ascribed to
Christ, idque millies, about a thousand times; because he rules and governs,
not only the little house of his Church, Heb. 1.2, 3.
but also the great house of this whole World, as the Apostle shows.

Why the Father is styled God, and the Son Lord.
And the reason, why the name of God is usually attributed to the Father, and
the name of Lord commonly ascribed to the Son, is twofold.

1. Because the Father is the fountain of the whole Deity, therefore is he
usually termed God: and the Son is termed Lord, because he is appointed of his
Father to be Lord of all things, John 17.2.
and all power is given unto him, over all flesh.

Father is called God most usually, because that in the mystery of our
redemption, the Father remained still in his Majesty, and gave his Son only to
be our Redeemer; and the Son, though he was in the form of God, yet was he
content, not to remain with his Father in that equal Majesty, Phil. 2.7.
which he had with him from all eternity, but, He made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant; and so with the laying
down of his Glory, he laid down also the Name of God, and by taking unto him
the form of a servant, he took also the name of a servant, that is, in respect
of his Father, to whom, as a servant, be became obedient in all things unto
death: and therefore the Father calls him his Servant, saying, Ecce servus
meus, Behold my servant, Esaias 42.1. Matthew. 12.18. Whom I have chosen.
whom I uphold; which is interpreted of Christ.

But in respect of us, the Son is said to be our Lord, and so he is called
every where, because we are given unto him for his inheritance, that we should
serve him and acknowledge him for our Lord and Master; and so, as he is made
our Lord, the name of Lord is given unto him of his Father.

And therefore, though Christ indeed remained always God, and in the form of
God, wherein he was from all eternity, yet because he was appointed by the
Father, Christ laid aside the Name of God, and took two other names. The first
in respect of his Father.
and contented himself to be the Savior of all mankind, he humbled himself
unto death, and unto death he laid down the Name of God, and took unto himself
two other names. As

1. The name of a Servant, in regard of his Father, to whom he was made
obedient as a servant, and for which cause he always calls upon him as a
servant calls upon his Master, and refers all things unto him, as to his
Lord and Master.

2. He took upon him the name of Lord, The second, in respect of us.
in regard of us: and that is due unto him in a foursold respect, that is, By
right 1. Of Inheritance. Christ is our Lord in four respects.
2. Of Redemption. 3. Of Wedlock. 4. Of Creation.
For

1. He is the Lord our God, 1. By right of Inheritance.
and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands; and the
Father said unto him, Psalm. 2.8.
Dabo tibi gentes in haereditatem tuam, I will give the Gentiles for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession: And
therefore St. Peter says, Let all the house of Israel know for certain, or
assuredly, that God has made the same Jesus, Act. 2.36.
whom you have crucified, both Lord and Christ.

And in this respect also he is Lord of the wicked Reprobates, though they will
not obey him; for the Prophet David says, Psalm 8.5. and 6. Heb. 2.8.
Omnia subjecisti sub pedibus ejus. Thou have put all things in subjection
under his feet; and the Apostle says, this was spoken of Christ: And again,
the same Prophet speaking of him, Psalm. 110.1.
says, that the Lord said unto him, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool: Yea more then this, he is the Lord of all things
whatsoever; for Him has God appointed and made heir of all things, Heb. 1.
as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews teaches: and our Savior himself
says, Matthew. 28 18. John 18.15.
All power is given unto me both in heaven and in earth: And again, All things
that the Father has are mine.

Whereby you may see, that, Jure haereditario, by right of inheritance, as his
Fathers Heir, he is the Lord: 1. Of the Elect. 2. Of the Reprobates: And 3. Of
all the things in the world.

2. By right of purchase. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
2. He is our Lord by right of redemption or of purchase: for so the Apostle
says, You are not your own, because you are bought with a price: And St. Peter
shows, what price it was that redeemed us, and was paid for us, No
corruptible thing, as silver and gold, but the precious blood of Jesus Christ:
And therefore seeing Christ has bought us, and redeemed us out of the hands of
our enemies, he may justly challenge us to be his servants, and himself to be
our Lord and Master: for so the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Judge. 8.22.
Rule thou over us, and so be our Lord, and Governor, for that thou have
delivered us out of the hand of Midian.

3. By right of marriage.
3. He is our Lord by right of marriage, because he is the Husband of his
Church, and the Church is the Spouse of Christ: for so the Lord professes,
Hosea 2.19, 20.
I will betroth thee to me in faithfulness; and I will betroth thee to me for
ever, and the Husband is the head of the Wife, and so is Christ of his Church,
says the Apostle: and therefore, Ephesians. 5.23.
as Sarah obeyed her Husband, and called him her Lord; so Christ being our
Head, and the Husband of every faithful Soul, we acknowledge him for our Lord,
and be subject unto him, as to our Lord and Master.

4. He is our Lord by right of creation, 4 By right of Creation. John 1.2.
because all things were made by him, as St John testifies: And he has made
us, and not we our selves, says the Prophet David: and therefore he must needs
be our Lord. And no man can deny it: for the Prophet says, The earth is the
Lords and all that therein is, Psalm. 24.1.
the whole world, and they that dwell therein And why so? He answers
immediately, Because he has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon
the floods. And so St. Paul says, God that made the world, and all things
therein, Acts 17.24.
he is Lord of heaven and earth.

And this point of doctrine, The former Doctrine teaches us a threefold lesson.

1 Lesson in respect of the godly.


that Christ in all these respects is our Lord, and Lord of the godly, and of
the wicked, and of all things else, it should teach us this threefold Lesson.

1. In regard of the godly, it should teach them humility, obedience, and
comfort. 1. Humility, because they are but servants; and the Comique says, Non
decet hominem servulum esse superbum, It is a very unseemly thing, to see a
proud servant of an humble master. 2. Obedience, because the servant ought to
be obedient to his Lord and Master, and to be afraid to offend him; for, A son
honors his father, Mal. 1.6.
and a servant his master, says the Prophet: If Christ then be our Lord and
Master, where is our reverence, our fear, and our obedience to him? May not he
say to us as he does unto the Jews, Why call you me Lord, Lord, and do not what
I say? Luke 6.46.
For to say that Christ is our Lord, and not to do what he commands us, is but
mere hypocrisy; and with the Jews to say Hayl King, and spit in his face. 3.
Comfort, because they serve such a gracious Lord, as takes pleasure in the
prosperity of his servants, and will case them when they cry unto him, that
they are weary and heavy laden, Matthew. 11.
as himself does promise.

2. Lesson in respect of the wicked.
2. In regard of the wicked; it should teach them to be ashamed of their pride
and arrogance, to neglect their obedience, and to flight the Rule and Authority
of this their Lord and Master. For as of old, when Moses came unto Pharaoh in
the name of the Lord, he proudly answered, Who is the Lord, that I should hear
his voice? And Nebuchadnezzar, when the three children were brought before him,
did most arrogantly demand, Exodus 5.2.
Who is that God which can deliver you out of my hands? So now we have too many
that in words profess to be the servants of this Lord, Dan. 3.15. Titus 1.16.
sed factis negant but, as the Apostle says, they deny him by their deeds,
which they ought to be ashamed to do.

3 Lesson in respect of Gods creatures. 1 Cor. 4.7.
3. In regard of the creatures; seeing he is Lord of all things, and, as the
Apostle demands, What have thou, that thou have not received from him?

1. We ought to be thankful for what we have, and be contented with whatsoever
we have, be the same little or much: for, Is it not lawful for him to do what
he will with his own, and to dispose of them at his pleasure, to give what he
will, to whom he will, but thine eye must be evil, because he is good?

3. We ought to employ all that we have for the honor and service of this our
Lord and Master: for we are but his Stewards, and we must give an account how
we expend our Masters goods; he allows us food and raiment; and having that,
the Apostle says, we should be therewith contented. And truly, for mine own
part, I do here, on this good Day, and in this holy Place, prosess before you
all, I am sufficiently contented, and fully satisfied, and very thankful to
this my Lord and Master for what I have, having far more then I deserve, or
could expect; and therefore whatsoever I sue for to recover from any other, it
is not to enrich my self, or any of my relations, wise, children, or friends;
but I do it for the service of this my Lord and Master, and I will wholly and
fully bestow whatsoever I recover, for the repairing of this Church; so that,
recovering it, I shall be not one penny the richer, but this Church shall be the
better; and not recovering it, I shall not be the poorer, but the Church shall
want so much, as I should recover: and this is my resolution, and if I fail in
one tittle of what I say, Let these my words be a witness against me in the
last Day.

3. The next Attribute is (...), God; and Damascen says, The third attribute
is Gods knowledge and providence.

Three significations of (...). 1. Signification.


there be two principal Names of God, that is, (...), He that is, or I am, as
he says unto Moses, and God; and he gives three special significations, or
Etymologies, of this word (...), God.

1. (...), Curro, ambio, of running, and compassing about the world, to order
and to dispose of all the things that are therein; and this declares the
providence of God over all, even the least things of this world whereof not any
thing, not the lighting of a Sparrow upon the ground happens, as our Savior
shows, Matthew. 10.29.
without the providence of God: and the Wise man says, the Wisdom of God,
Attingit a fine usque ad finem, and disponit omnia suaviter, Sap. 8.1.
reaches from one end of the world to another mightily, and orders all
things sweetly: and so the Apostle says, that God, Portat omnia verbo virtutis
ejus, bears up all things with his mighty word, or the word of his power,
which is Jesus Christ; and in this sense both Proclus and Plato do interpret
the word (...) to signify the Providence of God, Hebr. 1.3.
and to show that nothing comes to pass without the will of God, and all
things that do come to pass by the will of God, are, in respect of God, most
holy, just, and good: for as in the creation, all that he made was exceeding
good; so in the ordering, disposing, and governing of them, all that he does is
exceeding just; and the very evil that he suffers to be done, he turns to
good, for his own glory, and the benefit of his Church, as he did the
crucifying of his Son, to the saving of all his servants. For, so great is his
goodness, says S. Augustine, that he would never have suffered Sin, or any
other evil to be done, unless his power and wisdom were able, as he drew light
out of darkness, so to draw a greater good out of our evil, though not to them
that commit the evil; Romans 6.1.
because we should not sin that grace might abound, as the Apostle shows.

2. Signification. Deuteronomy. 4.24.
2. The foresaid Father, and others say, that (...) is derived (...), that is,
adurere, and accendere, to burn and to kindle and enlighten: and so Moses
says, Our God is a consuming fire, either because of his wrath against sin and
sinners, 1 John 1.
or because of the brightness of his Majesty; even as S. John says, God is
light, in whom there is no darkness at all; Ezekiel. 1.27.
and therefore he appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire in the burning bush,
and in his vision to Ezekiel, he manifested himself in the appearance of fire,
which should make all sinners to be afraid to offend him, lest this terrible
fire should consume them.

3 Signification. Hebr. 4.13.
3. The said Damascen says, that (...) may be derived (...), because he sees
all things, and all things are patent and open in his sight, as the Apostle
shows, and no Creature, no word, no thought can be hid from him; and
therefore the Wise man advises all discontented persons, to beware of
murmuring, which is nothing worth; because the ear of jealousy hears all
things, and the noise of your muttering is not hid, Sap. 1.10, 11.
neither is there any word so secret, that it shall go for naught.

These be the Etymologies and significations of (...), which Damascen gives,
Curro, uro, cerno, to run, to burn, to see; and to these, the Latin Writers do
add another, and say that (...) may be derived a (...), by changing the
asperate D into TH, and that signifies fear, because all nations should fear
the Lord our God. And so the Greeks show us, Qualis sit Deus, what manner of
God he is, that sees and governs all things; and the Latins show us, Quid
sit nostri officii, what our duty is, to be afraid to offend this great and
glorious God; and so the Prophet Jeremiah demands, Who would not fear thee, O
King of nations? and God himself says, Fear ye not me, and will ye not tremble
at my presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea, by a
perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it; that is, which have bridled and tamed
that unruly Element, by the small and silly Sands, and though the waves toss
themselves, yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not pass
over these poor and feeble things.

4. The next Attribute here expressed is (...), The fourth Attribute is of Gods
power which is omnipotent in three respects. 1. Respect. Psalm. 135.6.
that is, Almighty, or that can do all things; and he is said to be almighty,
in three special Respects.

1. Because he can do whatsoever he would do, and he can hinder whatsoever he
would not have don: for whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and
in earth, in the sea and in all deep places, says the Prophet; and so the
Creation of the World makes this manifest. And Solomon says, Prove. 19.21.
that many devices are in man's heart, but the counsel of the Lord, that shall
stand, and all their devices, without his counsel, shall come to naught: as the
Giants, that thought to build the Tower of Babel to scale the Walls of Heaven,
were soon confounded, and their devices suddenly destroyed; Genesis 11. Genesis 19.
so the men of Sodom thought to press upon Lot and the Angels that were with
him, but the Lord presently blind-folded them; so Absolon conceited to make
himself King, but God brought him to the bough where he was hanged; and so our
late Usurpers and Rebels had brave devices and projects in their hearts to
destroy us all, and to make themselves Lords over all, but you see how easily
the Lord overwhelmed them, and brought them to shame and confusion.

2. He is said to be Omnipotent, 2. Respect.
because he brings all things to pass so easily, without any difficulty in
the world; for he did but speak the word and they were made, Psalm. 148.5.
he commanded and they stood fast. And he does all things, either without
means, or with the weakest means in the world; and sometimes contrary to the
nature of the proper means, as when he made the world out of nothing, he did
but say, Let there be light and it was so: Psalm. 77.20. Josh 6.20. Judge. 4.21.
Judge. 7.2.
and what weak instruments were Moses and Aaron to bring Israel out of Egypt?
Or Rams horns to batter down the strong walls of Jericho? or a silly woman, to
be the death of General Sisera? or Gideon with three hundred men to overthrow
the mighty Host and the innumerable Army of the Midianites? And with what
improbable strength has this Almighty God brought our gracious King to his
Crown and Kingdoms again? It was the Almighty God that did it.

And so in the Spiritual work of our Redemption, by what weak means has he
loosned and overthrown the work of the Devil, 2 Cor. 12.19.
and delivered his Prisoners out of captivity? For, blessed be this strong
Jehovah, we see how his power is made perfect through weakness, as the Apostle
speaks: and how Christ that seemed a worm and no man, as the Prophet
speaks, in becoming poor, has made us rich, and in becoming a curse, has
made us the heirs of blessing: 2 Cor. 8.9. 1 Pet. 3.9.
and after his Ascension into heaven, with what weak instruments has he
converted the world from Idolatry and Infidelity, to embrace the Christian
Faith? Through the foolishness of Preaching, says the Apostle, of a few poor
Fishermen, and us that are their successors: this is the Lords doing, and it
is mavelous in our eye. But it is more mavelous, that he should do what he
will, not only without means and by weak means, but also contrary to all means;
John 9.6.
as with Clay, that is able to make any man blind, to make a blind man to see;
and with Fire, that burns every thing else, to preserve the three Children in
the Fiery Furnace; and to make the raging Sea, that swallows down, and drowneth
man and beast, to be a Wall of defense unto the children of Israel.

3. Respect.
3. God is said to be Omnipotent and Almighty, because he is able to do, what he
will not do, that is, more then ever he did, or ever will do; for he is able of
these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham. Math. 3.9.
And he says to St. Peter, Think you, that I cannot now pray to my Father, and
he shall presently give me more then twelve legions of Angels, Math. 26.52.
and so he can do many thousand things, that he does not, and will not do.

Titus 1.2. 2 Timothy 2.13. Aug. de Trinitat. l. 15. c. 15.
But it is objected, that the Apostle says, He cannot lie; and again, He cannot
deny himself; to which St. Augustine answers that Magna est Dei potentia,
non posse mentiri, it is an argument of Gods great power, that he cannot lie,
or deny himself, because that to lie is the sign of weakness and imbecility,
when the liar is not able to do what he says, or to perform what he promises.
And he that desires further satisfaction in this Point, let him look into my
Best Religion, See the Best Religion.
where I have handled the same more at large.

So you have seen, how, and in what respect God is said to be (...), Almighty:
and that should teach us a twofold Lesson, 1. The one of Fear. Two Lessons to
be learnt.
2. The other of Comfort.
For

1. God threatens to ^unish and plague wicked sinners, 1. Of fear.
and he that blesses himself when he hears the curse, the Lord says he will
not spare him, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
but will blowout his name from under heaven; and again he says, Levit. 26.23.
if you wa k stubbornly and contrary unto me. I will also walk contrary unto
you, and plague you seven times more for your offenses; and do not you think,
that God is able to make good his threatenings? Therefore we ought all of us to
humble our selves, and to fear the Almighty God, and, as our Savior says,
Math. 10.28.
to fear him who is able to destroy both body and soul.

2. This Doctrine of the almighty power of God, 2. Lesson.
may afford us a great deal of comfort, against the Devil, our affl^ctions, and
all Tyrants. For when we see Satan's army and consider his stratagems against
us, we may well cry out with Elizaeus servant, Alas, what shall we do? 2. Reg.
6.15.
But when we remember what our Savior says, I give to my sheep eternal life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand, John
10.28.
because my Father which gave them me is greater then all, and none is able to
take them out of my fathers hands: 1 Pet. 1.5.
we may comfort our selves, and be assured, that, as St. Peter says, the godly
that do serve the Lord, shall be kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation; because he that is in us is greater, and more powerful, then he that
is in the world. 1 John 4.4.


5. The last Attribute here set down is which was, and is and is to come, and
this crowns all the other Attributes of God: for without this, to be Lord, to
be a God, and to be Almighty would avail little or nothing: but to be so, and
to be so for ever, Esai. 43.10. Psalm. 90.2.
is all in all, and only the honor and prerogative of the Almighty God. And so
God says, Before me there was no God formed, neither shall be after me: and
the Prophet David speaking to him, 1 Timothy 1.17.
says, Before the mountains were made, and before thou have formed the earth
or the world, thou art God from everlasting, Exodus 3.14.
and world without end, and St. Paul calls him, the king of ages, or the
everlasting King: and the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Esai. 57.15.
says, (...). For as he says unto Moses, I am is his name, that is, an
Eternal being, and which inhabiteth eternity, and as here these Beasts do say
which was, that is, Lord God almighty, and therefore the Maker and Creator of
all the things that are, What the former point should teach us.
and which is that is, Lord God Almighty, and therefore the ruler and governor
of all the things that are, and which is to come, that is, to be, as he is,
Lord God Almighty; therefore the rewarder of all men as their works shall be.

And this Eternal being of God should teach us all to labor for eternity: for
that which is vain, and vanishes, is of nothing worth: but the truth is, that
we shall all be Eternal, and for ever, either in felicity or misery, in joy or
in torments: and therefore our study and care should be, so to live and to
serve this Eternal God, that we may live with him in Eternal happiness, and
avoid those Eternal torments, wherein the wicked shall be chained for ever. For
you shall find that, as the same Father says, Praeterit jucunditas non
reditura, and manet anxietas non peritura.

And therefore I advise you all, and my hearts desire is, that you would be all
like these four Beasts, as I have explained them, in their description and
their practice, that so with these Beasts you may for ever live with him, which
was, and is, and is to come. To whom be all Honor, and Glory, and Praise, and
Thanks, for ever and ever, Amen.

Jehovae Liberatori.
THE ONLY WAY TO THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN.

A SERMON Preached before the Duke of Ormond's Grace, and the two Houses of
Parliament in Dublin.

By Griffith, Lord Bishop of Ossory.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, Anno Dom. 1664.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
MATH. 6.33. and LUKE 12.31. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.


I Have; not long since, began to treat of this Text before the most Religious
and most Honorable Person here: And what then the time prevented me, I shall
now endeavor, by Gods help, to conclude unto you; yet with an abstract and an
abreviation of the particular Points and Heads I then handled, that so you may
the better understand the whole: And as St. Paul says, Though to us it is
troublesome, yet for you it is profitable to hear the same things again, Quia
labilis memoria hominis, and good things will soon slip out of our minds. And I
said then, that the Angel Vriel tells Esdras, 2 Esdr. 8.2, 3.
the man of God, That as the earth has more dust and clay for earthen vessels,
then Ore and Mines for gold; so this present world has more men that tend
toward Hell, then those that shall possess Heaven: and that although many men
are created, yet there shall but few men be saved.

Chapter 9. v. 15.
And chap. 9. ver. 15. he says, That, Sicut fluctus majores sunt guttis, as the
wave is greater then a drop, so they are more that shall be destroyed, then
those that shall be delivered. And in the foresaid chap. 8. ver. 56, and 57. he
sets down the reason, Chapter 8. v. 56, and 57.
why so many men shall be condemned; not because God, by his absolute and
irresistible Will would have it so, Quia non voluit Deus hominem disperdi, For
he desires not the death of a sinner, and he would have no man to perish: But
it is, says the Text, Quia V. 60.
1. Spreverunt Altissimum. 2. Dereliquerunt vias ejus. 3. Conculcaverunt justos.
1. They despised the most Highest. 2. They forsook his ways, that is, to walk
in his Laws. 3. They trampled the just and good men under foot; things usually
done in the world, and too frequent in these days.


And left any man should detract from the testimony of this Angel, because the
book of this man is by many of our men deemed to be apocryphal, that is,
obscure, and not the clear Canon; therefore the Angel of the Covenant, Jesus
Christ, Tremel. Annot in c. 4.1 lib. Esdr.
which Tremel. says, is here understood by this Vriel, that signifies, Lux
and Sapientia Dei, the Light and Wisdom of God, which Christ Jesus is, as St.
Luke testifies, says the very same thing; for he tells us, That many are
called, but few are chosen: and more plainly, he says, Luke 11.
That wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and
many there be that go in thereat: And strait is the gate, Matthew. 7.13.
and narrow is the way, that leads unto life, and few there be that find it:
And he shows the reason hereof to be the very same, that Esdras had set down
before; for he says to Nicodemus, That this is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, John 3.
and men love darkness more then light, because their deeds are evil; for
Christ came into the world, not to condemn the world, but to save the world; to
seek the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and to teach us the way that would
lead us to eternal life.

And therefore, when the young worldling came to Christ and said, Master, speak
to my brother, Luke 12.13.
that he divide the Inheritance with me: our Savior grants him not his desire,
that was so pernicious to him, but he gives him far better things then he
desired, that if he accepted the same, would prove most advantageous unto him;
for he, like a Citizen of this world, had his mind only set to gain his
Brothers inheritance; and our Savior gives him counsel, to think of another
world, and to seek for that eternal inheritance, that would make him eternally
happy: And so he takes occasion from his unjust desire, to show unto us all,
what justly and chiefly should be desired. From whence you may observe:

1. 2. S^ecial Observations from the former Point. Observat. 1.
That if with this young man we come to Christ to pray for any thing, he will
either give us what we desire, if our desire be good, or better then we desire,
if we desire what is evil for us; For, as we read of Pompey the Great, and of
Titus the Son of Vespasian, that was called, Deliciae generis humani, The
delights of mankind, that they were so courteous to all Petitioners, that none
departed sad or discontented from them, saying, That, Non oportet quenquam a
Caesaris colloquiae tristem dis^edere, it was not fit that any man should go
sad away from Caesar's conference: so much better may we say of Christ, who is
clemency and bounty it self, and therein so far excelling them, as the ocean
Sea exceeds a drop of water, that if we come to him we shall never depart empty
away, and we shall never loose our labor, but we shall be sure to have, either
what we desire, or better then we desire. And we ought the more willingly to
come unto him, because he does so lovingly invite us, Matthew. 11.
saying, Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden; and then does so
graciously promise, that he will ease us, and not only give us the health of
our bodies, which was all that the Leapers desired, but also rest for our
souls, which is the best thing that can be wished.

Observat. Esaias 55.8.
2. You may observe from hence, That Gods ways are not as our ways, nor his
thoughts as our thoughts; for we commonly turn good into evil; and as the
Apostle says, We turn the graces of God into wantonness; as abusing wine and
strong drink unto drunkenness, our riches to oppress our neighbors, our wit to
deceive one another, and our strength to wound and kill our own brethren, even
as Cain, Romulus, and Caracalla have done before us. But God, as he called
light out of darkness, so out of our evil he draws good: and as in Sampsons
Riddle, Judge. 14.14.
Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness; so out of
the death of Christ, which was the most execrable act, and the most horrible
murder, that ever was committed, God drew the satisfaction for all our sins,
and the salvation of all his Saints: and out of intestine wars, we see how he
produces a happy peace, as he did to Solomon after the days of David: And so
here Christ, out of the ill desire of this undiscreet man, does, arripere
ansam, take hold of this occasion, to make this most excellent Sermon, that the
Evangelist sets down from the 15. verse to the 41.

The method that Christ uses, and which we should imitate.
And of this Sermon I have chosen this thirty one verse to treat of, at this
time; which is like Janus, looking backward and forward; backward in the
discretive conjunction, and word (...), but, that notes unto us what we should
not do; and forward in all the other words, that do fully teach us what we
should do: answerable to the method that the Prophet David proposes unto us,
saying, Eschew evil, and do good, and dwell for evermore; and which is the
method that we ought all to follow.

1. To take notice, and to observe, 1. The negative part.
what we should not do, and what evils we should eschew: for, as a good
Gardener will first root out all noisome and hurtful weeds, before he can
plant and sow his sweet and pleasant flowers; so must we root out all sins and
vices, before any grace or virtue can be planted in us: and as there was a Law
in Rome, de purgandis fontibus, of making clean their Wells and Fountains of
water; so must the fountains of our hearts be cleansed, before we can receive
the graces of God Spirit; because, as Solomon says, The holy Spirit of
discipline flies from deceit, and dwells not in the body that is subject
unto sin, and can no more stand in one heart, than the Ark of God and the Idol
Dagon could stand upon one Altar; and then, as S. Chrysostom says, If thine
hand be full of Counters, thou must cast them out of thine hand, before thou
can receive it full of Gold: so, if thy heart be full of sins, thou must
cleanse the same, and cast thy sins away, before there can be any room for the
graces of God.

Therefore our Savior first of all tells us, what we should not do; that is,
not to be too careful, and solicitous for the things of this world, but to
take heed, and beware of covetousness; And to that end he labors much, and
produces many reasons to pluck up, out of our hearts, this evil weed of
Covetousness, which, as the Apostle says, is the root of all wickedness.

And the Sum and substance of the whole Discourse is this; that of all the
wealth and riches of the whole world, 1 Timothy 6.10.
no man, no King, no Lord, can have any more, but his food and raiment; And the
Providence of God has so wisely disposed things, that every man, the poorest
man has these things, though not so excellent, yet competent, while he lives:
as we see, the poor Labourer has his food of coarse bread and roots, as
healthful to him, and his sleep as delightful, and oftentimes better then the
daintiest Diet is to the greatest Glutton; and the mean man that is clad in
Frize, or with John Baptist, in Camels hair, may be, and is, as well preserved
from the heat of Summer, and the cold of Winter, and has his nakedness as well
covered thereby, which is all the use and end of apparel, as they that are
clothed in Purple or Scarlet, or fine Linen.

And this Providence of God, to find competent food and raiment for all men,
the poor as well as the rich, our Savior illustrateth by the example of the
Fowls of Heaven and the Lillies of the field, whereof the one, i. e. the Fowls,
are sufficiently fed, though they neither sow nor reap; and the other, i. e.
the Lillies, are as bravely clad, though they neither weave nor spin; And yet
Solomon in all his royalties, was not arrayed like one of these, nor all the
colors in the Court of Spain cannot make so glorious a show as these fading
flowers: and Sardanapalus Diet, Herodian. in vitae Heliogabali.
or Heliogabalus fare; that, as Herodian says, feasted on the rarest Fish,
when he was the furthest from the Sea, and would have the daintiest Flesh and
Fowls, that could be gotten, when he was nearest unto the Sea, could add no
more unto their stature, then the Ravens carkases, or the Horse his grass, does
any whit lessen his full growth: and therefore, seeing none can have but food
and raiment, S. Paul says, that having food and raiment, we should therewith
be contented. 1. Tim. 6.8.


But seeing we are all so bewitched with the love of this world, that we spend
most of our time, and bestow most labor, and weary our selves in the pursuit
of the vanities of this world; give me leave to explain unto you four special
properties of these wordly things, that will show unto you the great folly of
them that are their greatest followers, and are most delighted with them, and
beautified by them; for, The four inseparable proparties of all worldly things.
1. They are variable. 2. They are unprofitable. 3. They are deceitful. 4. They
are very hurtful.


1. They are variable; and Solomon tells us, 1. They are variable.
they are all vanities, and evanescentia transeundo, and vanishing away by
passing away, from one to another; as being with one to day, with another to
morrow, and gone again from him the next day after; as the Stories tell us, how
Cheops, King of Egypt, that built the Pyramides all of Theban Marble, and kept
every day above thirty thousand men before that work, became so poor, that he
was fain to prostitute his Daughter to relieve his necessities: And of Croesus,
the rich King of Lydia, the Poet says, Irus and est subito, qui modo Croesus
erat: He suddenly became as poor as Irus. And to what end should I tell you of
Caius Marius, that was seven times Consul, and yet was brought so low, as to
hide his head in the Fens of Mynturnes: Or of Marcus Attilius Regulus, that had
fettered many a noble Carthaginian, yet at last found himself fettered in
Carthage: Or of Belisarius, that brave Commander, and most excellent Soldier,
under Justinian, and that was more famous then the King of Sweden; and had
taken Gilimer and Vitiges, two mighty Kings, his Prisoners; yet came to so low
an ebb, as to cry, Date obolum Belisario, quem virtus exaltavit, malitia
depressit, et fortuna caecavit; O give one halfpenny to Belisarius, whom
Virtue advanced, Malice suppressed, and Fortune has made now a poor blind
Beggar! Or of a thousand more, that Histories do record, to have been tumbled
from the top of all honor, wealth, and dignity, to the lowest degree of all
misery; when as within these few years your own eyes may see and observe
thousands of wealthy men, and honorable persons that are brought to the dust,
and to have nothing: and a thousand of others, that had nothing, to become
filled, some with the riches of Egypt, and others with the spoils of Israel:
which does sufficiently show unto us, how vain and variable a thing is wealth,
honor, and all other worldly things, that turn round like a wheel, Et ut Luna
mutantur, And are as changeable as the Moon, and unconstant like the Wind.

2. They are unprofitable.
2. As they are vain and variable, so they are unprofitable, for none of all
these things can redeem our souls from hell, nor make satisfaction for one sin:
when as the Prophet tells us, Mich. 6.7.
That thousands of rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, will not satisfy our
God for the sin of our soul: And the Prophet David says, It will cost more to
redeem our souls then so: And Christ himself says, Matthew. 16.26.
What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? As if he had said, All
the wealth and all the honor in the world are not sufficient to redeem one
soul: The which thing St. Peter means, when he says, 1 Pet. 1.28.
That we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, that
could not do it; but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ.

And as all the riches of the world cannot purchase the redemption of one soul,
so no more can they procure the health of our bodies: For the Poet tells us,
Non domus and fundus, non aeris acervus and auri
Aegroto domini deducunt corpore febres:
They can neither deliver us from death, nor preserve us in health, nor yet
keep us out of prison, when God delivers us into the hands of our enemies:
And therefore the wise man says, That when the rich men's eyes are opened, they
themselves will cry out, Sap. 5.8.
What has pride profited us? Or, what has the pomp of riches availed us? Just
nothing; because they are but like the Spiders web, that, as the Prophet says,
will make no garment for us.

3. They are all deceitful.
3. All the things of this world are deceitful, and do deceive most of those men
that love them and rely upon them: for so our Savior in the Parable of the
Sower says, The seed which fell among thorns, Matthew. 13.22.
is like unto him, that hears the Word of God, and presently the care of this
world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the Work; for rich men, and all
other worldlings, are like unto him, that in his sleep dreameth he feasteth,
and is at a pleasant banquet, filled with all dainty fare; but when he awaketh,
behold, his belly is empty, and his soul is hungry: And so the Prophet David
says, The rich men have slept their sleep, and when they awaked they found
nothing in their hands: And so now they are asleep and dream that themselves
are the most happy men in the world, and the dejected Servants of God to be the
most miserable; but when death opens their eyes, and their souls are once out
of their bodies, they do see that now all worldly things have forsaken them,
and they must go naked of all wealth, and disrobed of all honor, before the
seat of Judgment, to give a strict account of their Stewardship, how they have
gotten, and how they have employed all their wealth: and then they will
confess, as you see they do, in the fifth of Wisdom, Sap. 5. What the
worldlings at last do confess
O how were we deceived! for these are they, Quos habebamus in risum, whom we
derided, and had in a parable of reproach; we fools thought their life madness,
and their end without honor, and our selves only happy; but now they are among
the Sons of God, and their lot among the Saints, S^p. 5.3, ^, 5.
and we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of understanding has
not shined unto us; Et sic decipimur specie recti, and thus in all these things
we do but, as Ixion did, embrace a Cloud for Juno, and so deceive our selves
with the shadow of things.

4. The things of this world, as riches, honors, 4. They are hurtful.
and the like, are not only deceitful, but also hurtful, and so hurtful, that
the Apostle says, They that will be rich do fall into temptations, and a
snare, and into many hurtful and foolish lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9.
which drown men in destruction and perdition: For as the Vipers do gnaw out
the bowels of their own Dams, so the riches, honors, authorities, and the like
things of this world, do many times prove the only bane and poison that destroy
their owners, both in this world and in the world to come: As witnesses the
story of that rich Roman Citizen, who having done nothing against the
Commonwealth, nor any man else, that he knew of; yet being desirous to see the
proscribed, he finds himself with the first in the Proscription; and then he
cries out, How vanities and vain desires have destroyed many men.
That it was his fair house at Nola, and not any thing that ever he did, had
undone him, and caused him to be proscribed: So Plotius Plancus, the brother of
Minutius Plancus, Consul and Censor of Rome, was so rich, and lived so
delicately, that being sought for by the Soldiers, during the Proscription of
the Triumvirate, Valor. Maxim. l. 6. c. 18.
to be put to death, and being hid in a very sure place by the faithfulness of
his Servants, he was betrayed and discovered, only by the smell of his
perfumes; as was also Mulcasses, King of Tunis, discovered in like manner,
Jovius hist. l. 47.
as Paulus Jovius records: whereupon the Poet says, So many men, whom virtue
might have saved,
Are by fond pleasures of their lives bereaved.


And so many Women too: For Demonica, a Maid of the City of Ephesus, promised
to Brennus, that besieged the same City, to deliver up the Town unto him, if
for a recompense he would give her all the golden Chains and Bracelets of the
Gauls, to which Brennus yielded; and after he got the City, he caused all his
people to cast all the golden Jewels they wore about them, into the lap of this
covetous Maid; and she being oppressed with the weight of so much gold, yielded
her life under it: And Titus Livius relates the like story of the daughter of
Sp. Tarpeius.

But to search no further for ancient examples to confirm this point, How many
men have we seen searched after, imprisoned, and killed, for being rich and of
great possessions, and being in honor and authority; which perhaps had never
been looked after, if they had been poor and of no command, and had neither
place nor wealth to lose, and their persecutors to gain nothing thereby? For
you know the old saying, Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator, The poor
traveller that has never a penny to lose, never fears the thief, when the rich
Merchant oftentimes loses both his life and his treasure.

And Dives the rich Glutton will tell you, that the riches and treasures of
this world do not only prejudice their possessors in this life, but most of all
in the life to come.

And therefore well does bur Savior advise us, and say, Labor not for the
food that perishes, that is, John 6.27.
labor not so much for any thing that vanishes, and is of no certain
continuance; but labor for that which endures for ever, and which will bring
us to eternal life: And well does he here persuade us, not to be too careful
for the things of this world, especially because they are all so vain, so
fruitless, so perfidious, and so pernicious unto their possessors, that too
greedily do hunt after them. And so much shall serve to be spoken for the
Negative part of this Text, that teaches us, What we should not do.

2. In the Affirmative part Christ sets down, 2. The Affirmative part.
What we should do, that is, Seek the Kingdom of God, etc.

In which words you may observe these two parts. 1. A Precept. 2. A Promise.
Or else, 1. A Work. 2. A Reward.
And

1. In the Work or Precept, you have three things to be observed. 1. In the
work three things to be considered.


1. An act to be done: (...), Seek ye. 2. The things that are to be sought: and
they are two things. 1. The Kingdom of God. 2. His Righteousness.
3. The time when we are to seek them, first of all, Seek ye first the Kingdom
of God.
1. The act enjoined is, Seek ye; 1. The act that is enjoined.
and if Christ had said no more, but, seek ye, all men would have readily
obeyed his command; for all men seek. And now, they say, we have a Sect of
Professors that are called Seekers; but as those silly women, whereof the
Apostle speaks, That they are ever learning, 2 Timothy 3.7.
and yet never come to the knowledge of the truth: So our Savior says, That
many men will seek, but they shall not find, because they seek amiss; and that
is, Either Why men find not what they seek for.
1. What they ought not to seek: Or, 2. When they should not seek it: Or, 3.
Where it is not to be found: Or, 4. Not so carefully as they ought to seek it.


1. What we ought not to seek for.
1. The worldlings seek indeed: But what do they seek? Quaerenda pecunia primum;
and for the wealth of this world, Currit mercator ad Indos: And so the Lawyer
seeks, the Physician seeks, the Divine seeks, and every man seeks for
something; and too many seek for that which should not be sought for; for
revenge, or for their neighbors goods, and therefore they shall not find this
Kingdom of God.

2. When it is too late to seek.
2. Others seek for what they should seek for, i. e. the Kingdom of God; and yet
they find it not; because that, with those foolish Virgins whereof our Savior
speaks, they seek to enter when the door is shut; Matthew. 25.10.
for as it is too late to shut the door when the steed is stolen, so many
times it is to no purpose to knock when the door is shut, or to seek when it is
too late: for so Dives, Qui negavit micas interris, rogavit guttas in poenis,
which denied the crumbs to Lazarus on earth, desires a drop in hell, but he is
denied; and so shall all they be denied, Qui quaerunt salutem in medio
Gehennae, quae operata est in medio terrae, which seek for salvation and help
in the midst of Hell, or of Purgatory, which was wrought in the midst of the
earth, and should be sought after while we live on earth: And therefore the
Prophet Esaias bids us, To seek the Lord while he may be found; and that is
now in the Church, Esaias 55.6.
and not hereafter in Purgatory; for now is the time acceptable, now is the day
of salvation.

3. Others seek it and find it not; 3. Where it is not to be found.
because they seek it in the place where it is not to be found: for, as they
that seek for counsel among Fools, and honesty among Knaves, and truth among
Heretics, may seek long enough, and yet miss to find them; so they that seek
for the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness of Christ in the Dominion of
Antichrist, or among unrighteous Rebels, shall hardly find it. And therefore we
must seek it where it may be found, and that is in the true Church of God, and
in his Holy Scripture: and not in the Synagogue of Satan, or in the Fanatique
Conventicles of our upstart Sectaries, or in any Popish and absolete Traditions
of the Church of Rome.

4. Others also seek the Kingdom of God, and yet find it not, 4. When they seek
it so carelessly.
because they seek it so coldly and so carelessly as they do; for great things
cannot be had without great labor. And therefore Solomon says, he that would
find Wisdom, must search for it as for Silver, Prove. 2.4.
and seek for it as we seek for hidden Treasure And you see, the worldling
cannot get a little wealth without labor, the Lawyer cannot understand the Law
without study; and do you think, with our foolish Enthusiasts, that we shall
understand the Holy Scripture without paines-taking? Surely, How no great nor
good thing can be had without labor.
they that cannot understand Terence without a Comment, shall never be able to
expound the deep Mysteries of the Scripture, and to reconcile the repugnant
Texts thereof without Books and without Labor; for, as St. Aug. speaks,
Quidquid est, creed mihi, in Scripturis illis, altum and divinum est,
Whatsoever is in those Scriptures, believe me, it is high and Divine; and
though in some places it is like a shallow Foord, wherein a Lamb may wade, and
the meanest man may understand what he should do, and the main points of his
belief; yet in many other places, you shall find it like the deep Ocean,
wherein the greatest Elephant may swim, and the best Wits fail to understand
it: And if the C^tizen cannot get his Wealth, nor the Scholar his Learning
without labor and pains, do you think to find and to attain to the Kingdom of
God by a ^old and careless seeking after it? No, no, that cannot be; Quia non
dormientibus sed pugnantibus adveniet regnum Dei, the Kingdom of God falls
not into the Sleepers lap, but they that strive for it, shall obtain it; and
therefore our Savior bids us, Luke 13.24.
strive to enter in at the narrow gate; and he says, that the Kingdom of God
suffers violence, and the violent take it away.

And so you see, how we ought to seek for any thing that we would find; when,
and where, and how it may be found; that is, with such pains and care, as it
ought to be sought. Now,

2. The thing that we ought to seek for.
2. Our Savior, thinking it not enough to bid us seek, lest we should mistake
the thing, that we should seek, and passing by all other things that are scarce
worth the seeking, or much looking after, he sets down that Vnum
necessarium, and that Pearl of invaluable price, which we ought to seek, that
is, the Kingdom of God.

And who would not seek a Kingdom? Truly if Christ had said no more, but seek a
Kingdom, I think enough would have been ready enough to seek it: for, it is
strange, says Camerarius, Camerar. l. 5. c. 8.
to consider of the inordinate desire that men have had to reign and to rule as
Kings; what Villainies they have committed to become Kings; and what Execrable
things they have don to continue Kings; The ambitious and inordinate desire of
men to reign as Kings.
for Amurath the Third caused five of his younger Brethren to be strangled in
his presence: and Ismael, the second Son to Techmas King of Persia, did put to
death as many of his Brethren, as he could find, and all the Princes that he
suspected, to have any desire to his Kingdom; that so, they might reign and
rule without fear; and Soliman mistrusting his own Son Mustapha, when he
returned Victorious from the Persian War, and was received with such general
applause caused him presently to be strangled, and Proclamation to be made
throughout all the Army, that there must be but one God in Heaven, and one
Emprour, that is, himself, upon Earth: and Camerarius, says that this is a
perpetual custom in the race of the Ottomans and Turkish Souldans, to put all
that pretend to succession unto death. Neither is it only a Turkish custom to
do so; but it is the practice of most of them that are bewitched with this
inordinate desire to rule as Kings to do the like; for Plutarch writes that
Deiotarus, having many Sons, and being desirous that only one of them should
reign, slew all the rest with his own hands; and Justin says that Phrahartes,
the Son of Horodes, King of the Parthians, killed his own Father; and after
that, massacred all his Brethren, that he might reign and rule alone. And the
Sacred Story shows, that the very people of God, the Sons of Israel, were
not free from this fault, Judges 9.
but were pestered with this disease; for Abimelech, the Son of Gedeon, slew
seventy of his Brethren in one day, and played many other Tragical parts, that
he might make himself a King; and the furious ambition of Absolon did let him
on to play the Parricide, 2 Samuel 15 16.
and to end his Fathers days, that he might reign in his place.

And not to go from our own home, did not Henry the Fourth, put by Richard the
Second, his own King and Cozen German, that himself might be the King? And did
not Richard the Third, cause the true King and his own Nephews, the Sons of his
own Brother Edward the Fourth, to be done to death, that he himself might be
King? And did not that arch-Rebel and Traitor now of late amongst our selves,
play the like Tragical parts, that he might gain the rule of these Kingdoms?
And so did many others in many other Kingdoms: for there is not any thing so
Sacred, which the great men of this world, that desire to be made greater, will
not violate, and spare neither King, Father, Brother, or Friend, to bring
themselves unto advancement, and to be the rulers of the People, and to have
the command and power over their Goods, and Lives; as the proof hereof is seen
in Antoninus Caracalla, who when he had murdered his own Brother Geta in his
Mothers lap, and betwixt her arms, and being advised by some of his friends to
Canonize him among the Heroes and to place him among the Gods, to mitigate the
thought of so execrable a fact, answered like a wretch, sit divus, modo non sit
vivus, let him be a God among the dead so he be not alive among Men; Camerar.
quo supra.
so great an enemy is the inordinate desire of bearing rule to all Piety and
right; says mine Author.

Therefore our Savior does not stop when he had said, seek a Kingdom, which he
knew most men would be ready enough and some too ready to do, without bidding:
but he adds (...), the Kingdom of God; and not the Kingdom of this world, nor
the Kingdom of the Antichrist, nor of sin, but the Kingdom of God. And the
Kingdom of God, is taken many ways; but especially, The Kingdom of God three
fold.
1. For the Kingdom of Nature. 2. For the Kingdom of Grace. 3. For the Kingdom
of Glory.


1. The Kingdom of nature.
The first is all the world, Heaven, Hell, Sea and Earth; and all men, good and
bad, are the subjects of this his Kingdom; for he is, Rex universae terrae, and
super omnes nationes mundi, whom he rules with his mighty power, and by his
wisdom disposes all things sweetly, even when he permits the wicked to
flourish, and chasteneth his own children every morning; our King doing herein,
as the Husbandman does with his Oxen, mactandus liber ibit ad pascua,
servandus jugo premitur, that which is appointed for the slaughter shall freely
run to the best Pasture, but that which is to be preserved shall be pressed
under the Yoke.

2. The Kingdom of Grace.
2. The Kingdom of Grace comprehends not all creatures nor all men, but the
elect only, that is, the good and godly men, in whose hearts this King writes
his holy Laws, and rules them by his Spirit, that guides and directs them
to observe his Laws.

3. The Kingdom of Glory.
3. The Kingdom of Glory is that, which the Apostle describes, whose joys
passes all understanding, whose subjects are the Saints and Angels, and whose
King is Jesus Christ, the King of kings.

The first of these was established by power, when the Almighty God created all
things by his powerful Word, or the Word of his power, which is Jesus Christ;
but it shall be finished through its weakness, when languishing Nature, that
still grows weaker and weaker, can hold out no longer.

The second was begun in weakness, when Christ the Son of God began the same in
the the infirmity of our flesh, and to gather his Church by the preaching of a
few Fishermen; but it shall end in power, when after he has put all his
enemies under his feet, he shall by the power of his Deity absolve the same,
and deliver it, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 15.
unto God his Father: but,

The third shall begin in power, and continue in power without ending: when as
the Poet says, Gloriosum Imperium sieve fine dabit,

-- Cui nec metas rerum, nec tempora ponit; God shall give us a glorious
Kingdom, without ending, and eternal happiness unto his Saints: where there
shall be no fight, because they have no enemy; no tears, because they can
recieve no hurt; no fear, because there is no danger; and no grief, because
there is no evil, but all peace, all joy, all felicity, because God will be all
in all.

And of these three Kingdoms we ought to submit our selves with all
contentedness unto the first, and with all care and diligence to seek the
second, that so to our everlasting comfort, we may attain unto the third. Which
kingdom we shall never come unto, unless we seek the second, which is the
kingdom of grace, as we ought to do: for, as among the Romans none came to the
Temple of Honor, but by the Temple of Virtue; so none shall come to the Kingom
of glory, but the Subjects of the Kingdom of grace; and therefore we must seek
for that as we ought to do: and that is,

1. Generally, that the Church of Christ may be enlarged by the preaching of
the Gospel, and by all other ways that we can to convert men to the faith of
Christ, and not to pervert them by wicked errors, or the evil examples of an
ungodly conversation.

2. Particularly, that the Spirit of God, and not the Spirit of Satan, the
grace of Christ, and not our fleshly lusts, or any other sin might reign in us,
and rule our hearts to do all things according to Gods Laws; that so we our
selves might be members of his Church and subjects of this kingdom.

And, as I told you before, our seeking for this kingdom, must not be as
children seek for their learning, coldly and carelessly, as indifferent whether
they get little or much; but, as the woman that lost her groat lighted a
Candle, and swept the house, and sought diligently for it till she found it; so
must we seek for this kingdom with all diligence, and never leave seeking till
we find it; for, Non mollis est via ad astra, the way to heaven is not easy,
nor strewed over with sweet flowers; but we must through many tribulations
enter into the kingdom of Heaven; How easy a matter it is to slide into hell.
Indeed, the Poet can tell you, that facilis descensus averni, the way to hell
is very easy, and you may soon slide thither by any sin; Sed revocare gradus,
superasque evadere ad auras, Hic labor, hoc opus est; but to climb up to heaven
requires labor and pains, and they that think otherwise, do but deceive
themselves; because there are many hindrances, and rubs, and obstacles in our
way to keep us back from this kingdom: as this present world, that made Demas
careless of the world to come; How difficult to climb to heaven.
and our own flesh, that like Dalilah lies in our bosom, and is more
dangerous than the world, and the old Serpent the Devil, that goes about like
a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; And therefore, seeing it is so hard
a matter to pass through the Pikes of these enemies, Abjicienda est omnis
desidia and ignavia; Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Johan.
We must cast away all sloth and idleness, says Saint Chrysostom: and quia
angusta via, robusta anima opus est, and because our enemies are so mighty, we
must be strong, and of good courage, that we may overcome the world, subdue the
flesh, and resist the Devil, who is Leo inter formicas, a Lion among those that
fear him; but formica inter Leones, a coward among Lions, running away like
Thyrsites before Achilles; James 4.7,
for, if you resist the Devil, he will fly from you, says the Apostle.

2 Chronicles. 9.18 Six especial steps to the kingdom of heaven.
And if you strive to pass through these dangers, and desire to know the way to
Gods Kingdom, you shall understand, that, as the ascent to Solomon's Throne was
Per sex gradus, by six stairs, so we have six special steps to ascend to the
Throne of grace.

1. Regeneration.
The first is by Regeneration, Quia nascimur ad laborem, and renascimur ad
salutem, because we are born the children of wrath, to labor and to miseries;
and therefore we must be born again, that is, by the washing of water, and the
working of Gods Spirit, if you would walk toward this kingdom: for, Except you
be born of Water, and of the Spirit, John 3.
you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, says our Savior.

The second is, by Outward profession, that is, 2. Outward profession. Cant.
1.8.
as Solomon says, by following the steps of the fleck unto the tents of the
Shepherds; and, as they do, to profess the Faith, and never to be ashamed of
the Cross of Christ.

The third is, by Hearing Gods Word, 3. Hearing Gods Word.
i. e. the truth of the holy Scripture; and not the dreams and traditions of
men; for my Sheep hear my voice, says Christ, and if you hear his voice, your
souls shall live, says the Prophet Isaiah: Jer. 23.16. and c. 12.6. Deuteronomy.
13.3. John 10.5. Matt. 7.15.
but the hearing of old newly revived Heresies is not the way to this kingdom,
but the way from it; and therefore we are flatly forbidden to hear the doctrine
of all such deceitful teachers.

The fourth is by Believing Gods Word, 4. Believing Gods word.
and giving credit unto his sayings, even as Abraham credidit Deo, believed
God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness; for otherwise, if we
believe not what we hear, our hearing of it will avail us nothing, but rather
be a witness against us; and yet, as the Prophet Isaiah demands, Isai. 53.1.
Who has believed our report? So, I fear, that of many, which come to hear
Gods word, there be but few that believe what we say, when as we have too many
men like those whereof Tertullian speaks, Qui credebant Scripturis, ut
crederent adversus Scripturas, i. e. to believe what they pleased out of the
Scripture; and many more, that do lead their lives so lewdly, and so
dissolutely, and follow after the vanities of the world so eagerly, as if they
believed there were neither heaven nor hell.

The fifth is, By continual Prayers, 5. By continual prayer.
and constant invocation upon God, that he would open our ears that we might
hear, and so work in our hearts, that we might believe the truth of God; for so
our Savior bids us, Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock
and it shall be opened unto you; and S. Augustine says, If any man would find
out the truth, agant orando, et quaerendo, et been vivendo ut inveniant, Let
them pray to God, and study hard, and live holily, and God will help them to
understand the truth.

The sixth and last step of this Ladder, that reaches up to the Kingdom of
Heaven, is by doing the will of God, and leading our lives according to Gods
Laws; for so the Apostle tells us, Romans 2.13.
Not the hearers of the Law, but the doers of the Law shall be justified: And
Christ says, Not every one that says, Lord, Matthew. 7.21.
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father which is in heaven: So that to hear Sermons, to understand Gods Word,
and to pray to God, is all in vain, unless we do study and strive withal to do
our best endeavors to live according to Gods will: And therefore.

2. Our Savior, desirous to show unto us the readiest way to come to this
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 6.33.
says, Seek ye the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, that is, the
righteousness which is acceptable in his sight; and that is, as St. Paul says,
To follow peace with all men, Heb. 12.14.
and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: And you must observe,
that righteousness here is to be referred to God, and not to the Kingdom;
because, as Cajetan well observes, (...) is of the feminine Gender, and (...)
of the masculine; Cajetan. in loc.
and therefore must be referred ad (...), unto God, and not (...), the Kingdom
of God.

The which thing, together with infinite such other doubtful and obscure places
of Scripture, does sufficiently show unto you, that ignorant, unlearned men,
that have neither Arts nor Language, neither Greek nor Latin, but do run to
teach others before they have learnt any things themselves, like those in the
Canticles, who watched over others, but kept not their own flock, are but blind
Guides of the people, fitter to lead them into the ditch, then to resolve them
of any doubt, or to convince any learned Heretic.

The righteousness of God taken four ways.
And further you must observe, that although the righteousness of God is
specially taken four ways in Scripture, and signifies,

1. That distributive righteousness, which is called (...), jus Dei, whereby he
punishes the wicked, and delivers the innocent, and whereof the Prophet
says, Psalm. 9.4. Psalm. 119.137
Thou art set in the throne that judge right: And again, Thou art just, O
Lord, and righteous is thy judgment.

2. That uprightness which is in God, and is opposed to The Lord is righteous,
and loves righteousness; his face beholds the thing that is right.

3. The truth of God, as where himself says, I the that is, nothing but the
truth. Esaias 45.19.


4. The mercy of God in Christ, and through Christ, toward Psalm. 31.1.
Deliver me in thy righteousness: And again, Psalm. 71.1.
Judge me according to thy righteousness; that is, according to thy mercy and
goodness showed to us in Christ Jesus, who is, as the Prophet says, Jer. 23.6.
Jehova justitiae nostra, the Lord our righteousness; and so the righteousness
of God to us; because, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.21.
He was made sin for us; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,
that is, that we might be freely justified before God, through faith in his
righteousness.

Yet by the righteousness of God here in this place, we are to understand it,
says St. Chrysostom, in none of the foresaid significations, but for, Quid
odit, et quid amat, What God loves as just and righteous, and what he hates
as wicked and unrighteous; that so we might do what he loves, and shun what he
hates: because, as Aretius says, Aret. in loc.
there is a righteousness besides our justifying righteousness, that is plainly
necessary for the obtaining of the Kingdom of God; for though, as our Divines
say, Fides sola justificat, Faith only justifies us, and we are freely
justified by our faith in Christ, that lays hold on his righteousness, which
is imputed unto us: yet, Fides justificans nunquam est sola, aut solitaria, The
justifying faith is never alone, separated from the works of that
righteousness, which is the inseparable adjunct and concomitant of the
justifying faith.

And therefore if you desire to be Citizens of Heaven, and Inheritors of the
Kingdom of God, you must be just and righteous men; and your righteousness must
not be like the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, in ostentation, to
deceive the world, but in deed and verity, in the sight of God; for so Christ
tells you plainly, Except your righteousness, that is, not only the
righteousness of Christ, which is yours by imputation, and which all men know
does by many thousand degrees exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees; but except your own inherent righteousness, which is wrought in you
by the Spirit of Christ, exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
you shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of God. James 3.18.


And truly, the want of this righteousness and just dealing among men, is the
cause of all mischief, and of all the greatest miseries of this world, and of
eternal damnation in the world to come; and the performance of this
righteousness would make all men happy; both in this life, and in the life to
come: For,

What is the cause of all mischief.
1. What brings Wars, the greatest of all the Plagues that are here on earth,
but unrighteous dealing? For righteousness and peace have kissed each other;
says the Prophet; and thou, says St. Augustine, do love and desire peace,
which is the Crown of all worldly happiness, (though now the crown is fallen
from our head, woe unto us that we have sinned) Sed justitiam non amabis, Lam.
5.16.
but thou will not follow after righteousness; therefore peace shall be far
from thee, because there is no peace to the wicked, Esaias 48.22.
says my God; no peace to them that shed innocent blood, no peace for
unrighteous dealing, to them that take away a man's right, and hold it still
perforce.

But their unrighteousness will destroy them, as indeed injustice and
unrighteous dealing will undo any people, when a Kingdom shall be translated
from Nation to Nation, because of unrighteousness; and when the same shall be,
as it was said of Carthage, fuller of sins then of men; as we see the Monarchy
of the Assyrians was translated to the Medes and Persians; and the most famous
Republic of the Romans spoiled, when, forgetting their pristine equity and
just dealing, whereby they became so great, they began to be unjust; and, as
the Poet says, -- Mensuraque juris
Vis erat --
And they measured the Law and equity by their strength, and he had the best
right, that was most powerful: as the wicked proclaim it in the Book of Wisdom,
Let our strength be the Law of justice; which has been the ruin and
subversion of many a Nation.

And so it will be with us of this Nation, if we cast away all Justice, and
hold the truth in unrighteousness; because God is no respecter of persons, and
we have no reason to think that he will deal any otherwise with us, then he
has done with his own chosen people the Jews, or with any other unrighteous
Generation.

And as unrighteousness is the mother of wars, and the bringer of destruction
to Nations and Kingdoms, so it is the nurse that breeds strife, and
increases contentions and Suits of Law among neighbors, and so becomes the
greatest enemy to brotherly love, which is the greatest virtue, and the
chiefest grace of all Christianity, 1 Cor. 13. ult.
as Saint Paul shows.

And as unjust dealing thus pulls down upon us all the plagues of Heaven, so
you may see, Therefore let men take heed of maintaining wrongs and oppressions.
in the fifth Chapter of the Book of Wisdom, and in Saint Paul, and many other
places of the holy Scripture, how it excludes all unrighteous men out of
Heaven. But

2. On the other side, if you look upon righteousness and just dealing, Plato.
The praise of just dealing.
(...): says the divine Plato; All men cry out with one mouth, How beautiful a
thing is temperance and righteousness: Cicero calls this righteousness the
Lady and Mistress of all virtues: Pindarus says, That (...) (...), a golden
eye and a golden countenance are always to be seen in the face of Justice: And
Theoguis says, (...)
(...). Even as the Latin Poet says, Justitia in sese virtutes continet omnes:
Justice is that virtue which comprehends all virtues in it self: For he that is
a just man wrongeth no man: And Solomon says, Prove. 16.12.
The Kings throne is established by righteousness: And again he says, Prove. 14
34.
That Righteousness exalts a Nation; so that both King and Kingdom shall
prosper through righteousness: And he says further, That although evil
pursues sinners, yet to the righteous good shall be repaid; Prove. 13.21.
And when the house of the wicked shall be overthrown, Prove. 14.11. Chap. 3.33.
the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish; because God blesses the
habitation of the just.

And therefore the very Heathens erected a Temple unto Justice, and ascribed
divine worship unto Astraea, which they termed the Goddess of Justice, How just
and righteous the Heathens were, to the shame of our Fanatic and Cromwellian
Christians in Ireland.
and many of them were very just, and most singular observers of justice; for
Homer says, That Sarpedon preserved the Kingdom of Licia, (...), through
justice and fortitude: And Herodian says of Pertinax, That he was both loved
and feared of the Barbarians, as well for the remembrance of his virtues in
former battles, as also, (...), because wittingly or willingly he never did
wrong or injustice to any man: Plutarch ascribes the like virtues to Lucullus:
Cicero to Pompey: Ovid to Erictthaeus: Virgil to Aeneas: Suetonius to Octavius
Augustus his Father; and many others of the Heathens are recorded to have been,
like Aristides, exceeding just. And

I would to God all those that say they are Christians, were as just a^ these
Heathens were, or as righteous as the Scribes and Pharisees; for they were so
strict in their lives, especially in show, and made so great account of
justice, that they would tithe Mynt and Rue, and the rest of the very smallest
things: and therefore S. Paul says that they were the strictest Sect of all
the Jewish Religion: and yet our Savior says, Except your righteousness does
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. So you see, the way that leads you to the Kingdom of
God, is to be just and righteous, and so honest men, without which it is in
vain to pray to God, it is in vain to believe in Christ, and in vain to rely on
him: because, as the Prophet David says, you must offer to God the sacrifice
of Righteousness, Psalm. 4.5.
and then you may trust in the Lord.

But wherein does the sacrifice of Righteousness consist, Q.
or how shall we become just or righteous men, Rsep.
and so acceptable in the sight of God?

I answer, that to be just and righteous, and to offer the sacrifice of
righteousness is, reddere unicunque quod suum est, That is, to render 1. To
God, 2. To our King, 3. To our Neighbors, 4. To our selves,
what belongs to each of these; 1 Branch of Righteousness.
and these are like the four Rivers of Paradise watering the whole Garden of
God, that being well observed, will make it a Paradise indeed.

1. What belongs to God? Our Fanatique Enthusiasts and Sectaries, think that,
as God is a Spirit, so he requires no more but to be served in Spirit and
truth; for as the Prophet says If he be hungry, he will not tell thee, because
all the Beasts of the Forest are his, and so are the cattle upon a thousand
hills; And therefore the Lord says, my Son give me thy heart, and so worship
me, with Faith, Hope, Love, and the like spiritual affections, which are most
correspondent to me, that am a Spirit.

That God will be worshipped with all that we have.
But you must know that they are very much deceived: for as God has made both
Body and Soul, and has given us all that we have, Houses, Lands, Riches, and
whatsoever else we do possess, so he will be served and worshipped by all that
we have, with our Hearts to love him, with our Tongues to praise him, with our
Eyes lifted up to behold his wonders, with our Knees bowed down to submit unto
him, with our Hands to do the work that he requires, and with our Wealth and
Riches to honor him, as the Wise man commands, Honor God with thy riches.

And so our Savior, when he bids us to render unto Caesar what was Caesar's,
and to God what is Gods, means it of our Wealth and Riches, that we ought to
render unto God, and not of these internal services and spiritual worship that
we do likewise owe to God; for here the question was of the Tribute and Money
that the Jews were to pay to Caesar, and therefore the true sense of our
Saviors answer was secundum materiam subjectam, according to their question;
give that part of your Wealth and Riches to Caesar, which belongs to Caesar and
that part of it to God, which is due to God, that Caesar himself may not have
that, which belongs to God.

Q
But then you will demand, what is that part and portion which belongs to God,
out of that All which God gives unto us. Resp.


Levit. 27.30.
I answer that they are first the Tithes, which God requires to be paid unto
him; and secondly the Donations, which his people do freely offer unto him, and
God does most graciously accept them, which is an unspeakable favor that the
great God, and creator of all things, the giver of all things, that owns all
things, and wants nothing, should so graciously accept the small gifts of us
his poor creatures, far beyond the Clemency of Xerxes, that did so courteously
accept a little cold water that was presented unto him by a poor subject, that
had nothing else to offer him.

But when any Lands, Houses, or Moneys, or any other part of our Goods is
offered unto God, let us not be so unjust as to rob God thereof: for you may
see, what the Prophet says, will a man rob his God, yet you have robbed me,
Mal. 3.8.
in Tithes and Offerings; that is, in converting the Tithes to your own uses,
which I commanded to be paid to uphold my services; and taking those Lands and
Houses into your own possessions, which most pious men had offe^ed to maintain
my Religion.

Or if we do this (as I see it commonly don in Ireland and in too many places
in England) then let us take heed lest that, quorum flagitium imitamur, eorum
exitum inveniamus, we find not the like success as they found that had don this
before us: And what is that? I will show you some examples of good note.

And I will not insist upon the punishment inflicted upon Achan, Gehezi,
Shisake King of Egypt, Johas King of Israel, Sennacherib King of Assyria, and
Belshazzar King of Babylon, and others, for their Sacriledg, and Injustice
against God; because you may read the same at your leisure in the holy
Scripture.

But I shall desire you to remember, what Seneca, Sen. de Benefic. l. 5. c. 12.
a man that knew not Christ, says Sacrilegi dant poenas, quamvis nemo usque ad
Deos manus porrigat, the robbers of God's right shall never escape unpunished,
though no man cry to God against them: as it appears, not only by what
Justine writes, l. 4. of Philomenes, and what Lactantius says of Fulvius for
robbing the Temple of Juno Lacinia, but especially by what Aul. Gellius
writes, how that after Quintus Caepio robbed the houses of God in the City of
Tolouse, as many as touched any part of that spoil, misero cruciabilique exitu
periit. And we need look no further, then what succeeded the spoil that King
Henry the Eighth made of the goods of the Church; for though he had more Wives
then many others of our Kings, yet his Issue reached not to the second
Generation; and though he gave those spoils to his Nobility, yet it is well
observed by Sir Henry Spelman and others, that in a short time most of their
Posterity came welneer to beggerie.

But I will conclude this Point with the words of Charles the Great, The most
excellent Speech of Charles the Grear.
that was as great a Soldier as any of you, and as good as great: Novimus
multa regna, and reges eorum, propterea cecidisse, quia Ecclesias spoliaverunt
resque earum militibus dederunt; quapropter nec fortes in bello, nec in fide
stabiles fuerunt, nec victores extiterunt, sed multi vulnerati, and plures
interfecti terga dederunt, regnaque, and ^egiones, and quod pejus est, regna
Coelorum perdiderunt, atque propriis haereditatibus caruerunt, and hactenus
carent; And I will add the Charge, that the wise and strenuous Earl of
Strafford gave to his Son, William Wentworth, when he was dying, which is, that
As he would answer it to him in heaven, he should never meddle with any of the
Patrimony of the Church, for it will be the canker that will eat up the rest of
his estate, and therefore charge him again, as he will answer him in heaven,
never to meddle with it.

And the reason of all this is, that Religion is the very ground of all our
happiness, and the chiefest of all our comfort; and the tithes and donations of
Religious men are the main outward props of our Religion; and if with Sampson
you take away the pillars, you overthrow the house: so take away the means that
maintains Religion, and your Religion, like a tottering wall, will soon fall unto
the ground, and then you have dissolved all the ties and associations betwixt
God and man, and left us all as aliens and enemies unto God; and therefore,
when other mischiefs have their limits, and so hurt but one or other, and there
is an end; yet this robbing of God of his right, turbabit foedera mundi, will
set the world beside its hinges, and sweep away all our happiness.

And, I hope, this which I have here spoken, will deterr all from Sacrilege,
and teach them to be just and righteous, to render unto God what is Gods.

The second branch of our righteousness.
2. The next branch of our justice and righteousness is to render unto Caesar
what is Caesar's. And what does belong to Caesar, that we ought to render unto
him?

I find six special things due unto him, answerable to the six special ensigns
and emblems of Royal Majesty. For, 1. The Sword axacteth Fear. 2. The Crown
imports Honor. 3. The Scepter requires Obedience. 4. His Person meriteth
Defense. 5. His Charge calls for our Prayers. 6. The Throne deserves
Tribute, without which, his Royalty can never be maintained.


And yet we mutter, and murmur, and are more averse to render this duty unto
our king then any of all the rest; for here you see, when the Jews came to
Christ, they question not any other duties, but they demand of him, Is it
lawful to pay tribute unto Caesar? and they were often ready to rebel, rather
then to part with their money: and what do Rebels do, but as our late Rebels
have done, to undo themselves and their posterity, and bring many miseries upon
many others: for, Qui non vult duci, debet trahi; he that will not be obedient
to the Government, must be forced with punishment.

But they might have considered, as eloquent Osorius says, Osor. de rebut
Eman. l. 12. p. 386.
that Rex infinita negotia sustinet, aequabile jus omnibus administrat. The
King undergoes, infinite affairs, he administreth equal right to all his
people, he keeps away all dangers from the Commonwealth; he rewards the
faithful, and restrains the froward, and he preserves his Kingdom, both
from foraign foes, and intestine frauds, and an hundred things else, which
private men cannot conceive. And these things cannot be done, without great
means, and much money; and therefore Deioces, when he was elected King of the
Medes, Herodotus l. 1.
caused them to build him a most stately Palace, and the famous City of
Ecbatana, and to give him a goodly band of men for the safeguard of his person,
and to provide all other things fitting for the Majesty of a King, and so all
the other kings of the Gentiles did the like.

And Solomon also, and all the rest of the kings of Israel required no small
aid and tribute from their Subjects; for though Tertullian out of Deuteronomy. 23.17.
reads it, Deuteronomy. 23.17.
There shall not be, (...), a payer of tribute of the Sons of Israel; yet
Pamelius well observes it, that these words are not in the original, but are
taken out of the Septuagint, which also says not, Of the Sons, but (...), of
the daughters of Israel, that is, ex impudicitia and lupanaribus, for their
dishonesty, as it is said in the next Verse; that the hire of a Whore, and the
price of a Dog, are an abomination to the Lord; and so S. Augustine uses the
word (...), for those unchaste sacrifices, wherewith such women did oblige
themselves; and so does Theodoret likewise.

But that the Jews paid tribute, it is manifest out of 1 Samuel 17.24. 2 Samuel
17.24.
where this reward is promised to him that killed Goliath, that his fathers
house should be absque tributo, free from all tribute; and, to make it yet more
plain, it is said that Solomon appointed Jeroboam super tributa universae domus
Josephi, 2 Reg. 2.28.
says the Vulg. Lat. that is, of the Tribe of Ephraim and Manasses, as our
Translation reads it.

Yea, though the Jews were the people of God; and thought themselves free, and
no ways obliged to be taxed by foraign Princes; yet after Pompey took their
City, they paid tribute to the Romans, Luc. 15. c. 18.
says Josephus; and our Savior bids them, to render unto Caesar the tribute
that was due to Caesar, saying, (...) where he uses the same word that S. Paul
uses, when he bids us to pay our debts, and to owe nothing to any man,
saying, (...), Romans 13.
Pay to every man that which you owe.

And rather then himself would omit this duty, though he never wrought any
other miracle about money; yet herein, when he had never a penny, he would
create money in the mouth of a Fish, as both S. Hierom and the Interlin. gloss
do think, to pay for himself and his Apostle.

And therefore seeing the Kings occasions are so great, and the Subsidies,
Imposts, Customs, Aids, and Excises, and the like Taxes are so due unto them
by the Laws of God and man, they can be neither just nor honest men, nor be in
the way to the kingdom of God, that deny or defraud the king of these duties.

What shall we say then of those men, that will rather wink at malefactors and
transgressors of the Laws, then justly bring their Fines into the King's
Exchequer? I will say nothing at this time, but that I cannot conceive how they
are either just or righteous men herein, or in the way to the kingdom of God:
^or whosoever does any ways defraud the King of any right that is any ways due
unto him, is in the next degree to him that commits sacrilege, and robs
God himself: and I believe, that, if it were not for the tricks and quirks of
some men to quit the offenders, there would be more moneys brought unto the
King, and fewer faults committed in the Commonwealth.

3. The next branch of Justice, The third branch of righteousness.
is to deal honestly with all our neighbors, to deceive no man, to oppress no
man, to wrong no man: And as our Savior says, all things, whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the
Prophets; this is all that the Law requires, Math. 7.12.
this is all that the Prophets harped upon, and this is all that we need most
especially to insist upon, to persuade men to deal justly and honestly one with
another: and where men will not do so, to have justice and judgment done unto
them, which is the only way to continue peace amongst us, and to bring a
blessing upon the whole kingdom: they will bring a plague upon it.

And because, as I conceive, there was never more need of Justice to be
executed then now, when of late we were all involved in such confusion, that as
yet could not be reduced to any just and perfect position, I must humbly crave
your patience to stay a while upon this point.

And whereas there are four sorts of men concerned to have justice done unto
them: 1. The Churchmen. 2. The Adventurers. 3. The Soldiers. 4. The Innocent
Irish Papists.


1. I have often showed, how ominous it is, to weaken the hands of the Clergy,
by keeping away their means to disinable them to do the service of God.

2. For Adventurers, that bestowed their moneys to suppress the Rebels, and
reduce them to their due obedience to his Majesty.

3. For the Soldiers that fought for the same ends, they ought justly to be
rewarded, according to their merit: but for those that for covetousness, And of
such, I am sure there are too many.
to get the Lands either of the Church or of the Irish, they cared not how, nor
how much, nor from whom they got it; I wish that their judgment may be
according to their desert, and the merit of their desire.

4. For the innocent, either Irish Papists, or ejected Protestants, I fear it
may be with many of them, as it was with the Gibilines, who being at variance
with the Guelphs in the City of Papia, promised to Facinus Caius, all the
houses and goods of the Guelphes, if he assisted them to get the Victory; which
he did; and after he had subdued the Guelphs, he seized upon the goods both of
the Guel hs and Gibilines: and when the Gibilines complained, that he brake his
covenant, in taking their houses, and pillaging their goods that were
Gibilines, the said Caius answered, It was true indeed, that they were
Gibilines, but their goods were the goods of Guelphes, and so belonged unto
them, and so to him: So, perhaps, the covetous Adventurers, and the greedy
Soldiers, may say of them, as they do of us of the Church, that they are
innocent, and we faithful to our king; but ours, and their lands and fair
houses, are the lands of Rebels; and therefore, as they do hold ours from us,
so they will keep theirs from them.

But this is no justice, nor to do as you would be done unto; for, as Abraham
said to God, Will thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? Genesis 18.23.
And as Abimelech said, Lord, will thou stay a righteous nation? So I say, God
forbid that any innocent man, be he of what Religion he will, should lose
either house or lands.

But you will say, The Irish Papists are not so innocent; for though their
hands did act nothing, for fear they could not prevail; yet it may be their
hearts did earnestly wish, that all the Protestants should be rooted out, and
perhaps their Fathers or Grandfathers were as deep in rebellion as any other;
and therefore they may be as justly deprived of their estates, as they would
have deprived us.

I confess that, as when Croesus sent to the Oracle, to expostulate, why he
should be so hardly dealt withal, that was so bountiful unto the Gods, and so
faithful a server of them? The Oracle answered, That for his bounty the Gods
preserved his life, but his Kingdom was translated, and his other affliction
happened for the iniquity of Gyges, that was the death of Candaules: So God may
justly punish the present Innocents, for the precedent faults of their
forefathers; as he did cut off ten Tribes from Rehoboam for the sins of
Solomon; and he that knows our hearts may justly whip us for our evil thoughts.

But we are not to judge of any man for his thoughts, nor to punish him for his
wishes, until they do break forth either into words or acts; because the other
must be left alone for God.

And therefore, seeing that he which condemns the Innocent, is as abominable
to God, as he that absolveth the wicked, that justice should be observed, that
no innocent man should suffer; yet I would not have those deemed Innocents,
that are more then apparently known to be very nocent.

There is another degree of justice, which should be performed to the oppressed
Protestants, that have been ejected out of their estates, and to our poor
neighbors, that are ready to starve in the streets: For, as Saint Ambrose
says, Esurientium paenis est quem tu detines, nudorum indumentum quod tu
recludis, and miserorum pecunia quam tu in arca abscondis. And therefore,
though we term it alms, yet it is justice in us to do it, and they that are
able are unjust if they do it not.

4. The last branch of justice concerns our selves: The fourth branch of our
righteousness.
for a man may be unjust to himself, as all covetous men, and the prodigal
persons are, when as the one has the blessings of God, and has not the heart
to use them, and the other does abuse them, to the shame and destruction of
himself, profusely wasting them in feasting and drinking, or, as some do, in
beautifying their Tiaras, and some others in sweeping the streets with Si ks
and Velvets, which are vanities, that I know not how they shall answer, when
they come to appear before Almighty God; and yet we that are the Preachers
shall be but laughed at, for reproving of these vanities, and telling them how
it is far from that justice which we should render unto our selves, besides the
abuse that they offer to Gods creatures.

And thus I have showed you what is just and righteous, and directed you the
right way to the Kingdom of God. God give us grace to walk therein.

But you will demand, Where is justice without partiality now to be found,
among Neighbors, or in the Courts of Justice, or in the Parliament House? I
cannot, and I dare not say, you shall not find justice therein; yet this I dare
say, I have seen faction and friends, contrary to justice, to have carried
things in all these places; and therefore, seeing that Injustice and Oppression
do make wise men mad, especially if they see the servants of Rebels and
Traitors favored and countenanced, against the most faithful servants of their
King, and the Ambassadors of the living God: And seeing that as Solomon says,
Eccles. 3.16.
I saw the place of judgment, and wickedness was there; and the place of
righteousness, and iniquity was there: My advice to you all is, to follow our
Saviors counsel, If any man will sue thee at the Law, Matthew. 5.40.
and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also: for in so doing, in your
patience you shall possess your souls, and walk in the right way to the Kingdom
of God.

And then secondly, what is here promised shall be undoubtedly performed, All
these things shall be administered unto you, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom be glory, and honor, and thanks, and praise for all his mercies and
favors for ever and ever, Amen.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
JOHN 3.14. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must
the Son of man be lifted up.


THe Holy Apostle Saint Paul, speaking of many things that befell the Jews,
while they wandered in the Wilderness, says, 1 Cor. 10.11.
(...): All these things happened to them in a Figure; Heb. c. 8. c. 9. and c.
10.
and so were Types of things to come, for our ensamples, says our Translation;
and so the Apostle proves at large in his Epistle unto the Hebrews. As,

1 Aaron whose type he was. Exodus 28.
1. Aaron their High Priest was a Type of our High Priest, Jesus Christ, and he
ascending into heaven, left his Apostles, and they, the Bishops, to be his
Substitutes to govern his Church here on earth, in the place of the High
Priest, and the Priests and Levites were Types of our Priests and Deacons; and
his holy garments, and most glorious ornaments, which the Rabb. called Bidge
Zahab, golden vestments: as were the Ephod, the Breast Plate with precious
Stones, the Vrim and Thummim, the robe of the Ephod, set with golden Bells and
Pomgranates; the plate of the Miter, and the embroydered Coat, all so exceeding
glorious, that when Alexander saw the High Priest Simeon the just, thus
attired, coming to meet him, he was ready to adore him, saying, That God had
thus appeared unto him the night before.

And so indeed he was the Type of our true God, Jesus Christ, and his glorious
apparel signified the honor, glory and respect that should be yielded to the
ministry of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.7.
and the servants of Jesus Christ; for so the Apostle reasons, that if the
ministration of death, i. e. of the Law written and engraven in stones, were
thus glorious, and this glory was to be done away; then how shall not the
ministration of the Spiririt, i. e. of the Gospel which is to continue, be much
more glorious?

For as Kings and Princes, and great Lords, if they have no means, nor
servants, to uphold their estate, and to maintain their greatness, with great
power, when there is need, they shall not be respected nor secured against
rebellious spirits; so if the Ministers of Christ be poor, Pauper ubique jacet,
and no great regard will be had of their words; for all the brethren of the
poor do hate him, how much more do his friends go far from him? And though
Solomon tells you, that the poor wise man delivered the City that was besieged
by a great King, Prove. 19.7.
yet he says, no man remembered this poor man, but his wisdom is despised,
Eccles. 9.15, 16.
and his words are not heard.

And therefore it is no wonder, that the poor Vicars preaching, brings such
poor fruits of charity, when the great men of the Country carry all the great
Livings from them; or that poor Bishops can do no great good, when those that
have been great offenders, Been nota.
shall carry away the greatest Lordships from them.

2. As Aaron the High Priest of the Jews, 2 The Tabernacle, what it typifieth,
and what the Temple typified.
was a Type of our High Priest, Jesus Christ; so the Tabernacle that Moses made
in the Wilderness, and the Temple that Solomon built on mount Moriah. (where
Abraham was to sacrifice his Son Isaac, and which was one of the three hills
which were in the same tract of ground, Sion, Moriah, Calvary) were types and
figures of the Christian Churches that should be erected under the Gospel: For,

As in their Temple, there were three things considerable: First, the Sanctum
Sanctorum: Secondly, the Sanctum; Vide Goodwin.
and thirdly, the Atrium, answerable to our Cathedral Churches, that have 1.
The Quire. 2. The Body of the Church; and 3. The Churchyard: and,

In the Holy of Holies, were the golden censer, and the Ark of the Testament,
wherein were, 1. The pot of Manna. Heb. 9 4.
2. Aarons Rod. And 3. the Table of the Law, signifying, that the Christian
Bishops, that have the charge of the Sanctum Sanctorum, must always preserve
these three things: first, the Manna, to feed the flock of Christ; secondly,
the rod of Discipline to correct them; and thirdly, the Law, to keep them
within the bounds of their obedience.

And there was a covering of the Ark, What the Propiriatory signified.
which was called (...), the Propitiatory, or mercy-seat, because it covered
and hid the Law, that it might not appear before God to plead against, and
accuse sinful man for the transgression of this Law; Romans 3.25.
and this signifies our preaching of Jesus Christ to be (...), our
Propitiatour, as the Apostle calls him; and (...), our Propitiation, as S.
John calls him. 1 John 2.2.


2. In the Sanctuary there were two things: 1. The Incense-Altar. 2 What the
Incense Altar, Shewbread, and Candlestick signified.
2. Table, whereon were
1. The Shewbread. 2. The Candlestick.


And these were Types and Figures that signified the chiefest things in our
Church: as the Incense-Altar betokened the prayers of the people, Psalm. 141.2.
as the Prophet David shows; and whereas this Altar of Incense was to be
sprinkled by the High Priest, with the blood of the Sacrifice, once every year;
it signifies that our prayers, be they never so many, and never so fervent,
Exodus 30.10.
yet if they be not purified and perfected by the blood of Christ, they are
unvaluable before God.

2. The Shewbread, and the Candlestick signified the light that the people
should receive by our explaining of the Word of God, and the feeding of their
souls by the preaching of the Gospel, and blessed Sacrament of the body and
blood of Jesus Christ.

3. The Court of the Temple, was divided by a wall of three cubits high;
Joseph. l. 8. c. 3 John 10.23. Acts 3.11.
that the one part of it might be for the Priests, and the other for the
people. And this Court of the people, was sometimes called the Temple, and
sometimes Solomon's Porch.

So you see the Jews had Jesus Christ and the Gospel of Jesus Christ, but
veiled over; and we have them with open face.
And in this Court was their Corban, or Alms-box, which the Greeks termed (...),
and the Latins from the Greeks Gazophylacium, the treasure, and the alms that
was put into this box, the Hebrews called Tsedaka, which properly signifies
justice; to teach us, that it is justice for us to relieve the Poor, and that
the matter of our alms and relief should be goods justly gotten, and not, as
many do, steal a Goose, and stick a feather, rob many, and relieve a few.

These were the chiefest parts of the Temple, and the chiefest things therein,
and this Temple was thrice built. 1 Reg. 6.37.
1. By Solomon, that finished the same in seven years. 2. By Zorobabel, that
finished it in the ninth year of Darius Hystasp. Joseph. l. 11. c. 4.
and so from the second year of Cyrus that began it, it was forty six years in
building. 3. By Herod, that finished the same in eight years.


Idem l. 15. c. ult. 1 Chronicles. 29. v. 3.
And what provision David left for the erecting of this, you may read.

Besides this Glorious, Great, and Magnificent Temple, What their Synagogues
Typified.
that was answerable to our Cathedral Church, they had many Synagogues, that
were as our petty Parish Churches: for though (...), As (...), Copia lactis.
Goodw. l. 2. c. 2.
from the Verb (...) to gather together does properly signify a Collection of
any things, that may be gathered together; yet commonly, the Synagogues are
taken for the Houses dedicated to the worship of God, wherein it was lawful to
Pray, to Preach, and to Dispute, but not to Sacrifice.

And it is likely they began to build these Synagogues when the Tribes were
settled in the promised Land; When their Synagogues began to be built.
because the Temple, being too far distant from those that dwelt in the remote
parts of the Land, they built to themselves Synagogues to Pray to God in them,
instead of the Temple. For so we read, that Moses of old time had in every City
them that preached him, Act. 15.21.
being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day: and David, in his time,
finds great fault with those wicked and profane wretches, that, like our
late Rebels, Psalm. 74.8.
destroyed and burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land.

And of these Synagogues Sigonius writes, Sigon l. 2. c. 8. de Repub. Heb.

Matthew. 4.23. Act. 9.2. c. 13.5. etc. 13.14.

Maymon. in Tephilla c. 11. Sect. 1.


there were four hundred and eighty in Jerusalem: and in other Cities and
Provinces, there were many other Synagogues, as in Galilee, in Damascus, at
Salamis, at Antiochia: and they held him for a very good man and a lover of
their Nation that built them a Synagogue, where they might pray, and serve God.
And Maymonides says, the tradition was, that wheresoever ten Families of
Israel were, they ought to build them a Synagogue.

And, were the Jews, that were under the Law, and burdened with such infinite
taxes and ceremonies of their Religion, as were more then they were able to
bear; so Zealous, so Religious, and so ready to part with their Wealth, and the
best things they had, to build so sumptuous, and so glorious a Temple, and so
many Synagogues, for the service of God, that were but the Types and Shadows of
our Cathedrals and parish Churches, that are for the Preaching of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ? And shall we that are freed from all the ordinances of their Law,
be so cold and so careless to repair the houses of Jesus Christ, But we may
remember what Hor. says, Delicta majorum immeritus lues, Roman, donec Templa
refeceris, aedesque laben^es deorum and foeda nigro simulacra fumo. l. 3. Od.
6.3. All that happened to the Jews are Types and ensamples for us. 1 Cor. 10.11.
that has don so much for us, as I shall show you by and by? Truly I am sorry
to see it, and I am ashamed to speak it, that such a Cathedral Church as this,
and so many other Churches as I have seen in this Diocese, should be so
Barbarously demolished as they are, and so little regard had of their
repayring. They weep for us, because we weep not for their abuse. But to go on,
and

3. As the High Priest of the Jews was the Type of Jesus Christ, and their
Temple was the Type and Shadow of our Cathedral Churches; so all that they did
and all that happened unto them, were Types and Ensamples for us that are now
under the Gospel; and, as the Apostle says, they are all written for our
admonition; And so our Savior here tells Nichodemus that, As Moses lifted up
the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up;
wherein you may observe these two things. 1. The Type which is expressed in the
History. 2. The thing Typified, which is the Mystery signified by the
History. For, (...). And,


1. For the History you may read it in Numb. 21. v. 4. to the tenth verse; and
which you must well observe, before you can understand the Mystery. And
therein you may observe these four parts. V. 5.
1. The Sin committed by the Israelites, v. 5. V. 6.
2. Their Punishment, inflicted upon them for their sin. 3. Their Repentance and
confession of their sins, v. 7. V. 7.
4. The Remedy that preserved them, v. 8. and 9.


V. 8.9. 4. Parts of the History. 1 Their sin four fold.
1. Their sin seems to be morbus complicatus, a twisted and decompound
wickedness, consisting of these four special branches, that do most commonly
walk together. 1. Ingratitude, 2. Inconstancy, 3. Impatience, 4. Injustice,
For,

1. 1. Ingratitude.
They had received from the hands of God the greatest blessings that ever
Nation received; from a handful of hunger-starved people, no more then
threescore and fifteen souls, to be multiplied and increased, Acts 7.14. Exodus
12.37.
within the space of two hundred and fifty years, to the number of about six
hundred thousand men, besides women and children.

And then, being cruelly oppressed and tyrannized over, by Pharaoh King of Egypt,
to be so wonderfully and miraculously delivered out of his hands, so fully and
opulently, with silver, and gold, and Jewels, and abundance of all manner of
wealth; and for God himself to guide them, and to feed them with the bread of
Heaven, and the food of Angels: What a monstrous ingratitude was it, for such a
people to murmur against God, and to complain against Moses, as if God had
purposely brought them, and Moses maliciously drawn them, out of Egypt, to be
destroyed in the Wilderness of Arabia petrosa, the most uncomfortable place of
all the earth? And is this the thanks that they render unto God for the wonders
that he wrought for them in Egypt, and the fearful things that he did by the
Red Sea? where they exceedingly rejoiced for their deliverance, and sang that
excellent Song of thankfulness unto God, saying, That he had triumphed
gloriously, and thrown the horse and his rider into the Sea: Exodus 15.1.
But

2. They had now changed their thoughts; 2. Their inconstancy.
and their levity and inconstancy is showed unto the world, and so they
continued always a fickle and giddy headed people, never constant in any thing
but in inconstancy; for though Moses brought them out of bondage, and eased
their shoulders from their burdens, and their hands from making the pots; yet
when he had been but forty days absent from them, they will needs make golden
Calves, and cry out, These be thy gods, O Israel, that brought thee out of the
land of Egypt: And though King David subdued all their enemies, the
Philistines, 1 Chronicles. 18.
and the Moabites, and Hadarezer King of Zobah, and the Syrians, and the
Edomites, and the Ammonites, and had given them rest on every side: and Solomon
his Son had brought them peace all his days, 2 Chronicles. 1.15
and made silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, and built them
such a glorious Temple, for the service of their God, as had not the like in
all the world; yet when his son Rehoboam did but a little discontent them, they
presently cry out, 2 Chronicles. 10.16.
What portion have we in David? And w have no inheritance in the son of Jesse:
And so, though Jesus Christ healed their sick, raised their dead, cast out
their devils, and by their own confession did all things well; and therefore,
as it were to day, spread their garments under his feet, and cried, Hosanna;
yet, as it were to morrow, they had no other note then, Crucify him, crucify
him.

And such was the inconstancy of this people, that though at first they
joyfully received, admired and loved the celestial Manna, yet now they say in
plain terms, Our souls loatheth this light bread. Numb. 21.6.


3. Their impatiencie.
3. Though the Heathen man, Menander, could say, (...), It is the part of a wise
man, to bear all calamities and misfortunes patiently; because, as Horatius
says, Levius fit patientia, Quicquid corrigere est nefas: When as another
says, Dat spatium quo se crimine purget homo: Patience yields a man a time and
space to purge himself from that sin, which has brought his calamities upon
him: Yet this people, for this their travel, which they thought too tedious,
betwixt Egypt and Canaan, grew weary of it, and fell into such impatiency, that
they could not contain themselves, but they must secretly murmur, and then
publicly with open mouths complain against God himself, and against his
Servant Moses, as if they had dealt too cruelly, and too maliciously with them.
But

4. Their Injustice. Amos 3.2.
4. How unjustly they do this, it is apparent to all the world; for God
professes, You only have I chosen, that is, for his own inheritance and his
own people, of all the nations of the earth: And Moses continually ventured his
life, spent himself wholly to do them good, to provide them food, to procure
them flesh, Numb. 11.12.
to draw water for them out of the Rock, and to carry them in his bosom, as a
nursing father bears his sucking child; yet so palpable was their injustice,
thus falsely to accuse both God and man.

And this was the sin of Israel, The sin of England just like the sin of the
Israelites.
and this was the sin of England, in a far greater measure and a much higher
strain then they did. For,

When God, much more merciful to us then he was to them, had more abundantly
showed his wonders and his favors to us, then he did to any other Nation under
Heaven, as in our deliverance by Jesus Christ from sin and Satan, whereof their
deliverance from Egypt and Pharaoh was but the shadow, and sending to us such
pious Princes, so stout a Protestant as Queen Elizabeth, so wise, so learned,
and so peaceable a King as King James, and so mild a man, so religious, and
every way so excellent, and surmounting all other men in all piety and
goodness, as King Charles the first, to bring us out of the Egyptian darkness
of errors and superstition, and to preserve the pure light of the Gospel
amongst us, which no Nation under Heaven had the like: yet we did not only
murmur and complain against God, and against his Anointed; but we raged and
railed, we rebelled and murdered the best of Kings, and our own most gracious
Governor, that like an Angel Pelican, gave his own blood to give life unto
his children; so fa^ did we exceed these sinful Jews in all wickedness. But,

2. Having seen their sin, 2. Their punishment.
what follows but their punishment, which is always at hand, even at the
heels of sin; for God having heard their murmuring, the Lord sent fiery
Serpents among the people, and they bit the people, Numb. 21.5.
so that many of them died; where you may observe, how just and how
proportionable their punishment is unto their sin: for as the people, like unto
Serpents, spitted out their poison against God, and his Servants; so God sent
these fiery Serpents to disgorge their venom against this people.

And you may observe further, that if God did thus severely punish the
murmuring and the words of this people, for the Text says no more, But that
they were discouraged because (...) the way, and therefore spoke against God
and against Moses, saying, Wherefore have you brought us out of Egypt to die in
the wilderness, where there is no bread, neither is there any water? Which a
man might think was but very reasonable, for men over-wearied with long travel,
and most tedious journeys, and destitute of their necessary food, to demand
such a question, without any great offense; yet you see how highly God is
displeased with them, and how severely he does punish them for their murmuring,
and the demanding of this question of him, that was their Governor.

And if murmuring against Moses be thus punished, what punishment deserves the
murdering of our King.
And if this, I say, that seems to be so light an offense, be so severely
punished, with no less then death, what punishment, think you, do they deserve,
that not only speak words, even bitter words, and demand questions beyond
loyalty, and without reason, without honesty; but also rebel, take arms, and
fight, and most barbarously murder their own lawful, just, and most excellent
Prince?

Shall this people be thus punished for words, and shall these men escape for
their horrible deeds? or shall we pardon them, whom God says, He will not
pardon? For when King Manasseh shed the innocent blood but of his Subjects, the
Lord says (which I do not remember be says of any other sin in any place)
that He would not pardon it. 2 Reg. 2^.4.


Truly, if we do suffer these that rebelled against their King, and murdered
the Lords Anointed, to live and to flourish, as men guiltless of all fault, and
not do our best to bring them legally to their just deserved punishment, then
certainly we are as culpable, as, if we shed innocent blood; for he that
justifies the wicked, or pardons a Rebel and a Murderer, Prove. 17.15.
and he that condemns the just, or kills an innocent man, even they both
are equally abomination to the Lord, because the Lord professes, that He will
not justify the wicked, Exodus 23.7. Genesis 9.5, 6.
or spare him that sheds innocent blood.

And therefore, of all other men, I do profess, that I cannot endure that any
one, that has born Arms to fight against his King, should be rewarded with
any part or parcel of the Revenues of the Church of Christ, and the inheritance
of God, for their great wickedness against God; and if they must needs be
rewarded for any good service that they have done since, let them be rewarded
otherwise; and as the Jews would not put the price of blood into their
Treasury, so let not the Treasury of Gods Church be given for the reward of any
man that had his hand in shedding blood. So I have done with the punishment of
this people, but not with the fruits of their punishment: For,

3. Their punishment puts them in mind of their sins, 3. Their Repentance and
confession.
and brings them to repentance for their sins, and to say unto Moses, We have
sinned, because we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee. And so the
Brethren of Joseph, when they were afflicted, said one to another, We are
verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul,
Genesis 42.21.
when he besought us and we would not hear, therefore is this distress come
upon us.

And this is the reason, why God does punish us, The reason why God punishes
his children.
not because he delights in the afflictions of his Creatures, but that his
punishments might bring us to repentance, Quia plagae dant animum; and, as
Saint Gregory says, Oculos quos culpa claudit, paena aperit, The eyes which
sin has shut, stripes will open, as here it has opened the eyes of these
murmurers.

And I would they would do so to the Rebels, and the Murderers of our King: But
Saint Augustine has observed, that the more you stir filthy puddles, the more
they will stink; so the more God punishes the wicked, the more they will
blaspheme God, and, like unto Pharaoh and Saul, grow worse and worse: And
therefore the Prophet Jeremy complains, Thou have stricken them but they have
not grieved, Jer. 5.11
thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction: And God
himself demands, Esaias 1.5.
Why should you be stricken any more, seeing my correction does not amend you,
but that you revolt more and more? So the Rebels and the Murderer^ of our King
were so far from repentance, that they proceeded to rob God himself, to throw
down his Churches, and to commit most horrible Sacrilege.

But, as the same Father, Saint Augustine says, If you stir a precious
ointment, the more you stir it, the more fragrantly it smells; so the more
God afflicts his children, the more humble, and the more penitent they will
be, and they willl say with David, Psalm. 119.
Psalm 119. It is good for me that I have been in trouble, that I may learn thy
statutes; and it is good indeed for them to be punished for their sins, because
their punishment works repentance, and their repentance gains pardon and
mercy at the hands of God: for so,

4. The great mercy of God to the penitent.
4. When God heard the peoples confession, and saw their repentance, the Lord
said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery Serpent, and set it on a pole for a sign,
that as many as are bitten and stung, may look on it and live; so Moses made a
Serpent of Brass, and set it upon a pole, and as many as looked up to the same
recovered, but they that refused to look up to it, died; where

1. You may observe, how merciful the Lord is to the penitent sinner, and how
ready he is to provide a salve for the sorrowful soul; for, though he that
hides his sins shall not prosper, yet he that confesses and forsakes the
same, shall find mercy; as here this people finds the same, by looking up
unto the brazen Serpent; but

2. You must understand, that, as the Wise man truly says, He that turned
toward it, Sap. 16.7.
was not healed by the thing he saw, but by thee, O God, that art the Savior
of all; for the Brass had not the virtue or power actually to cure, and to
convey health to the stinged people; but it was the ordinance of God obeyed and
believed, that restored them to their health; and so it is in many other
things. As,

Numb. 5.27, 28.
1. The cursed water drunk by the suspected wife, shall cause the thigh of the
guilty woman to rot, and her belly to swell; and should free the guiltless
woman, and cause her to bear children: the which power, to distinguish the
chaste wife from the unchaste, could not be in the Water, but in the Ordinance
of God, that appointed the water, so used, as it is there expressed, to produce
those effects.

2. The Water in Baptism, and the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, have not of themselves the power to wash us from our sins, and to feed
our souls to eternal life, they are but poor things, and feeble means, too weak
to convey Christ and all his graces unto us; but it is the Ordinance of Christ
that appointed them for this end, and has promised, that how weak soever they
seem to be, yet, if we believe his words, and prepare our selves to receive
them, as we ought to do, we shall find them to be sufficient instruments to
convey Christ and all his benefits unto us; even as here, the looking on a
Serpent of brass was sufficient to preserve this people from the poison of the
fiery Serpents, only because God had appointed it, and promised it should be
so.

And therefore, we must not prize things by the outward show, as Naaman did the
waters of Jordan, but we ought to consider the will and commandment of God,
that appointed and decreed such and such things to be done, and has promised
that we shall receive such and such graces by them; as the poor blind man to
receive his sight by washing his eyes in the pool of Siloah, John 9.7.
and we to receive the body and blood of Christ under the consecrated Elements
of bread and wine.

And so much for the (...), Sicut, the lifting up of the Serpent in the
Wilderness.

Now follows the (...), Sic, the lifting up of the Son of man, which was
typified and figured by the lifting up of that Serpent. For,

2. It is apparent, that when God, 2 The mystery which was the lifting up, or
crucifying, of Jesus Christ.
which could by a thousand other means have cured this Serpent-bitten people,
commanded the same to be done by having a brazen Serpent upon a pole to be
looked on, had a singular consideration of some deep mystery that should be
understood, and was shadowed out hereby: and now our Savior takes away the
veil, The resemblances betwixt the making of this Serpent, and the manhood of
Christ.
and explaineth the same to Nicodemus, and shows unto him, that this Serpent,
whose erection he, being a great Doctor of the Law, could not be ignorant of,
was a Type and a Figure of himself, and did most excellently represent all the
parts of the mystery of his Incarnation; As,

1. The purity and sanctity of his assumption of our flesh: Isai. 53.12. 1 Pet.
2.22.
so our Savior Christ, though he appeared like a sinful man, and was numbered
among the wicked, yet in very deed, he did no sin, neither was there any guile
found in his mouth; for though he assumed the true flesh, and the whole nature
of man, yet he assumed not the sin of man, Ambros de Spiritu sanct. l. 3 c. 9.
and the vitiosity of his nature; but, as Saint Ambrose says, In veritate
quidem corporis, sed sine veritate peccati suscepit Dominus speciem peccatoris,
in the verity of a body, but without the verity of sin, the Lord took upon him
the shape of a sinner; Romans 8.3.
and therefore S. Paul says, that God sent his Son, not in sinful flesh, but
in the similitude of sinful flesh: Where you must observe, says Cassianus,
that Similitudo non ad carnis veritatem, sed ad peccati imaginem referenda est,
the word Similitude is to be referred, Cassian. Collat. 22. c. 2.
not to the flesh, which was true, but to the word Sinful, which the flesh
seemed to be, but was not



So the body of our blessed Savior was begotten, as the Greek Father says,
(...), not by the ordinary way of procreation (as the carnal effusion of the
seminal humor) but by the power and operation of the Holy Ghost; who framed
this blessed Body, Non de substantia sua, What the Holy Ghost did in framing
the manhood of Christ.
not of his own substance, for so he should have begotten it a Spirit, and a
God; Quia omne generans generat sibi simile, but, as S. Augustine says, Per
potentiam, jussionem, and benedictionem Spiritus sancti: by the power, command,
and blessing of the Holy Ghost; who,

1. As the fire purges all dross from the Brass, 1. Purify it as the fire
does the brass.
so did he prepare and sanctify the blood and seed of the blessed Virgin,
whereof the body of Christ was to be composed, that it might be made a fit
subject for the eternal Word to be united to it: And,

2. As the Brass, melted in the fire, 2. Perfect it in an instant, as the
molton brass did the Serpent.
is no sooner poured into the Mould, but presently the perfect shape and
figure, of Man, Beast, Serpent, or any thing that the Mould is made for, is
produced; so though in ordinary generation, first the Liver, then the Heart,
and then the Brain, are fashioned, and so the other parts, one after another,
and all not fully completed till at least the fourtieth day; yet the
Holy Ghost completed the Body of Christ at the very instant of his conception
perfectly, quoad perfectionem partium, non graduum, in respect of all parts,
and endued the same with a reasonable Soul at the same instant of his
conception: which is not in other generations until the fourtieth day.

And so Christ from his first Conception was perfect God, and perfect Man, of a
reasonable soul and humane flesh subsisting, which is the true Catholic Faith,
and the Orthodoxal Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and of the Primitive
Church, as it appears out of Saint Hierom in cap. 2. Jer. and Athanaes. in
lib. de Incarnat. verb. and St. Aug. in cap. 18. de fide. ad Petr. and Damasc.
lib. 3. cap. 2. de Orthod. fide. and St. Bern. in Hom. 2. sup. Missus est, and
many more.

3. The lifting up of the Serpent and fastening it to a long Israel might look
up to it, and looking on it might be healed from the poison of the fiery
Serpents; was a Type, that foreshewed the fastening of Christ upon the Cross to
suffer death for our redemption, that all men, whosoever would, might look on
him with the eyes of Faith, and so be cured from the sting of the old Serpent
the Devil; and as none was healed from the stinging of the fiery Serpents, but
they only that looked up on the Brazen Serpent; so it is impossible for any
man, to be healed from the poison of sin, but by a lively quick-sighted Faith
in Jesus Christ and him crucified, because Christ tells us plainly, that none
comes to the father but by him. Joh. 14.6.


4 Resemblance.
4. As all that were bitten by the fiery Serpents were cured by looking upon the
Brazen, Serpent; whether they were before it, or behind it, on the right hand
or the left, if they turned their eyes to the Brazen Serpent they were healed;
so all that went before Christ, as Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, David,
and the rest of the holy men of the Old Testament; and all that lived from the
beginning of the world, before he was lifted up; and all we that now live, long
after his lifting up; and all the men that were since, or that now are, in the
East, or in the West, in the North, or in the South, if with the eyes of Faith
they look to Christ, and believe in this lifted up Son of Man, that is their
Crucified Savior, they shall be saved from all their sins; for so Christ
himself here testifies to Nicodemus that he was to be lifted up, that is, to
be Crucified, and like this Serpent fastened to his Cross, Joh. 3.15.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.

And therefore away with them, that do abridg and abbreviate the great mercy
and favor of God toward his people, as if he were a respecter of persons, and
sent his Son to die for some chosen men, that he pleases to elect out of all
the rest of the relapsed posterity of Adam; No, no, beloved, God is no such
niggard of his Graces: but, as he opens his hands, and fills all things
living with plenteousness, Ps. 145.16.
and here caused the Brazen Serpent to be lifted up on high, in the open
Wilderness and not in a secret corner, where all, and not a few, might look up
unto it; so he gave his Son, to be born in the Stable of a public Inn, where
all travelers may boldly and justly challenge a room to lodge in, and he was
lifted up and Crucified not in the walled City, where the enemies, (as we were
all enemies unto God) may not enter; but without the gates, as the Apostle
notes it, and upon Mount Calvarie, where every man might come and see him; and
so he calls all men to come unto him and never denied or refused any man,
that came as he ought, to come unto him.

And therefore if any man receives not the grace of Christ, culpa non est
vocantis sed renuentis, the fault is in our selves, and not in God, that
desires not the death of a sinner, not takes any pleasure in the miseries of
his creatures, but tells us plainly Perditio tua ex te, because we will not
look up to him.

5. As this Brazen Serpent was first molded and made, 5. Resemblance.
and then hung up and fastened on a pole, and exposed to all winds and
weathers, not for its own good, nor any evil that it had don, but for the good
and benefit that redounded to others, and for the evil that others had
committed, and could no other way be helped, but by looking up to this harmless
and innocent Serpent; so the Son of man was contented to be made Man, and then
to be lifted up and Crucified, or fastened to his Cross, not for any benefit
unto himself, who was in the form of God, equal to his Father from all
eternity, nor for any evil that he had done, who by the confession of his
enemies, was a just man and did all things well; but exinanivit se ipsum, he
emptied himself of all his Glory, and was made Man for us, and for our benefit,
as the prophet Esaias shows. Esai. 9 5.
Unto us a Son is born and unto us a Son is given; Dan. 9 76.
and he underwent that shameful death and suffered those bitter pains, not for
himself, says Daniel, but for our sins, says S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21.
that we by his stripes might be healed; and our sinful souls cleansed by his
blood, which could not otherwise be redeemed, with a thousand Rams and ten
thousand rivers of Oil.

And yet I must tell you, how unlikely in the judgment of the world, both the
one and the other was this way to be effected. For,

It is affirmed by some Naturalists, that if one be poisoned with the Sting and
Venom of a Serpent, the very looking upon shining Brass is present death unto
him that is stinged; and how then should it be likely to be believed, that the
looking upon the brazen Serpent should or could be the only means to save these
peoples lives, from the venom of the fiery Serpents? Even so, when Christ told
the Jews, that, If he were lifted up from the earth, John 12.32.
he would draw all men unto him, that is, if he were put to death, his death
should give life, or at least be sufficient to give life, to all men: the
people answered, We have heard out of the Law, that Christ abides for ever;
and how say thou, That the Son of man must be lifted up, and so by his death
restore life unto the world: This is a riddle to us, not possible to be
believed, that thy death should preserve our life.

Esaias 55.8.
But you must know, That Gods ways are not as our ways, nor his thoughts as
our thoughts; for we say with the Philosopher, that, Ex nihilo nihil fit: but
God made heaven and earth, and all the things that are therein, out of nothing,
and he drew the light out of darkness, and the beauty and well-composed frame
of this universal World, out of a rude unshapen Chaos.

And therefore, when God has appointed and commanded any thing to be done, and
promised it should produce such and such effect, it is not for us to doubt or
to examine, whether such a cause can bring forth such effect, or to consider
whether it be likely or unlikely to do the same; but we ought to do what God
commands us, whatsoever it be, and to believe whatsoever he says, and be
sure of whatsoever he promises, how unlikely soever it be to be effected: for
so, when God said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have a Son, that is, Isaac,
and that she should be the mother of nations, and Kings of people should be of
her, which should spring from Isaac; and afterward bad Abraham to sacrifice his
Son Isaac, which made the former promise very unlikely, and in man's judgment
altogether impossible, that he should be sacrificed and killed, and yet be the
father of so many Nations: yet seeing God commanded him to do it, Abraham
neither doubted of Gods promise, nor disobeyed his command, but presently
carried him to Mount Moriah to be sacrificed: So when God commanded Moses to
lift up his Rod over the Sea, and promised the Sea should be divided, Exodus
14.16.
so that the children of Israel might go on dry ground through the midst of the
Sea; and so likewise, when he commanded him to smite the Rock of stone, and
promised that the waters should flow thereout, which had no possibility with
all the power of nature to be done; yet Moses never doubted of Gods Promise,
but presently did what God commanded both in the one and the other.

Even so when God commands us to do any thing, and promises we shall have such
and such blessings by doing it; as to have our sins remitted, by being baptized
in a little water, and by the worthy receiving of a little Sacramental Bread
and Wine, to enjoy all the benefits of the body and blood of Christ, and by a
steadfast faith in the death of Christ, to be assured of eternal life; how
unlikely soever they may seem to be, we ought, with Abraham, and Moses, and the
rest of Gods faithful Servants, most readily do what God bids us, and
undoubtedly believe what he promises.

And though it may seem a strange wonder that cannot sink into worldly men's
heads, that Christ his death should procure to us eternal life, and therefore
the preaching of this doctrine is to the Jews, that looked for such a Christ
that should abide alive for ever, a stumbling block; and to the Grecians, that
gloried only in their eloquence, and ascribed all things with Aristotle, to
their natural causes, mere foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23.
as the Apostle testifies.

Yet if you truly weigh this doctrine of our deliverance from eternal death,
How just it is, that the death of Christ should free all men that believe in
him, from eternal death.
and obtaining of everlasting life by the death of Christ, we shall find it
very consonant to just reason, and no ways to be doubted of; and that in a
twofold respect.

1. Because that although we for our sins deserved most justly to die the
death, that is, to suffer the eternal wrath of God, whom we have and do so
highly offend; yet seeing it agreeable to reason, that, Christ paying our debt,
and suffering for our sins, as the Prophet testifies he has done, we should
be discharged and have our lives spared? For so, when the Officers came to
apprehend Christ, and to arrest him, and he asked them, Whom seek ye? And they
answered, Jesus of Nazareth: And he said, I am he; and if you seek me, then let
these that are my Disciples, and do believe in me, go their way: It is apparent
by these words, that Christ held it agreeable to all reason, that if he paid
the debt, the debtor should be free; and if he suffered death for us, we should
be delivered from that death which we deserved.

Adam, yet the death of this one man, Propter unionem hypostaticam, by reason
of the hypostatical union of the Godhead with the manhood in the person of that
one man, whereby he is not only man, but also God himself, his death being the
death of God, must needs be of sufficient worth and value to satisfy God, and
be more satisfactory to his justice, then the death of all Men on Earth, and
all the Angels in Heaven; in as much as the death of the Creator is of more
infinite value then the death of all creatures.

And therefore well might Christ say, and happy are we that he said it, That
the Son of man must be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life: And I, if I be lifted up, or being lifted
up, will draw all men unto me, that is, all which will believe in me.

And so you have seen, what was typified in the Wilderness unto the Jews by the
brazen Serpent, was presented and performed to us by Jesus Christ: to whom, for
his infinite love and favor toward us, and his bitter Passion and death, when
he was lifted up and crucified for us, to deliver us from eternal death, be all
honor, and glory, and thanks, and praise for ever and ever, Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE PUBLIC FAST The eighth of March, in St MARY'S
OXFORD, Before The Great Assembly of the Members Of the HONORABLE HOUSE OF
COMMONS There Assembled.

By GRYFFITH WILLIAMS L. Bishop of OSSORY: And Published by their Special
Command.

JOHN 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the life.

London, Printed by J. Hayes, 1664.

Die Sabbati nono Martii, 1643.
ORdered that Mr. Bodvell and Mr. Watkins give the Bishop of Ossory thanks, and
desire him to Print his Sermon.

Noah Bridges.

THE ONLY WAY TO PRESERVE LIFE.
Amos 5.6. Seek the Lord, and you shall live.


LIght is the first born of all the distinguished Creatures; The excellency of
the light.
the first word, that the Eternal Word, after so many ages of silence uttered
forth, was, Let there be light; Genesis 1.3.
light that gives life to all Colors, that is the mother of all beauties,
which has no positive contrary in nature, which makes all things manifest, to
the detestation of all evil, and the crowning of every good, and which is a
creature so beloved of the Creator, that he calls himself by this name,
saying, (...); 1 John 1.5.
and he makes it the most worthy associate of Truth, when he says, Send forth
thy light and thy truth: therefore Light is a Jewel, Psalm. 43.3.
not to be valued by the judgment of man.

And yet the sight, by which we partake of all the benefits of the light, and
without which the light will avail us nothing, nor yield us any comfort, as
good old Toby shows, saying, Quale gaudium est mihi qui in tenebris sedeo? is
but one sense, and but scarce the fifth part of the happiness of the sensitive
Creature; a small thing, in respect of that most invaluable good, which is
termed Life, Life, how precious.
and which is of more worth to every living creature, then is all the world;
for the Father of Lies spoke Truth herein, though to a lying end, That Skin for
Skin, and all that ever a man has, Job 2.4.
he will give for his life.

Therefore, as the greatest threatening that God laid upon Adam, to deter him
from Rebellion, and to detain him within the Compass of his Obedience, Genesis
2.17.
was, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death; so the
greatest Blessing that he promises to any man for all his Service, is Life, or
to live, ^s The just shall live by faith. Hab. 2.4. The bloodthirsty, how
detestable.
Which shows how detestable, beyond my ability of expression, are those
bloodthirsty men, that so maliciously and wickedly do hunt after the life of
man, and do shed the blood of so many Innocents; no ways like that good God,
which made not Death, nor desires the Death of any sinner, much less the
destruction of the Righteous; nor yet like Alexander, that knew not God, yet
knew this, that when his Mother Olympias, that was a bloody woman, lay hard
upon him, to kill a certain innocent person, and to that end said often to him,
that she carried him Nine Months in her Womb, therefore he had no reason to
deny her; answered her most wisely, Good Mother, ask for that, some other
reward and recompense, because the life of man is so dear, Am. Marcellin l. 14.
c. 10.
that no benefit can countervail it, and the unjust taking of it away is so
heinous, that it is impossible for any mortal man to make satisfaction for so
great an offense.

Matthew. 3.7.
What shall we say then to those (...), that when their own most gracious King
does so often solicit for peace, do still make them ready for battle, and
have taken away the lives of so many thousands of men? 2 These. 2.3:
truly, if they are not (...), yet certainly they are the sons of Apollyon, the
children of the Destroyer, Death, how terrible.
that without speedy repentance can receive no better reward then damnation.

But as life is the sweetest and the most excellent of all things that are in
this world, Aristot. Ethic. l. 3. c. 6.
so death (says the Philosopher) est omnium terribilium terribilissimum;
because this brings our years to an end, finisheth our days, and puts a
period to all our joys; and though there is but one way of life for all men,
and that one alike to all, to come naked out of their Mothers womb; yet, Job
1.21.
as the Poet says, Mill modis lethi miseros mors una fatigat. Statius
Thebaid. l. 9.
There are a thousand ways to bring any one of us unto his death.

And here the Prophet threatens death unto the people of Israel many ways.
The Israelites, how threatened
Quocunque aspiciunt, nihil est nisi pontus and ether. Ovid de Trist.


For, the City that went out by a thousand, shall leave a hundred, and that
which went out by an hundred shall leave ten to the house of Israel, that is,
as Remigius and Hugo say, Verse 3.
the Israelites shall be so plagued by the Assyrians, 2 Reg. 18.10.
as well in the three years siege of Samaria, as also before and after the
same, by the Sword, Famine, and the Pestilence, which, Sicut unda sequitur
undam, do ever follow like Jobs Messengers, one in the heel of another, the
sword always bringing famine, and the famine producing pestilence, so that
almost all shall be consumed, and scarce ten of an hundred shall be left. And
as the Spirit of God says unto Esayas, Go, tell this people, hear ye indeed,
but understand not. Esaias 6.10.
Then said the Prophet, Lord, how long? and he answered, until the Cities be
wasted without Inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the Land be utterly
desolate; So now this distressed, England, how threatened, and how miserable we
are.
though formerly most happy Kingdom, is threatened to be scourged in like
manner; with the worst of wars, famines, and pestilences. Praesentemque viris
intendunt o nonia mortem.

And as the Poet says, all that we do see, say, we are appointed to be
destroyed, and destined unto death; when as S. Bernard says, Quos fugere
scimus, ad quos nescimus; we know whom we would shun, but we scarce know where
or to whom we may flee to be safe and secured of our Lives; for as Jeremie
says, Servants have ruled over us, Lam. 5.8, 9.
and there is none that does deliver us out of their hand; We get our bread
with the peril of our lives, because of the Sword of the Wilderness: And
therefore as our Prophet says, Wailing is in all streets, they say in all
highways, Amos 5.16.
alas, alas, and they call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful
of lamentation to wailing.

Esaias 34.5, 6. 2 Reg. 8.1. Amos 4.10.
Yet seeing the sword is the sword of the Lord, and it is the Lord that calls
for Famine, and the Pestilence is the scourge of God, which he sends amongst
us, as our Prophet says; and that God never draws his sword, How God deals
with his people.
and throws away the Scabberd, as if he never meant to put it up again; never
sends a famine, but in that famine he can feed the young Ravens that call upon
him, and satisfy the hungry with good things; and never powers out any
plague, but that in the greatest infection he can preserve his servants, that
although a thousand should fall besides them, and ten thousand at their right
hand, Psalm. 91 7.
yet it shall not come nigh them; and never sends any temptation, but if the
fault be not our own, 1 Cor. 10.13.
he does with the temptation make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear
it; because he, being (...), the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
and the God of all comfort, to them that fear him, as well as the God of
Justice to render vengeance to them that offend him, has the suppling Oil of
Mercy, as well as the sharp Wine of Justice to power into the wounds of every
penitent sinner; therefore our Prophet here joyneth to the Lamentation for
Israel, an Exhortation to repentance; and though he threatens Death for our
sins, yet he sets down an Antidote, whereby we might, if we would, preserve
our life; and though I confess the Physicians are very useful, Physicians, how
useful.
and to be honored, as the Scripture speaks, to be sought after, especially
in the times of sickness and Mortality; yet I am sure that neither Hippocrates
nor Galen, nor all the School of Salerne, the whole College of Physicians
shall ever be able to prescribe a Potion, so precious and so powerful to
p^eserve your Life, as I shall declare unto you; for God, which is truth it
self, has said it; Seek the Lord, and you shall live; wherein I desire you to
observe, Two parts of the Text.
1. A Precept; the best work that you can do, Seek the Lord. 2. A Promise; the
best reward that you can desire, And you shall live.


1. The Precept, twofold.
1. In the Precept you may see there are two words, and so two parts.

1. Seek, which is the Act, that all men do. 2. The Lord, which is the Object
of our seeking, wherein most men fail.
1. The word seek does presuppose that we have lost, or be without the Lord;
and so we have indeed, we lost Paradise, 1. The Act.
we lost God, we lost our selves, and our own Souls, and are become like lost
sheep without a Shepherd; and therefore we have great reason to seek, and to
seek diligently, till we find (...), Luke 19.10.
what we lost. And

The loss of God is nothing else but the withdrawing of his Love, The loss of
God what it is
and the withholding of the influences of his favor from us, like the parting
of the Sun from our Horizon, whereby darkness follows; and so all miseries
and mischiefs, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, wars, famines, plagues,
and all evils, Two things considerable.
must be the lot of them that lost the love of God, but then you must consider,
1. The cause for which the Lord departs from us. 2. The means whereby we
suffer him to be detained from us. 1. The cause why the Lord departs from us,
is sin.



1. The cause that drives away God from us, is sin; for by this Adam lost him,
and as the Prophet shows, this makes the separation betwixt God and all the
children of Adam: for your iniquities have separated between you and your God,
and your sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear, says Esayas:
Cap. 59.2. And you may see this truth further cleared and proved in Lam. 3.39.
Psalm 5.5. Ezekiel. 18 4. Romans 6.23. Jam. 1.15. Lev. 11.44.
: And it is no marvel that sin should make such a separation betwixt God and
us, if we consider the nature of God, and of sin, for,

God testifies of himself that he is holy; and there is as much difference
betwixt holiness and sin, as is betwixt the clearest light and the blackness of
darkness; for holiness is of such a resplendent Excellency, that the very
Enemies of it, the prophanest Atheists, that neither fear God, nor regard men,
Why sin separates us from God.

The nature of holiness* how excellent.


yet will they, nill they, they cannot choose but approve it in others, though
they reject it from themselves; because as Seneca says, Virtus in omnium
animos lumen suum immittit, ut qui non sequuntur eam, videant tamen; virtue and
goodness do so shine among all men, that they which use it not, which love it
not, yet cannot choose but see it, yea and confess it too, to be most admirable
and excellent in it self; for what adulterer is so impure, but that his
conscience will tell him, especially at some time or other, that chastity is
better then his sensuality? What drunkard is so besotte^, but that his heart
will tell him, especially when he is sober, that sobriety is better then
surfeiting and drunkenness? or what swearer is so far past all grace, that his
own soul will not tell him, and sometimes compel his tongue to confess it, that
to say indeed, is far better then by his hideous oaths to lose that God which
made him, The nature of sin, how execrable.
and heaped his blessings upon him?

On the other side, sin and filthiness are such ugly monsters, that the very
followers and practisers thereof cannot choose but condemn them and hate them in
others, though they do love and follow the same in themselves: yea as St. Aug.
says, they that are filthy themselves, Aug. de Civit. l. 14. c. 18. Chrysostom. in
Ephesians. c. 4.
will call their own lewdness filthiness, and though they love it, yet they
will not dare to profess it. And all this St. Chrysostom expresses most
elegantly, saying, (...), which in effect is, that holiness is such a thing,
that the very Enemies thereof canchuse but admire it, and wickedness is such a
thing, that the very Lovers thereof cannot choose but condemn it; therefore it
is no wonder that God, which is holiness it self in abstract^, should hate all
those that work wickedness. All sins not alike.


Yet you must observe that as every offense divorceth not man and wife; so all
sins do not alike separate the love of God from us: for there be some sins that
do but anger him, so that he only chides us, or most gently corrects us, not in
his indignation, nor as the Prophet says, in his heavy displeasure, but in
love for the amendment of the sinner; and there be other sins, that do so
highly provoke him, that he does utterly forsake us, to execute his wrath and
vengeance upon the sinner, for the honor of himself, and the destruction of
the other, as the Lord says, I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, that is, in
his destruction. And therefore though we ought to take heed of all sins, yet
more especially of these; because they are more odious unto God, and more
pernicious unto our selves.

And here I find three sins set down of this kind, whereby these Israelites
lost the Lord; and they are 1. Idolatry against God, v. 5. and. 26. 2.
Injustice toward men. v. 7. and 11. 3. Contempt of the Priest, whereby they
became hateful both to God and man, v. 10.
Which were 3 deadly sins; ^s I shall show ^ou in their order.

1. Idolatry is a sin most heinous and most odious unto God; I know few or none
so pestiferous; for though Atheism is a fearful sin, to be without a God in the
World, without him, without whom we cannot live, we cannot move, we cannot have
our being; Yet Atheism seems not so ugly a Monster, Exodus 14.17.
and so detestable unto God, as Idolatry is; and though the profanation of
Gods Holy Name is a transcendent sin; yet this seems but to ascend so high into
Gods displeasure as Idolatry does; For in the first precept which is against
Atheism, The three fearful sins of the Israelites. 1. Their Idolatry.
he does not say without any threatening, thou shall have none other Gods but
me; and in the third precept which forbids all vain swearing, he does but
say, I will not hold him guiltless that takes my name in vain; but in the
second precept, where he prohibiteth Idolatry, he seems to search for words,
and to coin phrases to express his hatred to this sin, against which he
expandeth his fury to a mighty reach, saying, I am a jealous God, that do visit
the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation
of them that hate me, Idolatry how hateful to God.
as if Idolaters only were the chiefest haters and the greatest enemies of
Almighty God; and therefore most justly hated by God; and no marvel; for as
Plutarch says, he had rather men should think there was never such a man in
the world as Plutarch, than to say he was so savage and so cruel, as to kill
and eat his dearest friends and children; ita satius est nullos Deos credere,
quam Deos noxios: So it is better to think there are no Gods, than to believe
them to be such as thy self art, as the Prophet speaks; or like Jupiter,
Saturn, and the rest of the Gentile Gods, that were murderers, adulterers, and
such like wicked Gods: Gods not worthy to be men. So it is better to do no
service unto God, than to do that which is so exceedingly contumelious unto the
Deity; because that service which is to injurious unto God, and so deroga^ory
to his honor, is most acceptable unto the Devil; as the Israelites, mistaking
the true se^vice, and thinking they sacrificed unto God, did indeed offer their
sons and daughters unto devils, Psalm. 106.36.
as the Psalmist speaks, such is the nature of Idolatry; So that indeed we
can never ple^se the devil better, nor show our selves faithfuller servants
unto him, than when we do thus displease our God, and show our selves so
perfidious unto His Majesty.

And yet it is wonderful to consider how apt and prone the Children of Israel
were to fall and to wallow in this monstrous sin of Idolatry: How prone the
Israelites were to fall into Idolatry.
for no sooner were they come out of Egypt, but they must worship God in the
shape of a golden Calf, so they turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into
the similitude of a Calfe that eats hay; and no sooner was any good man dead
that had planted the true Religion amongst them, but presently they supplanted
the same by their Idolatry; and this our Prophet shows at large in this
Chapter, as

Ver. 26. 1 In the passage to Canaan when they worsh pped Moloc.
1. To observe the order of their committing it, and not of the Prophets setting
of it down, when he says, you have born the tabernacle of your Moloc; that is,
in the wilderness, when Moses was talking wi^h God on mount Sinai, as S^.
Hierome and Rupertus think; or rather, as Ribera thinks, when they committed
fornica ion with the daughters of Moab, that were the next adjoining neighbors
unto the Ammonites, whose god this Moloc was; and you have born Chiun, your
images, the star of your god, which ye made to your selves; or as St. Stephen
reads it out of the Septuagint, Remphan who he was.
the star of your God Remphan, or Rephan, as others read it, which Giraldus
takes to be Hercules; Ribera thinks him to be Jupiter; but St. Hierom, Remig^us
and Beda take it for the star of Venus, which going before the Sun in the
morning was called Lucifer, and following the Sun at night was called Hesperus,
and was worshipped by the Syrians, as the Queen of Heaven; and as Servius, upon
that verse of Virgil.

Errantesque Deos agitataque numina Trojae, observes how the Gentiles carried
their tutelaty gods with them, Genesis 31.34.
as Rachel did her fathers Idols, whithersoever they went: so the Israelites in
imitation of them, carried these Images in the Tabernacle after a most solemn
and a pompous manner.

2. The Prophet shows their Idolatry, 2 In their settled Land.
when he forbids them to seek Bethel, and to enter into Gilgal, or to pass into
Beersheba; 2 Reg 23 8: 1 Reg 12.29.
because these places Bethel and Gilgal toward the North, and Beersheba
Southward, were the uttermost parts and borders of the Holy Land, where
Jeroboam did set up his golden Calves.

And the Children of Israel were such calves, The reasons why the children of
Israel were always ready to worship their calves.
that all the holy Prophets and the godly Kings, could never withdraw them from
the Idolatrous service of these calves; and the reasons thereof you may gather
out of the Text. 1. Because they were such gods as gave them ease and liberty.
2. Because they were calves. 3. Because they were golden calves. 4. Because
they had wodden Priests; no better than their gods:
For

1. Jeroboam said, it is too much for you to go to Jerusalem; cost, and too
much pains; for he knew the people would like very well of that Religion which
would give them most ease, and prove least chargeable unto them; as men had
rathet sit to hear, than kneel to pray, and to give a small stipend to their
poor Lecturer, than pay the tenth of all their increase unto their learned
Pastor; but this liberty overthrew all their piety.

2. He made two calves, though there can be but one God, not former practice in
the Wilderness, and their usual worship in Egypt, because he knew men would be
easily seduced to their old wont, but especially to enlarge their liberty, to
let them serve God as they list, which is very pleasing to flesh and blood;
because the calves were such gods, as did not much care what service was done
unto them; yet

3. He set up golden calves, to make a glorious show, because the hypocrites in
the world would fain seem to do all for the honor of God, and the preservation
of the true Religion, pulchra laverna, Juven.. 16.
da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri, when as indeed it is but like
their god, a calfe, though of gold, yet dead without life, without sense; and
such is the Religion of all Hypocrites, a liveless and a senceless Religion;
let them pretend what they please. And

sleep in their sins, and never wake, they must have Priests of the lowest of
the people, which were not of the sons of Levi, that is, of the regular
ministers and conformable Clergy, but those that were sit for such
Libertines, as being neither able for their Learning to know God, to teach his
truth and confute Errors, nor daring for their baseness to contradict the
people in any of all their wicked ways; for Jeroboam knew that Learned men,
and men of worth, would never adore such Calves, though they were made of Gold;
nor yet humor their people in their ease, idleness, and Idolatry; therefore
when men would change their Religion, they must change their Priests, even as
Christ did when he translated the Jewish service into the Christian Religion,
he changed the Order of the Priesthood, says the Apostle; Heb 7.12.
so when we would overthrow the true Religion, and make way for Libertines, we
must cast out the true Priests, and with Jeroboam take for them the basest of
the people, Cha. 30.8.
children of base men, viler than the earth, as Job speaks, which can neither
confute heresy, nor hinder Idolatry among their flocks.

1 Reg. 12.30.
But what says the Text? this became a sin, an indeleable sin to all Israel,
that caused them to be led into perpetual captivity, and to lose their
everliving God, because they served these golden calves, Ver. 27.
and were led by these wooden Priests; for so the Prophet sets down,
therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, says the
Lord, whose name is the God of Hosts, and it was such an everlasting stain to
Jeroboam, 1 Reg. 14.16. etc. 15. 30.
that it is his indeleable Epithet, carbone notabilis atro, Jeroboam the son
of Nebat that made Israel to sin.

And it were well if this sin reached no farther than the children of Israel;
for indeed such is the nature of all men, apt and prone to devise services unto
God as they list; every one will be independent, and serve God as he pleases;
and all such devised ervice is nothing else but Idolatry, says the Apostle:
Col. 2.23. 1 John 5.21.
and thereore St. John writing unto Christians, concludes his Epistle with
little children, keep your selves from Idols, which is worth our observation;
because they might (as many do) make an Idol of many things; of their Pulpit,
of their Preachers, of their Altars, and of the most consecrated bread in the
Eucharist, when, as the Church of Rome does it to this very day, they
transubstantiate the same to become Corpus Domini, and do orally eat that with
their teeth, which the Scripture teaches us to eat sacramentally by faith;
which very doctrine of transubstantiation, and thereupon the adoration of their
host, and the asportation of it, as the Israelites did their Moloc, I fear, if
it be rightly discussed, will prove to be little less than Idolatry; for as I
will not reject that truth, which the Devil uttered, Mat 5.7.
Thou art Jesus the Son of the most high God, nor refuse the four Gospels, and
the three Creeds, of the Apostles, the Nicen and Athanasian, because the Pope
uses them, but will believe all the truth that the Church of Rome believes,
and therein join with them the right hand of fellowship; so I will hate the
errors, and detest the Idolatry of any Church that commits it.

And therefore, How the Primitive Christians were slandered.
though as the Christians of the Primitive Church were most falsely traduced,
and charged to be the causes of all the calamities, dearths, wars, sedition,
and all the other evils that happened unto the Heathens, (which indeed
themselves were the sole causes of, because they would not become Christians)
and therefore persecuted the Church of Christ, and in all their Counsels had
none other Conclusions but Christianos ad leones, let us throw away these
Christians to the Lions, to the fires, and to the Waters; so now the Enemies of
the truth say, we are Papists, and Idolatrous, and the causes of all these
calamities that are fallen upon this Land; How we are now slandered.
and therefore let them be deprived, degraded, and destroyed; yet in very deed
we are so far from those points, which Jewel, Cranmer, Latimer, and the rest of
those holy Martyrs, and godly Reformers concluded to be Popish and Idolatrous,
that as we have hitherto most learnedly refuted them, so we are most constantly
resolved to oppugn them while we live, and rather to lose our lives, than to
depart from the true protestant faith, and to embrace the Idolatry of any
Church in the World: and you must know, that as the Philosopher says, Non quia
affirmatur, aut negatur, res erit, vel non erit, things are not so and so,
because they are reported to be such; as Gold is not Copper, because an
ignorant Artist affirms it, nor Copper Gold, because the like Ignoramus
avoucheth it; so a wicked man is not good, nor Rebels loyal, because flatterers
commend them; neither is a good man wicked, nor faithful Subjects malignants,
nor true Protestants, Popish, because the slanderers traduce them; as Christ
was neither a drunkard, Mat. 11.19.
nor a glutton, though the Jews accused him of both; and we are neither Papists
nor Popish though as the Apostle says in the like case, Romans 3.8.
we are slanderously reported to be such, but things ought to be affirmed to be
as they are indeed, and men ought to judge righteous judgments; and then you
might see, and so be assured, we are so far from Popery, that as I said before,
we lay on them little less crime, than Idolatry.

And seeing (...) is derived ab (...) video, we see it may be derived farther
and brought nearer to our selves, then the Church of Rome; Hier. in Jer. c. 32.
and Aug. l. de vera religione. Col. 3 5.
for so men may, as St. Hierom says, erect an Idol in their own brains, as
the worldling makes his Gold to be his god; the Heretics and Separatists make
an Idol of their false Religion: the precise Hypocrite makes an Idol of his
dissembled purity: and the very Rebels make an Idol of their seducers and
leaders, and their own most obstinate opinions: and all these, and the like, do
offer up Idolatrous sacrifices upon the Altar of their own folly; and therefore
well might St. John say, Keep your selves from Idols; because the children of
the Church, when they leave their true Leaders, and take blind guides, may soon
fall and be filled with Idolatry. And seeing we have so many such rebellious
Idolaters amongst us, if there be any Idolaters in the world, is it any wonder
that God should so abundantly pour out his indignation upon us? or that he
should not visit for these things, Jer. 5 9.
and be avenged on such a nation as this?

2. Injustice was the other sin, whereby the Israelites lost the Lord, when as
the Prophet says, Ver. 7. The second sin of the Israelites, Injustice.
they turned judgment into wormwood, and left off righteousness in the earth:
wherein you may observe two things in the iniquity of this people. 1. Generally
among all the Vulgar sort. 2. Jer. 5.1.
Particularly among the very Judges and Princes of the Land.


1. The common people left off righteousness, 1 Generally.
and dealt most unjustly one with another, oppressing the poor, afflicting the
just, and filling themselves with thefts, robberies, and all other kinds of
unrighteousness, sins able to overthrow the whole earth, The praise of Justice.
Pro. 25.5. Pro. 14.34. Theog. p. 431.
and to destroy all the Society of mankind; for justice establishes the
thrones of Kings, it exalts a nation, it is the sister of peace, the mother
of prosperity, the preserver of amity, and as Theognis says.

(...): And on the other side injury and oppression, as Solomon says, Eccles.
7.7.
is able to make a wise man mad, and injustice is the destroyer of peace, the
producer of War, and the bringer of whole Cities, Kingdoms and Nations to
confusion; for as St. Aug. says, Quid sunt regna, remota justitia, nisi magna
latrocinia? What are Kingdoms, if you take away justice, but as our Cities are
now in most parts of our Land, the Dens of Thieves, that enrich themselves with
the treasures of wickedness, Mica. 6.13.
and are clad with the spoils of the poor? and how is it possible that men
should live one by another, cum vivitur ex rapto? when Pillaging and Plundering
shall become our common trade, and the great men's strength shall become the Law
of justice? and yet this is not all, for

2. As the Prophet Esaias says, their Princes, that is, 2 Particularly. Isa.
1.23.
their chief Lords, were rebellious and companions of thieves; and their Judges
their Sanhedrim, and great Council of State afflicted the just, as our Prophet
says, and took bribes, Ver. 12^ Jer 5 5.
and turned aside the poor in the gate from their right; and what a lamentable
thing is this, when the poor, the fatherless, and the widows that are oppressed
shall come unto the gods to seek relief, and they shall find them like Devils?
to add sorrows unto their afflictions, and to make the remedy far worse than
the disease, when a man shall spend more in getting his right, then his right
is worth, or when as the Prophet says, the judgment shall be turned into
wormwood; which is now with us, as it was with them, the very State of this
Kingdom; for when His Majesty called a Parliament, the highest Court of Justice
in our Land, I may say of it, as the Lord says of Israel, when he looked for
grapes, it brought forth wild grapes: when we expected justice, behold we found
oppression and wrong, yea, such oppressions, such injustice, and such cruelty
we found among these Judges and Princes of Israel, as cannot be paralleled
among the worst of Pagans; so that now indeed they have turned judgment into
wormwood; which by reason of its exceeding bitterness made the French Proverb,
Dioscorides l. 3. Apellus in Isagogico. Judgment turned to wormwood two ways.
Fort comme aloyne ou absynte, and made the Greek comicks to call it (...),
that is, impotable.

And judgment may be turned into wormwood two special ways.

Naboth, without any color of right, without any cause, and in the highest
degree of injustice, with the greatest measure of iniquity: as when Aristides
was banished out of Athens, justus, quia justus, and the Christians were
persecuted and murdered, only quia Christiani; and the Bishops are now hated of
many men, only because they are Bishops, that is enough, though we can find
none other cause in them worthy of death, or of bonds. And this is indeed
absynthio amarius, bitterer than Wormwood, and is done by none but by the Sons
of Belial; Jer. 5.9.
And shall I not visit for these things?

Sulpitius Gallus did with his wife, because she walked abroad without her
veil, or as the Elder Cato did often deal with offenders, and P. Aemilius did
with Rutilius, inflict a punishment for a just fault, but in the highest degree
of severity; for though sometimes severity may and ought to be used, ut
multitudinis furores compescantur, and atrocia flagitia puniantur, that the
fury of the wild unruly multitude may be refrained, and heinous offenses, as
Treasons and Rebellions, and the like intolerable sins, may by the punishment
of some be prevented in others; for so we find that whole Towns have been burnt
to ashes, and famous Cities have been utterly destroyed for the Tumults and
rebellions of undutiful and disloyal Citizens; yet in other cases, Lib. 19 in
fine.
as M. Cicero says in Marcellinus, when it was in my power either to condemn,
or to absolve, ignoscendi non puniendi quaerebam causas, I did rather search
out the means to save them, then look after the causes to punish them; or as
Alphonsus, being advised by some of his followers, ut ne nimium lenis erga suos
esset, that he should no be too gentle toward his people, lest they might
bring him into contempt, answered more graciously, Good men are naturally
clement.
that he was rather to take heed, ne nimia severitas conciliet invidiam, lest
too much severity should beget him hatred: so I believe it is the nature of the
best men to be least severe, as holding it the better course to offend on the
safer side, and rather mercifully to remit somewhat of the punishment that is
due, than rigorously to add any thing more than is just; because mercy
rejoices against judgment, and it is hardly believed that the son of Severity
can be a good child of the God of Clemency, because as the Poet says, -- Sola
deos aequat clementia nobis: Claud. Excess of severity condemned by God. Amos
1.4, 5.
And the Scripture reproves the excess of cruelty toward the greatest Enemies
of Gods Church; For the Lord threatens to break the bars of Damascus, and to
send a fire into the house of Hazael, and to devour the palaces of Benhadad;
and why will the Lord do all this? but because they were not satisfied with the
subjection of the Gileadites, but when they had vanquished them, they showed
themselves so merciless, that to satisfy their wrath upon them, Verse. 3.
they thrashed them with thrashing instruments of Iron: And so the Lord
threatens the Moabites, that he would send a fire upon Moab, which should
devour the Palaces of Kerioth; and Moab should die with tumult, Amos 2.2, 3.
with shouting, and with the sound of the Trumpet; and he would cut off the
Judge from the midst thereof and would slay all the Princes thereof with him:
And why would the Lord do all this unto the Moabites? but because they were not
satisfied with the pyls of the Edomites, but like merciless wretches, triump ng
in the miseries of miserable men, they were so enraged against them, that like
bruit beasts, which were void of all humanity, 2 Reg 3.27.
they burnt the bones of the King of Edom into lime; for it is not acceptable
unto the Lord, that any man should insult over his enemies in the day of their
destruction, not speak proudly in the time of their distress: and therefore we
must examine quo animo, as well as quo supplicio, we do punish the greatest
transgressors; because God oftentimes is offended with the manner of that
punishment, whereof in respect of the matter he himself is the author.

And yet, as in judgments and punishments you must qualify your own
Affections, to do all without bitterness; so you must look to the quality of
the offender; for the same censure is not to be imposed, nor the same
punishment to be inflicted on him that sins through infirmity, and upon
another that opposes authority, and sins through obstinacy; upon him that
is seduced to rebellion, and upon the seducers and leaders of the more simple
Rebels: All sins not alike, nor the same sins committed alike.
for though all sins deserve punishment, yet all sins are not alike, neither do
all commit the same sins alike; but some sins are more contracted and more
private, and others are more public and more spreading; and therefore far more
dangerous than the other, because such sinners, and peccant and docent peccare:
and therefore God orders his judgments according to the offenses; sins of
infirmity he punishes with pity, and mixeth his punishments with Clemency, but
upon horrible sins he lays terrible punishments, Micah. 5.15.
and as he says in Micah, He will execute vengeance in his anger; so when the
Jews were grown incorrigible, he says, Jer. 21.7.
He will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their life, and they
shall smite them with the edge of the sword, and shall not spare them, nor have
pity, nor have mercy upon them: and such a sin is murder, and the shedding of
innocent blood, whereof the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 19.13, 21 Et vide Ezekiel. 8.17, 18.
Thine eye shall not pity him, but life shall go for life. And such a sin is
the sin of Rebellion, which is as the sin of Witchcraft, and spreads it self
like a Gangrene, and infecteth many millions of men; and therefore the
resisting of authority deserves more severity and less clemency, than any sin,
as you may see it in the punishment of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, who in the
judgment of God himself deserved no less than to be consumed with fire from
Heaven, Rebellion, how horrible a sin.
or to be sent down quick to Hell; which in the judgment of Optatus, is so
fearful and unparalled a vengeance, showing the transcendent odiousness of
rebellion, that the like cannot be found since the creation of the world;
because rebelling against lawful Authority is no less than fighting against the
divine Majesty; and therefore the most holy Saints of the Primitive Church,
that were most innocent in all their lives, would notwithstanding suffer the
most cruel death, rather than they would resist this ordinance of God; or
otherwise, if they had so impudently reviled their Heathen Judges, and so
rebelliously resisted their persecuting Kings, as you see many have done of
late against the most gracious Princes, the Church had never canonized them for
godly Martyrs, but had registered them among the most wicked Malefactors.

3. Contempt of the Priest was the last, The third sin of the Israelites. Ver.
10.
but not the least sin whereby the Israelites lost the Lord, when they hated
him that rebuked in the gate, and abhorred him that spoke uprightly, that is,
the Prophet or Preacher, says Cornelius a Lapide; because the Jews had their
Tribunals and Judgments in the gates of their Cities, as Moses shows: and
therefore Jeremy, Amos, Deuteronomy. 21.10.
and the rest of Gods servants sat also in the Gates, as you may see Jer. 17
19. Esdras l. 2. c. 8.
, to rebuke the wrong Judgments, as St. Hierom and Lyra note; and to speak
uprightly, that is, Perfectum and sanctum sermonem, a perfect and a just
Judgment, as the Septuagint and Symmachus render it; and this the people hated
and abhorred; which is the height of all iniquity, to reject the Prophet, and
to exclude his counsel from our judgments: Sinners that reject their Teachers
and Pastors, are incurable.
for as the Gout is the shame of the Physician, because he cannot cure it, so
this is the plague of the soul, and a sin that is incurable; for though a man
commits many and great sins, and leads a very dissolute life; yet if he will
dutifully hearken unto counsel, and patiently bear with his rebukes, there is
great hope of his amendment; but as the diseased that is deadly sick, and yet
like Harpaste, that would not be persuaded that she was blind, though she could
see no more than a millstone, will not believe that he is sick, and cannot
endure the sight of his Physician, runs on a pace to death without any hope of
life; so the Judges that hate the Prophets company, and abhor the assistance of
the Priests in their judgments, as the Israelites now did, and that sinner who
does hate his Teacher, and shuns the society of him that seeks to save his
soul, have little sign of grace, and as little hope of eternal life; and
therefore the Scripture describing the deadly estate of the most desperate
sinners, such as with Ahab had sold themselves to work wickedness, says, they
are like those that contend with their Priests, Hos 4.4.
of whom there is little hope and less good to be expected any ways; for is it
possible that a blind man should find his way, when he beats away his Leader?
Or that a child should thrive, when he bites and beats away his nurse that
gives him suck? So it is impossible that they should do well which hate the
light, or that they should ever learn any good, which abhor the Teachers of all
godliness.

Gem. de coelo. l. 1 c. 22. Job 9 9. The Preachers like the Hyades
Geminianus tells us, that the Ministers of Gods word are like the Hyades,
whereof Job speaks;

1. Because the Hyades or Pleiades, as we translate them, are watery stars, so
called from their effects; the word Hyades of (...) signifying nothing else but
rain; So the Pre^chers pour showers of heavenly doctrine upon the barren ground
of our souls, to make them fruitful, even as Moses says, My doctrine shall
drop as the rain, Deuteronomy. 32 2.
and my speech shall distill as the dew.

Pleiades do arise, the days lengthen, the Sun is hotter, and the Earth
produces more plentiful fruits; so by the preaching of Gods word, the light of
truth is increased, the heat of Christian love and charity is kindled, and the
holy fruit of all good works is increased: Therefore if the Preachers be as the
rain to make us fruitful, as the light to direct our ways, as our Fathers to
instruct us, and as the Angels of God to bring us into heaven, as the Scripture
testifies that they are, then I beseech you tell me, what holy frui^, what
heavenly light, or what Christian good can be in them, that despise their
Teachers, and expel their fathers from their societies?

Yet this was the sin of the Israelites, and I fear, we cannot free our selves
from it: for how have they been used since the beginning of this Parliament?
Was not he most cried up, that cried most against the Church and Churchmen?
And men of no note became famous in the House by making invective speeches
against the Bishops, (...). 1 Cor. 4.13. Heb. 11.38. and 37.
and he was deemed most eloquent that was most bitter against them; and how
h^ve they been handled ever since? Voted out of all their means, and not any
thing left them to buy them bread: graviora morte; and being thus made as the
filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things unto this day, as the
Apostle speaks: they are either cast with Joseph into the dungeon, or driven
to wander in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented; And I may say of some of them with
Jeremy, Jer. 5.9.
they that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets, they that were clad
in scarlet embrace dunghils, they sigh and seek bread, and have given their
pleasant things for meat to relieve their souls. Lam. 4 5. and 1.11.
And shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord, and shall not my soul
be avenged on such a nation as this? Yes, says our Prophet: and for these
things the Israelites lost the Lord: and we may fear he has left us for the
same faults.

2. 2. The ways whereby God is lost from us.
The means or ways by which we depart from God and so lose the Lord, are very
many; I will only name unto you these three, whereby Joseph lost our Savior in
Jerusalem;

And they are, 1. Negligent security. 2. Ignorant blindness. 3. Obstinate
opinion.


1. Joseph went with Christ into the Temple, but through negligence homewards
without him, so the neglect to seek God, is the only way to lose God; because
as Saint Gregory says, Quem tentationis certamen superare non valuit, saepe
securitas deterius stravit.

2. Joseph knew not that Christ was left behind him; and know not that they are
without the Lord, being like the Inhabitants of Egypt that reap the benefits of
Nilus, but are ignorant of the fountain from whence it springs; because they
are ignorant of their faith and of their own most desperate condition, while
they have mo^e care of the Evidence of their Lands, than they have of the
assurance of their Salvation.

Joseph thought that Christ was gone before with their friends, and thereby he
was deceived; so many men lose the Lord by their false persuasions; for Arius
thought he found Christ when he denied his Deity; Saint Paul thought he did God
good service when he persecuted the Saints of God; and so many men, as those
seditious Preachers and Brownists about London, and many other parts of this
Kingdom do think, perhaps, they teach the truth of God, when as God knows,
they teach the people nothing else but the most desperate and damnable doctrine
of devils, when they persuade them to resist the ordinance of God, Romans 13.
which commands every soul to submit it self unto the higher powers, and that
is the King, as Saint Peter testifies; 1 Pet. 2.13.
and so by these false thoughts they do uterly lose the true God, and shall
finally lose themselves, unless they do speedily change their minds; and
therefore as the Emperor Antoninus was wont to say in another case, so I say
in this, ejice opinionem, si vis salvus esse, cast away such false opinions and
believe the truth, rely not on your selves, nor on your lying Leaders, but as
our Prophet says, Seek the Lord, and you shall live. And so much for the
causes and the ways by which we lose the Lord.

What we ought to do, when we have lost God. Genesis 2.
Now when the Lord is lost, the only remedy that we have is to seek him; but
alas beloved, is it in our power to find him, or have we any ability to seek
him? Can the lost sheep find her shepherd, or could Adam ever seek after God,
if God had not sought after him, and called him, Adam, where art thou? I must
answer like Athanaeus riddle, a man and no man, with a stone and no stone,
killed a bird and no bird, that sat upon a tree and no tree; that is, an
Eunuch, with a pummy killed a bat upon a fennel; so I say, it is, and it is
not: for if you speak of a man unregenerate, and as yet destitute of Gods
grace, he can no more seek for grace than dead Lazarus could raise himself out
of his grave: because the Apostle affirms all to be, (...), Ephesians. 1.2.
dead in trespasses and sins: and our Savior says, Without me you can do
nothing: Joh. 15.5. (...). Prosper de lib. arbit.
and Prosper calls the grace of God, Creatricem bonorum in nobis, the Creator
of all the good that is in us, according to that saying of the Apostle, (...),
we are his workmanship, (...), created in Christ Jesus: and you know that a
creation is from nothing.

But when the Lord has quickened our dead spirits, and mollified our hard
hearts, then he looks that we should not be, quasi dormientes quasi non
volentes, as men asleep and negligent of our own good, but that we should
diligently seek the way, and finding the same, to walk therein: Ephesians. 2.10^.
for this exhortation to seek the Lord, and our Saviors invitation, to come
unto him, and the like, do sufficiently evince, Mat. 11.28.
that in all Christians God works not sicut in lapidibus insensatis, as in
senseless stones, or in creatures that have no reason, as Saint Augustine
speaks, but in men that have a freedom of will to follow after those things
which do pertain unto salvation; Aug in Epist. 89. quaest. 2.
Quia liberum arbitrium non ideo tollitur quia juvatur, sed ideo juvatur quia
non tollitur; because our free will is not taken away, because it is helped,
but it is therefore helped because it is not taken away, as the same St.
Augustine speaks. And Fulgentius has the like saying, l. 2. De veritate
praedest.

And therefore seeing the Devil can neither forcibly compel us to any evil, nor
violently detain us from any good, How the devil inticeth us, and cannot compel
us to sin.
but only by the proposal of seducing objects, and by the subtle obscuring the
beauty of the perfect good, to allure us unto the one, and to withdraw us from
the other, we ought to arm our selves with a resolution to follow the counsel
of the Prophet, to Seek the Lord, that we might live, and not die; for Why will
you die, O ye Inhabitants of England?

But in this our inquisition and search after God, Four things to be considered
in our search for God.
we ought carefully to consider of these four particulars. 1. To find out the
cause, why he left us. 2. To go to the place, where he resideth. 3. To know the
time, when he may be found. 4. To understand the manner, how we are to seek him.
For,

1. To know the cause why God left us. Psalm. 147.14.
1. God was amongst us as in the holy place of Sinai, and then Kings with their
Armies did flee, and were discomfited, and we of his household divided the
spoil; and then God sent a gracious rain upon his Inheritance, and refreshed it
when it was weary, and poured his benefits upon us; he made peace in all our
borders, and filled us with the flower of wheat, and he blessed us so, that we
were even envied for our happiness; Job 19.11:
but now he has forsaken us, and hides his face from us, and goes not forth
with our Armies, but he has kindled his wrath against us, and counted us as
one of his enemies; Cap. 6.4.
he has made his arrows drunk in our blood, and his terrors do set themselves
in array against us, so that now we are a byword among the Heathens, and our
enemies laugh us to scorn.

Therefore as the good Physician first se^rcheth out the cause of the disease,
and then prepares a potion for the cure; and as Joshuah, when God turned away
from the children of Israel, and delivered them up into the hands of their
Enemies, never left searching, Josh. 7.18. 2 Samuel 21.1.
till he had found out the accursed thing, that was the cause of their
destruction; and David also, when there was a famine three years, year after
year, inquired of the Lord, what should be the cause thereof; so we must
inquire and search out the cause why the Lord has overthrown all our hedges,
and given us as a spoil unto our Neighbors. And herein as Demodacus said of
the Milesians, We have committed the same sins, and more sins, and more
hainously than the Israelites did.
they were no fools, but they did the same things that fools did: So I say, we
are no Israelites, but I fear we have committed the same sins as the Israelites
did, Idolatry, injustice, and contempt of our Teachers: nay, have we not added
unto these Sacrilege, Perjury, Drunkenness, Luxury, and all kind of
uncleanness? Yea, have we not made injustice, and perjury, and sacrilege, and
contempt of the Ministers, and rebellion against the Ordinance of God, and many
other sins that formerly were but personal sins, now to become national, when
they are committed, continued, and maintained by the Representatives of the
whole Kingdom? And shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this, says
the Lord? Verse. 19.
Yes, says our Prophet, we shall be to them that desire the day of the Lord,
for it is darkness and not light, and it shall be as if a man did flee from a
Lion, and a Bear met him: that is, to escape the least, and to fall into the
greater punishment; because the Lion is a more noble enemy than the Bear, when
as the Poet says, Parcere prostratis scit nobilis ira Leonis. But the Bear is
a most ravenous raging Beast, Hos. 5.12.14.
that will tear us all to pieces; so it is to escape the Sword and to die by
Famine, to provide against Famine and to be destroyed by the Pestilence, which
shall follow one another so long as we continue in our sins; and the wrath of
the Lord shall not be turned away, but his hand will be stretched out still: As
in Levit. 26. after many plagues he adds, I will bring seven times more
plagues upon you for your sins. And therefore if you would turn away the wrath
of God, you must turn away from these sins that have provoked him to wrath;
Quia sublata causa tollitur effectus. And then

2. If you would find the Lord, 2. The place where God may be found.
you must go to the place where he resideth; for though Enter praesenter Deus
est ubique poten or, in respect of his omnipotent Essence, the spirit of the
Lord fills all places: If we climb up into Heaven he is there, if we go down
to Hell he is there also; and as the Schools say, he is Supra coelos non
elatus, subter terram non depressus, intra mundum non inclusus, extra mundum
non exclusus: yet in respect of his favorable presence he is not to be found
in every place; How God fills all places.
for if you seek the righteous God among unrighteous men, the faithful God
among lying perjurers, as the Grecians sought for Helen in Troy, when she was
with Proteus in Egypt, we shall be sure to miss him; because the holy spirit of
discipline flees from deceit, and dwells not in the body that is subject
unto sin; and therefore the place is to be considered where we must seek him:
and that is principally 1. The Church of Christ, among the faithful. And God is
found 1. In the Church among the faithful.
2. The holy Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles.


1. As Joseph and Mary when they lost Christ, found him not in the ways among
their friends and acquaintance, but in the Temple among the Doctors; so we
shall find him, not in the factious confederacies of private Conventicles, but
in the public assemblies of Gods holy Church, Psalm 26.8.
which is the place where his honor dwells; not among Perjurers, Liars,
Rebels, and the like, but among the faithful, and among those that fear the
Lord; for The Lord is with them that fear him, and put their trust in his
mercy, and with such he may be found.

And therefore if you would find the Lord, you must not walk in the counsel of
the ungodly, Psalm. 1.1.
nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful; you must
have nothing to do with the stool or seat of wickedness, which imagines
mischief, and does countenance their wickedness by a Law; but where you see the
righteous gathering themselves in the name of Christ, and joining their forces
in the fear of God, there is the Lord in the midst of them, Lev. 26.12.
even as himself has promised; I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and
will be their God, and they shall be my people.

2 In the holy Scriptures.
2. As we may find the Lord in the Church of the righteous, so we may find him
in the holy Scriptures; not in the Turks Alcoron, nor in the Popes Canon, nor
in man's Tradition, nor in any like unwritten verities, which are the muddy
inventions of distracted brains, and the idle vanities of seduced souls; we
send you to no such places to seek the Lord, whatsoever the malice of our
adversaries says of us; but we direct you to the pure Word of God, (...), for
thy Word is truth, and the Scriptures (...), John 17.17. John. 5.39. Aug.
Confess. l. 11. c. 2. 2 Timothy 3.13. Hieron. in ep. ad demetriad.
testify of me, says our Savior; and therefore Deliciae meae scripturae
tuae, thy Scriptures are my delights, says S. Augustine; and the reason is
rendered by S. Hierom; because they are able (as the Apostle s^ith) to make us
wise unto salvation; and all wisdom without this is but meet foolishness; for,
Quid prodest esse peritum and periturum? what will it boot a man to be wise
unto perdition, to be subtle to play the Rebel, to be a crafty Traitor, and to
go to Hell with a great deal of wit and learning, Aug. quo sup.
as St. Augustine speaks?

Psalm. 120.4.5.
Therefore though you should be constrained to dwell with Meshec, and to have
your habitation among the tents of Kedar, among the Egyptians or Babylonians,
among them that are enemies unto peace, as God knows how soon any of us may be
taken by such enemies: yet if we leave them, and take the holy Scriptures,
there we shall have the Lord to be our companion, though we should be shut up
with Jeremy in the dungeon. But

3. For the time of seeking God, 3. The time when God may be found.
you must remember that the Prophet bids us Seek the Lord while he may be
found; and many men seek salvation, in medio gehennae quae operata est in medio
terrae; and therefore mistaking their time they miss to find it; for God
allowed us no time, to seek him, but the time present, during this life, and no
other time; and you know the first Aphorism of Hippocrates is, that Ars longa,
vita brevis, Art is long, and our Life is short; yea, so short, Seneca de
brevitat. vita, c. 1.
that as Seneca says, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and others, quarrelled with
nature for giving beasts and plants so long an age, and to man so short a time,
which as the Prophet says, is but a span long, Psalm 90.10:
a dream, a thought, a nothing; so soon passes our time away, and we are
gone. And yet it is strange to see, how men do spend that little time which
they have to live, aut nihil agendo, aut male agendo, either in doing nothing,
or that evil which is indeed far worse than nothing; for though you see no man
willing to part with his money, yet you may find how lavish every man is of his
time, which is more precious than all wealth: And Seneca tells us of diverse men
in his time, Senec de b^evit. vit. c. 12.
that spent every day an hour or two in the Barbers shop, to cut down those
hairs that grew the night before, and were more curious of their locks than
they were careful of the Commonwealth; and others worse than these, spend
their time in gaming, drinking, and oppressing their poor Neighbors; and they
are very loath to consider, how vainly and how wickedly they do wast their
days: for he that has desired with ambition, conquered with insolency,
cozened with subtilty, plundered with covetousness, and misspent all by
prodigality, must needs be afraid to review those things, which must needs
make him ashamed; or if these men have so much grace to look back to see what
they have misspent, before they have spent all, then shall you hear them say,
that if they were young again, they would change their course, and Seek the
Lord, that they might live, and not lose their lives in following after lying
vanities; but alas that cannot be; for as Plato says, (...), time and tide
stay for no man, and as the Poet says, nec quae preteriit hora redire potest,
that which is past cannot be recalled again; and Seneca says, that the
greatest Poet that ever was tells us, our happiest days do pass from us first.

Eccles. 12 1.
And therefore I say to you young men, remember your Creator in the days of
your youth, and as Timothy had known the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15.
(...), and was nursed up in the fear of the Lord, so do you; for what will it
avail you to compose your speech according to the rules of Lilly, and the
Rhetoric of Cicero, and not to have your lives answerable to the rules of
charity and the precepts of the holy Scriptures? to learn out of Aristotle the
nature of the creatures, and to remain ignorant of the will of the Creator? and
to have learned that whereby you may live richly here for a while, and to
neglect that whereby you may live happily hereafter for ever? And I say to you
old men that nunquam sera est ad paenitendum via, it is never too late to
repent if you can but truly repent; for he that requires your first fruits
refuses not your last age; And I say to you all, to day if you will hear his
voice, Psalm 95.
harden not your hearts; for now is the time acceptable, now is the day of
Salvation; and semper nocuit differ vocatis.

When we ought most especially to seek the Lord.
But though we ought at all times in all places to seek the Lord, yet there are
some times wherein we ought more especially and more earnestly to seek after
him, than at all other times; and those are the times of troubles and
adversities, when God scourges us for losing him: Psalm 50 15. Mat. 11.28.
for so God bids us, call upon me in the time of trouble; and Christ says,
come unto me all you that travel and are heavy Laden; and so the Brethren of
Joseph sought unto God in their troubles, and the Mariners that transported
Jonas, Jonas 1.5, 7.
though but heathens, yet will they call every man upon his God, when the Sea
was ready to swallow them up; Mat. 8.25.
and the Disciples being in the like danger came crying unto Christ, and said,
(...), Lord save us, me perish; and they that will not seek the Lord in their
distress will never seek him; for the Prophet speaking of the wicked, says,
fill their faces with shame, Psalm. 83.16.
that they may seek thy name: and of them that will not then seek him, the Lord
says, Why should ye be stricken any more? as if he had said, Isa. 1.5.
you are now past all hope, when your afflictions cannot make you seek the
Lord, but that you will revolt more and more, and prove like Pharaoh, that the
more the Lord plagued him, Exodus c. 8, c 9, c. 10.
the more he hardened his own heart.

And therefore seeing the Lord has now bent his bow like an enemy, and set us
as a mark for the arrow, he has set our necks under persecution, and turned
our songs into mournings, and our happy and long continued Peace into cruel
Wars: though heretofore we have past our time in vanities, and have neglected
to seek the Lord: yet if we have any grace, let us now seek unto the Lord, and
say with the Prophet, O Lord, Lam. 5.23, 21.
wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long a time? turn
thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned, renew our days as of old.
And

4. For the manner how we ought to seek the Lord, 4 The manner how we ought to
seek the Lord. 1 Totally with all parts. 1 of our bodies 1 Cor. 6.20.
it must be. 1. Totally with all our parts. 2. Carefully with all diligence.


1. With all our parts of body and soul, externally and internally, with
outward profession, and with inward obedience. For

1. Externally we are to glorify God in our body, that is, with our members,
with bended knees, with our eyes lifted up to Heaven, and with our tongues
praising God, and confessing our own sins; that God may be justified in his
sayings and clear when we are judged, otherwise, as many ask and receive not,
because they ask amiss, Romans 3.^. James 4.^.
that is, aut praeter verbum aut non propter verbum, either not according to
Gods will, or not for Christ his sake: so many men do seek and find not,
because they seek amiss, either too proudly or too remissly, Our outwar^
seeking consists chiefly (...) three point^
or some way else otherwise than they ought to seek; and therefore that you may
not miss to find, I beseech you mark how you may seek aright, as other godly
men have done; and that is briefly. 1 Humbling our selves.
1. Humiliando corpus: by humbling our bodies. 2. Confitendo peccata, confessing
our sins. 3. Orando Deum, praying to God. For


1. Look upon the Saints of the former times, and see how they humbled
themselves when they sought the Lord; 2 Reg. 22.11, 19 Psalm. 51.17. 2 Chronicles.
12.7. Judges 20.26. 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
for when Sennacherib sent Rabshecah against Jerusalem, Hezechiah rent his
clothes, and covered himself with Sackcloath, and went into the House of the
Lord. When Josias heard the Curses of the Law against the transgressors
thereof, his heart was tender, says the Text, and he humbled himself and rent
his clothes, and wept before the Lord; and so did Ahab, though but an
Hypocrite, and the King of Ninev^h, though but an Heathen, and all that fought
the Lord aright, humbled themselves before the Lord: and to testify the
trueness of their humiliation they rent their clothes, they put on Sackcloath,
they besprinkled themselves with ashes, they went barefoot, and they fasted
from all meat, and a licitis abstinuerunt, quia concupierunt illicita. For
though a beggar may be proud in his rags, and another may be humbled in
scarlet, yet quia per exteriora cognoscuntur interiora, and our habits and
actions should suit with the times and occasions, as we put on wedding garments
and our mourning weeds, when the times do call for such: so it is not fit to
come with proud hearts, vain habits, wanton looks, and patched faces, when we
come fasting and to be humbled for our sins, Psalm 35.13.
for this is not to humble our selves with fasting, as the Prophet speaks.

2 Confessing our sins. Lam. 3 42. Bar. 1.15, 16. etc. 2 12. Dan 6.5, and 8.
and Ezra. 6.6.
2. We must confess our sins and acknowledge our own unrighteousness. We have
transgressed and Rebelled, says the Prophet Jeremy; and Baruch sets down
the form of the confession that we should make, saying, to the Lord our God
belongs righteousness, but to us the confusion of faces, to our Kings, and to
our Princes, and to our Priests, and to our Prophets, and to our Fathers, for
we have sinned before the Lord, we have done ungodly, we have dealt
unrighteously in all thine Ordinances: and the Prophet Daniel makes the very
same confession; and so David, when God sent the Plague among his people,
confessed his own sins, 2 Samuel 24.17.
saying, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: and the reason of this is
rendered by Solomon, Prove. 28.13.
He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
forsakes the same shall find mercy.

And therefore I do confess the sins of the Clergy, we have not discharged our
duties as we ought to do; and I would say a great deal more of the highest
order of our Calling, but that a great deal more than is true is said by
others: Genesis 3.12. 1 Samuel 15.21.
for we will not excuse our selves: but as the Poet says of Women. Parcite
paucarum diffundere crimen in omnes. Blame not all because some are lewd, so I
say of the Bishops and Clergy: let every horse bear his own burden, let them
that transgress, if you know any such, be severely punished, and as their lives
should be more holy, so let the punishment of the offenders be the more
exemplary, and let that Judas that will betray his Master have the reward of
Judas: but as Christ cashiered not all the Apostles, because Judas was a
Traitor, and Peter a denier of his Master: so should not we destroy the
Calling, or as Abraham says, destroy the righteous with the wicked, because
some of them in your opinion may be unworthy of that calling: for this would be
culpam flagitio fugare, to drive away sin by a greater sin, and vertere domum,
in stead of verrere domum, to destroy the house, when they should but sweep the
house.

And as the Priests so must the People confess their sins if they would find
the Lord, for it will not serve our turn to recriminate, to do as Adam did, lay
the fault upon the woman, or as Saul did, to post over his fault unto the
People: it is not the way to find the Lord, to lay all the blame upon the
Parliament, and to make the Rebels the sole causes of our miseries: for though
they cannot be excused for their wickedness, yet you may be assured we suffer
all this that is come upon us for our own sins, though not for the sin of
Bebellion, yet for other odious sins, that have provoked God to stir up these
Rebels to punish us; and as the Prophet says, erravimus cum patribus, so it
may be, we might, if we would confess the truth, say erravimus cum fratribus,
we have in some sort committed the same sins with them; for sins may be
committed diverse ways, Sins may be committed diverse ways.
as 1. By acting it. 2. By commanding it, as David did Joab to kill Urias. 3.
By Counselling how to do it, as Balaam did Bala^ to entangle Israel. 4. By
consenting to it, as David speaks, Psalm. 50.8.
When thou saw a thief thou consentest unto him, and have been partaker with
the adulterer. 5. By delighting to see it done, Romans 1.32.
as St. Paul says, to have pleasure in them that sin. 6. By our silence,
conniving and not hindering sin to be committed, when it lies in our power,
and it is our duty so to do; for qui non vetat peccare cum possit, jubet; and
if any of you that are here, have or had your hearts at London in any of these
ways, the Holy Ghost will tell you, Rev 2.14. or a few things
though thou have not denied my faith, when thou dwell even where Satan's
seat is, yet (...) I have somewhat against thee; because thou should have
nothing to do, Psalm 94.20. For in all this I speak not of Popish and auricular
confession to the Priest.
no compliance at all with the stool of wickedness, which frames mischief by a
Law: and therefore repent, and be not ashamed to confess your sins to God, if
you would find the Lord. And

3. We must make our humble and our fervent Prayers to God, that he would
forgive us our sins, and be entreated for us, and reconciled unto us for his
mercies sake, and for his son Jesus Christ his sake; Lord have mercy upon us,
and forgive us our sins, 3 Fervent prayers.
that we have sinned against thee; for this was the practice of all the Saints
of God, in all their calamities, as you may see, when the Israelites murmured
against Moses, and God would have utterly destroyed them for it, Number. 14.19.
Moses prayed unto the Lord, and said, Pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of
this people, according to the greatness of thy mercy; so when Sennacherib came
against Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles 32.20.
Hezechiah the King and Isaiah the Prophet prayed, and cried to heaven: And his
prayer is set down, 2 Reg. 19.15. and when the Moabites and Ammonites, in a
huge multitude, came against Jehosaphat, he set himself to seek the Lord, says
the Text, and proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judah, and made an excellent
prayer to God, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. usque ad verse. 13. which I desire you to read and
observe it well; so Daniel, after he had made confession of the sins of the
people, makes an earnest and most fervent Prayer to God for the remission of
their sins; so David says unto God; Dan 9.16 usque ad 20. ver.
look upon mine adversities and miseries and forgive me all my sins: and Christ
bids us to ask, and we should have, Mat. 7.7.

And if we thus unfainedly confess our sins, Psalm. 25.17.
and fervently beg pardon, and constantly forsake our sins, God is faithful,
(says the Apostle) that is, faithful, because he promised, 1 John 1.9.
to forgive us our sins.

2. As we are to seek the Lord externally, with all the parts of our bodies, so
we are to seek him internally, 2. With all the faculties of our souls.
with all the faculties of our soul; and as David concludes this manner to his
Son Solomon, it must be with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, for otherwise
to seek the Lord with outward profession, and not with inward obedience is but
mere hypocrisy, 1 Chro. 28 9.
like the Religion of the Jews, that were ever handling of holy things, but
without feeling, and drew near unto God with their mouths, and honored him
with their lips, Isa. 29.13.
when they called upon him, and prayed unto him, but removed their hearts far
from him: And therefore God abhorred their devotion, and said, I hate, I
despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies,
though you offer me burnt offerings, Amos 5.21.22. and Isa. 1.11.
and your meat offerings, I will not accept them, neither will I regard the
peace offerings of your fat Beasts, and as the Lord says in Jerem. When they
fast, I will not hear their cry, Jer. 14.12.
and when they offer burnt offering and oblation, I will not accept them, but I
will consume them by the Sword, and by the Famine, and by the Pestilence:
Outward profession what it is like.
because this outward profession is none otherwise than a shadow that is
something in show but nothing in substance, or like Zeuxis and Parhasius
Pictures, whereof Zeuxis deceived the birds with his counterfeit grapes, and
Parhasius deceived his fellow Painter with the Picture of a Sheet.

But let not us deceive our selves with a sheet or a shadow of holiness, and
think that current which is but counterfeit: for we must seek the Lord with all
our hearts, or otherwise, if we offer Sacrifice with Cain, and pray with the
Pharisee, and fast with the Jews to strife and debate, or with the Rebels to
plunder and murder, Isa. 58.4.
and hear as many Sermons as the precisest Hypocrite, and yet forsake not our
sins, and obey not Gods Ordinance, to submit our selves to the higher powers,
but Rebel against Gods Anointed, we may with Esau hunt for a blessing, but
catch a curse, and seek the Lord for mercy, but find him in his justice: when
he shall say unto us, (...), I know you not whence you are, Luke 13.27.
depart from me all ye that work iniquity.

2. We are to seek the Lord most dilig^ntly
2. As we are to seek the Lord totally, with all the parts both of our bodies
and of our souls; so we are to seek him, not frigide, coldly and carelessly, but
with all diligence, as the woman that lost he^ g^oat lighted a candle, Luke
15.8.
and swept the house, and sought diligently till she found it; and therefore
St. Chrysostom writing upon these words of the Apostle, work out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling, says; he does not barely use the simple
word (...), Phil. 2.12.
work it out, but he says, (...), that is, as the Father does interpret it,
(...), accurately, precisely, and with a great deal of care and study; even as
Saint Paul says the twelve Tribes served God, (...); Acts 26.7.
instantly (says our Translation) day and night; and surely not without great
cause; for as in the civil policy, salus populi est suprema lex, the safety of
King and People is principally to be regarded; so in the life of a Christian,
hoc est unum necessarium, this ought to be our chiefest care, to seek the Lord;
for as Seneca says of Philosophy, sive aliquid habes, O jam Philosophare, sive
nihil, hoc prius quaere quam quidquam; so much better may I say with the
Prophet, whether thou have somewhat or nothing; yet seek the Lord before thou
seek any thing.

2. The object of our seeking the Lord.
2. The Object of our seeking is the Lord: a Subject much farther exceeding the
former, than the Celestial globe is larger than the Center of this earth: and
therefore he might easily be found, if he were but carefully sought: for
Jupiter est quodcunque vides -- and the Spirit of the Lord fills all places
being not far from every one of us, Acts 17.28.
seeing as the Apostle says, in h m we live, and move, and have our being: how
then can we mi^s to find him, without whom we cannot choose but lose our selves?

But such is our misery, that we seek him not; for as the swine do eat the
acorns, yet never look up to the tree from whence they fall: so do we deal with
the blessings of God: we gather them, and yet are ignorant of him, and do
sacrifice with the Athenians (...), and therefore we thank him not, because we
know him not, and we know him not, because we seek him not: but many of us seek
our Lady, and not the Lord, What men do seek after.
and pray to her and offer sacrifice to the Queen of heaven, more and better
than to the Lord of heaven: other^ seek to neither Lord nor Lady, but to their
servants, (that here on earth are commonly prouder than their Masters) to the
Saints and Angels: others mounting not their thought any higher than the earth,
do only seek for the things of this world, quaerenda pecunia primum; some for
riches, some for honors, and some for revenge, which is the worst some of all;
and others seek knots in a bulrush, great doubts in needless points; for I will
not touch on those overwise men, How many men search for trifles.
that seek to find out the deepest Mysteries of Gods secrets, in his absolute
decrees and unsearchable ways of Election and Reprobation, and the like; but
of those lighter heads, that bestow their search about things of nothing, as
the Graecians did beat their brains to find out how many rowers Ulysses ship
had, and whether the Iliads or the Odysses were first written; so we must know
whether the ancient Monks wore their Cloaks short like the French, or down to
the heels like the Spaniards, or whether Saint Augustine wore a white garment
upon his black clothes, or a black cheimer upon a lawn surplice; and a thousand
such like points and ceremonies that are like the spiders web, which will make
no garment for them; or like the banquet of a sick man's dream, that will not
satisfy their hungry souls, and are raised up by the Devil, to this only end,
that while we seek after these fruitless things, that may hurt us much, but
avail us little, that may best be spared and ought least to be disputed, we
might leave off to seek the Lord, and those things that do necessarily pertain
unto salvation.

But in universalibus later error, What it is to seek the Lord
general things are often dark, and every one says that he seeks the Lord, but
that either he m^keth darkness his secret place, Ver. 14.
his pavilion round about him with dark waters and thick clouds to cover him;
or else dwells in the light that no man can attain unto it; Psalm. 37 27.
otherwise, God forbid, that you should imagine, says every man, that we do
not seek the Lord. Therefore to take away this curtain, to unvail this glorious
face, and to let you see, that few of us do seek the Lord, whatsoever we say,
the Prophet tells us plainly, that to seek the Lord, is to seek good, and not
evil, or, as he explain h it further in the immediate Verse 15. it is to hate
the evil and love the good, and to establish judgment in the gate; and this
the Prophet David said long before, eschew evil, and do good, and dwell for
evermore.

Besides, God is truth, and God is justice; therefore you must seek the truth,
and you must do justice: for When truth shall flourish out of the earth, and
righteousness, shall look down from heaven, Psa. 85.11, 12.
then the Lord will show loving kindness he will speak peace unto his people,
and our Land shall give her increase; but while our Land flows with Lies, and
the father of lies rewards the Liers, and spreads them abroad to uphold
robberies, oppressions, and rebellions; the Lord will not speak peace unto us;
because righteousness and peace have kissed each other; and therefore though we
should be never so desirous of peace, and to procure peace, be contented, it
should be done upon unrighteous terms, it may be with the ruin of the Church;
yet it cannot be; None can make peace but God. Jer. 25.29. Psalm. 46.9.
because it is not in the power of any man, no not of the King himself to
conclude a peace, when God proclaims war; for as he calls for a sword upon
the Inhabitants of a Land, so it is he, and he alone, that makes wars to cease
in all the world, he breaks the bow, and knappeth the spear in sunder, and
burns the Chariots in the fire, and without him it cannot be done; as you may
see in Ier. 47.6. And I fear (and I pray God it be but my fear) that as the
wrath of God was never appeased, for the innocent blood of the Gibeonites, that
Saul most unjustly spilt, until it was revenged by blood upon the house of
Saul, so the innocent blood, that has been spilt in this Kingdom, can never be
expiated, until an atonement be made by blood; because that without blood
there is no remission, that is, of blood, unless they do with Manasses wipe
away the streams of blood, with the streams of most penitent tears; for he that
sheddeth man's blood, that is, illegally, by man shall his blood be shed, that
is, judiciarily, by the Magistrate, says God in the Old Testament; and all
they that take the sword, that is, without due authority, shall perish by the
sword, that is, by just authority, says our Savior Christ in the New
Testament; and therefore if your peace may not be had with truth and according
unto Justice, gird you with your swords upon your thighs, O you mighty men of
valor, and let the right hand of the most highest teach you terrible things,
until as our Prophet speaks, Ver. 24.
judgment shall run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream, that
is, smoothly without any manner of opposition, as Montanus and Vatablus render
it: Set God and his truth always before your eyes, and labor for that peace,
which may stand with the peace of Conscience, and with your peace with God; or
otherwise you may purchase a worldly peace at too dear a rate, it may be with
the loss of your souls; when God shall say unto you, as he does unto the Jews;
Shall not I visit for these things? as if he said, you indeed for your peace
and prosperities sake, for fear of danger, and in hope of rest, may be
contented to wink at all these sins that have provoked me to wrath, and perhaps
to sell my truth, and suffer my service to be abused, and my servants to be
destroyed, that you may live in peace: but do you think that I am such an one
as your selves, or that I will suffer all these things to go unrevenged? No,
no, says the Prophet, The Lord is known to execute judgment, and he will be
Judge himself; he will kindle the fire, and none shall quench it.

And therefore noble and religious Gentlemen, that love your God better than
the World, and his eternal honor better than your own temporal happiness, love
peace and ensue it, but let it be with the truth and with justice; let the
story of the worthy Maccabees be set before your eyes, that rather than they
would change their Religion, or suffer the service of God any ways to be
impaired, and their Ecclesiastical government to be in any thing changed, they
sold their peace with the loss of their lives, which is their everlasting
praise; and here I do profess, I do most heartily wish for peace, and would
think my self most happy to see peace established, as of old; but rather than I
should see it with the ruin of the Church, with a Presbyterian Discipline,
that new-sprung outlandish weed of man's invention, and no plant of Gods
plantation, I beseech Almighty God, that I may beg my bread and se^k it in
desolate places, that my blood may be poured like water upon the ground, and
the remainder of my years may be cut off from the Land of the Living; so much
do I desire to embrace mine own misery, rather than to see the Churches
infelicity, and the service of God so much vilified. And I am confident, that
all my brethren the Bishops and Prelates will say with Jonas, If we alone be
the cause of all this storm, and if our persons by any thing, that could be
done to us, could appease these distractions, and procure the peace of the
Church and State, do what you will to us. Non multum nos movebit.
Si propter nos haec tempestas, if you see just cause, cast us all into the
sea, so you save the Ship of Christ, preserve the Church, rent not the garment
of Christ, devour not the revenues of the Clergy, and destroy not the
government that was established by the Apostles, and continued to Gods glory
and the gaining of so many thousand souls to Christ, from his being on earth to
this very day; because the dishonor that must infallibly redound to God, and
the detriment that must fall to the Church of Christ, by the abolishing of
Episcopacy, troubles us a great deal more, than any loss that can happen unto
our selves; for did we see the same government, with the same power, as it
ought to be, settled on any other persons; though our selves were degraded, (how
justly we would leave the censure unto God,) you should never hear me speak
much thereof.

So you see what it is to seek the Lord, not his Essence which is
incomprehensible, but to do his will, and to obey his Commandments which is
most acceptable unto him, as to love him, to pray unto him, to rely upon him,
and to do toward all men, that which is just and righteous in his sight. What
we ought to do to live.
Or to set down all in a word, do as the Lord directs you, and you shall live;
and that is, 1. To do your own best endeavors to preserve your lives. And yet
2. Refer the preservation of your lives only unto God.


1. In the time of peace and prosperity, 1. To do our best to preserve our own
lives. 1. In the time of peace. Psalm. 55.23.
the best way for us to preserve our life is to serve God; for if you honor
your father and mother, your days shall be long in the Land, says the Lord
himself; and so the keeping of his other Precepts is the preservation of our
lives. But the bloodthirsty and deceitful man shall not live out half his
days: and so the drunk^rd, the luxurious and the malicious shall by their sins
diminish their years; because sin is that sharp Atropos which cutteth off the
thread of man's life, and the great Epitomiser which abbreviates all things unto
us; as it wastes our wealth, it destroys our health, it confineth our
liberty, it shortneth our days, and to sum all in one Catastrophe, it brings
us all into our graves: Niceph. l. 11. c. 3.
when as Trajan said unto Valens, it sends victory unto our enemies, and
destroys us sooner than our enemies; and therefore as you love your life, so
you must hate your sin, and as the Heathens clipped the wings of victory lest
it should fly away from them unto their enemies; So we must clip our sins, or
else victory will fly unto our enemies.

2. In the time of dangers, wars, plagues, 2. In the time of dangers.
or any other distress, we are commanded by God to do our best to preserve our
lives; for it is not enough for us to say, the Lord will save us, but we must
do our best to save our selves; So the Mariners that carried Jonas prayed unto
their Gods, and yet rowed, their best to preserve their lives; So Jehosaphat,
Ezechias and Josias when the Armies of their enemies came against them, did put
their whole trust in Gods assistance, and rely upon his help for their
deliverance; yet they prepared the instruments of War, they fortified their
Cities, and gathered all the strength of men that they could make to withstand
the violence of their Foes; and we must do the like, when we are in the like
danger; for though the Scripture bids us, cast our care upon God; yet it bids
us not to cast away our care, or to be without care, but to have a care, and
the best care that we can take to preserve our lives from the danger of the
enemy, to raise men and money, and as Solomon says, 2. To rely wholly upon God.
to prepare the horse for the day of battle. And then

2. When the horse is prep^red, and we have endeavored our best, we must refer
our lives only unto God; it is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but as the Prophet says, salvation belongs unto the Lord; for it is
he that gives victory in the battle, and it is he that saves our life from
destruction; for as his help will not preserve us without our care; so all our
care cannot save us without his help; but when both these go together, then we
may be sure that our care and endeavor with his favor and assistance will so
preserve us that we shall live.

Therefore when we lose and are put to the worst, we should not be dejected,
which is the fault of too many of us, but we should say with King David, I will
yet trust in God, which is the help of my countenance and my God; and when we
gain and get the better of our enemies, we should not be puffed up with pride,
and diminish the praise of God, who gave us the better, which is the fault of
as many more, that ascribe too much unto themselves and too little to Gods
goodness: but, as the Poet says of Pompey, so much more should we say, that
are Christians. -- Non me videre superbum
Prospera fatorum, nec fractum adversa videbunt.
Or as Menivensis says of King Alfred, Si modo victor erat ad crastina bella
pavebat,
Si modo victus erat ad crastina bella parabat.
So should we do, in all fortunes go on, eodem vultus tenori, and in all our
actions rely on God, and refer our selves wholly unto him: and doing so, we
shall be sure to live.

1. Because he has promised us, that if we thus seek him according to his
will, we shall live according as we desire; and he is not as man that he should
lie, nor as the Son of man that he should change his mind, but he is Yea and
Amen, he is truth it self: and therefore sicut verus est in retributione
malorum, ita verax est in promissione bonorum, as he is most certain in the
punishment of the wicked, so he is as certain in his promise to the godly.

willing to save us, and therefore cries unto us, Why will ye dye? why will ye
dye: O ye house of Israel? For as I live says the Lord, I desire not the death
of a sinner; and it is worth our observation to consider how pathetically and
how feelingly he speaks to this purpose: Psalm. 81.14, 15, 16.
O that my people would have hearkened unto me, for if Israel had walked in my
ways, I should soon have put down their enemies, and turned my hand against
their adversaries; the haters of the Lord should have been found liars, but
their time should have endured for ever.

3. Because he is able both to perform his promise, and to satisfy Seek him
that makes the seven stars, and Orion, Ver. 8.
and turns the shadow of death into the morning, and makes the day dark with
night, that calls for the waters of the Sea, and pours them out upon the
face of the earth: that is, as St. Hieron. shows, Fortificare debiles.
seek him that is the Creator of all things, that is mighty to save, and able
to do whatsoever he pleases, to strengthen the spoiled, Ver. 9.
as Vatab. and Arias say: or as Aquila turns it, subridere potentiam potentium,
to scorn the strength of the mighty, and to destroy the destroyer.

And therefore if God be with us, though we be weak and our enemies strong, we
few and they many, yet we need not fear them: because we rely not upon our own
strength, but upon the assistance of our God, qui dividit contritionem super
fortitudinem, which casts abundance of destructions upon the mighty, as the
Septuagint render the words of the Prophet; and though we be simple, and our
enemies subtle and crafty, full of all politic devices, to raise men and to
get money, and to unite their strength by wicked Covenants, Oaths and
Associations: yet we need not fear, because we rely not upon our own wit, but
upon the wisdom of God, which can destroy the wisdom of the wise, 1 Cor. 1.19.
and cast away the understanding of the prudent, and turn the counsel of
Achitophel to his own destruction: Prove. 21.30.
and non est concilium contra eum: and therefore, O my beloved Brethren, seek
the Lord, and fear not, but, as Moses says, stand still, that is, Exodus 14.13.
constant in your resolution, for the service of your God and the King, and
behold the salvation of the Lord which he will show unto you this day, or at
this time: 1 Samuel 14.6. 2 Chro. 14.11.
For there is no restraint unto the Lord to save by many or by few, as both
Jonathan and Asa testify.

2. The promise
2. The promise (as I told you at first) is the best of all desires, you shall
live; the former part was like the toylsome labor of the Inhabitants of
Persepolis, when they cut the wood with their axes; but this latter is like the
feast that Cyrus made unto them, Justia. l. 1. hist.
when they had finished their Labors: durus labor, sed merces dulcis, though
the labor is hard, yet the reward is sweet; and it never troubles us, to take
great pains, where we shall be well paid, but to labor all night with the
Apostles, and to catch nothing, How ill some masters reward their servants.
durus est hic sermo, this is a hard saying, after a hard labor; but it is not
so in Gods service: for, though in following the lusts of the flesh, and the
vanities of this World, excessit medicina modum, the reward that the Devil
gives us, shall be a great deal sorer than all the pain we have taken in his
service: for he deals with u^, Val. Max. l. 9. c. 3. Curtius hist. l. 3.
as Alexander did with Clitus, Calisthenes and other of his chiefest Captains;
or as Darius did with Eudemus, to expose him unto death, when he forsook his
own native Country, and de^icated his whole life to his command; yet in the
service of Christ it is far otherwise: whatsoever a man does for him he shall
be rewarded a hundred fold, How abundantly Christ rewards his servants.
and though he gives but a cup of cold water for his sake, yet for this, he
shall not lose his reward; And therefore this should encourage us to seek the
Lord, because our reward does so far exceed our work.

Mat. 10.42.
But let us consider the nature of this promise, thou shall live; that is, live
long, live well, and live for ever. For

1. The seekers of God shall live long. Psalm 37.2.
1. Though the bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days, and the ungodly shall be soon cut down like the grass, gemit sub pondere
tellus, when the earth is weary to bear them on it; yet if we seek the Lord,
our days shall be long in the Land, which the Lord our God given us, and
though the pestilence, that walks in darkness, Psalm. 91.6.
and the arrow that flies in the noon day, do threaten our death at every
hour, yet when a thousand shall fall besides us, and ten thousand on our right
hand, it shall not come nigh us: such is the reward of serving God.

2. They shall live well. Isa. 3.10.
2. They shall not only live, for a miserable life is not so good as a happy
death, but they shall live well and happily while they live; for surely it
shall go well with the righteous, says the Prophet, and King David says, the
Lions may want and suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord shall want no
manner of thing that is good, and the reason is rendered by the Apostle, Psalm.
34.10.
because godliness has the promise both of this life and of the life to come.
And 1 Timothy 4.8. 3. They shall live for ever. Psalm. 37.27.


3. If we eschew evil and do good, we shall live for evermore, and gloriosum
imperium sine fine dabit, and God will give us a Kingdom without ending; And
therefore seeing this promise is so plentiful, it is worth our labor that we
should seek the Lord.

perform his promise? for, did not the Prophets, the Apostles, and all the
Martyrs of the Primitive Church seek the Lord, and believe in Christ with all
their hearts; and yet was not Zachary stoned in the Courts of the house of the
Lord? Micheas killed by Joram? Amos knocked in the head with a club? Isaiah
sawed in pieces by Manasses? John Baptist beheaded? How they that sought the
Lord were used in this world.
St. Stephen stoned? James killed? St. Paul beheaded? St. Peter crucified? St.
Thomas killed with a Javelin? St. Mark burned? and what shall I say of Simeon,
Polycarpus, Justinus, Attalus, Marcella, Apollonia, and abundance more of holy
Saints, Alii ferro perempti, alii patibulo cruciati. Eusebius. Ec. hist.
whereof alii flammis exusti, some were burned, others beheaded, and all
deprived of their life for seeking the Lord and confessing Christ? And for any
happy life the servants of God do lead, does not St. Paul say that all which
will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution; and afflictions do
wait for them in every place? 2 Timothy 3.12. Acts 20.23. Psalm 37.36. Luke 16.
and when the ungodly flourish like a green bay tree, clothed in scarlet, and
fine linen, and fair deliciously every day; the poor Saints even in their
bonds are glad to eat ashes as it were bread, and to mingle their drink with
weeping?

I confess this has been ever a sore objection that disheartened many men, and
made King David's feet well nigh to slip; Sol.
but if I shall obtain your patience to stay with me a little in Gods
Sanctuary, I shall soon unty this Gordian knot, or so cut it to pieces, that it
can no ways be any hinderance to our progress. For

1. Seneca proves, Seneca de brevit. vitae c. 8.
that long life consists not in the great number of years, but in virtuous
actions; and the wise man says, an undefiled life is the old age; for God
esteems of no time but what we spend in his service; Sap. 1. All time lost
that is not spent in Gods service.
and therefore they that lived 100 years in pleasures have but lost all their
time, and been as dead all that time which they lived; and those holy Saints
that were cut off in the midst of their days, have lived longer, because they
spent their whole time in Gods service; the other lost their time, and lost
their life, as Titus was wont to say, diem perdidi, I lost the day, wherein I
did no good, and these have gained every hour. And

2. Afflictions not so esteemed by the Saints as they are by the worldlings.
2. Whatsoever afflictions the Saints do suffer, we must not account them so
great miseries unto them, as the world takes them; for the Philosopher tells
us, that quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis; and they esteem
them not as the world does; but they count them, as the fatherly chastisements
of Gods love, and not any arguments of Gods hatred, and as the Poet says, How
God sweetneth the afflictions of his servants.
Una eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit. the same hand, which laid on their
stripes will heal their sores.

invincible gift of patience; which does more iurage their tormenting
persecutors, Tert. in apol^g
then themselves are in suffering torments.

content, that is, in any estate to be contented; Phil. 4.11.
which is far better than to abound with wealth, and to want this heavenly
gift; for he is most rich that desires nothing, and he is best pleased, that is
never discontented. And

rejoice in tribulation, and to account it all joy, James 1.2. Romans 8.31. Ver.
37.
when they fall into diverse temptations; a strange thing, that they should
rejoice in that which the world does most fear; yet such is the case of the
righteous, that neither life, nor death, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
any other thing shall be able to separate them from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus; but they abound in want, they are content in Prison, they rejoice
in death, and in all things they are more than conquerours for his sake that
loved them.

And therefore to conclude, let us seek the Lord and we shall live, and we
shall be happy; because he never fails them that seek him; but he will hear
their prayers and will help them, so that they need fear neither the scarlet
gowns, nor the sharpest swords, neither their dissembling friends, nor their
greatest enemies; for that God is with them in Prison, as with Joseph; in the
Sea, as with Jonas; in the fire, as with the three Children, and in all places,
to preserve them, from all evil here, and to bring them to all happiness
hereafter, to live for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be all
praise and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

Jehovae Liberatori.
FINIS.
How the Rebels dealt with the Bishop while he was Preaching this Sermon.
While Archimedes was very studious in the framing of his Mathematical
proportions, the enemy, says the Historian, was sacking the Town and pulling
him out of his house, or ready to pull down his House about his ears: and not
much unlike; That very day, the 8th of March, when I was, as Religious as I
could, I am sure, with an unfaigned heart, Preaching this very Sermon in S.
Mary's, the Rebels out of Northampton, seized upon my House, took away all my
goods and Cattle, and as I am informed by a Letter from a faithful Preacher,
the Committee concluded to sequester all my Estate, and all that I purchased
for my Wife and Children by the indefatigable pains of 17 years service, in an
honorable house, to the use of the Parliament; so that now the poor Bishop of
Ossory, Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charibdins;

Or as Lucian says, shunning the smoke (of the Irish insurrection, that only
withheld all that they should pay unto him) he fell into the fire (of the
English Rebellion, that thus took all that he had from him;) for which I pray
God to forgive them; it does no ways trouble me, when I know, that he, which
lent me all, may justly send whom he will to fetch all away from me; and I do
Profess before my God; if I had all the Rebels Estate, yet I should freely
without the least dispute, leave it, lose it, and part with it, rather than I
would take their wicked Covenant, prove disloyal unto my King, depart an inch
from the truth of God, or any ways defile my conscience for any worldly
wealthy; and I do heartily thank my God, that he has given me this resolution,
to rejoice more in the sincerity of this my Prosession, than any ways to
grieve at my losses, afflictions or persecutions: and therefore the taking away
of my Estate moves me to nothing else, but to pray to God to give them grace to
repent them of their sins committed against God, and their Rebellion against
their King, whom God has commanded them to honor and to obey: so I leave
them, that left nothing besides Loyalty to his King and fidelity to his God,
unto their Orator, still remaining,

Gr. Ossory.
Though the Lord slay me, yet will I trust in him, says holy Job; and though
the pretended Parliament should rob me to my very shirt; yet will I both Preach
and write and pray against their wickedness; this will I do, so help me God,
who is my God, in whom I trust. Amen.



THE EIGTHTH SERMON.
MATTHEW 17.21. This kind of Devils goes not out, but by prayer and fasting.


THe holy, and blessed Apostle, S. Paul, being a stout Champion of Jesus
Christ, says, He has fought with beasts at Ephesus, which was a great City,
full of Great men, and of great wickedness; and he overcame them: and I have
fought with beasts in London, not inferior to Ephesus, any ways; and with the
limbs, head and tail, of the great Antichrist, the members of the the long
Parliament; and as yet, I praise Jehovah, my Deliverer, I escape invulnerate;
and now I am to fight with Devils, and do hope, by the help of the same
Jehovah, Yet in the end of this Treatise you, may see, how one of these
Daimons, before I printed the same, dealt with me. Ephesians. 6.14, 15, 16.
to escape their fiery darts, and to be freed from them, if not to foil these
foul spirits; and S. Paul says, that when we go about to wrestle with these
Principalities, and spiritual wickedness, we must put on the whole armor of
God; and he names them, Shield, Sword, Helmet, and all, Cap-a-pe: and I will
follow his counsel; but principally insist upon these two principal weapons,
which our Savior here names, and are the fittest to combat with those Devils
that I am here now to strive withal; and they are Prayer and Fasting; for this
kind of Devils goes not out, but by prayer and fasting.

To begin then, you must understand, that Christian Profession is resembled
unto a Race, and the Runners in this Race are the Professors of the Christian
Religion: 1 Cor 9.24. Heb. 12.1.
men, women and children, nobles, gentles, and beggars, all Christians, and all
run in this Race; Hierom. Epist. ad Eustach.
for so S. Hierome says, Stadium est haec vita mortalibus; hic contendimus, ut
alibi coronemur; this life is a Race for all mortal men; and here we,
especially that are Christians, do strive, that we may be crowned elsewhere,
and our striving, our fighting, and our running must be, Non pedum celeritate,
not by the swiftness of our feet, were we as swift as Asahel, or Atalanta the
swift, sed and morum sanctitate, and fidei probitate contendimus: but we must
contend by the holiness of our life, the sincerity of our actions and the
purity of our faith: and the prize that we run for, is a prize most precious
and invaluable, no less than a Crown, and a Crown neither of Olive, nor of Oak,
neither of grass nor of gold, which Aul. Gellius says, Aul. Gellius l. 5. c. 6.
the Romans used to give unto their Victors, for these are contemptible, and
corruptible things; but our prize that we strive and fight for, is a Crown of
eternity, which S. Peter calls (...): 1 Pet. 1.4.
a Crown of glory that fades not; and Saint Paul calls it, (...), 1 Cor.
9.25.
an incorruptible Crown.

Now, the place where we run, and strive, and fight for this incorruptible and
never-fading Crown, is civitas hujus mundi, the great city of this whole
Universe, via lata, and via laeta, a broad way, and a merry way to them that
never intend, or seldom think to come to the end of this way, but via aucta,
and via anxia, a narrow way, and a bitter pensive way to them that long to come
to a period of their journey; because, as S. Hierom says, Hierom in Ep. ad
Eustach.
Hi magnis inimicorum circumdantur agminibus: and illis h^stium plena sunt
omnia; these are encompassed about with whole troops of enemies, and all things
are full of hostility against them: and S. Augustine says, Aug. in Sermon. ad
Alippum.
that omnes qui ad Paradisum redire desiderant, oportet transire per ignem and
aquam; all that desire to return, and pass into Paradise, must pass through
fire and water, through many letts, many hindrances, and many afflictions, that
like the flaming sword in the hand of the Cherubims, do stand in our way, Genesis
3.24.
to stop and hinder our passage unto Paradise.

And the chiefest obstacles, and greatest Enemies that do hinder us, are these
three sworn covenanting friends, and forsworn enemies of our souls, that, in
our Baptism, we have promised and vowed to fight against; that is, 1. Mundus.
2. Caro. 3. Demon.
1. The World. The th^ee chiefest enemy that do fight against us.
2. The Flesh. 3. The Devil.


And, though Haec tria pro triuo numine mundus habet, the wicked and ungodly
men deem of these, and adore them, as if they were three Gods; yet we that
strive for the incorruptible Crown, must be resolved, 1. To despise the world,
and to trample all the vanities thereof under our feet, and, as the Apostle
says, Not to fashion our selves like unto it. 2. To subdue the flesh, and to
mortify all the deeds and lusts of the flesh, which are fornication, idolatry,
covetousness, and the like; and as S. Paul says, by no means to suffer sin to
reign in our mortal body. 3. To withstand the Devil most manfully, to resist
his temptations, and to expel all his wicked motions out of our souls.


And because the Devil, a principio, from the beginning, was primitivus
peccator, the first sinner, and now likewise is the primus motor, the first
mover, the chief doer of all the damnable plots that plague us, and the chief
undoer of every man, he being the agent, and the other two his Assistants, he
the Author, and they the instruments, he the grand Captain, and the others his
fighting Soldiers against our souls; therefore I thought it our best course
now, first to set upon this first and worst of all our enemies; and to set down
the best way to destroy him, by destroying his plots, that seeks the
destruction of us all; and to that purpose, I know no better way then the right
understanding and the due performance of that direction which our Savior for
that end, sets down in this parcel of Scripture: Hoc autem genus
Daemoniorum, says Beza, non ejicitur (non egreditur, says Beza) (...), is the
Greek word, and (...), says Pasor, signifies egredior, to go out; so this
kind of Devils goes not out, but through prayer and fasting.

In which words, you shall find not parvum in magno, such as we find in earthly
minerals, a little gold in a great deal of unprofitable earth, but you shall
find magnum in parvo, as it were the whole world in a little Map, abundance of
matter in few words, and an incredible store of pure substance in each particle
of this short and most comfortable sentence, that teaches us to cause and make
the very Devils to go out, and run away from us: for these two words, Prayer
and fasting, rightly done, will make the Devils fly and hasten away from us,
when they dare not stay any longer; for so S James says, Resist the Devil,
James 4 7.
that is, by prayer and fasting, and he will fly from you.

Well then, to proceed; that most famous, and most excellent Philosopher,
Aristoteles Stagarites, the light of Nature, and the Penman of her secrets,
who like a most skillful Architect does so compose his work, ut nihil desit
addendum, nihilque sine vitio se offerat demendum, Faber. Stap. in Praesat
Aethic. Arist. Epist. Joh. Relico.
says Faber Stapulensis, that nothing can be added to it, nor any thing taken
from it without blame; does most plainly conclude, that of all natural things,
there can be, nec plura nec pauciora, Arist. Phis. l. 1. c. 6.
sed tria tantummodo Principia, neither more, nor less, but only three
Beginings, that is. 1. Matter, 2. Form, 3. Privation.


Of which I intend not now Philosophically to discourse, but I only name them,
as a pattern of my method in this succeeding Sermon of the driving away of
Devils: which I may rightly term the first of the three beginnings of a
Christian; the beginnings I say, non constitutionis sed renovationis, not of
his being and creation, but of his well being and regeneration; where, by
inverting the Philosopher's method, the first of these must be Privation. For
as the Weeds of a Garden must be first rooted out, before the delightsom
Flowers are p^anted; The first beginning of a Christian. 1 John 3.8.
so the first beginning of a Christian must be destructorium vitiorum, an
ejection of the Devils and the destruction of all Vices, for which purpose
Saint John says, The Son of God was manifested and came into the world, that
he might destroy the works of the Devil: then the second beginning of our
renovation, The second beginning of a Christian.
is adificatorium virtutum; to be just and upright, and to behave our selves
honestly, filled, as many of the very Gentiles were, with all moral virtues;
and the third is, gratiarum repletorium, the replenishing of our souls with all
divine graces, as Faith, The third beginning of a Christian. These three ways
are the fai^est ways for us to assu^e our selves of our Christianity.
Hope, Charity, Patience, and the like: and these two last do depend upon, and
succeed the first; for, as in Nature, nullus locus corpore caret, sed semper
aliquod corpus continet, no place wants a body, but it always holds some one
body or other; as when one body departs and gives place, another body fills
that place immediately, as when your vessel of Wine is emptied, it is filled
with Air, ne detur vacuum in natura, lest there should be a vacuity, which
Nature always abhors; even so, when the Devil is expelled, and our hearts
cleansed, 2 Cor. 7.1.
as the Apostle says, from all filthiness, both of Flesh and Spirit, then
virtues will begin to spring in us, and our souls shall be fitted, as clean
vessels, to receive the graces of Gods holy Spirit, Sap. 1.4. and 5.
which, as the Wise man says, flies from deceit, and dwells not in the body
that is subject unto sin.

And therefore, touching this expulsion of Satan and his suggestions, which is
the first step to God, and the sum and substance of my Text, I shall desire you
to observe these three things. The division of the Text.
1. The Matter, 2. The Form, 3. The Privation,


1. The Matter, or the sum and substance of the work, which is the ejection, or
casting out of Devils: hoc genus ejicitur.

2. The Form, Manner or Means, by which they are cast out, and that is, Prayer
and Fasting, and no ways else; for, non ejicitur nisi per orationem and
jejunium, they go not out by any other means then by Prayer and Fasting.

3. The Privation, which follows their ejection and casting out, Aristot.
Metaphys. l 5. c. 22.
and is as the Philosopher teaches, absentia prioris formae cum aptitudine
materiae ad aliam recipiendam, the abscence of the former conditions that we
had, with an aptitude or fitness of our souls to receive far better qualities;
and therefore must consist, 1. In Remotione mali, the removal and rooting out
of all evil thoughts, words, and deeds. 2. The Reception and planting in our
hearts all good virtues and graces of Gods spirit.


Or, if you please, you may consider in these words;

1. Actus.
1. The Act, which is the casting out of Devils.

2. Modus.
2. The Means, by which we cast them out, which are Prayers and Fasting.

3. Effectus.
3. The Effect or Success, which follows their casting or going out, and it
is a freedom from Satan's tyranny, and a blessed fruition of liberty, to be
prepared to receive Gods holy Spirit, and his graces, for the saving of our
souls.

And touching the first point, which is, the casting out of these Devils, I
shall desire you to consider with me these three things;

That is, 1. The Ingredients, 2. Their Ingression, 3. Their Ejection,


1. The Ingredients, 1. Of the Ingredients.
or those that enter into a man to take possession of his heart and Soul, are
said to be, genus Demoniorum, a kind of Devils: and (...), which is, quasi
(...), sciens, a word derived of (...), scio, disco, signifies a knowing-One,
whomsoever he be; whether he be from heaven, or from the earth, or from hell.

But use and custom has most commonly appropriated this word (...) to the
worser kind of knowing ones, or intellectual creatures, that is, the infernal
Angels, which we call Devils: or else the most wicked men, which are termed
Devils incarnate, and which oftentimes do show themselves Devils indeed; and to
do as much mischief as the Devils of hell; as, the experience we have had of
the cruelty and wickedness of our late Rebels, does sufficiently testify unto
us.

Whereby you may perceive that there are two special kinds of Devils. 1. The
Devils of Hell, which are Spirits, That there are two kinds of Devils.
or spiritual Devils. 2. The Devils of the Earth, which are Men, or carnal
Devils: and of these, I shall treat last.


And for the first kind of Devils, I shall only speak of these three things. Of
the first kind of Devils. Consider three things.
1. Their Nature, 2. Their Names, 3. Their Number,
And

1. Touching their Nature, you are, 1. Of the nature of the Devils.


Danaeus Isagog. c. 4. de Angelis. Damasc. l. 2. de Orthodoxa Fide.
but true real substances: for though some men deny them to be any substances,
but rather to be motus and (...), certain inward motions, and vehement passions
of the mind, whereby men are tossed and carried away to do this or that thing,
as Danaeus writes; yet not only the most ancient Fathers, as Damascen,
Tertullian, and others; and so the School-Divines; as Thomas and the rest of
them; Zanchius deoperibus Dei. l 2. c. 2.
and so likewise all the modern Writers (as Zanchius does, by eight special
Reasons prove them to be (...): i. e. things really existing;) but also the
most sacred Scripture, which is veritatis omnis regula, the rule of all truth,
does most plainly show unto us, that they are (...), Substances; for they are
said to talk with Christ, to obey Christ, to enter into the Swine, to be
tormented, to be tied in chains, to reside in everlasting darkness and the
like; Quae omnia, in ea quae sunt mera spectra, and res imaginariae, non
competunt; all which things cannot be said of those things that are but mere
phantasms, and bare imaginary things; but of things only, which are vere
(...), truly real things indeed, says Lambertus Danaeus, quo supra.

Sadduces, and some other Heretics thought; Apud Casman. Angelograph. part 1.
c. 4. Lactant. Instit. l. 2. c. 15. Two Reasons to prove they have bodies.
so they be spiritual substances, and not compounded of matter and form, as
Symonius, and Swingerus in his Aethick Tables, and diverse others do affirm;
for, though Origin in his second Book, (...), and Tertullian in his Book, de
carne Christi; and Lactantius, and Rupertus Tuitiensis, and others do affirm,
that they have a body, by which they do subsist, though the same be more
subtle and purer then the bodies of all other inferior subjects: and for
proof thereof, they do render a double reason.

Clemens Alexandrinus, Genesis 6. Clem. Alex^ Strom. l 3.
Tertullian, Lactantius, and others do expound that place of Genesis; but this
they could not do, unless they had some bodies; and therefore they are not pure
spirits.

corporeal fire; as S. Augustine, and others do affirm: but a mere spiritual
substance cannot be tormented by any corporeal thing: therefore they must needs
subsist of some corporeal matter or substance.

Yet the evidence is so plain, That the Devils are altogether immaterial.
that they are altogether immaterial and pure spirits, and ab omni materia
liberi, without any concretion of matter or bodies, as that indeed, it cannot
be contradicted, if we look into the reasons of the Fathers, which they produce
out of the eighth Chapter of S. Luke, and the eighth Chapter of S. Matthew, and
the 103. Psalm, and the sixth Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians; as of
Dionysius in his Book, de Divinis Nominibus, cap. 4. Ignatius in his Epistle
unto the Trallians; Nazianzen in his second Oration, de Theologia: Epiphanius
in the 26. Heresy: S. Chrysostom in his 22. Homily upon Genesis: Theodoret in
his Book de Divinis Decretis: Greg. Nyss. in his Book of the life of Moses,
Basilius Magnus, Fulgentius, and the Council of Lateran under Innocentius the
Third, and diverse others, both ancient and modern Writers. 1. Reason answered.
Aug. de Civit. l. 15. c. 22. Chrysostom. Hom. 22. in Genesis Cyril. l. 9. advers.
Julian. Suid. in vocabulo Seth.


And therefore, to the first Reason, we answer with Saint Augustine, S.
Chrysostom, S. Cyril, and Suidas, that by the Sons of God, we are not to
understand the Angels, but the Posterity of Seth: For, as by the Daughters of
men, we understand by men, that carnal crew of wicked tyrants, which were the
posterity of Cain, and were both worldly minded, and fleshly given, and so
wholly negligent of Gods service, as you may see it in many places of the
Psalms: Even so, by the Sons of God, we ought to understand the godly seed of
Seth that despised the world, and called upon the name of the Lord, and at
length began to grow cold in the service of God, and to follow after the lusts
of the flesh, and the vanities of this world, and these were called the Sons of
God, as all the godly are: and,

To the second Reason we answer, 2. Reason answered.
that as the human souls be pure spirits, and yet are tormented in a corporeal
fire, as it appears by the soul of Dives, that confesses it self to be
tormented in that flame, when his body was buried in the earth: even so these
infernal Spirits that have no bodies, but are altogether immaterial, may, by
the omnipotent power of the Almighty God, Vide Greenwood in a Sermon,
entitled, Tormenting Tophet.
be perpetually punished and tormented with a corporeal fire; as S. Hierom and
others have most plainly and largely declared.

3. You are to observe, that, as they are spiritual substances, Peripateticks,
and the Priscillianists, that were a kind of Heretics, did imagine, that they
were eternal Evils, or Devils from all eternity, Zanchius de Operibus Dei. l.
2. c 5.
as Zanchius notes, because, as they allege, there is no sin in heaven; and
he that once goes to heaven, cannot sin when he is there, being as it were
ravished with the Beatifical Vision, and the love of the divine goodness: and
therefore say they, if they had been made in heaven, they could not have fallen
away from God;

Whereupon Manichaus taught, that there were two Gods from all eternity; the
one good, and the Author of all goodness, Danaeus Isogog. c 6. Clem. Recog. l.
3. Nicephor. l. 5. c. 31.
and the Creator of all the things that are good; the other evil, and the doer
of all wickedness, and the maker of all the things that are evil; and this most
heretical Opinion, says Nicephorus, continued almost 300. years, before it
could be rooted out; Yet not only this Opinion has been exploded and condemned
for a most wicked heresy, but also the very reason and foundation of their
Opinion is so weak, that it may be very easily answered.

For, although now, the inhabitants of heaven cannot sin, and those celestial
Citizens shall never be banished from their mansions, because they are now
confirmed by grace, and supported by Gods Spirit, ne a veritate voluntatem
averterent, lest they should turn their wills and minds from the truth; as S.
Augustine speaks, Aug. de Civi^. Dei, l. 12. c. 9.
yet, Non fuit sic ab initio, it was not so from the beginning; for, if God had
made them immutably good, It is the property of God alone, to be immutably
good. Malach. 3.6.
he had made them Gods, and not Angels: because it is the privilege and
property of God alone, to be immutably good; as the Prophet shows, Ego Deus,
and non mutor, I am the Lord, and I change not, as if he were not a God, if he
had the possibility to change; or that therefore he is God, because he cannot
possibly change: James 1.
and so Saint James sets down this for an incommunicable property of God, to
be unvariable or unchangeable, and without any shadow of turning.

And therefore as man in Paradise was created, Omnino ad imaginem Dei
altogether according to Gods own Image; and yet was left in the counsel of his
own mind, either to stand or fall, to continue happy, or to become most
miserable, even so the Devils, though they were created in Heaven, which was
their Paradise, and were made likewise good; yet they had, potestatem cadendi,
a power either to stand, if they were so pleased, or to fall if they would not
stand: And so the good Angels too; they were mutabiles natura, changeable if
they would, and they might have fallen if they pleased; but because they chose
to stand in the time of their trial, they are now made, immutabiles gratia,
Isidorus de Summo bone, l. 1. c. 12.
unchangeable through the grace and favor of God, for their faithfulness and
submission to his divine order, as Isidorus speaks.

And as the falsehood of their eternal impiety is sufficiently proved, so the
truth of the contrary Position may be as sufficiently confirmed by the word of
Truth; for they are the creatures of God; and therefore they must needs be good
by their creation; for when God had finished all his works, he looked upon them
and considered all, and every thing that he had made, Et ecce erant valde bona,
and behold they were all exceeding good; and therefore the very Devils were
all, Creatione boni, sed Depravatione mali, Danaeus Is^goges c. 19.
Good Angels by their creation, but wicked Devils by depravation, which they
contracted, Non natura creata, not from that nature which God created, but from
their own proper malice; which they had, not from God, but was bred within
themselves.

And therefore not only the Apostle says, That they kept not their first
estate: But our Savior Christ himself affirms, Quod non steterunt in
veritate, That they stood not, or remained in the truth; whereby it is most
apparent, that when they were created, they were in the truth; or otherwise,
Zanchius de operibus Dei. l. 3. c. 2.
Quomodo dici potest, eum non stetisse ^bi nunquam fuit* faith learned
Zanchius: How can the Devil be said not to have stood there, where he never
has been? And so Saint Augustine likewise does most excellently declare this
truth, and confirm the same against Manichaeus, August. Passim.
with unanswerable Arguments, l. 11. c. 20. De Genesi ad literam, and de Civit.
Dei l. 12. c. 1, 2, 3. and de vera Religione c. 13. But then,

Theodoret, Theodor. q. 6. in Genes.
Quam ob causam e Coelo Diabolus decidit? Why or what cause moved the Devil,
that was a glorious Angel in the sight of God, to fall away from God, and
thereby to throw himself and his adherents unto the bottomless pit; and there,
instead of that eternal happiness which he have lost, to be tormented with fire
and brimstone in everlasting darkness for evermore?

To which Question Theodoret says, That it was the fond conceit of some
foolish fellows, to say, that Satan was therefore thrust out of Heaven, because
he refused to adore and worship Adam, whom God would have him to reverence,
because he had made Adam in his own Image: But this Theodoret proves to be
false, because the Devils fell before Adam was made; who was therefore made, as
some Divines write, to supply the room of the relapsed Angels.

Zanch. de operibus Dei, de lapsu Angelorum.

Three Opinions about the first sin of Satan. 1. Opinion.


And Zanchius writes, That Augustinus Steuchus, in his eighth book and thirty
eighth chapter de per. Philos. rehearses three other Opinions about the fall
and the sin of the Devil.

1. Opinion is of Justin Martyr, in his Apology for the Christians: and of
Clemens Alexandrinus l. 3. Stromat. and of Severus Sulpitius l. 1. de sacra
Historia: and of Tertullian, Lactantius, and many more of the first ancient
Fathers that, (upon the sixth Chapter of Genesis, where it is said, That the
Sons of God, or the Angels of God, as St. Ambrose reads it: or Filii Elohim, as
the Hebrew has it, which Aquila translateth, Filii Deorum, the Sons of the
Gods, or Filii potentum, the Sons of the mighty powerful Ones, as Symmachus
reads it; or Filii Magnatum, the Sons of the great Ones, and noble Ones, as the
Chaldae-Paraphrast has it; or Filii Principum, the Sons of the chief Princes,
as Pagninus reads it (best in my mind) saw the daughters of men, that they were
fair, and took them wives of all that they liked) do expound the same of the
Angels, which leaving their care of these inferior things, which God had
committed to their charge, To preserve us, as the Psalmist speaks, in all our
ways, that we dash not our foot against a stone, were overcome with the love
of those fair women; of whose looks the Poet says, they were -- aemula lumina
Stellis,
Lumina quae possunt sollicitare Deos.
Eyes emulating Stars in light,
Enticing Gods at the first sight.
And so they fell into base lusting after these beautiful creatures, even as we
see many men do so now adays; because, as the Poet says, Ludit amor sensus,
oculos perstringit, How the inordinate love of women bewitcheth us.
and aufert
Libertatem animi, mira nos fascinat art:
This unlawful love does betray our senses, shuts our eyes, and takes away the
liberty of our minds, and does wonderfully bewitch our souls; so far, that he
says, Credo aliquis Demon, subiens praecordia, flammam
Concitat, and ruptam tollit de cardine mentem:
He believes some Devils do kindle these flames, and take away our senses from
us.

And therefore the foresaid Fathers do conclude, that the first sin of Satan,
and his fellow-Devils, was carnal Lust and Concupiscence, which is one of the
three things, which we profess in our Baptism, that we will forsake.

Tertullian's reason for the sin of the Angels to lascivious lust. 1 Cor. 11.10.
Whereupon Tertullian says, That for this cause, the Apostle commanded the
Women to be covered in the Church, or, as the original has it, (...), To have
some power over their heads, because of the Angels, that is, lest the Angels,
that are to assist them in their devotion, and to carry up their prayers and
desires to Heaven, should be tempted and enticed to lust after them.

And truly I think with Tertullian, it were well that the Women should be
covered, though not because of the heavenly Angels, yet because of lascivious
men, whose wanton eyes do often carry away their thoughts from their heavenly
duties to gaze upon their fading vanities: That there is double mistake in
Tertullians reason.
For, touching the heavenly Angels we may find in Tertullian's reason a double
absurdity.

Isidorus l. 1. c. 10. and Aug. de fide ad petrum c. 3.
contrary to the Will of God, as both Isidorus, and Saint Augustine do most
fully and excellently declare.

quantum cognoscibilia sunt, so far as they are knowable.

And therefore touching this first opinion of their fall and sin, as this
Inference is insufficient, so the foundation of it is not firm; Zanch. de
operibus Dei l. 4. c. 2.
and I will not say with Zanchius, that this opinion is, nimis stulta; and the
Authors of it, nimis stupidi; as Theodoret in his forty seventh Question upon
Genesis; because that should be, sermo nimis durus, The double reason against
the error of this first opinion.
too rigorous a censure upon those worthy men that held it: But, I say, they
were mistaken in a double respect.

1. Because that there is no mention in the Scripture of this sin, of carnal
Concupiscence, or fleshly Lusts, until almost a thousand years after the
Creation of the World; but it is Chrysostom, that before Adam was formed the
Devil fell away from his dignity: And the Wise man says, That by the envy of
the devil, death entered into the world: Therefore he sinned before Adam sinned;
for otherwise, if he fell not before man was made, how could he, remaining in
so great a dignity in Heaven, envy man here on Earth? It is not likely, but it
is against all reason to think, that an Angel incorporeal, placed in the height
of glory, and in the sight of God, should envy man, that bare a body of earth
about him, and lived here on earth; but he being cast down from Heaven, and to
be chained in extreme ignominy, and seeing man in such great dignity, then his
malice, says, Saint Chrysostom, Non potuit non graviter far aliorum
foe^icitatem, could not endure the sight of others happiness without envy.

2. Because that the Lord God himself says, Genesis 6.3.
My Spirit yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years: At natura
incorporea carnes non habet, But the Spirits have no flesh, neither have the
Angels a life defined or determined by time, Theodoret q. 47. in Genesis
seeing they are immortal, says Theodoret.

Therefore the sin of these foul Spirits could not be any carnal Lust.

2. Opinion is of them which say, 2. Opinion of their fall. Eccles. 10.13. That
pride caused them to fall.
That the first sin of Satan was Pride, according to that of Syracides, Initium
omnis peccati est superbia, Pride is the beginning of sin; and the beginning of
pride is to depart from God, when the heart turns away from his Maker:
Whereupon Saint Augustine says, Aug. in vet. Test.
That the Devil, elatione inflatus, puffed up with pride, would needs be
counted, and so taken, for God: And so Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom in
Isai. ad hom. 3.
That Satan, Per superbiam factus est Diabolus, qui antea Diabolus non erat, by
his pride was made a Devil, which before he became proud was no Devil: A good
Lesson for proud fantastical men to think on, what their pride will bring them
to, which brought the Angels of Heaven to be Devils in Hell.

Hierom in c. 28. Ezekiel, Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Ser. 3. Nazian. Orat. 1. de pace.
Fulgent. ad Monimum l. 10. Esaias 14.13. and 14. 1. Reason to prove pride to be
their sin. Job 41.34. Ezekiel. 28.2. and 14.15.
And this was the opinion of St. Hierom, and of St. Ambrose, and of St.
Nazianzen, Fulgentius, Athanasius, Theodoret, and many more.

And this their opinion may be confirmed both out of the Old and New Testament:
For,

1. In the old Testament it is said, Cogitavit apud semetipsum, He thought with
himself to exalt his throne above the stars of God, and said, I will ascend
above the height of the clouds, and I will be like the most High: The like
whereof we find in Job, under the name of the Leviathan, who is said to be the
king over all the children of pride: And the very like in Ezekiel, under the
title of the Prince of Tyrus, whose heart was lifted up, and he said, I am a
god, and I sit in the seat of God; and the Prophet, in the person of God, says
of him, Thou art the anointed Cherub that covers; and I have s^t thee so;
thou wast upon the holy mountain of God, thou have walked up and down in the
midst of the stones of fire, and thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day
that thou wast created, until iniquity was found in thee: For though I am not
ignorant, that the place of Esaias is literally to be understood of the King of
Babylon, and that of Job of the Whale, and the other place of Ezekiel is spoken
of the King of Tyrus; yet this can be no hinderance, but that mystically these
places may signify the Devil, who is the head, and the grand Captain of all
the children of pride, Rupertus de victoria verbi Dei. 2. Reason to prove it.
Luke 10.18.
as Rupertus Tuitiensis does most excellently declare.

2. The same may be proved out of the new Testament, where our blessed Savior,
for the repressing of this detestable sin of pride, alleges the fall of
Satan, saying, I beheld Satan, as lightning, fall from heaven: and therefore
take heed of being proud that the foul Spirits are subject unto you, lest you
fall likewise, even as he did: And so Saint Paul shows, That he which is
puffed up with pride, 1 Timothy 3.6.
falls into the snare, and judgment, or condemnation of the devil, that for
his pride was adjudged and condemned to hell: And let all proud Gallants take
heed of the like judgment and condemnation.

3. Opinion is of them which say, 3. Opinion of their fall.
That the first sin of the Devil was Envy, when he saw man, that was formed of
the dust of the earth, to be made in the Image of God: and to confirm the same,
they allege Athenagoras, and Petrus Alexandrinus, and especially that place in
the Book of Wisdom, where the Wise man says, That, Per invidiam Diaboli, Sap.
2.24.
mors intravit in mundum, through the envy of the Devil death came into the
world: But this, says Zanchius, crosses not the truth of the former opinion,
but may well agree with it, and proceed from his pride; seeing, as Aquinas
says, Thom 12. q. 84. ar. 20. and 22. q. 77. art. 5.
Envy is a branch of pride, Quando bonum inordinate fugit, invidia, When
through envy it scorneth, and inordinately flies from that which is good: So
the Angel first puffed up with Pride, Noluit Deo subjici, refused to submit
himself to God, and to obey his Rule and Command, Zanch. l. 4 c. 2.
and then he was filled with envy against man, says Zanchy.

And so it was the envy of the Devil that brought death and damnation to all
men; and his pride first begat his envy, and wrought his overthrow, and brought
his damnation upon himself, and upon all the children of pride.

And therefore, as we ought to take heed of pride, which is the sin of the
Devil, and a most devilish sin, What a devilish sin is envy
that brings neither pleasure nor profit, but scorn and destruction to his
owner: so we ought to beware of envy, which is nothing worth, but wounds the
envious man more then him that is envied; As, Indivia Siculi non invenere
tyranni Tormentum majus, the Sicilian Tyrants never found a greater torment
then their own envy; which, like Promethe^s Vulture, gnawed their wretched
souls night and day, whenever they saw, or thought upon the prosperity of
another; as it vexed the Devil to the very Soul, to see Adam in Paradise, and
himself thrust out of Heaven.

Yet herein Envy is very just, because, as the Poet says, Sit licet injustus
livor, nil justius illo est:
Namque premens alios, opprimit ante patrem.
It kills his owner before it hurts another; for as the Rust eats up the
Iron, sic invidia quem infecit animum, consumit; so envy wastes and consumes,
the very heart and Soul that it possesses, says Saint Basil.

A story showing the true nature of Envy.
And for a fuller expression of the nature and benefit of Envy, the Poets
faign, that when Mercury the messenger of the Gods, was sent of their errand
here on Earth, he lodged one night in a Covetous man's house; and the next night
in an Envious man's house, his next neighbor: and for his kind entertainment he
told them, whatsoever the first desired, he should have it, and the other
should have it double; the Covetous man presently bad his neighbor ask what he
would, and the Envious man, considering, that now, if he asked a house, his
neighbor should have two; if he demanded a thousand pound, his covetous
neighbor should have two thousand: therefore not knowing how otherwise to be
even with him, he desired that one of his own eyes might be plucked out, that
his neighbor might lose both his eyes. And such is the nature of Envy, I had
rather beg my bread then possess it.

But seeing it is the most common received opinion of all Divines, that the
first sin of Satan that made him a Devil was his Pride, it will not be amiss a
little to discuss the particular object and cause that produced forth his
Pride, and by his Pride his Rebellion and opposition against God, which always
do proceed and spring from the proud Spirits, as I am sure it did from our late
Rebels. What was Satan's pride.


Touching which I find several judgments: For,

1. Saint Augustine in his forty ninth Tractate upon Saint John, and Saint
Cyril in his Dialogues, de Adoratione in Spiritu, do think it to be an assuming
of a Deity unto himself, and imaginando ea, quae supra naturam ejus erant, esse
sua, and imagining those things, which were above his Nature, and beyond his
reach, to be his own, and of his own proper power: The opinion rejected.
but I think, it cannot be, that the Devils should desire an absolute equality
with God in his Essence, and in his infinite Attributes: for then they must
think it absolutely possible for them, to have an absolute equality with God;
but in regard of their knowledge, they knew this to be impossible: and then also
they must be changed in Nature, which likewise could not possibly be; because
the essential Attributes of God cannot be agreeable or communicable to any
Angel, or to any created Essence, but to him only who is the true God by
nature. And therefore,

2. Aug. de Civitate Dei l 11. c. 3. Greg. Moral. in Job. l. 34. c. 13. Anselm.
de Lapsu Diab. Wherein the Devils pride consisted. Amb. Cath. in Libello de
gloria Angelorum and lapsu malorum. Vigner. Iustitut. l. 3. and 5. Bern in
Cant. Sermon. 17. Especially in withstanding the decree of Christ his Incarnation.
I find Saint Augustine expounding this his desire of equality freedom, to be
exempted from all service and subjection unto their maker; and so Saint
Gregory, and Anselm, do affirm, their particular Pride to have consisted in
refusing to be subject unto their Creator; which is nothing else, but an
absolute rebellion, and disobedience against their governor.

But I like well of Nazianzeus Exposition upon the words of Esaias, that Satan
would have extolled himself above the clouds of the word of God, or rather the
word God, that is, above the eternal Son of God, Incarnate, and as it were,
clothed with the Clouds of our humanity: and so his pride was,

1. In a desire of an equality with God, by an hypostatical Union betwixt the
Angellical Nature and the person of God; such as is in the person of Christ,
betwixt his Manhood and his Godhead; as Ambrosius Catharinus, Vignerius, and
Saint Bernard, do affirm.

2. In rebelling, opposing, and contradicting the truth of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, that God should love mankind so well, as hypostatically to unite unto
himself the nature of man, which he had denied unto the Angels. And to this I
think the Apostle seems to aim, Heb.
when he says, that Christ, non assumpsit angelos, took not upon him the
nature of Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham; for which cause he is styled
(...), a lover of Mankind, as where the Apostle says, cum apparuit (...). But
we never read that he is termed (...) in all the Scriptures. And therefore the
Devil, and all the wicked Angels, that were his adherents, would not allow of
this decree of God, nor obey that counsel and command of God, when he brings
in the first begotten into the world, Heb. 1.6.
let all the Angels of God worship him, which they, in the height of their
pride utterly disdained, and refused to do; but did then and ever since labor
and seek, with all their might, How the Devil always labored to hinder the
Incarnation of Christ and to evacuate the benefits thereof.
and by all means to hinder the same to be done; and being done, to evacuate
the benefit and fruit thereof, by hindering us men to believe it, and to be
thankful for it.

For so,

1. By his subtletie he sought to put Adam out of all favor with God, to the
end that this Union of man's nature with God, might be wholly frustrated,
because he knew disobedience to his commands; and therefore, thought he, if I
can seduce Adam, to eat the forbidden fruit, I shall evacuate that design of
God and break that Gordian-knot all to pieces.

And when he saw, that this Plot could not prevail, to annihilate the decree of
God to love and to unite man unto himself, but that the wisdom and goodness of
God found out a way to verify that saying, qui struit insidias aliis, sibi
damna dat ipse, he that digs a Pit for another shall fall into it himself, when
God said, Genesis 3.
that the seed of the woman, which Satan had seduced, should break the Serpents
head, and so bring more damage to the Devil, then to either Man or Woman: then,

Cain to kill his own Brother Abel, still to provoke God against Man, and to
hinder this Union betwixt God and Man: and when he saw that God in mercy had
granted another seed by the birth of Seth, then he thought to work more wisely,
and more generally to corrupt the whole World, and to make the Sons of God whom
he loved, to run a Whoring after the Daughters of those men whom he hated; And
seeing this device, that was so devilish, yet would not do the deed that he
desired, but that Noah found favor in the sight of God, to preserve the
generation of mankind; and that God which is the God of truth, would not alter
the thing that is gone out of his mouth; Then,

3. He puts off the shape of the Serpent, and leaves to play the Fox, and
puts on the Lions skin, and like a Lion indeed he seeks by his cruelty at
sundry times and in diverse manners, to destroy that blessed seed from whence
Christ, the God and Man, should spring. As,

1. When he stirred up and moved wicked Pharaoh, Exodus
his firstborn Tyrant, to kill all the male children of the Israelites from
whom God had promised unto Abraham, the blessed seed should spring. And then
raised up proud Haman to root out all the Jews, and the whole offspring of
David, to whom God had sworn, and made a faithful Oath, that the Messiah should
come out of his Loins; and after that caused Antiochus, (whose surname,
Epiphanes, signified Illustrious, but his deeds were most odious) to persecute
all the Jews and to butcher the best of them, that so he might hinder the birth
of that blessed Seed, and crush the Chickin while it was in the shell; And when
all this his subtletie and cruelty, could not serve the turn, but that Christ
was born indeed, and had hypostatically united our flesh un^o his deity; Then,

4. He plays the Devil indeed, and stirs up Herod to kill all the Children
that were in Bethlehem, and in all the Coasts thereof, that so by that means,
he might kill Christ; and when he sees he could not kill him, he labors to
corrupt him, to make him to forsake his God, as he had done; and to throw
himself down from the Pinnacle, and to break his neck; or to fall down and
worship him: for he knew, this, if he could effect it, would unty the knot, and
hinder the progress of Gods purpose.

But as holy Job affirms, non est potestas quae comparetur ei, Job. 42.2.
and says, Job 24.2.
to God, I know that thou can do every thing, and that no thought of thine
can be hindered, Quia non est consilium contra Dominum, because no counsel can
prevail against the Lord; therefore his counsel did stand, and his will is
done, and the Word is made flesh, John 1.14.
and we saw his glory as the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth.

And yet for all this, though he sees the Promise of God fulfilled, and his
truth accomplished, and God united to our nature, he still persisteth in his
pride, and prosecuteth his malice against man, to frustrate and oppose the will
of God. And though Christ, by his death, which he brought him to, has overcome
death, and led captivity captive; yet does he never leave to hinder men to reap
the benefit of Gods favor, and the fruits of the death and passion of Jesus
Christ, but fostering still his pride and rebellion against God, and his malice
against man, he enters into the hearts, and possesses the very souls of all
wicked men: so that he makes some of them to become mere Atheists, scarce to
believe that there is a God; and many more to deny the mystery of Christ's
Incarnation, as do the Jews and Turks to this very day: and others he
bewitcheth to believe most damnable errors, as with that Dog Servetus, to deny
the humanity of our Savior Christ; and others to blaspheme against his Deity,
as that accursed Arius and his followers: and so he still labors to hinder
this truth to be believed at all, or at least, not to be believed in that
manner as it should be. Zanchius de Operibus Dei, l. 4. c. 2.
And all this you may more amply see in Rupertus Tuitiensis; de victoria Verbi
Dei, and in Zanchius de Operibus Dei, and de peccato Angelorum.

And this consideration of the Pride and Rebellion of the Devil against God,
and his implacable malice against man, should teach us all to take special care
to beware of him; and to pray to God to bless us from him, and not to have him
so often as we have him in our mouths, nor especially in our hearts.

So you have seen, that although by nature the Devils were good, and so created
good by God; yet by their pride, and continual rebellion against God, they made
themselves Devils, and the Authors of all evil for evermore.

Yet, lest we should err about their nature, Two points to be considered about
the nature of the Devils.
as they are now, in statu corrupto, corrupted by their own wickedness, we are
to consider these two points.

1. That there are many things, that in themselves, are good in them.

2. That all those good things are perverted and corrupted by them to a
perverse and wicked end: For,

1. You must understand, that by their fall, they have not

And therefore let not wicked men, oppressors, Church-robbers, Adulterers,
proud persons, and the like, That men should not think it enough to have some
good things in them, but endeavor to be good in all things.
think well of themselves, because they have some good things in them: as a
good wit, great learning, fair speeches, some charity; and it may be some
justice, and the like: for so the Devils have some good things in them
likewise; and if thou had no good things in thee, thou were worse then the
very Devils: But, if thou would be deemed a good man, thou must be ex omni
part bonus, good in every way, or at least endeavoring to be good in all
things, such as Job and Zacharias were, that walked in all the Commandments of
God without reproof.

2. You must note, that there is none of those good things in them, by making
them means of effecting the greater evils, as by their knowledge and subtilty
to deceive us, as they deceived Evah; by their might and power to torment us,
as they tormented Job, and those poor possessed men that we read of in the
Gospel; and by their agility to be every where, in every corner ready to entrap
us. And therefore how wary, and how watchful should we be to escape their
wiles, and to prevent them; for the more powerful our enemies are, the more
preparation we ought to make against them:

But, to the end we may the better see how far, and how many ways they pervert
and turn all these good things, that God has given them to work our
destruction, and to show their rebellion against God; let us proceed unto the
second point, and so consider the names and titles whereby they are named and
made known unto us: because, as the Poet says, Convenient rebus nomina saepe
suis.
The names do often agree with the natures.


2. Of the names and titles of the Devils.
2. Touching their names and titles, you must understand, that all the names
which we find given unto them, are either

In respect 1. Of their Nature and being, or 2. Of their Practice and desire to
do mischief. 3. Of the Forms wherein they appeared. 4. Of their Knowledge and
Understanding. 5. Of their Might and Power to effect what they intend to do.


Matthew. 4.1. Mar. 1.12. Luke 10.20. and sometimes they are called Angels: as in
1 Cor. 6.3. and in 2 Pet. 2.4. But this is rather a name of office than of
nature, whereas (...) signifies Nuncius, a Messenger.



1. Spiritus malus, an evil Spirit, and the unclean Spirit, and that not only
because he is (...), 1 Samuel 1.16. Matthew. 13.19. and 39. Zach 13.2. Matthew 12.43.
1 Pet. 5.8. Zach. 3.1.
Evil in himself, but also endavoureth by all means to make all others evil and
unclean.

2. Adversarius, an adversary: for so S. Peter says, Your adversary the Devil
goes about like a roaring Lion: and he is styled our adversary, because he is
always against us, and is continually an accuser of the brethren, in which
respect he is likewise styled (...), the Devil, that is, Calumniator Dei and
hominum, the reviler or slanderer both of God and Men.

3. Spiritus fornicationum, the spirit of Fornications: for so the Prophet
Hoseas says, Hos. 4.12.
The spirit of whoredoms has caused them to err; and he is so called, not
only because he pricketh our flesh to carnal and unlawful lusts and
uncleanness, but especially, because he instigateth all men unto spiritual
fornication, to run a whoring after strange Gods, to commit idolatry with the
Idols of the Gentiles, and by their covetousness and greedy hunting after
riches and the wealth of this world, which is Idolatry, as the Apostle
affirms, when we make a god of our gold, and neglect the service of the
everliving God.

4. Spiritus mendacii, a lying Spirit, and the Father of lies; for so he says
himself, 1 Reg. 22.22.
I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets of Ahab: and our
Savior faith, he has been a liar from the beginning; and he is a liar, John 8.
not only because he does always use to lie, as he did to Evah, when he said,
Ye shall be like Gods, and yet made them like Devils, but also, because he
suggesteth nothing else but lies to every one of us, and persuades us by all
means to turn the truth of God into a lie, as S. Augustine shows. August.
contra Jud Pagan. and Arian. c. 2. That the Devil sometimes speaks truth


But, though he be a lying Spirit, and the father of lies, yet this proves
not, but that, as Maldonate very accurately shows, the Devil may sometimes
speak a truth: for he spoke the truth, when he said, I will be a lying spirit
in the mouth of all his Prophets, for so he was; And he spoke the truth, when
he alleged the Scriptures to Christ in the Desert; and when he confessed Jesus
Christ to be the Son of God, even as S. Peter did; though, as S. Augustine well
observes, Saint Peter was commended, and the Devil reproved; because, as the
Proverb is, Non pulchrum est laus in ore peccatoris, I desire not the praise of
a lewd and dissolute fellow; so truth loses of his luster, when it proceeds
from a common liar, whom men do suspect when he speaks the truth: and besides
this, whenever the Devil speaks truth, he always levelleth at an evil end;
But always to an evil end.
as when he spoke the truth of Ahabs prophets, it was to deceive them, and to
destroy Ahab: and when he alleged the truth of the Scriptures unto Christ, it
was to see if he could persuade Christ to offend; and when he confessed Christ
to be the Son of God, it was not to persuade us to believe it, but to make us
not to believe it, because the Devil spoke it.

And therefore whenever liars, or the Father of lies, do speak the truth, we
should take heed of them, and believe the truth, not because they have spoken
it, but because the Scripture says it, or that we have other far better
reasons to persuade us to it then their saying of it, for that a liars truth,
if there were no other reason to believe it, is always to be suspected.

5. Satanas, (...), a Tempter, because the Devil does always provoke us unto
sin, and attempteth by all means to bring our sins unto perfection: But here
you must observe in what sense he is called a Tempter, because there is a
twofold temptation. Aug. Epist. 146. ad Consentium.
1. Alia probationis: The one of trial. 2. Alia deceptionis: The other of deceit.


By the first we are tried, Whether we be good or bad, right or counterfeit,
that if we be found faithful we may be approved, and so crowned; and thus, as
the Goldsmith tries his metal, whether it be Gold or Copper; so God, and not
the Devil, tempts or tries us by crosses and afflictions, whether we will
cleave close to him, as Job did, or start aside like a broken bow, as Demas and
all Apostata's do: Ambrose de Abraham. l. 1. c. 8.
and thus God is said to have tempted Abraham, when he commanded him to
sacrifice his Son Isaac.

By the second kind of temptation, we are deceived that we might be damned; and
thus, as Saint James truly affirms. God tempts no man, James 1.13.
but the Devil is the chief author of all such temptations, and is therefore
rightly called, Satan the Tempter.

3 In respect of the forms wherein they appeared, they are Eve under the shape
of a Serpent, which had, as some write, the countenance of a fair Maid, that
Evah might the sooner be persuaded to listen to her suggestions.

And I read it cited out of Saint Augustine, that it is not permitted unto the
Devil to invest himself with what form or shape he will, or naturally he can
take upon him, but he is limited to such semblances as God is pleased to
permit unto him; or otherwise there is no question, but he would have taken a
goodlier and a more specious resemblance upon him, then the form of a Serpent,
if God would have suffered him so to do, when he appeared unto Evah.

And though he often appears in the form and shape of a man, yet because
Christ, by reason of the hypostatical union of God and man, that are so fast,
and so indissolubly linked together, that both the Natures do make but one
Person, is worshipped and adored under the form of man; God never permits the
Devil to assume that form, when he appears and requires to be worshipped and
served of his Vassals, that forsake their God, and give themselves, as Witches
and Sorcerers do, unto the Devil; but he appears either in the shape of an ugly
Centaure, or a shaggy Goat, or some such like ill-favored beast: And therefore
Saint John in his Revelation says, That they worship the beast, which may as
well signify Satan, as the Antichrist that worshippeth Satan.

The Devil, commonly appears in the shape of ugly creatures; and always so,
when he requires to be worshipped.
And the Divines do observe diverse passages of Scripture, which intimate, that
the Devil, when he would be worshipped, does often present himself in the form
of a Goat; and that therefore the Hebrew word Sehir, signifies both a Goat and
a Devil: As both Saint Jerome, and the Chaldee Translator, do render the word
in the seventeenth of Leviticus and the seventh, where the Lord says,
Nequaquam hostias tuas immolabis Sehir, to signify the Devil; and so our
Translation reads it, Thou shall not any more offer thy sacrifices to the
Devil: And Rabbi Quimhi, the best interpreter of the Hebrew words, shows, the
reason why the Devil should be called by Sehir, which is the name of a Goat,
is, because he appears to them, that give themselves to him, in the shape and
form of a shaggy Goat: Tho. 12. q. 102. art 3. Lyran in Exodus 12 and 1 Reg. 30.
And so Aquinas, and Lyra, and Sanctes Pagninus, interpreting the four and
thirtieth of Esaias, where he says, Schirims, or pilosi saltabunt ibi, the
shaggie beasts shall leap and dance in the wilderness, do say, it signifies,
the Devils shall play, and leap, and dance there: And to make this yet more
plain, the two chiefest Oracles of the Devil, Hammonium, that is derived of Ham
the son of Noah, Genesis 10.
and Dodonaeum, of whom we read amongst the grandchildren of Noah, were
figured, the first in the form of a Goat, and the second in the shape of a
great horned-Ram.

Whereby you, may perceive, that the Devil has appeared, and does often
appear, unto the Sorcerers, and Witches, and other wicked men, in the shape and
form of other creatures, from whom he is denominated, according to the names of
the creatures, whose forms he does assume.

Their knowledge is great in two respects
Scien^es, knowing creatures, which we translate Devils: and so they are called
here in my Text; and they are called (...) in a twofold respect.

Zanch. de operib. Dei l. 4. c. 1.
Et qua adhuc praedi^^ sunt ex parts, and with which in part they are as yet
endued, says Zanchius.

2. In regard of their acquisite knowledge, which by their

1. They hear and have heard very much: 1. They hear much. Job 1.6.
as they hear God himself when they stand before him; they hear the good
Angels, when they come among them; they hear much from the Word of God when we
preach it, and, I believe, far more attentively then many of us do hear it,
though they believe it not, and look for no benefit by it; and they hear all
the words of men; and they can tell how to make use of all that they hear. And

2. As they hear very much, so they see very much more: 2. They see much.
And that,

1. 1. In respect of their residency. Ephesians. 1.2.
Partly by that eminency of place wherein many of them are seated; which is the
Air, as the Apostle speaks: not that the Air is the proper place and seat of
their habitation, where they shall be punished; but where now, as from a
Watchtower, they look down round about them to behold all the actions of men.

2. Partly by their wandering up and down, and, 2. In respect of their celerity.
Job 1.7.
as he says himself, By going to and fro in the earth, and walking up and down
in it, and that with such great celerity, as no winged Fowl is able for to
match them: Quia omnis spiritus, ales est: and hoc Angeli and Daemones sunt
says Tertullian. All spirits, both Angels and Devils, are like a flying bird;
and therefore, says he, they are here, and there, and every where in a moment;
Et totus orbis illis locus unus est, and all the world to them is but, as it
were, one certain place: not by their ubiquity, as filling all places at once,
which is only proper unto God; but by their celerity, moving into a thousand
thousand places, as it were, in a moment.

And so in these two respects they have abundant, and, in a manner, infinite,
knowledge, and that not only about the Creatures, and all the secrets of
Nature, and all the actions, yea and sometimes the secret motions of all men,
but also concerning God himself, and his divine Mysteries: as they know that
there is a God; Aug. de regulis verae vitae. Orphaeus apud Just. Martyr. Mark
1.24. Ath^nas. in vitae S. Antonii
and they know him to be, (...), one God of himself; and, (...), one God in all
things; and they know him to be, (...), the most high God; and they know Christ
to be the holy one of God; and so they know the Scriptures, for they allege
them unto Christ, and oftentimes to St. Anthony, as Athanasius writes in his
life.

And therefore it is not knowledge (that many men abuse, and makes many men
proud) that can make any one happy, unless they do rightly use their knowledge
to the glory of God, the edifying of their neighbors, and the saving of their
own souls: for you see the Devils have more knowledge then any of us all, and
his knowledge does but make him liable to the greater torments: Quia corruption
optimi est pessima, The abuse of the best things, is the worst thing of all.

potestas aeris, the power of the Air, Principalities, and Powers, and the
Prince of this world. And that we might the better understand the greatness of
his power, 1 Pet. 5.8. Apoc. 12.9. Job 40.20.
he is called, the roaring Lion, the great Dragon, the great Leviathan, and the
like; all names of power.

But yet here you must observe a twofold property of their power: As,

And they have (...), non (...). Vide Zanch. de operibus Dei l. 4. c. 2.
1. That it is, Potestas data and concessa, and non propria atque innata, a
power given them of God, and not their own proper innate power from themselves:
for all the power they have, they have it given them from God, and not from
themselves: And therefore, as our Savior says of Pilate, so I may say of
them, That they had had no power at all, except it had been given them from
above by God.

2. That it is potestas limitata, non absoluta, a power limited, Their natural
power, which they have from God from their creation is very exceeding great,
but now since they sinned it is abridged, bridled, and they said to be held in
chains.
and not absolute; for as God says unto the Sea, Hitherto shall thou go and no
further, here shall thou stay thy proud waves; so he says unto the Devils,
Thus far shall you molest, oppress, and persecute my servants, but no further:
^or, as Saint Augustine says, si Diabolus tantum nocere posset quantum vellet,
aliquis justorum non remaneret. If Satan might do, what he would do, not a
righteous man should remain upon the face of the earth.

And therefore, whatsoever he can do, he can do the same but by the leave and
permission of God; for he is like a Bear; in a Chain; and without Gods leave,
he could not touch Job with the least of his fingers, John 2.16. Matthew 8 41.
nor enter into the Swine without the permission of Christ; and therefore much
less can he enter into any man or woman, and so possess them, without the leave
and license from God;

But when God gives him leave, and suffers him without stop, then his power
extends it self, to do very much upon the creatures: And God gave him leave
at Hickham to throw me down upon the pavement of Flint stones, but not to
destroy me.
as he caused the winds to meet together and to smite the four corners of the
house of Job's Son, and so to overthrow the same; and so likewise, with this
leave and permission of God, his power reaches, to the raising of storms and
tempests, clouds and darkness, and the sinking of Ships, to the destruction of
Men and Women, as he threw down the house, to destroy all the Children of Job;
and so he can enter into men or women, and drive them as he did the swine, to
hang, drown, or do any other mischief unto themselves, as here, to cast, the
Possessed often time into the fire, Matthew. 17.15.
and often into the waters. For though he has no power to work upon the
Celestial bodies, because an inferior substance, or a lower cause, vim nullam
habet in superiora corpora, have no power at all to work upon superior bodies,
as the Philosophers do affirm; yet we see plainly, that his power extends
unto all sublunary and elementary creatures.

And therefore seeing the power of the Devil is so great, What the former point
of doctrine teaches us.
as both his names and his doings do declare, and yet that all his power can do
just nothing, not so much as to shake the leaf of an Aspen Tree, without the
leave and permission of God, it should teach us.

1. To pray to God. 2. To rely on God.
1. To pray to God to preserve us, and to put a hook in his nostrills, to stop
him from his malice.

2. Doing this, to be as bold as Lions, to do our duties without fear of all
the Devils in hell; for if God be with us, what need I care, what Men or Devils
can do unto me? quia non plus valet ad dejiciendum, inferna poena quam ad
erigendum divina tutela, because all the power of darkeness is not so able to
cast me down, as the assistance of God is to hold me up, or to raise me, when I
am fallen.

We read of other names of the Devil according to the distinct places and
offices that they have among themselves, to do mischief and to tempt wretched
men, to sin and to offend their God, as Lucifer and Beelzebub, that tempt the
young Gallants unto pride, and to murder each other, in a single Combat,
rather then they will abate an inch of their reputation. And Leviathan, that is
the arch Doctor of all Heretics, and fills their heads with such itching
curiosities, as makes them leave the true light, and fall away to erroneous
darkness: and Asmodeus that inticeth young men and maids unto wantonness and
fleshly lusts; Judge. 8.33. and c. 9. 4. 3. Of the number of the Devils. Arist.
Physicor. l. 8. and Metaph. l. 12. Text 48.
and Bal-bereth that we read of in the eighth and ninth of Judges, and tempts
men to quarrels and contentions; and Baalim, and Astaroth, and many more, too
tedious to rehearse, and which were the gods of the Gentiles, but the names of
Devils, for dii gentium Demonia; but

3. To pass from their Names unto their Number; Aristotle is of opinion, that
there is one supreme cause, which is God, not tied to the pressure and
incombrance of a body, and forty seven spirits subordinate to that supreme
Cause, according to the number of the motions which he observed in the
celestial orbs of Heaven; and Merc. Trismegistus, as Aquinas cites him, is of
the same mind, and denies that there are any other spirits, excepting those
that wheel about the heavens: for they thought that those heavenly bodies could
not so ordinarily move, except they were animated and quickened thereunto by
some spirits of life: which is very true, and seems agreeable to what Ezekiel
speaks of the celestial bodies, which he calls wheels, that the Spirit of
life was in the wheels: but they might have considered, that if those spirits
were necessary for the uniform and uncessant motions of the celestial spears,
which were created for the service of man, then was it much more convenient,
that the first and supreme cause, which i^ God, should have many more infinite
numbers for his use and service, and so Daniel says, that thousand thousands
ministered to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; Daniel
7. Vide Job 25. v. 3.
and holy Job demands, Is there any number of his armies? and Rabbi Moses the
Egyptian, l. 2. c. 7. says, That they be as many, as be the virtues of the
heavens, the Stars, and all other inferior things: and the Platonicks say,
that they are so many, that they are indefinite.

And if there be, as it is most true, so many good Angels waiting always upon
God, to do him service, and to praise him, and magnify him for ever; then
questionless it is most certain that the number of the Devils is very very
great, and, in all likelihood, far greater then the number of the good Angels;
for, as among men, Magna plenitudo hominum, sed magna solitudo bonorum, the
worser part is by far the greater part, and the number of Reprobates is far
more then the number of them that shall be saved, as our Savior testifies: so
it is verisimile, that the case is so betwixt the good and the bad Angels that
more fell then stood: for it is asserted by all the Schools, that they fell
from all the orders of Angels, and Archangels, principalities, dominations,
virtues and powers, Cherubims, Seraphims, and Thrones; and it is most certain,
that quoad nos, their number is infinite beyond number, Mark 5.15. Luke 8.30.
for a Legion of them which consisted of some thousands, had entered into one
man; which made me oftentimes to wonder, how many Legions of them were in the
members of the long Parliament, and how many indeed, are in all the wicked men
of the world, when they could spare a Legion to reside in one man?

And therefore well might Saint Anthony see the whole world filled with Devils,
and covering the same with Nets and Snares which they have laid in every place,
and in every thing; as snares in our meat, snares in our drink, snares in our
clothes, and snares in every thing we do, and in every path we walk; and all to
the end that they may catch us, and catching us to destroy us.

And therefore, how warily should we walk upon thorns, and among snares, and
continually pray to God, to give his good Angels charge over us, to preserve us
in all our ways from these wicked Spirits, that otherwise will do worse then
dash our heads against the stones, when they destroy both our bodies and our
souls in hell.

And so you have seen the nature, the names, and the number of the ingredients;
and now

2. The Ingression of the devils into men and women.
2. The next point is, their ingression or Entrance into the bodies of men and
women to possess them; and this is so plain (when the subjects are fitted for
them by their sins, and wicked course of life, and God in justice, for the
neglect of his Service, or dishonor to his Name, gives them leave so to do)
that more need not be spoken of it; but as the fellow, that fell into a Pit,
and his friend, that saw him there, began to question him, How long he had been
there, and how he fell in, and the like, the poor man in the Pit answered, I
pray thee take care how to help me out, and not to question how I came in: so,
when we see so many men and women, as we have seen of late, while the long
Parliament lasted, possessed with such and so many Devils, as they were; the
best course that we can take, is speedily to use the best means to dispossess
them; and that is, says our Savior, by prayer and fasting; which is the third
Point that I am to treat of.

But before I could finish the handling of these two rare Graces, and most
powerful Weapons to drive out these Devils, I know not by what machination, or
by whose fascination I cannot tell; only, Credo aliquis Demon, magna me
facinat ira,
Percussitque senem, dum sanguis rivulo fluxit.


I do verily believe, some of these Devils followed me with great wrath, and
with a full intent to destroy me, and it had not failed, but he had done it,
had not the great Jehovah, my continual Deliverer, commanded his Angels to
preserve me; for as I was coming from Oxford to London, at Wickham, after
Dinner, the man of the house holding my Horse at the block side, for ^e to get
up, and I ascending the steps, to the top of the block, as soon as ever I laid
my foot upon the third step, I found the same loose, and lifted up, and I was
so forcibly, suddenly, and so strangely thrown down upon the pavement of
Flint-stones, that cut such a huge gash in my forehead, that the blood
exceedingly gushed out upon the pavement, and was able to dash out my brains;
and my whole thigh, from my hip to my knee, was so bruised, that being lifted
up, I was not able to stand, but was carried in betwixt two, and recovered
twice, as they say, with strong Waters, when I fainted, until I was laid upon
my bed. By the good man of the house, and honest Master Parsons that rode in my
company, and was very careful of me.


All which, in so strange a manner, as I found it done, I do conceive, and do
verily believe, could never accidentally be done, but that some evil Spirit,
the Devil and Satanas did it purposely to end my life, that I might no more
oppose his dear limbs and adherents.

But, as God had prepared a Whale to save Jonas as soon as ever he was cast
into the Sea, so God provided a Surgeon for me presently, and he washed my
wounds, and did help me, Blessed be God for it; and God I beseech him, to give
me his grace, never to forget this, and all other his goodness, and mercies,
and loving favors toward me, but to serve him, and praise him, and magnify
him for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom, with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Jehovae Liberatori.
FINIS.
THE PERSECUTION AND OPPRESSION (Which, as Solomon says, is able to make a
wise man mad,) OF JOHN BALE, That was called to be Bishop of Ossory, by the
sole Election, without any other man's Motion, of that pious King, Edw. 6.

AND OF GRUFFITH WILLIAMS, That was called after the same manner to the same
Bishopric by the sole Election, without any other man's Motion, of that most
excellent, pious King, and glorious Martyr, Charles I.

Two Learned men, and Right Reverend Bishops of Ossory.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1664.

I. THis John Bale was a great Scholar, and a Doctor of Divinity in the
University of Oxford, in the time of King Edward the sixth, and he himself
wrote a Book, (which the Right Worshipful, and my much honored Friend, Sir
James Ware lent me) wherein he sets down, the vocation, persecution, and
deliverance of himself: and out of that Book I have drawn this Abstract of his
life and persecution, and expulsion from that very house from whence I was also
expulsed, and for which I am still oppressed and troubled.

1. His Vocation was by the mere good will, without any solicitation of any
other, of that good King Edwards, when he saw him in South-hampton, he sent
unto him by diverse of his Nobility, to bid him prepare himself to go to be the
Bishop of Ossory, which he obediently did, and transported himself and his
Family into Ireland, and being consecrated at Dublin, though with some
opposition, by reason of the Popish inclination of the Catholic Clergy, he
presently went to Kilkenny; where

2. His Persecution did begin, for he no sooner began to preach the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which he incessantly did, but the most part of his Prebends and
the Popish party opposed and contradicted him; and within a very little while,
after the death of King Edw. 6. he was exceedingly persecuted by Barnaby
Bolger, and the Popish Priests, and others, that sought his death in his house,
this Bishops Court, alias Holms Court, Rich. Foster a Deacon, Rich. Headly,
John Cage, and the Maid.
where he saw five of his household Servants, four men and a maid, of sixteen
years of age, killed, before his face, and so had he been slain also, had he
not shut the Iron Grate of his Castle, and kept the Kearnes out, until the good
suffereige of Kilkenny, with a hundred horsemen, and three hundred footmen,
brought him away in the night time, and so delivered him out of their hands,
and forthwith sent him to Dublin, from whence, his life being there likewise
hunted after, he was conveyed away in a Mariners apparel, and in his passage
to Zealand was cruelly tossed by tempests, and was taken at sea, and carried to
St. Ives in Cornwall, where a wicked fellow named Walter accused our Bishop
Bale of High Treason before the Justices there, yet being not able to prove any
thing against him, the good God delivered him out of their hands.

And yet not long after one Martin an English Pirate did most falsely accuse him
of many heinous crimes, as the p^^ting down of the Mass in England, caused
Doctor Gardener Bishop of Winchester to be imprisoned, and poisoned the King,
and many other heinous things, which brought him abundance of troubles and
vexations with the Captain of the ship wherein he passed toward Holland, as
himself relates at large, from fol. 38. of his Book of his persecution unto
fol. 42.

And because they are so fully exemplified and expressed by himself there,
together with the rest of his troubles and persecutions which he had in Ossory,
in Dublin, and in his passage by Sea toward Germany, in the Book that himself
printed, of his Vocation to the Bishopric of Ossory, and his persecution in
the same, I will set no more down here, but refer my Reader to that Book.

II. GRiffith Williams, born at Carnarvon, at fourteen years old was sent to
Oxford, from whence by reason of the hard usage of him Junonis ob iram; by an
angry Juno, that was his Unckles virago, he was fain to betake himself, within
two years after, alienas visere terras, and failing to pass into France, where
he intended, he was forced to retire into Cambridge, where having no friends,
nor money, a Country Gentleman of Harleton, named Mr. Line, having but one
little Son, about eight years old, took affection unto me, and entertained me
into his house, and table, to tutor and teach that young Child, and being
there, I got my self admitted into Jesus College; where, as it came to my
course, I kept my Exercise, and within two years after, (having gotten a
Certificate from Christ-Church in Oxford, of my study and good carriage there,
for two years before, I had my degree Bachelour of Arts, and within three years
after, I took my degree Master of Arts, at 21 years of age, and, being admitted
into the holy Orders of a Deacon by the Reverend Bishop of Rochester, and of
Priesthood by the Bishop of Ely, after I had been a while Rector of Foscot in
Buckingham-shire, I became a Preacher and Lectorer in St. Peter's the Proud in
Cheapside, and in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, For I found it so. And then
printed my first Book, entitled, The resolution of Pilate; and my second Book
entitled, The delights of the Saints.
for the full space of five years; I Lectored upon St. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans, and then began my persecution by the Puritans, as they were then
called, and Fanatics of those days, (saving a little opposition that I
formerly had by the same generation, while I was Curate of Hanwel in Middlesex)
for now, the more pains I took to study, and to preach the truth boldly unto
them, as I ever did without fear, the more mad they were against me, and so
mad, that not only forty, as they were against St. Paul, but I believe above
twice forty conspired together to work my death, and most falsely accused me, of
such things as I never knew, never did, and never said, yet they prosecuted the
same so maliciously that I was bound over (and they did their very best to
hinder me to get any bayl) to answer for my life, at the Sessions house upon
the Goal delivery of Newgate, where, I might demand, tantenae animis
terrestribus irae? But he that dwells in the Heavens, and knew mine
Innocence, and the cause of their malice, laughed them to scorn, and became to
me, as he is always to them that fear him, Deus in opportunitatibus, a present
help in trouble, Who seeing that they would prefer no Bill against me, quitted
me, and said they had forfeited, and should pay their Recognizance, as they
well deserved, to the King. See the Epistle to the Reader before the seven
Golden Candlesticks.
and delivered me with credit and honor out of the mouth of those Lions, that
were exceedingly blamed and checked by that worthy Judge, that afterward came
to be Lord Chancellor Coventrie: Sic me servavit Apollo; So that Jehova saved
me to whom I have committed my self ever since, and vowed, I would praise him,
and thank him, and do him the best service that I could, while I lived, as I
showed in an Epistle before the seven golden Candlesticks. Then immediately
after this, being then about twenty seven years old, I went to Cambridge, and,
though my former troubles wasted my means, (being, by reason of the former
accusations of mine enemies, suspended by the Bishop of London, and driven to
be released by an appeal to the Prerogative Court) yet I took my degree
Bachelour of Divinity, and returning to London, I presently petitioned to my
Lord of Canterbury, Abbats, (whom ever after I found, my very gracious Lord)
and to my Lord Chancellor Egerton, (whom I found so likewise) and showed them
the great wrongs and abuses, to my utter ruin, that I had suffered from the
Bishop of London, and those bloody persecutors, without any shadow or color of
truth in any of all their Accusations; and they presently pitying my case gave
me the Parsonage of Llan-Llechyd, worth to me a 100 li. per annum, a better
Rectory, than that which mine enemies caused the Bishop of London to take from
me, that was rightly presented to it by the Earl of South-hampton. But sicut
unda sequitur undam, so one affliction comes in the neck of another; for I was
no sooner arrived in Llan-Llechyd, but the Bishop of Bangor, because I refused
to take another living for this that he saw was so commodious for him, began to
persecute me afresh, and devised certain Articles, which ex officio he
prosecuted against me, and I was fain again to appeal unto the Arches, and my
Lord of Bangor being in London, my Lord of Canterbury sent for him and me, and
checked him exceedingly for his prosecution, and gave me a License to preach
throughout diverse Diocesses of his Province, and a Protection from being
molested by my Lord of Bangor; yet still I found that busy Bishop would not be
quiet, but as the Poet says, Manet alta mente repostum, judicium paridis, so
my complaint against him to my Lord of Canterbury stuck in his mind, as I had
but a little respect or joy in his Diocese, especially from his Lordship;
therefore, after I had continued there four years, about 32 years old I went to
Cambridge again, and took my degree Doctor of Divinity; and then, returning to
London, I became a domestical Chaplain to the Earl of Montgomery, afterward
Earl of Pembroke, and Lord Chamberlain to his Majesty, to whom I had been
Chaplain at large for many years before. And then blessed be God, I had a
little rest from my persecution, and began to study hard, to Print Books, of no
small Volumes, nor of mean Subjects, as the seven Golden Candlesticks, and many
other Sermons, now termed, The best Religion, and The true Church: divided in
six several Books. And to be promoted, to some eminent places, to be his
Majesty's Chaplain, a Prebend of Westminster, and Dean of Bangor, and before I
was full forty years old, in Election and very like to have been made Bishop of
St. Asaph.

But, when the Sun shines brightest it continues not long without Clouds, and
often times follow storms and tempest; so after I had spent these halsion
days, and lived many years in the Kings Court, I found some rubs and obstacles
of my desires by reason of some discontent and difference betwixt me and the
then Archbish. of Canterbury About my seeking to be Bishop of Asaph.
, that clouded the brightness of my hopes for some while; yet at last, when the
Long Parliament began to struggle, and not only to chop off the head of the
wise and stout Earl of Strafford, but also to clap up the Bishop of Canterbury
in Prison, and to clip the wings of all the rest of the Bishops, his Majesty,
of his own gracious mind and accord, without any motion of any man made unto
him, when the Lord Primate of Ireland delivered him a Petition from the Bishops
of Ireland, to desire his Majesty to nominate a very worthy man, Doctor
Syb^horp, that was Bishop of the poor Bishopric of Kilfanora, unto the
Bishopric of Ossory, answered the Primate, that he had reserved the same for
Doctor Williams, Dean of Bangor: To whom the Primate replied, Your Majesty bids
him to his loss, (to use the Primates own words, as he told me,) and his
Majesty answered, He could make him a saver, and therefore let him have the
refusal of it; and when I heard of this passage from my Lord Primate, I thought
I were a very unworthy man if I refused so gracious an offer of so gracious a
Master; and considering that, as my Predecessor, and a man of my spirit, Bishop
Bale, was called by the sole free motion of that pious King, Edw. 6. so I was
called by the sole free motion of the most religious King Charles I. I thought
my self rightly called by God unto it, and I accepted the same, and yielded
unto the divine calling, with all thankefulness unto his gracious Majesty. And
now the storms and tempest begin to darken the Sunshine of my prosperity; for I
was no sooner arrived in Ireland, seen Kilkenny, and preached once in that
Cathedral, and consecrated in Dublin about Michaelmas, but the Rebellion there
brake out the October following, after I had spent well-nigh 300 li. and had
received not one penny; then was I forced to fly toward his Majesty, and the
next Summer after having occasion to go to Dublin, after I had settled my Wife
and Family in a house that I had by Tocester, and the first night that I came
to my house, after my return from Ireland, the Rebels in North-hampton, having
heard how zealously I had preached for his Majesty, and that now I was returned
to my house by Tocester again, sent a Troop of horse under the command of
Captain Flaxon, and so he carried me a prisoner to North-hampton, where at my
first entrance into the Town, I saw a whole troop of Boys and Girls, and other
Apprentices, that expected my coming, and as the boys cried to Elizeus, come up
thou bald pate, come up, so they cried along the street, a Bishop, a Bishop,
and with this Io paean was I carried to the Commissioners Lodging, where I was
clapped up close in a Chamber, and one of the Commissioners, Sir John North, I
believe the civillest of them all, came to me with a Satchel of Writings, that
Captain Flaxon found in my house, and opening the same, the first writings that
came into his hand was the Treatise that I had written, and had entitled it,
The Grand Rebellion, and had written those words on the outward leaf thereof;
and as soon as ever he took it out of the bag, I made bold, And if I had not
done so, I had been undone.
before he had cast his eye upon the Title, to take it out of his hands, and
said, this is a Sermon that I carried with me to preach where I should rest on
the Lords day, but that the Letters, that were to the King, and to the Bishop
of York, and others, were in the Satchel, and he for haste to see the Letters,
suffered me to put my Sermon and the Grand Rebellion into my Pocket, which I
feared would have been my death or utter ruin, if the Commissioners had seen
it. Then Sir John, having taken out the Letters, asked me, how I durst at those
times carry Letters unto the King? I answered, they were Letters from those
poor Bishops, that therein showed to his Majesty how they were pillaged and
persecuted by the Popish Irish Rebels, and I knew, and had a Copy of what was
in them before I would carry them; then Sir John said, I did wisely to do so:
and so he went in unto the rest of the Commissioners, and left me, locked in the
room, yet very joyful for having gotten my Grand Rebellion out of his hands:
but behold still the malice of Satan and the subtilty of his Instruments, while
I was walking up and down the room, and had torn the worst case that I had writ
against the Parliament, and chewed it in my mouth and threw it away, an arrand
knave was peeping at the key hole, and went unto the Commissioners and told
them that I had some desperate or treacherous Papers, which he saw me tear;
then Sir John North comes to me again and aked, what Papers those were that I
was seen tearing? I smilingly answered, Alas Sir, ever since I came from Sea, I
was troubled with a looseness, and having by chance a loose leaf in my Pocket,
I plucked it out, and said, this is the Paper, that I had in my hand, to go to
the house of office, and he looking upon it, and finding it of no effect, said,
Is this all? And went his ways: and then I remembered what our Savior said,
When you are brought before Rulers, Mark 13.11.
take no thought what you shall speak, for it shall be given you, in illa hora,
in that very hour, what to answer; and God also wrought in the Commissioners
such thoughts of me, and my sufferings by the Irish, that they gave me a Pass
to go home, and delivered me my horses, which Captain Flaxon hoped to have had
for his reward, and the forty pounds, which he found in my house, and which I
told the Commissioners was all that I had to keep me and my Family: So
graciously did God help me, that I went home with joy, contrary to the
expectation of my Neighbors, that informed the Rebels of my return to those
parts.

And within a few days after was the Battle at Edgehill, at which time, I
went to his Majesty, and waited on him until he came to Oxford, And here in
Oxford I printed first my Grand Rebellion, and afterward, my discovery of
mysteries, and last of all, The rights of Kings.
where immediately I printed my Grand Rebellion; and finding how well and how
graciously his Majesty accepted of my endeavors therein, I went to Wales and
studied my discovery of mysteries, or the plots of the Parliament, to overthrow
both Church and State, and by the next Winter I came to Oxford to Print it, and
being printed, Secretary Faukeland misliking a passage, that I had set down of
the Episcopal power in causa sanguinis, would have had it called in, but his
Majesty would not suffer it to be suppressed; therefore I resolved, by the next
Winter, to publish (as I did) my Book of the Rights of Kings both in Church and
Commonwealth, and the wickedness of the pretended Parliament; and in the
interim I was persuaded to go to London, to see what I could work upon my Lord
of Pembroke, whom I had served so many years, and tutored all his Children,
whereof two were now with his Majesty; and when I came to London I took the
opportunity to go unto him, For I conceived that time to be the safest time.
while he was in bed, and after much conference with him, about the differences
betwixt the King and his Parliament, and their disloyalty to his Majesty, and
that I saw he began to be offended and very angry, for fear he should deliver
me to the Parliament, that formerly had caused all that they found of my Grand
Rebellion to be burnt, I took my leave of him, and presently highed me to go
out of Town; but was denied to pass, until I used my wit to the Mayor of
London, to get a Pass, by telling him, that I was a poor pillaged Preacher of
Ireland, that came to London to see my friends, and now having some other
friends in North-hampton and thereabout, And I have his Pass by me to this very
day.
I humbly desired his Pass to go to see them, and he pitying my case, called
for a cup of Wine, and commanded his Clerk to write me a Pass without a Fee.

And then, after I had passed a good way toward North-hampton, I turned to
Oxford: and from thence within a while to Wales, and from thence to Ireland;
and after Nasby fight, being bound with my L. Taafe in a thousand Marks a piece
unto his Majesty, for the appearance of Colonel Vangary, (that returned at
Edgehill fight from the Parliament unto the King with Sir Faithful Fortescue)
at Beaumares Sizes, for taking away a Drove of Cattle from the Drovers of
Anglesey, and he not appearing, our Recognizans were forfeited, and I was fain
to return to his Majesty, with Letters from my Lord of Ormond, that Van-garie
could not come out of Ireland, and therefore his Majesty was humbly desired to
remit the forfeiture of our Recognizance, which his Majesty, by his Letters to
the Justices of Peace of Anglesey, very graciously did, and sent another Letter
by me again to my Lord of Ormond: but in my passage to his Majesty, I was like
to be carried to the Parliament, by a knave, that about ten miles from
Aberystwith began to examine me, and said that I was a Spy for the King, and
therefore I must be carried before some of the Parliament Officers, to be
examined; and I had no other shift but to commend him for his care, and to tell
him, that there were too many Spies abroad, and I was but a poor pillaged man
in Ireland, that would very willingly go before any man, and I still called for
drink, until he was persuaded that I was a very honest man, and so he let me go
in peace. And before I could pass into Dublin, General Mitton with his Army,
had entered into our Country, and I, preaching that Sunday, that he came, at
Rhudhland, had an Alarm about midnight, and was fain to flee to Carnarvon
shire, and when he came to Carnarvon shire, to slay too Anglesey. And because
Anglesey was an Island, and could not be won if the Inhabitants would be true
among themselves, we that were true Royalists, summoned the chiefest Gentry of
the Country, Clergy and Laity, to meet on a certain day in Llan-geuenie, to
consider what we should best do for the defense of our Country; and though that
Doctor White, and my self, Mr. Jo. Gruff. and Mr. Morgan, and Mr. Michael
Evans, drew an Oath of our faithfulness and Allegiance to his Majesty, and the
defense of our Country to the uttermost hazard of our lives and fortunes,
against the rebellious Parliament so full and so well as our Wits and Learning
could devise, and all that were there, excepting Mr. O. Wood of Llan Gwyven,
took it without any scruple, yet, before any one drop of blood was spilt, or
many days were past, the Gentry Articled with General Mitton, to yield up that
Island into his hands, and he did set Garrisons where he pleased: then I,
conscious of what I had done, always and every where against the Rebels, durst
not trust to the mercy and truth of the Parliament, but gave ten pounds to
Captain Roberts, that Mr. O. Wood had appointed over the Garrison in Holy Head,
to suffer me to pass in a Parliament Ship, (for the King had none in those
parts) into Dublin, and the Master of the Ship, that carried me, said, he durst
not set me on shore any where, but bring me to Captain Wood, that was then
Vice Admiral to the Parliament in the Bay before Dublin; yet I thought it was
better for me to trust, that God would deliver me from that wood, than to stay
among the briars of the Long Parliament; so when we came to the Bay, and near
the Vice-Admirals Frigot, it being late in the Evening, I told the Master that
I was very ill, as I was indeed, and I gave him a 20 s. piece of Gold for
carrying me over, and desired that I might stay in my Cabin there, till next
morning, which he readily yielded.

And early the next morning, when I thought all the Seamen in Captain Woods
Ship, excepting the Sentinel that kept the Watch, were asleep, lest any of them
should know me, I desired to be sent to the Vice Admiral; and so I was. And
when I came there, I gave 2 s. 6 d. in silver to the Sentinel, to tell Captain
Wood, that here was a Kinsman of my Lord of York, (whom I knew was respected
by all the Parliamenteers, because he had besieged the Castle of Conway for the
Parliament, and was the chief man that called Mitten into the Country, and the
only instrument to bring Anglesey to submit unto him) and he had a Pass from
Holy Head to go, to do a little business in Dublin, and when he had finished
his business, to return with as much speed as he could unto my Lord of York
again, and I thought this was a fair tale; and indeed, I thank God, it took
effect; for Captain Wood came to me, and after he had examined me about diverse
things, and I had answered him as warily as I could, he searched me, and,
though I had in my Pocket a Letter from his Majesty in my behalf to my Lord of
Ormond, yet, because I had so artificially set it on the backside of a
Pocket-glass and Combcase, betwixt the leather and the glass, he suspected no
such thing, though he beheld his own face in the glass, and so conceiving no
ill thought of me, but that I was a very good friend of the Parliament, being a
Kinsman of my Lord of York, and of his name too, he called for a good Glass of
Clarret-wine and drank to me and to my Lord of York, and I drunk it off every
drop; and put on a bold face, as I was wont to do every where, knowing that
degeneros animos timor arguit.

And then he sent me to shore toward Hoeth, and before we came to Land we
should see three or four Soldiers, runnagadoes, that were desirous to go to
the Parliament ship, but I gave five shillings to the Rowers to put me to land
a pretty way from them, and when I was set on land, the boat-men turned away
presently and would not receive the Soldiers into their boat, which the
Soldiers seeing, called unto me to come to them, How I escaped the runnagado
Soldiers.
or to stay for them, but I would not tarry, but went away as fast as I could;
and they seeing that presented their Guns, as if they would shoot at me; yet I
still ventured to go on, knowing; that being no standing mark, it was but a
chance to hit me, if their pieces were charged, and they shot at me, and when
they saw their vain threatening did not frighten me, they began to run after me,
as fast as ever they could, and I began to run from them, as fast as ever I
could, and being a pretty way before them, and seeing some Irish men reaping,
not far off, I made toward them, and thought I could get to them before they
could overtake me, and so I did: yet running so fast, and so far, I was all of
a sweat before I came unto the Reapers, who kept off the Soldiers that they
durst not come near me. Thus was I saved from those, that I assured my self
would have robbed me, if not kill me.

Then I went to Dublin, and stayed there, and preached often, until Ireland
was surrendered upon Articles unto the Parliament; and I being by name to have
the benefit of those Articles, and having received a very fair and considerable
sum of money, by the hands of Sir George Lane, from my Lord of Ormond, that had
always showed himself a most honorable friend, and a bountiful helper and
benefactor to me; I resolved to live upon that small temporal means which I
had, about twenty pounds a year, in Wales: But, after I put my Books, and
Clothes, and household stuff, How I was taken prisoner and robbed by Captain
Beech. And nothing troubled me so much as the loss of a paper Book which I had
written, full of Sermons, which vexes me to this very day.
and all the Money I had, and my self into the Packet-boat, to pass to Holy
Head, our ship was taken, about the middle way, by Captain Beeche, and I was
robbed of all that I had in it, Clothes, Books, Money, and Household Stuff, and,
with a great deal of entreaty and favor, I prevailed with Captain Beeche, to
cast us all, his Prisoners, upon a little Island, called, Irelands eye, and
making there a fire that we brought with us from the Ship, we had a boat that
carried us into Hoath, and from thence we went all to Dublin, where Doctor
Loftus very friendly gave me as much money as carrried me to London; and there
I petitioned to the Committee for Sequestered men, to be restored according to
the Articles of Anglesey and of Ireland, to my means; and one of them, named
Scot, that since has been hanged, demanded, if I had not written the Grand
Rebellion? and I answered, I did: then said he, and do you come for performance
of Articles, that deserve rather to have your head cut off; No, no, said Corbet
and the Chairman, let us go to another matter; and I, lest I should be clapped
by the heels, And after the Committee read the Letters I got them from them to
show them to other Committee men, and I keep them with me to this very day.
stunk away from those Wolves, as fast as I could.

Yet I was loath, so, desistere caeptis, but I would try movere omnem lapidem,
and seeing hac non successit alia aggrediar via, and, having procured a little
money, I went to Sir Thomas, now Lord Fairfax, and giving his Secretary some
pieces of Gold, he got me my Lord Fairfax his Letters to the Committee of
Northhampton and of Anglesey to restore me to my temporal means, and they not
sitting together, I was fain, in a very cold and snowy weather to walk on foot
(for I had no horse, nor money to buy one) from one to one of the Committee, to
get their hands to restore me, and so I had them, and I thank God I was
restored; then after I had been in London, and had the favor to go with my
Lord of Ormond in his Coach from Kingston to Hampton Court, to wait upon his
Majesty, a little before he went to the Isle of Wight, I went, as soon as ever
I heard the King was gone, to live privately and poorly in mine own house in
Wales, and there fell hard to my study to finish my Great Antichrist, and to
preach as occasion offered it self; and so I continued for a long time in a
very poor condition, so poor, that when three or four of the Parliament
Soldiers were sent to quarter at my house, and there, finding neither Servants
to attend them, nor Beer to drink, nor other provision, but some barley bread,
and a little glas-doore, I got a good dinner with them, of that provision which
they brought, and they presently went to their Captain, and told him, my house
had nothing for them, and they must have a better quarter, and so before night
they were removed to a far better accommodation, and my mean condition
preserved me ever after from the quartering of any Soldiers, while I lived
there. So poverty was to me an advantage; and so I always thought and
believed, that God would work together all things for the best for them that
love him, as the Apostle says, and therefore this made me, when my Lord of
Pembroke (whom I had for so many Lustras of years served) offered in this my
poor estate, to procure me a living, then void in Lancashire, from the
Parliament, worth four hundred pound per annum, so I would be ruled and submit
my self to the Parliament, to thank his Lordship for his Honorable favor,
When all the rest of the Bishops accepted of 100 li. a piece from Hen. Crumwel,
I refused the same.
but to refuse the Living, for which he several times called me fool for my
pains; and so likewise when Mr. Henry Crumwel heard of my often preaching in
Dublin, and was desirous to hear me in his own house, and when I had ended my
Sermon bad me dine with him, and as he allowed the rest of the Bishops 100 li.
a piece per annum to maintain them, so a friend of mine told me from his
Lordship, he was favorably pleased to do the like to me; to whom I answered,
that I was infinitely obliged to him for his favor, but that I was resolved to
live contented with that small means that I had of mine own. I was so fully
persuaded to retain mine integrity and faithfulness to my King, and assured my
self of that change and revolution, which I so speedily expected to come to
pass.

And so I continued there in Llanlechyd in that poor condition until his
Majesty, that now is, was upon his march toward Worcester; at which time Sir
Gruffith Williams, my very good friend and Landlord, being Sheriff, desired me
to preach at the Assizes in Conwey before the Judges; and the whole Country
knows how boldly and freely I showed them their cuty, now to manifest their
Loyalty and love to his Majesty, whom God had thus graciously brought unto
their doors; so that Courtney the then Governor of Beaumaresh, coming to Town
after Sermon, and hearing what I had preached, did exceedingly fre^, and chafe,
and chide with the Judges, because that they would hear such a man, as was so
well known to be such a grand enemy unto the Parliament, and concluded with the
now Sir John Carter, the then Governor of Conwey, (that told me as soon as I
had done my Sermon, but that he would not seem uncivil, he would have plucked me
by the ears out of the Pulpit, a fine sight) that they should clap me up in
Prison; but I hearing of it, did immediately, as fast as ever I could get my
horse, and posted away, as it were upon Pegasus, to hide my self from those
then tyrannous whelps of Cerberus; the same Carter, being the man, that (when I
was preaching at Llan Sannam, and another whelp of the same litter, rose up,
and contradicted all that I had said, and caused me to be plucked out of the
Pulpit, and such a tumult to arise, that I feared much slaughter would be
committed, and that I should be torn all to pieces; and when some of the
Gentlemen of the Parish, at the Quarter Sessions in Ruthen, would have indicted
the fellow that disturbed me in my Sermon) said, they should rather indict me
for preaching contrary to the order now set forth, than him that had so justly
hindered me; so I was only blamed, and he acquitted by the justice of Sir John
Carter.

After this I continued in my poor house until I had finished my Great
Antichrist, and then I showed it to very many of my friends, whom I durst
trust, both in Ireland and Wales, and told them when (according to the
Prophesies of the Scripture, that I had collected and was fully persuaded of
the truth thereof) his now Majesty should be restored, and I carried it to
London to be printed, and left it with my old friend, that had printed my Best
Religion, Mr Stevens, and he showing it to some of his friends, Presbyterians I
conceive, to have their opinion of it, and some of them answered it somewhat
large, and Mr. Stevens delivered the same to me, and the conclusion was, The
answer and the answerers opinion of the printing of it, I have by me to this
day.
the printing of it is like to be much to the damage of the Printer, and the
ruin of the Author, (if he be found out) and little credit, in my opinion, is
so like to gain thereby. So Mr. Stevens durst not venture to print it by any
means; yet, if I could have had any other to print it, I would have done it,
and resolved to have fled into the Low Countries when it had been done; but it
could not be, that any Stationer would venture to do it; so I went to Wales.

But when I heard that Sir George Booth was risen in Cheshire; and was so near
the time that I expected and foreshewed his Majesty's restoration, I took a
young Philly that I had of three years old, and in a very cold snow and frost
in January, I went soft and fair toward London, hoping that now, so many men
looking after the coming in of our King, and Colonel Monk expected to assist
him, I should have my Great Antichrist published; yet still the Rump was so
strong, that it could not be: therefore I was fain to retire toward Wales
again; and going from my house by Tocester, where I had left my Mare, some ten
miles, in a frosty morning, a foot, I afterward went a horseback, but had not
rid one quarter of a mile, but my Mare, whom all my Neighbors there said she
was great with foal, lay down under me; and I, fearing she would cast her
Foale, and so perhaps lose my Mare, or forced to leave her behind me, was
resolved to lead her in my hand; and so I did from that place, which was
Daintry, to my house in Wales, about seven score miles, the way being somewhat
fair in the latter end of March.

Then, having some occasions to go to Ireland, being at Holy Head, I had notice
with the Post, from London, that the Parliament, according as I found in
Scripture, had voted the coming in of the King, and I, landing in Dublin about
seven of the Clock the next morning, being Sunday, pre^ched at St. Brides, and
publicly prayed for the King, I am sure the first man in the Kingdom of
Ireland, and the next morning went toward Kilkenny, and going to Donmore, to
present my service to my Lady of Ormond, I found her, as she was ever, the most
honorable of all the Ladies that ever I knew, and taking me aside, informed me
of the state of Kilkenny, and of all things thereabouts; so I went to Kilkenny
and preached there, and publicly prayed for his Majesty, the next Sunday after
I had done the like at Dublin, and then hasted back to Dublin, and from thence,
without stay, to Holy Head, and resting but one night in mine own house, I rode
as fast as I could to London, and having left all the Lands that I had in
Ireland, in pawn for 100 li. which mine own self carried to London, I agreed
for the Printing of my Great Antichrist, and immediately after his Majesti^s
happy arrival in London, having the same printed in three Printing-houses, and
my self paying for the printing of it with ready money, I got it presently
done, and presented it to his Majesty, who very graciously accepted thereof.

But one of my Countrymen had begged of his Majesty the Deanery of Bangor; yet,
when I informed his Majesty, that my good King and gracious Master, his Father,
had conferred it upon me, to hold it in commendum, so firm as Law could make
it; his Majesty was most graciously pleased presently to send to Sir Edward
Nicholas to recall the Grant that he had made to Mr. Lloyd, but the same being
past to the Great Seal, my Lord Chancellor, to whom I ever was very much
obliged, knowing my Faithfulness to my late King and best Master, and my
sufferings for him, did most honorably stop it, before I could come unto his
Lordship; and so by his Majesty and my Lord Chancellours goodness, I still
enjoyed my Masters favor.

Then, things being somewhat settled, I went to live upon my Bishopric, in
Kilkenny, where I found the Cathedral Church and the Bishops house all ruined,
and nothing standing but the bare walls, without Roofs, without Windows, but
the holes, and without doors; yet I resolved presently to mend and repair one
Room, and to live in the Bishops house, and as I had vowed, that if I should
ever come to my Bishopric, I should wholly and fully bestow the first years
profit for the reparation of the Church, so my witness is in heaven, that I
have done it; and have since bestowed more, as forty pound the last Summer for
repairing the Steeple of the Cathedral, And this Summer six score pounds for to
make a Bell, worth they say 200 l.
and yet a thousand pounds more will not sufficiently repair that Church, which
I vowed to bestow, If I recover the Bishops house, and live to it; and a great
deal of cost more I laid out upon the Bishops house. Yet now began my
Oppression, which grieves me much more than my Persecution, because my
persecution was personal, and concerned my self alone: but mine Oppression does
now reach to the dishonor of God, and the robbing of Jesus Christ of his
service, and the destruction of his Servants; when as the Church of Christ
cannot be ruled without Governors, nor instructed without Teachers, and
neither of them can subsist without maintenance.

And yet now Noblemen and Gentlemen, Soldiers and Citizens and all, think no
Bread so sweet, no Wine so pleasant as that which they snatch from the Altar,
and no Land so fertile as that which they hold from the Church, and keep it by
force from the Churchmen; and to give you a taste of this truth, I have
printed a Narrative and a true Relation of a Law proceeding, betwixt my self
and Sir George Ayskue, a civil Gentleman, I, confess, and one that has been
Vice Admiral to the Long Parliament, but now is very faithful to our present
King, and sorry for what he has been, as I verily believe, and is a man of a
very fair carriage, and of very good parts; yet bewitched with the disguised
spirit of Sacrilege, to hold fast in his hands the Lands of the Church, and
not only he, but many others are sick of the same disease, as appears by the
subsequent of this relation.

A true Relation of a Law-proceeding, betwixt the Right Reverend Father in God,
Griffith L. Bishop of Ossory, and Sir George Ayskue, Knight, etc.
Shows,
THat the Lordship of Bishops Court, alias upper Court, belongs to the Bishop
of Ossory: And as I am informed, Jo. Bale Bishop of Ossory dwelt in the Manor
house thereof, and was from thence driven by the Tories in Queen Mary's days,
to flee to Geneva to save his life; when he, looking out at his Window, saw his
Steward, that was, with his H^y-makers, killed before his face; and he being
fled to Geneva, Jo. Tonery was made Bishop of Ossory, and he made away diverse
Lordships, and among the rest, this Bishops Court in Fee-farm, as they pre end,
to one Rich. Shea, Bishop Bale being yet alive, and lived in Queen Elizabeth's
days; after, Tonery came Bishop Gafney, and Bishop Bale still alive; and after
Gafney, came Bishop Walsh, and he finding the invalidity of the Fee farms made
by the Popish Bishops, while the right Bishop was alive, petitioneth to Queen
Elizabeth, and had her Letters to the Lord Lieutenant and Council, to hear the
Cause, and to relieve the Bishop according as they found the equity of his
Cause, but before he could have any redress, he was killed by some Irish man
(to prevent the recovery of the said Lordship, as it is conceived) in his own
house; After that, came Bishop Deane, and he vigorously prosecutes the recovery
of the said Lordship, and he had not done much more then begun, but he dies:
Then came Bishop Wheeler, and he petitioneth to my Lord of Strafford for the
said Lordship of Bishops Court, and by the great care and desire of the now
most Reverend Primate of all Ireland, to benefit the Church of Christ, Bishop
Wheeler had the Lordship of Frenis-Town, (that was one of the pretended
Fee-farms made by Tonery, and formerly yielded the Bishop but 4 li. yearly, and
does now yield 50 li. every year) yielded up unto him; so that Shea might still
continue in the Bishops Court; and when Wheeler died, my gracious King, and
good Master, Charles the First, commended me to the Bishopric of Ossory, then
came the Rebellion, and I was driven to flee before I had received one Penny
from my Bishopric, or had continued two Months therein; but blessed be God
for it, I was restored by our now most gracious King; and having an Order from
the most Honorable House of Lords, to be put into the possession of all the
Houses and Lands of the Bishop of Ossory, that the last Bishop died seized of,
the Sheriff of the County of Kilkenny did put me, among diverse other places,
into the possession of the said Bishops Court, and the Tenants attourned
Tenants unto me, and continued from the (...) d^y of April until the 8th. day
of October following, 1662. at which time, one Captain Burges, and diverse
others, Anabaptists and Sectaries. the Tenants of Sir George Ayskue, that never
come into the Church, yet came into the Bishops House, and thence expelled the
Bishop and his Tenants, from his possession. And I, the Bishop hearing of it,
went thither my self, with two men and my Chaplain Mr. Thomas Bulkley; and
finding the door open, I and my Chaplain went in, and one of them, that kept
the possession, affronted and justled me at the door of the Loft, to hinder my
entrance in, and yet I got in; and then more and more came into the Room, to
the number of 9 or 10 persons: And some of them, especially Captain Burges,
vilified and threatened me to the fear of my Life, and some did shut the Iron
Grate, and locked it, as I conceived, to keep me there for their Prisoner, and
to hinder my two servants, that I had sent with my horses to Freshfoord, to
come in; and when they demanded if they meant to murder their Lord, and desired
to come in, one of them, that had a Cudgel in his hand, said, that if he
offered to come in there, he would knock him in the head; and my man answered
him with the like menaces, and I, hearing of their high threats, and fearing
what mischief might fall out there, sent a peremptory command to my men, to go
home, and let what death soever pleased God, come to me; but, after that I got
liberty to go unto mine own house, I called a private Sessions, and Indicted
Will. Portis, Tho. Collins, Jo. Rayman, Josias Scot, Will. Burges, for their
forcible entry; but the Indictment, being removed by a Certiorari to the Kings
Bench, though I had retained two Counselors, and gave them twenty shillings
for their Fee, to do things right, and according to Law, yet through the error
of the Clerk, there were some faults found in the Indictment, and so the same
was quasht by the Judges of the Kings Bench: Then I got the best Attorney that
I thought was in Dublin, and is so reputed by all my friends, to draw me
another Indictment against the foresaid forcible enterers; and being drawn, I
carried it to Sir William Donvil, the Kings Attorney, and gave him his Fee to
review it, and mend it, if any thing was amiss in it, and make it so, as it
might stand good in Law, the which thing, he very carefully did, and amended
some things with his own hands: And I knew not what I could or should do more,
to draw a good Indictment.

Then I desired the Justices of the Peace, to send a precipe, to the Sheriff
to summon a Jury to examine the force, which they did, upon the said place,
where the force was committed.

And, though Sir George Ayskue had for his Attorney, Mr. Smith, the now High
Sheriff of the County of the City of Kilkenny, and Mr. Johnson, the Recorder
of the City of Kilkenny for his Counselor, to plead against the finding of
the Indictment true, as much as ever they could, and another Counselor stood
against it, as much, or more than either of them both; and I had neither
Attorney nor Counselor to say any thing for it, but what the Witnesses
proved; yet the Jury did presently find it Billa Vera.

Then I desired the Justices of the Peace to restore me to my Possession, but
to prevent the same, Mr. Smith, Sir George Ayskues Attorney, having a
Certiorari ready in his Pocket, did immediately, as soon as ever the Jury had
brought in their Verdict, deliver the same into the hands of the Justices of
the Peace, and they delivered it to the Clerk of the Peace, and the Justices
said, that now they could not restore me to my Possession, because that their
hands were stopped, and all the proceedings must be transmitted to the Kings
Bench, by Octab. Hillarii.

And when I came to Kilkenny, I went to the Clerk of the Peace, and examined
the same Indictment, which the Jury found (and which I had done before) ad
amussim, very diligently, with that Copy, which the Kings Attorney had amended,
and averred to be sufficient; and I prayed the Clerk of the Peace, to give me
a Copy of that Indictment, which the Jury found, the which he did under his
hand, and I examined all again, and found them in all things to be verbatim,
word for word agreeable one to another.

Then by Octab. Hillarii, the time set, to return the proceedings to the Kings
Bench, I went to Dublin: But there was no Indictment returned; still I
expected, but still in vain; At last I complained to the Lords Justices; but
they answered, that they could not help it, for they knew not, whether the
Certiorari was delivered or not: At last, seeing it was neither returned, nor
like to be returned, I was advised to make Affidavit, that I had seen it
delivered into the hands of the Justices of the Peace, and that I heard it
read, and then saw it delivered to the Clerk of the Peace; and then upon the
reading of my Affidavit, and a motion made by my Counsel thereupon; there was
an Order set down, that there should be 20 li. fine set upon the Clerk of the
Peace, if the proceedings and the Indictment came not in by such a day; So, at
last, it came in, but it was the last day of the Term that it came into the
Court; and then the Kings Sergeant moved for my possession; but the Counsel, on
the other side, pleaded, that there was an error in the said Indictment; and
being somewhat long in alleging the Cases of A. and B. and of John an Oaks
and John a Style, the Lord Chief Justice told him, it was the last day of the
Term, and Motions were to be heard: Therefore seeing they could not hear out
the Matter now, they should show cause by the second day of the next Term why
possession should not be restored.

Then I thought this was to keep me long enough out of my Possession, and to
let Sir George Ayskue have one half years rent more, to the two half years Rent
that he had already, since I was driven out of my Possession, and to let his
Counsel have time e ough added, to what they had already, to pick as many holes
as they could find, or could make in mine Indictment, but, considering that, as
the Poet says, Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas, I went away,
and said nothing.

But upon the second day of the next Term, which was appointed for the hearing
of it, the Kings Attorney moved for possession, and the Counsel of the other
side began to plead the errors of the Indictment, but the pleading was
presently put off, and it was prosecuted the next day: The Kings Attorney being
not there; and the main error, that was of any moment, and which was neither
seen nor touched the Term before by Sir George his Counsel; (for all other
things alleged, as my Counsel said, were but trifles, and could easily be
answered) was, that in the Indictment it was said, Per Sacramentum quindecem
virorum, whereas it should be Per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum
comitatus Kilken. predict. extitit. presentat. which words were all left out of
the Indictment, and the other words put in the room of them; Then I stood up
and said, I was certain, the words quindecim virorum were not in the Indictment
that was found by the Jury, and that all the other words were in it; because
that my self had examined it, and read it, and had likewise a Copy of it, under
the hand of the Clerk of the Peace, which was examined with the Original by my
self: And I offered in open Court to make Oath of all this; but the Lords
Justices answered, that they could not proceed but according to the Record,
that was returned to the Court, which they must conceive to be the true Record;
And I answered, That I hoped they would not judge according to that Record,
which I would swear was false and corrupted, and not the true Record, nor
according to the Record that was found by the Jury; yet I could not prevail to
have the Clerk of the Peace sent for, and to bring the original Record to be
showed in the Court, therefore by the next day I brought this Affidavit in
writing: THe Right Reverend Father in God, Griffith, Lord Bishop of Ossory,
this day made oath before me, that he had sundry times perused the original
Indictment and Record of Forcible Entry found by a Jury of the County of
Kilkenny, upon the 18th day of December last past, against the said Defendants
in the Custody of one Nicholas Halpenny, who as is alleged is either Clerk, or
Deputy Clerk of the Peace for the said County, and that the said Indictment and
Record being removed into this Court Pursuant to his Majesty's Writ of
Certiorari, this Deponent did peruse the said Record so transmitted by the said
Halpenny, and does find upon view and examination thereof, that there are
sundry Circumstantial and substantial words, which are in the said original
Indictment found by the Grand Jury omitted to be returned; and as this Deponent
believes and remembers other words are inserted therein by the Clerk that
returned or drew up the same. He further deposed, That before the Record was
returned into this Court, he had a Copy of the said Original attested under the
hand of the said Halpenny, which he does find upon examination to be different
from the Record now lodged in this Court, by virtue of the said Certiorari, and
that as this Deponent is credibly informed, and verily believes, the said
Certiorari and Record now returned was for the space of one month, or
thereabouts, in Dublin detained in the hands of Mr. Patrick Lambert, who is
said to be Attorney for Sir George Ayscue Knight, the pretended Proprietor of
the premises in the Indictment contained, before such time as he returned the
same, and that this Deponent could not have the said Record returned ere that
he had by the Court a conditional fine imposed upon the Clerk of the Peace, or
his Deputy for his neglect in not returning thereof.



And then my Counsel moved, that it might be read, and so it was: And I showed
to their Lordships what great wrong and abuse this was to me, and an injury to
his Majesty, to have the Record falsified and corrupted, and protested in the
open Court, that, so long as I could either speak or go, I would not suffer
this abuse to pass unexamined, and at last, with much ado, I got the Lords
Justices, to grant their Writ, to enjoin the Clerk of the Peace, to appear
upon the Saturday following, to answer such things as should be objected
against him sub paena c. librarum. at which time he came; and I went with him
to my Lord Chief Justice his house, to show him the original Record, and how it
was falsely transcribed, and not according to that, which was brought into the
Court; but my Lord Chief Justice seeming, as I conceived, somewhat angry, said,
he would hear nothing, nor, see any thing, but what should be showed in Court;
and then the Clerk of the Peace came with me to the Court, and when he was
called, he confessed the truth, that the Record transmitted to the Court, was
not according to the original Record, but was falsely written by his Clerk,
that he trusted to write it, altogether unknown to him; then my Counsel moved,
that the Record might be amended according to the original Record; but the
Lords Justices answered, that they could not alter the Record brought into the
Court: And the King^ Solicitor, Mr. Temple, very honestly replied, they might,
if they pleased, have it amended, for that, in such a case, some error or
mistake was found in an Indictment in the time of one Clerk of the Peace, and
it was ordered to be amended pro rege in the time of another Clerk of the
Peace; the Lord Chief Justice answered, this Indictment was brought into the
Court the last Term, and therefore it could not be amended this Term. Then I
replied, It should have been brought in in the beginning of the last Term, but
it was concealed till the last day of the last Term, and this error then was
neither seen nor spoken of; and how could we move then, to have it amended,
before we knew the falsehood and corrupting of it, which was no ways perceived
till this time? Yet, for all that I could say or do, I could not prevail to
have the Record amended, according to the original Record. And when I saw that,
I desired my Counsel, to desire their Lordships, either to grant that it might
be amended, or to quash it out of hand, that I should not spend my self in
Dublin, but go to begin a fresh, and to indict them again; and then my Lord
Chief Justice answered, seeing we desired to quash it, let it be quasht; which,
in respect of the Kings fine, I conceived, should not be done, if the original
Indictment, found by the Jury, was good. Then I got the Kings Solicitor, Mr.
Temple, and the Kings Sergeant, Sergeant Griffith, and Mr. Darcy, to draw me an
Indictment, that would stand good in Law; and presently I went to Kilkenny, and
required the Justices of the peace to send their pre^cipe, to the Sheriff, to
summon 24 men to appear at Freshfoord the 23 of the instant, which they did
accordingly; and the Deputy Sheriff appointed these Gentlemen to be summoned,
Nom. Jur. ad inquirend.
John Grace of Courtstowne, Esquire; Jonas Wheeler, Gent. Rich. Donvil, Gent.
William Davies, Gent. Walter Bushop, Gent. Walter Nosse, Gent. John Pursel,
Gent. William Pay, Gent. William White, Gent. Ralph Hale. Gent. Lewis Mathews,
Gent. Robert Grace, Gent. George Lodge, Gent. Edmund Butler, Gent. Matthew
White, Gent. William Hunter, Gent. Thomas Green, Gent. Vincent Knatehbul, Gent.
Ric. Comerford of Degenmore, G. Tho. Bowers of Knoctopher, G. Emanuel Palmer,
Gent. Mathias Reilegh, Gent. Chri. Auetstone of Thomastone. Tho. Hussie of
Gowrom, Gent. Toby Boil of Condonstown, Gent. Tho. Tomlius of Lyniate Abbey.
Joseph Wheeler of Killrush. George Barton of Goslingstown, G.


But before the Bailiffs were gone to summon them, the High Sheriff was come to
the Town, and seeing the List of the Subscribed, and having conferred with Sir
George Ayscue, that lay in the next Room where the Sheriff lay, he said those
men should not serve in the Jury, but he would choose a Jury for this business,
and he nominated such men: Anabaptists, Presbyterians, and others of the most
rigid Sectaries, that were in all the whole County: Yet because I knew two or
three of them to be very honest men, I was very well contented with them. But
as soon as ever I was gone from the Sheriff, those men were put by, and other
Sectaries put into the List in their stead A Jury as my friends, that knew
them, said would hang all the Bishops in Ireland, if they were their Jury to
try them.
. And the Bailiff coming to me for more money then I had given him, for
summoning those that the Deputy Sheriff had appointed, because now, the High
Sheriff had appointed men, that he had picked out over all the County of
Kilkenny: Then I suspected some evil determined against me, and I desired the
Bailiff, to show me the List of those, that he was to summon, and when I saw
those honest men that I knew, put our, and others put in their room, I put the
Warrant in my Pocket, and bad the Bailiff tell the Sheriff, that my Witnesses
for the King were not ready; and after he told this to the Sheriff, he come to
me again weeping and crying, and desired me for Gods sake to give him his
Warrant: For the Sheriff was very angry with him, and he was utterly undone,
for showing me the Warrant, but I kept it still in my Pocket.

And thus was I served, with a great deal of travel and charge above 60 li. in
seeking to recover the Church Lands, which I resolved and vowed if I could
recover it, to bestow it wholly for the repairing and re-edifying of the
flat-fallen Church of Kilkenny: And now, let the Judge of all the World, and
let all just and honest men judge, whether this be a fair and just proceeding.

But quorsum haec? To what purpose is all this pains of this Relation? Is it to
tax and charge the Reverend Judges either of injustice or partiality? No, By
no means: I tax no man; but I set down rem gestam the whole matter a capite ad
calcem; and they, the Judges and Counselors, being great Lawyers may find all
this to be just; and especially, to make it seem so to be; and though for all
cheating Pettifoggers and covetous Counselors, that against the dictate of
their own consciences, and against their King and against the Church of God,
will, for a Fee, sell their souls unto the devil; I hate their doings that are
Sicutatri ^anua ditis: Yet I do from my heart honor and reverence all the
grave and just Judges, and Learned Lawyers, without whose help and Counsel and
Judgment, we could not live in this Commonwealth. And though I failed at the
Kings Bench, to prevail to procure those Fines unto the King, which I conceived
should be imposed upon those five that I indicted, (whereof the chief of them,
that is, Captain Burges is now sent Prisoner to Dublin, by my Lord of Ossory,
which may be a just Judgment, that he should be committed by my Lord of Ossory
for his abuse done to the Bishop of Ossory,) yet I have had very fair Justice
done me, by the Judges of the Court of Claim, and I am confident, to find the
like from them again, and to be righted by the Judges of the Court of Exchequer
And so likewise from the Kings Bench and Common Pleas.
for the wrongs and damages that I sustained by those that forcibly entered
upon my Possessions, and do still detain it from me, when I shall bring the
cause before them. Therefore I have no reason for the biting of a mad Dog, to
hang all the good Dogs in the Country, or for the abuse or injustice done me
by some one man or few Lawyers, to exclaim against all others, when as the Poet
advises us, Parcere paucorum diffundere crimen in omnes. But I do exceedingly
tax my self, and mine own understanding, that understanding both Greek and
Latin, and having read what Lambert, Bolton and Dalton have written of
Forcible Entries, I should be such a Dolt, as not to understand this Proceeding
of mine, about the Indictment of those Forcible Enterers to be a just and a
fair Proceeding.

Therefore mine apprehension conceiving such proceedings to be foul, and very
much amiss, and that the justice which I had, upon the whole matter, had not
what Pindarus such Justice uses to have, that is, (...), I thought good, to
set down the same, not to accuse, and complain against any one for being
unjust, or to seek any redress unto my self; for I have born, and can be
contented still to bear, more wrongs than this: But I do it for these ends.

1. To let poor men see, how they may be wronged and oppressed, and have their
Land and Possessions taken from them by great and powerful men, and what they
are best to do in such a case; and my counsel is, to be patient, because as I
said before, Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas, and as our
Savior says, If any man sue thee for thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also;
So I say, if any great man, that has a great Place, or great Friends, take
away thy Lands, let him take away thy House also, rather then spend thy Money,
and lose that with thy Lands; for as Christ says, If these things be done to
the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? So if these Proceedings pass
against me, that can both speak and follow my business to the uttermost, and,
I thank God have ability to go through with it, what shall become of thee, and
thy Cause, that art a poor man, when thou swimmest against the stream, and
kickest against the pricks?

Therefore I advise thee, rather in such a case, to cry to God, than complain
to any Judge, lest that as the Poet says, Excessit medicina modum, thy remedy
will prove worse than thy disease. For thou see how I am served, put our of
my House, and spend above 60 li. and have no redress.

2. If this proceeding and dealing with me, be, as I conceive it, not so fair
and so just as it should be, both for the King and my self, that am ejected out
of my House and Lands; then I conceive, His Majesty and the Parliament should,
to prevent the like Oppression and wrongs to poor men, provide an easier and
plainer way to relieve the oppressed, and to set down an usual Form of
Indictment, or to cause that the Indictments should not be so easily and so
frequently, upon every Lawyers motion, quasht, as they are reported to be:
Especially when the matter of Force is plain and evidently proved. And this
redress of Injuries I petition and move for, for these four special reasons.

1. Because the difficulty of framing the Indictments so, that a cunning Lawyer
cannot easily find a fault, and a flaw in it, and then the frequent quashing of
such Indictments, as are found faulty, is a great wrong to his Majesty, in
depriving him of those Fines that otherwise are due, and should be rendered
unto him.

2. It is a great Abuse and injury unto the poor Subject, that shall be driven
out of his Possession, and, for want of a sufficient Clerk or Counselor to
draw the right form of his Indictment, (which as I see few can do) he shall
both spend his Money, and lose his labor; and perhaps, he is not able to do as
I did, three or four times to draw Indictments, till he finds one that may
stand good.

3. This frequent quashing of Indictments is a great encouragement for
Oppressors, and wicked men to wrong their neighbors more and more; for say
they, I will enter upon him and thrust him out, and if he does indite me, I
will remove it to the Kings Bench, and I shall find a Lawyer that will quash
his Indictment by and by.

4. This very practice and proceeding may be feared to prove the very bane and
destruction of whole Nations and Kingdoms: For if Righteousness exalts a
Nation, and a Kingdom is translated from one Nation to another People, because
of unrighteousness, as Solomon says, and as we may read it in all Histories.
Then you may see how requisite it is, for Kings and Princes, to look to those
things, and not to suffer unrighteous Judges, either for favor to one, or
hatred to another, to do what they list, and to make their Laws like a Nose of
Wax, to bend which way they please, or like a Spiders Web, that catches the
small Flies, but is broken, by the great humble Bees, all to pieces; but to be
like the Chancellor Steel, that although he hated my person, yet, he said,
though I deserved it not, I should have Justice, and so he did me Justice
presently, and I love to do right to my Adversary, and to say the truth of mine
enemy.

But for my self, I thank God for it, as I lived many years very quietly and
contentedly with far less means then 20 li. a year, and with far less pains and
troubles then I have now, so I doubt not, but I could live so still; and I
resolved and vowed, as I have attested in my Epistle to his Majesty, that, if I
should recover this Bishops Court unto the Church, I would wholly and fully
bestow the same for the repairing of the Cathedral Church of Kilkenny: So that
recovering it, I should not be one Penny the richer, or not recovering it, not
a Penny the poorer; and so the wrong done by this Proceeding, whosoever did it,
is, as I conceive, more against the King and the Church than against my self.
And if the Proviso for Sir George Ayskue carries this Bishops Court to him
from the Church, which in my understanding is clean contrary to the very words
of the Act, page 72. Let him pray that he has it not with that Sauce which God
prescribes in Psalm. 83. And so I end, and so be it, as God pleases, Amen.

And after I had delivered this same Relation unto his Majesty, and showed the
Effect and sum thereof, by the next day I gave him this Petition.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of Gruffith, Lord
Bishop of Ossory,
Shows,
THat your Petitioner has caused five of the Tenants of Sir George Ayskew to
be twice Indicted for a forcible Entry upon the House and Lands of the Bishop of
Ossory, and yet your Petitioner with the Expense of above 60 l. could not
prevail to have them punished as the Law requires, whereby your Majesty is
wronged in not receiving the Fines that should be imposed upon them for that
offense, and your Petitioner is abused, in being still kept out of his
Possession, to about 300 l. Damages.

May it therefore please your Majesty to write to the Duke of Ormond, or to the
Parliament, to see that the former Proceedings may be reviewed, and that your
Petitioner may be relieved according to Justice.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
And my Lords Grace of Canterbury very graciously, and like a most Religious
Father and Countenancer of the Fathers of the Church, going with me to deliver
it to his Majesty, and to let him understand the substance of it, said, here is
the good Bishop of Ossory (so his Grace was pleased beyond my Deserts, to style
me) that has a very reasonable Petition to your Majesty, and telling him the
sum of it, his Majesty, like a most Pious King, most graciously answered, I
will do it with all my heart: and my Lords Grace sent for Secretary Benet, and
he drew me this his Majesty's Answer the next day.

Whitehal, July 16th. 1663.
HIs Majesty is graciously pleased effectually to recommend the Consideration
of this Petition to his Grace the Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
to the end his Grace may forthwith take care, to settle and establish the
Petitioner in his Right, and that such who disturb him may be punished
according to Law.

I know not what more I could have desired; his Majesty herein doing more then
I desired: And when I was very willing to have given 5 l. in Gold for Sir Henry
Bennets Fee, that most Courteous Gentleman, Mr. Quod-dolphin, said, I should
not pay one penny, but Sir Henry would lay that upon the Church, and my Lord of
Canterburies score: So fairly, and so friendly was I used at his Majesty's
Court: The Lord bless them, and reward them for it; and grant them always the
like Favor a I found with them.

And when I came with his Majesty's Reference to my Lord Duke of Ormond, I
found his Grace, as honorable, and very gracious in his Answer and Direction
to me; but, when his Grace referred the Petition (that I drew to his Grace, to
do as his Majesty directed) and his Majesty's Reference, to the Council Table,
I must acknowledge, that I feared the success, and so it happened according to
my fear; for when I was called before the Council, his Grace said, he was no
Lawyer, but he left the Matter to them, to inform me, what was to be done
according to Law; and my Lord Chancellor said, that both my self, in my
Relation, and my Lawyers and Counsel confessed, that the Judges did act, and
their Proceedings were according to Law; and therefore I must even begin again,
and it was my best course to proceed according to Law; and I answered, if all
this in my Proceedings were Law, I pray God send us a better Law; for I showed
the whole Proceedings to his Majesty, and to diverse of the Judges of England,
and they said, this was a fair proceeding indeed, to set up a man of straw, and
then shoot at him, to bring a false Indictment to the Court, and then quash it;
for I proved it in the open Court (by the Confession of the Clerk of the
Peace, that brought the true Indictment with him to the Court, and acknowledged
that the other was falsified, either by the Clerk that he trusted to write it,
or by some other, he knew not who:) that the Indictment brought to the Court,
was not the true Indictment, that was found by the Jury; and so without any
more words, my Lords Grace seemed to me very graciously to smile, and so I was
dismissed.

But I fear that the favor which Sir Geo. Ayskue finds in every place against
me, may produce no good effect.
And then I called to mind the cause that moved me to fear the success I should
have at the Council Table, not Injustice, that I mean not. I know that they are
just, but that the Justice I should have, would not be to my advantage, and the
favor that I desired: For when I still ind^ed the forcible Enterers, and still
proceeded against Sir George Ayskues Tenants, he preferred a Petition to the
Council Table, about this Lordship of Bishops Court; and I hearing of it,
conceived that before any thing should be done thereupon, I should have the
favor to be made acquainted with the same Petition, that I might answer it,
but I could hear nothing of it, until a little while after, some of the
Bishops, by reason of the power to my L. Lieutenant and Counsel given by the
last Proviso in the Act of settlement, fearing that they would alter and
retrench some of his Majesty's Favors and Additionals granted unto them, by
the said Act, petitioned that they would not do so, but leave all things that
concerned the Bishops, statu quo, as they are expressed in the Act, without
Alteration or retrenchment; and my Lord Lieutenant and Counsel granted their
Petition; but with this only Proviso, that Sir George Ayskues right might be
preserved, that is, as I conceive, against all the Bishops, for that none is
named; and this Proviso, of all the men in Ireland, is but only for Sir George
Ayskue, and of all the Bishops in Ireland, it seems by all likelihood, only
prejudicial to the Bishop of Ossory: Which notwithstanding, if the last Proviso
in the Act of Settlement, be well understood and rightly followed, can be no
prejudice to him at all, as I conceive it; for that the Power given to my Lord
Lieutenant and Counsel by that Proviso, is as I understand it, a power to alter
and retrench any thing, in part or in whole, which they shall find either
contrary to his Majesty's Declaration, or inconsistent with, Which are the very
words in the Proviso.
or to the general settlement of the Kingdom; and I conceive, that the
suffering of the Bishop of Ossory, to enjoy his own House and Lands, where the
Bishops used to live and reside, cannot be contrary to his Majesty's
Declaration, not inconsistent with the general settlement of the Kingdom. And
therefore I humbly conceive, that my Lord Lieutenant and Counsel have no power
by that Proviso granted unto them, to take away his Majesty's Grant and Favor
to the Bishop of Ossory, and to settle the same upon Sir George Ayskue;
especially if his Majesty was deceived in his Grant to Sir George Ayskue, as I
verily believe he was; for his Majesty grants him the Lands settled upon him for
his Service in Ireland; and I have searched and examined the Matter as much as
ever I could, and yet could never find nor understand what Service he had done
in Ireland, that deserved to carry away the House and Lands of the Bishop of
Ossory, or indeed of any Service, that he did in Ireland at all, either for
King or Parliament.

And if for all this, he carries the Bishops House away, I will sing, Mopso
Nisa datur: and seeing how many of the Bishops Houses and Lands, that were by
an Order of the House of Lords, delivered to my possession by the Sheriff of
the County, and were peaceably in my Tenants possession, and paid me Rent ever
since his Majesty's happy coming in, were given away, while I was in London,
Petitioning about this Cause, and could not be at Dublin, to answer them that
sued for them, nor dreamed of any Suites against me, and being not able in mine
old Age (especially seeing what Pains, Charge, and Success I have hitherto had
with Sir Geo. Ayskue) to follow so many Suits, against so many men, so powerful
as they are, in the Courts of Justice, at the Council Table, and in all places,
I will like Balaams Ass, so unjustly beaten, lie down under my burden, too
heavy for me to bear, and call and cry to God to arise and maintain his own
Cause, and the Cause of his own Son Jesus Christ.

Yet in this Suit, betwixt me and Sir Geo. Ayskue, because I have taken so much
pains, and spent so much Money, (and specially because I do hate and abhor,
that any man I mean not Sir G. Ayskue, but whosoever he be.
, which has fought under the Standard of the Beast and Long Parliament,
against that Most Pious King, and my Most Gracious Master, Charles the First,
should carry away the Houses and Lands, that Religious Princes have dedicated
for the Hono^r and Service of Jesus Christ, for the Reward of that wickedness)
I resolved once more to enter into the List, to follow my always very
honorable Friend, my Lord Chancellours Advice, and try the Success with him,
by the Verdict of an honest Jury, and Lindired 6 of the Tenants and Servants of
Sir Geo. Ayskue, for a forcible Entry, and 5 of them now, the third time; and I
had six Counselors help, to draw and compose the Indictment, and so to review
it, and correct it, if any thing was amiss therein, that, being found Billa
Vera by the Jury, it might so stand good, and not be quashed, as my two former
Indictments were, by the Judges of the Kings Bench.

And the 6 forcible Enterers being indicted, for fear lest the Record should be
falsified, and corrupted, as the former indirement of them had been, I got the
Clerk of the Peace, to send it enclosed in a Letter sealed up, by my man, to
his Agent in Dublin, to be ^elivered into the Office, which mine Adversaries
presently told to my Lord of Santree, and was objected as a Piaculum; Meaning,
as I conceived, by the Relation that I had printed of the former Proceedings.
and when the Record came to the Court, my Lord Chief Justice said upon the
Bench, that my Lord Bishop had abused the Court, to whom I replied, that I had
not abused the Court, for that I had set down nothing but the Truth, and was as
Ioah as any man, to offer the least Abuse to any of his Majesty's Courts, or
Judges of his Courts; And after my Lord Chief Justice and my self had conferred
together, I found him my very honorable Friend, and I retained three of the
Kings Counsel to follow the said Cause for his Majesty, and the Counselors of
the Fanatics failing to quash the Indictment, my Lord Chief Justice told them,
they must either submit, or be bound to prosecute their Traverse; and they
became bound in 200 l. to prosecute the same upon the 10th. day of Easter Term,
which was the sixth day of May. And when, upon that day the Jury were sworn,
That their children and their childrens children may understand from what (I
will not say Canaanites, but Catharis^s) they are sprung. Who and what my
Witnesses proved,
viz. William Baker of Ballytobin, John Pursel of Lismore, William Baxter of
Earlstown, Isaac Jackson of K^lamery, John Jones of Ri (...) Robert Hawford of
Ballyneboly, Nicholas Pharoe, Thomas Tomlins of Lismoteag, Chrystopher Render
of Fadenarah, John Nixon of Brawnebarn, William Cheshire of (...) and Thomas
Huswife of Gowran; good men and true, or neither good men nor true.

1. I brought in evidence, Mr. Sheriff Reigly (who was the Sheriff that gave me
possession) and Mr. Connel (and Hugh Linon, that was thought needless) to prove
my possession given by the Sheriff of the County of Kilkenny, by virtue of an
Order of the House of Lords, of this Lordship of Bish. Court and the Lands
thereto belonging, and of the Tenements in Freshfoord, as it was expressed in a
Shedule annexed to the Order of the Lords, upon the 29th day of April, 1662.
and that the Tenants did atturne Tenants, and gave pieces of money in earnest
of their rents, and promised to keep the possession, and to continue Tenants
unto me during my pleasure.

2. Mr. Thomas Bulkley, Mr. William Williams, Thomas Davies, and my self proved
the multitude of persons, to the number of ten or twelve, that upon the 8th day
of October, 1662. were entered into the said Bishops Court, and there forcibly
kept the possession against the Bishop, and some (one with a sword by his side,
and a staff or Cane in his hand, and another with a long staff in his hand)
threatened that they would make him repent his doings and coming there, and that
Sir George Ayskue would spend 500 li. before he would leese this Bishops Court,
and that Captain Burges said, he would keep and uphold the possession for Sir
George Ayskue with his life and fortune; and others, having shut the Iron
Grate, to hinder the Bishop to go out or his Servants to come in, when his
Servants demanded, what they meant, to murder their Lord? And desired to come
in, to wait upon their Master, they threatened them, and said, that if they
offered to come in there, they would beat them down, and knock out their Brains.

3. Mr. Richard Marshal, Mr. George Far, Mr. John Murphey, and Ed. Dalton,
(that proved how he was thrust out of the house by head and shoulders) proved
the forcible entry, with arms and weapons, a Gun, and a Pike, and Staves, into
some of the Tenements in Freshford; and that for nine days, they kept the same
with such a company of Fanatics, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, that they
seemed rather to be a Garrison, than the keeping of the possession of any house.

And after nine days they bound George Far and others in a bond of a
thousand pounds that they should continue true Tenants to Sir George Ayskue,
and keep the possession for him against the Bishop of Ossory.

And because the said George Far proved this point so fully and so plain,
that nothing could be said against it; one of the Fanatics Counselors said,
what I conceive was very unfit to be spoken, in so public a place, and before
such honorable Judges of any of the Kings Witnesses, that this man, the
principal of the Witnesses, was a parricide, which I dare justify to be most
untrue.

4. For impounding the Cattle, and beating and wounding them that sought to
hinder it, the said George Far proved the same so fully, and that one of the
women, that was beaten, lay long sick after her beating, that Sir Audley Mervin
and Sergeant Gruffith would not suffer three other Witnesses, that I had there
at the Bar, that is, John Duran, Barbara Marshal, and another Wench, to be
sworn and examined, and so to trouble the Court any further; because said they,
you see the Lords Justices, and the whole Court, are sufficiently satisfied,
that I had more than abundantly proved the forcible entry, and detaining of
this Bishops Court, but they gave way, to six of the Intruders Counsel, to say
what they could for their Clients.

And when each one of them had made his Oration, and spent much time, and my
Lord Chief Justice heard them, with a great deal of patience, to prove what I
never denied, but was ready to confess all that they said, touching the large
Writings and Evidences, that they produced, to prove the Title and Interest of
Mr. Robert Shea to this Bishops Court, which at this time, when the question
was only of the forcible entry, I had no reason to contradict, and which
perhaps might be good (and perhaps not) before he forfeited the same unto his
Majesty.

But for Sir George Ayskue, that for his Service, How S. George Ayskue came to
have this Bishops Court.
you know to whom, (which makes me believe it will never prosper with him) had
a Commission from the Usurper Crummel, that for 200 li. which was due unto him
for some Service that he had done, as I am informed, the Commissioners should
allot him so much Lands, as they thought worth 200 li. and they out of favor
to him, and getting Lands so cheap as they did, gave him this Bishops Court,
and so much more other Lands, as are now far better worth than 200 li. per
annum; his Counsel said never a word touching his Title and Interest; for he
enjoyed it not peaceably and quietly, but only during the time of the
Rebellion, and Usurpation, (which I conceive to be no true Possession,) for as
soon as ever his Majesty was so happily restored before one year had gone
about, I sent to enter upon it, and to distrain for my Rent, and Captain
Burges, Sir George Ayskues prime Tenant, gave me a Writing, which I have to
show, under his hand, to become answerable unto me for the whole Rent of this
Bishops Court and Freshfoord, when I should be peaceably settled in it.

So when these six Counselors had spent their spirits in tyring the worthy
Judges, and beating the soft air, to no purpose, but only (like those Fanatic
Preachers, that read their Text, and never touch it after) to amaze the simple
and -- Jury which I may justly term -- for that I am confident, the most of
them were resolved what to do before ever they heard the Evidence: My Counsel,
that were Sir William Dunvil, the Kings Attorney, Sir Audley Mervin The Speaker
of the House of Commons.
, Sir John Temple, the Kings Solicitor, Sergeant Gruffith, and Mr. Rian, all
very worthy men, and worthy to be named, thinking it no wisdom in them, as one
of themselves told me, nor any ways beneficial, either to the King for his
Fine, or to me for the Possession, to follow those extravagant Counselors in
their devious ways, and to answer their needless discourses, so far from the
point in question, as being only about Sheas Title, and no ways touching nor
contradicting the forcible entry, were very silent, and said never a word to
all that the adverse Counselors had said, but left the Evidence to be
explained to the Jury by the Judges, who had so exactly examined them, and so
patiently heard what both sides could say: for which, some of the adverse
Counselors, and some of my friends blamed them very much, for making no
manner of replication at all to Sir George Ayskues Counsel. But truly I do
conceive, that digitus dei erat hic, that as he opens the mouth of babes and
sucklings to show forth his praise, so he shuts the mouths of the Wise and
Learned, when it pleases him, as here he did, for the trial of this Jury,
whether they would be true and honest, that, being found Like Belshazzar,
weighed in the balance and found too light.
as I conceive they are, they might be made an example (which he knew I would
do, to the uttermost of my power) for all other Juries, to terrify them from
falsehood and wrong, to the great benefit of the whole Kingdom, which, without
some severe censures upon such high Offenders, would rather prove to be a Den
of thieves than a seat of safety for honest men, that were best (if -- Juries
may still do what they list) to obey the voice, which cried in the air, at the
Siege of Jerusalem, Migremus hinc.

Then my Lord of Santry, that is, my Lord Chief Justice, seeing my Counsel
silent, began most nobly, rightly, and truly, as a most upright Judge, and like
himself in all his judgments, told the Jury, that for the title and matter of
Law, and the Interest of either in this Bishops Court, it was not in their
charge to inquire of it, but they, that were the Judges of the Law, and of the
right interest were to do it, and would do the same, when my Counsel should
move for the possession, but they were, for the King, to enquire only of the
matter of fact and force; whether after possession was given to the Bishop by
the Sheriff, by virtue of an Order of the house of Lords, and the Bishop
continued his possession from April to the eighth of October, The which sa^d
he, a Disscisor should not forcibly be put out.
though he should be a Disseisor, yet was he not forcibly put out, and kept out
of the same? This was their only charge, to inquire after: and for this, said
my Lord Chief Justice, you see what is proved; a multitude of persons, ten or
twelve at the least, when as one may make a forcible entry; you heard also,
said he, what weapons they had, Gun, Pike, Sword, and Staves; and you heard
what threatening words they used, that they would make the Bishop to repent his
coming there; that they would knock down his Servants and beat out their brains
if they attempted to come in; and you heard likewise how they had beaten and
wounded those Servants, that sought to hinder them to impound their Cattle; and
all this, said my Lord Chief Justice, makes the forcible entry plain, so that
you need not stand upon it. So justly and so fairly did my Lord of Santry deal
herein, without either fearing or favoring the one or the other.

So the Jury was dismissed; and all that heard the evidence, Sure, if I had not
been a Bishop they would never have given such a Verdict.
and what my Lord Chief Justice said, would have laid, some twenty to one, some
forty to one, and some a hundred to one, that the Jury would not stand upon it,
but presently find the Verdict for the King. Yet they brought their Verdict for
the Defendants.

And as I am informed, all the Grave and Reverend Judges wondered, and were
discontented at their Verdict; And who will prosecute for the King if Juries be
suffered to do thus?
and whereas some would have the Jury fined, and imprisoned for the wrong they
had done to the King; my Lord Chief Justice answered, there was a fitter place
to punish them: meaning, as I conceive, the Star Chamber.

And if such men, that formerly most of them were against their King, be thus
permitted, to drive men out of house and home, and forcibly to enter into their
possession, though they should be Peers of the Realm, which is a violence
offered unto the Law, and a pe^ty Rebellion, the next degree, and forerunner
of rebellion against their King himself; and when any oppressed and expulsed
man shall with a great deal of pains and labor, and with a vast expense of
money, and an indictment upon indictment, thrice over, bring the same to a
travers, and they, the Jury, without any Conscience, contrary to all justice,
and contrary to all their evidence, and the plain Declaration and Judgment of
the Lords the Judges of the Court, and of the whole Court, shall do what they
please, and say, Quod vol^^us, id sanctum est, what we do is Law, without any
speedy remedy against them, to the utter undoing of many poor oppressed men,
who had better suffer any, the greatest wrong, than seek to be relieved, And as
the Poet says, Excessit medicina modum.
by such a way, whereby usura superat sortem, and the seeking of a Remedy shall
so far exceed the Disease, I know not with what safety, either of Life, State,
or Fortune, (which are all in the power of the Juries, to determine of them)
any man can live in this Kingdom.

For here, (especially in the County of Kilkenny,) where that perfidious Rebel
and Traitor Axtell planted his Colony, such a multitude of Anabaptists,
Quakers, and other worser Sectaries, What I say against these, I say not
against the worthy Gentlemen and good Protestants, that are also very many, and
my very good Friends in these parts. Neither do, I say it against those welbred
Gentlemen that were Officers, and Commanders in the Ar^^ but of the generality
of the Common ^ouldiers, and some of the meaner Officers, that for their small
Arrears got large Territories, and are now great Freeholders, and the chiefest
Jurymen and Judges of our Lives, Lands, and Fortunes.
that in the beginning of the English Rebellion, were broken Citizens and
Tradesmen, Taylers and Tinkers, Shoomakers and Cobblers, Plow-men, and others,
the like, men of no fortune, thought to raise themselves by the Irish Wars, and
having some Arrears of Pay due unto them, go Orders to set out Lands unto them
for the same, and the Kingdom being depopulated and wasted, and made a
Wilderness without Inhabitants, the Lands were of nothing worth, and they had
what Lands they pleased, and as much as they pleased, for their Arrears; for
ten pounds as much as is now worth a hundred pounds a year; and for a hundred
pounds as much as I will give a hundred pounds per annum.

These men, that followed Axtells Religion, and were of his Plantation, being
mounted up on Cock-horse, to be such great E^^eholders, (the Irish Proprietors
being, for the most part, driven away; and the Church Lands also taken into
these Soldiers hands,) they must now be, for the most part, the principal Jury
men and so the Judges of our Lives, Lands, and Fortunes.

And they, considering their own interest to be alike, in the Lands, both of
the Church, of the Irish, and of all, from whomsoever they hold it, do stick
and cling together, like sworn brethren, or rather like forsworn wretches, to
defend and maintain each others Title and Interest in the Lands, that each one
holds, both against Clergy and Laity, God or the King, be the same right or
wrong, they will not lose their lands.

And they do encourage each other thus to continue in their wickedness, saying,
that they got their Lands with the loss of their blood, and the hazard of their
lives; and therefore, to get the King some small fine, whereof he shall have
but the least part of it, and be but very little the better for it, and to
dispossess their own fanatic Party, and give the Lands unto their Enemies,
especially unto the Bishops, whom of all others they hate most of all, and
Bishop Williams above all the rest, as he that hates their former Rebellions,
and their now practices, more than any man else, they will never do it: though
they hazard the loss, both of body and soul.

Indeed, for the Bishop of Ossory he understands their malice toward him, well
enough, (I pray God forgive them) so great, that, were it not for some honest,
and truly religious Irish Gentlemen, and some of the Catholic Religion, I
profess that I durst not live amongst these, that formerly warred against their
King, and if the truth were known, do as I believe, as little love their
present King, as they do much hate our Church, and the Bishops of our Church:
when as they that hate their Bishops, cannot be said to honor their King, as I
have most fully showed in my Grand Rebellion.

And therefore I went unto his grace, my Lord Lieutenant, and related to his
Grace the Verdict of the Jury, plain contrary to their evidence and the
Declaration of my Lord Chief Justice, and the Judgment of the whole Court; and
therefore did most humbly desire his Grace, to give me leave to go for England,
to dispatch some necessary occasions, and to signify unto his Majesty, that,
if there were no Court of Star Chamber here, nor any other provision made, to
punish all perjured Juries, and all high Transgressors of the Laws and heinous
offenders, that deprive his Majesty of the fines, justly due unto him, and his
Subjects of their right, we, the true Protestants, and his M^jesties loyal
Subjects, were not in safety, nor able to live among such Confederates of
wickedness; but must, as King Boco said to the Senate of Rome, depart thence,
lest the ire of the Gods, or the rage and injustice of such men do utterly
destroy us. And his Grace very mildly and graciously answered, my Lord, the
Bill for a Star Chamber is already arawn, and sent to his Majesty to be signed,
and will speedily come down, to pass the Houses, and then such Malefactors may
be fully punished according to their offense.

And I protested, and do protest, that I would be with the first, that would do
my uttermost endeavor, to punish this Jury, and all false and forsworn
perjured Juries, and the like high Transgressors, that concern me whatsoever.
For,

It is most certain, that Impunitas peccati invitat homines ad malignandum; And
therefore I do believe, that I am as equally bound in conscience, to punish
this Jury, as I am to recover the Lands of the Church.
and as Solomon says, because the punishment is deferred, the hearts of the
children of men are altogether set, to do evil; and my Divinity assures me,
that to punish a perjured person, and a transcendent Transgressour of the Law,
is as acceptable unto God, as the relieving of the Oppressed; because that
hereby we do our best that those, which will not be persuaded by good Counsel
to be honest, and virtuous, may be forced with stripes, to do their duties, or
at least terrified from being so vicious, for that as St. Bernard says, Qui
non vult duci debet trahi.

And therefore, with what means that God has given me, I will with his
assistance, do my best, to repair Gods House, to relieve the Distressed, and to
punish the Perjured, and the Oppressors of Gods People; and the rather, because
that here, in the parts, where I live, I have seen, in three or four years,
more forcible Entries, Riots and Oppressions than I have seen in England, or
Wales, that might be thought a little more wild than England in all my life, so
that a Stranger, might rather think it a Country of Robbers, Tyrants, and
Oppressors, much like unto Albion, when Brutus entered it, than a Country where
with safety he might dwell amongst them; for I do profess, were it not for some
honest Irish, that are not all of my Religion, nor I of theirs, that do further
me, encourage me, and protect me, in Gods servic^, and the advancement of Gods
Church, I had rather live a poor Curate in my own Country, than a Bishop among
such a company of Crumwellian Anabaptists, Quakers, and other worser Sectaries,
that do live in these parts, and the wind of his Majesty's happy Government,
and the prudent care of my Lord Lieutenant, has driven them, As by their
actions and hatred I do perfectly discern them.
like the Church Papists in Queen Elizabeth's days, to come within the Pales of
our Church; and yet are as false-hearted, if the same might be seen, both to
the King and the Church of Christ, as ever they were in Crumwells days; as I
conceive it to appear, by the oath of one of my Witnesses, that swore he heard
the Captain of these forcible Enterers, that I indicted, encouraging his
followers, to keep the possession for Sir George Ayskue, and to assure
themselves, things should never be quiet until they returned and come again as
they were before; which was a strange saying, as I understood it.

Yet I would not have my Reader here to think, but that as the Scripture
distinguishes betwixt the seed of the woman and the seed of the Serpent, the
Children of God and the Sons of Belial, so I do here in no ways prejudice, nor
think the least evil of the true-hearted English and true Protestants, the
worthy Gentlemen, the Officers, Captains and Commanders of the Army, that are
likewise many in these parts; but I make a great deal of difference betwixt
them, so much, as that I do as much love and honor the one, as I do hate and
abhor the doings and wickedness of the other.

So you may see, what it is to live in Ireland, For here now the Poet may well
say, that Terras Astrae^ reliquit.
among Anabaptists and other Sectaries, worse than Pagans; and how it is my
Fortune to feel the brunt, and taste the poison of their Malice, to publish the
same to all posterities: God deliver his Servants from them. Amen.

ANd now, until I shall see whether the Star Chamber will think it Justice, as
I do, that this -- Jury should bear all the damage that I sustain by their
Verdict, and which I should have recovered upon the forcible Enterers, if they
had gone according to their Evidence. I thought good to prefer this Petition to
His Majesty.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of Gruffith, Lord
Bishop of Ossory,
Shows,
THat Justice is a virtue and grace most acceptable with God; yet your
Petitioner has been infinity injured, and your Majesty likewise wronged:

1. By forcible Enterers that drove your Petitioner out of his house of Bishops
Court and Freshfoord.

2. By a wicked forgerer of the Indictment of those persons, that were indicted
for that entry.

3. By a packt Jury, that, when the forcible Enterers were three times
indicted, by three several Juries, quitted them, contrary to their evidence,
and the mind of all the Judges.

May it therefore please your Majesty to cause that Justice may be done to your
Petitioner, and that you would write to the Sheriff of the County of Kilkenny,
that, as formerly he has settled your Petitioner in this Bishops Court and
Freshfoord, by virtue of an Order of the House of Lords, so he would now settle
him in his right and possession of the same by virtue of an Order from your
Majesty.

And your Petitioner does here promise, and engage himself to God and to your
Majesty, that, as he bestowed about four hundred pounds already, so having the
four hundred pounds per annum, that your Majesty granted, settled upon him,
according to the Act of settlement, page 71, and 72. he will lay out a thousand
pounds more to repair the flat fallen, formerly fair Cathedral Church of St.
Keny.

And shall ever pray for your Majesty, etc.
The sad condition of the Church and Clergy in the Diocese of Ossory; and I
fear not much better in all Ireland.
THE Church of Ireland in former times was very famous and glorious for many
things especially for Piety, and neighbourly Charity, and bounty of the people
one toward another, as it appears by the rare and many many Edifices of
Churches and Monasteries, endowed with ample means and revenues, dedicated for
the honor of God, and the service of Jesus Christ; all to be seen at this very
day: for which cause it was wont to be admired and applauded, and by the
bordering Nations, that observed their sedulity in pious works, and neglect of
worldly pomp, when, as the holy Patriarchs lived in Tents, so most of them were
contented to lie in Booths, and poor earthly Cabins, or houses made of Earth,
that they might build to God houses of Marble, most sumptuous and glorious; and
that they might be the better able, to bestow the more, to adorn and beautify
the houses and Temples of God; it was called, and not amiss, Ecclesia
Sanctorum, the glorious Church of holy Saints; that aimed only to go to heaven.

But now since the unhappy time of that potent K. H. 8. when Sacrilege,
through his discontent with the Pope, about his divorce with Queen Katherine,
Ut fama vagatur, began to get the upper hand, and to throw away Piety from the
Church, and trample it under-foot, and cover it over with the Cloak of
hypocrisy, and the vain shadow of no Religion, instead of the true service of
God, you may see reliquias danaum, the ruins of Troy, and in all places the
carcass of Religion, lodged in the thrown- down walls of all the Abbeys and
Monasteries, and most of the Cathedrals, and the other Churches of Ireland,
that are now, as the Prophet says, defiled and made heaps of stones, Psalm.
79.1.

For if you walk through Ireland, as I rode from Carlingford to Dublin, and
from Dublin to Kilkenny, and in my Visitation thrice over the Diocese of
Ossory; I believe that throughout all your travel, you shall find it as I found
it, in all the ways that I went, scarce one Church standing, and sufficiently
repaired, for seven, I speak within compass, that are ruined, and have only
walls, without ornaments, and most of them without roofs, without doors,
without windows, but the holes to receive the winds to entertain the
Congregation.

And what a lamentable thing, and a miserable-fight is this? If you say, that
in the time of blindness the people were over zealous in building too many
Churches, and thinking to merit much thereby: I say, that now, in the fullness
of knowledge, and the Sunshine of the Gospel, they are too riotous to pull
them down, and too negligent of Gods honor, and of the Peoples good, to waste
and ruinate so many Churches, and to let the people want them to meet together,
to serve God; which will merit a worse reward for them, than they shall have
that built them.

You may remember, that when Moses was to erect the Tabernacle, in the
wilderness, within a desert place, of no trade or traffic, and therefore not
easy to get any wealth in it: Yet Moses requiring their aid and free will
offering to do the same; they were ready, and so willing, every man, beyond his
power, to bring in their oblation in such abundance, that Moses was fain to
tell them, they had brought enough, and too much: and therefore forbade them to
bring in any more; he like a good man and just, being not desirous to make any
gain of their bounty.

And you may read in 1 Chronicles. 29.3. 1 Chronicles. 29.3.
when King David resolved to have the Temple built, what great provision he
left for the erecting of it; and how Solomon his Son did most gloriously finish
the same in seven years, 1 Reg. 6.37.
and furnished the same with all things necessary for the service of God; and
after that Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed it, the Jews under Zorobabel did most
readily, beyond the ability of captived men, newly released, contribute, and
offered their free will offerings toward the re-edifying of the same, which
they finished in the ninth year of D^rius Histaspes, Joseph. lib. 11. c. 4.
that made it to be forty six years in building, from the second year of Cyrus,
who began it, according as the Jews say, to our Savior Christ. And because
these newly released Jews, that had scarce taken root in the Land of Jury, and
were but scarce seated, and unsettled in Jerusalem, were not able to make this
their Temple answerable in glory and sumptuousness, to that most rare and
admirable Temple, which those two mighty Kings, and Kings of all Israel, David
and Solomon, had joined their wealth and strength together to make it a most
glorious house, for the most glorious and Almighty God; therefore Herod, that
was but an alien, an Idumean, knowing that great and glorious things are to be
offered, ascribed, and dedicated to the great and glorious God, re-edified and
finished the same most sumptuously in eight years, Joseph. l. 15. c. ult.
as Josephus writes; and he built the same so exceeding excellent, and more
admirable than the Egyptian Pyramides, that Cheops builded of rare Theban
Marble, so that for the rareness thereof, the Disciples show it our Savior
Christ, saying, Master, see what manner of stones, Mar. 13.1.
and what buildings are here.

And the Jews generally were so zealous of Gods service, and so ready to build
and erect houses for his service, that, besides this glorious, great, and
magnificent Temple, they had many Synagogues, that is, other lesser houses,
like unto our Parish Churches, dedicated and consecrated for the worship of
God; and he was counted a very good man, and worthy of all love and respect,
that had built one of these, as they tell Christ, that the Centurion was worthy
to have that favor showed him by Christ, as to heal his Daughter, Luke 7.5.
because he had loved their nation, and had built them a Synagogue, that is, a
house for the people to meet in it, to pray, and to serve their God in it.

And it is most likely, they began to build these Synagogues when the Tribes
were settled in the Land of Canaan; because the Ark, that remained in Shilo, and
afterward the Temple, that was erected in Jerusalem, Why the Synagogues of the
Jews were built.
were so far distant from them that dwell in the remotest parts of the Land,
that they could not come so often, as they would, unto it, therefore they built
to themselves Synagogues, to pray to God, and to serve him in them, instead of
the Temple: for so we read that Moses of old time, probable, I say, from their
very first beginning of their settlement, Acts 15.21.
had in every City them that preached him, being read in their Synagogues every
Sabbath day: where, by the way, you may observe, that of old time, contrary to
the conceit of our new Fanatics, the reading of the holy Scriptures was
accounted the preaching of Gods word; though I deny not, but after it be read
and so preached, Luke 4.18.
it may be further explained, as Christ did that place of Isa. 61.1.

And you see they had these Synagogues in every City, so they must have as many
Synagogues as there were Cities in all their Land; The number of their
Synagogues.
and Sigonius writes, that there were four hundred and eighty of these
Synagogues in Jerusalem; and the Scripture shows that in other Cities and
Provinces there were many other Synagogues, as in Galile, in Damascus, in
Salamis, and in Antiochia: and Maymonides, one of their prime Doctors, says,
the tradition of their Elders was, that wheresoever ten Families of Israel
were, they ought to build them a Synagogue.

And shall the Jews, that were under the Law, and burdened with such infinite
Taxes and Ceremonies of their Religion, as were more than they were able to
bear, Acts 15.10.
as the Apostle testifies, be so zealous, so religious, and so ready to part
with their wealth and the best things they had to build so sumptuous, and so
glorious a Temple, and so many Synagogues, to perform those services that God
required of them, which notwithstanding were but the types and shadows of that
true Religion which we have, and do profess to embrace it; and shall we, that
have the substance of those shadows, which they had, and the truth of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, which they never had, but in aenigmate, preached so
clearly and so amply among us, and are freed from all the legal Ceremonies and
Ordinances of the Law, be so cold and so careless as we are to repair the
houses of Jesusr Christ? I fear then that these Jews shall rise in judgment
against us.

Nay, more than this, if you look into the stories of the Gentiles, Grecians,
or Barbarians, that knew not God, but knew that there is a God which all men
ought to worship; you shall find how zealous they were to build Temples and
Oracles to their unknown Gods, that were no other than the devils, as the
Oracle of Delphos, Amphiaraus, Hamonium, Dodonaeum, the Temple of Diana, at
Ephesus, of Vesta, Ceres, Minerva, and other Goddesses of the Gentiles, and the
many many Temples, that the Romans and other Nations built, to Jupiter, Apollo,
Mars, and the rest of their false and feigned Gods and Goddesses, that were
indeed but very devils; Quia dii gentum daemo^ia.
and how sumptuously they erected and gloriously adorned and beautified those
houses of these deceitful Oracles, and were so exceeding bountiful, almost
beyond belief, in their oblations and donations, to these holy places, as they
deemed them, as it appears in Herodotus, Herodotus l. 1.
by the large gifts of inestimable value that Cresus sent to the Temple of
Delphos, and other Temples of those Gentile gods.

And because they knew no otherwise, but that these infernal devils were
Celestial Gods, and so worshipped them as gods, with Temples, Altars,
Sacrifices, Prayers, and Oblations, dedicated unto them, which do only and
properly belong to the true and eternal God: therefore Horace says to them
that neglected the erecting and beautifying of these Temples, that belonged to
these no Gods: Delicta majorum immeritus lues
Roman, donec templa refeceris, Horat l. 3. Ode 6.

Aedesque labentes deorum, and fada nigro,
Simulachra fumo.
The which Ode, that worthy and learned Imitator of this best Lyrick Poet thus
excellently translateth, in this elegant Lyrick Verse. Roman resolve thou shall
desertless taste
Sins scourge, for vice of Predecessors past;
Until thou do again repair
Decayed Temples, and make fair
The falling houses of the gods, disgraced,
And cleanse their Images, with smoke defaced;
To think thee less than gods, thy power commends,
Hence take beginnings, hither aim thy ends;
The gods neglected did impose
On sad Hesperia many woes;
Twice Pacorus, and twice Manaeses hand
Our inanspicious forces did disband;
Who with a plentious prey made glad,
To little chains new links did add.


And if by the judgment of this learned man they shall suffer for all the sins
and offenses of their Fathers and Forefathers, until they re-edifie the
Temples, and raise the flat-fallen houses of these gods, and beautify the
defiled Monuments and Sepulchers of their Heroes, and other noble persons that
were dead: What shame and what punishment do we deserve, for suffering the
Tombs and Sepulchers of our heroic Fathers, and the Temples, Houses, and
Altars of our good God and our Redeemer Jesus Christ to lie so waste, so
ruined, and so defiled as they are here in this Kingdom of Ireland; for I do
believe that of about 100 Churches that our forefathers built and sufficiently
endowed in the Diocese of Ossory, there are not 20 standing, nor 10 well
repaired at this day.

Truly, I have done my best, beyond my ability, let Demas and the detractors
say what they please, to repair the Quire of St. Kenny, and I have privately
vowed, and publicly protested often, and engaged my self to God, to His
Majesty, and to the People, and I am contented to be bound in a bond of one
thousand pounds, that if the Bishops Court and Freshford, (that were given to
the Church, and dedicated to God, for the service of Jesus Christ,) shall be
restored to the Church, there shall not one penny, or penniworth, of all the
rents, and profits thereof, be retained or transferred to me, or any of mine;
but it shall wholly and fully be employed and laid out for the raising and
reparation of that Cathedral Church which the Lord has now committed to my
charge.

But if I shall still see, as I have seen hitherto, that Rebels and Traitors
that have been, (if such as have fought under the Standard of the beast and
Great Antichrist, against their own King, to bring him to be murdered, may be
so styled,) shall be countenanced, furthered, and upheld, to carry away, and
enjoy the Lands and Houses of the Church, and so little regard had of that
justice we owe to render unto God, what belongs to God, and less respect to the
servants of Jesus Christ than to the followers of the Antichrist; then seeing,
as the Prophet says, in vacuum laboravi, I have labored in vain; I have spent
my strength, my time, my means, and my money for naught, in seeking to bring to
God what is Gods, and to the Church what of right belongs unto the Church,
Liberavi animam meam, and I hope I may freely turn the leaf, and as God said of
the house of Eli, I said indeed that the house of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and the house of his Fathers should walk before me for ever: but now, says
the Lord, be it far from me. And seeing they had so far dishonored him, and so
much profaned his service, it was just with God so to do.

And so I said indeed, I would do my best, and I would bestow as much as I was
able, and perhaps more than many would imagine, to repair the Cathedral Church
of St. Kenny; yet now being disappointed of my hope, and finding men preferring
flesh and blood before the dictate of the Spirit of God, favoring those, that
have been rebels, before such as are religious. Seeing I cannot build the
Church of Christ, I have resolved, to the uttermost of my power, to overthrow
the Synagogue of Satan; that is, to punish perjurers, and such others, high
transgressors of Gods Laws, and to leave the houses of God (as finding my self
unable to prevail to do therein any good,) wasted and ruined as they are. And
if this I cannot do, but that Scelera sceleribus tuebuntur, one false and
perjured Jury shall be defended, and protected, and justified by another false
Jury; and one wicked oppressor excused by another the like oppressor; or that
the fear of great men will not suffer poor spirited Lawyers to afford us Law
for any money: then ad te domine clamabo, that we can have neither truth nor
justice in the earth.

But to proceed to show the miseries of the Church of Ireland, though it be a
very lamentable thing, and an unanswerable argument of the decay of Piety, and
of small Religion in the noblest persons, to suffer the houses of God to lie as
they do, for hogs and other beasts to dig up the bones of holy Saints, it may
be, the Fathers or Mothers of the now great Lords and Ladies of the Kingdom.
Yet as the Lord said unto his Prophet Ezekiel, Turn thee yet again, and thou
shall see greater abominations, Ezekiel. 8.6. so I say to my Reader: For,

2. The great want of able Ministers in this Kingdom, and why they are so scant.
2. As God is without Churches for his people to meet in to serve him, so he is
without servants, enabled to do him service, to praise his name, and to teach
his people; and to have Churches and no Churchmen is to no purpose.

But why have we not such Churchmen as are able to instruct Gods people?

I say, it is easily answered; that it is not so easy to get able, worthy, and
sufficient Churchmen, unless there were sufficient means and livings to
maintain them: for as Seneca truly says, Sublatis studiorum premiis ipsa
studia pereunt, where there is no reward for learning, there will be want of
learned men, as one demanding why there were no Physicians in Lacedemon, answer
was made, because there was no stipend nor allowance set forth for the
Professors of that faculty; but as Martial says to Flaccus, Sint Maecenates
non decrunt Flacce marones,
Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt.


But here in Ireland since Hen. 8. Why we want learned and painful Preachers
here in Ireland.
overthrew the Abbeys and Monasteries that were as Universities to breed
Scholars, and to send them forth to feed the flock of Christ, and gave the
Revenues thereof, which were the Ecclesiastical Livings of the Church, unto his
Nobility and lay Gentry, that spend the same, in many places, in hawking and
hunting, and perhaps in some other worser employments, the Church of Christ
wants Scholars, and which is worse, wants means to maintain those
Scholars, that otherwise would supply the defects of this Kingdom from other
Universities, if they should have maintenance to support them, and to supply
their necessities.

If you say, Queen Elizabeth to make up the breach which her Father made,
caused the College to be built by Dublin, to breed up Scholars, to instruct
the Natives.

I wish the Natives were bred therein, according to the Statutes and
Institutions thereof; but the Natives say, I know not how true, that the
English by friends do carry away the places, and the Irish, as they lost their
Friends, and their Lands, and their strength, so they lose their right. But the
truth is, that the whole Society of this College cannot adequate, that number
that the Priories and Monasteries formerly bred; or if they could, yet the
means and maintenance being alienated the Laborers cannot make up the f^ll
tale of bricks, when the straw is taken from them, and they must run over all
the Land, like the Israelites, to gather stubble, and to use other labor to
maintain themselves and their Families.

And to make this apparent unto my Readers, I have here set down all the
Rectories and Vicaredges in my Diocese, and what Procurations, (besides their
Subsidies and twentieth part, It may be at some dear year they may be of more
worth or that the cunning Farmar may make more of them then the Minister does.
which they are, and ought, to pay unto his Majesty, and besides many other
Taxes, that must lie upon them,) they are to pay every year, to the Archdeacon,
to the Bishop, and to the Archbishop, every third year, and to the Primate,
when he comes to visit them: and I have in my last Visitation, with the help
of my Archdeacon, Mr. Teat, and my Register Mr. Conell, and two or three more
of my gravest Clergy men, searched, and inquired, as diligently as we could,
what was the value, that every Living might be worth communibus annis: and
accordingly I have here set them down; that my Readers may themselves judge,
whether these many Livings, that each Clergy man holds, are more, or enough,
Deductis deducendis, to make one competent Living, for (...) worthy and able
man, that will constantly reside, and conscionably preach unto Gods people.

And these be the names of the Livings, their Procurations, their yearly value,
and the persons that do hold them. viz.
Procurat. Value. l. s. d. Com. Orm. R. Offerulam 0 12 0 Segrave V. Ibid. 0 6 0
Episc. R. Bordwel 0 3 4 Episcop. V. Ibid. 0 1 8 Neyland R. Aghavo Cul. Jun. V.
Ibid. 1 2 8 Episcop. R. Rath-Sarau. 0 4 8 C. Orm. R. Rath-Downy 0 10 8 Episcop.
V. Ibid. 0 5 4 Bar. de Ossor. R. Cowlkerry 0 4 8 Cul. Jun. R. Delgnie 0 1 6
Teate R. Donnogh-more 0 5 4 V. Ibid. 0 1 8 Civit. Kilk. R. Skirke Cul. Sen. V.
Ibid. 0 14 Cul. Sen. R. Kildermoy 0 4 8 R. St. Nicolai. 0 4 8

2. Decanatus de Aghor.
Eccles. Cath. R. De Skaffin 0 3 4 Com. Desm. R. Donnogh More 0 14 8 Williams
V. Tubbrid Britt. 0 4 0 Eccles. Cath. R. Clontabrit. 0 4 0 Sir To. Foord R.
Killahie 0 4 8 Pattridge V. Ibid. 0 2 4 Baro de Oss. V. Killenie and Cahire 0 7
4 Willams R. Cloghmant. and Kilrush 0 7 6 Eccles. Cath. R. Rath-Logan 0 5 10
Eccles. Cath. R. Cowlkashin 0 5 8 R. Deane R. De Eirke Kerney V. Ibid. 0 14 8
Decan. R. Irlingford C. Orm. R. Glashard 0 4 8 Eccles. Cath. R. Ballilorcan 0 4
8

3. Decanatus de Odogh.
Archd. Bulk. R. Castrie de Odogh 0 8 4 Drisdale. V. Ibid. 0 4 4 Barry R.
Glash-crowe 0 2 4 Spencer R. Rath-behath 0 4 0 Eccles. Cath. R. Durho 0 14 8
Teat R. Rosconnel 0 8 8 C. Orm. R. 0 4 4 Goburne R. Attanagh 0 5 0 Moore V.
Ibid. 0 2 6 Co. Orm. R. Kilmenan 0 5 0 Kilkormicke 0 2 8 Com. Orm. R.
Donnogh-more 0 6 8 Drisd. V. Ibid. 0 3 4 Com. Orm. R. Kilcolman 0 6 8 Spenser
R. Cowlcrahin 0 7 6 D^isdall R. Kilmocar 0 4 8 S^enser V Ibid. 0 2 4 Dris^all
R. Comer 0 13 4 Cull. Sen. V. Ibid. 0 6 8 Collegium V. Disart 0 11 0 Cull. Jun.
V. Mothell 0 9 0 Civit. Kilk. R. Macully 0 18 6 Cull. Sen. V. Ibid. 0 0 9 Com.
Desm. R. Don-mors 0 5 8 Spenser V. Ibid. 0 2 4 Moore Jun. V. Agharnie 0 7 0

4. Decanatus de Syller.
Archd. Bulk. R. Kilferegh 0 4 8 Moore Sen. V. Donfert 0 6 8 Idem. V. Kiltranie
0 4 8 Wilson R. Inshiolaghan 0 10 8 Idem. R. Tulloghanbroge 0 9 8 Idem. V.
Ibid. 0 4 10 Kerney V. Kilmanagh 0 6 8 Collegium R. Dromdelgnie 0 8 8 Collegium
R. Bally-bur 0 3 4

5. Decanatus de Claregh.
Civit. Kilk. R. Dromerthe 0 2 4 Cull. Jun. R. Kilmadimocke 0 3 4 Idem. R.
Kilderie 0 5 0 Civit. Kilk. R. Fennel 0 6 0 Collegium R. S. Martini 0 2 0
Miler. R. Gowran Drisdall V. Ibid. 1 12 0 Vic. Dubl. R. Blanchfield 0 6 8 Mr.
Moore R. Dongarvan 0 12 8 Miler V. Ibid. 0 6 4 Cull. Sen. R. Claregh 0 5 0

6. Decanatus de Obercon.
R. Thomastowne Teat V. Ibid. 0 4 8 Co. Orm. R. Disart 0 2 8 Kerney V.
Rosbercon and Shambogh 0 2 10 Cap. Holsey R. Kilkolbin 0 5 4 Kerney. V. Ibid. 0
2 8 Spenser. R. Listerling 0 5 6 V. Ibid. 0 3 2 Civit. Watf. R. Kilmahevog
Blake V. Ib. and Bally Margur. 0 2 2 Kerney V. Kilkoan and Kilbrit 0 4 0 Idem.
V. Tristle Maure 0 2 0 Com. Orm. R. Rower 0 8 8 R. Deane V. Ibid. 0 4 4 R.
Tannerveghan 0 6 8

7. Decanatus de Kells.
Teate V. Jerpoint 0 6 8 Co. Orm. R. Knoctopher Bulkley V. Ibid. 0 3 10 Barry
R. Aghaviller 0 5 0 V. Kilknedie 0 4 0 Collegium R. Kilkeis 0 4 0 R. Innethart
0 4 0 Moore V. Mallardstowne 0 3 0 V. Ballegh 0 4 8 Moore V. Earlestowne 0 4 0
Dr Chamberl. R. Callan 2 15 0 and pro Synodalibus 0 7 0 R. Deane V. Callan 1 8
1 and pro Synodalibus 0 4 2 Capella villae de earti 0 3 4

8. Decanatus de Overke.
Blake V. Rath-Patrick 0 1 4 Kerney R. Killokeghan 0 3 4 Idem. V. Dunkit 0 3 4
Bulkley V. Illud 0 0 11 Idem. R. Kilmaboy 0 3 4 Drisdall R. Ballymartin 0 1 4
Bulkley V. Portnescolly 0 1 4 Collegium V. Rath-keran 0 1 8 Bulkley V. Polroan
0 2 4 Wilson R. Ballytarsney 0 1 4 Bulkley R. Clonmore 0 2 8 Wilson V. Fidowne
0 14 8 Bulkley R. Tibbritte 0 1 8 Blake V. Cashlane 0 1 2 Barry R. Bewley 0 3 4
Bulkley V. Tibbnaghaine 0 3 0 Drisdall V. Rossenan 0 0 8 V. Kilbecocke 0 3 0 V.
Killahie 0 0 10 R. Bally heth. 0 1 8

Eccles. Cathed. 1 11 0 Colleg. S. Canici 0 19 0 Civit. Kilken. Prior S. Johan.
4 0 0 Civit. Water. Prior S. Kathar. 0 6 8 Baro. Oss. Prior Aghamacartie 2 0 0
Co. Orm. Prior Kells 6 13 4 Civit. Wat. Prior Kilkellihine 6 6 8 Co. Orm. Prior
Jerpoint 0 15 4 Vicee: Galmoy Prior Fartenegeragh 2 0 0 Clarke Prior Inisteng 4
0 0 Q. Medietat. Fidowne 0 6 8 Col. Welsh R. Kilbecocke 0 6 8 and Killahie R.
Rossenan 0 2 0 Clarke R. Thomastowne 0 15 0 Inisteog 0 15 0 Cap. Holsey R.
Kilcoan 0 5 0 Clarke Collankill 0 3 4 Civit. Wat. R. Cashlane 0 10 0 Mr. Welsh
R. Donkitte 0 13 4 Co. Sup. Oss. R. Killenie 0 4 4 and Cahire Preb. Whiting. R.
Attire and Attan. 0 5 0 Total 69 4 11 procurat.

These be all the Rectories and Vicaridges in the Diocese of Ossory; and of
these
1. The Dean and Chapter have six: that is, 1. Skaffin 3 s 4 d 2. Clontabrit 4
s 8 d 3. Rath-Logan 5 s 10 d 4. Bally Lorcan 4 s 8 d 5. Durho 13 s 8 d 6.
Coulcashin 5 s 8 d


2. The College of the Vicars have six: that is, 1. Disart 11 s 2. Dromdelgney
8 s 8 d 3. Bally-bur 3 s 4 d 4. St. Martin 2 s 5 Kilkeyse 4 s 6. Rath-Keran 1 s
8 d The Cathedral 1 l 11 s And the College 19 s


3. My L. Duke of Ormond, for himself and my Lady Duches have 1. R. Offerulam
12 s 2. R. Rath-downy 10 s 8 d 3. R. Glashard. q. 4. R. Lawkil. q. 5. R.
Donnaghmoore 14 s 8 d 6. R. Kilmenan 5 s 7. R. Kilcolman 6 s 8 d 8. R.
Donnoghmoore 6 s 8 d 9. R. Kilmocar 4 s 8 d 10. R. Donmore 5 s 8 d 11. R.
Disart 2 s 8 d 12. R. Rower 8 s 8 d 13. Knoctofer q 14. Prior Jerpoint 15 s 4 d
15. Prior Kells 6 l 13 s 4 d 11 l 6 s Irish. 8 l 9 s 6 d sterling. procurations.


But I do understand that this pious and most honorable Duke does most
religiously (as it is said of Arauna, All these things as a King did Arauna
give unto the King, 2 Samuel 24.23.) intend to yield up, and to bestow them all
for the building of a College in Kilkenny, to bring up Scholars for the
service of God, and the perpetual honor and glory of himself and the
succeeding Race of his Family for ever; and I beseech God continue his grace in
that most godly resolution: And let the God of heaven multiply his blessings
upon him, to ride on with his honor more and more.

4. My Lord of Upper Ossory has 1. Koolekerry 4 s 8 d 2. Aghamacartie 2 l 3.
Calline and Cashire 4 s 4 d 2 l 5 s Irish. 1 l 3 s 9 d sterling.


5. My Lord of Galmoy has Fartinageratgh 2 l


6. My Lord of Cavan has 1. Thomastowne 15 s 2. Inisteog 4 l and 15 s


7. Sir Robert Foord has R. Killahie, and Kilbecocke, 6 s 8 d


8. Captain Holsey has R. Kilcolbin 5 s 4 d R. Kilcoan and Kilbrit 5 s q.


9. Sir Jo. Ponsonby has R. Fidown 6 s 8 d


10. Colonel Dillan has R. S. Keiran. R. Capel: S. Nicolai.


11. Mr. Welsh has R. Dunkitt 13 s 4 d R. Rosenan 2 s


12. Archdeacon Bulkley has 1. R. Bananagh 2. R. Kilferagh 3. R. Odogh. 4. R.
Disort. c. or. q. 5. R. Tulloherin


And I did always conceive, that no Churchman, that understood what Sacrilege
is, and the hainousness of that sin, would ever accept of any impropriate
Livings, and hold the same as a lay fee from the Church of God; for, if a
Clergy man holds it lawful to take five, I do not wonder that a lay man should
hold twenty.

13. The City of Kilkenny has 1. R. Skirke. 2. R. Tubbrid britain 4 s 3. R.
Maculli 18 s 6 d 4. R. Dromerthin 2 s 4 d 5. R. Fennel 6 s 6. Prior S. John 4
l.


14. The City of Waterford has 1. Prior S. Katharin 6 l 8 s. 2. Prior.
Kilkellihine 6 l 6 s 8 d 3. R. Portnescolly.


The best Livings in all the Diocese are held by the Nobility, Gentry and
Cities.
And all these Rectories are the best and the chiefest Livings, that are of any
worth, or of any more within the Diocese of Ossory: and as I showed you, the
Nobility, Gentry, and Cities do hold them from the Church, and do yield little
or nothing for the service of God in those Churches, neither dare the poor
Vicars and Curates, according to the Bishops appointment, ask them any thing
for the serving of these Churches; nor is it to any purpose for any Incumbent
to sue for any Tithes or rights that belongs unto his Church, for when he
sueth, and has proved the truth of his Allegation, and to his great expenses
expects judgment, then presently, upon a false suggestion, comes a
prohibition, to stop all just proceedings in the Court Christian; which is the
usual and common practice against all the Christian Ministers in Ireland, when
they sue for any right; and which is the cause that the Christians wanting
Vicars and Curates, that will not undertake to strive against the stream, or to
labor in Gods Vineyard, and to want bread, our good God is thereby
dishonored, the People uninstructed, and ignorance, superstition, and Popery,
very like to continue still (...) out amongst them.

A memorable Instance. Mr. Partridge.
And to make this more plain unto you, I will here set down a thing recenti
memoria facta; A poor Minister, and very honest man, expelled by the Irish
Rebels from his Livings, and plundered of all that ever he had, and kept out of
all, (as we all were, by far more wicked rebels,) was lately restored and
placed by my self in the small Vicaredge of Killahie; but Sir Robert Foord,
having the impropriate Rectory, bestowed the same with his Daughter to a very
great rich man, powerful, Colonel Stopford.
in former times, with the Long Parliament, and he forbids his Tenants to
suffer the poor Vicar to have his Vicarial Tithes; that were not all worth five
pounds per annum, because they paid none for all the time of the Rebellion:
therefore the poor Vicar sueth for his Tithes, and by sufficient. Witnesses
proved the payment thereof, before the Wars, unto the Vicar: whereupon the
great Gentleman came unto me, and said that such a Minister of my Diocese sued
the Tenants and Servants of Sir Robert Foord, that was a Privy Counselor, and
a great Parliament man, and therefore desired me to stop the Suite: I answered,
that I could not do so; for what if all the men in the Parish were the Tenants
and Servants of Parliament men, and denied to pay their Tithes to the Vicar,
shall the poor man be without his means, during all the continuance of the
Parliament? So he may starve for want of food, and the people perish for want
of instruction: Then he showed me a writing under the hand and Seal of another
Bishop, that stopped the proceeding of a Minister in his Diocese against the
Defendants, upon the Allegation and proof, that they were Tenants and Servants
of Sir Robert Foord: And I answered, that I was not to guide my actions by the
doings of other men, though reputed never so wise, but to do what I conceived
to be just and honest without the fear of the greatest man; and I answered him,
there should be nothing done in his cause but what was just; so we parted; and
his Agents gave it out, that he would spend a hundred pounds before the Vicar
should have any Tithes there: and the next news that I heard was a Prohibition
from the Chancery to stop the proceeding in the Court Christian, which I
conceive to be no furtherance of the Christian Religion. And so M. R. Deane,
Vicar of Callan, having sued one for his right, in mine Ecclesiastical Court,
when the matter was ready to be sentenced, there comes a Prohibition to stop
it; and so in many other the like causes. And how can a poor Minister, not
worth five pounds in all the world, nor scarce clothes to his back, when he was
put into this Vicaredge, wage Law with such a man, of a vaste estate, so that
he could offer fourteen hundred pounds (some say more) for a Purchase? Cuncta
trabit secum, vertitque aerarius omnis, Nec patitur certa currere quemque via.
Let the world judge, what would become of Religion, if all Impropriators
should thus deal with their Vicars, and all great men and powerful Parishioners
with their poor Parsons? Even as I am dealt withal; to spend above four hundred
pounds to gain the rights of the Church: and to be not one jot the nearer to
prevail, than I was the first day.

But to proceed; having seen how the best Livings are held and disposed of, and
how the poor Parsons, Vicars and Curates are commonly dealt withal, What
Livings the Clergymen do hold in their possessions.
you shall understand what Livings the poor Clergy men hold in their
possession, and of what value they are unto them (deductis deducendis,)
communibus annis, as by the inquisition of three or four of the ablest
Clergymen in my Diocese, with my self, I have understood the same in my
Visitation; and thereby my Reader may understand the meanness of our Irish
Livings.

Their Procurations. Worth. M. Barry has 2 s 4 d 1. Glashcrowe 5 l. 5 s 2.
Aghaviller 8 l. 3 s 4 d 3. Bewley 10 l 4. V. S. John 10 l 10 s 8 d 33 l Mr.
Blake has 2 s 2 d 1. Kilmahevog and Bullymagarney 10 l 1 s 4 d 2. Rath-Patrick
5 l 1 s 2 d 3. Cashlane 5 l. 4 s 8 d 20 l Mr. Bulkley has 11 d 1. Illud 8 l 2.
Kilmaboy 16 l 1 s 4 d 3. Portuescolly 6 l 10 s 2 s 4 d 4. Polroan 7 l 2 s 8 d
5. Clonmore 3 l 10 s 3 s 10 d 6. Knoctofer 6 l 1 s 8 d 7. Tibbrit 1 l 3 s 8.
Tibrahaine 1 l 10 s 15 s 9 d And he has the Prebend of Clonamry 6 l Mr. Cull
Senior has 14 s 8 d 1. V. Skirke 16 l 4 s 8 d 2. R. Kildermoy 30 l 6 s 8 d 3.
V. Comer 2 l 10 s 1 s 9 d 4. V. Macully 3 l 5 s 5. V. Clarech. 1 l 12 s 9 d Mr.
Cull Junior has 1 l 2 s 8 d 1. V. Aghavo 15 l 9 s 2. R. and V. Mothell 5 l 3 s
4 d 3. Kilmadimoy 4 l 5 s 4. Kilderie 4 l 2 l And he has the Prebend of
Tiscoffin 10 l Dr. Chamberlain has 2 l 15 s 1. R. Callan 10 and pro Synod. 7 s
Mr. R. Dean has 4 s 4 d 1. Rower 11 l 1 l 8 s 1 d 2. V. Cullan 40 l 3. R.
Eirke 50 l 1 l 12 s 5 d And he has the Prebend of Kilamerie 20 l and pro
Synod. 5 s 2 d The Dean of S. Keney has 1. Irlingford 2 l 2. R. S Patrick 30 l
The Church down, and the people have neither Sermon nor Service. Mr. Drisdall
has 4 s 4 d 1. Castrie de Odogh 5 l 3 s 4 d 2. Donnoghmore 8 l 13 s 4 d 3. R.
Comer 25 l 1 l 12 s 4. V. Gowran 14 l 1 s 4 d 5. Bally-martin 4 l 2 l 14 s 5 d
Rosenan 2 l 10 s Dr. Edwards has 1. The Prebend of black Ruth 16 l Mr. Goburne
has 5 s 1. R. Attanagh 30 l Mr. Kerney has 6 s 8 d 1. V. Kilmanagh 30 l 2 s
10 d 2. V. Rosbercon and Shambogh 10 l 2 s 8 d 3. V. Kilcolbin 8 l 4 s 4. V.
Kilkoan and Kilbrit 3 l 2 s 5. V. Tristle-maur 5 l 3 s 4 d 6. R. Kiltokeghan 5
l 7. V. Dun-kitt 5 l 14 s 8 d 8. V. Eirke 35 l 1 l 16 s 2 d And he has the R.
of Kilmanagh for his Prebend 24 l Mr. Miler has 1. R. Gowran 40 l 6 s 4 d 2.
V. Dungarvan 10 l Dr. Neyland has 1. R. Aghavo 50 l Mr. Moore Senior has 6 s
8 d 1. V. Dunfert 4 s 8 d 2. R. Kiltranie 3. V. Ballytobin 6 l 3 s 4. V.
Mallardstowne 6 l 4 s 5. V. Earlestowne 10 l 18 s 4 d 6. V. Ketts 15 l Mr.
Moore Junior. 2 s 6 d 1. V. Attanagh 10 l 7 s 2. V. Agharney 7 l Mr. Segrave
has 6 s 1. V. Offerulam 15 l M. Spenser has 4 s 1. R. Rathbehath 8 l 7 s 6 d
2. R. Cowichrahin 5 l 2 s 4 d 3. V. Kilmocar 2 s 4 d 4. V. Donmore 8 s 8 d 5.
R. and V. Listerling 10 l 5 s 6 d 6. V. Main 10 l 1 l 10 s 4 d And he has N.
Main for his Prebend 10 l. Mr. Teate has 1 s 8 d 1. R. Donnaghmore 15 l 8 s 8
d 2. R. Roseconnel 16 l 4 s 8 d 3. V. Thomastowne 10 l 6 s 8 d 4. V. Jerpoint
13 l 1 l 1 s 8 d And he has the R. of Kilfane for his Prebend 15 l Mr.
Whitingham has 1. V. Killanie and Cahire 2. Killinkar And he has Aghore for
his Prebend 12 l Mr. Williams has q. 1. V. Tibbrid-brittain 4 l 7 s 6 d 2. R.
Gloghmantagh and Kilrush 16 l Mr. Wilson has 10 s 8 d 1. R. Inshiologhan 8 l 4
s 10 d 2. V. Tullaghanbroge 3 l 1 s 4 d 3. R. Ballytarsney 12 l 14 s 8 d 4. V.
Fidowne 12 l 1 l 11 s 6 d.

These be the rest of the Livings within the Diocese of Ossory; Whether the
foresaid mean and rates be able to maintain a sufficient Ministry.
and the just value (so far as I could learn) of each of them; and do you think
that this value is sufficient to maintain an able Ministry to supply all these
Churches and Parishes as they ought to be, or that Popery shall be suppressed,
and the true Protestant Religion planted amongst the people, by the unition of
Parishes, and the diminution of Churches without any augmentation of their
means? Credat Judaeus Apella, non ego.

ample augmentation is added to all the meanest Bishoprics of Ireland, and he
has most royally and religiously bestowed all the Impropriations forfeited to
his Crown upon the several Incumbents, unto whose Churches they did belong.

Paradise, the devil was ready to cast him out: and when God makes our paths
straight and easy, Satan will straight put rubbs and blocks in our way to
stumble us: so, though I gave above fifty pounds for Agents money to follow the
Churches cause, and spent above thirty pounds to procure a Commission, to gain
that augmentation, which his Majesty was so graciously pleased to add unto the
Bishop of Ossory; yet presently there comes a Supersedeas, to stop the
proceeding of my Commission, How the devil hinders all intended good
and I am not the better, either by Augmentation or Agents, so much as one
penny to this very day: and some devil has put some great rub for a stumbling
block in my way: until God removes the same, and throws it where blocks
deserve to be. And though his Majesty has been pleased to bestow his
Impropriations upon the Incumbents, yet my Lord Lieutenant and the Council
thought it fit, to take forty pounds per annum out of those Impropriations for
the better provision of the Quire in Dublin; and so by that means, the Clergy
of Ossory are not the better by one penny: that the Clergy might be like unto
their Bishop: for I find but four impropriations forfeited to his Majesty, and
bestowed upon the Church in all the Diocese, and these being set by Mr.
Archdeacon Teate, to the uttermost pitch that he could, they did not reach to
forty pounds the last year.

And to say the truth, without fear of any man, we are not only deprived of the
Vicarial Tithes and offerings by the Farmers of the great Lords Impropriate
Rectories, but our Lands and Glebes are clipped and pared to become as thin as
Banbury Cheese, by the Commissioners and Counsel of those illustrious Lords:
for though his Grace, our most excellent Lieutenant, the Duke of Ormond, is (I
say it without flattery) a man of such worth, so noble, so honorable, and so
religious, as is beyond compare, and for his fidelity, and Piety, and other
incomparable parts, scarce to be equalized by any Subject of any King, and so
many other great Lords are in themselves very noble and religious; yet as
Rehoboam, in himself considered, was not so very a bad King, but had very bad
Counselors that did him a great deal of dishonor and damage: so this most
honorable Duke, And thus, as Christ was crucified betwixt the good thief and
the bad, so are we, betwixt the good Lords, and their bad Agents. But let them
fear, least by making their Lords great here on earth, they do make themselves
little in heaven.
and other great Lords, may have, as I fear some of them have, such
Commissioners and Counsel, that, as well to make themselves a fortune, as to
enlarge their Lords revenues, will pinch the Parsons side, and part the
Garments of Christ, betwixt themselves and their Lords, as my Lord Dukes Agents
have distrained and driven away my Tenants Cattle for diverse great sums of
Chieferies, and challenged some Lands, that as I am informed, were never paid
nor challenged within the memory of man.

And who dares oppose these men, or say unto them, Why did you so? Not I,
though they should take away my whole estate; for as Naboth had better have
yielded up his Vineyard, than to have lost his life, so I conceive it better to
yield to their desires quietly, than to lose both my Lands and my labor by
such a Jury, as will give it away though never so Unjustly: whereof I have had
experience, and a sad proof non sine meo magno malo. Yet,

The Civility and Piety of the 49 men.
I confess the 49. men have been very civil, and showed themselves very fairly
conditioned, and religious both to my self, and as I understand, to all other
Clergymen; and I wish that all Noblemens Commissioners and Agents would be so
likewise, that their doings may bring a blessing and not a curse upon them, and
perhaps upon their Lords and Masters, Lords and Masters shall answer to God for
the oppressions that their servants do under their power.
that must give an account to God for the ill carriages, and the oppressions of
the poor by their servants, who dishonor their Lords, and make them liable to
Gods wrath for the wrongs that they do, to make them the greater, and so
receive the greater condemnation: for great men must not only do no wrong
themselves, but they ought also to see, that none under their wings, and
through the color of their power and authority, do any wrong unto the poor.

But to deal plainly, and to show what respect, favor, and justice we the poor
Bishops and Clergymen have from the great Lords and Courts of justice in this
Kingdom, I will instance but in the example of my self; who, after I had
exposed my self to the daily and continual hazard of my life, by my preaching
and publishing so many Books against the Rebels and Long Parliament, which I
have unanswerably proved to be the Great Antichrist, and had, for all their
Reign, served, duram servitutem, and suffered more hardship than any Bishop,
and upon my restitution to my Bishopprick, by the happy restoration of our
most gracious King, having spent above four hundred pounds to gain the Bishops
Mansion house, where Bishop Bale saw five of his Servants killed before his
face, and himself driven to flee to save his life, and which was given to Sir
George Askue by Cromwell for his service to the Long Parliament, I have fully
showed the favor and the justice that I had at the Kings Bench, though I must
ingeniously confess my Lord Chief Justice dealt as fairly and as justly as any
Judge in the world could do. And I do pray to God that both Judges and Jury and
all the pleaders may have better at the Bar of the King of Kings.

Then letting pass the proceeding of the Court of Claim, that gave away the
Lands and Houses that were in my possession, while I was in London, though a
chief Member of that Court promised that nothing should be done against the
Church until I returned home, and acknowledging the civility and fair respect
that was showed me by my Lord Chief Baron, and the other Barons of the
Exchequer, in doing right both to the King and to my self, by putting the
Bishops Lands out of charge. His Majesty having most graciously conferred four
hundred pounds per annum ^o me and my Successors, out of the fee Farms
forfeited to his Majesty, and the Parliament confirming the same by the Act of
settlement; I took a Commission of enquiry, and when all my Witnesses came
together, and were ready to proceed, there comes a Supersedeas to stop our way:
but his Majesty's Attorney Sir William Dunvil, and Sir Audley Mervin, and the
rest of the Kings Sergeants and Sollicitors did so faithfully, so learnedly,
and so religiously plead on his Majesty's behalf and the Church, (for which the
God of heaven will reward them,) that they had the Supersedeas superseded and
v^cated by our most honorable and most religious Lord Chancellor; and then I
proceeded, and the Jury found this Bishops house and Freshford forfeited to the
King, and worth a hundred pounds per annum; then coming to Dublin, to have my
Commission put upon the file, and to get a Pattent according to the Act and the
Kings Grant to enjoy the same, after I had spent above a hundred pounds to
bring the matter to this pass, I received this answer, that my Lord Deputy and
Council were resolved to do nothing unless they received the Kings Letter and
Command to do it; and though I was sorry for the vaste expense of money that I
laid out to no benefit, yet I am glad to see men so observant of the Kings Word
and Command: I would to God they and all others the Kings Subjects would have
obeyed Solomon's Counsel to observe the words and commands of our late most
gracious King Charles the First. I should not have needed to suffer so much as
I have done, and so often to have troubled our now most gracious King; and to
have spent near sixty pounds for Agents money for the good of the Church; and
above four hundred pounds to repair the Chancel of S. Keney, and in all above
five hundred pounds to recover the Bishops Mansion house, and Freshford, from
Captain Burges and Sir George Ayskue, and to be not one jot the nearer, nor one
penny the richer for all this money that I have spent; nor have any more by one
pennyworth than what my most gracious King, and late loving Master gave me to
this very day, and I conceive this to be nothing else, but --

But then after I received this answer, I presently went to London, and
presented this Petition to his Majesty.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of Gruffith Lord
Bishop of Ossory.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner has suffered the loss of all that he had, and the
continual hazard of his life, during all the time of Cromwell and the Long
Parliament, for his service and faithfulness to your Majesty, and your Royal
Father, of most blessed memory.

That your Majesty has been most graciously pleased, to grant four hundred
pounds per annum out of the forfeited Fee-farmes for an augmentation to his
poor Bishopprick of Ossory; and that your Petitioner, being by the Sheriff put
into the possession of the former Bishops Mansion house, called Bishops Court,
by virtue of an Order from the House of Lords, and being forcibly driven out by
the Tenants of Sir George Askue, whom your Petitioner has therefore indicted
three several times by three several Juries, yet after the expense of above
four hundred pounds could not be righted. And your Petitioner having got a
Commission of inquiry, what Fee-farmes were forfeited to your Majesty, and when
the same Commission was superseded, having, with a great exp^nce, superseded
that supersedeas, and had, by the fourth Jury, found the said Bishops Court to
be a Fee-farme held from the Bishop of Ossory, worth by improvement a hundred
pounds per annum, and forfeited to your Majesty; yet, after the expense of
above a hundred pounds to bring the Commission to this pass, your Petitioner
received this answer from the Lord Deputy and Counsel, that they were resolved
to pass no Pattent of any Lands, granted by your Majesty, and the Act of
Settlement unto the Bishops, but to such as had your Majesty's special Letters
to do the same.

And forasmuch as it had been better for your Petitioner to have had nothing
granted unto him, than after such a vaste expense (above five hundred pounds)
to miss of gaining one hundred pounds per annum; Your Petitioner humbly
prays, that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to write your Letters to
the Lord Deputy to pass a Pattent according to what the Jury found, and
according to your Majesty's former Grant, and the Act of Settlement.

And your Petitioner does oblige himself to lay it out all for the repair of
the now ruinous Cathedral Church of S. Keney, and he shall ever pray, etc.
And his Majesty did most graciously read it every word himself; and then said,
I will speak to my Lord of Ormond to do it.

So whether I recover it, or not, Non hujus facio, I weigh it not a rush, for I
hope my Savior Jesus Christ (whose Solicitor I am only in this suit) will not
impute the loss of this to me, seeing I have done my very best to regain it for
his service; yet could not do it, by reason of the great Friends of Sir George
Askue, who made me, like Ixion, (that embraced a Cloud for Juno,) to spend five
hundred pounds to hunt after a shadow, and to lose the substance, and to have
his Majesty's gracious (...), to become (...); but, let him take heed of Moses
Emphatical Prayer for Levi, and of David's Prophetical Prediction, what shall
become of them that keep the Revenues of the Church, and the Houses of God in
their possessions; and let his great Friends, and his Jury pray to God, that
they may have more favor from Jesus Christ, than they have showed for his
honor; and if this be the reward that Sir George Askue and the Bishop of
Ossory shall receive for their service to King Charles the first, I will say no
more, but pray to God, as I do, both day and night, to be a just Judge betwixt
me and them, that have opposed me, in this the Churches right, Amen.

So you have seen some part of the miseries of the Church of Ireland, and all
the Livings in my Diocese of Ossory, and who holds them, and what they are
deemed to be worth, communibus annis, unto the Incumbents: and this, together
with the state and condition of the Bishoppricks in Ireland, which are now like
Anthropophagites, eating up and devouring one another, (excepting the poor
Bishopprick of Ossory, that stands yet alone like the trunk of a goodly
Oak, without boughs, without leaves, without beauty;) when as many Bishops
here in Ireland have two or three Bishoppricks apiece: As the Bishop of Cork
has also Rosse and Cloyne; the Bishop of Limricke has also the Bishopprick of
Kerry; the Bishop of Waterford has Lysmore; the Bishop of Laghlin has the
Bishopprick of Fermes; the Bishop of Dublin has also the Bishopprick of
Glandelo; the Bishop of Downs has likewise Conner and Kilmore, whose Lands
and Lordships the great Lords and Gentry hold, and they the names of those
Bishoppricks, whereof, formerly, each Bishopprick was sufficient to maintain an
able Bishop. If you say, the Bishops themselves made away their Lands in
Fee-farme: I dare boldly and truly say, as Christ does of the like case, that
they who did it were thieves and robbers, Joh. 10.8. and they that received
them were no better, but they that retain them worse. When as now two or three
Bishoppricks must be soddered and conglutinated together, to make an honest
competent means for one learned Bishop. This I say shows he miseries of our
Churches, and the difference betwixt the fruits that the purity of the Gospel
produces in our times, and the Piety of our forefathers that lived in the
Primitive times, and afterward under the manifold mysts and several
Superstitions of the Romish Church, when the Lands and revenues that they gave
to God to maintain the Bishop of Ossory to do him service, is now As I believe:
worth fifteen hundred pounds per annum, and our zealour Gospellers have
brought i^, in the last Bishops time, to be scarce worth two hundred pounds per
annum; and I believe the other Bishoppricks are not now and then much unlike
it, and so we and our forefathers are not much unlike those two Sons, whereof
our Savior speaks, whose Father said unto the first, Go work to day in my
Vineyard, and he said, I will not, but afterward he repented and went; and he
came to the second, and said likewise, and he answered and said, I go Sir, and
went not: So our forefathers lived in the times of blindness, and knew not well
what was acceptable unto God; yet they did to the uttermost of their endeavors
and knowledge, what they were able, to please God, and to serve him; and we
have his Truth, and his Will, his Gospel, and his Mercies plentifully
published, and poured forth amongst us, and we do all that we can, to obstruct
his service, and to evacuate the Religion of Jesus Christ.

And therefore I do much fear that these blind Christians, as our Gnostics
contemptuously call them, The Papists shall rise in judgment to condemn our
fruitless and sacrilegious Protestants.
shall rise in judgment to condemn the great and quick-sighted worldlings, and
fruitless Christians of our time: who, by their profaneness and Sacrilege
have so much hindered Gods Service, and caused our most holy Profession to be
so much blasphemed, and slighted among Infidels and Pagans, and the rest of the
enemies of Jesus Christ.

Sacrilege, or those men blamed, that, for the reformation of the Church, took
away those things that were usurped by the Pope, and abused by the Monks and
Friars to uphold Masses and Dyrges, and to continue their Superstition, to the
great dishonor of God, and the hazard of many thousand souls?

horse, will thou take it away from the thief, and keep it still from me? Art
thou any better than the thief to me, or any juster in the sight of God? So
the Pope and his Popelings took away the Tithes and Oblations, the Lands and
the Livings of the Church, and thou tookest them from the Pope and his Friars:
And why do thou not restore them to the Churches, to the which they do
belong? For, thou may remember that when Nebuchadnezzar had, like the Pope,
robbed the Temple of God at Jerusalem, and abused the Vessels thereof in the
service of his false God; and Belshazar his Son had in like manner profaned
the same, by his lascivious quaffing therein with his Queens and Concubines,
for which he was justly punished by the revenging hand of God, Dan. 5.3, 25.
yet Cyrus, when he had taken Babylon, and so robbed the thief that had robbed
God, and understood, that these holy Vessels did belong to the Service of God
in the Temple of Solomon, he durst not meddle with them, to retain them for
himself, but, lest he should be punished for his Sacrilege, as Belshazar was,
he commanded them to be carried to Jerusalem, and to be restored to their
former proprietors, and for their former use in the divine Worship of Almighty
God.

And so should Hen. 8. and those Lords and Ladies, that have taken away the
Revenues of the Church from the Pope, have restored them to the Protestant
Bishops, and the reformed Ministers of our Church. Cod. Theod. l. 4. C. 16.
tit. 44. contra Donat. And so S. Aug. shows all the godly Emp did Ep 50 ad
bonisac. militem.
For so you may find a Decree of the godly Emperors Honorius and Theodosius
against the Montanists in these words, If there be now any of the Edifices of
the Montanists standing, which are rather to be termed Dens of wild beasts,
than Churches of Christ, let them with their revenues, be appropriated to the
Sacred Churches of the Orthodox Faith; and in the said Code it is said, let the
Bishops, Priests, and Prelates (that is of the Donatists) be stripped of all
their Revenues, and be banished to several Islands; and let those possessions
where Superstition has reigned, be annexed to the holy Catholic Church.

And good reason for it; for as the Ark of God, when it was taken and abused by
the Philistines, yet did it not then cease to be the holy Ark of God, and
therefore when it was afterward sent home by the Philistines, it was received,
respected, and as much reverenced, and to the same ends used by the Israelites
as it was before; as were also the Vessels of Solomon's Temple, after their
return from Babylon: So the Revenues of the Church, though taken from the
Church, and abused by the Pope, yet, being restored again to the Church, as
they ought to be, they have the same effect, notwithstanding their former
abuse, to promote the service of God, as they had before: For being once
dedicated for Gods service, they ought never be to alienated from it, as I have
most fully showed in my Declaration against Sacrilege; but, as those Censers
(wherewith the two hundred and fifty Rebels, impiously usurping the Priests
Office, would needs offer Incense to God,) were hallowed; and therefore God
would not suffer them afterward, to be at any time employed for any common
uses, but commanded, that they should be made into broad plates for a covering
of the Altar, Number. 16. and so the Brass which those Rebels had so wickedly
abused, should be religiously used by the true Priests for Gods service: So the
Lands and Revenues of the Church that were once hallowed, and consecrated for
Gods Divine Worship, though the Idolaters did abuse them, and the Lay Lords
usurp them, yet God cannot endure, that being once in his possession, and given
for his service, they should be snatched out of his hands, and transferred to
Lay and profane uses, but that, like those Censers, they should ever continue
for the service of his Altar; and so St. Augustine shows as much in his 154
Epistle to Publicola.

And thus you see, how God is robbed, his Service neglected, and his Servants
deprived of their means and maintenance, so that they can neither discharge
their duties to God, nor feed the flock of Christ, and instruct the people
committed to their charge; as they ought to do, and would no doubt do the same,
if they were enabled to do it, which is a lamentable thing: and yet I can show
you a greater abomination, Ezekiel. 8.6. even in the Visitations of these poor and
pillaged Clergymen: I remember God has a twofold visitation, the one in
mercy, to relieve the oppressed, to deliver the Captives out of their
Captivity, as he visited the Israelites in Egypt, and the like; the other in
justice; to punish the malefactors, and the transgressors of his Laws, as he
visits the sins of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate him; but whether the Visitations of our Clergymen
be in mercy, or in justice, or whether it be pro correctione morum, or
collectione pecuniarum, and refectione corporum, or both, I will not determine;
I believe their first institution aimed at our good, for the praise of them
that do well, and the punishment of the refractory and evildoers; but time and
craft corrupts the best things, and as the wicked turn the graces of God into
wantonness, so covetous men and corrupt minds, do abuse all the good
institutions of our Ancestors; so the service of the true God was, in time,
translated to become the service of the Idols of the Gentiles; and so, I fear
me, these Visitations of the Clergy, that at first aimed at their good, and for
their relief, are now become, in many places, an oppression, and a heavy yoke
upon their necks, and a burden scarce portable upon their shoulders: As

1. In the multiplicity of them, 1. The multiplicity of Visitations.
three or four that may be in one year; as first the Archdeacon, he visits, and
gathers up his Procurations, perhaps all the money that the poor Clergy can
procure; then comes the Bishop, and he visits, and the Clergy must now double
their file, his Procurations being twice as much as the Archdeacons; then,
every third year, the Archbishop comes about in his triennial visitation; and
if in either the Bishop, or the Archbishops visitation, the Clergy fail, either
in the payment of their Procurations, or making such refections as shall be to
the satisfaction of their Visitors, their Livings may be sequestered, and let
them live as they list; and after all this, the Lord Primate, if he please, may
come in the same year, to make a regal Visitation; and he being so good a man,
and coming from so good and so gracious a King, deserves no less than the best;
and the best entertainment, that can be made for his Grace is fit to be made
for him; And can these many visits, think you, be for the profit of the poor
Clergy? But,

2. 2. The Refections.
The refections seem to be more burdensome than the Procurations; especially
because the Procurations are certain, what every man must pay, but the
Refections (contrary to the mind of our Savior, that says unto his Disciples,
Into what house soever ye enter, eat what shall be set before you, Luke 10.7.)
must be to the satisfaction of the delicate and delicious company of the
visitors, and not according to the power of the poor Clergy; when they remember
not the old Proverb, That the full dog knows not how, or what the empty dog
does bark; and if they be discontented with their entertainment, their Censures
must be as they please, and none dares say, that it is unjust, or how can it be
so from the men of God? Yet, as all powerful great men can easily find a staff
to beat a dog: so the superior Bishop or Archbishop can (if they please) soon
find a fault in a poor inferior Clergy man.

Now I will set down (for I fear no man living,) what information I have by
Letters from the last Visitation of the Archbishop of Dublin, that was held in
my Diocese of Ossory, by his Surrogate Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley: and these be the
very words of the Letters, that the World may thereby see, and the Judge of all
the World may judge in what case the poor Clergy do stand.

My Lord,
IT pleased God a little after your journey to Dublin to take out of this life
your Grandchild Mrs. Cull, who discovered much Religion on her death bed; and
as she wanted not attendance in her sickness, so neither decency, nor solemnity
at her Funeral: Since your Lordships departure your Maid did, unknown to me,
marry Mr. Barry the Smiths man, whom she brought to lie in your Lordships
house, whereupon there arose some quarrels between Thomas and her, insomuch
that Thomas sat up a whole night with Candlelight for fear of the men, as he
complained unto me, whereupon I charged the man not to lie at night time in
your Lordships house till your Lordship did return; which has prevented the
like inconvenience since: As to the triennial Visitation I shall give your
Lordship this brief account, The Lord Archbishop did not come in person, but
sent Mr. Bulkley, whom we waited on three miles to bring him into Town, he told
us what noble refections he met with in the Diocese of Kildare, Leighlin, but
that here he was resolved to lodge at his Daughters house, he asked what
Provision we had made for his Register, we told him Mr. Connels house; when his
Register came to Town, though his men some of them and his Portmantle were in
Mr. Connels house, he did not like his lodging, and complained to the Vicar
General; On Monday, after the Commission was read, he told us, that in regard
the refection for the Archbishop was neglected, he suspended the Jurisdiction
for six months, and whereas he thought to behave himself as a loving brother,
he would prove a severe Judge, and that we should expect nothing but utmost
justice; we invited him that day to dine at Whitles, where we bespoke a Dinner
for his refection, which cost six or seven pounds; but he refused, and every
day we invited him, but could not prevail,; on Tuesday, and Wednesday he seemed
very mild and respective, and earnestly desired to be an happy Instrument in
the reconciliation of Mr. Dean and my self, Mr. Cull, and Mr. Drisdale, upon
which importunity that we might not discover our selves to be litigious, I was
willing to be reconciled to him, whom I had no visible quarrel with, so was
Mr. Drisdale, but Mr. Bulkleys awe upon Mr. Cull made him condescend to a great
submission, and ask him forgiveness flexis genibus; the next day the
Archdeacon told me, that if we would discharge his Servants quarters, he would
take off the Inhibition upon the Jurisdiction, whereupon Mr. Connel and my self
engaged to discharge the Reckoning; and so we thought that all things had been
ended in a fair correspondence, but upon his departure, he did privately
sequester all the Livings of Mr. Cull Junior, the Vicaredge of Aghaboe into the
hands of one Manby the Archbishops Chaplain, he sequestered out of my own poor
means Donnoghmore and Rosconnel, and two Livings more of Mr. Cull Senior, and
there were many other Sequestrations that I could not get an account of, which
they carried to Dublin; Thus praying for your Lordships speedy return to
countenance and support the Clergy; I rest,

Kilkenny, July 23. 1664. Your Lordships most obliged Servant, Joseph Teate.


And now having set down this Letter, I would have my Reader to understand that
whatsoever I set down here, touching my Lords Grace his Visitation, I say it
not to accuse any of his Officers of the least fault, or to lay the least blame
on them for any unjust proceeding therein.

The things acted by Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley in my Lords Grace his Visitation,
which the Bishop of Ossory understands not, as 1. The suspension of the Bishops
jurisdiction. Canon 24.
But I only set down rem gestam, to show how heavy the Censure was, and how
burdensome (which a just judgment may be) unto the poor Clergy, whose neglect
or fault, I excuse not, if they committed any, but only pity their case under
their Censure; and likewise to show how far, beyond my understanding, (which
notwithstanding might be most just) many things were acted therein; As,

1. The Suspension or inhibition of the Jurisdiction, I know not for how many
months together, nor for what cause, if as Mr. Teates Letter says, for the
neglect of the Archbishops Refection, I find the Canons say, that neither the
Archbishops in their Visitation shall charge their Suffragans, nor the Bishops
their Clergy, with any noctials or refections, over and above their ordinary
Procurations, (reserving notwithstanding unto the Archbishops the refections
heretofore usually received in those Diocese, where the same Procurations are
not received by them, which are yearly paid by the Clergy unto their Bishops.)

But the Archbishops do receive from the Clergy of the Diocese of Ossory all
the Procurations that they do yearly pay unto their Bishops.

And yet notwithstanding this exemption of Refections by the Canon, I am sure I
paid seventeen pound for the Archdeacons refection in the Archbishops last
Visitation, which is a great deal more than the Subsidy and twentieth part that
I pay unto his Majesty any year, and it may be more than ever was bestowed upon
a Dinner for the blessed Apostles S. Paul.

But you see in the Letter, how highly they do extol the Bishop of Kildare,
which is the prime Bishop in the Kingdom, for the noble entertainment that he
made at this Visitation, spending, as some say, forty pounds at least for their
Refection; and the Bishop of Lachlin and Fernes in like manner, that was not
much behind the former, to show his love and respect to his Metr^politan, my
Lords Grace of Dublin.

Truly, I do honor, respect, and reverence, and do heartily love my Lords
Grace of Dublin, as a most noble Gentleman, and a most reverend and a worthy
Father of the Church, and as much, and it may be more than any of them, and
have suffered somewhat for the love I bare him; though my large expense for the
rights of the Church darkened the expression thereof in the Archdeacons
Refection, as the Archdeacon represented it to his Grace.

Or it may be, as some say, my Jurisdiction (for the Jurisdiction is mine, and
not my Archdeacons, nor Register,) was suspended because I appeared not, at the
Visitation, but went to England without my Lords Grace his leave; especially
after I had notice of his Visitation.

Indeed, I must confess, I went after I had notice of the Visitation: but my
only business was the business of the Church, and I had my Lord Lieutenants
leave, under his hand and seal, to go without any prejudice unto me; neither
was I so forgetful of my duty, or of civil respect, as to neglect my Lords
Grace, but I went unto his Grace to excuse my absence from his Visitation, and
to desire his leave, to go on my journey; and he very graciously yielded unto
me.

And why, after such leaves obtained, my Jurisdiction, which is half my
Episcopal Function, should be inhibited, I understand not; If Mr. Bulkley
says, quomodo constat, that you had my Lords Grace leave to be absent: I
answer quomodo constabat, how did I know, that Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley should
visit me, and would think me so uncivil, and so ill bred, as to forget my
respect and duty to my Lords Grace, as to go away without his leave?

I, but why did not you, says the Archdeacon, send a Certificate under the
Archbishops hand, that you had his Grace his leave?

1. Because I did not understand, that, if I were at Cork, or Kerry, or some
other such remote place from Dublin, it is absolutely necessary by any Canon or
Law, that I must either go or send to Dublin to get my Lords Grace his leave to
go about my most unavoidable occasions, of what consequence soever they be, or
else, to be sequestered from my means, or to be suspended from my jurisdiction.

2. Because that, having his leave ore tenus, by word of mouth, I did not
believe that Mr. Archdeacon would imagine, that a man should not trust the
Archbishops words except he had it under his hand and seal, when as I never
doubted of any honest man's word, and much less of the words of my Lords Grace
of Dublin.

Yet the Jurisdiction was suspended, as they say, for six months, till all the
harvest and the profit of the year should be past over; and what a grievance
this is, to all those parties, that have suits depending in the Bishops Court,
to have justice retarded all this while, and to those also, that would sue for
their Tithes, or for any other right within the cognizance of the
Ecclesiastical Court, I do not understand it, but am sorry for it: and let
others judge of it.

2. The taking of the Articles exhibited against the Dean out of the Bishops
Court.
2. When as Articles were exhibited unto me of high nature, against the Dean of
S. Kenny, and I calling him into my Court, to answer them, and giving him his
own time, that he desired to have, to make his answer, that he might not be
surprised, and this long before any inhibition of my Jurisdiction came into my
hands; I do not understand how the same suit, depending in my Court, could be
taken off, but by an appeal, and transmitted by a due Course of Law: or
otherwise, all the suits and causes depending in my Court might be cancelled
and taken off, as well as this: and what a grievance is this, to the
prosecutors of any suit, and of how much damage I cannot imagine.

3. 3. The giving of Relaxations of the Bishops Sequestrations without hearing
what the Bishop could say for sequestring them.
When the Deane of Kilkenny came to be instituted into his Deanery that was
Sequestered into the hands of Alderman Butler, and would neither pay the Fees
for his Institution, nor take a Relaxation of that Sequestration to this very
day; and I letting him alone for this, and for many other prejudices, that
concerned my self, yet when diverse of his Parish came unto me, and complained
how duly they paid their Tithes and all duties unto him, and yet how roughly
he used them, and how negligent he was of them, when as they had neither
Service, nor Sermon, not Minister, to Christen their Children, Marry their
Youths, and Bury their Dead, but they must go, and entreat this man or that man
to do it, and that I could not persuade him to have a better care of his Flock,
nor to pay any Dues to his Majesty, to my Lord Duke of Ormond, and the Bishop,
I Sequestered his Living for the better Service to be done unto his people, and
the sooner to get those Duties due both to the King and Bishop; and he
understanding thereof, instead of coming to me for to desire a Relaxation,
(which I expected,) he went and desired to see the Sequestration, and the man
that had the Sequestration, gave it him to read, and he put it in his Pocket,
and keeps it to this day, and gathered his Tithes, giving many opprobrious
terms, and using great threatenings against the honest man to whose hands I had
sequestered his Living.

And when Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley came to the Archbishops Visitation, he,
without my privity, and without any appeal, or demanding what I had to say
against him, gives a Relaxation of that Sequestration.

And all this I cannot well understand; but it puts me in mind of a Play Book
that I saw on a Booksellers Stall, entitled, A King and no King; and of what
the Jews said to Christ, Hayl King of the Jews, that is in their mind, Rex fine
Regno: For thus, taking the Articles out of my Court, and relaxing the
Sequestration, and undoing whatsoever I had done, I conceived I should be a
Bishop and no Bishop: or a Bishop without the authority and power of a Bishop.

And truly, I do think, I were better to use no Jurisdiction, than in vacuum
laborare, and to do things to no purpose, but only to be undone again; which
is not so much a prejudice unto me, as it is to all those Parties that had, or
should have any Suits depending in the Bishops Court, and must every third year
go fifty or sixty miles to follow their Suits, and with a vast expense in
Dublin; and I wish his Majesty would consider this agrievance of his People.

But now, as Abraham said to God, Genesis 18.30. I have taken upon me to speak
unto the Lord, let him not be angry, and I will speak; so I say to my Lords
Grace of Dublin, The things that the Bishop of Ossory observes to be
considered out of the Letters. 1. Touching the Refection.
seeing I have taken upon me to speak of these things, let not his Grace be
angry, and I will yet speak a little of what I have observed in the afore-cited
Letters; And

1. For the Refections, I will say no more but what you see in the Letters; and
what I said before touching this Point, but desire (if we must still continue
to give Refections to the Bishops and Archbishops,) that the uncertainty of the
expense might be remedied, and either commuted for a certain Sum of money, or
limited not to exceed a Sum as shall be agreed upon, to be convenient, that the
poor Clergy might be certain what they are to do, and understand in what case
they stand, and not be punished for their ill-doing and neglect of their duty,
when they think they have been very bountiful and have done very well; And,

2. 2. For the reconciliation of the disagreeing persons.
For the Reconciliation of the persons disagreeing it was a very good, and a
very charitable work; but for the submission of the Senior Cull unto the Deane,
it puts me in mind of Aesops Fable, Lupus ad caput fontis, bibens videt agnum
procul infra bibentem; for to say the truth, Ea fama vagatur, the Dean is
reported, and I will not justify the report, to be very litigious, and
covetous, and to have much wronged the poor Vicars; and to have been, as
Chaplain to one Delboire a Cousin of his, at the Siege of Basing House, against
his late Majesty; which, if true, makes me believe him to be a very unworthy
man, and not worthy to be countenanced against any honest man; and I know Mr.
Cull is reputed to be a very honest man, presented so to me by the Mayor and
Aldermen of Kilkenny, and I am sure a very constant and painful Preacher; and
yet the Deane charged him with such heinous crimes, that, if proved, were
sufficient utterly to undo him; Whereupon Mr. Cull, to quit himself of the
Accusations, preferred these Articles following against the Deane, and
delivered the same to me, and I finding, that, if Fame be true, they might be
all very easily proved, did put the same into my Court, to be answered by the
Deane: And not to prejudice the Reputation of the Deane, (the things alleged
being not proved,) but that my Reader might the better understand the truth in
this place.

And the Articles, being exhibited unto me, by the Junior Cull from his Father,
is I showed before, I required his Proctor to draw up the same in forma juris,
and my Register to deliver them to the Dean; and in open Court, I gave the Dean
his own desired time to answer them; and all this being done, the Articles
exhibited, the Dean having his own time to answer them, and lying long in the
Court before any tidings of the Archbishops inhibition came unto us, I conceive
it strange, and cannot understand, quo jure, how these Articles should be taken
out of my Court, as they were, without my privity, without an appeal, or any
other due course of Law, and the offender quitted, and set free without any
answer to any Articles, (which I conceived to be rather a covering of faults,
and cherishing offenses, than a reformation of manners,) but especially to
consider that the party wronged, and so highly injured, The strange injunction
laid upon Jo. Cull.
should be enjoined to make such a submission, as flexis genibus upon his
knees, to ask forgiveness to him that did the wrong: hoc mihi magnum est, hoc
miram, I pray you forgive me, that I did not thank you for abusing me: to
justify herein the foresaid Fable true; for, I know no wrong that Cull did to
the Dean, but I can make it good, that the Dean did many ways exceedingly
wrong poor Cull; And yet Cull must be enjoined to ask the Dean forgiveness upon
his knees; and truly, to this day, I could not learn for what, unless it were
for complaining that the Dean dealt with him, as the Wolf did with the Lamb.

And not only so, but the report goes, that the poor man (who spends what he
has, to maintain his two Sons in Oxford,) was awed, (as the word of my Letter
is,) that is, threatened and terrified, that if he did not do as. Archdeacon
Bulkl^y enjoined him, he should be deprived of all the means he had, and should
not be suffered to serve in all Ireland: which if true, (as I easily believe
it,) is the readiest way to increase the oppressions and wickedness of men, to
the great dishonor of God, and not to further the reformation of those
offenses, that ought most severely to be reproved; especially in those men,
that by the dignity of their places, should be the light and good example unto
others, yet will be indeed the very scandal, shame, and reproach of their
Calling: I say no more, but that such proceedings do seem very strange to me,
that never saw the like in the Kingdom of Ingland, nor ever read the like done
in any Ecclesiastical Court.

3. For the Sequestration.
And for the Sequestrations, I can say little or nothing to them; because I know
not well the causes, for which they were sequestered; but I pity the poverty,
and the loss and want that must thereby follow to the sequestered parties, to
disinable them for a while to do that good, which otherwise they might do to
themselves and their Families.

Yet, as the old Axiom is, that Corruption unius est generatio alterius, so
their loss is a gain to the Officers and friends of the Sequestor, (though
perhaps they have not so much need of it, as those that are sequestered,)
because Mr. Archdeacon Bulkley (as I am informed) wrote his Letters to the
Dean, and to his Cousin Mr. Lloyd (who, notwithstanding his Letters, dealt like
a Gentleman with the sequestered parties) to make the best agreement they could
with the Sequestered Clergy for their own profit and advantage, before they
should have their relaxation; which I believe was never so intended when
Sequestrations were first ordered to be extended.

But for Jonathan Cull, that is said to be sequestered for not going to his
Grace, to ask leave to go to Oxford, before he went, (which was indeed a fault
in Cull,) and no man will excuse him, unless he can yield a very good reason
for his neglect.

But for his Non-residency from his Livings, I think, that the Statu^e does
allow him to be absent from his Living, and to live in the University studendi
gratia until he be forty years old, and I having sent him word, from the
Rector of Lincoln College, where he is a student, that he must make haste to
come before the Act; and his new-married Wife being lately dead, he might be
thereby so troubled, and in such an ecstasy, as to forget his duty and
obedience to my Lords Grace, not so much out of contempt or neglect of his
Grace, as out of ignorance, bashfulness, or forgetfulness, that might well
excuse him before any mild, and no severe Judges a tanto licet non a toto; and
therefore consideratis considerandis, the fault, which might be accounted
venial, might be conceived not to deserve so heavy a Censure, as to be deprived
of all his means, whereby he is disinabled to continue his study in the
University; which makes me believe, the Sequestrator conceived some greater
cause to sequester him, either against him, or against some other of his
relation, which is probable, as I conceive it, to be against my s^^f, whom some
thought to wound through the side of Jonathan Cull, because I know the man to
be so civil, and of so fair a carriage, as to give no just offense to any one,
or in any place; I would the accuser of his brethren were so blameless: but
many times Aristides is punished for being just, and Clodius applauded for his
wickedness.

Or if he, or any other of my Clergy has justly deserved punishment, I will
not be their Advocate to justify or to excuse any heinous crime.

And for the Visitations themselves; The Visi ations of this Kingdom.
the Bishops Visitation seems to be clipped here in this Kingdom of Ireland
more than seems convenient; for the chief parts and duties of this Office of
Episcopacy, different from Presbytery, do consist in these two special things:

1. Ordination of the Priests and Deacons to be the Teachers and Pastors of the
Church, to feed the flock of Christ.

2. Jurisdiction, to rule and govern all the members of the Church, Clergy, and
Layty, according to the Laws, Canons, and Constitutions of the Church.

And if in this Triennial Visitation of the Archbishop, he inhibits the Bishop
Jurisdiction for two or three months, before he visits, and then when he
visits, suspends the Jurisdiction for six months more, as here you see he does,
or for more than that if he please, and this every third year: and in any part
of the year, when he will; has not the Archbishop swallowed up almost all the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop? And then as the Pope sends his Legatos a latere, to
do only what the Pope directs him; so the Bishop shall stand by the Archbishops
side, and shall be set aside, as often as he pleases, which seems to me to be a
Jurisdiction ad placitum, and so little better than a Cipher, that standing by
himself, signifies nothing, and so is worthy of a Presbyterial correction.

But, as Monarchy is the best kind of Government in the World, when the same is
well ordered, and rightly used, as I have most amply showed in my Book, of the
Right of Kings, so the multiplication of powers into one hand, being abused,
has produced Tyranny among the Tyrants of the Gentiles; and, as Presbyterians
say, i^ the Popes of Rome: Therefore our Savior Christ, seeing how ambitious,
and how greedy his Disciples were to usurp authority, forbids them, (not, to
use their authority, and the jurisdiction that he gives them,) but he
forbids them to abuse it, (...),
i.e. not (...), to domineer one over another, as the heathen Tyrants did, 1
Pet. 5.3. and to that end, the most Divines say, and I think all, except the
Popes Parasites, I am sure all the Presbyterians affirm it, that Christ equally
distributed the power and authority, that he gave, to the Governors of his
Church, See Bishop Howsons Sermons that proves this Point at large.
which were the twelve Apostles, amongst them all: and therefore they had all
equal jurisdiction; though S. Peter had the priority of nomination, in respect
of order, which must be observed in all the actions and the works of God, which
is the God of order.

Yet I, that am and will be as observant, respective, and obedient to my
Archbishop as any Bishop in Ireland shall be to his Metropolitan, say not this,
as finding any fault, or laying the least blame, upon the Canons and
Constitutions of the Church, and the Laws of these Kingdoms (for all must
confess, that the Office and Calling of an Archbishop was not so from the
beginning, nor is, jure divine, of Christ's institution,) that ordered and
appointed the same to be governed and guided by the Bishops subordinate to
their Archbishops, that are to have the oversight of them; which is a most
excellent way, that all things may be done right in the rule and government of
Gods Church: So it be done with that temper and moderation that it ought to be
done.

But I say this, to the same end as our Savior said it to his Disciples, that
all things might be done, Leni spiritu, non dura manu, rather by an inward
sweet influence, than an outward extreme violence, and that all the Bishops,
and the Archbishops in their Visitations, and in all their actions should study
and strive to be like Moses, that in the Government of Gods people was the
gentlest, and the meekest man upon earth, and endeavored, as he says himself,
to carry them in his bosom, which is the greatest commendation, and the best
quality that can be in any Bishop, of whom, it is a shame to say, Non pater est
Aeacui, thou art not the son of Moses, sed te genuere ferae, but thou art more
like the savage beasts: when thou art so cruel, so unmerciful, and so severe in
the censure of thy brethren of thine own Coat.

For as I said long ago, so I say now, and will say it still, One of the
chiefest causes of the late distractions in our Church.
that the rigid carriage of some severe Bishops, and their undiscreet
Surrogates, on the one side: and the high stomachs and proud behavior of the
Presbyters, on the other side, when the Governors ruled, and domineered like
Tyrants, and the Presbyters, like stubborn Children, refused to be obedient,
has been one of the chiefest causes of the late distraction and miseries, that
we have felt in this our Church.

But I will demand of the Lay men, whether that Censure, be commendable, when
for a fault that deserves a penny fine, the offender shall be punished with a
pound? And that delinquency, which springs through ignorance, or forgetfulness,
and not of obstinacy, shall be equally punished with the highest
transgressors; which is, in my judgment, like Draco, that wrote his Laws in
blood: Yet may you see the like Draco's sometimes in the Sequestrations and
Censures of some Clergymen: Poor souls, I can but pity them. And I will not be
the Judge, but let the Reader consider it; A young man is newly instituted into
a little Living, and becomes bound to his Majesty for his first fruits, then
goes to his study to the University, that he may be the better enabled to do
God service, in the Church of Christ; yet, because that either through
bashfulness to go to so great a Prelate, that he never was acquainted with, or
through ignorance of his duty, or forgetfulness, or perhaps for haste to save
his passage by Sea, when as time and tide stay for no man; or some other
excusable cause, he goes to Oxford without his Archbishops being acquainted
therewith, though his own Bishop sent for him in all haste to come up before the
Act: yet for this heinous crime and great piccadillo fault, he is sequestered
from all the means he has, before he receives the first harvest fruits, or
perhaps one penny from the same, whereby he is disinabled to pay the Kings
first fruits, and to maintain himself in the University, and so undone: and if
this Censure be equivalent, and not exceeding the fault, judge you.

And as dislike and disaffection produce sometimes heavy Sentences upon the
poor Clergy for light faults; so I have often seen great oppressions, and much
baseness used by some great dignified Clergymen, that I could name, and yet
they were so far from Censure, that others were upheld and applauded in their
wickedness and so, Juven. 1. Satyr. 13.
as the Poet says, -- Multi Eademcommittunt diverso crimina fato
Ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic diadema:


One man is applauded and crowned for the same fact for which another man is
condemned and hanged.

The last Visitation of the Archbishop in this Diocese of Ossory.
But for the last Visitation of the Archbishop in this Diocese of Ossory, I
shall, besides what I have said already of the Inhibition and Suspension of the
Jurisdiction, say somewhat more than I said of the Sequestrations of the
Clergy; And, 1. Of the Number of those persons that were sequestered. 2. Of the
Causes for which they were sequestered. 3. Of the Consequents of their
Sequestrations.


1. You must understand, that in all my Diocese of Ossory, I have but twenty
two beneficed Clergymen, and of them twelve are non-resident, and eight of the
twenty two were sequestered; viz. 1. Mr. Barry. 2. Mr. Cull Senior. 3. Mr. Cull
Junior. 4. Mr. Drisdall. 5. Mr. Moor. 6. Mr. Spencer. 7. Mr. Teate. 8. Mr.
Kerny.


Whereof fix were continually resident, and in my judgment, the most learned,
and most frequent constant Preachers, that have any Ecclesiastical preferment
in my Diocese.

2. For the Causes, why their Livings were sequestered, I cannot, and I do not
say but that they may be very just, either for not rendering to Caesar what
belongs unto Caesar, as the twentieth part, Subsidies, and the like payments,
due unto his Majesty; or for not rendering to God what is Gods, as the due and
diligent serving of their Churches, and the payment of their Procurations, and
the discharging of all other dues and accustomed duties unto his Grace, or to
them whom he sent to visit them; or for holding their Livings contrary, either
to the Civil or the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Land; or for the unworthiness of
the persons incapable of them, or some other just and lawful cause.

My Registers Letter informs me, that Mr. Cull Juniors Livings were sequestered
for going to the University without his Grace his leave, whereof I have spoken
before; and others for distance of miles, if they were above six miles one from
another, though they say, that for the tenuity of their Livings they had the
Kings Pattent under the Broad Seal, to hold them some thirty, and others twenty
miles distant; in which case, I say no more, but, if they shall not keep them
above six miles distant, they might live better and grow richer here in Ireland
by keeping Sheep, than by feeding of Christ his flock; or if the Law prohibits
them, to keep them, beyond that distance, I wonder, why they are admitted, by
the Relaxations of the Sequestrations, to keep them still if they were
sequestered, to get Fees for the Relaxation, to Mr. Proby, my Lords Grace his
Register, and not to deprive them of either Living; my Lords Grace dealt more
graciously, and like himself, in granting the Relaxation of them, than his
Surrogate did in the Sequestration of them.

But if they were Sequestered, for not paying the Archbishops Procurations, or
other duties due unto his Grace, I blame them very much, that they paid them
not; for though by reason of the smalness of their means, and the worthiness of
the men, in their pains taking, I forgave all my Procurations and other dues
also, to most of the poorer sort of them, ever since his Majesty came in, and,
to my remembrance, have not received so much as ten shillings in Procurations
from all my Clergy to this very day; yet that should not make them careless or
forgetful to pay all duties, that are due to other men; and therefore I told
Mr. Barry, that says, for not paying eighteen pence Procurations to the
Archbishop, he paid thirty two shillings to his Register, for his Relaxation,
that he did very unwisely therein; though, to excuse himself to me, that was
angry with them all that were negligent to pay all dues to his Grace, he had
says, that eighteen pence is not in my List, nor in the Archdeacons List of
Procurations, neither was it ever paid, or demanded to be paid, either by me,
or by my Archdeacon, or by any other Bishop or Archbishop before; or otherwise,
if he known how it came into Mr. Archdeacon Bulkleys Roll, he would rather
have paid his eighteen pence than thirty two shillings; and so I told every one
of the rest of them that were sequestered, and paid thirty two shillings for
each of their Relaxations, that it was their own fault, and their folly, that
they had not paid what was so justly due unto his Grace.

3. The consequents of their Sequestrations,
3. For the Consequents of these Sequestrations, as they were very beneficial
and profitable to the Archdeacons Friends, and to my Lords Grace his Officers,
as I could show you in what particulars, so they were very fatal and grievous
to the poor Priests, that were sequestered; for I, charging them, upon their
Canonical obedience, to show me the truth of the proceedings and sufferings
which they sustained, I received a Petition from the Senior Cull, and a Letter
of Mr. Marby, my Lords Grace his Chaplain, to a friend of his; (which I once
thought to insert in this place,) but I did not, yet I perceived thereby, how
heavily this burden lay upon the poor man's back, that protested unto me, he
spent near thirty pounds before he was quitted from all his troubles in this
business, and he was brought so low, that I was fain to lend him twenty pounds
to be sent to Oxford to relieve his two Sons, lest otherwise they should be
expelled out of their College for want of money to pay their arrears; and how
great a prejudice and hinderance it was to the Junior Cull in his proceedings
in the University, himself best knows, and can best inform you: the which
things I conceived were very much to be pitied by any compassionate Father in
the Church of God, that has a fellow-feeling of another misery.

And I understand likewise, from the rest of the Clergy, and the poor Clarks of
the Parish Churches, what an infinite charge the rest of the sequestered parties
had been at, in paying about thirty two shillings Fees for every Relaxation,
and Sequestration granted against them; besides their own proper expenses, and,
if I am not misinformed, besides two pence a mile from Dublin to Ossory, (which
in some places is betwixt fifty and sixty miles,) to the Apparator that served
the Sequestration; and besides a far greater trouble and loss which these
sequestered persons had from the Tenants, to whom they had set their Tithes
before they were sequestered, and (by reason of the great charge, and small
means of some of them) were fain to take some part of their money beforehand;
for when the Farmers of their Tithes, saw that their Livings were sequestered,
and put into other men's hands, yet, (though they had a Relaxation of them
afterward,) they pretended a far greater loss than it may be they had, and so
made the loss very great unto the Incumbent, that must bear all the damage, and
save the Tenant harmless; as to instance in one example for all.

The Dean and Chapter having paid me no Procurations, An instance of the loss
of the sequestered parties.
for all the Livings that they held, since his Majesty's happy restoration, I
sequestered the same into the hands of two of the ablest and best experienced
Prebends, Mr. Teate, and Mr. Kerney, who, I knew, would give a just account to
me, and to the rest of their fellow Prebends; and they did set the Tithes unto
those Tenants that were most able, and gave most for them; but when Archdeacon
Bulkley came to visit the Chapter, his great friend, and old acquaintance, the
Dean, that had all the former years Revenues in his hand, and had given none
account of any part thereof unto the Chapter, and was much grieved at my
Sequestration of it, out of his hands, would not pay the Procurations due to my
Lord Archbishop of Dublin, no more than he would pay to me any of my
Procurations; whereupon Archdeacon Bulkley, whether to please the Deane, or to
pleasure his Cousin Bulkley, I know not, sequestered the same again into the
hands of his Cousin Mr. Thomas Bulkley, and the rest of the Prebends had lost no
less than five pounds by reason of that Sequestration, if the Law had not
forced Mr. Tho. Bulkley to yield it up into the former Tenants hands. And so
did the rest of the Clergy lose very much by reason of their Sequestrations,
which they had never been acquainted with since my restoration; though I
received not forty shillings from all my Clergy since I came to be Bishop to
this very day, nor so much as one penny from the Dean in all my life.

Then about two months after the Archbishops Visitation was past, I received a
Letter from Mr. Proby, the Archbishops Register.

And therein a List of them that had not paid their Procurations unto his Grace.

At the reading of which, I did greatly wonder at the partiality of Archdeacon
Bulkley, that could spare to sequester Mr. Richard Seagar, Mr. Whittington, Mr.
Williams, Mr. Richard Deane, Mr. Goburne, Mr. Wilson, and Dr. Chamberlain, that
were the Deans friends, and for whom he interceded, though five of them were
non-resident, and yet would presently sequester those eight (whereof seven were
always resident, and took most pains in all the Diocese,) whom he knew the
Bishop therefore had a very good opinion of them, as well as of those whom he
spared; and the Dean had so eagerly, I will not say maliciously, but I dare say
causelessly, complained of them; and these also to have their Relaxations
granted before they had paid their Procurations; I hope it is not to sequester
them again, which they well deserve, if their former warning has not taught
them to pay them. And therefore, I that have always persuaded and taught
obedience to be observed by all inferiors to their superimendents, would not
be negligent of my duty, to do according to my Lords Grace his Order, but I
sent my Apparitor to all the particulars of my Clergy mentioned in the
Schedule, to come and make satisfaction for their Procurations, or to expect
what might succeed, which they were better, like wise men, to prevent.

And they, when they came unto me, showed me their Acquittances, under Mr. Juxe
his hand, that they had already paid them.

So I thought this storm was over: Yet within a while I heard that about some
ten poor Parish Clerks, and five of the Clergy were cited to appear at Dublin,
(a journey to some fifty or sixty miles, in the short Winter days, and over
ways as foul as any is in Ingland,) to answer Articles that should be objected
against them.

Then diverse of the Clerks came crying to me, that they had rather leave their
Clerkeship than to take such a journey to Dublin; and one of the Clerks the
Archdeacon Bulkley had given a License to, and yet cited him to Dublin to show
his License, the which, when he showed, the Officers of the Court said, they
mistook it, and dismissed the cause, and yet afterward sent a Citation for the
Fees. And my Clergy entreated me to intercede for them that did not know
wherein they had offended, nor what could be objected against them: and I
answered them all, that I would neither meddle nor make in their business; but,
if they have done well, then all would be well, if otherwise, let them suffer
for it, I would never excuse their negligence, nor Patronize their offense;
then some of them appearing at Dublin, expecting their Charge, and desiring
earnestly to be dispatched, Archdeacon Bulkley answered, Your Bishop is writing
of Books, (for he had some inkling of mine intent,) and will not apply himself
to my Lords Grace to intercede for you.

Yet my Lord Archbishop very nobly and graciously willed the Archdeacon to take
their answer, and to dispatch them that they might go home; and the Archdeacon
Bulkley willed them, to confess their faults, and to submit unto the Court, and
they should be discharged; and I hearing of this advice, willed them to confess
the truth, but not of any guilt, wherein they were innocent.

And therefore when they had their Articles, ten or twelve, read unto them,
(for they had no Copy of them,) they saw, they were but mere suggestions, and
not any thing in any of them, that could any ways touch them, or prejudice
them in any thing, and they presently made their answers unto them.

And when they had answered and confessed no fault that they committed; upon the
payment of their Fees, for the charges of the Court, they were dismissed.

Whereby, it seems to me, that, if they were guiltless, and nothing could be
proved against them, they might as well cite all the Clergy, and all the men in
Kilkenny, and suggest Articles against them, to bring them unto Dublin, to pay
Fees to enrich the Officers of the Court; and that being done, to send them
home glad that they are dismissed.

Then after this the Churchwardens of S. Mary's in Kilkenny, having very
justly, as I understand, presented diverse persons at the Archbishops
Visitation, Canon 65. and 67.
they were, contrary to the Canons, cited to appear at Dublin, forty seven
miles, to make good their Presentation, as the Churchwardens informed me; which
was so ill resented, that we could hardly get any that would take the
Churchwardenship upon them, for fear of the like troubles if they presented any
man. But, when I demanded of the Archdeacon why the Churchwardens were cited to
make good their Presentment: He answered, it was not so; but they retained a
Proctor to prosecute against those that refused to pay the Church taxes, and
they not following their suit, they were sent unto, either to come and
prosecute, or the Defendants should be dismissed: which if so, I blame not the
proceeding, but let the Churchwardens suffer for their own error, when they
sue out of my Court without a dismission, or an appeal.

Yet out of all my former discourse, it appears what an heavy burden and an
infinite charge this last triennial Visitation of the Archbishop has been to
the indigent Clergy of Ossory, both in their threefold Procurations, their
manifold Sequestrations, and long Winter journeys to procure their Relaxations,
and the manifold losses that they sustained by their Tenants, that, by reason
of the Sequestrations were disappointed of those tithes that they had taken
from the Incumbents, which makes me think, that we do not follow our Saviors
Counsel and Precept to S. Peter, To feed his flock; nor what we learnt in the
old Adage, that says, Boni pastoris est pecus tondere non deglubere; for
certainly these foresaid things do seem deglubere pecus non tondere; and to
cause his shepwards to starve, and not to enable them to feed his Lambs.

And therefore, as the sin of Solomon moved God to raise up Hadad the Edomite,
and Rezon the Son of Eliadah, and Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, to vex Solomon for
the sins of Solomon, 1 Kings 11.14, 23, 26. So I do not wonder, that God
suffers the devil to stir up Presbyterians, and Quakers, Why God suffers
Sectaries to vex the Bishops.
and other Anabaptistical Sectaries to vex the Bishops for these and the like
sins of the Bishops against God and his poor people, when they suffer and
countenance their Commissaries, Registers, and other Officers, to be like a
talent of lead upon the necks of Christ his Sheep.

But I do therefore demand, if these things, Whether the foresaid abuses ought
not to be redressed.
and all the things I showed to be amiss in this Treatise, ought not to be
reformed and amended?

I know some will say, they ought not thus to be published to the World, to
discover the weakness and imperfections of our Brethren, to make them more
contemptible in the eyes of the scoffers of our Calling, than they are; and
therefore will much blame me for this my publication of these things.

But as Caligula was so wicked, and his life so beastly, Reynolds in the life
of Caligula fol. 31.
that some Historiographers have been in doubt, whether it were best to bury
them in oblivion, or commit them unto memory: and it is answered by mine
Author, That, seeing it is profitable to the Readers, and to Posterity, to know
the evil doings of others, and the disgrace they have thereby, to make them
afraid to do the like evils, lest in like manner they should be published to
their shame: therefore it is far better to discover the faults of Governors
and great men, than to conceal them; because it is done, Why great men's faults
ought to be discovered.
not with any desire of any evil to the doers of those evil deeds, but out of
an earnest endeavor to amend them, and to prevent the like carriages in all
others; not to disgrace any, but to prevent the disgrace of all.

But though it be not amiss to make known the injustice and the faults of Great
men, that there may be a redress of them; yet who dares complain and speak of
the Vices of their Superiors? An tutum est scribere in eos qui possunt
proscribere: I have read how the Mice held a Consultation, The Fable of the
Mice.
how they might escape the fury of the Cat; and one wiser than the rest, said,
it might easily be done, if there were but a Bell tied about the Cats neck; for
so they might hear her coming, and they might get away; and all liked well,
and applauded the device; but to this day they could never agree, which of them
should tie the Bell about the Cats neck: So all the poor and inferior Clergy,
all sigh, and groan, and complain of their Taxes, and Pressures, and
Oppressions, by the Bishops, and Archbishops, and Archdeacons, and their
Suffragans, and all that come to Censure them; but not one of them all dares
tie the Bell about the Cats neck, and complain of these Great Powers unto the
Higher Powers, to have their abuses redressed, for fear of a worser
consequence; no less than to be crushed and torn all to pieces.

Yet I remember, what Seneca says, that he which is careless of his own life,
may when he will, be Master of another man's life; so he that is careless of his
own state or promotion, and regards not the confluence of wealth and worldly
things, may without fear do things that other timorous men dare not venture to
do.

The manifold deliverances of the Author.
And truly I must confess, that since the great Jehovah, my continual deliverer,
has delivered me from that multitude, of those malicious Enemies, that sought
after my life, when I was scarce budded in the world, and ever since has
preserved me so many times from such great, and so unimaginable dangers, as
from Captain Flaxen, when I was carried Prisoner to North-hampton; from Captain
Beech, when I was taken prisoner at Sea, from the drunken Captain that would
have delivered me to the Power of the Parliament, hard by Aber-ystwith; from
Sir John Carter and Courtney, that would have clapped me in prison when I
preached for his now Majesty at Conway; from the wicked Committee of plundered
Ministers, that said I deserved rather to have my head cut off, than to have
any Articles performed with me; from so many desperate Sea-voyages and Land
journeys that I passed through; and from Captain Wood, when I was under his
hands in the Parliament Ship; from the Great Antichrist, the Long Parliament;
and especially from the devil himself, when he threw me down at West-Wickham,
and God said unto him, as he did of Job, He is in thy hand, but save his life;
I never feared what man could do unto me: but as the Prophet David said, the
Lord delivered me from the mouth of the bear, and of the Lion, and he will
deliver me from this uncircumcised Philistine: So I say, the Lord that
preserved me so many times, from so many dangers, will still preserve me, while
with a sincere heart I endeavor to discharge my duty: especially seeing the
Lord says, I, even I am he that comfort you; and who art thou that art
afraid of a man, and of the son of man that shall be made as grass, and
forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth the heavens, and laid
the Foundations of the Earth, and have feared every day because of the fury of
the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy.

Therefore, as I have been always resolute, and in a manner, desperate, in the
judgment of the timorous, as it appears, by the three Books, that, in the
behalf of our late King, I printed in Oxford, and the three Books that I writ
of the Great Antichrist, while the Long Parliament and the false Prophet were
in their greatest prevalency; and by the Sermons that I preached at St.
Nicholas, and other Churches in Dublin, at Conwey before the Judges, at Lla^
Sannan, and in all places: So now in mine old age, when I am so near my grave,
I have less reason to fear, and more cause to be resolute, to say the truth, to
discharge my duty, and to implore my most honorable Friends, my Lords Grace of
Canterbury, my Lord of London, and my old familiar Acquaintance my Lord of
Winchester, whom God has placed so near his Majesty, and has raised to that
eminency of dignity pre consortibus above their brethren, not so much for their
own sakes, as for his honor and service, and the good of his Church, and like
so many religous Joseph's, to relieve their distressed Brethren, to join in mine
assistance, most earnestly to beseech, and most humbly to petition to his
Sacred Majesty, that he would be graciously pleased to relieve and help the
Church of Ireland in those threefold grievances that I have foreshewed: as, that

1. Seeing the Lands and Revenues of the Church, were I am sure, in many places
of my Diocese, given for their reward that fought against his late Majesty; and
that by reason of their wealth and great friends to uphold them therein they do
possess them; and we that would erect our Churches therewith, are disinabled to
do it without our means, that are so forcibly with strong hands, and by such
friends detained from us; his Majesty would be pleased to cause them, or some
others, some ways, and by some means, to have the Churches of God, for the
service of Jesus Christ, to be erected and repaired Especially the Bishops
Cathedral Church in Kilkenny.
, and not, to the scandal of our Religion, (which the Jews, Turks, and Gentiles
would not do,) to suffer our very Cathedrals, and so many other Parish Churches
to lie so ruinous, and so rooted up as they are.

2. That seeing so many great and goodly Impropriations are taken away from the
Church of Christ, and from the service of God, and are held in the hands of
such great persons and powerful men, that will not part with them, (as I showed
to you before,) and the poor Vicars of such Rectories impropriate, have scarce
so much means belonging to the Vicaredges, as will put bread into their mouths,
whereby they are constrained, for the relief of their Families, to take Farms,
and other Lands to occupy, like Lay men, and to neglect their duties, and the
service of Gods Church, and to suffer the poor people either to be instructed,
and to have their children baptized, married, and buried by the Popish Priests,
or to have no Priests at all; and we that are the Diocessans, by reason of the
small values of those Vicaredges, can find no men that are worthy and able
Ministers, that will come and accept of those slender maintenances; and those
that do accept them, we cannot make them, by reason of their smalness, to
discharge them; And seeing, as I said, the Churches are down, and the Lands,
Livings, and Revenues of the Church, are thus, as I showed, in the hands of the
great and powerful men, and rich Cities, and we can as easily pluck the club
out of Hercules hands, as get any of them out of their fingers, when the poor
men dare not, scarce, ask their dues of them, or if they sue for them, the
remedy will prove far worse than the disease, to go to Law with Corporations,
or with mighty men, to spend their money, and commonly to go without their
right, as they have a plain-example in my proceedings with Sir George Aysku^,
and the detention of all my Procurations, (which, as Bishop Bale says, in the
Page of his Book, was almost half the Revenue of the Bishopprick of Ossory,) by
the foresaid great men and Cities ever since his Majesty's restoration; and I
know not how to get them; it is no wonder to me, that Pope^^ should, not only
continue, but increase more and more, and the Service of God decay more and
more, and injustice, Idolatry, and wickedness abound in this Kingdom more and
more, and I tell you herein the plain truth; let who will be angry, and let
others think what they please.

And further, seeing, that beside the payments and taxes that they are bound to
pay to his Majesty by the hand of their Bishop, and to their Bishop, and
Archbishop, and all other payments for their Churches, they are frequently,
contrary to the Acts of Parliament, exceedingly molested, taxed, and
distrained, for the same taxes, which they have formerly paid, by the Lay
Collectors: and the trouble to be discharged from those unjust Taxations is
worse, then the repayment of them again, when as excessit medicina modum, the
remedy is worse than the disease.

Therefore that it would please his Majesty, for the honor of God, and the
good of the poor people, and the poor Clergy likewise, to cause the Churches to
be built Especially the Bishops Cathedral Church at Kilkenny.
, and some competent means and sum to be deducted out of those Impropriations,
and to be added for the augmentation and better support of the poor Vicars, and
some fairer and easier way to be devised for the poor Clergy to recover their
right; and a prohibition of the Layty under a Subpaena to recharge them for
those payments which they are charged with, and enjoined by the Act of
Parliament to pay to their Diocessans.

3. That seeing three or four Visitations, that may be, of the Archdeacon,
Bishop, Archbishop, and Primate, in one year cannot choose but be a grievance
and a great burden unto the poor Clergy, that are poor enough without the
charge of so many Visitations, added unto the rest of their taxes: That it
would please his Majesty to cause the Government of the Church of Ireland, to
be brought to the same form, manner, and fashion, that is used in the Church of
Ingland, that is, for the Archdeacon to Visit for two years, and the Bishop to
visit every third year, and then the Archdeacons Visitation to cease for that
year the Bishop visits, and the Archbishop to visit once in his time, and both
the Archdeacons and the Bishops Visitations to cease when the Archbishop shall
visit.

And thus the Clergy and the Church Officers shall have but one Visitation,
quot annis, in every one year; which I think is very sufficient for the
rectifying of all abuses, and for the far greater ease both of the Clergy and
Layty: and which, I believe, none should be against the same, unless it be
such, as are too miserably covetous; for a small matter unto themselves, to
bring a heavy grievance to very many; which for my part, the Lord knows, that
I never liked it; and I suppose, it should be for the honor and praise of the
Chief Governors and Fathers of the Church, as we are styled, to deal with our
Clergy as with our Children, to ease them what we can, and not to make them
fast for our feasting.

And I find great reason, that we should in all things here in Ireland conform
our selves to the Church of Ingland; for as Polydor Virgil wri^e h, that Pope
Adrian, Polyd. Virg. l. 13. Hist. Angl.
and after him Alexander, moved S. Christian the famous Bishop of Lismore,
their Legate, to call a Synod at Cashel, wherein they defined eight Articles,
whereof the last was, That forasmuch as God has Universally delivered the
Irish into the government of the English, they should in all Points, Rights,
and Ceremonies accord with the Church of Ingland: and Gelasius, Campians hist.
of Ireland, l. 2. c. 1.
Primate of Ardmagh, in the presence of King Hen. 2. gave his consent to those
Articles.

And therefore I wonder what has altered or hindered this our conformity with
the Church of Ingland, unless it be pride, covetousness, or ambition, and
aviditas dominandi; which are weeds fitter to be rooted out of Churchmens
hearts than to be cherished in the Primates of Gods Church, and which I verily
believe are now far enough from the thoughts of our most grave and most
religious Archbishops, who, as I hope, will most easily yield to this
conformity, that neither the Bishops be so abridged in their Jurisdictions, nor
their Clergy so much oppressed in their Visitations, as they have been.

Yet here I would not have my Reader to imagine that I speak for the ease or
remittance of the Procurations, Taxes, or other Impositions, of them that hold
the Abbeys, Priories, and Impropriate Rectories, which they have for nothing,
and as it appears to me, contrary to all divine right; and therefore should pay
the same continually every year to them that do the Service of God: but I speak
it only for the ease and benefit of the poor incumbent Rectors and Vicars that
labor and take pains for the good of Gods people, and for the saving of their
souls that hold their means from them.

And, if this may not be done, to reduce the Government of the Church of
Ireland to the same form, and after the same manner as the Church of Ingland is
governed, yet that the Archbishops and Bishops should take special care to see
that their Surrogates, Chancellours, and Deputies should not any ways to
enrich their Friends, Officers, and Servants, and to feast themselves, oppress
the poor Clergy, and others the poor Servants and Officers of the Church of
Christ. I doubt not, but the Bishops and the Archbishops are all just, and
merciful, and tenderhearted toward all their inferior Clergy; and can no
ways be justly blamed for the faults of their subordinate Officers or
Deputies, which they are ignorant of; And I do profess without flattery, and in
the word of a Christian, that my Lords Grace of Dublin, in all that he did, or
said, was so noble, just, and gracious toward those honest Clergy men, whom
his Archdeacon so severely trounced, that the least shadow of the least blame
cannot be laid upon him. And I believe Archdeacon Bulkley would never have done
what he did, but to satisfy the mind and desire of a most unworthy person, and
malicious slanderer and false accuser of his Brethren, which can be neither
true wisdom, nor honest policy, to please men, and to offend Almighty God.

And now to conclude our sad condition, when, after all my many years
sufferings, and had spent above four hundred pounds to repair the Quire and
Chancel of S. Kenny, and about six hundred pounds in Law against Sir George
Ayskue for the right of the Church, and did perceive the success like to be
fruitless, I once thought to present this Petition to his Majesty.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of Gruffith, Lord
Bishop of Ossory.
THat whereas your Petitioner has seen how highly your Majesty has been
abused, and how slowly and scantly righted by one Jury, and how much both your
Majesty and your Petitioner have been wronged by another Jury, and how mightily
he is obstructed to gain your Majesty's gracious Grant, and the right of the
Church, where your Petitioner is but the Solicitor, and aymeth at no benefit,
not so much as one penny for himself.

Your Petitioner, that desires nothing, but that Justice (which establishes
the Thrones of Kings) may be done to God, to your Majesty, and to himself, he
humbly prays that the whole matter betwixt him and Sir George Ayskue may be
heard at the Council Table, or tried by an honest Jury here in Ingland.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
But, considering my years, full 78, and mine infirmities, and especially how
heavy the Seas are always to me, and perceiving the impossibilities of
prevailing contra stimulum calcitrare, when such greatness does so visibly
oppose me: I conceived, that, till God should otherwise dispose of things, Sat
mihi posse pati, and pray to God that he would arise and maintain his own
cause: Et dot mihi velle mori: and let them that detain the Right of the
Church, and them that maintain and uphold them in it, remain under the prayer
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 3^.8, 9, 10, 11. Psalm 84.10, 11, 12, etc.
and the Prophecy of David, and the judgment of God betwixt me and them.

Jamque opus exegi; and with the two-edged sword of truth I smote at the
impieties and corruptions both of the Clergy and Layty, of Church and
Commonwealth, and of the great men and rich men without fear. In me convertite
ferrum; and I doubt not but I shall attrict unto my self the malevolency,
detraction, and persecution from many men; but I have always armed my self
with the resolution to endeavor to do my duty, and discharge a good
conscience; and as Queen Hester said, so say I; if I perish, I perish, having
published my own funeral Sermon in the Sermons I made for others, and commiting
my self, as I have done ever:

Jehovae Liberatori.
In Impios Sacrilegos.
HEu mala progenies, fatis servata nefandis,
Gensque inimica deo: dominans voraxque sacrarum
Quid fuer as quid fisque vide: tua prima propago
Sancta fuit, sobolemque petet lues atra secundam,
Cum leo terribilis virgineis editus oris
Flammiferam ex orco pellagique plangentibus undis
Educens aciem, magnos urbesque virosque
Sternet, and antiquis solemn lunamque movebit
Sedibus: ille etiam patrio jure infima summo
Reddet, and oppressos in coelum mittet inermes.
A Prayer of the Author.
O Sweet Jesus Christ, as thou art God in Heaven, and have a care of thy Church
here on Earth, I beseech thee, suffer not thy Servants, that stand for thee, to
be cast down and trampled under feet, and those that have fought against their
King, to bring thine anointed Vicegerent to be murdered, to carry away the
Inheritance of thy Church, and the Lands that were dedicated for thy Service,
to be enjoyed for the Reward of that transcendent wickedness; lest thy Servants
should be too much dejected and disheartened to stand for thine honor, and
thine Enemies encouraged to proceed on in the like malicious wickedness: but
rather let them feel the power of Moses Prayer for Levi: and David's Prophecy
against them that will rob thee and thy Servants of their Houses and
Possessions: and be thou a just Judge betwixt us and them. Amen.

FINIS.

