VIRGINIA: More especially the South part thereof, Richly and truly valued: viz.

The fertile Carolana, and no less excellent Isle of Roanoak, of Latitude from
31. to 37. Degr. relating the means of raising infinite profits to the
Adventurers and Planters.

The second Edition, with Addition of THE DISCOVERY OF SILKWORMS, with their
benefit.

And Implanting of Mulberry Trees.

ALSO The Dressing of Vines, for the rich Trade of making Wines in VIRGINIA.

Together with The making of the Saw-mill, very useful in Virginia, for
cutting of Timber and Clapbord to build withal, and its Conversion to many as
profitable Uses.

By E. W. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for John Stephenson, at the Sign of the Sun below
Ludgate. 1650.

To the worthy Gentlemen, Adventurers and Planters in VIRGINIA.
My loving Friends:
I Thought it convenient here briefly to mind ^ou of those Necessaries, that
if wanted there, would greatly prove your prejudice, and render you obnoxiou^
to many evils, which are these.

Necessaries for Planters.
For Aparell: Provide each man 1. M^nm^uth Cap, 1. Wa^^^oat, 1. Suit of
Canvase, B^nds, Shirts, Shoes, Stockings, C^nvase to make sheets, with Bed and
Bolster to till in Virginia, 1. Rugge, and Blankets. For Arms: Provide 1. Suit
of complete light Armor, and each man 1. Sword, 1. Mu^ket or Fowling Piece,
with Powder and Shot convenient. For Household stuff: Provide one great Iron
Pot, large and small Kettles, Skellets, Frying pannes, Gridiron, Spit,
Platters, Dishes, Spo^ns, Knives, Sugar, Spice, Fruit, and Strong water at Sea
for sick men. For Tools: Provide H^wes br^^d and n^rrow, Axes broad and
narrow, Handsawes, two-hand-sawes, Whipsaws, Hammers, Shovels, Spades, Augors,
Piercers, Gimblets, Hatchets, Handbills, Frowes to cleave pale, Pickaxes, Nayls
of all sorts, 1. Grindstone, Nets, Hooks, Lines, Plowes: All which
accommodation wherewith each to be well furnished, together with hi^
Transportation, which is ordinarily 6l. a man, and 3l. a tun his goods, may
amount unto 20l. a man, charges.
Nor needs the careful Adventurer much doubt what Wares may prove his profit
there. For any Commodities of this Country are good Merchandise transported
thither. viz. Strong waters, Haberdashers wares, Ironmongers wares, Drapers
wares, Stationers wares, and many other wares which those ste^ill witted
Americans do easily admire. But your judgments are sufficient. And likewise I
have further discovered them in the ensuing Treatise of the Incomparable
VIRGINIA. So wishing you all prosperous happiness and happy prosperity here,
and i^ the world to come eternal bliss, I rest

Your faithful Servant, E. W.

To the Supreme Authority of ^his Nation, The Parliament of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable:
THis Dedication in it self unworthy the honor of an addr^sse to your
Grand^urs, and of a fo^^e too d^ad in sh^ddow ^o approach neer^ you^ m^st
vigo^ous luster, repos^s it self yet upon a confidence that in imitation of
that God of whom you are in power the proper Representatives who vo^chsafed
grac^ously to accept a poor pair of Turtles from those whose abilities could
not ascend to a more rich oblation, you will be pleased to cast a favorable
aspect upon this humble offering, as proceeding from a grateful clear and
sincere inten^ion^ whose desire being strongly passionate to present Your
Honors with s^mething more worthy the ^uspice of a beginning Year, is
circum^cribed by a narrowness of abilities and fortunes.

And indeed my lowness had prompted me to have found out a more humble Patron
for this Treatise; but since the Interest of that Nation you have so happily
restored to its just and native liberty is the principal aim intended in it,
since the public acknowledgement of the world unites in this common testimony,
That God has subscribed to all your Heroic and Christian undertakings with
his own broad se^l of Victory^ with his own field word, Go on and prosper: led
you through the red sea of blood into the Land of Canaan, into the Harvest and
Vintage of Israel, since Pharaoh and his mighty ones have been swallowed up in
the rapid current in the hideous cataracts of their ambitious opposition^ and
have by loud and convincing testimonies (t^stimonies attracting the admiration
of your friends, and confounding the malice of your enemies) made it a blessed
object of your consideration, that the preservation and fix^re requires a
bl^ssing no less sub^ime, and a virtue no less exalted, then the acquisition
and tenure of conquests, made good in the eyes of Christendom by vindicating
the English Honor upon the British Ocean with a ^uiss^n^ Navy, a formid^ble
subject of am^zment to the Foreign Enemies of your Sion, by a strong winged
prosecution of the Irish Assass^nates, a spacious lettred ex^mple to teach
English Mutineers what they may expect by the red sentence of justice upon
Irish Rebels: All endeavors holding forth the way to improve the interest of
this Nation, are improperly addressed to any other then your selves, who as you
have been the unexampled instruments of our unpini^nd liber^y, ought to be the
sole Judges of whatsoever may relate to our future felicity.

We should have suspected the sincerity of History in its delineation of the
Majesty which sat upon that August, and venerable Roman Senats, after having
made the Land tremble under the terror of their Armies, the sea to labor
under the burden of their numerous Navies, after having delivered all power
oppressing the universal liberty to the revenging beak of their victorious
Eagles and minted the Governments of the world by the Rom^n Standard; had not
the Concentricity of your undertakings had not the Homogeniousnesse of your
actions and felicity, vindicated and asserted the honor of a^tiquity, and
raised your rep^tations upon so high a wing of glory, that Posterity will be
lost in the same mist of jealousy and incredulity of your own augustnesse,
yet for ever want the revivall of such examples the restoration of such
presidents to confirm them.

And to the end you may in all things either parallel or tr^nscend that Roman
greatness, of which you are the inimitable exemplary, who enriched the heart
and strengthened the arms of their Dominions by dispersing Colonies in all
Angles of their Empire, Your pious care has already laid a most signal
foundation by inviting encouragements to undertakers of that nature: In the
pursuit whereof le^ me beg the liberty in this Paper, under your Honors
Patronage to publish the many pressing and convincing reasons which have and
may induce you to prosecute a design of such universal concernment.

1. It will disburthen this Nation of many indigent persons, who having
formerly perhaps enjoyed a fuln^sse of abused or forfeyted plenty, and at the
present reduced to an in^quality of such subsistence, are commonly prompted to
their own^ and other men's ruin by making the high ways (which should be as
public and inviolable a sanctuary as the most sacred places) an ambuscado to
innocent Travelers, by which interruption of passages, there is commonly
occasioned a decay and disincouragement of commerce, and daily examples inform
us, that Prisons at present are almost as full of criminal as indebted
persons. 2. It will take off all Parish charges, in providing for destitute
Minors and Orphans, whereof there are at present a burthensom^ mul^itude,
whereby the Parishes so freed, may with greater alacrity and ability, part with
contributory moneys to maintain^, recruite, and encourage your Armies and
Navies. 3. Those Orphans so provided for may by Gods blessings upon their
labors become happy and wealthy instruments, advantageous to the place of
their nativity in particular, and their whole Nation in general. Whereas the
condition of their birth and the usual way of exposing them, makes them
capable of no more gainful calling then that of day-labourers, or which is
more frequent hereditary beggars. 4. The Republic in its present constitution
abounding with so dangerous a number of male contents, who commonly like Shrubs
under high and spreading ^edars, imagine the spacious height of others to be
the cause of their own lowness, may by this means be honorably secured, and
such men removing their discontents with their persons, will have a brave and
ample theater to make their merits and abilities emergent, and a large field to
sow and reap the fruit of all their honest industrious and public intentions.
5. It will to admiration increase the number of Ships and Seamen, (the brazen
wall of this Nation) all materials to advance Navigation, being abundantly to
be furnished out of those Countries, and the more ingenious Passengers by
conference and disputation with the knowing Mariner, will take a great delight,
satisfaction, and ambition, to attain to the Theory of that knowledge, while
the less capable being accustomed and assigned to an usual part in the toil
thereof, and instructed by the ordinary S^aman, will be brought to a good
readiness therein and speedy perfection. 6. All Materials for shipping, as
Timber, Cordage, Sails, Iron, Brass, Ordnance of both metals, and what ever
else we are necessitated ^o supply our wants with out of the E^sterne
Countries, who make it not unusual to take advantages of their neighbors
necessity, and often times upon a pre^ence of differen^e or misintelligence
betwixt us, embrace an occ^sion to over-rate or over-custome their commodities,
or (a real quarrel widening) sell it to other Nations from whence we are
forced to supply our selves at a second or third Market. 7. It will give us the
liberty of storing a great part of Europe with a larger plenty of incomparably
better fish, th^n the Holander has found means to furnish it withal, and
will make us in no long tract of time, if industriously prosecu^ed, equal, if
not transcend him in that his most benificiall staple. 8. It will be to this
Common wealth a standing and plentiful Magazine of Wheat, Rice, Coleseed,
Rapeseed, Flax, Cotton, Salt, Potashes, Sope-ashes, Sugars, Wines, Silk,
Olives, and what ever single is the staple of other Nations, shall be found in
this jointly collected. 9. It will furnish us with rich Furrs, Buffs, Hides,
Tallow, Biefe, Po^k, etc. the growth and increase of Cattle in this Nation,
receiving a grand interuption and stop, by killing commonly very hopeful young
breed to furnish our markets, or store our shipping, merely occasioned by want
of ground to feed them, whereas those Provinces afford such a large proportion
of rich ground, that neither the increase of this or the succeeding age can in
any reasonable probability overfeed the Mo^ety. 10. By it many of your Honors
Reformadoes and disbanded soldiers being dismissed with the payment of such part
of their arrears as your own judgment (guided by the rule of your immense
disbursements) shall think a convenient recompense, by transporting themselves
thither may change their desperate fortunes into a happy ^ertainty of
condition, and a contented livelihood, which will be a means not only to
disburden this Republic as before) but to remove all those clamors usualy
disturbing your public consultations, and to win upon them by your bounty to
invert all those fearful imprecations, with which they would (as much as in
them lies) unblesse your proceedings, into a joyful and ferve^t concurrence of
prayers to the Almighty to shoure down blessings upon your heads, who, next
under him, are the glorious and visible instruments of their increasing
happiness. 11. It will be a generous and moving encouragement to all
industrious and public spirits, to employ those parts with which God and
nature has blessed them in the discovery of such happy inventions as may drive
on hopeful designs with a lesser number of hands then is usually assigned to
them, which issues of the brain are legitimate and geniall to beginning
Plantations, where the greatest want is that of people: but for our own or
other popular Kingdoms where we are commonly overprest with a greater multitude
of l^bourers then imploy^rs, by much l^sse acceptable, since our indigent
people look upon such Engines merely as Monoppolies to engrosse their livelihood
12. It will add a very considerable increase to the Revenue of your Honors
own Customs, and I shall assume the liberty in all humility to offer up to your
more advised deliberation by way of supplement to your incomes, whether such
mal^factors a^ the letter of the law dooms to death, yet leaves a latitude for
extent of mercy in the bosom of the Judges, whose release oftentimes proves
not only ruinous to them so discharged, since not seldom they return to their
vomit, but pernicious to the Commonwealth reinvaded by their insolences and
disorders, might not be made instrumentally serviceable to the State, if (as it
is frequent in other Countries, where they are condemned to the Galli^s) by way
of reparation for their crime, they were sentenced to serve a quantity of years
according to the nature of their offenses, which expired, they should enjoy all
immunities with others, and by this course be reduced and accustomed to a
regular course of life. Of these a thousand transported and employed by an
understanding improver, would by their labor advance an income of forty
thousand pounds sterling per annum, at the leaft, and so proportionably
according to their number.
That all these, and many inestim^ble benefits may have their rise, in^rease,
and perfection from the South parts of Virginia, a Country unquestionably our
own, devolved to us by a just title, and discovered by John Cabot at the
English exp^nces^ who found out and took seizure, together with the voluntary
submission of the Natives to the English obedience of all that Continent from
Cape Florida Northward, the excellen^ temper of the air, the large proportion
of ground, the incredible richness of soil, the admirable abundance of
Mineraels, vegetables, medicinal drugs, timber, situation, no less proper
for all European commodities, then all those Staples which entitle China,
Persia, and other the more op^le^t Provinces of the East to their wealth,
reputation, and greatness (besides the most Christian of all improvements, the
converting many thousands of the Natives) is agreed upon by all who have ever
viewed the Country: To which the judgment of the most incomparable Ralegh may
be a convincing assertion, whose preferring of that Country before either the
North of Virginia or New England, though it may sufficiently command my
submission and acquiescence; yet for more particular satisfaction be pleased to
accept these reasons for such prae^ation.

1. The apparent danger all the Colonies may be in if this be not possessed by
the English, to prevent the Spaniard, who already has seated himself on the
North of Florida, and on the back of Virginia in 34, where he is already
possessed of rich silver Mines, and will no doubt vomit his fury and malice
upon the neighbor Plantations, if a prehabitation anticipate not his
intentions, which backed with your authority, he understands too much of your
power, and is too sadly acquainted with your admirable successes and generous
resolutions, not to sit down by any affronts offered to those under the wings
of your protection, to attempt any thing against such who are immediately your
own Colony, lest thereby he administers matter of a fire, to which his own
fortunes in the Indies must be a fuel, and himself raked up in its ashes. 2.
But the South of Virginia having a contiguous Ledge of at the least one hundred
Islands, and in the midst of those the incomparable Roanoak, the most of them
at the same distance from the Continent that the ^le of Wight is from
Hamp^hire, all of hazardous acce^se to Forrainers, and affording a secure
convenience from surprizall by the Natives, will if possessed and protected by
your power, be as an inoffensive Nursery to receive an infant Colony, till by
an occasion of strength and number, we may pour our selves from thence upon
the Mayneland, as our Ancestors the Saxons from the Isle of Tanet into
Britain. 3. It dispences a moderate equality of heat and cold between the two
violent extremes thereof in Barbad^^s and New England.

It will admit of all things producible in any other part of the World, lying
in the same Parallel with China, Persia, Japan, Cochinchina, Candia, Cyprus,
Sicily, the Southern parts of Greece, Spain, Italy, and the opposite Regions of
Africa.

4. It has besides all Timber for shipping, the best and reddest Cedars, and
Cypress trees that may be found in any Country. 5. And lastly, the planting
of this Collony will open a most compendious passage to the discovery of those
more opulent Kingdoms of China, Cochinchina, Cathaya, Japan, the Phillipines,
Summatra, and all those beauteous and opulent Provinces of the East Indies,
which beyond dispute lie open to those Seas which wash the South-West parts of
Virginia, through whose bosom all those most precious commodities which enable
the Chinesie, Cathayan, Persian, and Indostant Empires, may more conveniently,
speedily, with more security and less expenses be transported thence from
Spawhawn^ or other remoter Provinces to Gombroon, by a long dangerous and
expensive ^aravane, and from thence to Su^at, where when arrived the doubling
of the Line, Calentures, Scurvies, with a long train of diseases and Famine
attend its transportation into our own Country. 6. Whereas by expandeing our
selves to both sides and Seas of Virginia, our commerce to those noble Nations
lies open in short and pleasant voyages to the encouragement, enriching and
delight of the Seamen, and personal adventurers, who will share in the
delicacies and profits of those Kingdoms, without participating in the miseries
attending our present voyages thither. The Cargason being easily conveyed, by
much the greater part of the way, through Navigable Rivers, and from the
Eastern shore of Virginia in a month, or at the largest six weeks time into
England.
And by this means the Hollander, Spanyard, and Portugal, who (by the supine
negligence of this Nation, and its Merchant Adventurers) do with insufferable
insolence Lord over us in both the Indies, when they shall to the unknitting of
their joints perceive by your nursing care over the Infancy of your Colonies,
that they are arrived under your auspice, to cover both the Seas with numerous
Navies, and your Honors eye of indulgence and providence waking to their
security, will be content laying aside all other passions to wave future
affronts and injuries, or fall a deserved sacrifice to your offended justice.

And that this address may appear the more seasonable, I have (without any
privity or relation to his person) taken leave to intimate to your Honors,
that there is a Gentleman whom the public reputation and testimony of those
who have the happiness to know him render of excellent abilities, integrity, and
a never shaken affection to your cause in all its crisis and dangers through
which God with a clew of success has been your conduct) who has already
undertaken for the transportation of some men thither, and only waits for your
Honors approbation and authority, the world taking notice, hopes and
encouragement from thence, that as this Colony is like to be the eldest of your
legitimate daughters ^n that nature, so by your indulgence she shall have the
happiness not to be the youngest in your affection.

May that God who has begirt your house with a Grove of Laurel, continue the
advance of those Victories till the whole Nation be crowned with Olives: May no
sin, no ingratitude of ours divert his protecting hand from us, his ass^stant
arm from you: May the generations to come in admiration of your virtue and
gratitude for their by you^ derived happiness, make every heart your monument,
wherein to embalme your memory whilst the Histories of all Nations and times
enrich their ^nnals with your names as the most serious and triumphant part of
all examples and transactions. And lastly may your own thankfulness to him from
whom these dispensations of mercy have distilled like the dew of Hermon upon
your heads and borders, so continue in your bosoms, that when you shall be ripe
for translation, he whose instruments you are, may welcome you with the
approbation of, Well done good and faithful servant, Which are the undisguised
wishes of

Your Honors most humble, obedient, and faithful Servant. Ed. Williams.



Virginia in General, but particularly CAROLANA, which comprehends Roanoak,
and the Southern parts of Virginia richly valued.
THE situation and Climate of Virginia is the Subject of every Map, to which I
shall refer the curiosity of those who desire more particular information.

Yet to show that Nature regards this Ornament of the new world with a more
indulgent eye then she has cast upon many other Countries, whatever China,
Persia, Iapan, Cyprus, Canay, Sicily, Greece, the South of Italy, Spain, and
the opposite parts of Africa, to all which she is parallel, may boast of, will
be produced in this happy Country. The same bounty of Summer, the same mild
remission of Winter, with a more virgin and unexhausted soil being material
arguments to show that modesty and truth receive no diminution by the
comparison.

Nor is the present wildness of it without a particular beauty, being all over
a natural Grove of Oakes^ Pines, Cedars, Cipresse, Mulberry, Chestnut,
Laurel, Sassafras, Cherry, Plum-trees, and Vines, all of so delectable an
aspect, that the melanchollyest eye in the Wo^ld cannot look upon it without
contentment, nor content himsefe without admiration. No shrubs or underwoods
choke up your passage, and in its season your foot can hardly direct it self
where it will not be died in the blood of large and delicious Strawberries: The
Rivers which every way glide in deep and Navigable Channels, betwixt the
breasts of this uberous Country, and contribute to its co^^eniency be^uty and
fertility, labor with the multitude of their fishy inhabitants in greater
variety of species, and of a more incomparable delicacy in taste and sweetness
then whatever the European Sea can boast of: Sturgeon of ten feet, Drums of
six in length, Conger, Eeles, Trout, Salmon, Bret, Mullet, Cod, Herings,
Perch, Lampreyes, and what ever else can be desired to the satisfaction of the
most voluptuous wishes.

Nor is the Land any less provided of native Flesh, Elkes bigger then Oxen,
whose hide is admirable Buffe, flesh excellent, and may be made, if kept
domesticke, as useful for draught and carriage, as Oxen Dear in a numerous
abundance^ and delicate Venison, Racoones^ Hares, Conyes, Bevers, Squirrell,
Bears, all of a delightful nourishment for food^ and their Furs rich,
warm, and convenient for clothing and Merchandise.

That no part of this happy Country may be ungrateful to the Industrious, The
air it self is often clouded with flights of Pigeons, Partridges, Blackbirds^
Thrushes, Dottrels, Cranes, Hernes, Swans, Geese, Brants, Duckes, Widgeons,
Oxeyes, infinites of wild Turkeyes, which have been known to weigh fifty
pound weight, ordinarily forty.

And the native Corn of the Country Maiz, is so grateful to the Planter, that
it returns him his entrusted seed with the increase of 2 or 3 hundred
interest, so facilely planted, that one man in 48 hours may prepare as much
ground, and set such a quantity of Corn, that he may be secure from want of
Bread all the year following, though he should have never so large an appetite
to consume it, and have nothing else to live upon. Nor is it above three, or at
the most four months intervall betwixt the time of planting and gathering:
Planted in March, April, or May, it is ready for the Barn in June, July, and
August; and of this by a provident management, you may have yearly three or
four Harvests. The stalk bruised yields a juice as big as Rice, pleasant as
Sugar, and the green Ears boiled in such juice is comparable in agreeableness
to the palats to what ever our Pease, Sparagus, or Hartichoke, has either for
satisfaction or delicacy. Nor is the Corn difficult in preservation, for in
six or seven years there is scarce any sensibility of its corruption.

But lest our palats should have so much of curiosity as to dislike what ever
is not native to our own Country, and wheat is justly esteemed more proper
this happy soil, though at the first too rich to receive it, after it has
contributed to your wealth by diminution of its own richness, in three or
four crops of Rice, Flax, Indian Corn, Coleseed, or Rapeseed, will receive
the English wheat with a grateful retribution of thirty for one increase,
every Acre sowed with wheat will produce six, seven, or eight Quarter of the
grain entrusted. And though Mr. Bullock be pleased to under-ra^e at it half
the crown the bushel, which in the Canaries will yield ten and twelve
shillings, and in Spain eight, yet even in that proportion you are recompensed
with six, seven, or eight pound the Acre, of which two men by a discreet
division of their time, will plow, reap, and in at the least 60 Acres.

Which though it may appear a matter of admiration, yet I shall easily make it
apparent by the following Narration, in which such is the exactness of the
Air in this Country, that you may have five successive Harvests of the same
grain in different seasons. For though a man and a boy with much ease may plow
an Acre every day, the ground being pliable of a rich black and tender mold,
and no frost^ or snowes, no usual droughts or raines to hinder the going of
the plow, yet I shall allow a month for the plowing of twelve Acres, and thus
plowing in September, October, November, December^ and January, you may have
your several Harvests in June, July, August, and S^ptember, which may easily
be inned by the same hands the labor not falling in a glut upon them, but the
Corn ripening according to its several seasons.

And thus by two men's labors only you have a grateful return of at the
least three hundred and sixty Quarters of Wheat, which will at that under rate
formerly mentioned, viz. 2s^ 6d. yield so many pounds sterling: Nor is there
such difficulty in the threshing, as may be at first sigh^t suspected, since it
may easily be tread out with Oxen, as it is usual in Italy and other Countries.

The first Wheat being reaped, if you desire a croppe of Barley, the same L^nd
plowed in July, will return its ripe increase in September, so that from one
and the same piece of ground you may have the benefit of two different Harv^sts.

But the Rice (for production of which this Country is no less proper then
those Lands which have the greatest reputation of fertility) sowed, yields a
greater increase with ^he same labor 40 Acres of this plowed if valued but at
7s. 6d. the Bushell^ will yield 600l. all done by two men and a Teame of Oxen,
w^o may by other labou^ in the intervall betwixt the committing the seed to
ground, and its ripening, fall upon ^ole^seed or Rape seed, infinitely rich
Commodities with the same facility.

The objection, that the Country is overgrowne with Woods, and consequently
not in many Years to be penetrable for the Plough, carries a great
feebleness with it. For there are an immense quantity of Indian fields cleared
already to our hand by the Natives, which till we grow over populous may every
way be abundantly sufficient, but that the very clearing of ground carries an
extraordinary benefit with it, I will make apparent by these following Reasons.

1. If we consider the benefit of Potashes grown from ten to fifty pound the
Tun, within these twenty years, and in all probability likely to increase by
reason of interdicting Trade betwixt us and the Muscovite, from whence we used
to supply our selves; We shall find the employment of that very Staple will
raise a considerable sum of Money, and no man so employed can (if
industrious) make his labor less then one hundred pound, per annum: For if
we consider that those who labor about this in England give twelve pence the
bushel for Ashes, if we consider to how many several parts of the Country
they are compelled to send man and horse before they can procure any qu^ntity
to fall to work upon; if we consider some of the thriftiest, and wise, and
understanding men, fell Wood on purpose for this Commodity, and yet
notwithstanding this Brigade of difficulties find their Adventures and Labors
answered with a large return of profit, we who have all these things, already
at our own door without cost, may with a confidence grounded upon reason^
expect an advantage much greater, and a clearer profit.

Nor can we admit in discretion, that a large quantity of those should not
find a speedy Market, since ^he decay of Timber is a de^ect grown universal
in Europe, and the Commodity such a necessary Staple, that no civil Nation can
be conveniently without it.

Nor are Pipe^taves and Clapboard a despicable commodity, of which one man may
with ease make fifteen thousand yearly, which in the country it self are
sold for 4l. in the Canaries for twenty pound the thousand, and by this means
the labor of one man will yield him 60l. per annum, at the lowest Market. If
all this be not sufficient to remove the encumbrance of Woods, the Saw mill may
be taken into consideration, which is in every respect highly beneficial by
this Timber for building houses, and shipping may be more speedily prepared,
and in greater quantity by the labor of two or three men, then by a hundred
hands after the usual manner of sawing.

The Plankes of Walnut-trees for Tables or Cubbords, Cedar and Cypress, for
Chests, Cabinets, and the adorning magnificent buildings, thus prepared will be
easily transported into England, and sold at a very considerable value.

But that in which there will be an extraordinary use of our Woods is the Iron
mills, which if once erected will be an undecaying Staple, and of this forty
servants will by their labor raise to the Adventurer four thousand pound
yearly: Which may easily be apprehended if we consider the deerenesse of Wood
in England, where notwithstanding this great clog of difficulty, the Master of
the Mill gains so much yearly, that he cannot but reckon himself a provident
Saver.

Neither does Virginia yield to any other Province whatsoever in excellency and
plenty of this Oar: And I cannot promise to my self any other then
extraordinary success and gain, if this noble and useful Staple be but
vigourously followed.

And indeed it had long ere this grown to a full perfection, if the treachery
of the ^ndians had not crushed it in the beginning, and the backwardness of
the Virginia Merchants to reerect i^, hindered that Country from the benefit
arising from that universal Staple.

But to show something further, what use may be made of Woods besides the
forementioned Wallnut Oil, at the least a fourth part of the Trees in Virginia
being of that species, is an excellent Staple, and very gainefull to the
industrious Labourer.

Nor is it a contemptible profit that may be made of Woods, if by boaring holes
in diverse trees, of whose virtues we are yet ignorant, and collecting the juce
thereof, a scrutiny be made which are fit for Medicinal Liquor and Balsomes;
which ^or Gummes, Perfumes, and Dies, and here I may justly take occasion to
complain of our own sloth and indulgence, if compared to the laborious
Spanyard, who by this very practice have found out many excellent Druggs,
Paints, and Colors, merely by bruizing and grinding Woods, probably
convenient for such experiments: which if boiled, and a white piece of cloth
steeped in the boiling liquor, will by its tincture discover what color it is
capable to give, and i^ many should fail in the trial, yet does it not fall
under the probab^lity, but that diverse noble an^ useful mysteries of Nature
may be discovered by some such perforations scrutinies. Nor are the many
Berries commonly of an excellent color and luster unfit for such experiments;
since the labor is little or nothing, and the issue if succesfull of
remarkable advantage. And this the Spanyard has experimented to the increase
of gain and reputation; and above this is so signally curious and industrious,
that he has discovered many rare and delightful colors, not only by the
means before mentioned, but by bruizing and boiling diverse Fish-shells, the
brightness and variety of colors giving him a just reason to pursue such
curious examens.

The French relations of their Voyages to Canada, tell us, that the Indians and
themselves falling into a contagious disease, of which Physicians could give no
Reason or Remedy, they were all in a short space restored to their health
merely by drinking water, in which Saxifrage was infused and boyld, which was
then discovered to them by the Natives, and we justly entertain belief that
many excellent Medicines either for conservation of Nature in her vigor or
restoration in her decadence may be communicated unto us, if projection of
this stamp be so much encouraged by hopes of reward or honor, as to be put in
practice.

By this Improvement of Woods, the Ground coming to be cleared, we have a
soil fit to produce what ever is excellent in Nature, the Vine and Olive which
Naturally simpathize together, will thrive beyond belief, nor need it be any
interruption to Tillage, since the Vintage and Harvest always fall but in
different Reasons.

That wild Vines run naturally over Virginia, ocular experience d^clares who
delighting in the Neighborhood of their beloloved Mulberry-trees inseparable
associates over all that Country, and of which in this their wildness Wines
have been made, of these Wines if transplanted and cultivated, there can be
made no doubt but a Rich and Generous Wine would be prod^ced: But if we set
the Greek Cyprian Candian or Calabrian Grape, those Countries lying parallel
with this, there need not be made the smallest question^ but it would be a
Staple which would enrich this Country to the envy of France and Spain, and
furnish the Northern parts of Europe, and China it self where they plant it
not, (of which more hereafter) with the Noblest Wine in the World, and at no
excessive prices.

And from this Staple it is not unworthy of our most serious consideration, what
an occasion of wealth would flow upon this Nation: Virginia when well peopled
being able to match Spain in that his Sovereign Revenue, and the State by
addition to their Customs for exportation thereof according to the mode of
France and Spain, would in no short time be sensible of this most inestimable
benefit: To which if we join the Profits of our Olives, we may (Gods
favorable hand blessing our industry) be the happiest Nation in Europe.

Nor need we be at that charge for Caske under which Spain labors, where
ever we cast our eyes upon this Fortunate Country we may find Timber proper
for it.

For the advance of which noble Staple, I should propose that the Greek, and
other Rich Vines, being procured from the Countries to which they are geniall,
every Planter in that Country might be enjoined to keep a constant Nursery,
to the end when the ground is cleared, that they may be fit for removal, and
the Vineyard speedily planted.

Further that some Greek, and other Vignerous might be hired out of those
Countries to instruct us in the labor, and lest their envy, pride, or
jealousy of being laid aside when their mystery is discovered, may make them
too reserved in communicating their knowledge, they may be assured, besides the
continuance of their Pension of a share in the profits of every man's Vintage,
which will the more easily persuade them to be liberal and faithful in their
instructions, since the public advance of this design cannot miscarry without
a sensible loss to their particular interest.

That before their going over a general consultation may be had whith them
what ground is proper, what season fit, what prevention of casualties by
bleeding or splitting, what way to preserve or restore Wine when vesseld, which
species of Wine is fittest for transportation over, or retention in the
Countrey^ which for duration, which for present spending: It being in
experience manifest that some Wines refine themselves by purge upon the Sea,
others by the same means suffer an evaporation of their Spirits, join to this
that some Wines collect strength and richness, others contract feebleness and
sowernesse by seniority.

These consultations drawn to a head by some able person, and published to be
sent over in several Copies to Virginia, by the inspection of which people
might arrive at such competent knowledge in the Mystery, that the reservation
or jealousies of those Vignerons, could not but be presently perceived and
prevented.

But from hence no occasion should be derived to break or fall short of any
contract made with those Vignerons, who are to be exactly dealt with in
performance of Articles, every way made good unto them, with all just respects
to win upon them, and the nonperformance of this has been the original cause
why Virginia at this day does not abound with that excellent commodity. Those
contracted with as hired servants for that employment, by what miscariage I
know not, having promise broken with them, and compelled to labor in the
quality of Slaves, could not but express their resentment of it, and had a
good color of justice to conceal their knowledge, in recompense of the hard
measure offered them, which occasioned the laying aside of that noble Staple,
the diligent prosecution whereof, had by this time brought Virginia to an
absolute perfection in it, and to a great degree of happiness and wealth which
would attend it.

And had this been as happily followed as it was prudently intended^ that
excellent Country had not hung down its desolate head in so languishing a
condition as the disrespect cast upon her, till of late years had reduced her
to. Nor had the poor Planter (who usually spends all the profits of his labor
in foreign Wines) been impoverished by the want of it: but with delight might
have shaded himself under his vine, reaped the benefit of it in Autumn, and
buried all the memory and sense of his past labors in a cheerful rejoicing by
his own harth with the issue of his own vineyard.

And from hence might Barbados, St. Christophers, and all our Islands in the
Indies, have richer, better, and by much cheaper, wines transported to them
from a place much nearer in distance then Spain or the Canaries) and which
doubles the benefit such intercourse together, would draw them to an
association in power as well as communication of Staples.

Were this brought to a just perfection no other Nation could upon a quarrel
betwixt Us, and Spain, and France, reap a benefit by selling us their Wine at
a third Market. And what we vend now for it (that being made Native to us)
might be returned in Bullion, to the app^rent enriching of the Commonwealth,
and the impoverishing of our Enemies, or at the least Friends deservedly
suspected.

All Authors of Agriculture unanimously consent that neither Arable Pasture,
Meadow, or any other Grounds are so benign genuine, or proper for planting
Vines in, as those cleared Lands are, wherein not Shrubs, but Tall Trees were
standing. And we must want a parallel in any part of the World to compare
with Virginia for tall and goodly Timber Trees cleared of all under Woods, to
which when cleared your Vines may be removed (the very removeall of them, as
indeed of all other, giving an addition to their perfection (the excellency of
transplantation being more particularly insisted upon hereafter.) But in the
clearing of these woods it will be a saving of labor, and a delight to the
Vine, besides other profits following to leave the Mulberry trees standing
there, being such a happy correspondence together such a mutual love ingra^ted
in them by Nature, that we well may conclude with this Axiome^ that the same
Nature joins all her excellencies together by an association of simpathies.

Nor does she wave that her happy order in Incomparable Virginia, where the
soil and climate that fits the one, is equally amiable to the other, their
loves and hates happily according, what the one shunnes, the other flies from,
what the one affects, challenges the others embraces, and were not this soil
and climate most geniall and proper Nature her self (whose productions are
never useless) would never have crowned the Virgin Brow of this unexampled
Country, with such a universal plenty of them, or with such a voluntary
League have united them every where together.

VIRGINIA compared to PERSIA.
BUT to illustrate this with another argument: Let us compare this
felicity-teeming Virginia, as it is situated from 31 degrees of Latitude to
40. with other Countries, seated in the same degrees which opens us a method of
observing what Commodities Nations so planted abound with, which found we
shall discover in this excellent Virgin a disposition ingrafted by Nature to be
Mother of all those excellencies, and to be equal (if not superior) as well in
all their noble Staples, as in nearenesse to their particular enricher the
perpetually au^picious Sun. And this to whom Virginia owes the publication
and portract of her incomparable beauty; Mr. Harriot the noble Mathematician
delivers us by a happy instance in finding out for her ^ noble Sister of the
same Latitude, the most glorious Persia, innobled as much by this comparison as
in her Empire. And those who have traveled and viewed Persia, unanimously
relate wonders of her admirable fertility in all sorts of Grain and Fruits,
with an unexpressible abundance of Silk and Wines: In which this her
rich-bosomed Sister claims an equality in her plen^y of Mulberries, Silk, and
Gums, Vines, Maiz, Rice, and all sorts of Grain: only as a fuller-dowryed
Sister she merits a priority in fertility, pleasure, health, and temperature, a
Virgin Country, ^o preserved by Nature out of a desire to show mankind fallen
into the Old age of the Creation, what a brow of fertility and beauty she was
adorned with when the World was vigorous and youthful, and she her self was
unwounded with the Plough-shares, and unweakened by her numerous future
teemings.

Another eyewitness of this Victorious Empire, delivers to memory that
Covazan in a Province of that Countrey^ is so incomparably fruitful, that
Dearths are never known, nor Famine ever suspected in it, that in one only
City called E^y, there is such an inestimable store of Silke^ that there might
be bought in one day in that City as much Silk as will lode three thousand
Camells. And he is little conversant with experience or History, who is
ignorant that the abundance of Silk Native to that Country and Climate, is
almost the sole Staple of that mighty Empire, by which never-to-be exhausted
Treasure of Silks the sinews and vitalls of the Persian Empire, the Sophy to
the general good of Christendom, keeps both the horns of the Ottoman Moon
from completing their ambitious Circle. And if the English East India Company
of Merchants were not wrong-byassed by the factions and sinister ambition of
some men in Authority amongst them, a great part of that wealthy Staple might
be transported into England, and by that means dispersed over all parts of
Europe to the enriching and honor of this Nation.

The digression upon this Parallel has diverted me from ampliation upon the
public benefit, which may devolve into this republic by the Olive, which
being genuine to the Vine, will by a happy consent of nature indisputably
flourish in a vast abundance, and by a transportation into the warmer Regions,
where the heat or scarcity of Cattle causes a like indigence of Butter, will
be a Staple of inestimable value, and of no smaller conducement to our own
shipping, into those provinces near the Equinox, or in those voyages where the
doubling of the Line either putrifies, or makes it of a taste little pleasing
or agreeable to the palate.

VIRGINIA compared to CHINA.
BUt to leave Persia and descend to a more wealthy and powerful parallel, the
richest and mightiest Empire in the World lies in the same latitude and climate
with our fortunate Virginia; namely China, divided from it only by the
Southsea, and (which will be a part of another discourse) not of any long
distance from it, agreeing with it in multitude of Staples. China is stored
with an infinite number of Mulberry trees to feed Silkewormes with, and vends
silk in such a vast proportion, that in one only City Lempo, which some call
Liempo, the Portugeses, have with no small admiration, observed that one
hundred and sixty thousand pound weight of silk has been carried out in one
Ship in the only space of three Months.

Into Cambula the chief City of Tartary (as Authors of great repute and
credit, and one who was personally there, reports) there comes ^very day from
China, a thousand wagons laden with silk. Nor is China less happy in its
multitude of navigable Rivers, in its wonderful fertility of all sorts of
grain, Maiz, Rice, etc. of which it receives every year three or four most
plentiful Harvests. Rivers stored with an incredible quantity of Fish and
Foul, enriched and ennobled with numerous Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron,
and other Mettalls, Quicksilver, Nitre, Alum, Precious stones, Pearls, Musk,
Cotton, Sugars, Rubarb, China Root, vast proportions of Flax, Furs
extraordinary rich. To this happiness of soil and situation, they associate
an equal felicity of parts and industry, by which they pretermit not one span
of ground which they assign not to particular and profitable uses, and by an
ingenious division of the ground according to the quality of the soil, design
the drier part for wheat and barley, That which is more visited with an
improving moisture, to Rice and Sugar; As^ents and Mountains to groves of
P^nes and Chestnuts, between which are planted Maiz Panicle, and all kind of
Pulse. In other proper places are Mulberry Groves, Gardens, Orchards, Flax, and
in a word no spot of ground misimployed from its proper advantage.

And that Virginia is parallel in neerenesse of Staples, as well as
neighborhood to the sun, to that celebrated Empire, what multitudes of Fi^h
to satisfy the most voluptuous of wishes, can China glory in which Virginia
may not in justice boast of? What Fowls can she make oftentation of, in which
Virginia can be esteemed inferior? Can China, insolent with her prosperity,
solely lay clay^e to a more singular honor for her affluence in Maiz and other
grain, for the maintenance and luxury of her plenty-wanton Inhabitants, without
an open injury to her equal, to her Maiden sister, to our incomparable
Virginia? Are her Mulberries springing from a voluntary bounty of Nature less
numerous or useful then those to which China has added all the assistance
which could be expected from advantages of tra^splantation, or an industrious
people? If China will descend to particulars, to compare Quantity and Quality
of Fish and Foul, Let her show us Turkies of 50 pound weight, Let her instance
an example of one hundred and fifty Foul, to reward the labor of three
charges of shot and powder, Let he^ publish a president so worthy of admiration
(and which will not admit belief in those bosoms where the eye cannot be
witness of the action^ of five thousand fish taken at one draught near Cape
Charls^ at the entry into Chesapeak Bay, and which swells the wonder greater,
not one fish under the measure of two feet in length. What Fleets come yearly
upon the coasts of New found Land, and New England for Fish, with an incredible
re^^rne? Yet it is a most assured truth, that if they would make experiment upon
the South of Cape Cod, and from thence to the coast of this happy Country,
they would find Fish of a greater delicacy, and as full handed plenty, which
though Foraigners know not, yet if our own Planters would make use of it,
would yield them a Revenue which cannot admit of any diminution, whilst there
are Ebbes and Floods, Rivers feed and receive the Ocean, or Nature fayles in
(the Elementall Original of all things) Waters.

There wants nothing but industrious spirits and encouragement, to make a rich
Staple of this commodity; and would the Virginians but make Salt pits, in which
they have a greater convenience of Tides (that part of the Universe by reason
of a full influence of the Moon upon the almost limitlesse Atlantic causing
the most spacious Fluxes and Refluxes, that any shore of the other divisions in
the World is sensible of) to leave their pits full of Saltwater, and more
friendly and warm Sunbeames to concoct it into Salt, then Rochel, or any parts
of Europe. Yet notwithstanding these advantages which prefer Virginia before
Rochel, the French King rayses a large proportion of his Revenues out of that
Staple yearly, with which he supplies a great part of Christendom.

And if from this Staple the miserable French can procure a subsistence, some
of them a comfortable livelihood, notwithstanding all the private oppressions
of their grinding Landlords, the Public Tallies, Subsidies, Aides, Imposts,
and other hard Titles of a^thorized Rapine. What shall we imagine the
freeborne English in a Country where he owes no Rent to any but to God and
Nature, where he has Land to satisfy his desires in its extent, his wishes in
its fertility, where free quarter is a word only un^erstood by Report, may
expect of profit and content both in this Staple of Salt, in that of Wines made
in those Countries, where either the Spanish insolence and exactions, the
French extortions, or the Turkish Imperial Robberi^s, though in the highest
degrees of exorbitance, are not of force so to disincourage the Inhabitants
from attendance upon the Vineyard, which notwithstanding all those
Horse-leaches of Imposition, returns them such a profit a^ make them keep a
middle path between the ascent of Riches, and precipice of Poverty.

Nor would it be such a long intervall (Salt being first made) betwixt the
undertaking of this Fishing, and the bringing it to perfection; for if every
servant were enjoined to practice Rowing, to be taught to handle Sails, and
trim a Vessel, a work easily practiced, and suddenly learned, the
pleasantness of Weather in fishing season, the delicacy of the Fish, of which
they usually feed themselves with the best, the encouragement of some share in
the profit, and their understanding what their own benefit may be when their
freedom gives them an equallity, will make them willing and able Fishermen
and Seamen.

To add further to this, if we consider the abundance, largeness, and
peculiar excellency o^ the S^urgeon in that Country, it will not fall into the
least of scruples, but that one species will be of an invaluable profit to the
buyer, or if we repeat to our thoughts the singular plenty of Herrings and
Mackarell, in goodness and greatness much exceeding what ever of that kind
these our Seas produce, a very ordinary unders^anding may at the first
inspection perceive that it will be no great difficulty to out-labour and
out-vye the Hollander in that his almost only Staple: Which we may also sell
at a cheaper Market then in common estimation^ if we revolve the Salt to be
our own, which they buy from France, or fetch from the Isle of May, and that
the very freight of Passengers (of which allured by this improvement, and the
public approbation, there will be constant multitudes) in our own Sh^ppes
will at the least defray 3^ fourths of the charges.

I should not unwillingly hear (though I despair ever to know it for a
certainety) that China did exceed us in fishing; for were it granted, we
should not imagine those watery Inhabitants so circumscribed and limited to one
part of the Ocean especially the same Climate and Latitude, inviting them as
not to visit our opposite shore of Southwest Virginia in as great variety and
plenty.

And to the more curious and able Persons I shall offer what singular object it
were of variety and plenty, if they would take the advantage of some tides and
seasons, when the resort of fish is greatest to stop the Return of them out
of some Creek perpetually flowing with Salt by Sl^ces, or such other
invention: Here would those great ones generate and produce till even they
labored with their own Multitude, if permitted to increase two or three
years, who might with very small charge be maintained, and yearly render to
the proprietar an Ocean of Fish in a narrow confine of Water.

Nor were it unworthy the labor to make an experiment whether the S^urgion
himself might not receive a kind of Domestication in that narrow circumscript
on, especially if we let it descend into our thoughts, that (by small
perforations in the sluices he perpetually admits a Renovation and change of
salt Water) he may receive the some benefit of Liberty, namely variety of
Water, which he delights in when unconfined, and admitting the Original
Breeder not to thrive well by such imprisoning, yet Customs ascending as high
as Nature in the Breed, would make that Familiar to them, which peradventure
might have been offensive to the first Spawner, and should they delight (as in
some seasons of the year Fishes do vary their Resorts) at any time in fresh
water; A large Pond dug near having either Springs to feed it, or Raines
to fill it, might by communication of a Sluice receive both them and Salmon,
when they seek aft^r the Freshes.

And that Fishes may be unwilded, and become Domestic, History will
sufficiently inform us, wherein are delivered Reports of some who grown more
particularly intelligent, were distingu^sht by names, and understood themselves
so called: and Martial in one of his Epigrams to Caesar, (I mean Domi^ian)
tells the Prince speaking of Fishes so instructed, Quid quod nomen habe^t and
ad Magistri Nomen quisque sui venit cita^^s? And further, Ma^^mque lambit, a
thing, which though a Poet, and consequently bold, ev^n to untruths, yet he
durst never have obtruded upon Caesar, whom himself makes a party in the
experiment.

And to add something to what has formerly been delivered of Balsomes and
Colors, why from the Livers and most unctuous parts of those more delicate
Fishes, may not curiosity find a means to extract an Oil, which (if it be not
Medicinal, though I am inclined by several Reasons to belie^e the
affirmative) may notwithstanding artificially distilled after its first
extraction prove a delicacy for the Tables of Princes and Great Ones,
especially for Sauces, and other Confections which Luxury has found out for
the irritation of dull and retreating appetites. But I cannot believe it to be
deprived of its particular virtue in Physical operations, and the industrious
conclusions of our Ancestors have by such probations discovered many rich
Mysteries of Nature; whilst we either glutted with our own plenty of
Receipts, or out of a too fond a Reverence we pay to antiquity acquiesc^ in
their prescriptions, as in the ne plus ultra, the Hercules Pillars of Wisdom,
beyond which there were no passage, or else fear every innovation brings
inconveniences in his Train, which opinion if it had possessed those our
Ancestors, the World had continued in ignorance, and must for ever have layne
sick of an incurable folly in the Fools Hospitalls.

For what concerns the Flax of China, that we may not lose the smallest
circumstance of Parallel with Virginia, Nature her self has enriched this
her bosom Favorite with a voluntary plant^ which by art, industry, and
transplantation may be multiplied and improved to a degree of as plentiful,
but more excellent Nature: Which because of its accession to the quallity of
Silk, we entitle Silk Grass: Of this Queen Eliz^beth had a substantial
and rich piece of Grograine made and presented to Her. Of this Mr. Porey in his
discovery of the great River Chamonoak, to the South of James River delivers a
Relation of infinite Quantity, covering the Surface of a Vast Forest of
Pine-trees, being 60. miles in length.

It had been wished that the injun^tion given to every Planter to set so many
thousand Plants of this kind had been effectually prosecuted: The intermission
wher^of has been a prejudice not easily imaginable: Nor is it yet too late to
effect it, and in all probability by transplantation it may thrive beyond
comparison larger, and the skin of it grown more tender and delicate, may
arrive to some equali^y with the labou^ of the Silke-worme, if it be managed by
such Rules of Nature best suit with its production.

For Hemp there is a natural kind of Hemp, a sp^cies of Flagg in that
Country, from which being boiled you may strippe a long and fine skin, not
only proper for Cordage, but the finer sort singularly useful for Linen; of
this two hundred weight has been sent into E^gland, of which has been made
excellent Cordage, and very good Linen. This, by observation of the soil it
grows in, and transplanted into Grounds of like, but richer property, would
together with tht Silke-grasse make a Staple of admirable Return and Profit;
Provided every Planter had an injunction for this, as well as the former to sow
or set a convenient proportion, to which his own profit (quickened with the
imposition of a mulct in case of neglect) would easily invite him. And by this
means would Virginia not only furnish her own people, but supply other
Nations with Stuffes and Linen.

To the Brass of China, we shall oppose the Virginian Copper (or Gold, for
yet it is doubtful) for by a concurrent Relation of all the Indians, justified
to several English of Quality, particularly to the Earl of Southampton^ in
Mr. Poryes Narrative^ to Sir William B^rkely, all seconding Mr. Heriots Report,
that within ten days West toward the setting of the Sun, the Natives of that
Country gathered a kind of a Red Sand falling with a stream issuing from a
Mountain, which being washed in a sive, and set upon the fire speedily, melts
and becomes some Copper, which they show us, but as they say much softer. We
shall only suppose it to be Copper, contrary to the opinion of diverse knowing
men, who apprehend it for a Richer Metal; but melting with such ease two parts
in five turning to a Solid Metal, the other three parts being peradventure not
any thing of the Oar, but only such Rubbidge, as joined to the Oar in
rouling, and this falling merely from the superficies of the Mountain, yet a
Rich Copper; what eye enlightened with the smallest beam of Reason, will not
conclude it for an extraordintry accession of Wealth to this Country? and why
may not the intralls of this Mineral be Gold, since the skin and crust of it
is Copper? Nature her self oftentimes dealing after the mode of diverse great
men, delighting to lay an unregarded outside over her Richest Linings.

To proceed in continuation of our comparison with China, if it abound more in
visible Silver (of which with our abundance of Staples may quickly put us into
a ^ondition of entering into completion with) yet cannot Virginia in all
probability be destitute of that Metal: For besides diverse conjectures
grounded upon natural cir^umstances: Mr. Gage in his Relation of the Indies,
assures us that the Spaniards have found out a rich Silver Mine on the back
side of Florida Westward, in 34 degrees of Latitude, and the farther they
extend their search Northward, the more Rich and Pure the Mines discovered
improve themselves.

Nor shall we plead inferiority in Pearls with China or Persia, since Mr.
Heriot assure^ us of a large quantity of Pearls found amongst the Natives,
spoiled by their ignorance in boring of them, and defacing their oriental
luster, by exposing them to the fire. These were found amongst the Indians at
Roanoak, and the Relations of the Natives on all hands unanimously concur that
the South and West of this opulent Country was stored with such abundance and
variety, that the Indians used to make and adorn Babies with them: And one of
the English had collected a Bracelet of very oriental Pearl, to the number of
five thousand, which were all lost in the Return to England.

If China suppose a merit of precedence in Musk, Virginia may justly oppose
them with her Mu^k Rat, or Muscassus, which in all probability cannot but be
the same; for it is a tradition received into the Number of truhts, that the
Confection of their Musk in that Country is bruizing and burying a certain
Creature to pu^refaction, of which this Odor is effected, and it is very open
to conjecture that this Musk-R^t or Musc^ssus, whose flesh and skin are
extraordin^ry redolent and durant, and of which there is an infinite plenty, by
such order may be brought to the same perfection. Neither is it so improbable
that this Odor should proceed from putrefaction, which is naturally an
abhorrence to the Nosthrill: for if you apply too near to the substance of the
Musk, there is an occult subolency of such a putrefactive original. Neither
are all excretions of Nature in themselves offensive to the sense of smelling,
for the Flux of the Civet-Cat is accounted am^ngst our most sov^raigne
Per^umes: And this exp^rimented will be a Staple of noble use, and no less
benefit.

Nor shall we yield the Laurel of preeminence in Richness of Furs to
China, if the Furs of Beavers, Otters, Martines, and above all Black Foxes
(which are upon some part of this Continent) may pretend any title to
Richness: And yet have we been hitherto so supinely negligent to permit the
Dutch and the French to carry away most of this precious Commodity, to trade in
our Rivers, under-sell us, and which discovers either an ^mplacable malice or
insatiable avarice, trade with those Indians (of whom we have no reason to
nourish any great confidence) for Muskets and Powder.

To conclude, what ever else China may presume to boast of: Whether Nitre,
Alum, Quicksilver, Rhubarb, and China Root, of which some we have already
discovered: If we consider the parallel in Latitude, the equality of
temperate Climate, the parity in soil, and its fertility, the similitude in
brave Navigable Rivers, the unanimous congruity and consent in diverse known
Commodities, we shall have an ample basis to ground conjectu^es upon, that
what ever singularity of Nature that Nation may im^gine her self Victorious
over others^ will be found equal in this Garden of the World, this aemulous
Rival of China, Virginia: And the Chinese may with as great justice deny the
Europ^ans the benefit of both eyes, as boast that they precede in any thing
except Antiquity of habitation and a long experienced industry, this great
Luminary of the new World Virginia.

What ever other commodities, the Novelty of inhabiting this amorous Virgin
has made it appear defective in as Sugar, ^ndigo, Cotton, Ginger, and other
advantageous Staples, we shall appeal to all who have seen this unexampled
Country; (we mean Roanoak, and the more Southern parts, and those Countries
toward the fertile Mangoack) whether it be guilty of any contrariety,
distemper, or extremity which might hinder their production. The Sun, which
in other Countre^s makes his visit in Flames and Droughts, here casts his
auspicious Beams, and by an innocent and complementall warmth, courts the
bosom of this his particular favo^rite, hastening and disposing its womb for
ripe productions, which salute him in an absolute perfection. Winter Snowes,
Frosts, and other excesses, are here only remembered, never known. The purling
Springs and wanton Rivers every where kissing the happy soil into a perpetual
verdure, into an unwearied fertility: no obstructions in your expectations,
attempt and hope them, prosecute and enjoy them.

Nor have we in design to lay any imputation upon the Barbados, which already
abounds to admiration, with the Staples last mentioned, yet it will become
our charity to wish the Country as health^^ll, as it is fruitful; that it may
answer the expectation and merit of its most industrious and public spirited
Planters, who have given a brave example to all, by the effects of their
industry and unwearied constancy. From a thing almo^t lost to memory, (at the
least to reputation) they have raised the honor of that Island, to be a
subject of admiration for wealth and Staple, and that so little a circumference
of Ground should be able to vent the value of two hundred and fifty thousand
pound yearly, as some Merchants have maintained, not only adds to the weight
and measure of their just estimation, but increases the favorable wishes of
all ^overs of industry, that they had a larger proportion of ground to improve
upon.

And if an invincible sloth does not possess us in Virginia, (we mean the
South) why should not we raise an equal or greater profit upon as fertile and
convenient a soil? especially if we consider ^he populousness of the place,
has so raised the price of Land there, which we have here gratis, where number
of inhabitants do so little take from our abundance, that they add to our
wealth, security and plenty, and the sole means to increase and improve upon
Staples.

We have made it apparent that what ever China has of Staple or delicacy, is
produced or producible in this above-example Virgin. But to show that even
China her self must in some things give place to this more happy Maiden, T^rra
sigillata, or Lemnia, (as peculiar an income to the Grand Signiors Treasury, as
that of Salt is to the French Kings) and of which China can no way boast, is
native to this Country; Vines are either not natural, neglected, or not
understood by the Chineses^ but in this incomparable soil the Grape presents
it self every where to your delighted prospect. And what ^hadow can there be
of scruple that Wines well cultivated, and issuing from a rich Grape, will not
be as commodious a Staple to that voluptuous and gluttonous Nation, who wanton
away their wealth in banqnets, as the Wines of France and Spain are to the more
Northern and less abstenious Nations of Europe?

There ^eeds no objection be made against this Staple; for the Southwest part
of Virginia being once discovered, the Sea laid open and that passage complete
in all its numbers^ the pleasure of the commerce, the richness of returns,
and the extraordinary quickne^ of the profit, will invite so many to come over
and plant that commodious quarter of Virginia, that as we shall never labor
with too numerous a multitude of inhabitants, so we shall not have any great
occasion to complain of the paucity of Planters.

Nor is Tobacco in those Indian seas (especially cured as in Virginia, and of
that strength and excellency) a commodity of inconsiderable commerce,
particularly if we call to mind what gain there is by the exchange for
Indian commodities, so that any ordinary understanding may comprehend that
although Tobacco should yield but three pence the pound in India, yet by way of
barter with those Nations where the return quadruples the value in England,
the gaynes gotten by it might be very considerable.

But if we may believe Printed Relations (and the person delivering it so
clearly, is, in my opinion^ worthy of all credit) Tobacco from Surat to Moco
yield ten for one profit, returned in Eastridge feathers to England, you have
six to one profit; but this is for those Planters who are so infected with that
disease of the Country, that they cannot admit of any other Staple, though
more gainefull and less laborious. Yet is not Tobacco without its virtues: for
the Spaniard has found out, besides the use of it in smoke, (or the smoky use)
that the juice thereof (when green) applied to any wound cut, sore, and
without a^y distinction, whether green, festered, or cankered, will heal it
speedily, and almost miraculously; the leaf bruised or stamped, and applied to
any bite or sting of a venomous quality, to any wound made by a poyso^ed arrow,
the green leaf heated in hot ashes, and laid upon any part of the body
afflicted with aches, will work effects answerable to the most powerful
operations of Nature.

The Benefi^ and part of the Silke-worme mystery treated of.
BUT to show to the World that we may equal the best of the Western
Kingdoms in this noble mystery of Nature the Silke-worme: That France and
Italy are much below this Mignon of Glory and Profit, the universally
advantageous Virginia, we shall upon those in^allible demonstrations of
Nature, make evident, having the clew of truth, reason, and modesty to direct
us.

It will not be denied by any, whose forehead is not too brazen, that no
Country is so proper for adventitions as its own Native Commodities, the
seeds of things suffer a deterioration by changing the propriety of that soil
which was geniall to them, and the exact order of Nature suffers a diminution,
if we imagine any other Climate or Region more proper for the perfection of
any thing, then where it is originally produced.

Tellier aff^rmes that this mystery of the Silke-worme has not been
experimented in Europe above a thousand yeares^ being transmitted to our
Climate out of the Asiatick World, in so much that Italy has not been above
200 years enriched with this industrious Creature, France received it from
Italy, and it is observed, that the warmer the Region, by so much larger and
stronger increase and texture receive they from the labor of this admirable
and natural Weaver. France being of a colder temper then Italy, their Wo^mes
are weaker, in the more Northern part of that Kingdom from one ounce of seed
they profit five or six pound of Silk increase, worth at the least ^os. per
pound, in Languedock, and the warmer Provinces the same quantity is increased
to 7^ 8, or 9l. but in Brescia, of Calabria seed, they use usually to make
eleaven or twelve pound of Silk from the same original proportion.

The poor people in both those Kingdoms buy their Mulberry leaves to feed
this profitable and ind^strious Spinner, and the very charge of those leaves
amounts to a full half of all other their expenses.

The Nobility of Italy and France (the Grand Duke of Tuscany himself,
descending into a part of this profit) make up a considerable part of their
R^venue from their Trees, the Leav^s of every one being valu^d according to
their goodness and quality, from five shillings to twenty and upwards, so that
diverse make an income of three, four, five, sometimes a thousand pound, from
the sole profit of their Mulberry trees.

The Grand Duke from the sale of his, rayses an income ^^mm^xibus a^nis of
sixty thousand Ducats,

Yet diverse Gentlemen in Italy make a larger increase of profit, by setting out
their Mulberry trees to necessito^s people, for hal^e the gain arising from
the worm so ^^d. Those poo^e con^^ibute their seed, employ their labor, and
are at all expenses in bringing the silk to perfection; yet notwithstanding
when completed, the Gentleman who sets out his Trees, divides the moiety of the
entire profit, for the hire of his Leaves only, yet are these people, maugre
this difficulty, comfortable gayners.

And the same Tellier is bold to affirm, that non obstante the
disagreeablenesse of the Country to that worm, in the Kingdom of France from
the sole revenue now of Silk, arises a greater intrade then from their Corn,
Oil and Woad put together, which grow in that Kingdom in vast proportions.
And another French Author affirms, that the benefit of the Silk worm, (of
which France has had no trial till within these fifty years) arises to four
Millions per annum, sterling, and this he pretends to have all circumstances of
truth and certainty, drawn from an exact computation to confirm it.

If France (an almost improper Country for this improvement) can raise within
the verge of fifty years, so large and numerous a revenue, what shall we
imagine Italy (a warmer Region, and by much more convenient, although not
altogether Native, for this enriching creature) may merely upon this Staple
return in their Treasury, having besides the advantage of Climate, a hundred
and fifty years precedence in the mystery, and their seed more strong, better
fed, and less subject to diseases and casualties?

But Virginia a Country which Nature has no less particularly assigned for
the production, food, and perfection of this Creature then Persia or China,
stored naturally with infinites of Mulberry-trees, some so large that the
leaves thereof have by Frenchmen been esteemed worth 5l. in which the
indigenall and natural Worm has been found as big as Wallnuts; and the
using in the South thereof in admirable plenty and excellence; if this mystery
were but duly followed, and industriously promoved, might be a Magazine for all
the Western World, and singly in her self outvy France, Spain, and Italy, in
all their advantages collected.

Here the Leaves are only sold by nature, who requires no other satisfaction
then industry to make use of her bounty. Timber to erect their Fabrics is
provided, and costs no more then preparing a benevolent Sun, and a Serene
Sky, contributing their indulgence to its perfection. No narrow assignation of
Ground (richer then the most fertile France or Italy can pretend to, or boast
of) to plant those Trees on, if not near enough to the settled Plantations; in
brief, all the conveniences imaginable to assist and advance this to the
Noblest Commerce in the World, if neglect and sloth make us not ungrateful to
our selves, and nature, by abusing our selves, by not using her bounty.

To further this happy design, let us descend into an unequal comparison: Let
us compare our most incomparable Virginia, where the Mulberry and the Worm are
aboriginall to Italy, where they are only adventitious: Let us imagine our
own Worm of that strength and greatness only equal to those of Brescia and
Italy, where the usual ofcome from six ounces of seed is 72, ot at least 60
pound weight of Silk, and adhearing to this Parallel; let us see the
apparency in the profit.

A man and a boy, if their hands be not sleeping in their pockets, will feed
as many Worms as come of six or eight ounces of seed till they be past their
four first sicknesses, and within some 14 days of spinning: Indeed the last
14 days require a more extraordinary diligence and attendance, a more frequent
and careful feeding, because in that time they conceive, gather, and store up
the disposing matter from whence the Silk comes, which by an incomprehensible
mystery of Nature, they after as it were vomit out of their mouths, and spinne
out of their bowels. At this more particular season, there is a necessity of
adding the labor of three or four helps more (to which Women or Children are
as proper as Men) which is an inconsiderable accession considering the gain
arising from it.

That you may know the reason why Women, Children, lame and impotent persons
are as fitting to attend the last fourteen days, as Men, will appear by
their labor, which is nothing but to feed them within doors, cleanse, dry,
and perfume their lodgings, with some strengthening but not overstrong odor.

And as one skillful in this noble mystery is sufficient for the employing,
overseeing, and directing hundreds under him, so (the skill being rather
experimentally to be taught, then built upon long and ambiguous precepts) he
may be able to perfect all those under him within the five or six weeekes time
of their employment in the full understanding the mystery. And the better to
encourage both the teacher and learner of the mystery, the master should be
invited by reward to be liberal in communicating his knowledge, and those
under his instruction encouraged by arguments of honor and profit proposed to
the best proficient, would disperse seeds of emulation and diligence, since
every one would employ himself seriously to engrosse and appropriate to
himself the reputation and advantage in the victory.

And in boys and children, disputations frequently set on foot, with some
slight distinction of merit, would make all that are ingeniously disposed,
quicken their observation and diligence, to gain the credit of prelation.
Though to take off all disincouragement or despair, from those less
apprehensive and docible, in this noble and gainefull Trade of Silk, there is
no such absolute necessity laid upon them to be supersticiously and precisely
curious in observing the Book Rules, and written Precepts, that upon the
omission or unpunctuall observation of any of those Precepts in hatching,
lodging, feeding, and tending of the Silke-wormes, we should imagine such
minute deviations might occasion an improsperity or general failing: for we
will admit something may be wanting either in materials, accommodation, or
preciseness of knowledge; yet may the work (a higher and irresistible cause
not interrupting it) prosper and succeed, notwithstanding such defect, to the
great contentment and gain of them which keep them.

Let us imagine it to be granted that the indigency of the person improving the
incommodiousnesse of the place, or want of Houseroome, which the Books exactly
tie us to, be in many things preterregular (though such a supposition may fall
upon any other part of the World more justly then Virginia, where all
materials and convenien^y answer our exactest wishes) yet will daily examples
confirm us, that in Languedoc, Provence, and other parts of France, and as
many in Spain and Italy, amongst the common sort of that exaction tired
people, that one poor low-rooft Cottage, and one Room in it is all the house
extent they have to take their sleep in, dress their miserable diet, and
serve themselves of for use and retirement; yet does this industrious Creature
(such are the blessings with which God rewards the sweat of Industry) thrive as
happily (and sometimes answer labor with a greater felicity) as those which
the curiosity of Richer persons fit with all commodiousnesse of Chamber
feeding, and attending, which is a speaking encouragement that no man should
despair, but reposing a cheerful confidence in the blessing of the Almighty,
with this R^solution, that what ever mean^s, what ever curiosity, art, or
precept, may contribute toward the preparing and facilitation of a work, yet
the end, the event must depend on his eternal goodness to crown it, and all
our labors projected with never so great a Talent of humane wisdom and
experience, must conclude with this never failing truth: That except the Lord
build the house their labor is but lost that build it: Except the Lord keep
the City, the Watchman watches but in vain. We must therefore lift up our
hearts and eyes with thankefullnesse unto the Hills, unto the Mountain of
Israel, and Rock of David, from whence those streams of blessings must
acknowledge their sole, their original Fountain, which may serve as an
admonition, that neither the whole, nor any part of the work^ should be begun
without applying our devotions to him: Let it therefore be the Morning Omen to
the work, and the Evening auspice, Lord prosper the work of our hands,
prosper g^o^ Lord our handy works. After the Reposall of this confidence in
God; let him apply himself with his greatest industry and ability, with this
comfort and assurance, that he cannot but make a considerable return: Though
we should be much injurious to Art (the noble right hand and Midwife to
Nature) if we should deny a more promising probability of a riper and fuller
gain the more curious and observant he is in following all the approved
experiments, Rules, directions, and precepts thereunto belonging.

But the chiefest aim and intention of those Rules are to illustrate the
perfection of this Art, and to inform your knowledge, and better your future
experience and preventionall care, if any misadventure arrive, or miscarriage
in the Silke^wormes, or if they prosper not equally this year with the last;
for by inspection upon them you may understand the cause and reason of such
misadventure, and with it the remedy; and this also takes away all despair or
disincouragement for men, commonly men till they are convinced in the natural
ca^se of a disaster or failing attribute, all such mischances to Nature, or
else impu^e the non-thriving to their own misfortune by a ridiculous opinion
that they are not ordained to be fortunate in this or that Mystery, so
freequently does Fortune incur the blame of humane neglect or ignorance.

Besides we are to imprint in our knowledge, that no Rules can have so much of
generality and exactness, which will not admit of deviations arising from some
particular and variable circumstances. We must not therefore conform the
nature of the C^imate to our Rules, but our Rules to it, in which we must
resume to your deliberation how, and in what one Climate differs from another,
how the constitution of this year varie^ from the next, or the precedent, the
immediocrities of heat, cold, drought, and moisture, serenity, or mists, etc.
The manner of their lodgings, the quality of the wind to be admitted or
excluded: To temper a season inclining to a preternaturall coolness with an
artificial heat, to refresh and infrigidate the Air in times of immoderate
heat, by admitting the cooling Air and Winds proceeding from a cooler
Q^arter, and this to be observed with a more particular care; when they spinne
their Silk, that Creature then being very obnoxious to be stifled with too
much heat.

There must be likewise a providentiall regard in a moist season, that the
Mulberry leaves be carefully dried after their gathering, before they be
administered for food to the Silke-worme: But if the season partake more of
drought it will be wisdom to let the leaves lie and shade a little after
their gathering, that they may have them cool and refreshing, and in seasons
of temperature and continued droughts, it may be very requisite to water the
Roots of the Mulberry-tree, which will be a refreshing to the leaves, and this
is usually practiced in Spain; especially if the Mulberry-tree be seated in a
hot or dry ground, which otherwise must not be so prescribed without particular
caution.

Nor is it below our consideration to weigh the condition of the place in which
the Mulberry is planted, if in a sower foul or wet soil to collect what
inconvenience that food may bring unto your worm, and therefore if your
necessity will admit it to avoid such wholly, if not to use them with such
qualifications as may make them least offensive.

After having regard to the nature of the ground your Tree receives its juce
from, the quality of the season, in which you gather them; it falls next to
your consideration to compare the kind and nature of the Tree, together with
the kind and nature of their seed, worm, and silk, and directing your self
by an exact observation of particular circumstances, so to make exceptions, and
to order every thing with judgment and discretion thereafter, that your Books
and experience may by that means walk hand in hand together.

But time and observations will afford you many experiments, out of which
perhaps some more rules of Art may be framed, in diverse particulars, more
consenting to the Country and Climate of Virginia. Which finding, after good
trial thereupon made, it will become the reputation of a good Patriot in
general, and a good Master of a family in particular, to digest them into such
a regular order and method, that the publication thereof may be a common
benefit to all, and a private memorial to particulars.

For since in Persia and China it does not fall under likelihood, that they can
oblige themselves to observe all particulars in its strictest limitation, where
such an infinite quantity of silk passes through the hands of the people, it
is very agreeable to reason that in a Climate of the same nature and parallel,
namely Virginia, there may be rules found out of far l^sse brevity, and more
pertinency, then have yet been considered or published.

And yet where all these Rules are curiously observed, they make not only in
Spain and Italy, but in the colder parts of France a far greater gain (the
quantity of adventure and time considered) by thus chargeably feeding of
Silk-wormes, then by any other commodity whatsoever.

But to avoid that inconvenience of fetching leaves a far off, or attending the
growth of your own Mulberries, or that necessity which makes the poorer sort
of our own miserable people to lodge them in that Room which is their
Kitchen, their Chamber, their all. With what ease and convenience may there be
a house set up in the middle of a Grove of Mulberries, naturally growing, where
the Silkewormes, in a dry Cabinet of Boords, after the manner of Sicily, may be
kept (described more largely in the Books which treat of this Silkeworme, then
can be expected in this paper) set up with stones in it, in case the Country
and season require it, either to correct the ill sents, or (if so be they are
seated in cold, moist, or shady plac^s, of which your own sense and experience
will quickly acquaint yo^) to give the air a temper and qualification, which
if not prevented, may destroy your work by killing the Silkeworme.

And this Lodge built for them, the season of the year will invite your self
and family (I mean such part of your family as you assign to this work) to
lodge there also, the time being at the most but six weeks, and for the first
month, one third of your family will be sufficient to feed them, but the last
14. days; the other 2. thirds will be requisite that the worms may be more
often and plentifully fed the well feeding at that time contributing much to
their strength and perfection, and consequently to the improving your expected
silk, both in quantity and quality.

That all may be invited and courted to this undertaking, in this glorious
Country, Nature has left us destitute of no materials. To erect these slight
silken lodgings, will be no more expenses, then your labor; nor is that any
greater, then to cut out some posts and studdes, fit them, and set them up,
then to cleave and saw out small quarters, rafters, plankes, pales, and boards,
to make and set up the sides of the house, in stead of more substantial walls,
and to cover the roof in stead of Tile. For the effecting of all which with
the lesser trouble, that Country affords abundance of Woods, which will run
out, slit, and cleave into long lengths and br^adths, which by the directnesse
of the Ground will rive in a manner, as if they had been sawen for the work.
All which must be so close laid, joined, and nailed together, the one still
lapt over the other, that no Wind or Rain may penetrate therein to offend
that laborious Creature, and this may easily be prevented, if such chinkes and
open places as you shall discover be stopped up with Lome, Clay, and Lime, of
which materials in those Countries you will find no want. And to this
purpose the Indian Mats, and the like things may be made good use of in this
way, which will be sure to keep out Wind and perhaps Rain: But to these
things your own inventions, pro re nata, will abundantly furnish you with
matter of preventing casualties: Nor will it be unseasonable to repeat the
extraordinary convenience of Saw-mills, which in this case will be in a high
degree serviceable to you, and of ^his the whole Colony will be beneficially
sensible in boards, Plankes, housing, Silk-worm-lodgings, Timber, shipping, and
all particular kind of uses.

And this once erected, with what speed may such a house be clapped up
together, with a few nails one lopping over another, either long like a
Bowling-Alley, that the functions of the Family may be distinct, and no
offensive heat or sent disturb the Worm in his curious operations.

Or being in doubt of surprisall, some Families going into the Woods together
may equally join together, and those wooden houses (still observing that the
Rooms where the worms are may be set end and end together, that so the
Kitchins and their lodgings may be still the two extremes) may be cast into
the form of a Fort which pall^sadoed, and your house sentinelled by half a
dozen of good Dogs, will be a sufficient defense against all the Natives of the
Country.

And this may be in case they work not in common, which if by compact they
agree upon, the Lodging for the worms may be cast in the middle of such a
circle, the Timber houses round about shading them from over much heat, wind or
moisture, and the necessary fires there made, will thoroughly clear the air of
all vapors and mists which may disorder this innocent Spinner. The Silk
Harvest ready, and the increase brought to a just estimation: The Cohabitors
may according to the agreement made betwixt them, return with their Dividends,
and this removal into the Woods will have the same nature of content which the
Citizens take in a time of vacation and City weariness (Citizens being never
so weary as when they have no work) to visit the delights of the Country,
though with different ends; since these in their Voyages of pleasure expend,
the other both save and increase their stock and treasure. These Boards (the
work ended) being taken down are serviceable for seven years together, and
easily erected or renewed.

I am not altogether of advice, that the Indians be hired to assist you in
these Remoter Works, as sensible how apt they and the Devil t^eir Tutor may
be to embrace an occasion of being treacherous; but if they could be brought to
work by Parties (well watched and Spies amongst themselves set over them) in
the midst of our most populous Plantations, with their Wives and Children,
who will easily run through this curious, but not heavy labor, and may be
sufficient pawnes for the Indian fidelity, if cunningly divided, they would be
very serviceable in this kind for a small Reward, and peradventure might be
made great use of for this work hereafter by undertaking it themselves, which
may be manifested for these Reasons.

1. First, the Indian is naturally curious and very ingenious, which they show
in all their works and imitations: the only thing that frights them from
bringing any work to perfection, is the labor attending it. 2. But to feed his
curiosity, there is nothing in the world more p(...) then this cu^ious atome of
Nature the Silkeworme: to see th^^ ^^taught Artist spin out his transparent
bowels, labor such a monument out of his own intralls, as may be the shame,
the blush of Artists, such a Robe that Solomon in all his glory might con^esse
the meannesse of his apparel, in relation to the workmen, cannot but bring
them to admiration; and that thos^ spi^i^s whose t^oughts are of a higher wing
then ordinary, may be convinced of a divine power of the hand of God in the
Creation: which gaynd upon him, it will not be impossible to drive him to an
acknowledgement of Redemption, if private ends or any other respect then that
to Gods glory, possess not those who should cover a multitude of sins, by
winning a soul to his Creator, and forcing him from the jaws of his
Destroyer. 3. In this curiosity there is little or no labor (a thing which
they abhor) their women and children will be sufficient to go through with
it: and if they could but be brought to it, our Trade with them f^r silk would
be of greater consequence, then all their Furs or other commodities put
together. 4. By this means it were possible to fasten Clo^^hs upon them, which
if once it were effected, that which Mr. Bullock excellent patly calls, The
Universal not of Nature, Ambition would cement them to a more orderly course
of life, and one still striving to ou^vie the other in bravery of habits: there
would be no labor under Heaven like this, to reduce them to civility, the
toil thereof being inc^nsiderable, and the profit great to him in respect of
his now trifling Merchandise: and to us by trading with them, might be
returned for 5^. the pound at the most in commodities. 5. By this means would
he be brought to plant great quantities of Mulberry trees round about his
Plantation, which according to his constant inconstancy, evermore shifting,
would necessarily, our ^wne numbers increasing, fall into our hands and
possession, or if he should against the tide of his nature abide by them, yet a
very inconsiderable tri^le would buy the propriety from him. 6. The Silkeworme
harvest lighting at such a season of the year, wherein he by improvidence has
wasted all his Bread-corne, at which time he usually retires into the Woods to
seek a thin s^bsistence, by the allurement of this great profit he would
undo^btedly stay at his Plantation, and allow us a share in his increase of
Silk, for such provision of Maiz as would maintain him, and ^his would be a
large accession of profit to the English. 7. Admitting Virginia in its whole
extent from Cape Henry Southward (as a work so easily comp^ssed, and such
profit ensuing thereupon, especially to the Weroances or Reguli^, who have many
Wives, Slaves, and Children, would hardly fail from being a universal labor)
to contain in all thirty thousand people, of which the ^ourth part or more
men, if this Staple be followed by them, and our vigilance preventing any
Traffic of other Nations with them, it will yield the C^lony of course a trade
with them worth clear a hundred thousand pound per annum.
Neither do I comprehend a sufficient Reason why in so happy a Climate as that
of Virginia; there may not be a double Silk Harvest: This I am sure of, that
there are s^cre^s in Nature of retardation as well as acceleration of Springs,
and both being industriously brought to the experiment, the acceleration
anteceeding the first Spring, and the retardation postvening the latter by
three weeks, (which may easily be effected by election and distinction of
ground to plant in) and at the latter end of the Harvest the seeds being
disposed and ripened for production, will without doubt produce an effect
answerable to the most inestimable profit intended by it.

That the election of Ground may do this, we may see by freequent examples
betwixt things well cultivated, and that which is never transplanted from its
first wildness, and there are many presidents round about us, where in one and
the same Town, one and the same fruit have oftentimes three Weeks distance of
time betwixt their unequal maturity; the natural warmenesse or coldness of the
Ground occasioning the advance or procrastination of fruits according to its
several disposition.

Nor can such a course be any interruption to Harvest or Vintage, both coming
much after the season of the Silke^worme, though I should (in submission to
better judgment) conceive that with transplantation of trees (such as they
would have come later then ordinary, for that purpose being loosed from the
Ground near upon the ascent of their sap would spring for that season
according to their expectation later then is usual, and the next year its
novelty of ground having made it wanton will come much earlier, and more
improved then those whose fixure to the place of it^ first pull^lation keeps
it self to its former constancy, and by this means the later Harvest would
not be at the most three Weeks time after the (usual) income of the first.

And without doubt the Chinese and Persian could not vend such vast quantities
of Silk, with which they fa^shion so huge a part of the World with one single
Harvest, which though we are at present ignorant of, yet what should
discourage us from delivering such conjectures to a trial, since the examen of
it is not without probability, nor the discovery without an extraordinary
certainety of profit?

Those who will object that notwithstanding ^00 years practice I^aly has not
discovered this mystery, or if discovered, found it destitute of success, may
be pleased to receive this Answer: That there is an immense disproportion
betwixt the happyest Region of Italy, and the South of the excellent Virginia.
Italy (and that annually^ is subject much to inclemency of Winters, in respect
of our more temperate Maid^n, where Snows and black Swans are alike Prodigies;
the cold th^re is rather like a Phletomy to tame the Plethorick abundance of
Springs, then dead it: Nor are the Srpings of Italy so early as ours in that
Climate, and the Mulberry shooting forth later then all other Trees by much,
may by this means of transplantation and heat of soil, be equal with the
first, and by that early appearance give daylight to this and other more
abstruse Magnalia.

I have insisted so much the longer upon this Mystery of the Silk-worme,
because (if it were handled by a better pen, judgment, and ability) it is
every way noble and sublime, so much worthy the knowledge, not only for the
benefit (which is extraordinary rich how ever) but for the admiration of
Nature, who has ab^eviated all the Volums of her other Miracles into this her
little, but exact Epitome, like that Artist who contracted the whole body of
Iliads and Odysses into a Nutshell.

Besides what we have said of Silk we shall find the Indian profitable to
himself, and as in the Staple of Win^s, of which when he has r^c^ived ^he
whole knowledge, we cannot make the l^^st tittle of doubt, but he will with
all eagerness prosecute it: First, because it concerns his belly, to which no
people under H^av^^ are more indulgent; and secondly, his Wife and Children who
plant his Corn may take the charge of the Vineyard with not much more lab^ur.
But that which turns to our advantage is, that the Indian communicating the
knowledge of the Grape to his Neighbors, and they transmitting it all along as
far as New Spain, will stir up the Spanish jealousy to interdict all
Viti-culture amongst them, and as far as the extent of his power can fathom to
prosecute severely all such Natives as shall make it a subject of their
indu^try to the prejudice of Spain. This must of necessity make strong
combinations and leagues against the Spanish Tyranny, which though they are not
of themselves able to shake off, yet will the Spanyard fear to extend himself
further (except in such strength as at present his condition denies him)
knowing the Indians untingu^shable thirst of Revenge^ and his laying hold of
all opportunities to put it in execution, with all the powers of his
understanding cruelty and malice.

And thus shall the Spanyard in case he attempts our supplantation be
constantly discovered by the siding Indian, and if there be a necessity to
prevent his malice, by turning his design upon his own head, infinite
occasion of intelligence may we have from the enraged Native, how to attaque
him in his strongest security, where either the distance or impassability of
the way will make him confident and careless.

Further use may be made of the Native in fishing after Pearl, to which if we
allure him by a constant Trade with him for them, his own profit will quickly
enlighten his desire of more, and that desire quicken his industry.

That Virginia affordes multitude of Pearls, Mr. Lane is sufficient to give
public information, where he tells us a Relation delivered to him of a
W^roance, who had so great quantity of Pearl, and did so ordinarily take the
same, as that not only his own skins that he wears, and the better sort
of his Gentlemen and Followers are set with the said Pearl; but also his beds
and houses are garnished with them, and that he hat^ such quantity of them that
it is wonder to see: These are Mr. Lanes words exactly.

Nor is there any difficulty in the discovery of this, or engrossing the Trade;
especially since we are the Masters of the Country, and if any other Nation
should attempt to partake in the benefit of our Trade, the strength of Virginia
is at present such as may repel by violence, all Foreign encroachments upon
their trade and livelihood.

The Indians unanimously consent that twenty two mil^s beyond ^he Falls, is a
Rock of Crystal, and this they evidence by their a^rowes very many whereof
are headed with it. And that 3 days journey from thence, is a Rock^ or Hill of
Silver Oar. Beyond which, over a ledge of Hills, by a concurrent Relation of
all the Indians, is the Sea, which can be no other but that Sea which washes
the shore of China, etc.

That this report of a great Sea Southwest, beyond the Mountains, cannot have
the least of fiction or confederacy, since all the Indians from Canada to
Florida, do unjarringly agree in the Rela^ion, is obvious to the meanest
apprehension.

The discovery whereof, if we fall upon it by degrees, will be a work of no
long time or difficulty, but the unexpressible profit and glory of the action,
will raise the noble head of this above example Country to such a high Zenith
of wealth, power, and luster, that it will be reputed a very remarkable degree
of felicity to any Nation which shall reach to such a Vertical point of glory,
as to be reputed but our second in these most noble considerations.

By this means what wealth can there be in those richest provinces of the
World, in those Countries which Nature created for her Cabinets of excellency,
which we shall not discover? What discover without a power of Appropriation?
What opulency does China teeme with which shall not be made our own by the
Midwi^^y, by the Juno Lucina of this virtuall pass^ge? This by a happy
transmigration^ by an innocent Magic will convert that Country, (which by a
swelling denomination, yet without no^ some preten^e of Reason its Natives call
by a Title signifying all under He^ven) into our Maid of admiration and envy
Virginia. Her Silke-worm shall spinne for Carolana, her Cloth of Gold be weaved
for Roanoak. The English name shall keep company with the Sun, and those
Nations who owe him a particular adoration shall honor it as the next thing
sacred. The Eastern Nations oppressed with the slavery of those illustrious
horseleeches their princes, will come under our shadow, and by a thick repair
to our most glorious and happy Maiden, live with us in that liberty, which
Nature in their Creation intended to the noblest of his creatures Mankind. And
by this recourse all those curiosities of Art, in which those Eastern Nations
transcend Europe, will be conveyed to us with their persons. Cattle and Horse
in which they abound, will be sold to us for nothing^ for European trifles,
whilst the more necessary Staples of this ou^ W^st^rne World, will be sold at
advantages not convenient to be mentioned. The voyage short, easy, rich, and
pleasant. No doubling of the Line, no calentures, scurvies^ or other
long-passage dis^ases, to affright or distaste the laborious Seaman: whereas now
the enfe^bling and destroying of Mariners is almost an unavoidable consequence
of those long and dangerous, rather circumferences, then voyages.

But lest we should sing a Paean before a Victory, it will not be unworthy our
labor to discourse what means may be used in this Discovery. Which if it
should miss in its prosecution, (for which failing there is not the least
shadow of probability) yet might carry a vast profit to recompense all your
pains and expenses.

That it must not be attempted at the first heat, but must have more recourses
then one to the fire of a Trial, will be made apparent by these reasons.

First, the inconveniency or non feysibility of carrying so much provision as
will serve the Discoverers, whose number, in my opinion, cannot be lower then
two hundred, if we le^ slide into our deliberation the many unknown Nations,
through whose territories we are to make our passage, and which by common
estimation, are much more numerous in the Inland, then Marine Countries.

Next, admit we undertake and compass it with such a number, yet the
discovery not being capable of secrecy amongst such a multitude of
unde^takers, the public resentment of such a felicity approaching, not
suff^ring people to be silent: we should have this ar^ive to the Spaniards
knowledge, who will roll all stones under Heaven to dispossess or
prepossesse, and indeed the danger his Peru, Chili and Philippines, by such
seating, may lie obnoxious to, will add spurs to his inclination to prevent
us, which till we be in in a condition to resist, may be effected with our
absolute ruin.

The safest way therefore is, by degrees to steal upon the design, and take
our way thither, by ceasing of places of advantage, very frequently found in
that Contry, which we may progressionaly fortify at every twenty or five and
twenty miles distance, and to these places we may constantly send supplies of
victuals and ammunition, not only for the men there Garrisond, but for our
own reception and maintenance in the Discovery: and these men standing
continu^lly upon their guard, may (I mean those most remote) by conference
with the Indians, discover with much ease, of what distance, what access, what
harbors, what frequentation, and by what people the neighbor Sea consists of;
to take with them ex^mplars of all Mineralls, Drugges, Dies, Colors, Birds and
Beasts, drawn to the life in colors, which (by an invitation of reward) will
be a surer means of discovery, (if any such be) then by multitudes of people,
whose number commonly (as in the ex^mple of Fernando Soto in Florida) hastens
no other discovery, but that of unavoydable famine, and being usually, either
through necessity, or a disordred manner of living irregular and ungoverned,
fright the inhabitants from all commerce and conference or else make them join
in a confederacy to abuse and remove them by t^lling their unwelcome Company,
golden lies, and miracles of Countries farther distant, where they are likely
to find small satisfaction for their covetousnes or hunger.

Reason and experience will condemn us of folly, if we should refuse to
profit by commendable examples, though proceeding from Enemies or Friends
suspected: It will be therefore an incitement irreproveable to commend to our
own imitation the Custom which the industrious Spanyard practices in his
design of discoveries: Every one of the associates carry a little horn about
their necks in such journeys, by which mean^s if the error of the night or
thickenesse of the Woods occasion any separation betw^xt them, or an Ambuscado
of Enemies make the passage doubtful, by winding of that Horn, presently
notice is given to the rest, who upon receiving the sound give the first winder
notice of their residence, to which they may repair, or testify their
apprehension and readiness to prevent all hostile stratagems.

The same indefatigable Nation in their passage over Rivers, presently make
themselves light Canoas after the Indian mode, with which entering themselves
and swimming their Horses (whose heads they keep above water by a collar
fastened to the Boat) they overcome difficulties of currents, which to any
other but those seem^ insuperable, and indeed their labor in this kind show
them of admirable Resolution and Constancy.

Though we may entertain grounds of hope and confidence, that this discovery
of the South Sea may be m^de without any tedious Land-jou^ney, since it is
certain that from the great confluence of Waters in the Gulf of S^. Laurence,
four mighty Rivers receive their sourse, the first whereof pouring it self
North into Canada, another running Eastward into the Sea called Hunsons River,
the third running W^stward into the Maine are already discovered, but the
fourth upon which we have reason to fix high expectation bending Southward to
Florida, washes all the backside of Virginia, and may in all probability
discharge it self into the South Ocean, which if it suit with our conjectures,
Virginia will have by that means a double accession of security and
convenience.

For our security it will be a natural bar betwixt us and the jealous
Spanyard, who if he should injustly continue the possession of ou^ Florida,
which is indisputably English; yet thus dividided from us by a vast R^ver full
of Islands, and places convenient to command the Channel fortified and
maintained by our Nation, he is too full of providence and caution to attaque
us, if once in so good a posture.

For the convenience which sufficiently speaks it self the ease of
transportation by water, and all in our own Channel, the saving of Land
charges, and probability of a more speedy passage, are prespicuous arguments to
commend it.

And to confirm the probabilities of this passage by the Lake the more
strongly, the Indians of Canada confessed to James Cartier that i^ is but a
Months sailing, from thence to go to a Land where Cynanon and Cloves are
gathered^ Others told the same person, that from the place where they left
their Pinnace, there is a River which goes South-West, from whence there is a
w^ole Months sailing to go to a certain Land, where there is neither Ice nor
Snow seen, where the ^nhabitants do continually War one against the other,
where there is great store of Orenges, Almonds, Nuts, and Apples, with many
other sorts of Fruits. What ev^r belief other men bestow upon this Relation, I
know not; but tru^ly in such a general concordance of Reports, where there can
be no room left for confederacy or design, to be persuaded of the truth
therein, cannot have any vicious tincture of facility or cred^lity.

But it is time to remit these high and noble achievements to the prosecution
of those who have more power and ability^ who may give such ^ discovery the
honor of their names, and tr^nsfer a perpetual illustrious memory to
posterity, we shall only suppose it fai^ible and hope the effects will answer
such supposition.

Which if it should fail, why may not Virginia in her future felicity of silk
be a new China and Persia to Europe? why may not all the spicery of the East
flourish with an equal success in this our most justly tempered Climate?
already can Virginia boast of Cinnamon, which if transplanted might not be
inferior unto any? why may not the Cloves perfume Virginia with as aromatic
redolency as the Philipine Gardens.

Our air is more serene, better tempered then theirs, nor have we any more
sense of Winter to hinder the ascent of sap then the Moluccians, if it be any
thing more harsh in cold, yet is it but a check to a peradventure too forward
Spring. What multitude of flowers have our lat^ Gardens in England seen non
native to this soil or Climate? Fruits thought solely proper to Italy and
Spain flourish here to the envy of those Countties, who see often times the
Colonies in a happier degree of prosperity then the Mother, for Fruit and
Flowers.

But these designements must be the Daughters of time, curiosity and industry,
to whom away may be made passabl^, and easy, by that uncabinetting and
deciphring of Nature, Garden Philosophy^ what harsh disposition in the World
will not be lenified and refined by these curious conclusions? Di^clesian could
postpose the science of governing Mankind to the knowledge of managing his
Scions, to see those Plants grow up, which his own laureld hand had set, watered
and attended, and accordingly flourish, was in a manner the production of so
many Children, who in this have the advantage, that their florescence is not
subject to selfe-deprivation, give them but an acceptable ground^ a boun^eous
Air, and an arriding Sun and ^hey answer the most exact d^sires of the
Setter or Ingrafter; but Children, let them have all the Auxiliares of a full
Fortune, warmth of education, and heat of encouragement, by some private
disease of the genius, by some secret malignity in nature, or its right hand
custom, seldom or never thrive according to the wishes of the Parent, they
are either too rank with insolence, too much parched with rashness, or
withered with infamy and luxury, that those which planted them instead of
delight in that which they esteemed their Masterpeece, have nothing but a
Spring of indignation, or an Autumn of Melancholy to answer their expectation,
and are so far from contentment at their grows that they would have reckoned
it amongst the Smiles of their Fortunes, that no warmth of theirs had
contributed to their production, no indulgence to their continuance and
edu^ation.

These allurements are for those whose delights only are interested and
denoted to this reti^ed activity; but those who look further will find (that
which is rarely or never contingent to other contentments) this pleasure to be
attended with an inestimable p^ofit, and one of the most certain returns in
nature: But this fertility-labouring Country, especial^y in its Southern
beauties, in its Roanoak excellencies, like to a Princess, all composed of
Bounty, suffers no address to be made unsatisfied. Gentle Winters to court
your seed, warm Springs to marry them to perfect Masculine ripeness, nothing
but ingratitude and indiligence to delay or divert its liberality, hitherto
(like those confined Virgins in a barbarous Se^aglio) it has suffered the
imputation or injury of sterility by a non-complacency in i^s Savage Amourists,
the abundance of perfection having put them into a satiety or incapacicy of
enjoyment.

The truth of this being abundantly manifest, an apparent profit and delight
inviting the able and industrious; necessity must be the next Argument to those
whose Poverty can plead no excuse for their indiligence; yet this laborious
necessity is not so ingra^efull as in England, and in other more thick-peopled
Countries, what ever you sweat for in this bounteous Region, is crowned with a
recompense amazing your expectation; such things as make poverty and life
wearisome, contempt of, or impossibility of any melioration to their condition
are things here never charged upon hone^t indigence, or denied to a
commendable industry, nor can they palliate their sleep and sloth with a
pretense of wanting materials to work upon, or plead that such things as
should employ them must be first had out of England, since there is enough
abundantly and naturally in that unpresidented Country to employ their
industry, to enrich their labor.

Though Silke-grasse is unquestionably a Staple which will be Neighbor to the
profit of the Silke-worme, though the natural Hempe-flagge may be a
Merchandise in time equal to English Flax, though the Sar^aparilla be an
extraordinary vendible Commodity, though Pipestaves be so beneficial, that
with not many drops an extraordinary workman may make his labor worth sixty
pounds per annum.

Though he has fish there, and in such abundance that the attending diligently
upon two seasons, only returns him a Reward of one hundred pound sterling in
Sturgion, Salmon, Herings, Mackrell: Potashes a rich and never decaying
Staple, etc. Yet since against this an objection may be made what course they
may take for their provisionall subsistence. Those who apprehend such doubts
will be pleased to receive this answer, in which if they are sensible of Reason
they cannot fail to receive satisfaction.

There is no man will ever be denied the loan of Corn for his house-spending,
and seed till the Harvest; if he be a single man he may prepare as much ground
if cleared, and set as large quantity of Corn for his own spending and
repayment of what borrowed, in two days space as will abundantly suffice him
twelve Months.

Admit there be no cleared Ground, yet if he but unbarke the Trees one foot
round after the Indian mode to prevent the shade occasioned by the leaves,
which such unbarking quite destroys, the Corn (set betwix^ those Trees) will
thrive and prosper exceedingly, and their ground thus prepared will last seven
or more years successively, and this work cannot last him above five days at
the longest.

If he have a Family, his Wife and Children will be able to bear part in that
labor, and many others.

For Provision of flesh, if he can use his piece he may, even at his labor in
the Woods, have opportunity of killing Venison, Hares, Wild-fo^le (in their
season innumerable) and Fish, of which the Rivers are all times plentifully
furnished, and of great delicacy; if in all this abundance he is yet
apprehensive of Famine, we shall refer him to the number of those who are
afraid to be starved for meat in a Cooks shop.

Besides what a small sum of money will buy your Cattle, and Swine in
Virginia? Whose feeding co^ts them nothing but thanks to God, who has spread
that superfici^s of that noble Country with perpetual friut and verdure.
Poultry in infinite variety and plenty, the ^orbearance of whose increase for a
small term of years will make them so numerous, that they may always have a
full table.

The W^st Indie Potatoe (by much more delicate and large then what we have
here growing) besides that it is a food excellently delicious and strongly
nourishing, fixes himself wherever planted, with such an irradicable
fertility^ that being set it eternally grows: of this an extraordinary pleasing
and strong drink may be composed.

Nor is the M^iz less commendable for bread then malting, of both which in its
use it affords a peculiar goodness and convenience: And I am much to learn
how a poor man can in justice complain of want, when he is as it were
besieged with such plenty: This for provision may abundantly satisfy, but if
he can be content ^o forbear debauches and profuseness for the first three
years he may by any of the means aforesaid arrive to such a condition of
thriving, that he may allow himself a large latitud^ of expenses (that first
three years once expired) without much empairing his fortunes.

But since all men either by constitution of age, oppression of yeare^, or
different education, are unable or improper for the Fishnet or Hatchet, I shall
offer them a way which may be less laborious and peradventure more gainefull;
yet before I descend to this, I must take leave by digression to enlarge
something which I have already hinted on, namely the benefit of transplantation.

The removing and transposition of Wild Plants, does with an experimented
happiness wonderfully mitigate and engentile their le^^e noble nature; w^ethe^
(as an Author delivers it very elegantly) it be b^ reason that the nature of
Plants, as o^ men, is desirous of Novelty and peregrination, or because that at
their parting from their former grounds they leave there that rank wildness
virule^cy and ill quality from the Forest, where is first rooted the grate^ull
novelty and allurement of a well cultivated s^yle makes it ^^ceive a new by
exiling it from the old savagenesse and in^omestication of its first seat and
nature.

Since then the r^moving of wild Plants adds so much to their improvement and
melioration confirmed by natural Reason and unerring experience: Why may not
the diligent labor by removeall and transposing this excellent Staple of Silk
grass, make it thrive equally in greatness and goodness, there needs no
more art to be used then that of comparing the soil (transplantations into
worse grounds being naturally improsperous) and though there appe^re now
somewhat of trouble (though nothing of lab^ur) in peeling the silky skin of,
yet that it may be broken as Flax or cleared by some Instrument (the Commodity
richly rewarding the nobility of any invention) to this purpose; time and
further exp^rience will no doubt to the public enric^ing of the Colony and
this Nation make apparent. In this any one which is not sworn ^ servant to
ease and sloth, may with a small toil reap a considerable profit.

Next, what will not those Vines produce if well husbanded after their
transplantation, and in this most delightful labor the gain is so appare^t
that almost the blindest judgment may perceive it.

Orenges, Lemons, Pine-aples, Plantanes, Peaches, Apricocks^ Pears, Aples, in
a word all sort of excellent Fruits will grow there in full perfection; you may
sleep whilst they are growing, after their setting or engrafting, there needs
no more labor but your prayers, that they may prosper, and now and then an eye
to prevent their casualties, wounds or diseases.

Sugars, Indigos, Cotton, and Ginger, require a greater industry; but if we
consider the difference betwixt the two Climates of Barbados and Virginia, the
immoderate heat of the first and the exact temper of the other, the labor
though it may require as frequent handling, yet is by much less toylesome.

In a word, if a man be yet timorous of a thriving condition in this Country;
I shall with his pardon believe him, dis^rustfull of Gods providence; or if he
be so vitiously disposed as to hope after a Land where he may enjoy an
undisturbed plenty without the sweat of his brows, the Maps are so extremely
deficient in the description of such a Country, that I must desire him to
look for a new World and Kingdom, for such an easy accommodation.

If any make an Objection why this Country stored with all these Riches,
furnished with all these Staples, has so long held down her head in the
lowness of a desperate condition? Why being capable to crown her brows with
Garlands of Roses and plenty, she sat desolate amongst the W^llowes of neglect
and poverty? Let them but recall their Memory, how by the prevailency of
Gon^amore the Co^poration was dissolved, their patent cancelled, to which if
we add the cooperation of the Indian treachery in their first massacre, they
will cease their wonder at its languishing condition. and convert it to a full
admiration, how that Colony could ever raise her endangered head out of those
Gulfes of distraction, in which the Gold of Spain, the dis^ncouragement of the
Court, the discontent of the better sort of Planters, and the desperate
negligence of the more inconsiderable had in humane opinion irrecoverably
involved her.

But the incomparable Virgin has rai^ed her dejected head, cleared her
enclouded reputation, and now like the Eldest Daughter of Nature expresses a
priority in her Dowry; her brows encircled with opulency to be believed by no
other trial but that of expeperience her unwounded womb full of all those
Treasuries which indeere Provinces to respect of glory, and may with as great
justice as any Country the Sun honors with his eye-beames, entitle her
self to an affinity with Eden, to an absolute perfection above all but
Paradize.

And this those Gentlemen to whom she vouchsafes the honor of her Embraces,
when by the blessings of God upon their labors sated with the beauty of their
Cornefield, they shall retire into their Groves checkered with Vines, Olives,
Mirtles, from thence dilate themselves into their Walks covered in a manner,
paved with Orenges and Lemmons, whence surfeited with variety, they incline to
repose in their Gardens upon nothing less perfumed then Rose^ and
Gilly-flowers. When they shall see their numerous Herds wanton with the luxury
of their Pasture, confess a narrowness in their B^rnes to receive their
Corn, in bosoms to express fully their thankfulness to the Almighty
Author of these blessings, will chearefully confess: Whilst the Incomparable
Ro^noak like a Queen of the Ocean, encircled with an hundred attendant
Islands, and the most Majestic Carolana shall in such an ample and noble
gratitude by her improvement repay her Adventurers and Creditors with an
Interest so far transcending the Principal.

A valuation of the Commodities growing and ^o be ha^ in Virginia: valued in
the year, 1621.
And since those Times improved in all more or less, in some, in others, in
many double, and in some treble.

IRon, ten pounds the Tun.

Silk Coddes, two shillings six pence the pound.

Raw silk, 13s. 4d. the pound, now at 25s. and 28. per pound.

Silk grass to be used for Cordage, 6d. the pound: but we hope it will serve
for many better uses, and so yield a far greater rate, whereof there can never
be too much planted. Of this Q. Elizabeth had a silk Gown made.

Hemp, from 10s. to 22s. the hundred,

Flax, from 22s, to 30s. the hundred.

Cordage, from 20s. to 24s. the hundred.

Cotton wool, 8d. the pound.

Hard pitch, 5s. the hundred.

Tar, 5s. the hundred.

Turpentine, 12s. the hundred.

Rozen, 5s. the hundred.

Madde^ crop, 40s. the hundred: course madder, 25s. the hundred.

Woad, from 12s. to 20 the hundred.

Annice seeds, 40s. the hundred.

Powder Sugar, Panels, Muscavadoes and whites, 25s. 40. and 3l. the hundred.

Sturgeon, and Caveare, 2s it is in goodness.

Salt, 30s. the weight.

Mastick, 3s. the pound.

Salsa Perilla wild, 5 l. the hundred.

Salsa Perilla domestic, 10l. the hundred.

Red earth Allenagra, 3s. the hundred.

Red Alum, called Carthagena Alum, 10s. the hundred.

Roach Alum, called Romish Alum, 10s. the hundred.

Berry grain, 2s. 6d the pound: the powder of grain, 9s. the pound: it
grows on trees like Holly berries.

Masts for shipping, from 10s. to 3 l. a piece.

Potashes, from 12s. the hundred, to 14. now 40. and 35s. the hundred.

Sope-ashes, from 6s. to 8s. the hundred.

Clapboord watered, 30s. the hundred.

Pipe staves, 4l. the thousand.

Rape-seed oil, 10l. the tun, the cakes of it feed Kine fat in the Winter.

Oil of Walnuts, 12 l. the tun.

Linseed oil, 10l. the tun.

Saffron, 20s. the pound.

Honey, 2s. the gallon.

Wax, 4l. the hundred.

Shomacke, 7s. the hundred, whereof great plenty in Virginia, and good quantity
will be vented in England.

Fustick young, 8s. the hundred.

Fustick old, 6s. the hundred, according to the sample.

Sweet Gums, Roots, Woods, Berries for Dies and Drugs, send of all sorts as
much as you can, every sort by it self, there being great quantities of those
things in Virginia, which after proof made, may be here valued to their worth.
And particularly, we have great hope of the Pocoon root, that it will prove
better then Madder.

Sables, from 8s. the pair, to 20s. a pair.

Otter skins, from 3s. to 5s. a piece.

Luzernes, from 2s. to 10 a piece.

Martins the best, 4s. a piece.

Wild Cats, ^8d. a piece.

Fox skins, 6d. a piece.

Musk Rats skins, 2s. a dozen: the cods of them will serve for good perfumes.

Bever skins that are full grown, in season, are worth 7s. a piece.

Bever skins, not in season, to allow two skins for one, and of the lesser,
three for one.

Old Bever skins in Mantles, gloves or cap^, the more worn, the better, so
they be full of fur, the pound weight is 6s.

The new Bevers skins are not to be bought by the pound, because they are
thick and heavy Leather, and not so good for use as the old.

Pearls of all sorts that ye can find: Ambergreece as much as you can get:
Cristall Rock: send as much as you can, and any sort of Mineral stones, or
earth that weighs very heavy.

Preserve the Walnut trees to make oil of, and cut them not down: so also
preserve your Mulberry and Chestnut trees very carefully.

In the month of June, bore holes in diverse sorts of Trees, whereby you shall
see what gums they yield, and let them be well dried in the Sun every day, and
send them home in very dry caske.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
THat Virginia is parallel with China, and the happiest Countries of the East
and We^t^rne World in situation, and if not superior, equal to the best in
exactness of temperature. Page 1. That it is stored with all sorts of Timber
for structure of Houses, building of shipping, and all other uses^ whether of
necessity or ornament. Ibid. That the native fruits of the Country are various
and delicate. Ibid. That the Virginia Sea affords Fishes for number and taste
comparable to any other. p. 2. That the Native Beasts of the Land are many, the
Flesh of most excellent, the Hides of diverse useful, and the Furs
extraordinary rich. ibid. That diverse Harvests may be made of Corn in one
year, with the means, and the general quality of the soil. p. 2. That two
men's labor in Virginia may be worth 360 l. per an. p. 3.4. That Rice will
there flourish with extraordinary increase. ibid. That Potashes, Pipe^taves,
and Clapboard may be made there in great abundance and equal profit. p. 4. 5.
That the Iron Oar in Virginia is equal to the best of any other Nation, and
that Iron Mils will be of great advantage and profit. p. 5. That diverse rich
Dies, Colors, and Drugs may be found out there, and the way which the Spaniard
uses for this discovery. p. 5. That Vin^s grow naturally all over the
Country, which may make a rich Wine. p. 6. That Virginia will admit and
improve the most generous Grapes of any other Country, whether Greek,
Italian, or Spanish, with the means to undertake and advance this Staple. p.
7.8.9. That Virginia is comparable to Persia. p. 10. That she is by Nature made
capable of all those excellencies of China, to which she is compared^ from p.
11. to p. 21. That the art use, and excellency of the Silk-worme is more
convenient to be set on foot in Virginia, then any Country in Europe. p. 21.
That the Silke-worme is as natural to Virginia, (...) Persia, or China. p. 23.
That Mulberry-trees proper for this Mystery grow there by nature. p. 10. That
it may with much facility be set on foot, and with great felicity brought to
perfection. p. 29. That in this the Indians may easily be brought to be
coadjutors. p. 31. That Virginia may admit of a double Silk-harvest. p. 33.
That the Silk-grasse of Virginia may prove a Staple of incomparable richness.
p. 16. That th^re is a natural Hemp in Virginia excellent for Cordage and
Linen. p. 16.17. That there is a rich Copper (with great probability of a
Golden) Min^ in Virginia. ibid. That there is great probability of rich Silver
Mines. p. 18. That Sugar, Cotton, Ginger, Indigo, and Pepper will grow in the
South of Virginia wit^ equal fertility, and much more convenience then in
Barbados. p. 19. That Musk and Civet may both be made in Virginia. p. 20.
That from the Terra Sigillata, equal in goodness to the best, will be yielded
an incredible Revenue to the undertaker, and that it is there in vast
abundance. p. 20. That there is no exact necessity to observe all the
prescribed rules written by Masters in the Silk-worme mystery; that example and
observation will dimi^ish the number of these rules, and the conveni^ncy of
Virginia for that Creature may much abreviate them. p. 25.26.27. That all the
Spiceryes of the Philippines and other Countries may grow in Virginia in equal
felicity, the place affording as happy, an air, and a soil fitting in its
variety for their general production. p. 39. That the excellencies of
transplantation to meliorate what ever transplanted may be with less charges
and greater probability of thriving in Virginia, then else where made
experiment of. p. 39. That ground may be prepared even in woody places for
setting Corn, Vines, and Potatoes, without any eradication, or felling of
trees, with great speed and little labor. p. 41. That there is a Rock of
Crystal in Virginia, already discovered, and the place where. p 35. That if
the English will but equal or imitate the industry of the Spanyard, what ever
ha^ been discovered in New Spain, Peru, and Chili may be (by means there set
down) laid open to such their attempts. That as the Indian may be invited to
practice the Silk-worme mystery, so with (...) probable hopes of success he
may be gained upon to plant the Vine and Olive. p. 34. That his planting the
Vine will cement him to the English to the disadvantage of the Spaniard. ibid.
That the South-west Passage may easily be found out by a constant intelligence
and information of the Natives: from whence a trade and co^merce may be driven
with China and Cathaya. p. 38. That a fishing trade may be driven in Virginia,
which ^or excellency and plenty may be greater then that of Holland, and in
conclusion to make the Staple of fish a rich, delightful, and unlaborious
knowledge. p. 13. 14. 15. That Salt in Virginia may be made in greater
abundance and convenience, then at Rochel. p. 13. That so^e parts of Virginia
abound with Pearl, and that the Indian may be serviceable in fishing for them,
himself allowed a small share in the profit arising from so rich a
Merchandise. That who ever can but satisfy for his own transportation, need
not trouble himself for any stock to set up with, since so many several ways
are proposed for his enriching and maintenance. Lastly, it may evidently
appear through all the passages of the whole book, that Virginia duly
considered for exactness of temperature, goodness of soil, variety of
Staples, and capability of receiving what ever is produced in any other part of
the World, gives the right hand of pre-eminence to no Province under Heaven.
AS a Supplement to all which, since so many objections have been, and are
daily made, lest a wilful silence might believe their scruples as authentic as
reason it self; such as have been made to me have had this answer returned
them, with which I desire to satisfy and communicate to all others who may
have the same doubts.

Why rather do we apply our selves to the South of Virginia, then the North?
Why to a new where in probability all things may be wanting, rather then an old
Colony where already there is great abundance?

To this may be returned, that the South of Virginia is more proper then the
North, by reason of its fertility and aptness to produce all those Staples o^
Sugar, Cotton, Ginger, which the colder air in the North will not permit to
flourish: That the South is more proper, may appear by the large quantity of
Palmetoes which have been found there, who cannot flourish in any Country in
which there may be so much as an appearance of Winter.

Neither need we so much f^are a want or non-abundance in this new Colony, our
nearenesse to Virginia and N^w England being able plentifully to furnish us
with all sort of Cattle at a cheaper ^ate then in England, and the very
r^putation of this place once planted will quickly invite so many men as know
by experience or information the excellence of the place, to remove what ever
is theirs out of those more cold Countries to join issue with us in the better
Sunbeam'd Carolana.

Another objection is, what security we may expect from the Natives, who look
upon us as Intruders upon the Land of their Nativity, and seeing the South of
Virginia in like manner to be possessed as the North, whether they will not in
all probability attempt what ever rage, malice, and treachery can dictate to
them to oppose the beginnings of such possession to our extirpation, to which
they will be more enabled (say they) since we are at the first seating not
likely to be so numerous, or so well fortified to resist them, as in the North
of Virginia, where already they have committed two mass^cres notwithstanding
the length of years to secure the implanters, and their large numbers.

We should attribute too much of the Bug-beare to the Indian arms, to believe
that 10 of our men well appointed are not able to give law to their 100 aided
with all the advantages of animosity and revenge, to which by nature I must
confess them prone, but their cowardice is so great, that they never act any
thing but upon the scor^ of anticipation or security; a nights march and the
dawne of the day are the only opportunities which they take to revenge former
hostilities upon their sleeping enemies: he which considers the desperate
security the English then lived in, the fatal intercourse to the admission of
them into their houses, into the heart of all their plantations without any
jealousy (I had almost said discretion) will rather admire they were not
totally massacred, then but in part attemp^ed; and yet to show the invincible
baseness and Cowardice of those S^vages, then when in the heat of their
revenge and height of bl^ud, fury, and success^ ^when all Cowards but
themselves are irr^sistably desp^rate and ^ushing on their fortune) one man
that was mast^r but of a heart and pitch^forke, has been known stave off and
^ffright ten of those as^assinates; nor were any that had the gen^rosity to
oppose, or the discretion to keep good their houses mass^cred by them.

The baseness of these incomparable Poltrons considered, what cause should
there be to fear them? yet to show how those which through igno^ance or doubt
of their attempts may be sufficiently secured, these remedies have been
proposed and are resolved upon to r^move all futu^e attempts of tha^ nature.

Our first seating will be upon as pleasant Islands as eye may delight, into
which all access must be by water. The Indian (first bought out of those Seas,
which a most inconsiderable trifle will pu^chase and prohibited fi^hing there,
with a severe punishment to all those who shall against such prohibition
appear with their Canoas upon the waters) cannot assemble upon the main to our
prejudice, or gather together their Canoas without our notice; besides a small
thing will buy spies amongst themselves to discover all such practices; a knife
or a hatch^t will make them betray their neighbors, or which is more, their
kindred.

When our numbers (^y the blessing of God) shall enable us to grow upon the
maine, the same price which bought them out of Islands will purchase t^^m out
of the continent (I mean such a part of it as will sufficiently serve 100000.
Inhabitants) in the bounds whereof no Indian shall appear without an
uncountrefaitable mark of permission, and spies used as before; we may make use
of their intelligence concealing the Authors, which w^ll make those so
discovered attribute to miracle what we receive by information^ and
peradventure enter into a superstitious belief of our praescience of their
machinations^ which will deter their attempting the like for the future.

Another objection which is usually made, whether this part of Virginia may not
be too hot as the North of that Continent is too cold, considering the
constitution of the English not proper to endure it, the extremes of either
being alike distasteful.

Though it be certain that all over those Countries drawing near the Center of
the Sun a constant Brise arises and continues from 9. to 3. with a great
mitigation during the violence and height of the Sun, and that during those
intervalls, servants are so indulged as not to labor without doors, yet it is
certain that the violentest of heats in that Southern is not hotter then some
days which we feel in England.

And though ancient Philosophy may stumble at the doctrine (able to make reason
herself almost blear-eyed) yet those no less signal experiencers of the
modern will tell us, that the causes of moderation and habitability of those
regions proceed from that which imposed upon our Patriarchs of learning, who
upon favorable conjecture that the (supposed dangerous) neighborhood of the
Sun, and the rapid transit of the cele^^iall bodies, with the
perpendicularnesse of direct rays could not but perpetually exile all cold and
moisture as non-naturall and foreign to their immediate residence. Neither had
reason any allegations to the contrary, till experience opened its eye-lights
by this demonstration, for moisture is never more violent in those (which we
call torrid) regions then when the Sun is in his nearest visits; from hence
arise winds and impetuous showers daily, from hence the Sun having (in a degree
of debauch) caronsed too much in his spacious and sweaty journey, over the
Ocean does there discharge it; whereas in his abscence he receives no more of
those moist vapors then he can temperately and healthfully concoct.

Besides, these frequent showers do not only cool and refresh the otherwise
parching earth, but add as much to its fatness and improvement, ^s the
innundations of Nilus, Niger, and Zaire in Africa, and makes the earth
invulnerable against the Sun's hostility and arrowy beams: and as in an
Alembick a fire of heat and violence enlarges the quantity of vapors, which
stifled as it were and issulesse are converted into waters, but the fire being
but meanly eager, drinks up those vapors in their exhaustion; so the Sun ^n
the greatness in the Giantism of his strength, only exhales (not digests)
that quantity of vapors which he is enforced to disgorge in showers, which
draughts of his are in his lesser heat in a more temperate quantity imbibed and
concocted.

Nor deserves it a le^se part of consideration, that in that part of the world
in which there are so many unbounded Gulphs, such immense Rivers and inlets,
the vapors and exhalations cannot but add coolness and moisture to the
neighboring Elements of earth and air: and which is an indisputable reason
the almost equal length of days and nights dividing perpetually the time into
equal portion^ causes a less heat then presented it self to the
consideration-slumber of the ancients, which is confirmed by the Philosophic
Poet in these Verses.

Quodque die solis violento in canduit aest^^,
Humida nox reficit paribusque refrigerat horis.
Nights what e're days burn with over heated powers,
Cool and refresh by their length-equal'd hours.
Join to this the plentiful descent of Dewes greater th^n unexperienced
imagination can comprehend them, and in dispensation of moisture equal to
petty showers behealth the days with coolness and freshness, which added to
the neighborhood of such an unfathomed depth, such an unembraceable greatness
with their spacious fluxes resolve the heated air into a healthful moisture:
But nearer the Poles the continuance of the Sun, the almost no nights, and
long lived days make those parts more insufferably hot, then nearer an equal
division of night and light, and this cause makes the Summer hotter in Russia
then in England.

I had not dwelt so long upon this discourse, but only to show that if the
Center and headquarters of the Sun perpetually assigned betwixt the
Tropiques be capable of coolness and habitability: What shall Virginia a
Region as fortunately and temperately seated as the noblest Countries under
Heaven expect of moderate heates, and a by-these-infertiled surface?

To those other Questions how people shall transport themselves if of fortunes?
how the less able be transported? what conditions they are to expect? I shall
not doubt but public bills will make manifest to them, and that speedily. For
the other what means to live there? what way of improvement upon means? the
book is referred unto for directions: But if that appear unsatisfactory (that
and all things humane being subject to fa^lings) I owe too much to my own and
that Country, not to give them further satisfaction to the best of my
knowledge: And if they please to collect the Stationers name and residence from
the Frontispiece of the Book, I am confident he out of his humanity and good
affection, will either signify to them where I may prefer my addresses to
their information, or where I shall be to attend them, and withal contribute
my best knowledge in what may be useful to them, or bring them to such of
higher quality as may give them plenary satisfaction.

It is my opinion (but the more ripe judgment of others) that this Country
well husbanded, and peopled, will in regard of its variety of Staples, be such
a constant intercourse of Traffic to our Merchant Adven^u^ers, as to free them
totally from all those dangers which they now groan under, either by open
hostility of known, or under hand dealing of pr^v^te Enemies^ Trade will be so
secured among our selves of all those Staples which France and Spain sell us
with a hand full of exaction and causeless expostulations, that nothing but
the casualties of the Sea will contribute to c^st down countenances upon the
Exchange or making our Merc^ants Bankrupt.

And that this may want no poor contribution of mine: The R^^d^^ will be
pleased to take notice that a book fully discovering the whole mystery of the
Silke-worme, the whole art of the Vine, and the conversion of the Sawmill to
infinite other as profitable us^s, will shortly be published, in which the
Author as in this will reckon it amongst his happinesses, if he can at all be
availeable to private instruction, or the public benefit.

FINIS.
VIRGINIA'S Discovery of SILKE-VVORMES, with their benefit.

AND The Implanting of MULBERRY TREES.

Also The dressing and keeping of Vines, for the rich Trade of making Wines
there.

Together with The making of the Saw-mill, very useful in Virginia, for
cutting of Timber and Clapbord, to build withal, and its conversion to other
as profitable Uses.



LONDON, Printed by T. H. for John Stephenson, at the Sign of the Sun, below
Ludgate. 1650.

To all the VIRGINIA Merchants, Adventurers, and Planters.
Gentlemen:
THE unhappiness to be amongst the lowest of men, for parts and ^ortune,
cannot hinder me from the sa^is^action which I receive in my self, that none
is possessed with a more eager passion of contributing toward the advancing
Virginia to that degree of felicity which the bounty of nature, richness of
soil, and temperature of Climate designed her to: and were my power but of as
strong a Wing as my inclinations and desires, that above-example Country
should be placed in such a Zenith of stability, wealth, and glory, that it
should behold all the other National happinesses o^ ^he World in a Sphere
benea^h her; and her Merchan^s Adventurers and Planters, like so many
Load-starres to conduct Mankind into an innocent Ocean of un^athom'd wealth of
unrocky prosperity.

No Country under the S^nne is less ungrateful then Virginia, if she be but
justly courted, but to Complement a Virgin for her affection by brea^hing
smoke in her nostrils, to express our Civilities by vapor; and for all that
vast Dowry of spaciousness, wealth, bounty of air, and plenty of provisions,
to proffer her a jointure of Tobacco, is a Complement indistinguishable from
incivill rudeness.

What Riches may not the Silke-worme, Vine, Olive, and Almond afford us? By
these noble undertakings we contract China two thousand Leagues nearer to us,
and are not troubled though Spain and Italy were remooved five thousand more
distant from us: and if we could not satisfy the implacable curiosity of our
Senses without the Eastern Spices, it is without dispute, that what every
Orient has of Aromatic, would grow without any deterioration in this
incomparable Country.

Yet if, by some occult propriety of nature, these Spices, and Gummes should
not prosper with that success in the Country to which they are only
adoptive, as where they are natural: The South Sea flowing upon the skirts of
this gl^riously apparrelled Virgin, would not only furnish us, but (through
our means) all the Western World with whatever the Philippines and China have
in their brow, or bosom: which that it may be discovered, a Public
encouragement from the Merchants here, and the Colony there, would awaken all
spirits which have any scintillation of Honor, or industry, to undertake the
employment, effect it undertaken, and by the effect raise an unperishable
structure for their own glory, perpetuated by the public felicity.

The greatest defect that Colony can with consent complain of, is their want
of shipping, and the greatest with which others find themselves perplexed, is
the want of industry to build them. If Virginia had not as stately Timber as
any other Region whatsoever: if it had not a Soil naturally inviting them to
improve her in Iron for Gunnes, Anchors, and other conveniences; in Hemp for
Cordage, Flax for Canvase, and Pine trees for Mast: this defect might be
allowed for real: but where all these concenter, it is as unreasonable to
complain, as for a man seated at a Table covered with excellent provision, to
accuse his fortune for suffering him to perish with hunger, because his meat is
not digested in his stomach, without putting his hands and teeth to labor.

I could cordially wish that there were such quantity of cleared ground in
Virginia, that every one at his first arrival might fix upon the Plough, that
the so much discoursed of Staples of Wheat and Rye, might be brought to an
absolute ripeness of perfection: But to imagine so many millions of trees of a
facile removal, or that old Planters knowing the benefit thence arising,
should part with them to others, and seek new uncleared grounds for
themselves, were merely to dream of impossibilities.

But the Vine, Almond, and Olive, may be set where the tree is only barked
about to hinder it from leaving; besides if there were a necessity to have
absolutely cleared grounds, (which reason it self cannot imagine,) yet four
Acres of ground so cleared for the Vine, will return (by much) more profit,
and less trouble, then twenty Acres of Wheat, at such rates as they are prized
in the common estimation.

But since this profit reverts to the Purse without the toil of eradicating
trees, as great emolument, as if the ground were altogether treelesse, to what
purpose should we court sweat and affliction? or increase our miseries without
any addition to our happiness?

Gentlemen, the happiness of this Nation depends upon your constancy and
prosperity, if you seriously erect these staples, we shall be free from the
imperious usurpations of foreign Princes upon your estates, and shipping,
from the rapine of Pirates upon your lives or liberties. The decayed number of
our shipping may be resupplyed by encouragement of Carpenters of all Nations,
to make use of those materials which the inimitable liberality of this
Country gratefully presents you with: all S^aples (diffusively spread in other
Regions) will meet here united, and we shall arrive to that degree of
happiness, to make our intrade by much exceed our exportations: for the
completing of which, if such an inconsiderable, and lost thing as my self,
could be any way isntrumental, I should as cheerfully hazard my life in the
employment, as I now subscribe my self,

Your ready, faithful, and most humble servant, ED. WILLIAMS.

The Discovery of Silke-wormes; with their benefit, and implanting of Mulberry
trees.
THE Mulberry tree, yielding the sole food of this exellent Worm, must first
be provided for, whereof there are Myriads dispersed in the wide Continent of
Virginia, which may be collected by transplanting, grafting, or nursering.

For transplantation there are infinite advantages both of well-growne and
springing Mulberry trees, which may with much facility be removed, and with
great felicity thrive upon such a removal, of which experience can afford
frequent examples.

The Grafts must be chosen from excellent good Plants which express a large
fertility, and be something large of themselves, by which election there will
be a greater certainety of the goodness, and a more speedy expectation of
growth in those Grafts, which thrive better when grafted one upon another, then
upon the Chestnut, Apple Tree, Elm, White Popler, or any other, which if they
are not mortally opposite, are however praeternaturall to the Silke-worme.

The Nurseries have so much of tediousness and difficulty, that I shall hardly
advise to put it in practice; yet to those who have a stronger credulity then
my reason can persuade me to, I shall offer the sole expedient of effecting
it, if that may be called aptly an expedient, which has so little of
expedition in it.

Let the Person desirous to make a Nursery, observe, and gather such quantity
as will suit with his necessity, of the ripest Fruit growing upon those Trees
which bear the fairest and roundest leaves: These thus gathered, you must wash
in ^wo or three waters^ pressing them with your hands, by which (...)s you
shall find the expressed seed in the bottom of the wa^^^: ^ acced^ more to
the sowing of the Mulberries whole without such expression, how ever, either
the Mulberry entire, or the seed may be sowed after the manner following^

A bed of fat earth being dug, husbanded, and the Mould br^ught into a small
Powder, must have strait Rows or Lines in Fu^rowes, all half a foot equally
distant every Furrow two inches deep, and fou^e broad, this distance may be
something larger that an intervall may be made to the Weeder in the weeding of
such things as may hinder the Mulberries growth by participating in its aliment.

A great care must be had to water it often for the first year, if the
weather be dry, the succeeding year you may pull up and transplant your
Mulberry trees into another ground more at large, viz. at two or three foot
distance, which must be not retransplanted till the growth arise to some six
inches in the circumference, at which bigness you may remove them to the
ground designed for their constant fixation, leaving betwixt ^ach Tree a
distance of sixteen or twenty foot, that the too much vicinity may not make
the extending branches mutually inconvenience either by exclusion of a full
Sun, or wound themselves by intertangence of one another: In such warm
Countries as that of Virginia, the Root must be preserved cool and moist, by
a deeper implantation then is usual in colder Regions.

For the election of your Plants or Sciens you may take notice of two Families,
or Races, of Mulberry trees, the black, and the white, discordant in Wood,
Leaf, and Fruit; only having this in common to spring later then other trees,
as never emitting their leaves till all apprehension of cold is vanished, the
black Mulberry is not subdivided into any other species having the wood solid
and strong, the leaf large, and rude in the handling, the fruit black, great,
and acceptable to the Palate: But there are three apparently different species
in the white, distinguished only by the color of the fruit, namely, white,
black, and red: Yet is this fruit by much le^se grateful to the palate then
that of the black Mulberry. No other distinction besides, the color of the
fruit discernes them one from the other, the Leaves of all three being of the
same mean greatness of the same smooth feeling, the wood of the same
internal yellowness, almost as ^irme as that of the black Mulberry.

But the silk taking his quality from the leaf make us lay aside the black
Mulberry tree, since the bottomes from thence are too gross and heavy, whereas
the white Mulberry makes silk fine and light, to temper which many feed the
Worms with two sorts of meats by dictinction of times, viz. at the beginning
with white leaves, that the silk may be fine, in the closing, with black to
fortify it, and make it weigh: Yet this though it have an appearance of reason
at the first inspection, rarely answers the expectation, the very alteration of
the meat as from that which is more delicate, to that which is more gross,
being disagreable to the nature of the Worm, who must show that diminution in
the quality of his silks which he feels in the impairing of his nutriment.
Others make a contrary application of leaves by a more (imaginative solid
foundation) which is to begin their dieting with black, and conclu^e with
white; which cannot succeed better, for the black having disposed the matte^ of
the silk, the white leaves after administered have no power to alter that
seminall disposition.

We shall therefore fix upon it as a Principle of Nature, not to vary the
nourishment of this industrious Creature. If we begin with the black Mulberry,
the continuance of it will be necessary. If the Ground you possess be
already planted with black Mulberries, it is so much loss of time and expenses
to replant white: But if we are to commence a thing de Novo, every man's reason
leading him to choose the most profitable, and common exp^rience telling us that
the white antecede the black ones so incredibly in the point of Matu^ation,
that six years of growth advance not so much the latter as two the first; it
were an act declaring Bethlem for Dictator, not to prefer the most speedy and
profitable before the tedious and improper commodity. Besides which Em^lument
the Branches which by that speedy shoot they bring forth will be useful for
propagation of that tree to infinite Numbers.

There is yet experimental election amongst the white Mulberries. Some
affirming that the Leaves of those trees which emit the white fruit are fittest
to be assigned for this nourishment, which they fortify by this reason; That
Pullen and Swine do most delight in the white, and never eat the red and
black but by constraint^, a conjecture not altogether irrefragable; for why may
it not be controverted that Pullen and Swine being a greedy Generation, may
rather balance that which is most gross and fulsome, as best adapted for
their Palate, then that which is nice, and subtle, and best according to the
delicate tenderness of this Creature? Others who have their own experience to
fortify their assertion, commend the white Mulberry bearing the black fruit,
the color demonstrating a better concoction in the fruit, and consequently in
the leaf then the others.

But (which we must be extremely curious in) we must expel from our yard
all Muberry trees bea^ing leaves too much indented, which, besides that it is
an apparent sign of small subsistence and uncompleated nature, is more
defective in quantity and quality of nourishment, then that which is less
interruptedly circular: Yet this may easily be remedied, if you inoc^late such
trees in the Bud^ or Es^ucheon, having need of such freedom; the profit
thence arising being very considerable for this kind of nourishment: For by
this course that inconsiderable quantity of worthless and famelick leaves
receives a happy melioration into an abundant plenty of substantial and
nutritive nature. Nor is this transmutation improper, for any other Orchard
Plants which will succeed to your most advantageous expectation, and all
indomestick and wild trees may by this be made capable of a most happy
cultivation. This infranchizing may be practiced to the answer of your desires
in Mulberries of all Ages: In the older, on their new shoot^ of the antecedent
year then lopped; in the younger upon the smallest trees of the Nursery. But to
graft these trees in the first season, that their growth will permit it, is
most opportune and profitable; for by this means your Groves of Mulberry will
be entirely delivered from all apprehe^sion of jejune sterility, or
insub^tantiall deficiency: Nor can ever you fear a want of supply, if you
constantly maintain a Nursery of such Grafts, not from the seed, but from the
shoots and branches of your best trees thus propagated to an unperishable
infinity by couching them in the ground, and the trees increasing by their
reimplanting are constantly furnished with Leaves of an excellent sweetness
and greatness, exquisitely abundant in nourishment, and consequently exempt
from all the inconveniences which walk hand in hand with an ungrateful
wildness. Having described what Trees, Grafts, and Nurseries are best
conducent to our mystery; let us next dilate of their most proper soil, and
best order in planting.

The best soil and order ^or planting the Mulberry.
FOr the soil it must be chosen in particular much like that of the Vines,
inclining rather to dry then moist, light then heavy, sandy then clayie; for
those which opiniona^e themselves that a fat ground is inconvenient t^
Mulberries^ as supplying leaves of too gross and unsubtile aliment; The
Objection is pretty, but under pardon scarcely solid, neither am I capable of
any reason to the contrary, why a rich soil should not emit the growing Trees
with a greater maturation and bigness, then a lean Plantation, where the
tender Plants are even starved with the sparenesse of distributive moisture and
aliment: Yet to prevent the too gross substance of the leaf after the tree by
the advantage of a rich nourishment, has arrived to a competent greatness;
the order which we shall prescribe in their planting will admit the Plough
amongst them, where cultivation will easily take off the soil from all
exuberancy of fullsome rankness. The soil which is full of Springs, Lakes,
Rivers, or (which i^ worst of all) Marshes, is particularly to be avoided.

The manner of implanting them would require a distance of ^oure fathomes or
more, which in Virginia where we labor not under a penury of ground, may be
something more spaciously enlarged; the Reasons why this extent of distance
are: First, the intermixture of spreading Branches, where by their contingency
they violate and ^utually wound themselves will be avoided. Next, the Sun
has a more unimpeached immi^^ion and distri^ution of his Beams, with which
this tree is most particularly delighted. Lastly, this largeness of intervalls
permits a free passage for the Plough^ to take off all luxur^ancy of rankness,
which too much inspissates the leafes, which must feed this admirable Creature.

But of such Grains as may with lea^t impairement be sown under the Mulberry
trees, Oats and Pease are the most proper, which during the ^ollection of the
leaves may with very small detriment be tr^dden upon (the season commonly
falling in April and May, when their blades are backward) nay the very
compressure of the Earth makes them afterward arise more strongly.

I approve much more of interplanting the Vine; but (which I conceive the most
convenient for Virginia is) the setting of the Indian Potato has the most
inestimable benefit; the Potato having such a happy multiplica^ion of and in it
self, that whilst there is but a string of the Root left behind in the earth,
the species will be renewed. Besides the excellency of the food, whether for
man, or (where such a vast abundance may soon introduce a satiety) Cattle will
bring alone with it an inestimable advantage; whereas Corn may too strongly
impoverish a Ground, and the Vine it self when it comes to its ripest
excellency, will want the complete comfort of the Sun beams to give fruit a
well concocted maturity, the Mulber^y like an Ambitious Grandee, engrossing all
that favor to himself by his prevalency of height and greatness.

Nor should we be too curious to plant the trees one over against the other
exactly opposite; but ^ still observing for beauties ^ake to set them in a
right line) rather one against the Intervall of the other, that so the Sun
may have no interposition from any A^gle, to warm, comfort, and enrich this
tree, which aides the production of so many incomprehensible Miracles.

The order for collection of the Leaves.
THe order to be observed for collecting the leaves should be precisely
insisted upon, that the trees may be of longer and ^^ourishing duration, and
the food of a more curious and unsoyled nourishment: It is a truth not to be
denied, that the dis^eaving of trees is extremely prejudicial, and in some
irrecoverably deadly; the reason is their extraordinary scorching, by being
left without any shade of protection: But the M^lberry being (as it were)
destin^d to this work which it naturally supporteth, more inprejudicially
endures this ^emper of di^leaving then any other trees whatsoever. But for the
obviation of this inconvenience, it will be absolutely necessary for our
Master of the silkeworme^ to have such a proportionable number of trees, that
the half may alternately repose unpluckt every second year. This diligently
put into practice will make your trees contin^e verdant and vigorous for many
Generations.

To gath^r them with both hands leaf after leaf, i^ confessedly the most
proper, but yet withal the most expencefull; for the multitude of hands which
such a circumstantiall labor would exact.

The other way of gathering them with stripping them from the branches, is
without doubt extremely nocent to the tree, and worm: to the tree by
unbarking, wounding and perishing its branches. Nor is it less de^rimentall to
the Worm seeing this disorderly collection corrupts and sullies the leaves,
which this delicate nice Creature perceiving, either rejects them, or sickens
upon their reception by bruising the leaves, and expressing that which is the
life of i^s substance, the juice, and this commonly with unwasht hands, which
leave the ill odor unremoveable upon them.

The remov^ll of these inconveniences is easily effected by following the
course they practice in some parts of Spain, which is by clipping the leaves
from the branches with a sharp in^trument, like a Tailors sheares; by this way
you disleave many stalks at once, which falling into a clean sheet spread
under that tree for the purpose, seperating afterward the leaves also^ such as
are ^ound from unsound, such as peradventure have much of the stalk, from
those which are nothing but leaf, (the stalk being hurtful to this tender
Creature) and a^ministred to them the Sunny side of the leaf upward is the
most commendable practice of gathering and f^eding that has hitherto been
delivered.

The leaves of the old Mulberry are to be much preferred before those which are
not come to an absolute perfection; the age of perfection in the Mulberry, we
reckon to be accomplished in seven or eight years, as to soundness of
nourishment; not that they grow not after, but by that time it is grown
powerful to concoct such succulency as might before over master it.

The trees disleaved must by a diligent hand be pruned immediately after the
last collection; what ever is broken, wounded, or made unprofitable must be
carefully cut off. The extremes of all the branches must be top'd a little
with a sh^rpe pruning knife, which is an invitation to nature to send forth the
next year more vigorously. But whether it be in gathering the leaves, or
pruning the trees, it must be our principal care that they be entirely
beared, the omission of which, by not taking all the leaves off, turns back
the liberallity of the repeating Spring. This observation has been grounded
upon practice, made so successful by experience, that it has been found,
that trees after such culture and disleaving, have within a month attired
themselves with such a n^w border of leaves, that the former imbalding them
has been imperceptible.

Which induces me to believe a former assertion, that it is possible to have a
second silk harvest by this means, and why not equal with the first, I know
not, since the seed is more youthful and vigorous then that of the year
preceding grown feeble by its continuance.

The raines if they fall about the time this noble creature draws unto her
perfection and period, is by much more strangely prejudicial, then when they
are in the greatest of their feeding, the wet leaves occasioning them many
desperate diseases: the usual way of prevention is to have a provision of
leaves before hand, when there is any jealousy of rainy weather; but this
provision must be laid in a clean dry place which is fresh aired, and that we
may remove all dangers of contracting too much heat, to be turned often, which
course, although the Rain should not oppress us, yet is it of great
convenience, not so much out of apprehension to be necessitated as for the
quality of the food, it being much better after fourteen or fifteen hours
resting in a place clean and dry, then when fresh from the tree. But if you
are surprised by an unexpected season of wet, take those Mulberries which you
intend to lop the next year, (and the Mulberry would be lop'd every ten or
twelve year, which revives and strengthens the tree with a new youth) and cut
their branches which hung up in a dry corner, either of your house or barn,
or any other coverture in airy places, will soon have their leaves dry,
better conditioned, and of more efficacy then any leaves set to a fire, which
is too sudden, or to winnowing by a wind artificial and unnatural.

The Mulberries chief profit consisting in the leaf, we must be careful to
lose nothing of this revenue; which considered^ we should delay the disheading
or lopping of them till the Worms have done feeding, which would be about the
latter end of May, or the beginning of Iune^ and although by the disbranching
of them in such a season, we cannot expect such large returning shoots as those
which were cut in February or March, the dist^nce of time being material in
their growth, yet the profit of the leaves being double, very well answer such
inequality. The Mu^berry being of so frank and pliable a disposition, that
notwithstanding its amputation in unseasonable Moon and weather, no injuries
shall ^inder him from Regermination.

Yet are not these advantages (no necessity obstructing them) to be omitted by
any which are not enemies to their own profit. The Mulberries in the increase
of the Moone^ pouled, or lopt, bring forth their young shoo^s long without
spreading Branches; in the Wa^e short, with many little Branches crossing the
principal. To reconcile this (the election of the time being in our power) the
Mulberries seated in lean grounds, are most prop^rly disheaded in the new
Moone^ those which are planted in rich ground, in the last qua^ter; so will
those in the lean soil ^^it shoots as long as the ba^rennesse of the place
will affo^d them: and those of the fatter, through the benefit of the^ seat,
conveniently regaine that which they would not easily have done, cut in the
increase; For those aspiring branches, were they not r^strained by the counte^
shoots who participate with them in nou^ishment wou^d by reason of their
unweldy length, be forced to bend downewa^ds to the deforming of the tree from
the shape of a Mulberry into that of a Palm Tree, which is not to be feared
in the rest, by reason of the leanenesse of the ground, forbidding all
abundance of shooting: We have provided for the feeding of this little and
great Artificer, let us now express an equal care in his lodging.

The lodging of the Silk Worms.
IT IS a vanity to expect emolument from this mysterious Creature, if we sort
him not with a lodging proper and agreeable to his nature, who can with no
less disprofit be ill accommodated in his habitation, then in his
nourishment; who to show a particular affinity with the noblest of Creatures,
Man, makes his affection of habitation equal to his. Spaciousness, pleasure,
healthfullnesse, distance from off^nsive vapors, damps and humidities, warmth
in the extremes of colds, coolness in the extremes of warmth. Wh^t ever we
naturally desire and abhor, does this Creature by the prosperity or
infelicity of his labors show a most experimental resentment of.

His station therefore must be in the mean twixt the top and bottom of a
foundation, the first being too much obnoxious to heats or winds, the second
to colds and Damps. The Platform therefore of your building his station must
be so contrived, as to have his Basis three or four foot above the g^ound, nor
ascending within an equal distance of the Tiles. A Fab^ick (says D^ Serres)
of seven fathom in length, three in breadth, and two in height, will
entertain with ease the Worms enlivened from ten ounces of seed: this
proportion may be raised according to your seed. In VIRGINIA these may be of
very sudden erection; Nature has furnished that excellent Country with
materials, to invite all who have the desire to attempt it.

That the air and wind (if cool and dry) may have free passage to r^fresh
these laborious spinners, who near upon the perfection of their work are upon
the point of stifling^ (the season, and the abu^d^^ce of the silk wherewith
they are filled, both cooperating thereunto) W^e must h^ve window^s opening to
all Angles to receive u^susp^^ted inf^igidations in extreamities of heat, and
warming ^ranspirations in immoderate colds; Yet with this Proviso, that these
windows be fit not only to receive any favorable air, but to expel all
noxious vapors; and because this Creature loves any thing that is white and
luminous, it will sort excellently well with his disposition and safety, to
parget or plaster the inside of the house very well and smooth, both to
satisfy the eye and preserve him from the danger of Rats, which cannot clime
^p such a wall, though a principal care ought to be used that the several
stations on which they are lodged, be remote from all fixures to walls, which
might give Rats and Mice advantage.

To build the Scaffolds containing these Worms: Many Pillars of Carpenters
work directly squared, shall be perpendicularly erected, from the ground to
the seeling, to support the Tables which crossing the pillars upon little
joints sixteen inches distant one from the other (except that from the g^ound
which must be 36 inches.) Upon these Tables do we lay our Worms, but their
boards must not be equal in breadth, every table as it exceeds in height,
being to be narrower then the next below by four inches, and the highest
approaching the seeling to be narrowest of all. This Pyramidicall form is of
most beauty and safety to the Worms; when wandering upon the Edges from one end
of the Scaffold to another, seeking a fit place to vomit their silk, they fall
in such a precipice from the higher scaffold to the ground^ that they break
th^mselves in pieces: But by this means fal^ing but from one scaffold to
another, the smallness of the distance contributes to their preservation. The
breadth of the most lowest ^able shall be limited even to this proportion,
that easily of one side a man with his hand may reach the middle to attend the
Worms; as for the ascending scaffolds their continual diminution makes the
serving of them of greater easiness.

A Room of any capacity will admit several of these scaffolds (distinct from
the wall for reason before recited of R^ts) and also that the attender may come
on either side of the scaffold, such space being always to be left between
their po^ition^

^hese scaffolds must be made of an unsuspect^d fi^menesse, to prev^nt the
falling down of any part of it, or the whole either by (...) ladder which the
Keeper ascends, or the weight of the Worms themselves, when once grown great
and h^^vy.

To s^^nd these se^ffolds some m^ke boa^ds about them, ^s it were by Ga^leries^
othe^s have their getting up to them by little stairs app^opriated to this;
others by formes^ I approve of none more convenient then a light ladder which
fi^^all, and poss^sses but one place.

The timber fittest to employ in the tablure of this scaffolding is usually
fur or such light wood: In VIRGINIA I apprehend none fitter then Cedar or
Cypress, because of their delicious odours.

We have already spoken of such means as may refr^sh the overheated worm;
rests now to del^ver an experiment to warm the Air, this Crea^ure b^ing no
l^^^e Enemy to cold in the beginning of his apprentissage, then to heat when
he is ready to go out ^f this World M^st^r workem^n.

Aft^r having built your house for worms; let there be a hole pier^^d through
your wall, where you must make an Oven, the mouth whereof must be on the out
side of the house: Then before you make it off, take pots like flower pots, bu^
such as will i^dure the fire, and lay them with the mouth side of these p^ts
tending inwards toward the house, and the bottom within the Oven, lay these
t^us sidelong at an equal distance and work up the Oven with the pots
incorporate thereunto^ This done you may make a fire in the Oven, which by the
benefit of the p^ts conveyes a^l the heat to you without any inconveni^nce of
smoke. To make this heat the more agreeable to the Wo^m^s, and to keep the
house in a temperate and inoff^nsive warmth, you may put into these pot^
branches of Rosemary, Time, Ros^s, ^uniper, etc.

This Figure shows the order for ^^^king ^h^ T^bl^^ ^n ^^e Se^ffolds, to lay
the Leaves on, for feeding the Worms.


This Figure shows how ^o plac^ the Rods, between the Table^, for the Worms
to ^limbe up, and spin their silk.


This Figure represents the Engi^e, to wind off the silk from the Cods, with
Furnaces and Cawlderns necessary thereto.


This Figure pourtra^^^ the Cods, with the Butter^lies come forth of them, to
lay th^^^ Eggs upon black Serge, Chamlet, Tammy, or such like stuff, as in
this Treatise is showed.


The elec^ion and use of the seed of the Silke-Worme.
THere is a great deal of Reason, that we should be curio^s in the election of
ou^ seed; and it is not more Poetic then Philosophic, that of HORACE: Est in
juv^n^i^ est in equis patrum,
Virtui nec imb^llem feroces
Progenerant aquilam columbae.


What can we expect of generosity in that which has a disposition to degenerate
before produced: of all the seeds proper for the v^vifying this animal, there
is none more excellent^ as yet arrived to our knowledge, then that of Spain:
this De ^erres ^ffirmeth, though he seem to be in a kind of haesitation,
whether that of Calabria march not in a higher degree of reputation, as
yielding more abundance, and of equal hardness with the Cod of Spain; yet
this is certain in nature and reason, that seed transported into other colder
Regions, can no way lay claim to a parity of thriving with that continued in
its own Climate; and I doubt not but if the South of VIRGINIA, where the
Silke-worme is aboriginally native, were duly inquired after, the Seed of that
would have a particular excellency, to which all the Europaean Nations must
give the glory, the right hand of pre-eminence.

But leaving this to the scrutiny which shall be made by time, and experience,
we must grant the prime opinion to the Spanish, which however it thrive in
France for four years, yet afterward it degenerates extremely, so that it
must ^very four years be renewed, for within that circle it s^^f^^s a
manifest d^clension in goodness. Coming from Spain it is of a dark taw^y
color, after ce^taine generations, gray.

To prove whether the seed be dead or not, you must exp^^iment it upon your
nail, that which br^aks in cracking, c^sting ^orth ^umor and moisture, you may
assuredly esteem for good, the other is to be rejected. The smallness of the
Spanish se^d increases the number of Worms, for which it deserves a p^r^icular
prae^^tion.

No seed of above a year old is any further profitable, till you put them to
Hat^h, you may preserve them in Boxes thrust amongst woollen clo^thes in a
Trunk or Chest, and let the Chamber where such Trunkes or Chests are, be now
and then aired with a fire, to the intent they being rather warm then cold,
may be praedisposed for a hasty production when the season of the year shall
invite you to put it into practice.

To imbibe or steep the seed of Silke-wormes in the most generous Wine you can
procure, is an experiment that has always answered with a happy success; for
this not only discriminates betwixt the good and bad, (the good always
subsiding, and the other floating) but adds legitimation and strength to the
approved ones, making them come forth free and fortified, and causes them to
hatch almost all at one time. After the good are taken out, they must be set to
dry in the Sun, or before the fire, laid upon very clean paper, covered with
white linen, or smooth paper, lest the ^eat might bring it prejudice.

The vivification of the Seed.
THE Spring being come, and the Mulberries budding, it will be seasonable to
put them to hatching, which (all other ways omitted, as the keeping them in a
Box, in ones pocket, between a woman's Breasts, etc.) sorts best with Reason
and convenience, performed thus^ viz. That the seed removed from its first
vessel, shall be committed into a Box lined with Cotton, over which you must
put a white paper, which must separate the seed from the Cotton, the^ cover the
seeds (being not above half an inch thick) with a little b^d of Tow, over
which Tow you are to lay a paper pierced very thick with small holes, much
about the bigness of the tag of a point; over this paper you shall lay some
Mulberry leaves. And this is the preparative to hatch them.

To bring them forth, lay your Box so prepared between two Pillowes, which
moderately warmed with a Pa^ every two houres^ and after the first three and
four days visiting the Box at every such warming, to the end to separate such
as you shall see hatched, who will not fail to creep through the Tow, and
pierced paper to the Mulberry leaves, to which they will cleave: which to
remove, you must draw them out of the Box by taking hold of the Mu^berry
leave^ with a needle, and removing them and the Worms adherent into a bigger
Box or sieve; with paper at the bottomes, distinguish those of a hasty
production from those of a more slow, that the work may arise more equal.
These thus brought forth must by gradations be accustomed to endure the
coolness of the Spring, diminishing daily something from his accidental
warmness: the first four days let them in the sieve covered with clean
linen continue upon the bed, the curtains closely drawn, then removed into a
warm chamber, close from all penetrations, laid upon ranks close together,
that they may give and receive mutual warmth, allowing them a larger
proportion of room, as they increase in body.

But the most assured way to preserve the Worms until their second change in
warmth and security from Vermin, dust, or other hostilities of nature, is by a
great Press or Cubbord made with many stages, parget^ed or pasted for the
agreeableness of the odou^ with Ox dung, made of fur, or mats, and to draw
out at will seperately, equally distant four inches, compassed round about
with Linen tackt to the doors, with paper w^ndowes on the sides and foremost
door, to admit or exclude air after the exigency of the occasion; and here
vacant places being left at first to enlarge them, as they increase in growth
may they be distinguished according to the Dates of their first appearance
upon the Mulberry, rejecting all that seed, which is not enlivened before the
fifth day, as unprofitable for working by confusion of times, and useless by
their weakness.

Four times does this excellent Artist change his skin, which is the cause
of his so many sicknesses. The first sickness arriving within ^ight days from
the beginning of his life, is known by these symptoms; the head grows big
and white, and he hides hims^lf^ under the leaves: To administer any food were
needless^; but that they are not all sick at one instant, so that some must be
giv^n to nourish them which have not arrived to, or past over their sickness,
which you shall know by their change of color and creeping upon fresh leaves.

The second sickness arising within eight days, or thereabouts, from thence
is known by the sa^^ accidentalls, and must have the same applications, only
now they would be removed into new, clean, and more spacious places: The
third is in all like the two other, though something more dangerous; here you
must carefully prevent the accession of all cold airs whatsoever: It may
happen that some of these Worms may grow yellow, which is almost incurable in
themselves, and deadly contagious to all the rest; these must be carefully
selected from the rest and ejected. Remove, enlarge and cleanse as before.
Eight or ten days after appears the 4. change or sickness, and now the
recovered Worms being increased to their full growth, must be removed,
enlarged, and cleansed, as before.

At appointed hours morning and evening must this Worm be^ fed from their
hatching to their first change or sickness^; from the second change to the
third or fourth, they must be fed three times the day at the least, taking
this for an assured maxim, that after the recovery from their last sickness,
The very cloying of them with leaves^ even to the satiety of their appetite,
accelerates them to the perfection of their task; for these curious Vessels
will the sooner discharge themselves of their precious enclosed substance, by
how much they are the sooner replenished. Nor is there any prodigal
improvidence in this; for it has been observed that Worms have eaten near
as much in eight days when more sparingly distributed, as in four when
liberally handed to them; so that by such wary dispensation they save no
leaves, and lose four days in point of time.

But a particular eye of care must be had to the quality of the leaves you
feed with. No goodness of a selected tree being capable to secure it self
against accidental diseases arising from the unnaturallnesse of seasons,
wherein by extremes of drought or moisture, mildewes, heat drops, and other
distempers, all the leaves oftentimes becoming yellowish, spotted, or
speckled, declare the nature of that food highly unwholesome and pernicious:
Such as grow out of the Sun in the interior umbragious parts of thick trees
are almost as dangerous: No^ are the leaves of the second Spring which shoot
afresh on trees already disleaved of less guilt, through the inequality of
their Ages^ One banquet of those gives the last repast that your Worms shall
have need of, a flux thence arising killing them, and easing you of further
trouble, if yo^ account it so to be vigilant over your own profit.

The m^st agreeable to all Worms is to be fed with leaves of their own age,
and by this the feeble Creature shall meet with tender leaves, then grown
strong with leaves, f^ll grown correspondent to both their complexions. The
fault of the wet leaves may be corrected by patience, attending the serener
season; but of dry leaves you ought at no time (if you regard your own profit
with a sober providence) to be unprovided, and the way how to prepare has
been already delivered in this Treatise.

Th^se precious creatures exact no great expense or laborious care during the
first three or four weeks, b^ing satisfied with little, as most agreeeble to
the tenderness and smallness of bodies, and are very well entertained with
the leaves of the succors or other branches, from whence for the profit of the
tree on^ should necessarily cut them. At the beginning we go to gather leaves
with Hankerchiefs, then with little baskets, lastly with sacks and maunds, as
growing to a bigness to re^uire it, and a perfection to discern it.

That the Gatherers of these leaves should handle them with pure and washed
hands, we have already decla^ed absolutely necessary: But the Governor of
these chaste and magnific^nt Creatures must be Master of an exact purity. The
smell of Tobacco is deadly to them: Let his obs^rvance forbear it: Let him
have a watchful eye, that none of an offensive smell approach them; all ill
breathings upon them whether contracted by fulsome food or nature make this
innocently noble Creature express^ her r^sentment by her own death, or
sickness. Let him pu^ifie the rankn^sse of his own breath (when fasting) with
good Wine ere he approach them with the odor whereof the worm is highly
ch^rished. Let the Lodging be swept every day, and preserved so by sprinkling
the flou^e with vinegar, and afterward strawing it wi^h Lavender, Sp^ke,
Rosemary, Time, and such like of well comforting Odours. To these we may
sometim^s add a p^rfume composed of Frankincense, Benio^n, Storax, and other
quickening aromaticks bu^ned in the lodging.

Let the Tables be oft^n made clean and shift^d, by often, I mean every ^^ird
o^ fou^th day a^ the fur^hest, at which time the litter begins to be offensive
to this curious natured Creature; especially with the increase of the heat,
let his diligence increase, that no uncleanesse (at that time more then
ordinary malign) cut him from the benefit of his labors.

The litter must not be taken away by degrees to the trouble of our curious
Creature, but all at once; which may be ^ffected, if you leave at the end of
each Scaffold an empty station to place the adjoining Worms on, whose left
station being made clean is fitted for the next neighborhood, and thus may
all be removed and shifted by degrees, and a vacan^ table at the other end of
the scaffold r^maines to begin again (as before) within two, three, or four
days at the longest. And thus without carrying far, the Worms shall be
removed with ease and security, not once laying the finger upon their tender
bodies; for giving them fresh leaves at the time of their replacing, the Worm
will fasten to the leaf, and the leaf may be removed with his precious
burden, with no less safety then convenience.

It will be requisite to dispose the tables in such a fashion that they may
be seperately taken from the scaffold like tills out of drawers; for this the
easiest and less nocent way of cleansing, as preventing the falling of any
stench upon the lower ^ables, and by which they are more suddenly discharged of
their filth and ordure, merely by striking them gently on the floor, which
done, let them be swept and brushed perfectly well; Let the tables on which
you put your Worms after their first sickness be sprinkled with Vinegar or
Wine, then rubbed over with sweet Herbs to delight and encourage them to
labor. Some have made tryall^ which has succeeded happily of the smell of
Garlic and Onions to refresh them; I dare not absolutely assent to this
experiment; but it is clear as Su^^e-shine, that the Worm not only rejoices
in agreeable odours, but is succored thereby in his greatest ^aladies: of
which we now intend to discourse.

The causes of extraordinary maladies in Worms, and their ^^re.
THe extremes of colds and heates, the too sparing, or too abundant
administration of victuals in their several ages, and a malign disposition
of the leaves are the principle causes of all extraordinary maladies which
afflict this Creature. If the in^lemency of Cold has benumbed or diseased this
innocent Artist, the stove or oven formerly mentioned will recover it (the
stopping of all windows, and other admissories of air cooperating^) To the
greater complement of the c^re, let the lodging be perfumed with redolent
G^mmes, with Wine, strong Vinegar, or Aqua vitae: If on the contrary, the
torrid violence of heat have wasted the strength of this sudden and
excellent spinner: The fresh air admitted at the doo^es and windows some
brave artificial Fannes or Ventalls to raise this breath, if too little, or at
the last the exposing them upon their tables out of their lodgings to enjoy an
uncontrouled and liberal communion of the air, some half an hour before
Sun rising are the proper means of their recovery. Those which by a wastfull
liberality of their keeper in the t^ndernesse of their age have injured
themselves with over fe^ding, must be cured by a two days abstinence, and for
some two succeeding days dieted with a moderation. Those who famished by the
negligenc^ of their keeper are almost languishing to death, mus^ be restored
by giving them meat in slender proportion, but frequently repeated, by such a
diet regaining their forfeited appetite. Those which by having fed on yellow
spotted, or too young leaves have contracted a fl^xe, and from thence a jaundice
and spotted color, i^ companied with black bruisings, must upon the first
inspection be immediately ^emoved into separate chambers, that the change of
air and diet may labor for their almost desperate cure, and to prevent a
contagion, which from thence would universally domineere. But such Worms which
as an accession to this last disease you should behold bathed on the belly by a
certain humor flowing in that part of their bodies, are as incurable, good for
nothing but to repast your Poultry.

Indeed excepting this last inexpugnable malady perfumes and change of chambers
are generally conducing to overcome all diseases and to res^ore a new health
and vigor. But this noble Creature is by nature sufficiently privileged from
these diseases, if the unskilfullnesse or negligence of the keeper did not
violate this privilege, and by that violation increase his own trouble.

Nor is this care of the keeper to be only limited to the day, the night too
must require a part of his vigilance; Mice and Rats then take advantage, and
grieved that any Creature should labor for man without their participation or
obstruction devour them by Troops, and the Cat her self enters in^o a league
with these her usual prey^ to prey upon these poor things, whose innocence
and excellency makes them the more obnoxious to their cruel avarice. To remedy
this, the house must not be without continual Lamps, Bells, and other vain
terrors to affright them: The keeper himself also, or his Depu^y must
fr^quently walk round about his little A^my. And left the Oil (which
occas^ons diverse indispositions, if it fall but in a drop upon these nice
A^^^sts) might be prejudicial, the Lamp^s should be affixed on the wall, and
the portable lights with which he visits his curious charge of Wax, Tallow,
firre^tree, or any other of inn^xious, but illuminative substance.

These things well observed, within seven or eight da^es at the most,
succeeding their fourth and l^st exuviall sickness^; The W^rmes dispose
themselves to pay the expense of their Diet. To make preparation for them,
there must be accommodations of r^^^ necessary for these Worms to (...) up to
vomit their silk, and fasten their Webs by. To assemble these Worms (the
term assigned to this work) the most proper matters are Rosemary, cutting of
Vines ^^oots, of Chestn^^s, Oaks, Osiers, Sallowes, Elmes Ashes, and in
general of all flexible shrubs, not having any disagreeing od^ur. The feet of
these rods ^v^ned for the bet^^r fixure shall be joined at 15 inches distant
to the table below, and the t^p^ of them arch^d together at that above^ Which
Epit^^^all A^phitheater is Mast^r of as much beauty as those of the CAESAR'S in
the greate^^ volume of their luster and magnifice^ce; the upper part of the
Arch must be plent^^ully interwoven with sprigs of Lavender, Spike, Thyme, and
shrubs delectable to the smell. By this intermixture the Worms shall have
ample sat^sfaction to their restless curiosity, where firmly to fasten their
rich matter, having an election of such delectation of Perfumes, and variety of
shoots: But these twigs must by no means be green, the moisture extremely
offending the Cattle, and not suddenly withering, if the air be moist.

The Worms being removed to these Amphitheatrall Trophies, you may easily
discover their grateful inclination to spinne, by their bigness of body,
brightness, and clearenesse of belly and neck, neglect of meat, and irregular
wandering through the Troop; and a ^^ttle after to fulfill these promises they
ascend their branches to vomit, or rather spinne out their silky substance.
Here you must diminish their Ordinary, daily, for they will in short time have
united themselves to those shoots or twigs, quite forsaking the table. Those
Worms which clime not before the others union to the branches are of a latter
hatching; and to prevent all unseasonable intertextures in general, to the
retarding and perishing of the whole work, must be assembled two other tables
arched as these, that they may work together at one time.

The knowledge (when these Worms have perfected their Cod^ or bottoms) may be
obtained by an ear that is but the leastwaies curious, these creatures making
both a pleasant humming in feeding and continuing it in fashioning their
bottoms, give that noise and their completed work over both together. That
which falls next is the propagation of the seed to be preserved till the next
Harvest.

The Propagation of the Silk Worm seed.
HAppy creature, which live only to do mankind service^ and dyest when
thou have accomplished i^! Miracle of Nature! a Worm shut up in his own
monument, breaks through his silky grave, transformed into a Butterflye^
employes ten days to erect himself a s^pulchre, and an equal proportion of
time to leave it^ disimpri^oning himself from his own interment, by
perforation of his bottom, he returns to the view of Mankind in the figure
of a Butterflye, with wings, as if he had already try^^ph'd over his Mortality;
which done, he and his co-triumphall Females, coupling together perpetuate
their species by dissolution of their bodies; and that which compleats the
miracle, may arise from the long abstinence of this living three and twenty
days imprisoned without any sustenance or fruition of that which he takes a
particular delight in, day light.

Removing your branches from the Tables, and your silke-balls or bottomes from
the Branches 5 days after the work is perfected, the B^lls are then to be
made election of, for such seed as you will preserve for the year following.
Bonoeill, and De Serres do both agree that there should be proportioned 200
Balls for one ounce of seed, the Balls M^le and Female (the description of
which hereafter.) But whereas Bonoeill is of opinion that a hundred double or
trebble Bottomes which two or three Worms have spunne and made up in common,
will produce so many Worms as Bottoms: I demand his pardon if I accede rather
to the judgment of D^ Serres: for from every double or triple Bottom there
comes forth but one Butterflye, though it has more within: the Reason is, it
being not probable that they should be all ripe together, that which is most
mature by perforation of the Balls, ^xposes the other to the assault of the
air, which giving them cold, they dye imperfect.

To distinguish the sexes.
THE Male of the worm, when grown great, is known from the Female, by a
wrinkled head^ and a great appea^ance of eyes; the Female has the head round
without any such appearance. In the Bottomes o^ Balls the M^le is k^owne, as
having work^d himself into a Bottom, long slender, and by much sharper at one
end then the other: the Bottomes of the Female are bigger, softer, ^ound at one
end, half poynted at the other.

The Sex in those Butterflyes is thus distinguished: the Male is lesser of body
then the Fem^le, stirring the wings more often and more strongly. Selecting
then two hundred bottomes (male and female included in the number) you must
pass a thread through the first and outward Down, called the Sleave of the
Ball (using a wary hand that you pierce not into the silk, lest the cold
getting in you should quite abortive your Worms) of which you must make
several connexions composed of an equal number of both Sexes; these (to
prevent Rats and Mice) must be hanged upon some hook in a chamber of ^iddle
temper, but something inclining to coolness, yet however not subject to
moisture, that the Butterflyes may come out with the more facility,

Having pierced through their confinement, though nature her self infu^es in
them disposed applications to find out their opposite Sexes, it will be
necessary to couple such as yet are disjoined: all which, after you shall
perceive them in conjuncture, must be s^t either upon Say, Piropus, Tammey,
Chamlet, the Backside of old Velvet, in general upon any stuff which has no
woolly Down, wherein the grain may be lost, or where it may get between the
threads, as is linen) hanged upon the wall close by their Balls, or in defect
of such stuff, take Walnut-tree leaves one handful, or mo^e as you shall see
occasion, tie them by dozens backsides together, ha^g them at several nails
or pinnes, and set the coupled Buterflies thereon. Take the Chamlet, or other
stuffes, receiving the seed, and rub it gently between your hands, and the seed
will come out with great facility.

The principal time of the Butterflyes issuing out from the Cod, is in the
morning about eight of the Clock: the seed collected must be put into a Box
very clean pasted with paper, to exclude all air or dust, kept in a Chest in
a dry temperate place where it may be preserved till the Spring following,
avoiding to make any continual fires in such Chambe^s, lest the warmth
untimely hatch the Worms, which being brought forth at such a season must
perish for want of food.

The Spaniard takes commonly the double and triple Balls for seed, not that he
conceits every double Ball should produce two Butterflyes, or which is a
conceit of more fondness, Male and Female: but because the multiplicity of
creatures spinning their silk in common, make the work so confused that they
cannot well wind it off, which makes them be put in the rank of the pierced
ones for sleave^ and I must ingeniously acknowledge my self to a^^ede to his
opinion; for these d^^^le and triple balls a^e not u^apt ^or this pu^pose since
they com^on^y, as D^ Serres observes, come rather from a lustiness and
supplenesse of the Worme^ then any natural debility: Which su^e are so much
fitter to be culled out, that the best balls may be made into silk, which
will easily wind and the seed of these which is fully as proper for seed^ but
less apt for silk: neither do I know why they should not be preferred,
since the Spanish seed ^^oc^eding from these double and triple Balls carries a
particular ^^^^eminence above the rest^ which if we shall make ^se of, the us^
is the same with others, except that they must be clipped at the smaller end
with the point of a p^ire of scissors, with ^ regard that you cut not clean
through the bo^tome, which would by admission of wind destroy the Worm, and
this they do that the Butte^flies^ if more then one, may find an easy
passage; the best bottomes (if you will preserve them) for Grain, are great,
hard, weighty, and of carnation or flesh color.

The balls preserved for seed being made choice of, the next thing we are to
fall upon is, how to wind off the bottomes designed for silk: Which would be
of much more advantage for pu^ity and plenty of silk, and facility of labor
if they could immediately be wound off. The silk so fresh^y taken unwinding
without any loss or violence: But this delayed, the Gum, by which the Worm
fastens her threads becoming dry, does so harden the bottom, that without
difficulty and loss, the winding cannot be ^ccomplished.

This expeditious winding prevents the enclosed Worm of her full metamorphose
into a Butterflye^ and the bottom from perforation: But then where shall we
find so many workmen if the design were general, as could in seven or eight
days wind off so many millions of bottomes? Not excluding therefore such as
can have that convenience, the next best course to kill the Butterflyes in
those bottomes which we cannot wind off, is by exposing and laying them in
the Sun, the heat of which in its own work stifles this Creature: But let
this be two or three daye^ successively (not all at one exposure, lest your
silk be burned instead of stifling its spinner) two hours before, and two
hours afternoon each day respectively. Let the bottomes, spread upon sheets
be turned often, that the heat may destroy equally, no one excepted from this
sharp insolation; but this must not be done with a rude hand, which instead
of turning them may bruise the Worm, the slimy matter of whose body, being
thus bruised, is very pr^judiciall both for staining the silk, and gluing it
so together, that no Artist can ever unwinde them.

Removing them therefore oftentimes during such sunning with a gentle hand,
wrap them thus warmed in sheets, and let them lie in a fresh dry chamber.

But if the Sun should fail, an Oven of such moderate heat as is usual
after two hours drawing the bread, or heated to such a degree of warmth
(laying it over with boards, and the bottomes in sacks upon those boards, there
remaining each time an hour and a half, repeating it till your experience by
opening the most suspected bottom find the enclosed Worm consumed) will be
of equal operation.

But that which is the best and least practiced course is this: Take your
bottomes, and fill such a Furnace or Copper as your Brewers use, half full of
Water: Within three fingers breadth of this boiling water, lay a lid or planke
or board within the Copper, bored through as thick with holes as a Cullender,
and so fit to the side of the Furnace, that it by no means may sink into the
water: Upon this cover lay a thin Carpet of Darnix, or the like, and upon the
Carpet the silk bottomes, which must be often stirred, with care not to use
too much violence. The mouth of the Copper, except when you stir the bottomes,
must be constantly covered, that the h^are may smother the Worms: Your Worms
being dead, lay your bottomes in some room, where there is air to dry their
moisture. This is an assured (though not vulgar) experiment, and by it your
silk becomes as easy in the winding, and as pure in color and substance, as
if it had been spunne the same moment the Worm had given it perfection.

To wind off the Silk from the Cod or Bottom.
THe winding off the silk from the Cod or bottom, is thus ^ffected: fill a
Caldron full of very fair water and set it upon a Furnace, heat it to such a
degree that (...) water becomes bubbled, as though there were small Pearls in
the middle, being ready to sees; then cast in your Cods or bottomes, still
stirring them up and down with broom or other small bushes, if you shall see
that the heat is not capable to make your bottomes wind, augment your fire,
otherwise abate it.

The bottomes winding the threads will take hold of the broom or brushes; draw
those threads so affixed the length of half a yard and more out with your
fingers, till all the grossness of the bottom b^e wound off, which cutting
off and laying aside, take all the thr^ads of your bottomes united into one and
according to the bigness of thread you intend to make (as whether sowing or
stitching) chose the number, not letting the other threads fall into the water
again, which must be reserved to succeed) which you must run through an
Wire Ring, appointed for to rank the threads which (as you may see in the
draught or Picture) must be fastened upon the fore part of a piece of wood set
directly upon a form before the round or circle, which we call a Bobin, in
the top of which piece in a little space that there is, are fastened two Bobins,
distant from one another two fingers; from this wire ring the thread must be
drawn and crossed upon the bobins, whose only use there is to twist the silk
through a ring which is fastened in the midst of a staff; above the Bobins
you must continue the draught of your thread; this staff which moves with the
wheel is called a Lincet set a cross beneath the wheeles^ from that Ring you
must fasten your thread upon the wheel it self, which must be still turned
till the skeyne of silk be wound up, the Representation see in the next
figure.

Observe, when any thread discontinues, his bottom being wound off, to repair
your number from another bottom, this you shall perceive when your full number
of bottomes stir not altogether.

Be sure that you artificially cut the knots which will be in your threads,
that your silk may be more pure and uniforme.

Those which cast Gum Arabic in the water under pretense to make the silk
wind more pure and glossey, are but impostours, it being a mere cheat to
make the silk weigh the heavier.

Basins, or Caldrons, wherein you put your bottoms to wind, if of Lead re^^ore
the silk more pure then those of Copper, this Metal being subject to a
rubiginous quality, from which Lead is wholly exempt. Let the wheels be large
for the better speeding of the work that two skeines may be wound off
together. That the fire of the Furnace may be pure, and without smoke, let it
be made of Charcoale.

The difficulty of their winding may be mollified by soap, put in the Basin or
Caldron; the old Cods or bottoms hardened by time, will have the natural Gum
which glues their threads dissolved, and the silk come off much more easy.

Those bottomes of silk preserved for seed, and pierced by the Butterflyes,
may be made of good use, if washing them in water you throw them into a
Caldron ready to boil, with soap in it, which must be dissolved before the
bottomes are cast in: thus let them boil a quarter of an hour, or
thereabouts, which done, take them out, wash them in clean water and d^ye
them; being d^yed you must beat them with a round st^ffe of a good bigness
upon a stone or some block which is better, which will make them become white,
and smooth as wool. The way to spinne them after is this.

They must with the fingers be pulled one from one another, and opened as wool
uses to be in such preparations, let it then be put on a Distaffe and spunne
as small as you can, or please.

Treatise of the Vine.
THat the use of the Vine is really intended by nature for VIRGINIA, those
infinite store of ^rap^s which c^owne the forehead of that happy Country are so
many sp^^king testimonies: But what fate has hitheto diverted our English
there inhabiting from the public undertaking a Commodity of so inestimable
benefit, I do not say for a public Staple (though it would be as rich as any
other one species of Traffic whatsoever) but even from private Vineyards,
where they might sit under their own Vine, drink of their own Grapes,
satisfy even the most irregular desire of their voluptuous appetites, and all
this de suo, without entering into the Merchants books for Wines, peradventure
adulterate, without paying the sweat of their brows for the exudation of the
Grape. I dare not determinately judge, lest I might be forced to ascribe it
either to a strange nonchalency or sluggishnesse to their own profit, or which
is worse an inveterate contempt of all other ways of improvement (of what ever
return) in comparison of Fume of ^obacco^

But that they may not be ignorant of the profit of the Vine, they will be
pleased to know that the Vine requires (once planted) little more labor then
the Hoppe. To attend upon four Acrees of Hops is the ordinary undertaking of
one man in ENGLAND, who besides this, neglects not many other labors. If one
man in VIRGINIA be not sufficient to do as much as another in ENGLAND, ^
shall either imagine him to be lame or idle; nor let them object to me the
heat of the Country; if the mid-dayes be hotter, the mornings are much colder,
and the Labourer in VIRGINIA has this advantage of being full of bread to
satiety, whereas oftentimes the Hireling in ENGLAND having a family to feed,
and sometimes no employment, comes to work with a famished body^ and courage,
^ives merely de die in diem, with as little hopes of ever changing the copy of
his fortune, as renewing the lease of his Cottage with his Landlord: those are
but lean encouragements. In VIRGINIA the meanest servant (if he have any
spirit) is still in expectation of improving his condition, and without any
presumption may cherish his hopes, which promise him (his time expired) a
present happiness and future possibility of a Fortune equal, if not outgoing
his Master, the encouragement being greater, the care less, and his
provisionall subsistence by much better: why the Laborer in VIRGINI^ should not
be (I do not say superior) but equal in strength of body and resolution of
mind, to the miserable day-Hireling in ENGLAND, needs an OEDIPUS to unriddle.

By this I hope it granted, that the VIRGINIAN may without any extraordinary
efforts of sweat and spirit^, ^abour equally with those of ENGLAND, and upon
this account I shall assign a Vignard of four Acres to his tillage, an easy
task; let us compute the profit with the labor, and see what may be the
proceed of this proportion well husbanded.

That an acre of Vines in VIRGINIA (when once grown to perfection) will yield
an equal increase to a common Acre of Vines in FRANCE, there being as great a
difference between the soyles as the Acres, and much greater) will I believe be
denied by none, who pretend to modes^y or reason: yet the Acre of Vines in
FRANCE, one with another, very few excepted, will yield y^arely ten or twelve
Muyds of Wine, a measure containing seventy two gallons (a very famous
Frenchman LIEBAULT, is my Author:) what the common Acre, or Arpent, is in
FRANCE, the same man informs us: an Arpent (the common Arpent or Acre of
FRANCE) is 100 Pole in the square, the Pole being longer then ours by eighteen
inches; so that one French Acre yields three Tun of Wine and upwards; Our Acre
being near upon 50 Pole more, we doubt not of profit equal.

The excellent VIRGINIA will pardon me, if for dilucidation of an argument, I
make her pure and unexhausted brows descend to wear a Gyrlond of fertility
equal to that laborious and over-teeming Mother, the French Kingdom, nay to
her common Vineyards: yet let us compute the profit arising from the four
acres, being but one man's labor, we shall find the product even by that
estimate, to be twelve Tun of Wine, as the recompense of his particular
toil: let us imagine this but at ten pounds the Tun, and the profits of this
single person amounts to 120 pounds per annum.

Here they will object the dearness or difficulty of Caske; but this
objection must be made by those who know not VIRGINIA, where there is such an
excellent convenience, and abundance of peculiarly proper Timber, that the
Winter will afford the other Laborers together with our Vigneron leisure, to
cleave Pipe-^taves sufficient for private use of Caske, and to sell to the
public; one man (during that little season) being easily able to make four
thousand.

But our acre being a third part bigger, the soil better, why we may not
promise to our selves this profit, is an incredulity in ENGLAND, worth a brand
of misunderstanding, in SPAIN would deserve the Inquisition.

What soil is most proper for the Vine.
HE which will go to plant the Vine without the twinne consideration of the
qualyty of the soil, and the disposition of the air, has much affinity with
him who goes to Sea without Lead or Compa^se: the one seldom attaines his
Port, nor the other his Harvest.

The quality of the ground whereon the Vine thrives best, is a fine small
Mould, of a subsistence rather inclining to a gentle lightness, then a
churlish stubbornness: they which would not have it to be very fat, are
ignorant that while the Vine is young, the soil wh^re you plant may be employed
to other tillage, and by such expense of its native richness, reduced to that
which they commend so highly, mediocrity: But if the fatness of the ground
transmit a rich and never-failing sap into the nascent Vine^ making it grow
speedy and st^ongly, if the Vine participate of this fatness, which it may be
they call grossness, as desiring to have it more subtle, there is small
question to be made, but that this Wine so imbodied and fortified by nature,
must have extraordinary spirits to preserve it, and that age will have refined
all that grossness into more pure and noble spirits; that if transported, the
Sea will contribute to its melioration: whereas this Wine which they call
subtle and delicate spirits, if either preserved long or transported far, will
with so much applauded subtilty and delicacy lose all his spirits by age and
evaporation.

Scruple therefore at the richness of your ground no more then at the
rankness of your purse; it is in your power to correct either, if there were
necessity: let it have the qualities of gentle, easy, ^ine, and light, to be
stirred, seated (if possible) on the decline of a Hill, not near to any Marish
ground, nor having any springs gliding through it; these Mari^h grounds you
must avoid as you would do Level in a Valley. And the reason is, that the
Vine growing in these parts has a crude and undige^ted blood, quickly soures,
and has neither strength to commend or preserve it, and the Frosts in the
winter time sinking to his roots, by the moist passage of his situation, kills
it; the Grapes plumpe and break, and when as an additionall judgment to your
injudicious election, a Rainy year comes to afflict, the Kernells break out,
the true juice of the Grape accompanying it, and though it fall out that the
Grape swell again, yet let not your expectation swell upon it, for instead of
good Wine proceeding from thence, you will receive nothing but Viny water.

The gentle, easy, fine, and light ground being the best, does not so wholly
arrogate all excellency, as to deny an accession, a neighborhood of goodnes^e
to other soyles. The gravelly ground yields Wine of a great delicacy, but a
small quantity; besides the infant Plants are in danger of being wa^h'd away in
any extraordinary surfeit of raines, such grounds being not able to give them a
deep rooting. The like may be said of sandy ground which notwithstanding in
some places especially where it is of a nitrous substance, will not yield the
Palm to any ground of whatever richness; other grounds may have an enforced
richness, but because usually all such enfatning compost consists of Dung and
Urine, which spoil the purity of the Vine: If my advice were of any weight,
they should never be used for Vintage, till necessity commanded my obedience.

For the disposition of the air, as particularly whether inclining to a
Meridian, or Oblique to the South^ South-East, or South-West; if we contemplate
the nature of the Vine, that it by instinct, prefers places rather hot then
cold, dry then moy^t; that it hates storms and tempests, it affects a
gentle breathing wind, or a serene calm; we may presently collect that it is
neither to be placed open to the North, North-East, nor (in VIRGINIA
especially) to that Nursery of storms, the North^ W^st quarters, nor upon the
tops of Hills, where it lies equally assailable to all: the dear place then
for the Vines embraces, is a Descent, toward, not in ^ Valley (except never
subject to inundations) that being sheltred from the more blustering Domineerers
in the aire^ it lie open to the South, South-West, South-East, or any part of
the East and West, within the South quarter, for such a grateful mansion, and
acceptable soil assigned him, doubt not, but he will return you a rent which
shall satisfy your most unbounded wishes.

But le^t the eye in the option of your Vineyard, may impose upon you,
considering that every ground has some arcane quality which the sight is not
able to discover: to make a most certain experiment, let me propose this way
of Examen. Make a pit in the ground (where your inten^ions are to plant) two
foot deep, take a clod of the earth so cast up^ powder it, and infuse it in a
glass full of clear Raine-water, do your best to incorporate it with the
water by frequent agitation and mixture: let it repose till the subsided earth
have made his perfect residence and sett^ement in the bottom, and the water
recovered her native clearenesse; taste the water, and arrest your judgment
upon this, that such a ^a^t as the water delivers to your palate, will that
earth transmit to your wine: if of an inoffensive or acceptable reli^h, you may
confidently promise your self a Wine pure, and consequently (if the soil be
rich) very noble, nor is a salt taste an ill argument: but if it be a bitter
aluminous, or sulphury gust, this place is not fit for your planting, you lose
your Wine and your labor.

But VIRGINIA has a more certain assurance; God and nature have pointed them a
soil out with their own finger; let them therefore fix their eyes upon those
places where either the Vine or Mulberry grow conjoined, or separate, and let
them assure themselves of the excellency of the soil, a diffidence in this
being an affront to Nature: yet this caution is to be used that though Valleys
are Marshy places, may sometime have them by nature, yet their florescence
would be much more excellent and healthful if removed to such a ground as
formerly we have made choice of.

To make election of Plants.
CUriosity about the choice of your Vine Plants will commend your Husbandry;
let the Vine therefore from whence you take your Plant be of as little Pith as
may be, such unpithy Vines being both fruitful and fortified by nature,
bearing a remarkable abundance of substantial Grapes, and strongly resists the
violence of the weather, and of this fertility and firmness will your Plant
also participate. Let not the Vine you mean to plant from, be above the middle
of his strength, or age, and observe about September those which are most laden
with Grapes, fullest of eyes in their branches, and have been least wounded by
the unseasonablenesse of Weather. Take not a Vine growing on a South side, to
transplant him to a Northern: and set this down for a principle in Nature,
that all plants removed to a better situation and soil, answer your largest
hopes, by their fruitfulness: but transplanted to a worse, assure your se^fe
that without an extraordinary cultivation, there cannot be the least
probability of its thriving.

Let your Plant (if you may with convenience) immediately be planted after its
separation from its original; for while it yet retains any vital vigor, it
will the sooner apply it self to the desire of life and nourishment. If your
necessity will not admit of this ^estination, wrap it tenderly in its own
earth; and when your leisure will permit you to plant it, let it soake some
four or five days in water, and (if possible) running water: this immerging
is a very strong preparative to its sudden taking root.

If you apprehend a necessity of keeping him long or transporting him, (imagine
it the Cyprian or Calabrian Grape thus to be transportable into Virginia,) put
him into a close Barrel filled up with earth; and that no air may mortify
him, let both ends of the Plant be put into Onions or Garlic, or (which is
better) made up with wax, and now and then watered, but not more then to keep
the earth from resolving into a dry dust; for too much moisture might (instead
of preserving him) make him fructify, and your Plant would become all root.

We have already spoken how we must choose, but not what we must make choice
of: Let your Plants therefore be of those which grow between the highest and
lowest, (the lowest having too much of earthy juice, and the highest too
little) let them be round, smooth, and firm, having many eyes, and about one
foot and a half of old wood cut off with the new.

The manner, and way to Plant Vines.
HUman curiosity plungeth us in so many unnecessary toils, that it would almost
take a person off from necessary labor: Look into Columella, the Country
Farm, the Dutch Husbandry and all those supe^cilious Writers, and you shall
see them stand upon such impertinent Puntillos; one while the dependence upon
stars benights a man, another while the ground which should produce this or
that, must be cast after this form, or else it will be barren in spite of the
bounty of the Divine Providence.

Not enumerating therefore all their ways of Planting, I dare lay my life that
if the Vine were but set on foot in VIRGINIA, the ground prepared for it as
they do their Tobacco there, by a right line, holes made instead of their
Hillocks, but larger, deeper, and at greater distance, that there might
something grow betwixt them which might be inoffensive to it by nature, and
clear it from being choked with weeds, or something drawing a contrary
juice, (peradventure Onions and Garlic) or something requiring small
nourishment, (as Lupins) which turned into the earth again (distance of five
foot being left for a Plough, with caution not to come too near the Roots,
which must be bared with a stowe, the Plough running first the length, and then
the traverse of those rows, which therefore must be lineally straight) would
both fatten the earth, and cultivate the Vine all at one moment. Yet submitting
my self to judgments of greater experience then my modesty or na^u^e can ever
hope for, I shall deliver the several way of planting the Vine, with as much
brevity as the matter, and my first resolution rather to contract then enlarge,
will permit me.

The first preparing of the earth to receive the Vine must be done in Spring
or Summer, where the ground you dig or cast mu^t be cleansed from all manner
of superfluities whatsoever; namely, Roots, Weeds, Stones, etc. this digging
must be several times repeated, that the earth by alternate changing its
place of top and bottom may be thoroughly tempred, the dry refreshed, and the
moist qualified: Thus cleansed, cast it into many furrows (the sides whereof
the French call Chevaliers or Guides, because it should guide you in the
planting) the depth of eighteen inches or more; let the mo^ld cast up above,
be so disposed, that it may answer to the depth below.

Note that these furrows in a sandy, flinty, or wet ground mu^t ^ot be so
hollow as in that which is rough and crabbed^ In the bottom of the first you
may put stones about the bigness of an ordinary brick (but round) not bigger,
which in the heat of Summer refreshes, in violence of Rain opens a passage to
the water, that it dwell not at the Root to rot it.

The best season for planting of Vines is in October, the Moon increasing, the
Furrows must be made in August, that the exposed earth may have time of
digestive preparation.

If your plant have Roots, you must when you plant it cut them off all, except
it be newly gathered, if it be a slip or cut, which though it be not so
swift of growth the first year, yet is of much longer continuance, you must
soake it in water, if it be possible in running water five or six days.

He which plants the Vine, the ground thus prepared, and having a line with
him, that he may observe a just evennesse and straightness, both in the Row,
and to the opposite Plant, that so every four may make a regular quadrangle,
must bow his plant, the bigger end forward one foot into the earth of the
Ditch, letting first some of the Mould from the ^ides fall into it; let him
tread upon the Mould the better to fix the plant, and with his hand (the foot
still pressing upon that part of the plant which is inearthed) gently raise or
bow the top of the plant that it may grow erect: this done, let him cast some
more Mould on it, to the thickness of six inches, and cut the top of the
Plant, so as not to leave above three knots or joints above the earth: Let him
proceed in planting of the rest, observing the prescribed order: some set two
plants together in this order, that if one should fail, the other might
recompense the default.

If you will have your Vine to grow without stakes or props, cut it so, that
you let it not increase above two or three joints in the year, which will make
it to stand firm against all storms, if but naturally violent.

It will be extreme ill husbandry to plant Vines of different kinds or
qualities together, such diversity there is in their season of ripeness; some
preventing your expectation by the suddainenesse of their maturity, others
deceiving it by their late ripeness. We have spoken of the planting, let us
now handle the culture and dress of it, that his fertility may in some measure
require the labor of his implanting.

The manner of dressing the Vine.
MId May will be a season which will best inform you, whether your Plants
have taken so good root, that it expresses a verdure and germination in his
Branches; when therefore the shoot is able to endure dressing, let it be cut
within two or three knots of the old Wood, and if any other slips spring from
the Root, cut them away (with care however that it wound not the Root, or the
maine stock, which are wonderfully offended by the too near approach of any
tool that is edged) that the whole st^ength of the Vine may unite into one
common stock or pillar, to support and convey the sap into the permitted
branches, of which you may not let any flourish the first year of its growth.
It is observed, that to cut the Vine in the decrease of the Moon, makes the
fleshy part of the Grape of a more substantial grossen^sse and feeding, and is
a peculiar remedy for those Vines which are given to be over-ranke with wood:
Let it be the care of the V^gneron to remoove all obstructions of Weed^s which
uninvited participate of the Vines nourishment: the surest way to kill which,
is, to turn them in toward the earth, which is not only a destruction to the
thie^e of its moisture, but a restitution of the robbery; for the Weeds so
inverted enrich the ground to the great encouragement of the Vine, and the no
less profit of the Vine dressers. Let your knife with which you cut your Vine
be very sharp, and let your Vine be cut sloping at one cut, if possible, and
not far from the old Wood, that the growth of the Vine may the more speedily
cover the wound.

The Vines must be dressed or husbanded ^hree times the year, the first
culture of it must be in March, at which time you are to dig about the Root
three quarters of a foot deep, or thereabouts: The next season must be in
April, wherein you must dig about the Root, within a third of the former
depth, then you must also prune it by cutting all the branches, and leaving
some three knobs or joints of the new wood in your Vine of the first years
growth, and cutting off all dead or superfluous branch^s of the old, whose
permitted branches must also be pruned, lest they should spend that aliment
decreed for the Grape in elongation of the branches, all succors also must be
plucked away. ^n August the like course is to be used in the Wine of the
precedent Autumn leaving two or three joints or knobs of new wood: again the
old ones may be only dug, if at that time, and at all other times you
perceive any dead or wounded branches you must cut them off something further
then the mortification or hurt extends; and in all prunings let no Vine be cut
in the knob or joint, but in the space betwixt; there following usually nothing
but abso^ute and irremediable decaying, where they are cut in the articular
knitting. If in Apri^s dressing, the Vine h^ve no branched but only budded,
which is most usual (but more ^specially in March) you must nip the bud off
with your fingers^ to the end that the juice which would ascend to hasten the
germi^ation, may be stopped to strengthen and engross^ the store.

The third year the Vine will b^a^e you ^rapes in these Countries, but I am
confident that in VIRG^NIA it would bear at the second; and this my confidence
is grounded upon the hasty perfection all things receive in VIRG^NIA, by much
preceding all our neighbor Countries. The Peachtree arrives not to that
virility of growth in eight years, in these regions, which it obtaines at
four there. The like is verified in Apples and Cherries: and if it be
questioned how such men which p^radventur^ being in a necessity, are not able
to attend two years for a ^^^urne, shall in the mean while subsist: it is
easily answ^^ed^ that the intervalls betwixt the dressings of the Vines will
^ff^rd space enough for a reasonable Crop of Tobacco; and there is much mo^e
labor in looking to 5000. Plants of Tobacco then the like number of Vines,
especially if the interspaces be plough^d, and sow^d with Turnips or Lupines,
which both add to the fatness^ and unwilding of the ground, and choke up all
weeds and gr^sse which might afflict it. Contrariwise, Tobacco will admit
nothing in the Vacant sp^^^s, and must be perpetually weeded Further, th^ugh
oth^^ Vine-Masters prescribe the digging about the roots o^ their Pla^t in
August, which is the busy s^ason of inning the Tobacco, yet I am driven by
diverse reasons to wish such c^^ture omitted at that time of the year, since it
lays the root by so much the nearer to a violently torrid Sun which is so far
from cherishing of it, that it burns it; by which means his C^op of Tob^cc^
need not at all to be neglected: but these Vines steal into such perfection by
that tim^ they are arrived at fou^e years g^owth^ that twenty thousand Plants
of Tobacco though s^ld at 6 pence per pound, (a great rate in VIRGINIA) will
not retur^e you a like p^ofit, which tho^ght it may be something sp^ringly
believed, yet may be m^de apparent. For admitting ou^ Vines by that time of 4
foot high, by their so often cutting of the shoo^s, nourished unto a stock
strong enough to support it self; of B^anch^s, by the like tillage, equal in
v^gour, yield but a gallon of Wine per pi^ce, yet here is 20 Tun of Wine
yea^ely, for 3^ years together, (so long will the Vine thus husba^ded, l^st
fruitful, ^n^ vigorous, if Planted with the slip rather then the Root) without
any interruption but that which sets bounds and limit to all things, the divine
providence in his dispensation of seasons.

Of the Diseases of Vines, and their Remedy.
BEfore we can justify our expect^tions of a good H^rvest, we must providently
foresee and prevent (as much as in us lies) such cas^alties as may m^ke our
hope abortive; let us therefore cast our eye upon such D^seases which may make
the Vine unfruitful, or after the fruit produced, dest^oy its desired
fertility.

To prevent the Frost from benumming, or absolutely destroying your Vines, let
there b^ laid up in diverse places heaps of dry du^g, with an i^termixture of
chafe and straw, and when you conjecture the approach of the Fro^t, set this
combustible stuff on fire, and the smoke arising from thence will so temper
and qualify the air that your Vine for that season will be secured from
D^m^^ge: yet if (before you have applied th^s preventive remedy) the fruit of
your Vine be destroyed, cut it off very short, and the strength continuing in
the remainder will so fortify it, that the next year it will recompense you
double in the qu^ntity of your fruit; for what it has been robbed of by the
present.

To provide against the blasting of your Vine: When you perceive it upon the
point of budding, cut it as late as may be; for this late cutting it will make
your Vine something later, and by consequence, blossom or flower at such time
as the Sun is ascended to his greatest degree of heat and fervor.

To break off such Mists and Fogs as are already gathered in the air, and
give probable menaces to fall upon your Vines, you must apply your self to
this remedy^ let a smoke round about your Vineyard be made with Go^ts du^g,
kindled an^ set on fire. Such Fogges as have outstripped your care and already
fallen upon, and endammaged your Vines, must have the malignity of their vapors
taken off^ or at least assuaged by i^rigation of Vines, with the water in which
the leaves or roots of wild Cucumbers, or Coloquintida have been laid some
time to infuse: this must be applied immediately after the mists. Some are of an
opinion that Bay-tre^s (which by the way are dangerously sociable to the Vine)
planted round but not too near the Vineyard, will privilege the Vine from this
distaster, by attracting all the ill disposed malice of those Fogs unto it
self. This till experimented will hardly be worthy belief.

It is an opinion no way contradicted, that fertility is restored to a Vine
become barren, if humane Urine kept a long while stale, to make it the more
salt and rank, be dropped by degrees upon the Vine stock, which must immediately
after be laid about with dung and earth mixed together: the season for the
application of this Cure mus^ be in Autumn. Another way I should conceive to
be altogether as eff^ctuall, namely, to leave it nothing but the stock, bare
the roots, and lay there either Acornes, Chestnuts, or rotted straw; and if the
bign^sse of the root will permit it, to cleave it a little way, and to thrust
into the fissure a piece of Vine wood, cut small for the pu^pose; it being
certain that trees themselves sometimes groan under the sickness of being
hide-bound: Vines are perceived to want moisture, when their leaves turn of a
deep red color: this Disease is cured by watring them with Seawater, or stale
Urine.

The Bleeding of the Vine.
THE Vine sometimes is troubled with an extraordinary Efflux, or emanation of
its juice; some call it the weeping, others the bleeding of the Vine, and this
Disease is commonly so violent, that if not stopped it leaves the Vine without
blood and life. The remedy is to break the bark of the Vine upon the body
thereof, and to anoint the wound with oil boiled to the half, or else with the
Lees of Wine not salted; this done, let it be watered with Vinegar, which by
how much the stronger it may be, is so much more effectual.

The scattering Vine.
THE Vine sometimes is oppressed with an unretentive scattering disease, as
unable to maintain the fruit she has produced, which sh^e therefore
discharges, and lets f^ll from her; the symptoms by which you are to judge of
this disease, are an unnatural palenesse and dryness of the leaves, the
branch it self languid, broad, and of a more pithy softn^sse then usual. The
cure to this, is to rub Ash^s beaten and mixed with strong Vinegar about the
foot of the Vine, and to water all tha^ is round about the stock: Quaer^,
whether ^is^u^es in the ^^^ke made with a sharp knife some fix inches long
may not be an additionall Receipt to the former prescription. The tree
p^radven^u^e having contracted this malady by too close imprisonment in the
bark, being in a manner hide bound; how ever the foregoing M^dicine cannot in
this case but sort to better effect if the tree and bark jointly be rubbed
over then the bark one^y, unless this Medicine could give a relaxation to the
bark, which I have no faith in.

The Vine too full of branches, or luxuriant.
THE V^n^ expending it self too wastfully in overmany branches, ^u^t be (...)
v^^y short. If this overcome not that luxury, the usual ^em^dy is, let it be
bared at the Roots, and River gravel laid round about the stock, together with
a few Ashes or else some stones. The reason I apprehend not, except it be to
check its f^^tility which I conceive may more prosperously be effect^d, if
only the branches being cut, and the stock low, you suffer that exubrancy ^o
waste it self in adding more corpulency to the stock, which will of it self
be a sufficient spender to restrain and confine the former liberality of
juice.

The withering Vine.
IF the Grapes languish and dry away as they hang upon the Vine, before you
apply a remedy you must cast away all that are already aff^cted with this
contagion; then water the rest with Vinegar, in which Ashes of Vine branches
have been infused. The most as^u^ed remedy is to water the Root of the Vine,
from whence the dis^use comes with the st^lest Urine; the former Remedy being
something irregular, as if it were easily feisible to remove a malady by
application to the effects, without considering the efficient.

The rotting of Grapes upon the Vine.
THere are of Vines whose fruit pu^rifie upon the Branches before they come to
maturity: this disease is remedied by laying old Ashes to their Root, or
G^avell, or B^rley meal mixed with the seed of Purcellane about the body;
Quaere, whether this disease p^oceed from a Plethorick rankn^sse or em^ciate
debility: if from rankenesse all application of ashes hurt it: the symp^omes of
rankenesse are, when a tree lavishes his moisture into too many branc^es, which
may make him neglect to feed the fruit, as unable to maintain two spenders;
and I am confident the natural remedy for this is to bare him (as much as
possible) of wood, that it may divert the nourishment to the Grape; if from
debility, which you shall perceive by a flaccid palenes in the leaves, the same
remedy which we prescribed to the withering Vine, vi^. to water the Root with
Urine of a long stalenesse, will be the most proper.

The biting of the Cow or Ox.
Indeed the best way to prevent this disease, is to have your ground either
well p^led or quicksetted, or both: But that the biting or breathing of Kine
may not endamage the Vine (which hardly recovers after such wound or infection)
water the foot stock of your Vine with such water as the Tanners have used in
dressing and mollifying their raw Hides, and you may prom^se your self to be
secured from them, they as mortally hating such sents, as the Vine abhors their
bite or breathing.

Against Caterpillars.
THe opinion is, that Caterpillars and other noisome, though little Vermin,
will not mol^st the bud or leaf of the Vine, if the hook or hedgebill
wherewith you prune and cut off the superfluous branches of the Vine be
anointed over with the blood of a Male Goat, or the fat of an Ass, or of a
Bea^e; or with the Oil wherein Catterpillars or brayed Garl^ck have been
boiled, or if you anoint and rub them with the purse or sheath of a Badgers
stones, after your hook has been ground: These are curious rather then
apparently approved Medicines, and for their reason I must demurre to give it,
Quaere, whether the Oil wherein Catterpillars or brayed Garlic have been
boiled well, rubbed about the ^tock of the T^ee, may not make those Reptilia
abhor the a^cending, or whether the juce of Rue so applied, have not the like
virtue.

The driving Locusts from the Vine is done by fumigation, as either fi^ing of
old Ox dung, Galbanum^ old shoe soles^ Hartshorne, women's hair; but that
which they propose las^, I conceive to be the best, namely, to plant Pionie
near them.

To prevent Pismires.
PIsmires, who diverse times fret in sunder the wood of the Vine, even to the
very marrow, will not at all approach it, if you anoint and rub the stock with
the dung of Kine, or grease of Asses.

The Bay Tree, Hasell-tree, and Coleworts bear a particular enmity to the
Vine, and express it by eff^cts when planted near; this I cannot believe to
be out of any Magical Antipathy, but rather that these (as the Plum-tree) are
great and strong succors of juice, and happily drawing of the same, by which
the Vine is more particularly nourished, of which being cheated, it is no
wonder if she express a decadency.

The manner of the Vintage.
AND now we are come to that which is most acceptable to mankind, the
successful fruit of his labors reaped in his Vintage, which we must not of
a natural g^eedinesse precipitate, till the G^apes be of such a kindly
ripeness of age, that to let them continue on the Vine longer were to lose
them; this ripeness is visibly understood by a mutation in the Branch and
Grape; in the Branch you shall perceive a manifest mutation by an incline to
redness in the G^ape; if it be white it alters toward a yellow, if red
toward a black color; nor are the taste and touch les^^ discerners of such
full m^turity; for if they be sweet in ta^te, and the liquor of a glutinous
substance, cleaving to the finger; we may conclude that both they, and the
time to gather them are of full ripeness. There are also other signs, if the
kernel expressed out of the grape between your fi^gers, come out clean, an^
altogether separate from the flesh or pulpe of the Vine, if after such
expression (gently performed) the Grape diminish nothing from his bigness,
etc. These all, or the most of them concurring, prepare for your Harvest.

Yet in VIRGINIA, where the Harvest is more abundant then the Laborers, to
prevent a glut of work flowing upon few hands, and consequently not possible
to be thoroughly equ^lled: It will not be amiss to use both anticipation by
accelerating nature with artificial means in some, and retardation by
arresting the speed of growth in others, to accelerate Ashes laid to the foot
of Vines, and those Vines planted to something more advantage of an amorous
Sun, will make them a^tecede the others, at the least by their advance of
fourteen days; the other in their natural course following that sp^ce
after, and the others more particularly retarded (which may be easily effected
by the pruning of them later then the rest just upon their preparative to b^d;
which arresting the sap makes it afterward (though later) return with a
greater abundance) staying fourteen days later, there will be compleately
six weeks time for the gathering in of your Vintage. And by this means you
have your Vineyard tilled or manured every third yea^e all over, which will be
no ingrat^full accession to its duration in fertility and strength: Those of
the most forward ripene^se this year, being retarded the next, and those of the
natural maturation husbanded in that manner, the next Winter.

The fittest season to gather them must be in a serene unclouded sky (the
Grapes having any Rain or Dew upon them when gathered, losing much of their
perfect strength and goodness;) for the Wine made of Grapes thoroughly dried in
their collection, has a greater privilege of force and continuance: But
before this collection be attempted, all things fitting to receive your
Vintage must be prepared in cleanliness and order, viz. Baskets, Caske, and
Fat^s strongly hooped, Tubs great and small, Stands, Presses, etc. and all
scoured, washed, and furnished with their necessary instrum^nts and
conveniences.

The Grape gatherer must distinguish and separate the lean, green, sower,
withered, or rotten Grapes, from those which are of absolute ripeness and
soundness. That the Wine by such an uncomely confusion or mixture may not be
l^sse pure, sprightly, and healthful, then it was intended by nature, such
incon^iderate Gatherers are said to be of the Devils sending, to spoil Gods
provisions. Nor should they confusedly mix good with good, if of different
quality, as to mingle that which is strong and ri^h, with which is small, but
delicate. They prescribe that the Grapes so gathered should be left in the
ground at least a day or two, and that uncovered, provided it rain not, by
which means, say they, they will become much better, since the Sun dew, and
earth, by this exposure taking from them what ever they have of bad
unprofitable moisture, refine and purify them A course as far as my span of
reason can extend, so far from this promise of refining and purifying, that it
absolutely tends to their corruption. Have they wanted the Sun and Dew when
upon the stalk^? Could not the same Sun and Dew which enripened them, refine
and purify them there? As for the earths meliorating them, if melioration be
understood by putrefaction, it is easily granted; Apples that lie on the ground
are so meliorated, that is to say rotted, and shall the Grape a more delicate
and tender fruit avoid it? This is by way of digression, but it is necessary;
for without this caution a modest man which reads with an obedient judgment
any books of these men, taking the Author for an (...), subscribes to it,
observes the prescription, and gains a doctrine of future providence, by the
loss of his present Vintage.

But after the Grapes have remained a day or two in the house, it will be time
to put them into the Fatt to be trodden out equally. Those which tread the
Grapes should before they go into the Fatt have their feet and legs washed
extremely, and themselves covered with a shirt as well as drawers, that their
sweat may not mix with the Wine, and that nothing in the act of eating fall
from their mouths into it, they must be punctual in abstaining from eating of
the Grapes, while they are at this their labor.

Surely this way of treading the Grape is derived from some abstenious man, who
devised this stratagem under a pretense of expediting the work; but indeed to
deter men from drinking that which is so uncomely prepared. I know they will
allege that by treading it flows more naturally, and with all more pure
forth, then that which is pressed; but withal give me leave, say that the
very Press it self if it be not too violently and greedily labored, makes
it glide forth altogether as naturally and purely, and which is more with
greater equality; for in the Press, all the Grapes feel the impultion at
once, and if the Owner be not too covetous to bring the dross and gros^e
parts of the Grape to a second squeezing, and mixing with the first; without
dispute the Wine so expressed is altogether as good and strong as that which is
trodden, but I am certain much more cleanly.

The Wine (however) being expressed must be poured, dross, Husks, and all,
into a Fat to work or boil in, which it must do for the space of four and
twenty hours at the least, if you will have it fine^ delicate, and subtle;
but if you desire to have it strong and noble, let it work in the Fat four or
five day^s, with a Covering over it, that so the vapor thereof may not exhale,
or his force waste it self.

The Fat^ or Tub prepared, must have immediately before his reception of the
Wine, a little bunch of Vine branches laid before the Tap-hole, which (that it
may not heave up with the Wine) must be kept down with a clean stone or
Brick, or which is better and less offensive, a ring of Lead wound about it:
this when you draw the Wine will hinder the Husks or Grapes from coming out
with the liquor. Your Fat must not be full by half a foot or more, that the
Wine may have the more space to boil or work in.

Your Wine invessel'd must not be filled up to the Bung, nor the Bung closed,
that the Wine may have the greater liberty of despumation, and rejecting
whatever it finds reluctant to its own nature.

Every day you must fill up what is expurged, and something more, till you
find the Wine thoroughly appeased, and discharged of whatever might be
obstructive to its generosity: nor must this Caske be in the Cellar, but either
in the open air, or in some Barn where it has a liberal respiration; besides
the defects in Caske cannot be so easily discovered when the Wine is in the
Cellar, as in open places. When it is so thoroughly settled, that it has given
over all appetite or sign of boiling, you may have it committed to your
Cellar, which should stand upon the North here, (in VIRGINIA upon the
North-west as the coolest and driest Angle) paved with gravel or dry earth,
which is less subject to moisture or exudations then Brick, or especially
stone, absolutely remote and unmolested by any ill odours of Stables, Sinkes,
Bathes, Marshy places, etc. neither should it have any thing shut up or kept in
it, which have any sent of acrimony or harshnesse, as Cheese, Garlic, Onions,
Oils, (Trane, Neatsfoot, Linseed, and others, not the Salade-Oyle) it being
observed, that nothing is more open or obnoxious to contagion then Wine,
especially when new.

Your Vessels must be so ranked in order that they touch not one another, by
this means to leave a liberty of sight to foresee a misfortune, or prevent it
when happened. They must be so close stopped in the Bung with Clay, that not
the least irreption of air may be capable to taint it, to which it is very
subject.

To cause new wine to be quickly purged, put (after this proportion in the
re^^:) to 15 quarts of new Wine, half a pint of strong Vinegar, and within the
space of three days it will be fined.

To preserve Mustor new Wine all the year, take that Vine which voluntary
di^tilleth from the Grape, before it suffer the press, and put it into a
Vessel pitched within and without the same day: let the Vessel b^ half full,
and very well stopped with plaster above; and thus the new Wine will continue a
long while in his swe^tnesse. But to add to this experiment and the
continuance of the Wine, you must hinder it from working, which you may well
do, if you put the Vessel into some Well or River, there to remain thirty
days; for not having boiled it will continue always sweet, and is preserved
by the heat of the Pitch. Others prefer the burying of this Vessel in moist
gravel: and (which in my opinion is the best) others cover the Vessel first
with the dros^e of the Wine press, then heap upon it moist gravel; by which
meanes^ something interposing betwixt the extraordinary moisture and cold of
the gravel, which might have some influxe upon the Wine, your Must preserved
in an excellent mean of temper.

To know if there be any water in the Wine.
THE Malice of servants sometimes swallowing down their Masters Wine, and
fearing to be discovered if the quantity be diminished, or the baseness of the
Dealer to impose upon the Merchant, makes both of them adulterate it with
water, which not being discernable to the eye, may be made familiar to your
knowledge by this experiment: Take a withered Rush, immerge it in the Wine,
after a small space draw it out again: if the Wine have been thus bastarded,
you shall perceive the water cleaving to it. Othe^wise, take raw and wild
Peares^ cutting, and cleansing them in the mi^st, or in ^ieu of them,
Mulberries, cast them into the Wine^ if they float^ ^he Wine is neat and clear
from such sophistication; if they subside there is water in it. Some do^ anoint
a Reed a pi^c^ of wood, or paper, hay, or some other little bundle of herbs, or
strawes with Oil, which if they dry, put into the Wine, and after draw them
out, if the Wine have been embased with water, drop^ thereof will gather unto
the Oyl^. Another sure trial is to cast uns^aked Lime into the Wine; if there
be any adulteration, the Lime dissolves, if the Wine be undevirginated, the
Lime collects thereby a harder cementation. Others take of the Wine, and inject
it into a Drying Pan wherein there is boiling Oil, and the Wine (if depured)
declares it with a loud noise, and frequent Bubbles. To make another trial,
lay an Egg into the Wine, the Egg descending, manifests the abuse, not
descending, the Wine is as the Grape bled it.

To separate Wine from Water.
BUT as the miserable man in the pit de^ired his friend not to question how he
fell in, but to advise how he should get out: We will not be satisfied that
there is water in the Wine, but how it may be separated from it; which if we
may believe the deliverers of it, who have published it to the World in their
names, you must put into the Vessel of Wine melted Alum, then stop the mo^th
of the Vessel with a sponge drenched in Oil, which done, turn the mouth of
the Vessel so stopped, downwards, and the water only will come forth,
leaving the Wine pure: the reason of this I cannot give, and have only read
(not seen) the expeririment.

The way to correct over much wa^erishnesse in Wine.
IF glut^ of rain have made the year so unseasonable, that the Grape has
contracted a watery quality to the diminution of his Winy goodness: or if it
fall ou^ that after the time of gathering them, there fall such store of rain,
that the Grapes instead of Dewes are too much wetted, (such is the profit of
exposing the gathered clusters into the open air for 48 hours) the remedy is
to tread them quickly, and finding the Wine weak, by tasting it after it has
been put into the Vessel, and begun to boil ther^, it must presently be
changed, and drawn out into another Vessel, for so the watr^ part^ that are
in it will stay behind in the bottom, yet the Wine standing still charged,
will be totally corrected, if you p^t to every fifteen quart^ of Wine, a pint
and a half of Salt.

To make Wine of an acceptable odor.
IF you will perfume your Wine with a grateful odor, by which the brain may
be strengthened, as well as the heart exalted: take a few Myrtle-ber^ies dry,
bray them, and put them into ^ little B^rrell of Wine; let it so rest, close
stopped, ten days afterward use it at pleasure. The like effect will follow,
if you take the blossoms of the Grapes (those especially which grow upon the
shrubby V^nes) when the Vine is in flower, and cast them into the Wine, the
brimmes of the Wine-vessell being rubbed over with the leaves of the Pine and
Cypress tree, and this will give it a fragrancy delightfully odorate: Or which
is of equal facility, you may hang an Orange, or Pomecitron, (being of a
convenient greatne^^e) and prick it full of Cloaves, and that in such sort as
it may not touch the Wine, shut up in all these Applications, the Vessel very
close. If this like you not, take the simples of such mat^er as you would have
your Wine to smell of, infuse them in Aqua vitae, the infusion may be repeated
by percolation of the old herbs, and addition of new, till it have gotten a
full and absolute perfection of those odours you desire, then pour the Aqua
vitae (the herbs strained from it) into the Vessel of Wine.

To make Cute.
YOU may make the boiled Wine called Cute, if you boil new Wine that is good,
lovely, and very sw^et unti^l the third part thereof be consumed; when it is
grown cold put it into a Vessel and use it. But to make this Cute, that it
may continue all the year, gather your Grapes whole, and let them lie spread
three days in the Sun, on the fourth about noone tread them. The liquour or
sweet Wine which shall run out into the Fatt before the dross^y substance come
under the press, must be boiled one third as before; then to every nineteen
quarts of Wine add an ounce of ^rees or Corn flag well brayed, strain this
Wine without the Lees, which being done, it will continue sweet, firm, and
wholesome.

To cause troubled Wines to settle.
TO cause troubled Wines, and such as are full of Lees to settle, pour into
thirty quarts of Wine, half a pint of the Lees of Oil boiled, till the third
part be wasted, and the Wines will immediately return to their former
settlement. Otherwise, which is better and more easy, cast into the
Wine-Vessell the whites of six or seven Eggs, and stir them together very
well with a stick.

To know whether the Wine will keep long.
THE knowledge whether the Wine will continue long or not in a good condition^
is thus made apparent: When your Wine is tunned up, you must within some time
after change it into another Vessel, leaving the Lees behind in the first;
which you must diligently stop from taking any vent whatsoever; after some time
you may look into the Lees with careful animad version, whether they change
or contract any ill sent or not, or whether they bre^d any Gnats, or other such
Creatures; if you espy none of these mutations or corrupt generation, repose
your self with all confidence that your Wine will continue pure to the
lo^gest: But th^se symptoms discovered, will be so many admonitions to
dispose of that Wine with the soonest, which is already by nature inclined to
turn bad and corrupt; others take a pipe of Elder, or such other wood as may
be hollowed through, with which they receive the sent of the Lees, and by them
inform themselves how the Wine is conditioned.

A good palate will divine of Wines by the taste, namely th^^ if the new Wine
be sharp and quick, they repose confidence in its goodness and continuance;
but if flat and heavy, then they expect nothing but the contrary to good
qualities: again, if the new Wine (when put into the Vessels) be fat and
glewy, the sign is prosperous; but if contrariwise, it be thin and weak, it
is an ^rgument that it will easily be turned,

To keep Wine at all times.
TO effect this, you may cast Roch-Allum (very finely powdered) into the^
Vessel which you mean to put your new Wine in, or bay Salt very finely
powdered: or pibble stones, and little flints taken out of some Brook, or which
will retain the spirits of the Wine from evaporating; more certainly Salade
Oil, so much as will cover the superficies of the Wine.

To make that Wine sh^l not Flower.
Wine will have no Flower, if you put into it the Flowers of the Vine,
gathered, and dried, or the meal of Fetches, cha^ging the Wine into another
Vess^ll, when the meal or Flowers are settled down to the bottom.

To prepare Physical Wines.
NEither is this digression impertinent; Physicians are not so frequent in
VIRGINIA, as in PADUA, or LONDON, and were there more, yet the vast space of
ground, those people take up in their scattred dwellings, makes the addresses
to them very difficult: that therefore they may (in absence of the Physician)
have some common remedies for common diseases; I have thought fit to give them
this account of Medicinal Wines out of LIE^AULT, all of them of excellent
Virtues, and easy preparations^ the first shall be

To make Wines of Wormwood.
TO which effect, take of Sea-Wormewood, or in default of that, common
Wormwood, especially that which has the small stalk, and short leaves, eight
Drammes^ stamp them and bind them in a cloth which is not woven too thick,
cast it into the Vessel, pouring new Wine upon it, making this account, that
to every three pints of Wine there must be eight drams of Wormwood; continue
this proportion in the filling of your Vessel, which you must leave with the
vent open, that the Wine fall not a new to boiling. The use of this Wine is
good for the pain of the stomach and liver, and to kill Worms.

To make Wine of Horehound.
THis Wine being very sovereign for the Cough, must be made in the time of
Vintage, to which purpose you must gather of the Crops and tender stalks of
Horehound, of that especially which grows in lean untilled places; afterward
ca^se them to be dried in the Sun, make them up into bundles, tying them
with a Rush, sink them in the vessel to 65 quarts of new Wine; you must put
eight pound of Horehound to boil therewith, after the Wine is settled the
Horehound must be taken out, and the Wine stopped very diligently.

The Wine of Anise and Dill very good against the difficulty of the Urine: The
Wine of Pears against the flux of the b^lly; the Wine of Bays against the ach
and wringings of the belly; the Wine of Asarum Bacchar against the Jaundise,
Dropsies, and Tertian Agues; the Wine of Sage against pains and weakness of
the sinews, are all made as the Wine of Wormwood.

To make Wine of Betony.
TAke Betony^ the Leaves and Seeds about one pound, put it into twenty quarts
of Wine, and at the expiration of the seven month, change the Wine into new
Vessels. This most excellent Wine aswageth the pain of the Reins, breaks
the stone, and heals the Jaundise.

To make the Wine of Hysop.
TAke the leaves of Hysop well stamped, tie them fast in a very fi^e cloth, and
cast about one pound of them into twenty quarts of new Wine; this Wine is
peculiarly excellent against the diseases of the lungs, an old Cough, and
shortness of breath.

Wine of Pomgranates, made of Pomgranates that are scarce ripe, being thoroughly
bruized, and put into a vessel of thick red Wine, serves of singular use
against the flux of the belly: to which end also serve the Wines made of
Services, Mulberries, and Quinces.

The Ancients had a very high opinion of Treacle Wine, from consideration of
its extraordinary virtue in asswaging and healing the bitings of Serpents, and
other venomous Beasts. Nor had the Vine solely this virtue in its Grape, but in
the leaves also stamped and applied unto the grieved part. This Vine is thus
prepared: cleave three or four fingers breadth of the Plant you intend to set,
take out the pith, and replenish the vacant part with Treacle, afterward set
the cloven part covered and wrapped in paper. Thus Vines may be made
soporiferous, if you prepare them in the same manner with Opium, as before with
Treacle, laxative by preparing it with some soluble purge. By this means you
may have Wine to taste like the Greek Calabrian Frontig^ac, or any other noble
for its excellency; if the Lees purified and preserved be inserted into the
pith of the branch, Aromatic, if to these Le^s you add compounds of Cynamon^
Cas^ia, Cloves, or what ever shall be most agreeable to the nostrill and
palate.

To remedy Wines inclining to corrupt; and first of Wine beginning ^o sour.
IF you perceive Wine beginning to wax sour, put into the bottom of your
Ve^sell a pot of water well stopped, close the Vessel, yet so as at a vent hole
to receive and transmit a little air: the third day draw out the pot, and you
shall see a noble experiment of attraction, for the water will be stinking and
the Wine sound and neat.

At what time, and by what accidents Wine is most apt ^o corrupt, with its
remedy.
THE season when Wines are subject to turn or be troubled, i^ about the
Summer solstice, viz. the 11. of June, at the same time that the Vine emits her
blossom; nor then alone, but sometimes about the Dog-dayes^ by reason of the
variety of heates: generally the Wine is in some sort of commotion, when a
constant South wind disturbes the air, whether it be in Winter or Summer, in
great and continued raines also, and winds in Earthquake^ or mighty Thunder^.
To keep them from turning is by the injection of pan salt, when they boil or
work, or else of the seed of smallage, Barley-bran, the leaves of Bay-trees,
or of Fennel seed brayed with the Ashes of the Vine brayed. The like effect
have Almonds cast into the wine, or the A^hes of the Oak; the Meal of the
white Fetch both defends the wine from turning, and keeps it in his
soundness. Alum broken in pieces the same, the worst application is of
Brimstone, Lime, Plaster, etc. To recover the wine when ^urned, must be
e^fe^ted either by changing the Vessel, by beaten pepper; or take whites of
Eggs, beat them very well, and take the froth from thence arising of them,
pour them into the Ves^ell, which you must immediately roll after its
infusion: Or else take twelve Kernells of old Walnuts (the Virginian Walnut I
conceive exceeding proper) roast them under the Ashes, and while they are yet
hot, draw a thread through them, hang them in the wine, where they must be
till the wine (which will not fail) recover its former colou^.

If the wine become troubled, either the Kernels of Pine Apples, or Peaches, or
the whites of Eggs, and a little salt will not fail to clear and refine it:
Others take half a pound of Alum, as much Sugar, make a very small powder
thereof, and cast it into the ^e^sell.

To help Wine that begins to wast and die.
IF you by manifest Symptoms apprehend your wine suddenly inclining to
degen^rate and corrupt, this course is prescribed: If it be Clarret, take the
Yelke of an Egg, if white, the white; add to it three ounces of clear bright
stones taken out of ^ running River, make them into a small powder, together
with two ounces of Salt, mingle all together, and (the wine ^hifted into
another Vessel neat and clean, not tainted with any smell beforehand) cast in
this Compound; mingle it with the wine five or six times the day, until three
or four days be past. This remedy is not prescribed when wine is absolutely
spoiled, for then it would be applied to no purpose; but that the careful
Master should by his observation of it to such a disposition, prevent it by
this experiment.

To restore Wine grown musty, unto his former purity.
CAst into the Vessel Cowes milk salted: Some (but to the infinite
unhealthfullnesse of him that drinks it) attempt this restoration with Alum,
Lime, and Brimstone, a more undangero^s way is to infuse in it Juniper Berries,
and Irees Roots: Yet if the wine should continue this ill senting quality, by
having taken wind: Let it be rouled too and again to awaken the spirits
thereof, that they may the better disperse the strength of its infu^ion:
afterward set it again upon his cantling, replenish the Vessel and shut it
close to prevent wind for the future.

To preserve W^nes from sowring, may be performed by your disposing of you^
Vessel in a place that is very cool and dry (the V^ssels being very well
filled and well stopped) to prevent as well the emission of the spirits, by
which the Wine continues vigorous, as the admission of air. But in regard all
men are not the masters of such opportune conveniences, being forced sometimes
to make uses of places obnoxious to heat, and drawing one Vessel a long time,
cannot hinder the secret invasions of air; yet if you perceive in time that
your Vine begines to harbor an acid or sour quality, you shall preserve it
from falling into a full degree of sourene^se; if you take a good piece of
Lard, wrap it well in a Linen cloth, tie it to a small cord^ and let it down
by the Bunghole into the middle of the Wine, still letting it lower as the Wine
decreaseth. Some advise^ and not without a great appearance of reason, to put
into the Vessel, Oil Olive, or Salade, in such quantity, that it may only
cover the superficies of the Wine: Which Oil when the Wine is drawn off from
the Lee^, may be separated from them, and preserved.

To take ^way the waterishne^se and crude moisture of the wine, put into the
Vessel the leaves of the Pomgranate-tree, though in my opinion such Wine being
easily known in the ^att, when first trodden, should be corrected by boiling,
as before.

The remedy against venomous Beasts falling into the Wine, as Adders Rats, etc.
is, so soon as the dead body is found, to burn it and cast the Ashes into the
same Vessel, s^irring it about with a wooden stick: Others give advice to put
^ot bread into the Vessel which will attract all the venomous qualities to it
self, and clear the Wine.

Of the Olive.
THE Vine and Olive being such delightful associates as to express a mutual
emulation for the Glory of fertility when planted together. This Treatise shall
not divide them, they are both exhilaratives, the Vine rejoices the heart, the
Olive glads the countenance; and that VIRGINIA may express the delight she
affords to mankind by being reinforced with this second Sister of laughter,
the Olive; this discourse particularly designed to her improvement, shows its
planting and culture when planted.

The Olive tree, though it delight in a rich fat ground; yet if he have a warm
air, and a South, or South-East wind to refresh him, will in all places
testify a bounteous gratitude for its situation in an almost unlaboured for
fertility: Yet to prepare a place for this rich plant to prosper on, his
prosperity being no small part of your own, you must dig the pits where you
intend to plant them, a year before such implanting; in this pit burn some
straw, or which is better castings of Vine or Brambles (but no part of Oak,
there being such a particular enmity betwixt this tree, and the Oak, that the
Olive not only refuses its neighborhood, but dies if planted in the place
where the Oak has been rooted up) or you may leave it to the Sun and Rain,
which will without such adustion exhale and purify all infectious vapors: The
place being provided to plant upon, we must next select our Plant.

Select your Plants from the Shoots or Branches of those Olive trees which are
young, fair, and fertile: Let them be in thickne^se the circumference of an
ordinary wrist, in length eighteen inches; plant it the bigger end downwards
into the earth, prepared as before, and ram the Mould, mingled with Dung and
Ashes close about it: Let it be dug every year in Autumn. The time to
plant it is in April or May, it must not be transplanted for the first five
years, nor the Bough^ cut or pruned till it have attained eight. Graft it not
but upon it self, so will it bear fruit better in the species and number; in
its transplantation you must take up as much of the soil with its roots, as
you can possible, and when you reset it, give it the like scitu^tion for Coast
and Quarter that it had before.

Olives are intended for two uses when gathered; either to be served up at the
table in collation, or to make Oil of the largest sort of Olive, is most
proper for the table, the lesser more particularly convenient for Oil: They
must be gathered with the least offense to the tree that may be, the bruising
of the branches with Poles as some use it in striking down the fruit, makes
the tree barren: The best way therefore is to ascend the tree by a Ladder, in
fair weather (not so much for convenience of the Gatherer; as for the profit
coming from the Olive, which is not to be taken from the tree, but when it is
exceeding dry) and pulling them with your hand put them into a Wicker Basket,
which you shall have carried up with you to that purpose. Those Olives you
intend to preserve or pickle, must not have that full ripeness which is
requisite for those you purpose to make Oil of. The Olives which you keep for
Banquets must be full of flesh, firm, fast, large, and ovall; if you will
pickle them, put them into an earthen pot, and cover them with salt brine or
verjuice, or else with Honey, Vinegar, Oil and Salt smally beaten. If you
intend to keep them long, by changing your salt brine constantly every two or
three Months, you may effect it.

For the Olives whereof you are to express your Oil, you must gather no more
at one time then what may be made into Oil that day, and the day following:
before you bring them to the Press let them be spread upon hurdles, well
picked, and cul'd; let the hurdles not be too thick set with twigs, that the
Lees and watery humor of the Olive (which if expressed with Oil would make it
extreme full of faeculency, and corrupts it both in the nostr^ll and Palate)
may expend, wa^te it self, and drop through; some therefore that this
malignant humor may have a full def^uxion before they bring the fruit to the
Press, make a high and well-raised floor, with provision of partitions to
keep every days gathering separate; (which is, if your abundance be such that
your Press is not able to discharge you of them daily) the bottom of these
partitions m^st be paved with a declin^ descent, that the moistness of the
Olives may flow away, and be received into gutters or little channels there
provided for their transfluxe.

The Olives being thus prepared for the Press, and the Press readily provided
of all things necessary, viz. of Fats, Vessels to receive your several Oils,
scoopes to draw, and empty out the Oil, Covers great and small, spunges, pots
to carry out the Oil, tied about by bands or Cords of Hemp, or Broome-barke;
the Millstones, Oyle-mills, Pressers, and all other instruments serving
thereunto being very well cleansed, and the air having been before as well
heated by a plentiful fire; (if it be not warm enough by its natural
situation) for the assistance of heat makes all Oily Liquors resolve and run
more gently and freely, whereas cold astringes, and detaines it. This
Presse-house therefore should be so seated, that it may enjoy a full admission
and benefit of the South Sun, that we may stand in need of very little fire,
if any at all, such heat being no more assistant to the expression, then
ac^essary to the corruption of the Oil.

Carry your Olives thus cleansed to the Press, under which put the^ whole in
new willow baskets (the willow adding a beauteou^ and innocent color to the
Oil;) the Willow also something staving off the rude strokes of the Press,
that the Olives may be bruised with as little violence, and as much leisure as
possible: Nor would it be inconvenient if their skin and fle^h were a little
broken at the first with a Millstone, so set, that it should not break the
Kernels, which would utterly spoil the Olive, taking them from the Mill thus
prepared: let them be stronglier bruised in the Press, and put four pound of
Salt to every Bushel of Olives. The Oil which comes first is by much the
best, and therefore called Virgin Oil: the second which comes with more
violent expression is fitter for Liniments then the Table: but the last, which
is extorted from the dross, and stones, is of no use but for Lamps; or such
sordid employment.

The Tuns and Vessels wherein the Oil is to be put, must be well dress^d with
pitch and gum, made very clean with warm Lees, and carefully dried with a
sponge, into which you may power your Oil within thirty days after the
expression of it, so much time being necessarily allowed for the settling the
Lees, which by that will have grounded upon the bottom. The Cellars where the
Vess^ls of Oil are to be conserved, must be in a place of constant dryness
and coldness, heat and moisture being corrupters of the Oil; provide
therefore a Cellar on the North coast of your house: and for the better and
more neat preservation of your liquor, pour it rather into glass Vessels or
^arthen pots, which (if they be made capacious) are far more convenient then
the pitched retainers we forme^ly spoke of.

Accidents befalling Oyle^ with their Remedies: and first to recover frozen
Oil.
IF (in the time of Winter) Oil does freeze together with his Lees, you must
put into it twice boiled salt^ which dissolves and clears your Oil from all
further apprehension of danger; nor need you entertain a jealousy that it
will be salt, since unctuous matters (and especially Oil) have seldom any
relish of it.

To keep Oil from becoming rank.
When the Oil begins to change from his first purity of taste to a disposed
rankenesse; the remedy is to melt an equal proportion of wax and Oil
together, to which you are to mingle salt fried in Oil before; this you must
pour into the Vessel, which composition above the prevention of it, when
beginning to grow rank, effects an entire restitution to its simple pureness,
when already affected. Anniseeds cast into the Vessel by a particular
attraction perform the same operation.

To purify troubled Oil.
SOme are of advice, that the applying it to the fire or Sun recleares it.
Others, if the Vessel be strong, cast into it boiling water: how these
remedies agree with their former assertions, (wherein they declare heat so
unnatural to Oil) is beyond my reconciling: I for my part, should rather make
an experiment of Vinegar, which being cast into the Oil by degrees, has such
a penetrating and inquirent faculty over all the parts, that it would without
doubt recompose it.

To recover Oil corrupted in the Sent.
TO perform this, take green Olives, pound them, free them from their stones,
and cast them into the Oil: or else cast the crumbs of Barley bread mixed with
corn salt: otherwise, infuse in your Oil the flowers of Melilot: or else hang
in the Vessel a handful of the herb Coriander, and if you find the
putrefying quality yet unexpelled, cast in diverse times of the same herb, and
which is better, change his Vessel; this ill odor others drive away thus:
They take Grapes, pick out their Kernells, stamp them, and with Salt make them
into a lump or lumpes, which you must cast into the Vessel, and after ten
days fail not to change it: Which must necessarily be done after the
application of any remedy to Oil grown rank and putrified, the Vessel still
impairing what the remedy recovers.

We have done with the Oil Olive, after the manner of whose expression may
be extorted any unctuous matter of fruits, plants, or seeds namely, Walnuts,
Filberds, Almonds (both sweet and bitter) Nutmegs, the Kernells of Peaches,
Pine-Apples, Abricots, Cherries, Plums, Pistaches, the seed of Line, Rape,
Cole, Mustard, Hemp, Poppy, Henbane, the seeds or Pipins of Apples, Pears,
Cucumbers, Gourds, Melons, and other such like: But that we may give the
Reader a more clear dilucidation of the manner of preparation, We shall
briefly discover the method used in the expression of Oil from Almond and
Nutmegs, which will easily make him apprehend all the rest^ the particular
reason which persuades me to introduce the example of Almonds, is because I
have purposed before I finish this concluding Treatise, to discourse
particularly o^ the planting the Almond. Whose Oil if to be taken inwards, is
to be thus expressed.

Pill the Almonds after they have steeped some time in warm water, pound them
in a Mortar of Stone or Marble with a wooden pestle, make them up in little
Lumpes or Loaves, which you may knead with you^ hands against the vapor of
warm water, or put them in a glass vessel of a large content, for some four
or five hours: (let the seat and Glass be so contrived, that it may rather
be above the water to receive the vapor on its sides and bottom, then in it)
the Almond being thus mollified by the disposition of the moisture, m^st be
put into a hair cloth or hempen bag, and laid in a press, whose bottom must
be well heated, hollow, and bending downwards to give the better delabency for
the Oyl^ thus expressed, you may bake the drossy part of the Almonds under the
Ashes, which in time of necessity will serve for bread, of plenty for a dainty
and fatning food to your Poultry. This Oil is of sovereign excellency to
mitigate and remove the throws and gripes of women newly delivered, and to
aswage the pains of the Colic or Reins, taking it in two ounces of white
Wine, or one of Aqua vita; the Line, Cole, Rape^ Wallnut, and other need not
these curious preparations, and their Cakes are of unm^tchable nourishment to
fatten Kine and other Cattle.

Oil of Nutmegs.
Oil of Nutmeg (which in the South part of VIRGINIA not subject to any
inconveniences of cold would undoubtedly flourish) is thus made: bray them with
a wooden stamper, afterward press them out, the plankes being very well
heated; to extract it more rich, divide them into little heaps, and steep^
them three days in very good Wine, after dry them in the shadow of the Sun
two whole days, then heat them reasonably in a frying pan upon the fire,
sprinkling them with Rose water, and presently press them. This I judge
conveniently sufficient for Oyles^ Let us descend to the planting of the
Almond-tree, which as it has a peculiar excellency, so without dispute
returns a^ ample profit.

Of the Almond tree.
THough the Almond tree delight particularly in gravelly places, of which
VIRGINIA is too rich to afford a convenience; yet there is no dispute, but if
the Mould wherein you plant them be mingled with Oyster-shels, or such like,
of which there is to be found inexhaustible Quantities, they will have a
greater virtue then gravel to the quickening and ingerminating of this ^ree;
having the perplexed hardness of gravel and unctuousnesse of marle united.
The soil thus prescribed; let the seat of your Almond be in a hot place fully
exposed to the South or South-West, and it will not only flourish to your
expectation, but its fruit will be excellently qualified, and in vast
abundance: it grows very well of the stone, which because it cannot be
procured new should be kept close in a Vessel of earth; to be transported, set
it as you would your Peach; it thrives very well too of the branch or scien,
which must be cut from the top of the tree, and planted as the Olive, the
earth rammed very hard about it, and prepared as before, both the stone and the
scien should be steeped for the space of twelve or four and twenty hours in
homed water; the best season to set or plant it in VIRGINIA, is in October and
November. This tree will be of admirable use there, in regard that both that
and the Olive will hinder no undergrowing Corn; let neither this tree nor your
Olive grow above ten foot in the stock, and in this as in Olives, if you see
any branch aspiring higher then his neighbors, repress such ambition by
cutting him o^f, otherwise he will divert all the sap of the tree into his
own body, and leave his fellows in a starving and perishing condition;
amongst which if you maintain equality, they will altogether consent in
gratitude to return you a plentiful Harvest.

The barren Almond tree will become fruitful if you lay open his Roots in
Winter, or else if you pierce some part of the stock close to the earth, and
put through the hole a wedge of Oak, watering it about with stale Urine.

The bitter Almond will be capable of bulcoration, if you lay round about his
bared Root Swines dung tempered with Urine, casting afterward much mould upon
it, this must be practiced yearly, till he be perfectly reclaimed, you will
find the same effect if you bore a hole in the stock of the tree, and put
therein a wedge wrapped about with cloth dipped in Honey. Beasts by brousing and
cropping of the first and tender branches, change the nature of sweet Almonds
into bitter Almonds, are gathered when their Husks through the heat of the
Sun begin to divide; (I should therefore advise that those made choice of to
set, may be taken before such exact ripeness, that the heat of the Sun may
not exhale their generating vigor) if when you have beaten them down you
shell them altogether, and wash them in brine, they will become white, and be
preserved a long time; cautionarily that you dry them in the Sun; their
repository or granaries must have good open admissories for an unmoist air,
and lie upon that Coast that is most open to the North-West, being the driest
wind in that Country.

The Medicinal excellency of Almonds, is, that they are good for those which
are troubled with a clammy fleame in their throat, with w^ake lungs, and such
as are subject to the gravel in the Reins or difficulty of Urine, they are
great restorers to nature, and fortify the parts tending to generation; nor is
it only beneficial in its fruit, for the Gum also of the Almond tree
arrests the spitting of blood.

Of the Fig tree.
THE Fig tree grows with an unusual celerity, as beginning to bear the
second year from his planting, and is of that nature, that during a month or
five weeks when Grapes are ripe and good to eat, the Fig also is at that
season daily mature, and fit for the palate, it may be planted as the Vine,
and affects the same soil; such as have roots grow sooner, but without doubt
the branches continue longer; the order you observe in planting the Vine
adheare too in this, and it will p^osper. The fittest season to plant it is in
October, and the succeeding Month to the 15. or twentieth: You shall cause
them in planting the be^ter to t^ke root, if you loosen the barque, or which is
better bruise it gently at the nether end of the stem about half a foot. To
cause them to be fertile, and bring forth fruits remarkable for fulness and
verdure, put to his root rich Mould beaten and tempered with the setlings of
Oil Olive, and man's dung, or which I like better then this stercoration if it
have already a benine soil, crop the tops and ends of the branches when they
first spring.

To reclaim a wild Fig Tree, water him at the roots with Win^ and Oil mixed
together.

If you make a composition of an equal quantity of salt brine and water be^tow
this irrigation in a small trench round about the body of the tree, your Figs
are prevented from unripe fallings.

To have ea^ly Figs, water the tree with Oil and Pigions-dung, if your
ambition be not only to have the earliest, but the latest, take away the first
Buds, when they are about the bigness of a Bean.

To keep or preserve them, lay them in a pot of Honey full and well stopped,
but so that they neither touch the sides of the pot, nor one another. Or take
an earthen pot (the Figs being put in) stop it close, and immerge this Vessel
to another f^ll of Wine, no ^aint or corruption will possess your Figs so
enclosed, while the Wine retains his goodn^sse.

The plant steeped in brine, or the end thrust into a Sea Onion, becomes much
more fruitful when planted.

This fruit is of great virtue in making the belly soluble in abundance of
nourishment and provocation of sweat, dried and mingled with the flower of
Linseed or Fenugreeke, it resolves and kills all Impos^umes, and hard
tumors, in decoctions it assists much in driving away of the Cough, and
difficulty of breath, which last virtue the fruit also expresses very happily,
if ste^ped in Aqua vitae, the night precedent, and taken every morning during
the dominion of this disea^e after you, the Milk of the Fig Tree dropped into
the ear kills the Worms in it, the Leaves of the Fig Tree rubbed do
provoke the Hemorrhoides; the juice of Figs is of equal felicity in opening
them, which to increase his excellency amends all roughness, ill conditioned
scabs^ small pocks, purpl^s, freckles, ringwormes, and other eye-sad blemishes
of the face or body therewith anointed, being first tempered with the flower of
parched Barley, a little Cotton wool dipped in this juice, and laid upon the
aching tooth a^^wageth the pain.

Of the Pomeganate tree.
THE Pomegranate tree, which may be planted either from the Branch or succor,
is one of the most absolute encouragers of an idle person in the world;
provided, it be exempt from the intemperate operation of the cold, neither the
torrid heat of the Sun, nor the barrenness of the Soil, shall make him forgo
his glorious Rubies; no culture or dressing is required by it: yet if it be set
in a rich soil, it will be sure to make an advantage of it to his own
flourishing, and your profit: the wine thereof (for it affords Wine as well as
excellency of fruit) may be made after this manner.

Take the ripe kernels, freed and cleansed from their skins, put them into the
Press, and exact the Wine, keep it in Vessels till it is fully fined from all
working, which finished, distribute such a quantity if Oil as may float over
all the top of the Vessel, and this preserves it from sowring or corruption.

The Pomegranate apple put in a pot of new earth, well covered, and Luted with
clay, and set into an Oven so long, till the Fruit may be resolved into powder,
is of very Princely virtue; for (taking the weight of half a crown thereof in
red Wine) it miraculously stops the Bloody flux. It is also good in diverse
diseases of women, which (because they are more arcanely peculiar to that Sex)
I shall forbear to speak of.

Of the Quince tree.
THE Quince tree grows much sooner from the Root then Branches: it delights
in a soil of a moist and cold nature, and would therefore be planted toward
the more umbragious and cool corners of your Garden. The Garden, or reclaimed
Quince, bears two sorts of fruits, to which curiosity has assigned Sexes,
and they are called the Quince and Quincesse; the Male, which is the Quince, is
of a more wrinkled, dry, redolent Fruit, and golden color then the Quincesse.
If you graft the Male upon the Fe^ale, or ^convers^, the Quinces thence
proceeding will be tender, and may be eaten raw, which without such ^n
Hermaphroditisme must of necessity have been prepared, to which nature, rather
then to eat it crude has de^igned it. The use of Marmalade, and its
preparation is so publicly known, that it is unnecessary to repeat it.

It is not enough to enjoy the delight of these fruits for the Summer only:
The Winter too in reason should claim a part of our Summer contentments, which
cannot be better expedited then by drying such fruits as are capable of are
faction, and agreeable when dried, the principal whereof are the Vine or
G^ape, the Fig, the Peach, and Abricot.

How to dry Grapes, that they may be kept.
YOur Grapes being at their just ripeness, select the faire^t out of you^
Vineyard, for such quantity as you shall use, let them lie thin spread while
you prepare a Lie for them, made of fair water and Ashes, proceeding only
from the cuttings of the Vine without any other mixture of wood whatsoever:
sees this lie till you have made a strong and clear liquor, then taking or
straining away the Ashes, put the liquor into a clean Caldron, set it again
over the fire till it be ready to sees; then tying the stalks of your Grapes
with thread, and fastening the thread to such sticks and in such order bunch by
bunch, as Chandlers use to dip their Candles, which dip them into this lie
four or five several times: Which done, let them dry in the Sunne^ either so
hanging on their sticks, of which is better upon Lattices or Hurdles of Rods,
or the like, until they be conveniently dry; then barrel them, pressing them
very hard and flat in the Vessel, others dry them upon such Lattices or
Hurdles without steeping them even as they come from the Vine, and peradventure
more successefully.

How to dry Figs.
LET them (as the Grape) be gathered very ripe; then lay and spread them upon
Hurdles or Lattices of Reeds or Osier joined together^ with rifts or vacancies
betwixt the covering of those Osiers, that the air transpiring through those
void spaces may assist the Sun in the drying them; but you must be cautious
that during their exposure to the open air no Rain or Dew incommodate them:
When they are dry ba^rell with the same poise of pressure used to the Grapes.
Others take a big Reed or Cane of two or three foot in length, boring little
holes all the length of it, through which they put little sticks of two foot
extent, being the small and sharp upon which they thread the Figs, till they
are very full of them, and so hang the Cane in the Sun, which dried they
barrel up using the same course as before.

How to dry Peaches and Abricots of all sorts.
WHen they are very ripe, pare off the upper skin, cleav^ them into four
quarters, dry them as you did your Fig^^ barrel them and keep them for the
Winter.

The manner how you shall prepare them to eat is this; pr^vide an earthen pot,
and after you have washe^ your Peaches in fair water, put them into the pot
with as much Wine as will cover the Peaches, then sees them half a quarter of
an hour. They may be made ready without boiling thus; let them inf^se three
or four days in Wine, (which way they are much better) put to them beaten
Cynamon, and thus they will last a Month in the Wine, eaten every morning they
are very wholesome, and provoke a good appetite.

The fittest seasons for sowing of seeds.
TO prescribe Rules according to our Climate, to tha^ of VIRGINIA, may have
much of affection, but without all peradventures, little of Wisdom. We must
therefore seek for a nearer correspondence in parallells. Having therefore
seen some letters of an ancient date written by Frenchmen, then employed in
VIRGINIA, to their Intrusters, wherein they confess that of all the Provinces
of FRANCE: None came so near to that noble Country, as LANGUEDOCK and
PROVENCE, two of the Eyes of that Kingdom, abounding withal the delights and
delicacy that ITALY can pretend to, or SPAIN^ boast of; I could not but
apprehend that their times of sation and insition, of planting and replanting,
might in some measure correspond with that place where the English are now
s^ated, and having seen a regular distribution of the months and seasons in
the year for sowing, grafting^ and other offices belonging to the industrious
Lovers of Agriculture; I should both unsatisfie my own conscience, and
disoblige that Country, and its Christian Inhabitants, if I did not publish it
with the same resentment of affection I received it; not that any should be so
pinioned to these Precepts, that neither weather, inconveniency, or want of
opportunity should make him recede from the punctual observation of them: But
I speak it out of a very strong confidence that the observations of the
seasons according to these prescriptions will sort well with V^RGINIA in
general, and the Planters in particular, to whom it is intended, and indeed it
is as exact ^ Directory as any yet published.

I am not ignorant that Critics will laugh at this; much good do it them and
why so many Months for the same seed? W^y so many Repetitions? My Exceptionist
forgets that we not only covet to have things early, but their continuance:
Will it offend him that we have Ar^ichokes in May? and July both? Because we
may have Cabbage, Lettuse in April, shall we be forbidden to have any in May:
the principal scope of this directer was to show how long such and such seeds
might be continued to be sown, and in what Month and Moon, if he
apprehend it not; I can send him to no Month, but that of June, nor Moon, but
that of Midsommer.

He that will sow seed, must know that, Some may (...) ^owen at a^^ times of
the Month and Moon, as, Asparagus, Colewort of all sorts, Spinach, Lettuse,
Pa^s^ips, Reddish.
Others would be sowed in a certain Month and Moone^ as there must be sown
in February, the Moon being -- New Full Spike Ga^like B^^age Bug^^sse Ch^^use
Cori^nder G^urds W^ter ^^esses M^^^^^ne Pa^ma Christi Flower gen^le W^ite Poppy
Pu^s^ane Radish R^^ket Rosemary Sorrel Double Marigold Thyme. Anise Viole^^
B^ites Ski^worts Wh^te Succory F^n^ (...) P^^^l^y. H^^y ^histle Cole Cabbage
White Cole Green Cole Cucumbe^^ H^rts-horn^ Samp^^^ D^^rs grain Spinach
Cabbage-Lettuce M^l^^^ Onions La^ke^-he^le Burnet Leekes.
Old



Sow in March the Moon being, New Full Garlic Borage Cher^ile Cori^nder
Gourds M^joran^ White Poppy Pu^s^in^ Radish Sorr^ll Double Marigold Thyme
Violets. Anise Blee^s Skirwor^s Succory ^en^^ll Apples of Love Mavelous
Apples. Artichoke^ Basil Thi^^le^ Blessed Thi^^le Col^ Cabbage White Cole
Green Cole Citron^ Cucumbers Harts-horne Sampire Di^rs grain^ Spinach G^lly^
flowers Hyf^op Cabbage Lettuse Melons Onyons Flower gentle Burnet Leeke^ Sav^^y.
Old


Sow in April the Moon being New Majorane Flower gentle Thyme Violet^^
Full Apples of Love Mavelous Apples.
Old Artichokes Cabbage Cole Citrons Harts-horne Sampire Gilly flower^.



In May in the old of the Moon Blessed Thi^le.

In June the Moon New Go^rds Radishes.
Old Melo^s Cucumbers.



In Jul^ the Moon Full White Succory Cabbage Lettu^e.
Old White Succory Cabbage Lettu^e.



In August the Moon being Full White Succory.

Herbs growing of seeds that are sown may be transplanted at all times,
except Chervils, Arrage, Spinach, and Persely, which are nothing worth when
they are transplanted; ever observed that such transplantation be in a moist,
rainy weather, otherwise they must be very diligently watered.

You may take notice that the choice and age of seeds is d^uble, in choosing
them you are to regard that they be ripe, full, heavy, firm, gross, and of a
good color, not falling to powder through rottenness or bruises.

Some grow bettter of new seeds, as Leeks, Cucumbers.

Others grow better of old seeds, as Coriander, Persley, Savory, Beets,
Origanum, Cresses, Spinach, Poppey.

Further observe, that you must preserve from cold, Lettuses, Artichokes,
Basil, Cabbage Cole, Diers grain, Melons, fifteen days after they put forth
from the earth.

Make ^ccount that seeds thrive and prosper much better, when they are sown
upon such days as are between the extremes of cold and heat, then in hot,
cold or dry days.

Be pleased to remember, that seeds must be gathered in fair weather, in
the Wane of the Moon.

They must be kept some in Boxes of wood, Dry, and not laid upon the ground,
but kept very clean. Bags of Leather, Dry, and not laid upon the ground, but
kept very clean. Vessels of Earth, Dry, and not laid upon the ground, but kept
very clean.
others, as Onions, In their Husk. Chibols, In their Husk. Leeks, In their
Husk.
^o do regularly, we should Plant in the la^^ of the Moon. Gather Grafts in
the la^t but one of the Moon. Graft two days after the change of the Moon.





An Explication of the Saw-mill, an Engine, wherewith by force of a wheel in
the water, to cut Timber with great speed.
THIS Engine is very common in Norway and Mountains of Sweden, wherewith they
cut great quantity of Deal-bords; which Engine is very necessary to be in a
great Town or Forest, to cut Timber, whether into planks or otherwise. This
here is not altogether like those of Norway: for they make the piece of Timber
approach the Sawes on certain wheels with teeth; but because of reparations
which those toothd wheels are often subject unto, I will omit that use: and in
stead thereof, put two weights, about 2. or 300. pound weight a piece, whereof
one is marked A. the other B. The Cords wherewith the said weights do hang, to
be fastened at the end of the 2. pieces of moving wood, which slide on two other
pieces of fixed wood, by the means of certain small pulleys, which should be
within the house, and so the said weights should always draw the said pieces
of moving wood, which advancing always toward the Sawes rising and falling,
shall quickly be cut into 4. 5. or 6. pieces, as you shall please to put on
Saws, and placed at what distance you will have for the thickness of the
planks or bords ye will cut: and when a piece is cut, then let one with a Lever
turn a Rowler, whereto shall be fastened a strong Cord which shall bring back
the said piece of wood, an^ lift again the weights: and after put aside the
piece already cut, to take again the Sawes against another piece of wood.
Which once done, the ingenious Artist may easily convert the same to an
Instrument of threshing wheat, breaking of hemp or flax, and other as
profitable uses.

FINIS.

