A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, APRIL 2. 1690. Being the
Fifth Wednesday in LENT.

By WILLIAM WAKE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's: And Preacher
to the Honorable Society of GRAY'S INN.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard: And W. Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1690.

1 Timothy V. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's
sins.


SAINT Paul having planted a Christian Church at Ephesus, and being called by
his Apostolic Charge to Preach the Gospel to other places also, settles
Timothy there to supply what was yet wanting to the full Establishment of it;
and not long after his departure, sends him this Epistle to instruct him how he
should behave himself in the house of 1 Timothy iii. 15.
God, and fulfill that great Trust which was committed to him therein.

In the Verses before the Text, we find him directing this Holy man, how he
should proceed in inflicting the Censures of the Church upon Offenders, viz.
That he should First admonish them openly, in the presence of the whole
Congregation; 2 Cor. ii. -- 6. Chrysostom. Hom. xv. in 1. Tim.
That so both they who had Sinned, might be the more earnestly moved to Repent
themselves of it; and that others being terrified thereby, might have the
greater care how they fell into the like Sins, least they also became exposed
to the same Correction, v. 20. Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others
also may fear.

2dly. That he should proceed in these judgments Uprightly and Sincerely,
without Partiality, without Fear or Favor to any, v. 21. I charge thee before
God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these
things; that is, that thou proceed according to these Rules, in exercising the
Discipline of the Church upon Offenders; without preferring one before another,
or as our Margin reads it, without prejudice, Gr. (...).
doing nothing by partiality.

Lastly, That having tied any man by the Censures of the Church, he should have
a care not to make too much have to loose him again, and Restore him to the
Communion of it; but should diligently enquire into, and prove his Repentance:
Least by his easiness in receiving Sinners into Favor, he should lessen their
Fear and Apprehension of Sinning, and so bring upon himself the Guilt of those
Crimes which such an unwarrantable lenity would be like to encourage wicked men
to commit, when they should see how little it would cost them to expiate their
Sins, and satisfy the Church for them, v. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man,
neither be partaker of other men's sins.

It is a difficulty that has somewhat divided both the Ancient and Modern
Interpreters of this passage, To what it is that the laying on of hands here
spoken of is to refer? Whether to the Admitting of persons into Holy Orders in
the Church; or, as I have before explained it, to the receiving Penitents into
the Communion of it? For in both these Cases the Ancient Christians made use of
this Ceremony of Laying on of hands.

If we understand the Exhortation of the Text with reference to the Former of
these, the meaning of it will be this: That he should have a care diligently to
examine the Faith, and to enquire into the Lives and Manners of those whom he
admitted into any Holy Office or Function in the Church; and see that they were
duly qualified for it, according to those Rules Chap. iii. 5.
which he had before so largely given him for that very purpose.

But tho I shall not presume to censure this account of these Words, yet I must
confess I think the Latter Interpretation of them which I before gave, as it
equally agrees with the expression of St. Paul, and with the Primitive Custom
of laying on Hands upon those whom they received again into Communion after
having fulfilled the Penance imposed upon them for their Sins; so does it seem
to me somewhat better to agree with the rest of the Apostle's exhortation in
that place. And the Consideration which he lays before him to engage him to
this Care, is no other than what we find from hence transcribed sometimes into
the Penitential Canons of the Ancient Church; namely, lest by his Remisness in
this particular, he should have Other men's sins imputed to his account, and be
responsible to God, for all those Crimes which he neglected to punish with that
severity he ought to have done.

But which soever of these two be the true meaning of St. Paul's charge in the
former part of the Text, Lay hands suddenly on no man: The reason of it in the
latter will be in both the same; namely, that Timothy by his negligence in
either of these Cases would have rendered himself Guilty of other men's sins,
and therefore ought to be very careful and Circumspect, that he might not do so.

And this is the Use which I shall now make of these Words. It is a matter of
sad and serious Consideration that we who labor, the very best of us, under so
great a load of our own Sins, should yet as if that were not sufficient to
ruin us, add every day a number of other men's to them, to increase our
Account, and aggravate our Condemnation. There is I believe but seldom a day
passes, wherein we do not some of us render our selves Guilty in this
particular. I speak not now with reference to those, who not only live in an
Habitual commission of the most heinous Sins themselves, but take a great deal
of satisfaction, and even make it their daily Employment, to draw as many
others as they can into the Commission of them. As if they meant to Emulate the
impiety of those whom St. Paul has characterized, or rather branded in Holy
Scripture, as the most Desperate and Diabolical of any in the World, Romans i.
32. Who knowing the judgment of God, that they who commit such things are
worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in those that do them.

No, a man need not rise up to such a height of Villainy, to render himself
Guilty in the sight of God, of Other men's transgressions. He may be so at a
much lesser rate; and that I fear upon such accounts, as the best of us all
shall hardly be able utterly to clear our selves of it. I shall therefore make
it my endeavor in a few reflections to show,

I st. What those Circumstances are whereby we may be most likely to render our
selves partakers of other men's sins? From whence it will appear, II dly. How
careful we ought to be, of our selves and our Actions, that we may keep our
selves from being so. Is It. What those Circumstances are, whereby we may render
our selves partakers of other men's sins?
For the better clearing of which Point, I shall in the first place lay down
this as a Principle out of all doubt; That no man becomes a partaker of the
Sins of another, but by his own Act, i. e. by somewhat which himself does to
involve his Soul in the Guilt of it. For else, as a great man among the
Heathens themselves very well argued, another Marc. Ant. l. viii. Sect. 53.
man's wickedness might be my Evil, which, says he, God would not have, that it
might not be in another man's power to make me unhappy.

It Is true indeed so great was the care of God heretofore to restrain the Jews
from an Idolatrous Worship, that he threatened for this Sin to visit the
Iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third ^d. Com.
and fourth Generation; i. e. upon those who could not possibly have been in
any manner accessory to their Impieties. But besides that there is a great deal
of difference, between being partakers of other men's Sins, and being Visited,
or Punished upon Occasion of them; and that too only with some Temporal Evils,
such as their own Sins had very well deserved: We are plainly assured by God
himself, Ezekiel xviii. that even this complaint should be taken away; The
Children should no more bear Ezekiel. xviii:
the Iniquity of their fathers, neither the fathers of their Children, but the
Soul that sinned it should die. And in all the accounts we meet with in the New
Testament of the judgment to come, we are expressly told that every man shall
receive according to his own works; or as our Apostle has Phrased it, Gal. vi.
5. Every man shall bear his own Burden.

It remains therefore that no one either becomes partaker of the Guilt of
another man's Sins now, or shall be Punished for them hereafter, any farther
than he has by some Circumstance or other rendered himself accessory thereunto.
And our present business must be to enquire how many ways a man may do so? Now
those are in General these three:

(1st.) By giving Occasion to other men's sins, (2dly) By Approving of them when
Committed. And (3dly), By neglecting to hinder them from committing them when
we might and ought to have done it.
(1st), A man may become a partaker of Other men's Sins, by giving Occasion to
the Committing of them.

This is in General so very clear that I do not know that it has ever been
denied or doubted of by any. But now how many ways a man may become so far the
Occasion of another Sin, as to render himself thereby a partaker in the Guilt
of it, I shall not undertake precisely to define. I will offer some of those
that are the most obvious, and particularly reflected on as such in the Holy
Scriptures.

And First, He who Contrives the Commission of any Sin, and either by his
Authority over any other Commands, or else by his Arguments and insinuations
Persuades him to commit it; it is not to be questioned but that such a one does
undoubtedly thereby render himself partaker of it.

This was the case of David in the business of Uriah, 2 Samuel chap. xith and
xiith: When having committed Adultery with Bathsheba, and not knowing otherwise
how to prevent the scandal of it; he ordered Joab, who then commanded the Royal
Army before Rabbah, to set Uriah her husband in the 2 Samuel xi.
forefront of the hottest Battle, that he might be smitten -- 15
and dye; and so he might take Bathsheba to be his Wife. But tho Joab therefore
executed the Command, and the Enemy slew him as he had projected -- 17.
it; yet God charges neither the one nor the other of them with his Death. He
lays the whole Guilt of his Blood at the King's door, who had been the Occasion
of it; 2 Samuel xii. 9. Wherefore, says 2 Samuel xii.
-- 9.
the Prophet, have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his
sight? Thou have killed Uriah the Hittite, with the sword: -- Thou have slain
him with the sword of the children of Ammon. And then he goes on in the next
verses to pronounce Judgment against him upon the account of it; Now therefore
-- 10.
the sword shall not depart from thy house: Behold I -- 11
will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house; and I will take thy
wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie
with thy wives in the sight of this sun: For thou did it secretly, but -- 12.
I will do this thing before all Israel, and before this sun.

And immediately upon this Admonition we find David himself confessing his Sin,
and imploring God's forgiveness, v. 13. And David said unto -- 13.
Nathan, I have sinned against the LORD. And in that great Penitential Psalm,
Psalm. li. composed on purpose to be a standing memorial in the House of God, of
his Humiliation and Repentance for this very sin, he particularly acknowledges
himself guilty of the murder of Uriah, and deprecates God's anger upon the
account of it, v. 14. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God! thou God of
Psalm. li. 14.
my Salvation, and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

The truth is, such a one as this, is for the most part more guilty of the Sin
committed, than he who was either over-awed or persuaded into the Commission of
it. For tho every man ought to have such a care of himself, and such a concern
for his duty, as not to suffer either the Authority of the Greatest Person, or
the Insinuations of the Dearest Friend in the world, to be able to prevail with
him in a matter where the Glory of God, and the Salvation of his own Soul are
at stake: Yet there is a certain easiness and tenderness in our natures, that
not only too much exposes us to be overcome by such persons as we have either a
very great value for, or have otherwise been very much obliged to, and do what
we ought not, out of a false and unreasonable regard to them; but does also
render us many times extremely pityable, tho not excusable, in the doing of it.
Whilst he who thus executes the office of the Devil; projects the Villainy, and
prompts us to the Execution of it, must remain utterly inexcusable both in the
sight of God and Man, for his Impiety.

But Secondly, A man may be the occasion of another sin, and so become
Partaker of it, tho he does not in so eminent a degree as this concur to it; if
he does but in any other manner truly and effectually assist him in the
committing of it.

Now this may be done many ways: As, 1st. By contributing a helping hand to the
doing of it: Upon which account it was a Constitution of the Roman Law, That if
one committed a Theft Inst. l. iv. Tit. 1. Sect Interdum.
by the assistance of another; as for instance, If one set a ladder ready, or
left a door open, that another might go in and steal his neighbors goods; he
was adjudged thereby to be partaker of the Crime, and stood liable to the same
Punishment that the other did, who committed the Robbery.

And the same must be said, 2dly, of him who counsels and advises another to
any sin; and thereby puts him upon the Execution of it: As if, for example, a
man should persuade another in necessity, to supply his own wants by stealing
or defrauding his neighbor of his Goods.

And especially, 3dly, If he not only in general advises him to do this, but in
particular, points out to him a fair occasion, to put his advice in execution.
As if, for instance, he should not only counsel him in General to steal, but
should moreover tell him where a good Booty was to be had? How he might get
into his Neighbors House? What time would be the most proper for it? And in
what part of the House he should find what he went for?

Nay but 4thly. Tho a man should not go so far as this, nor be at all guilty of
helping or advising his neighbor to do Evil; yet If he gives his Consent to
it; If he encourage him in the Performance, and approves his doing of it; He
does even by this render himself partaker of the Guilt of it.

It Is upon this account that St. Austin charges St. Paul with the Death of the
Blessed Steven. Sermon. de Sanctis. i, iv, v.
He was none of the Witnesses against him, nor did he throw one Stone at him.
But he was standing by, and consenting unto his death; and he kept the Acts
xxii. 20.
raiment of them that slew him. And by doing of this he rendered himself no less
Guilty than the most zealous of those that appeared against him. Others cast
the Stones at him; but St. Paul slew him by their hands.

The Sum of this Second Remark is in short this: That whatsoever the Means be
by which any one assists another in his Wickedness; if he knows the thing to be
Evil, and yet still goes on to promote and encourage the Execution of it; He
sins thereby against his own Soul, and shall render an Account to God for every
such Crime, as any Other shall have committed by his Help and Assistance.

But I must go yet farther: For,

Thirdly, A Man may be adjudged by God to be the occasion of other men's Sins,
and as such to partake in them, though he does not thus directly contribute to
the Execution of them. And that especially by these two ways: * By his wicked
Doctrine; and, * By the Scandal and Influence of a bad Example: And by either
of which, if another be led into Sin, we find the Person who conduced but even
thus far toward it, nevertheless charged by God as Partaker of it.

First, He that advances any wicked Doctrine, whereby either to deceive Men
into the commission of Sin, or to strengthen them in it, does thereby render
himself Partaker of their Evil-doings.

It was a sad Complaint which God once made against the Prophets of old, Ezekiel.
xiii. That they prophesied falsely in his Name, and seduced his people, by
palliating their Vices, and sowing Pillows under their Arms, and not suffering
them to see their Danger; saying still Peace, peace, and there was no Peace.
But God denounces a terrible Judgment against them for their so doing, at the
third and following Verses: Thus says the LORD, Woe unto the foolish Prophets
Ezekiel. xiii. 3. etc.
that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing. Who say, The LORD says,
and the Lord has not sent them. Therefore thus says the LORD God; My hand
shall be upon the Prophets that see Vanity and that divine Lies, and I will
accomplish my Wrath upon them, to wit, upon the Prophets of Israel, which
prophecy concerning Jerusalem, and see Visions of Peace for her, and there is
no Peace, says the LORD God.

It would, I fear, be a melancholy Reflection to consider, how many of these
kind of Prophets there are at this time among us, who by false Principles and
mistaken Notions of Christianity, that I do not add, and by their open
Profaneness too, by their new Systems both of Faith and Morality, fall under
the same Censure, and thereby involve their Souls in a greater Destruction.

But indeed, What Other Account can we give of all those Principles and
Doctrines, whereby some extenuate the Danger, others cover over the very Nature
of Sin? Some lead men ignorantly into it, by teaching them that what is indeed
unlawful, may innocently be done by them; Others let them see and know what
they do, but then tell them they run no great hazard in the doing of it: A
little Sorrow and Confession at the last, and all is secure. Or should the
worst that can happen, yet alas! Hell is no such dreadful Place as it is
commonly misapprehended to be: It being unreasonable to think that God should
punish a few Temporary Sins, with Everlasting Torments. In short, That it is but
to die, and perish, and enjoy nothing; and why then should a man trouble
himself with the dull Formality of Religion now, when he has so little to
apprehend and be afraid of hereafter?

But let such Men as these know, that it is not a light Offense that they
commit in all this. There is a time coming when they shall render a severe
Account for these their Delusions: And undergo a Punishment not only
proportionable to their own Sins, but to all that Deluge of Evil which by such
Principles as these, has broke in upon the World in these latter days.

It was one of those great Evils for which God pronounced that severe
Denuntiation against the Jews heretofore, Isaiah v. 20. That they called Evil
Isaiah v. 2^.
Good, and Good Evil; they put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness;
Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter: that is, they confounded the Natures of
Things, destroyed all Distinction betwixt Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice; they
ran down Piety as a vain Practice, and recommended Profaneness, as true
Gallantry and Bravery: Therefore as the fire devoureth Isaiah v. 24.
the stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff, so their root shall be
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust; because they have cast away
the Law of the LORD of Hosts, and despised the Word of the Holy One of Israel.

Secondly, A Man may become the Occasion, and so partake of Other men's Sins,
not only by his Evil Doctrine, but by the Scandal and Influence of a Bad
Example.

And that, not only if he thereby designs to lead them into Sin, but though he
should not have the least desire, much less intention so to do. For Sin being
always scandalous, and apt to give offense, He who does any thing that he ought
not, and thereby leads his Brother from his Duty; must answer to God not only
for the Evil that he did, but for all the Consequences of it, to the deceiving
of any Other into the like Offense. And thus the Holy Scripture not only
condemns Jeroboam for making Israel to sin, upon the account of the Calves that
he set up in Dan and Bethel, on purpose to draw them away from the true Worship
of God: 1 Kings xii. 28. It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem; Behold
thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt: But
represents St. Peter to us as Guilty of leading the Gentile Converts into
Error; though by complying as he did with the Judaizing Christians he designed
only to condescend to their weakness, and not to give any the least cause of
Offense to the Others.

The Case was in short this: There were in those first times many among the
Jews who though they readily embraced the Gospel of Christ, yet could not
presently persuade themselves that they ought to abandon all the Rites and
Ceremonies of their own Law. With these therefore the Apostles thought fit to
bear for a while, and to permit them to observe their former Customs, as far as
was consistent with the Nature of Christianity so to do. But for the Gentile
Converts, those who had never been at all subject to the Law, to them they
preached a Gospel liberty, and exhorted them not to submit themselves to any
such burden.

St. Peter being at Antioch, in a Church which St. Paul had established of this
latter sort, freely for a time communicated with them; not making any
distinction of Meats or Drinks, nor at all observing the Law of Moses in any of
those things. But it happened whilst he was there, that certain Brethren came
down from the Church of Jerusalem to him, who were still zealous for the Law;
and in compliance with these, He began whilst they were with Him to alter his
manner of living, and no longer to use his former liberty, but to live again
after the manner of the Jews. He withdrew, says St. Paul, and separated
himself, fearing them of Gal. ii. -- 12.
the circumcision.

This example of his led many of the Jewish Converts, who before had lived in
all freedom with the Gentiles, into the like Abstinence; insomuch that Barnabas
himself was carried away with the dissimulation; -- 13.
And so began to raise some doubts and disturbances in that Church. But St.
Paul reproved him -- 14.
openly before them all: He charged him that he did not walk uprightly
according to the Truth of the Gospel: He withstood him to the face, and tells
us plainly He -- 11.
was to be blamed: And that for Compelling the Gentiles -- 14.
to live as do the Jews; i. e. for encouraging them to it, and persuading them
falsely by his example, that it was necessary for them so to do.

It is in the Case of Sin now, as it was in that of an involuntary injury under
the Law. If a Man opened or dug a pit, and neglected to cover it, and Exodus
xxi. 33.
another man's Ox or Ass fall therein, though he made it only for his own use,
and had not the least design of doing thereby any prejudice to his Neighbor,
yet because he did not take due care to fence it, and prevent all occasion of
harm from -- 34.
happening by it, he was to repair his Neighbors damage, and give Money to
him for the Ox or Ass, and the dead beast was to be his.

And so here: If a Man does any thing that may be apt to lead another into Sin,
and takes not that due care he ought to prevent his being deceived by it, and
another be thereby encouraged to do Evil, he shall answer for his neglect: And
if his Action was not only scandalous but sinful too; Evil in its self, as well
as apt to draw others into Sin; he shall be called to an account before God not
only for his own but also for his Neighbors Soul; and his Sin shall be
required yet one fold more of him for the occasion it gave to his Brother to do
wickedly.

There is yet one way more whereby a Man may give occasion to, and so partake
of other Men's Sins, and which comes yet nearer to the Case of Timothy in the
Text, than any I have hitherto named; and that is,

Fourthly; By advancing Evil Men to Places of Trust and Power, and thereby
giving them opportunity to do much more Mischief, than they could have done in
a private Capacity.

I need not say how great a part of the Calamities under which the World now
labors might be prevented, were none but Men of great Integrity, and Abilities
suitable to the Station to which they are called, ever permitted to have any
Rule or Authority, either in Civil or Religious concerns. Such as these, would
not only not do any Hurt themselves, but would in a little time either by their
Influence and Example, or else by a due severity against Offenders restrain
others from doing it. But when the Blind lead the Blind; When they who should
teach, and make others Good, are not Good themselves; what wonder if we see so
little sense of Piety among the People, when there is so little of it among
those that should set them an Example?

It is therefore certainly a Great Care that those ought to have, whose concern
it is to provide that none but Honest and Worthy Men be admitted into such
Stations, where if they are inclined to be Evil, they may do a great deal of
mischief to those below them. And if instead of having such a Care, as far as
is possible, not to suffer any wicked and profligate Persons to receive any
Favor or Countenance from them, they shall either take no Care at all, or it
may be, (which has sometimes happened) be well-enough contented that the vilest
Wretches should be the most honored and promoted by them; what less can they
expect than to answer for those Sins, which such Men by their means have had
the Opportunity to Commit?

When Jeroboam, whom we before mentioned, had set up his two Calves in Dan and
Bethel, and exhorted the People no more to go up to Jerusalem, but to worship
the Gods which he had made for them; we read, 1 Kings xiii. 33. that for the
better carrying on his design, he provided Priests for them of the lowest of
the people; such as he thought fit for his purpose, that would be ready for any
thing he should command them to do; whosoever would he consecrated Him, and he
became one of the Priests of the High Places. And how heinously God resented
this, we may see in the very next Verse; And this thing became sin unto the
House of Jeroboam, 1 Kings xiii. 34.
even to cut it off and to destroy it from off the face of the Earth.

But because the Great Aggravation of Jeroboam's Sin was that he admitted such
Fellows into the Priest hood on purpose to debase Religion, and confirm the
People in the Idolatry which he designed to establish among them; We will look
farther to the Instance of the Text, where neither of these things can be
supposed. Here the only fault we can imagine Timothy was capable of being
Guilty of, must have been the not being so careful and circumspect as he ought,
in trying and examining such Persons as he admitted into any Holy Office in the
Church. And yet St. Paul having exhorted him to this Care in the former part of
the Text, if we take his words in that sense in which they are more generally
understood; Lay hands suddenly on no man; makes use of this consideration to
enforce it upon Him in the latter, that otherwise he should be responsible to
God for all that mischief which should accrue to the Church by the means of
such persons as he admitted into the Government of it, without that due Caution
he ought to have used in a matter of such importance; Neither be thou partaker
of other men's sins.

I shall conclude this point with that advice which the Heathen Orator once
gave to his Friend: If you Is^er. ad Them. ^ 30.
should ever come to be in Authority, says he, Employ no wicked Person in any
of your Affairs; for whatsoever faults He commits, the blame will be sure to
fall on you.

And this may serve for the first way whereby we may become partakers of other
Men's Sins, viz. by giving Occasion to the Committing of them.

The ( 2d.) is, By our Approving of them when Committed.

And this too is a Circumstance which renders a Chrysostom. in Romans Hom. V. page
46, 47.
Man not only partaker of another Sin, but oftentimes more heinously guilty
than He who committed it. A Man may fall into Sin by Ignorance or Surprise; may
be hurried on by his Passions, and carried away in such a manner by the
violence of temptation, as not to be able to command Himself, and to withstand
the force of them. And this though it will not altogether excuse, yet will lessen
and extenuate a Man's Guilt; will render him though not innocent, yet not
extremely ill: He may Commit the Sin, and yet be so far from being pleased with
it, that he may abhor himself for Committing of it.

But there can be no Excuse for any one to justify and approve what he knows
to be Evil. Here is no room for passion or surprise: In short, it must be the
Evidence of a Soul hardened in wickedness, not only to do what is Evil, but to
take pleasure in it; and to applaud and encourage the practice of it.

Now two ways there are whereby we may declare our Approbation of another Sin:
and by both, but especially by the former of which, we shall be sure to render
our selves partakers of it.

1st. By making some Advantage to our selves by it. 2ldy, By Justifying and
Applauding of it to others. 1st. By making some Advantage to our selves by it.
This was the Case of Ahab in the business of Naboth, and for which God charges
him with all the Murder and Oppression, that without his Knowledge or Direction
had been committed in it, 1 Kings xxi. He desired by any means to have
purchased Naboth's Vineyard, and he was much discontented be cause he could not
persuade Him to part with it He laid him down upon his Bed, and turned away his
1 Kings xxi. 4.
face, and would eat no bread; but it does not Appear that he at all designed
by any unjust Violence to ravish it from Him.

But his Wife wrote Letters to the Elders of his City, and commanded them
saying; Proclaim a Fast, -- 9.
and set Naboth on high among the people: and set two -- 10.
men, sons of Belial, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou did blaspheme
God and the King; and then carry him out, and stone him that he may die.

This they did, and put him to death accordingly: -- 11.
And then the Queen first made her Husband acquainted -- 15.
with what was done. But what then was Ahab's Crime? Why, he received the News
with satisfaction; he was pleased with what had passed; and he rose up from his
bed, and went down to take possession -- 16.
of the Vineyard. And for this God charges him by Elijah with all the Violence
that without his knowledge had been before committed. Thus says the -- 19.
LORD, Have thou killed and also taken possession? therefore, In the place
where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.

The truth is, so great is the Equity of this Proceeding, that we find even the
positive Laws of most Cuntries, to observe the same measure. He that conceals a
Thief, and receives what is stolen, and partakes with him in his Booty; shall,
if discovered, be looked upon as if he had committed the Theft: And therefore
Solomon says of such a one, Prove. xxix. 24. That he hates his own Soul, that
is, He puts his Life in danger by it. And for what concerns the Conscience, is
even by the Heathen Moralists themselves (...) Phocyl.
adjudged as much a Thief as the other. And the Reason of this is clear,
Because by joining with the Sinner at the last, and partaking with him in the
Advantage for which the Villainy was committed, instead of correcting him for it
himself, or bringing him forth to a public Punishment; he plainly declares his
Consent to what was done, and both preserves him, and encourages him to do the
like again.

Nay but, 2dly, Though we should not make any Advantage to our selves by the Sins
of others; yet our very justifying and applauding of them, would of themselves
be sufficient, to render us partakers of them.

The Malignity of Sin lies not so much in what we do, as in the Affections of
the Heart, the Will and Intention with which we do it. The outward Act may
accidentally add indeed to the Aggravation of our Guilt: But it is the Heart and
the Affections of that to which God principally looks; and for which we shall
either be acquitted or condemned at the last day. A man may do that which is in
its self very innocent, and yet commit a great Sin by doing it, if he thought
it to be Evil, and yet did it. And on the other side, there are such
Circumstances wherein what is in its self unlawful, may yet without Sin be done
by us, if a man were invincibly, and therefore excusably, ignorant that it was
so.

He that loves any Evil, and wishes for an Opportunity to commit it, and would
be sure to embrace it if he had, is already guilty of it, though he should never
find the Opportunity he desires for it. Thus in the Instances which our Savior
Christ himself gives us, Matthew. v. He that looks upon a woman to lust Mat. v.
28.
after her, has already committed adultery with her in his heart: He that is
angry with his brother, and would do -- 22.
him a mischief if he could, is already a Murderer, though he never should be
able to strike his Poniard into his Breast. And therefore in the Case before
us; If when a Sin is done by another, We are pleased with it, we commend the
Fact, and so declare our selves to be in our Hearts consenting to it; we
evidently thereby, as far as concerns our Will and Inclinations, bear a part in
it, and shall accordingly be accounted in God's sight to have a share in the
Guilt of it.

Hence it is that we may observe, how studious Good men have always showed
themselves, in flying the very Conversation of Sinners: As if their keeping
company with Evil men, should seem to some an Approving of their Evil Actions.
It was the Resolution of Holy David, Psalm. ci. that he would not suffer any
wicked man to stand before him, to dwell in his House, or receive the least
Favor and Countenance from him. And in the cxixth Psalm, v. 115. he makes it
the Consequence of his own resolving to be Good, to drive all such from him as
would not be so in like manner with him: Depart from me ye Evildoers, I will
keep the Commandments of my God.

And the same was the Advice which St. Paul gave to the Corinthians, 1 Ep. v.
11. He bids them not to keep company with a wicked Christian: If any man, says
he, that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or a Railer, or a
Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a One no not to Eat. And again, in his
2d to Timothy, c. iii. having set down a large Catalogue of Sinners that should
rise up in the latter days; he bids us, ver* 5. From such turn away. And St.
John in his 2d Epistle, having given the same Advice to the Person to whom he
there writes, that if any of those who had denied the Faith of 2 Ep. Jo. 7.
Christ, after having been once made acquainted with it, should come to her,
she should not receive them -- 1^.
into her house, nor bid them God speed; subjoins this very thing as the Reason
of it, For he that bids 2 Ep. Jo. 11.
them God speed, is partaker of their Evil deeds.

And though I should be very unwilling to pronounce any thing rashly in a Matter
of such a Nature, and am sensible there are many Cases; some wherein a man
cannot avoid having to do with wicked men, as in the Common Concerns and
Affairs of this World: Others in which a man may worthily keep company with
them, as our Savior did with the Publicans and Sinners heretofore, the better
to gain some Opportunity to reclaim their Manners, and convert them from their
Evil ways: Yet I cannot but think it worth the while of a Christian to consider
with himself, how he will otherwise be able to excuse himself hereafter to God
Almighty, that he has received, loved, embraced the most profligate Sinners;
shown his Favor and Countenance to the most daring Rebels against Piety and
Religion; and delighted in the Conversation of those now, whose Portion he
deprecates, and whose Companion he would be very unwilling to become at all
adventures hereafter. Nay perhaps has done yet more than this: has loved them
for their very Vices; been pleased with their Prosaneness and Debauchery; and
smiled sometimes at those Sins in others, which he would have been ashamed to
commit himself.

But I must not insist upon all these things: and therefore,

3dly, and to conclude this whole matter; The last Circumstance, whereby we may
become partakers of other men's Sins, is, By neglecting to hinder them from
committing them, when we might, and ought to have done it.

Now tho this be a circumstance which seems more especially to regard those
whom God has set up as Watchmen over the House of Israel, yet is there no one
that must think himself altogether unconcerned in it. We all of us I hope have,
I am sure we all of us should have the same Zeal for the Glory of God, and the
same Charity for the Salvation of one another Souls. And though God has indeed
in a particular manner appointed some certain Persons to watch more than others
for your Salvation, and to call upon you to look to your selves, and not give
way to the Tempter: yet whosoever he be that sees another about to do that
which he knows will be odious to God, scandalous to Good men, and without a
timely Repentance ruinous to his own Soul, and has an opportunity to admonish
him of his Sin, and to hinder his committing of it, and yet neglects so to do;
let him fear, lest what God once denounced against the Prophet Ezekiel
heretofore, be finally verified in himself; c. 33. 8. When I say unto the
wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely die, if thou do not speak to warn the
wicked from his way; that wicked man shall die in his Iniquity, but his blood
will I require at thy hand.

But though we are therefore all of us obliged, as we tender our own Souls, to
do what we can in our several Capacities to save others; and in order thereunto
should hinder them from sinning, whenever it lies in our power so to do: Yet it
is not to be doubted, but that such persons as either by Nature or Friendship,
or any the like Engagement, ought to have a more particular concern than
others, for their Neighbors Welfare; or else by their Place, and Business, and
Character, are engaged in a more especial manner to watch over them, should be
more than ordinarily careful as to this matter, and will have much more than
others to answer for, if they be not.

And two ways in general there are, whereby such persons must labor to hinder
Men from sinning, as ever they mean to clear themselves from being Partakers in
their Iniquities.

First, By discouraging Sin all they can before it be committed: By setting
forth the Folly and Unreasonableness of it now, and the great danger that shall
certainly be the consequence of it hereafter: By showing the Vanity of all
those little Pretenses, in which wicked Men are apt to put their trust; and not
leaving them any hopes of Impunity, either in this World or in the next,
without a true Repentance of their Sins, and a Reformation from them.

Secondly, By a severe Enquiry into, and Punishment of it after. This indeed is
what the great Temper and Moderation of our present Discipline, that I do not
say some Defect in it, permits not us, as St. Paul here commanded Timothy to
do. We cannot call Sinners publicly into the Church, and lay open their Crimes
to them, and rebuke them before All, that others also may fear. But the Civil
Magistrate has great opportunities of supplying this Defect; and no doubt God
will require it so much the more at their hands, in that it is now no longer in
ours. There is indeed a Mercy to be remembered and shown in Judgment; and our
own Frailty ought to admonish us to make great Allowances for other men's
Infirmities. But there may be an Excess even in Good Nature it self; and
whatever the Consequence be, care must be taken that neither the Honor of God
be profaned, nor his Laws despised; that neither Virtue be run down, nor Vice
encouraged: And to that end Men must be kept from open and scandalous Sins at
least, if they cannot from others; and be punished even in Mercy now, that if
possible they may be reformed, and so not perish for ever.

And let us then

2ly, Which was the other general point we proposed to consider (the consequent
Application of all these Reflections) be persuaded to endeavor what in us lies
to prevent both our own and other men's Sins. Instead of Approving and
Encouraging any in their Wickedness. let us, as our Apostle advises, Heb. 10.
24. Consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works. Instead of
giving them any occasion, or laying any stumblingblock in their way, whereby to
lead them into Sin, let us by our good Example both teach them what they ought
to do, and if possible, make them in love with it. And let us look upon our
selves to lie under the same Engagement to God for one another, that Judah once
took upon himself for his Brother Benjamin, Genesis 43. 9. Of my hand shall thou
require him; if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me
bear the blame for ever.

I am sensible that I am now exhorting you to a Duty but very little, if at
all, considered by most Men. We think it to be enough for us to search out our
own Souls, and account with God for our own Miscarriages: And may perhaps be
ready to complain of this as some new Contrivance against your Liberty, to call
upon you to repent for other Men's sins. But if the Case be indeed so as the
Text plainly implies, and as I think I may presume to say, I have in some
measure made it appear to be: If there be many ways by which we may, and by
some or other of which it is probable the very best of us have rendered our
selves partakers of other Men's sins: Then I am sure it must remain, that we
have a concern to look beyond our own particular Offenses; and to enquire to
how many sins of others we may have contributed by any of these means I have
before mentioned; and the less we have been wont to do this heretofore, it will
argue the greater, not lesser necessity for us to set very seriously about it
now.

It is indeed an amazing Reflection to sit down and think, How much more Guilt
we may possibly contract by every sin that we commit, than we are any of us
willing to believe, or it may be able to comprehend. For not to say any thing
at all of those common Aggravations, which we are every where taught to examine
our selves about: Such as sinning against Knowledge, against the Checks of our
own Consciences, and the Motions of God's Holy Spirit to the contrary: sinning
against often repeated Promises, against the most serious Resolutions, against
the most solemn and sacred Vows of Obedience: In a word, sinning against many
providential Admonitions; such as Trouble, Afflictions, Losses, Sickness, and
the like; sent by God on purpose to reclaim us. Let us consider only this one
thing now before us, How many Men our sinning may be the Ruin of? How many
souls may, for ought we know, perish by our means? And what a desperate
increase this must add to our own Guilt? For if he who converts a sinner James
v. 19, 20.
from the Error of his way, and so is instrumental to the saving but of one
soul from death, shall for that cover a multitude of his own sins: O! then, how
fatally must we multiply evil against our selves, when by our neglect of our
duty we lead perhaps Multitudes into error, and involve their souls in
everlasting Destruction.

If we have therefore hitherto neglected so serious a Consideration; If our
Repentance has been only for the sins we our selves have committed, without any
regard to the Mischief we may have done our Brother by them; Let us now at
least be persuaded to think that we have yet one great part of our Humiliation
still behind; to deprecate God's Wrath not only for our selves but for others
too; and implore his Forgiveness of all those sins which have ever by our means
been committed by any in the world, and that he would not impute them either to
their, or our Damnation.

This if we do with that affectionate earnestness as becomes so great an
Aggravation, I am persuaded we shall not only very much increase our
Contrition, and so perfect our Repentance for what is past; but may also by the
Grace of God, establish our selves the better against returning to our Evil
Ways for the Time to come. And our desires not to partake in other Men's sins,
be improved into one Motive more, to keep us from continuing in our own.

I shall conclude this Discourse, after the same manner, and almost in the same
Words that S. Basil once did his Canonical Epistle to Amphilochius, upon the
occasion of that very Reflection we have now been making. Let us, says he,
consider the terrible Judgment Bevereg. (...). tom. II. p. 367.
of God, and the day of his Appearing, and let us fear lest we perish in other
men's Sins.

Let us call to mind the Admonitions of God to us; What Evils we have been
exposed to, What Calamities we have suffered: And let these convince us, That
for the Iniquities of our Lives we have been forsaken by him.

Our People have been led into Captivity, our Brethren dispersed far and near;
Because those who profess the Name of Christ, have yet lived so contrary to
their Profession,

But if after all this Men will not understand, That for these Causes the Wrath
of God is come upon us, wherefore should we after this have any thing more to
do with them?

Nevertheless, let us not cease Day nor Night, in Public and in Private, to
entreat and beseech them to consider these things; but let us not be drawn away
with their Wickedness.

Let us wish and pray, That if it shall please God we may yet gain them at the
last, and deliver them out of the Snares of the Devil: but if this we cannot
do, yet at least let us save our own Souls, tho we cannot theirs, and not
partake with them in their sins, lest we also partake with them in their
Destruction.



Now to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb; be ascribed as is
most due, Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and
Power, and Might, for ever and ever: Amen.
FINIS.

