Dr. WAKE's SERMON AT S. SEPULCHRES-Church; Before the LORD MAYOR, etc. On
Wednesday in Easter-Week, 1690.

Pilkington Mayor.
Martis xxixo Aprilis 1690. Annoque Regni Regis and Reginae Wilhelmi and Mariae
Angliae, etc. Secundo.

THis Court does desire Dr. Wake to Print his Sermon Preached on Wednesday in
Easter Week last, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London, at
St. Sepulchers.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR, AND Court of Aldermen, AT S.
SEPVLCHRES-Church, ON Wednesday in EASTER-Week, A. D. M.DC.XC.

By WILLIAM WAKE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's: And Preacher
to the Honorable Society of GRAY'S INN.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard: And W. Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1690.

GAL. VI. 10. As we have therefore Opportunity, let us do Good unto all Men,
especially unto them that are of the Household of Faith.
SAINT Paul having in the foregoing parts of this Epistle dispatched that
Subject which was the Great Occasion of his writing of it; and endeavored by
many Arguments to persuade the Galatians not to suffer themselves to be mislead
by those False-Teachers who were crept in amongst them, into a needless, and
even dangerous mixture, of the Law of Moses together with the Gospel of Christ:
Goes on in the Close of all, to exhort them to such Practical Duties as he
thought most necessary to recommend to them in those Circumstances in which
they then were.

It was the unhappiness of that Church, as it generally is of all Others in the
like Cases, that their diversity of Opinion, as to the Point beforementioned,
had set up a diversity of Parties and Interests amongst them; and made them
much more zealous for their own particular Tenants, in which they differed from
one another, than for the Common Faith and Doctrine of Christ, in which they
agreed together. Instead of glorifying God by a Holy Life, Gal. v. 15.
their business was to tear and worry one another about the Ceremonies of the
Law of Moses. Religion was turned into Disputing; And he was accounted the best
man, not who was the most careful to live quietly, and to do his duty
conscientiously, but who was the most violent to defend his Point, and to run
down all those that were of a different Persuasion.

In opposition to this furious and contentious Spirit, Saint Paul having first
determined the Point which occasioned all their difference, goes on finally to
stir them up to such Duties, as he supposed would be most likely to reduce them
to a Christian Temper of Love and Charity to one another.

And 1st, Since the Law was that they were so zealous for, he desires them to
reflect a little, what it was that the Law its self commanded them, Chapter v. 14.
For all the law is fufilled in one word, Verse 14.
even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

2dly, He represents to them, what the present Consequence of such Contentions
would be likely to be: That while they thus quarreled with one another, they
would give a fair opportunity to the common Enemy to destroy them all, Chapter v.
15.
v. 15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another.

3dly, V. 16, 19, 20, etc.
He bids them consider, that Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies, Envyings, and such like; how fair soever the pretense may be of a
concern for the Honor of God, and the Interests of Religion, are yet as much
the Works of the Flesh, and as destructive of Salvation, as Adultery or
Drunkenness, or any other the like Immoralities. And that, if they would
approve themselves truly zealous in his Service, they must do it by a quite
contrary Practice: By their Love, Chapter v. 22, 23, 24, 25.
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, and the like Fruits of
that blessed Spirit, which evermore leads Men to be kind and charitable to one
another.

And having thus given them these General Cautions, he finally adds two or
three particular Directions in such Instances, wherein they seemed more
especially to stand in need of his Advice.

As First, That they should not suffer their differences so far to transport
them, as to make them be perpetually quarrelling and disputing with one
another. For that this would be a means rather to keep up their differences,
and embitter their Spirits, and set them farther from Agreement, than conduce
to the composing of them, Chapter v. 26.
v. 26. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying
one another.

Secondly, Chap. vi. Verse 1, 2.
That much less should they indulge a peevish Temper so far, as to be glad of
any occasion to expose one another Sins and Infirmities; but rather should
mutually endeavor to help, and bear one another burdens: And consider, that
the best man in the World may some time or other be tempted, and overtaken in a
fault, and so need the same Charity.

To this end, Verse 3.
Thirdly, That they should learn to be Humble: And instead of comparing
themselves with other men, and valuing themselves upon their being Better or
more Orthodox than their Neighbors, should examine themselves by the Rule of
their Duty, and see how they stood with relation to that: And remember, that
when we come before God in Judgment, the Enquiry will not be, whether we have
not exceeded some others in our Piety, but whether we have lived so as we our
selves might and ought to have done, v. 5. For every man shall bear his own
burden.

Fourthly and lastly, That above all, they should not suffer their differences
in other things, to abate their Charity, or make them ever the less ready in
all Good Offices, whether to their Teachers, or to one another. But should
consider, that the Time is coming when God will call us to give an account of
our stewardship; Us. 6, 7, 8, 9.
how we have employed those Talents he has committed to us. And then they who
have been so wise as to manage them as they ought to do, shall receive a
Blessed Reward: Whilst those who have minded only their Lusts or their
Interests; who have either hoarded up their Riches without doing and Good at
all with them, or have spent them only in Sin and Extravagance, shall be
condemned to a miserable state of Everlasting Punishment: From whence he
concludes in the Words of the Text;

As we have therefore Opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto
them who are of the household of Faith.

From which Words I shall take Occasion to discourse on these Four Points:

Is It. Of that general obligation which our Christian Profession lays upon us to
DO GOOD: As we have therefore opportunity, let us Do Good.

IIdly. Of the Time and Measure, When and How far we ought so to do; (...). As
we have Opportunity; According to our Ability; for so also that Phrase may well
enough be understood.

IIIdly. Of the Persons to whom this Good is to be Done; to All men, especially
to them that are of the household of Faith.

IVthly. Of the great Engagement we have to do this, expressed in the verse
before, from which our Text is the Inference: Let us not be weary in
well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not; As we have
therefore Opportunity, let us do Good unto All men, especially unto them that
are of the household of Faith.

I begin with the First of these;

Is It. The general obligation which our Religion lays upon us to Do Good.

For the better clearing whereof, I must observe, That the word in the Original
is very emphatical; it signifies not barely the doing good, but implies a care
and choice in the Doing of it; that we should do, (...), the Good that
particular Good, whatsoever it be which another wants, and wherein we may be
capable of lending our assistance to him.

Charity is a duty as comprehensive as it is excellent: It extends its self to
all sorts of Good Offices whereby we may at any time be able to serve our
neighbor, and do any real act of kindness to him. And indeed since God
designed that to Do Good should be the indispensable duty of all Christians, it
was but necessary to give such a Latitude to it, that no Christian whatsoever
might have just cause to complain that he was not in a capacity, in some way or
other, of fulfilling it.

To run through all the several parts of this duty, and show in how many
Instances one man may be capable of Doing Good to another, were an undertaking
as difficult and infinite, as it would be to draw a Scheme of all the Miseries
and the Calamities, of all the Wants and the Necessities, which any man ever
did, or ever shall fall into in this world. Suffice it in general to say, That
by whatsoever Act of ours we do in any wise promote either the present Welfare,
or the Eternal Happiness of our neighbor; do in any sort contribute to make
him more easy or comfortable in this life, or to further his everlasting
felicity in the other; in that we discharge this Duty of Doing Good to him, and
which there is no man so mean or low in the World, but he may find frequent
Opportunities of putting in practice.

But tho this therefore be the general import of Doing good, and the undoubted
duty of every Christian; yet if we consider that expression according to the
style of the holy Scriptures, we shall find it commonly used there in a more
limited sense, to signify that particular kind of Act. x. 38. -- ix 36. 2.
Cor. i^ 8. 2. Th^^s^l. iii (...). 1 Timothy v. 10. (...)
Doing Good, which consists in acts of Mercy and Benificence.

And so I conceive it is that we are in a more especial manner at least, Se^
Chrysostom. in hoc.
to understand it in this place: And then taking this for the meaning of our
Apostle in these words, I shall not need say much to show what clear and
forcible obligations our Religion has laid upon us, in this sense more
particularly, to Do Good. In short,

* If to have given the plainest and most express Commands for the exercise of
such a Charity, and to have repeated those Commands more frequently, and to
have enforced them more earnestly, than almost any other Precepts in the Gospel
besides Mat. vi. 19. -- xix. 21. Luke vi. 30. -- xi. 41. -- xii. 33. Romans xii.
13. 2 Cor. viii. 7. Colos. iii. 12, etc.
:

* Mat. v. 48. comp. with S. Luke vi. 36.
If to have set before us the Practice of it, as that whereby above all things
we may the most nearly imitate the Perfection of God himself; Prove. xix. 17.
and render him our debtor from whom we have received all, whatsoever we enjoy:

* If to have made our Kindness and Charity to our Neighbor, 1 Jo. iii. 6. --
iv. 12, 20, 21.
the very mark whereby to try our Love and Duty to God; and to have declared
that no service we can do the One, shall be accepted, whilst we continue to
neglect the Other. But above all,

* If not only to have promised the Blessings of this life to the practice of
it, See below, iv. Point.
but to have set forth to us the great and final Inquest of the Day of
Judgment, as depending in a manner entirely on this one thing, and entailing
either Eternal Happiness, or Eternal Misery upon us in the other World,
according as we have been Charitable or not, in this:

If, I say, all this may be thought sufficient to lay an obligation upon us to
be very diligent and forward in the discharge of any Duty, there is then none
to which our Religion has been more careful to excite and oblige us than this
one of Charity, nor in which therefore a Christian will be less able to excuse
himself, if after all this he shall still continue to neglect the performance
of it.

But of the Obligations which we lie under thus to Do Good, I shall have
occasion to speak more fully in the Close of this Discourse: In the mean time
having thus pointed out to you what that Good is I am now more particularly to
recommend to your practice, and given you a general Prospect of our concern in
it, I shall go on to the second Thing which I proposed to consider,

IIdly. Of the Time and Measure, When and How far it is our Duty to Do this
good; As we have Opportunity; According to our Ability.

I have before said, that the Phrase of St. Paul would well enough bear each of
these Interpretations; and I shall rather choose both, than prefer either. They
Both agree very well with the design of the Text, and will either of them
afford some Useful and Seasonable reflections to us, to direct our Practice in
the Duty of it.

And 1st. Of the Time, the Season of Doing Good.

It has been the general Sense of the most Ancient Interpreters of this
passage, See Chrysostom. Hieron, etc. in loc.
to refer the Opportunity here spoken of to the Time of our present life; as
being indeed the only space we have for the Exercise of such a Charity. And
accordingly the Vulg. Lat. Syriac. Arab.
Learned Translations, departing a little from the strictness of the Greek
Original, have most of them rendered it not as we have here done, As we have
therefore opportunity: Communion Serve. Vss. 7, 8.
But as it still stands in our Liturgy, Now while we have Time, let us Do Good
unto all men. And thus it will agree very well with the Rest of the Context;
where the Apostle speaks of two different seasons, the One of sowing, the Other
of harvest; and Exhorts the Galatians not to neglect to sow now, -- 9.
and then they shall be sure to reap hereafter.

And indeed this is a Remark, than which none can be more proper for our
serious Consideration. It has pleased God to send us into this World, to
exercise our selves, and to prepare our Souls for the Happiness of the Other.
Here therefore is the Time of Labor; the fatal season that must render us
either Happy or Miserable to all Eternity. And I am sure, I need not tell you
either how short, or how uncertain at the best this Time is. Our years run on
apace; whilst we are discoursing of it we draw nigher to the Grave. Every
minute cuts off some portion of our Life; and we cannot tell how soon death may
overtake us, and deprive us of it all at once. And certainly then we ought to
esteem it a very seasonable Admonition, which the Apostle here gives us,
presently, whilst we have yet the Opportunity, to Do Good, seeing we cannot
tell how little a space we may have lest us for the doing of it.

It is the folly of a great part of the World, that in this, as well as in too
many other Instances of their Duty, they love still to Procrastinate, and put
off the doing of it as long as ever they can. They will Repent when they are
Dying, and be Charitable when they are Dead: But will rather run the hazard of
their Souls to all Eternity, than part either with their Sins or their Money
before needs they must. And truly for those of the Other Communion, who believe
that a little Sorrow and Confession at the last, is enough to discharge them of
all the Guilt of their Sins; and that by a Good Legacy left to the Church, for
Prayers and Masses to be said for them, they shall soon get quit of the
Punishment of them too; What wonder if they reserve both their Riches and their
Repentance, for so Seasonable a Time, and so Good an Occasion? But for men who
see through these delusions, and smile at such Bargains, and wonder how any
Christians can suffer themselves to be so grossly cheated in a matter of so much
concernment, as their Money commonly is to most, and as our Souls certainly
ought to be to all of us; nevertheless still to delay their doing Good, and
neglect the Opportunity, and leave the issue of all to a deathbed Repentance,
and a deathbed Charity: What can we conclude but that such persons as these,
must have too great an affection both for their Riches and for their Lusts; and
that could these Men have lived for Ever, they would never have thought of
being either Charitable or Religious?

Indeed for those who have been Liberal and Bountiful before, to finish their
Race with Glory; and adorn their Death, with the same Charity that had given a
Luster and Ornament to them whilst they Lived; This is so far from being worthy
of any Censure, that it ought rather to make their Memory precious to all
future Generations. But otherwise to tarry to the last hour, and never think of
doing Good to others with the Portion which God has Given us, till we are no
longer in a condition to enjoy it our selves; this must certainly be very
Sinful and Scandalous: And tho I will not say that such a Legacy, rather than
Charity, at the last, shall utterly lose its Reward; Yet as it wants much of
that Praise which the Early giver meets with among Men, so I think it may be
justly doubted whether it shall find so Favorable an Acceptance in the sight
of God.

But (2dly.) This Phrase, As we have Opportunity, will admit of yet another
consideration, and that more Agreeable to our litteral translation of it, viz.
When ever a fitting Occasion presents its self, and we are in a Condition of
doing of it. Not that we should suppose it to be our Duty, to give to every one
indifferently that shall ask of us, and in the usual dialect of the streets,
abuse the Sacred Name of Christ, to cover over their own Idleness and
Vndeserving. There is a Prudence to be used in the Distribution of our Charity,
as well as a Liberality to be shown in the proportion of it. And St. 2 These.
iii. 10. (...). in loc. p. 394. E.
Paul himself has told us there are some, who If they will not work, neither
let them eat. But that whenever a true and worthy Object of Charity presents
its self to us, we should then embrace the Occasion; and look upon it that this
is the Opportunity in which if we are able, we ought to do Good.

Nay but yet farther, (3dly.) Tho it be most certain in the General, that
whenever a titting Object of Charity calls upon us for our relief, we ought, if
we are in a Condition, to lay hold on the Opportunity to do Good: yet some
Special Seasons and Occasions there are, which will in a particular manner
deserve to be looked upon as the proper Times for this Duty.

Such are 1st. The Times of Want and Scarceness: Whether it happens by the Hand
of God, or through the Sins and Violence of men; Whether by some dearth or
famine in the Land, or by the miseries of War and Tumults; the Obstruction of
Commerce abroad, and the natural consequence of that, the Decay of Trade at
home. In these and the like Cases, the more the Necessities of the poor
increase, the greater should be our care and concern to relieve them: And we
must not think, that an ordinary Charity will excuse us, when such Accidents
and Calamities as these, call for an extraordinary bounty from us.

But especially, 2dly. Such is the Time of Trials and Persecutions for
righteousness sake: When it pleases God, whose Judgments are unsearchable, to
expose (as many times he does) his own Church and Servants, to suffer for their
Faith, and a good Conscience; being persecuted in one City or Country, to fly
into another: And thereby at the same time, that he does them the honor of
making them Confessors for their Religion, offers us the Benefit, of being in
some measure Partakers with them in their Afflictions; by our careful provision
for, and our generous reception of them.

It was this consideration especially, that opened so far the hearts of the
first Converts to Christianity toward one another, that they accounted nothing
they had their own; but were even glad of the opportunity to do somewhat
extraordinary in testimony of their Love to those, who showed so much Love and
Constancy to their Blessed Master. And sure we ought in some measure to imitate
the Primitive Charity of those Men, at a time when so many of our Brethren have
followed their Example, in a Primitive zeal, and firmness to their Religion.

This is the least return we can make to God, for the Peace and Tranquillity we
hitherto enjoy, when so many Thousands have been exposed to ruin for that
Faith, which we count it our Glory and Happiness to profess. And certainly we
ought to consider, if the storm should have broken first upon us, what we
should have in that case expected from them, and let that inform us what we
ought to do for them.

And these are such Opportunities, as the Necessities of Others make for us:
There are yet many special Occasions for Doing Good which our own circumstances
will offer to us.

So, 3dly. In the Times of our Happiness and Prosperity: When God does in any
extraordinary manner give a Blessing to us, whether in our Persons or in our
Affairs; Whether in our own Private concerns only, or in the more General and
Public welfare of our Friends or Country. These are such Times in which not
only our own Reason, and the Common Practice of Mankind, but even God himself
has directed us to make our Charity to Others, one way of expressing our
Grateful acknowledgments to Him: That whilst we rejoice in the effects of his
Mercy to us, our Brethren may find Cause to join thanks with us, for the
Liberal expressions of our Love and Kindness to them. And therefore when God
Commanded the Israelites in three Solemn Feasts every year, to keep up the
Memory of the Blessings he had done for them in bringing them up out of Egypt,
and planting them in that Good land which they possessed; He took particular
care that the Poor should not be forgot by them; Deuteronomy. xvi. 11, 14. Thou shall,
says he, rejoice before the LORD: Thou, and thy Son, and thy Daughter, and thy
Manservant, and thy Maidservant, and the Levite, and the Stranger, and the
Fatherless, and the Widow, that are within thy gates. For which end there was a
Public Collection always to be made at those Feasts; v. 16. 17. Three times in
a year shall all thy Males appear before the LORD, in the place which he shall
choose, in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the
feast of Tabernacles; They shall not appear before the LORD Empty. Every man
shall give, according to the Blessing of the LORD thy God, which he has given
thee.

And not only if we have already received any Signal Blessings and Deliverances
from God; But 4thly, When we would implore his Favor for Future Mercies;
Whether to deliver us from any Evils or Calamities which either our Sins have
deserved, or we may otherwise have just Cause to fear are ready to fall upon
us; Or else to send down some new Blessings upon us, or to continue, or to
perfect those we have aleardy received: In all these, and the like Cases, there
is nothing can more effectually appease God's Anger, and enliven our Prayers,
and make our Piety and our Repentance acceptable in his sight, and so obtain
those Mercies which we desire from him; than to accompany all our other
Service, with some extraordinary Acts of Charity, and thereby give a new Force,
and Vigor to it.

When Daniel had interpreted Nebuchadnezzar's dream, and therein discovered to
him the strange Judgment which God was about to bring upon him: How he should
be driven from men, and have his dwelling with the Beasts of the field, and be
made to eat grass as the Oxen, and be wet with the dew of Heaven; The best
Advice he could give him to stay the hand of God, and prevent the Evil that was
denounced against him, was to do some extraordinary Act of Mercy and Charity to
others, if perhaps he might thereby escape that Great Evil which was denounced
against himself: -- 27.
ver. 27. Wherefore, says he, O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto Thee;
and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine Iniquities by showing mercy
to the poor; If it may be a lengthning to thy Tranquillity. Hieronym. i^ Dan.
c. IV.
And it was the Opinion of St. Jerome, L. H. Edit. Erasin.
That Nebuchadnezzar did accordingly take the Holy Prophet's Advice; and that
it is to this we are to ascribe the delay which we read was made of this
Judgment, for Dam. IV. 29.
one whole year; till forgetting his danger, and returning again to his former
course, he forfeited the continuance of that Tranquillity, which God had been
pleased to lengthen to him upon the account of his Repentance and Charity.

But, Fifthly, And to conclude this Point: We ought to esteem not only such
extraordinary seasons as these to be in a more peculiar manner the proper Times
for this duty; But in general, Whenever either our own Piety, or public
Authority shall engage us to any especial, and singular Exercises of Religion;
In all these Cases, and upon all such Occasions, still our Prayers, our
Thanksgivings, our Repentance, whatever our Devotion be, it must ever-more be
accompanied withsome Expressions of our Bounty too; And our Charity to our
Neighbor, be the constant companion of our Piety toward God.

It was this that made the devout Prayers of Cornelius, Chrysostom. in Act. Hom. X.
p. 210. A.
though a Gentile, so acceptable unto him, that he sent down an Angel from
Heaven on purpose to assure him of it, and to direct him in the way for a
better understanding of his Duty: Thy Prayers, says he, Act. X. 4.
and thine Alms, are come up for a memorial before God. And it is to the neglect
of this, that we may, among other things, I fear, impute it; that we now too
often seem to lift up our Hearts in vain thither. I am sure the Wiseman has
told us, Prove. XXI. 13
That whosoever stops his Ears at the cry of the Poor, he also shall cry
himself, and shall not be heard, And when the Israelites heretofore complained,
with some Amazement, of the ineffectualness of all their Fasting and Prayers to
implore God's favor; And wondered what the meaning of it should be, that all
their Cries and their Humiliations stood them in no stead, Isaiah LVIII. 3.
Isaiah LVIII: 3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not? Wherefore have
we afflicted our Souls, and thou take no knowledge? Nay, and this at the same
time that God seems to bear witness to their Piety in other respects, Ibid.
ver. 2.
ver. 2. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that
did righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God: They ask of me
the Ordinances of justice, they take delight in approaching to God: The prophet
plainly tells them where the fault lay; They were at Variance among themselves,
and uncharitable to the Poor, and this spoiled all their other Piety; Ver. 4.
Behold, says he, ye fast for strife and debate: -- 5.
Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? A day for a man to afflict his soul?
Will thou call this a Fast, -- 6.
and an acceptable day to the LORD? Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, to
loose the bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
Oppressed go free, -- 7.
and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the hungry and
that thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thy House? When thou see the
naked that thou cover him, -- 8.
and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Then shall thou call,
and the LORD shall answer; -- 9, etc.
thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am. etc.

It were an easy matter to make a very particular Application of every one of
these circumstances to our selves at this time; and show that perhaps never any
People lay under greater Obligations to a liberal exercise of Charity, than we
of this Country do at this day. But I have already enlarged my self too much
upon these Reflections; and must not forget that there is yet another meaning
which some have given to the phrase of my Text which I have now been
considering; and which brings me to the other thing I proposed in this matter,

2dly, Of the Measure we are to observe in our Doing Good.

Now that in general is (...) As far as we are able, and our Capacities will
permit us to do it. For so we find the word (...) sometimes used, not only in
the best Greek Authors, but even in these very Epistles: and particularly Phil.
IV. 10. where St. Paul excusing the Philippians that did not sooner send their
relief to him, tells them they wanted no Good Will (...). But ye lacked
Ability: Non ^^^tis it is compotes.
so the Syriac renders it; and so Chrysostom in Phil* Hom. XV. p. 135. E.
St. Chrysostom, not to mention any others, expressly tells us we are there to
understand it.

But now what that proportion in particular is, which every one ought to
distribute in Works of Mercy and Charity, this is what I shall not undertake
precisely to define. Thus much our Apostle tells us, that what a Man sows, the
same he shall also reap: And that we are to understand this not only with
Relation to the kind, but to the Measure and the Proportion too, 2 Cor. IX. 6.
himself shows us, 2 Cor. IX. 6. He which sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and he which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, every Man
according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly or of
necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver. And from both which it is obvious
to conclude, that though S. Paul would not prescribe any certain Bounds to
Men's Charity, which ought to be a free will Offering, large and voluntary, not
narrow and constrained; yet that in general he has plainly enough delivered his
Opinion, that the more we give, the better God will accept of it; and the
greater and more certain shall our returns from Heaven be.

And to a truly Charitable mind, there will need no other direction than this.
But because such is the narrowness of most Men's Souls, that they are apt to
think every little pittance that they bestow on Acts of Mercy to the Poor, to
be abundantly sufficient to entitle them not only to an Acceptance, but to a
Reward also: Though I shall not presume to set any bounds where the Gospel has
not, by determining what men ought to lay aside for this Duty; yet thus far I
will adventure to correct their Mistakes, as to show what that proportion is
below which I suppose Men ought not, without some extraordinary Occasions, to
fall; or if they do, may have just cause to fear that they shall be looked upon
by God, as Unmerciful and Uncharitable.

Now in order hereunto, I shall in the first place take it for granted, that
every Man ought to be the more liberal in his Charity to others, the more free
and bountiful the Providence of God has been in its distributions to him. That
is to say, that our Charity must bear a proportion to our Abilities, and that
to whomsoever much is given, of him, in this sense also, much shall be required.

This is what St. Paul seems to have laid down as the standing rule for the
Corinthians to proceed by, 1 Epist. XVI. 2. That every one of them should lay
aside according as God had prosper'd, or blessed him: Which was the very
measure that we before saw Moses gave to the Jews heretofore; Deuteronomy. XVI. 17.
Every man shall give according to the Blessing of the LORD thy God which he
has given thee. And the same Apostle, in his 1st Epist. to Timothy, VI. 18.
Bids Timothy charge them that were rich in this world, not only that they
should be ready to give, and glad to distribute, but that they should be rich
in good works; i.e. should exceed others as much in their Charity, as they did
in their Estates.

And from all which it is very plain, that if those to whom God has given a
larger Ability than others; whose riches are greater, or whose occasions less;
who have neither so many to maintain now, nor to provide for hereafter; do not
in some proportion go beyond them in works of mercy and beneficence: They may
justly be looked upon to come short of that Charity God expects from them,
though otherwise they should chance to give in a lower and more scanty degree.

But Secondly, and to come more closely to the point proposed. It cannot
reasonably be doubted, But that as our Savior himself tells us, that He came
not to destroy the Law, Mat. v. 17.
but to fulfill it: So except our righteousness shall exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, -- 20.
. the strictest and most diligent observers of the Law, We shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. It remains therefore, that though the Gospel
of Christ, has not particularly defined what proportion every man should give
in works of Charity, yet that no Christians ought to give less now, than what
the Jews heretofore were ordinarily obliged to do.

Now the proportion of the Law was this. ^eat. xiv. 28. xxvi. 12.
That every third year they should set aside the tenth part of their yearly
income for the use of the poor: Levit. xix. 9, 10. Ib. xxiii. 22.
That they should permit them every Harvest to lease in their fields; Exodus
xxii. 25. Levitie. xxv. 35, 36. Deuteronomy xxiii. 19
That they should lend to them without Usury; Deuteronomy. xxiv. 19.
That they should not go over their Fields, their Vineyards, or their
Olive-yards a second time to gather them clean; or if they left any sheaf, or
clusters, or bunches behind, that they should not go back to fetch them, but
should leave all that escaped their first Gathering, together with a certain
Levit. xix. 19. Deuteronomy. xxiv. 19.
Part of each field, which they called the Corner of the field, untouched, for
the Stranger, for the Fatherless, and for the Widow; besides some other
Instances of the like kind, prescribed to them See Deuteronomy. xxiv. 14. etc.
.

This was the Jew's righteousness, that is, his duty, his obligation: And if he
transgressed in any thing of all this, he broke the Law, and sinned against
God. But they had Acts of Charity yet beyond this, and which they properly
called by the Names of Mercy and Bounty. Such were all their Voluntary
Offerings at their Feasts before mentioned: All their Occasional works of pity,
upon extraordinary Emergencies: If for example God had given them a greater
increase than ordinary in their fields or their Vineyards; or they had met with
any unexpected Good success in their Affairs: If their Children and their
Flocks were multiplied unto them; or else on the other hand, some greater sin
was to be expiated, or some Calamity to be prevented, which seemed ready to
come upon them, unless they took care, by some extraordinary Acts of Charity
and Repentance, to prevent the evil, and reconcile themselves to God.

Such was the measure of the Jews Charity under the Law, and certainly the
Christians ought not to be less. And therefore though I shall not pretend to
determine what every man ought to do in this particular, and indeed amidst the
great variety of Fortunes and Circumstances in the World, could not well give
any certain rules for this matter; yet thus much I am persuaded we may
conclude. See Dr. Hammond's Pract. Cat. l. 3. Sect. 1.
That no Christian can ordinarily excuse himself, who does not lay aside
somewhat more than the thirtieth part of his yearly income for the Stranger,
for the Fatherless, and for the Widow, besides all Occasional A^^s of Charity
on extraordinary Emergencies; which was the least that God required of the Jews
heretofore, and is, I believe, the least that any Christian can reasonably
presume shall be expected of him now.

And as we may justly suppose this to be the very lowest degree that is fit to
be mentioned among Christians for the ordinary discharge of this duty. So,
Thirdly, On extraordinary Occasions, such as those we before laid down, it is
certain, that this will by no means suffice. Here we must set no bounds to our
doing Good, but what our want of Ability, or Opportunity prescribes to us.
Charity indeed does not only allow, but oblige us first to provide for our own:
And when that is prudently and moderately done, what further remains, though it
be ours, yet it is ours only in trust for the supply of the wants and
necessities of our Neighbors. Chrysostom. de Lazar. conc. 2. p. 50. C. D. Edit.
Par. Gr. Lat.
And if the Exigences of the Poor be great, and they cannot otherwise be
supplied, we must resolve rather to part with all that we can spare, than to
see them languish and perish for want of it. And woe be to that man who
indulges either his Covetousness or his Vanity with that, for the lack of which
his poor Brother perishes! What our Savior once pronounced against the rich
Man in St. Luke, shall become his Sentence; Luke x. 25.
Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime have received thy Good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted and thou art tormented.

And this may suffice for our second point, of the Time and Measure of our
doing Good. Let us consider

IIIdly. To what Persons we are to do this; to All Men, Especially unto them
that are of the Household of Faith.

1st. We must do Good unto All Men.

It was the Opinion of St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Loc.
that St. Paul designed this part of my Text to be a reproach to the
narrow-spirited Temper of the Jews; who confined the greatest part of their
Charity to such as were of the same Country, or at least of the same Religion
with themselves, and to raise us up to a more generous and extensive practice
of it.

It Is true we find several Passages in the Law directing them to a concern not
only for their own people, but also for the strangers that were amongst them.
So Levit. XXV. 35. If thy Brother be waxen poor and fallen into decay with
thee, then shall thou relieve him, yea though he be a Stranger or a Sojourner,
that he may live with thee. And in those particular Precepts, Deuteronomy. XXIV. there
is an express provision made for them, at the 19th and following Verses: Deuteronomy.
xxiv.
When thou cuttest down thy Harvest in thy Field, -- 19.
and have forgot a sheaf in thy field, thou shall not go again to fetch it; It
shall be for the Stranger, for the Fatherless, and for the Widow. -- 20.
When thou beatest thine Olive Tree thou shall not go over the Boughs again, it
shall be for the Stranger, -- 21.
for the Fatherless, and for the Widow. When thou gatherest the Grapes of thy
Vineyard, the shall not glean it afterward; It shall be for the Stranger, for
the Fatherless, and for the Widow. But as in many other Cases they were but ill
Interpreters of the Law, so we find that in all these and the like places, they
understood by the Sea Ainsworth on Lev. xix. 10. Fagius, Vatablus, on Exodus
xxii. 21. Grotius on Levit. xxv. 35.
Stranger, a Proselyte, one that worshipped the same God with them: Or if they
chanced to go farther, as in those Instances of Charity before mentioned, we
are told in particular that they did, so as to allow the Gentiles also a part
in it; Yet alas! It was but a very small one, viz. That they would not hinder
them from taking what remained of their Gleanings after all their own poor had
gathered what they thought good; but permit them to carry away that which must
otherwise have been left for the Beasts and Birds.

But the Christian's Charity must not be dispensed by any such scanty Measures
as these. He must love All men; and for a proof that he does so, he must as he
has Opportunity do good unto All men. It Is not a Country, much less a
difference in Religion that must set bounds to his Beneficence. But as God
dispenses his Blessings to all the parts of the Earth indifferently; Makes his
Sun to rise, Mat. 5. 44, 45.
and his rain to fall upon the just and unjust, Senec. de Benef. l. 1. c. 1.
upon those who profess his true Religion, and upon those who persecute their
Brethren for professing of it: So must the Christian follow his Example, Luke
vi. 36.
and be Merciful as his Father which is in Heaven is merciful.

Such must in general the Christians Love and Beneficence be: But then as God
himself, though he is kind to the Unthankful and Evil, -- 36.
has yet a particular regard to his own Servants; and even amongst them, does
in a more especial manner promise to favor such as we are now speaking of, the
Liberal, and Charitable Christians above all others, so ought we also to do:
Chrysostom. in loc. p. 859. A.
We must, as we have Opportunity, Do Good, unto all men; But yet

2ly, Especially to them who are of the Household of Faith.

By those who are of the Household of Faith we may understand, Hieron. in loc. D.
either first, more largely, All Christians in general, who in the Scripture
Phrase are often called God's Household, Ephesians. II. 19. Or secondly, more
particularly, those of whom the Apostle was speaking ver. 6. Let him that is
taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good things. And
in which soever of these two senses we take the Expression, the Rule of our
Text will hold good in both: That we ought in a more especial manner to be
careful to do Good to them, beyond such others as we are not so particularly
engaged to.

Nay but, secondly, and to carry this Reflection yet farther: We may in the
exercise of our Charity not only make a distinction betwixt Christians and
others, and among them prefer those chiefly who labor in the word among us;
but should even with respect to all others, take care as far as we can to give
to those first who either the best deserve, or at least the most stand in need
of our assistance.

For since the largest fortune is not enough to enable a man to relieve all;
See Ambros. de Offic. l. 2. c. 15.
and it is certain that not only the wants of some may be much more urgent than
those of others, and so more fit to be considered by us; but also that there
are many, and those commonly the most clamorous and importunate, that are
utterly unworthy to be regarded by us: He who will Do Good with that prudence
and discretion he ought to do, must take all the care he can to distinguish
between the one and the other of these, that since he cannot be a Common
Benefactor to all, he may at least become so to them that the most deserve his
Pity.

And, (...) sit, etc. Ambros. Ibid. c. 16.
(1st.) There are many who finding Begging not only a more easy and agreeable,
but sometimes a more profitable Employment too, not only neglect to work
themselves, but even train up their Children to the same Trade of Idleness, and
of living upon the Charity of others. As soon as they are born, before they can
yet speak for themselves, their Looks and Cries serve for a new Topic to
increase the Importunity of their Parents: And no sooner are they able to use
their Limbs, and have attained so much of Christianity as may suffice for their
purpose, to engage the Compassion of unwary and good-natured men, but from
thenceforth they are set free to shift for themselves, and live as their
friends have done before them.

Now, though I will not say a man commits a Sin that relieves one of these, and
do confess, that sometimes he who gives to all, may chance to light on a true
Object of Charity among many that are much otherwise; yet certainly it is for
the most part a good deed misplaced: Chrysostom. Hom. in Laz. 2. p. 51. B. C. p. 52.
D.
And though I know St. Chrysostom seems to exhort us to give to all, upon this
consideration, That sometimes thereby we shall hit aright; yet I can no more
believe that the bare possibility of this should make a man charitable without
distinction, than that the passage of St. Paul, which he urges for it, should
engage us to receive indifferently all that pass by, into our Houses, because
by so doing some have entertained Angels unawares. Heb. xiii. 2.
But,

(2dly,) There is another sort of men, who by their own fault are reduced to
Poverty, and are now no longer in a condition to help themselves, though it is in
a great measure owing to their former sins and neglects that they are not.

I do not think that such ought wholly to be passed by, especially if they are
at last come to a due sense of their Folly, and to a serious Repentance for it.
But yet if we have before us better men, and as necessitous as the other; Such
as have wrought whilst they were able, and are now fallen into Poverty, because
either their Employment fails them, or their Strength is gone through former
Labors: If a decrepit Age has overtaken them, or it may be a numerous Family
keeps them still under, notwithstanding all their Pains and Industry; certainly
such persons as these ought first to be considered, and take place of those,
who have not so fair a pretense to our Assistance.

And this brings me to a (3d.) Reflection; and which will yet more direct us in
the wise discharge of this Duty. There are many every where no less
necessitous, but much more modest, than the rude and clamorous Street-Beggar;
Videndus est ille qui te non videt: Requirendus ille qui erubescit videri.
Ambros. de Offic. l. 2. c. 15, 16.
Who are fearful and scrupulous; Who mourn in secret, and complain to GOD in
their Extremities, but cannot tell how to make their Wants known to their
Fellow Christians. They labor diligently; they neglect no Care to support
themselves, and those for whom they are concerned to provide. But alas! they
labor in vain; Either a decay of Trade, or it may be unavoidable Losses in it;
Want of Business, Fire, Sickness, a thousand other Misfortunes keep them low
and miserable: They cannot tell how to ask our Charity, and yet are ready to
perish for want of it.

Such Men as these ought, I do not say to be relieved with all cheerfulness
when known, but to be enquired after and found out, that they may be both
assisted and encouraged by us. And our Charity should descend like the Dew of
Heaven upon them; in the most soft and easy, the most courteous and obliging
manner that is possible. We should take care to consult their modesty as well
as their wants; and if possible not let them know from what hand their help
comes, or to whom it is, besides God, they are to return their thanks for it.

The truth is, these are a sort of Men, that do as much deserve our Charity, as
the common sort of Beggars, for the most part, do our Refusal. And if it be
some kind of Reproach to our Country, that these latter are not more
suppressed, and set on work; it is certainly a great deal more both our Sin and
our Scandal, that the others should not be more carefully provided for, and
encouraged by us.

I shall add yet one remark more, (4thly) and which will bring me still nearer
to the Command of my Text; As we have opportunity let us Do Good unto all Men;
especially unto them that are of the Household of Faith.

I have before said, that by those of the Household of Faith we might
understand, either all Christians in general; or else in particular, those who
labor in the Word among us: And I am sorry I should have any Occasion to give
you a third meaning of it, for such Christians as are of the same particular
Faith and Church with one Another, or have any reflections to offer thereupon
to you. But, alas! both our Divisions are too great to be dissembled at any
Time, and the Consequences of them too deplorable, to be utterly passed by at
such a Time, and in such a Discourse as this.

We live in an Age, wherein Men's different Opinions in Points of Christian
Doctrine, have so far transported them, as to make them almost utterly forget
all the Measures of Christian Love and Charity toward one another. I need not
tell you how sad the Effects of a misguided Zeal have been, both in our own and
other Countries? What desolations it has wrought? How many thousands it has
ruined? What Wars and Disturbances it has raised, almost in all the parts of
the Christian World? We have seen with our Eyes, and it has been told unto us,
what Calamities our Brethren have undergone abroad: And to what extreme
Miseries they are reduced in the midst of us, no Man can be ignorant, though I
fear but few of us lay it so effectually to heart as we ought to do. And all
this for the sake of that Religion which by the blessing of God we yet enjoy in
peace and security.

In such an unhappy state as this; When the numbers of our distressed Brethren
are so great, their cause so Good, and their Wants so pressing, though I would
not be so uncharitable as to say that we should withdraw either our Affection
or Assistance from any other Christians, no not from those who have been their
Persecutors; yet certainly I may, without abusing the Design of my Text, say
thus much; That we ought, in the first place, to give to those who are of the
same Household of Faith with our selves, before such as do not stand in so near
a Relation to us.

And, blessed be God, who has not only hitherto continued his favors to us, it
may be, for this very end that we might be able to minister to the necessities
of these his Saints, but has in some measure opened our Hearts too, and made us
willing to do it. Only let us take the Exhortation of our Apostle in this
place, as well as his Direction; and since their needs still continue, let us
consider how we may still go on to provide for them; And let us not be weary in
well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

Which brings me to the last thing proposed,

Vthly, To consider the great Engagement we have to the fulfilling of this
Duty, in that Glorious Reward which God has promised to the performance of it.

Among all the Arguments which either the Authority of Holy Scripture, or the
Common principles of Reason afford to us, to stir us up to the practice of this
Duty, there is none that strikes so forcibly upon the minds of all sorts of
Men, as the Consideration of those great Blessings which God has promised to
the diligent performance of it; and of those severe Judgments which he will one
day execute upon those that shall continue to neglect and disregard it. Other
reflections may serve to convince Men of the Justice and Reasonableness of such
a practice, and which indeed is so very clear that there are few so ill-natured
and insensible as to deny it: But this shows the Necessity of it. Others may
force us to confess it to be very titting that we should be thus kind and
charitable to one another: But this speaks with Authority, and makes us resolve
in good earnest so to be.

He that tells me how highly reasonable it is that I should do all the Good I
can with the portion which God has given me, * That for this end I have
received it, and to this end ought especially to employ it: * That my riches
are not my own, but committed to me in trust for the Benefit of others, as well
as for my own use; and that I shall be false to that trust, if I do no Good to
others by them: * That I ought to express my Gratitude to God for his
extraordinary Favors to me, by being Bountiful to those who have not received
so large a portion of him: * That this will, above any thing, render me most
like unto God, and most beloved of Men: * That the poorest person in the World
is yet my Brother, partaker of the same Nature and Constitution, it may be of
the same Promise of Grace too with my self; and therefore that it will be
highly, not only un-Christian, but even unnatural and inhumane, not to have
some sense and feeling of his Miseries: Eccles. xi. 1, 2.
In a word, * That our Riches are very uncertain, and we should consider, that
what is the Condition of many Thousands now, but lately in as flourishing an
Estate as our selves, may, for ought we know, the next Year be our own, if God,
for our Incharitableness, shall think sit to let us also fall into the hands of
the same Cruel and Merciless men; and therefore that we ought to think what we
should judge reasonable for others in such a Case, to do to us; and then
remember the Great Rule both of Nature and the Gospel, and do even so unto
them; Mat. vii. 12.
does certainly speak a great deal of Sense, and may justly move my Assent to
his Arguments. But it is the man who can draw aside the Vail, and set Life and
Death, Blessing and Cursing before me; and then make it appear upon such
Grounds as I cannot deny, or even doubt of, that my Happiness or Misery, both
in this World and the other, depends upon my Observance or Neglect of this
Duty, that will awaken all the Powers of my Soul, and at the same time both
convince and force to a compliance.

And such is the Argument we have here before us, and from which therefore the
Apostle concludes the necessity of our doing Good, as a matter that would admit
of no debate: Be not, says he, deceived; God is not mocked: For whatsoever a
man sows, that he shall also reap. He that sows to his flesh, that is, that
either spends what he has on the sensual Enjoyments of the Flesh, or else
hoards it together to the Covetous satisfying the desires of it, shall of the
flesh reap corruption: But he that sows to the Spirit, i.e. as the next
Verses interpret it, does good, makes a wise, and pious, and charitable use of
what he has, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Wherefore, let us not
be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

Many are the Promises of the like kind which we meet with in other places of
Holy Scripture: And from all which it is obvious to conclude, that if we have
any regard either to our present Happiness, or to our future Glory, there is
nothing wherein we ought to be more careful, than by our Charity to establish
our selves in both. For,

1st. As to this Present Life.
What is it possible for any one to desire to make him a happy man in this
World, that God has not freely promised to the merciful and liberal?

Would he secure his Riches? Would he confirm the Enjoyment of them both to
himself whilst he lives, and deliver them down in peace to his posterity when
he comes to dye? This Charity has the promise of above any thing besides: Prove.
xxiii. 27.
He that gives to the poor, says Solomon, shall not lack. And in another
place, he gives this as the very reason of it, Prove. xxii. 9.
Prove. xxii. 9. He that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he gives of
his bread to the poor. And holy David confirms the truth of this Remark not
only from the Promise of God, but also from his own Experience, Psalm. xxxvii.
Psalm. xxxvii. 25. I have been young, and now am old, -- 25.
yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.
-- 26.
He is ever merciful and lends, and his seed is blessed. -- 27.
For the LORD loves judgment, and forsakes not his saints: they are preserved
for ever. But the seed of the wicked shall be cut off: -- 28.
The righteous shall inherit the land, and shall dwell therein for ever.

Nay, but would he do yet more? Would he even increase his Wealth, and grow
more prosperous in the Enjoyment of it? It Is a strange Assertion, but yet by
the Blessing and Promise of God, a very true one, that by giving it thus away,
he shall increase it. There is, says Solomon, Prove. xi. 24.
that scatters, and yet increases. And would you know who that is? He will
tell you in the next Verse: -- 25.
The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be watered
also himself.

Would he provide himself a security amidst all the uncertain, and many times
miserable Varieties of this World? And be safe even in the midst of all its
Dangers? Charity is the best defense, the surest preservative against all
Calamities: Psalm. xli. i.
Blessed is the man, says David, that considers the poor and needy, the LORD
will deliver him in the time of trouble. -- 2.
The LORD will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon
the earth, and not deliver him into the will of his enemies.

In short, would he be blessed in all things that he puts his hand unto, and
have every thing prosper according to his hearts desire? It was the promise of
God to the Jews heretofore, and I see no reason why we should not in proportion
apply it to our selves now, that he would deal with them, according as they did
with other men, Deuteronomy. xv. 7.
Deuteronomy. xv. 7. If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within
any of thy gates, in the land which the LORD thy God gives thee: -- 10.
Thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother --
Thou shall surely give him; because that for this thing the LORD thy God shall
bless thee in all that thou put thine hand unto.

These are some of the present Promises which God has made to the Charitable
man. I might to all this add the severe Threatenings even of present Evils to
the Covetous Miser; to him who has no bowels of Mercy toward any others, and
therefore deserves no compassion himself either from God or Man. Job xx. 15.
He has swallowed down Riches, says Job, and he shall vomit them up again; God
shall cast them out of his belly: and that for this very reason, -- 19.
ver. 19. Because he has oppressed and forsaken the poor.

But this is yet the least part of this Argument, and therefore I will not
insist any longer upon it. And indeed the portion of the Cross, which every
good Christian must expect more or less to meet with in this world, may often
times make these present Promises much less certain to us now, than they were
to the Jews heretofore. But the other part of the Consideration is without
Exception, viz.

2dly, That if we be not weary in well doing, then in due season, when the
great day of Retribution comes, we shall infallibly reap, if we faint not.

And here I shall presume, that no One will so far mistake the meaning of St.
Paul in these words, as to imagine, that this, or any other Virtue alone, will
be sufficient to our Eternal Salvation: So that if a man does but give
liberally to the poor, it is no great matter how he lives, or what he does with
the rest of his Estate. No, this is by no means the meaning of this Promise.
Charity is indeed a most excellent Virtue, and will go as far, it may be
farther toward the securing our Salvation, than any One thing besides in the
World. 1 Peter iv. 8.
St. Peter has told us, that it shall cover the multitude of sins: that is,
shall obtain the forgiveness of them. 1 John iii. 19.
And St. John prescribes it as the best means to assure our hearts before God:
that is, to enable us to appear with confidence before him in Judgment. And a
Greater than both has told us, that if we give Alms of such things as we have,
Luke xi. 41.
all things shall be clean unto us. But yet when all is done, neither this, nor
any other Virtue alone can save us. There must be an Universal Holiness in all
other respects too, Heb. xii. 14.
and without which no man shall ever see the LORD.

And yet perhaps even in this Case also, tho by our neglect in other matters we
should be so unhappy as to come short of Heaven, our Charity nevertheless may
not lose its reward; but may serve to make us less miserable, if not more
glorious; to allay our Damnation, if not to increase our Reward.

But not to pursue these Imaginations: That which the Apostle here promises is
plainly this; That if we be not wanting to our selves, our Charity shall be
sure to meet with a proportionable recompense from God-Almighty: and we shall
reap among others, these Three great Advantages by it Prove. x. 12. Dan. iv. 27.
1 Pet. iv. 8.
; First, That it shall prepare the way for the more certain and easy
forgiveness of our sins: Secondly, It shall procure us a more large and
comfortable portion of Gods Grace, Acts x. 4. 2 Cor. ix. 14. Hebr. vi. 10.
to enable us to discharge our duty the better now: And Thirdly, Mat. xix. 21.
Luke xvi. 9. 2 Cor. ix. 6, 7. 1 Timothy vi. 19, etc.
If we faint not, but persevere in this and all other parts of our duty, it
shall Crown us with a more exceeding weight of Glory hereafter. Whilst the
sordid, covetous Miser, were it possible for him otherwise to abound, in all
the highest perfection of Christian Piety, yet for want of this One Virtue,
shall lose his Reward, and be cast out, with the Mat. xxv. 25, 30.
unprofitable Servant, who hid his Talent, and made no use of it, did no Good
with it, into utter darkness, where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
Teeth.

And what then remains but that having all these Encouragements to stir us up
to a warm and vigorous discharge of this duty, we now suffer our selves to be
persuaded, in the words of our Savior Christ, to provide our selves Bags which
wax not old, Luke xii 33.
a Treasure in Heaven that fails not, where no Thief approaches, neither
Moth corrupts. Or as Himself elsewhere expresses it, with more immediate
reference to our last consideration; Luke xvi. 9.
To make to our selves friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when we
fail they may receive us into Everlasting Habitations.

And yet I cannot conclude without adding one consideration more, and which I
hope may, I am sure should be of very Great weight with us.

It has been one of the chiefest Reproaches which those of the Church of Rome
have endeavored to fix upon our Reformed Religion, that it has not only put a
stop to Charity; but has moreover cut off the very Ground and Foundation of it;
and all this only for rejecting those superstitions by which they principally
have their Gain.

How false this imputation is as to the latter part of it, we have now pretty
largely seen. God be thanked, Christianity affords Motives and Engagements
enough to Charity, without running to any vain and superstitious pretenses for
the support of it. He who believes the singular Efficacy of this practice both
by the promise of God, 2 Cor. ix. 14.
and through the prayers of those whom He relieves to obtain the forgiveness of
his sins, and to deliver his Soul from Eternal damnation, will need no Vision
of Purgatory to open his Heart to the Poor. He may indeed turn his Charity
another way; instead of bartering his Money with the Priests for Masses and
Prayers; for Pardons and Indulgences; for Holy Trifles to prevent or expiate
Sins, He may bequeath it to the Poor which is a great deal better. And if this
be the Charity which our Religion has put an end to, we shall neither be afraid
or ashamed to confess it.

And for the former; It might easily be made appear, that laying aside the
Superstitions we but now mentioned, there has much more been done since the
Reformation in works of wise and true Charity, than ever was done in twice that
time from the first rise of Popery among us to its going off. And how much
soever some of late have thought fit to Magnify the Piety of Rome and Paris,
yet upon these Principles we may venture to say, that in this as well as all
other Advantages, our own City does exceed them.

To run through a particular comparison in this point, were both to abuse your
Patience, and the Design of this discourse. Let the Account of what has been
done in its public Hospitals only this last Year serve as a short but
sufficient Evidence whereby to judge with how little reason we are taxed with a
decay of Charity amongst us.

A True report, etc.
Such was the Effect of the last Years Piety: And how much of all this has been
wholly Established since the Reformation; what vast additions have been made to
what was indeed begun before; how faithfully these great Trusts have been, and
are still administered; and kept up not withstanding the mighty losses they have
sustained, and the other frequent misfortunes under which they have fallen, is
well known to most of you in this Assembly.

Could I to all this Add the sum of what in such a doubtful, and discouraging
Year as this, according to common Estimate has been, has nevertheless been
expended within this One City in more private Acts of Mercy: What liberality
has been shown in Collections twice made for our Exiled Brethren, after two
before gathered for our Neighbors of the French Churches on the same occasion:
Not to mention all other Occurrences, from which no Day, scarce any Hour is
exempted; We should then have enough not only to silence, but to shame the
Cavils of our Enemies, and to engage us to bless God, who has in some measure
opened our Hearts to the Cries of the Poor, and not suffered them in vain to
call upon us.

But yet since this is the Reproach they would now endeavor to tix upon us;
let us be as ready by our Practice to confute this, as we have been, with good
success, by our Arguments, to answer all their other Objections against us.

Let us show them, that though our Religion will neither allow us to boast of our
Good Works to Men, nor to pretend to Merit by them of God; yet it teaches us to
he no less, nay in truth to be much more studious than themselves in the
performance of them.

And the more to engage us to this Care, let us often represent to our selves
the Great Motive which St. Paul has here set before us, to stir us up to a free
and ready Discharge of this Great Duty.

Let us consider, that the Time is coming, when we must give a strict account
of our selves, and of all the Abilities and Opportunities that we have had of
Doing Good, and what Use we have made of them.

That the Enquiry then will not so much be what our Opinions or Persuasions
were in such or such controverted Points of Christianity? To what Church we
have belonged? or, How well we have determined the many Questions that so
fatally distract and divide men's minds in matters of Religion? But rather, How
well we have lived? How charitable we have been to those who have differed from
us? and in particular, How kind and bountiful to the Poor and Needy?

This is what our Savior assures us, in the Great Account which he has left us
of the day of Judgment; Mat. xxv.
And with which, as being the noblest Argument that ever was or could have been
invented for the enforcing of this duty, and a short Summary of all that I have
here been laying before you to excite you to it, I shall conclude this whole
Discourse.

When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, Ver. 31, etc.
and all the Holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his
Glory.

And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them One
from Another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats.

And he shall set the Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left.

Then shall be say unto them on his right hand: Ver. 34, etc.
Come ye Blessed of my Father; inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foudation of the World. FOR I was an Hungered, and ye gave me Meat; I was
Thirsty, and ye gave me Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me in; Naked, and
ye clothed me; I was Sick, and ye visited me; I was in Prison, and ye came
unto me.

Then shall the Righteous answer him, Ver. 37, etc.
saying, LORD, when saw we thee an Hungered, and fed thee? or Thirsty, and gave
thee Drink? When saw we thee a Stranger, and took thee in? or Naked, and
clothed thee? Or when saw we thee Sick or in Prison, and came unto thee? And
the King shall answer and say unto them; Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye
have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto
me.

Then shall he also say unto them on the Left Hand; Ver. 41, etc.
Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. FOR I was an Hungered, and ye gave me no Meat; I was Thirsty, and ye
gave me no Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in; Naked, and ye
clothed me not; Sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not.

Then shall they also answer him, Ver. 44, etc.
saying LORD, when saw we thee an Hungered, or a-thirst, or a Stranger, or
Naked, or Sick, or in Prison, and did not minister unto thee? Then shall he
answer them, saying; Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of
the least of these, ye did it not to me.

And these shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, Ver. 46.
but the Righteous into Life Eternal.

FINIS.
BOOKS published by the Reverend Dr. Wake. And Printed for Ric. Chiswell and
Will. Rogers.
AN Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] Quarto.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, against
the Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the new Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART.

Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against Monsieur de Meaux and his Vindicator. The SECOND PART.

A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host: in Answer to the Two Discourses lately
Printed at Oxford, on this Subject. To which is prefixed a Large Historical
Preface, relating to the same Argument.

Two Discourses of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead.

A Continuation of the Controversy between the Church of England and the
Church of Rome, being a full Account of the Books that have been of late
written on Both Sides.

Preparation for Death; being a Letter sent to a Young Gentlewoman in France,
in a Distemper of which she died. 12o.

A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry; in which a late Author, viz.
the Bishop of Oxford's true and only Notion of Idolatry is considered and
confuted.

The Sum of a Conference between Dr. Clagett and F. P. Gooden, about
Transubstantiation. Published by this Author, with a Preface.

Sermons and Discourses on several Occasions. 8o.

A Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitehall, April 2. 1690. being the
Fifth Wednesday in Lent.

A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, at S.
Sepulchers Church, on Wednesday in Easter-week, 1690.

A Sermon preached at Paris, on the Thirtieth of January, S. V. 1684/5.

The Present State of the Controversy.

Now in the Press,
A Sermon preached before the King and Queen at Whitehall, May 4. 1690.
Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.


