THE DIFFERENCE Between the CHURCH of ENGLAND, AND THE Church of Rome. IN
Opposition to a late BOOK, ENTITLED, An Agreement between the Church of
England, and Church of Rome.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

Imprimatur.

October 6th, 1687. H. MAVRICE.

THE DIFFERENCE Between the CHURCH of ENGLAND, AND THE CHURCH of ROME.
THE Author of a Book newly published, called, The Agreement between the Church
of England and Church of Rome, says, Preface to the Agreement.
There has been of late a great cry, That the Clergy of the Church of England,
are now the chief, if not the only Opposers of Popery, and Defenders of the
Protestant Religion: And therefore, to put a Check to the insulting talk of our
Clergy (who would be thought the only Champions against Popery) it is become
necessary in the present Juncture to emit such an Essay as this, To show an
Agreement between the Church of England and Rome; and that the Controversy lies
only between the Church of Rome, and the Protestant Dissenter. This I confess,
is an Expedient of Expedients; and as it is necessary for the relief of those
who are so successfully beaten out of their late Pleas of Misrepresentation,
that they sullenly declare, Page 1:
Until that be yielded, they will not dispute: So it may be necessary in this
present Juncture, for the charming that Adder, which has yet been deaf to all
the Arguments of Flattery, Interest and Fear; and to put an end to that
Answering, Replying, Rejoyning and Sur-rejoyning, which for some Months he
says, both sides have been employed in. For if there be an Agreement in
Opinion between both Churches, there will be no further occasion for Disputing
between them; and if the only Opposers of Popery, the Clergy of the Church of
England, are convinced of it, there will be no further Disputing nor
Opposition: Since those between whom the Controversy then only lies, viz. the
Church of Rome, and Protestant Dissenter, are it seems upon terms of mutual
Cessation.

But now, left those of the Church of England, that after all the Complaints
made against them for Misrepresentation, will not grant any such thing
properly, and in a strict sense, (and it is likely not in any sense) should be
as obstinate and hard to be convinced in this case; Therefore to put it out of
dispute, (if he be to be credited) he has with some clearness demonstrated the
Agreement of Opinion between the Church of England and Rome, to be exact and
full. Preface.
And if Demonstration, and clearness of Demonstration, will not do it, nothing
will. But it is some men's way to talk most of Infallibility, Self-evidence, and
clearness of Demonstration, when they are farthest from it; and I began
presently to suspect our Author's credit, when I found him to shift his Ground,
as if he did distrust his own Demonstrations.

As for instance,

1. He had no sooner began to demonstrate this exact and full Agreement of
Opinion; but by way of Prevention, he declares, Page 2.
He would not incumber his Discourse with a Catalogue of Agreements in the
great Doctrines of Christian Religion, and Matters of Opinion; but would
confine himself to Matters of Government and Worship, which chiefly concerns
men's Practices. How! demonstrate the Agreement of Opinion, and yet forbear
meddling with Matters of Opinion! to undertake it, and then to except the thing
he undertakes! And then to confine himself to Matters of Government and
Worship, as if there were not as much Reason to show an Agreement in Doctrine,
as Practices; or that Matters of Government and Worship were not also Matters
of Doctrine!

2. When he seems to come to the Point he confines himself to, viz. Government
and Worship; yet he fails again, for it is only in some parts of Worship, Page 3.
which he ventures to say that the Agreement will be found exact and full. As
one sensible, that tho there is nothing in the Liturgy and Prayers of the
Church of England, (which he instances in) as to the matter of them, but what
every Christian may allow, and so what the Pope may as well as (he says) did
approve; Page 6b.
yet, that their Missal and Breviary contain such Prayers to the Saints, and
for Souls departed, etc. as can be by no other Figure made to agree with the
Worship and Prayers used in the Church of England, than one part of a
Contradiction can be reconciled to the other.

3. It Is further worthy of our Observation, That the Agreement he pretends to
prove, is not from the avowed Doctrine of either Church, but by some Quotations
he produces from two or three particular Authors, on the part of the Church of
England; and from such as on their own side, are rejected by the governing part
of their Church. So for instance he says of the Church of England, Preface.
They are the avowed Principles of some of the Clergy, and late Writers. And
when he undertakes for the Romish Church, he tells us. Page 16, 18, 30, 31.
That a great, if not the greatest part, grant to the Pope but a Primacy, for
the sake of Catholic Concord, etc. For Proof of which, he appeals to the
Councils of Constance and Basil, and the Privileges of the Gallican Church.
And yet the Acts of those Councils were reprobated in succeeding Councils; and
so far as concerns this case, were utterly disallowed, as Bellarmin says. De
Concll. l. 1. c. 7.
And of what little Authority the Gallick Privileges have been accounted at
Rome, there needs no more evidence than the case of De Marca, Page 22, etc.
as it is represented by this Author So that let his Quotations (which he
pretends to be very just in) Preface.
be admitted; yet his Argument from thence, for an exact and full Agreement, as
to this matter, amounts to this only: Some of the Church of England are for a
Primacy for Concord-sake, and some of the Church of Rome are for no more;
therefore the Agreement betwixt the Church of England and Rome, is very exact
and full in those points. And if this be his way of Demonstration, it might to
as good purpose be showed, That there is also in several Points, this kind of
Agreement between those that (he says) the Controversy only lies between, viz.
the Church of Rome, and the Protestant Dissenter.

4. When he offers at a Demonstration from these particular Authors, he
attempts not to prove it so much from what they say, as from what he himself
infers from it. So much he acknowledges; for when he had charged Dr. Sherlock
to have found out a Divine Institution for the Popes Primacy, Page 42, 43, 44.
(This being so gross, as he could not father it upon him, but he should soon
be detected) he brings himself off with this, This I confess, the Doctor does
not expressly carry any further than the Combinations of a National Church and
Primacy, that is, he says no such thing.

5. When he does find out some things in which the Churches are agreed, they
are such things as the Church of England agrees with the Ancient, and most
other Churches in, viz. Episcopacy and a Liturgy; and it had been to the like
purpose, if he had also showed their Agreement in the great Doctrines of
Christian Religion. And yet, even here he fails again; for he that concludes,
Page 44.
In a word, the Agreement between the English Clergy, and the Romanist, about
the immediate Divine Right of Episcopacy is so full, etc. does before
acknowledge that Ordination by Presbyters is granted in the Church of Rome to be
valid and regular, Page 36, 37.
and that all those that hold the Supreme Jurisdiction of the Pope, over the
whole Catholic Church visible, do hold the Divine Right of Bishops to be but
mediate, [ mediante Papa.] Page 42.
So that he is gone from an Agreement of Churches to an Agreement between
Persons; from a full Agreement in Opinion, to an Agreement in Government and
Worship; from Worship, to some parts of Worship; from Demonstrations, to
Inferences, and framed Propositions of his own; from an Agreement at last, to a
Disagreement.

And now we may look back with some comfort, to his bold offer, and clear
demonstration at the beginning, when he says, Preface.
The Author has with some: clearness demonstrated the Agreement of Opinion
between the Church of England- Men, and the Church of Rome, to be so exact and
full, that if the Government should so design, it were but dictum factum,
according to their Doctrine; and a Cassandrian Peace might be patched up
presently with Rome.

He advances, as if he were a kind of Plenipotentiary; but it may be suspected,
he that has this way of Demonstration, is not like to be very fortunate in the
Negotiation.

Thus much shall suffice for our Author's way of Demonstration, and his Attempt
to show the Agreement between the Church of England, and Church of Rome;
leaving a fuller Answer to some of his particular Discourses, to an abler Pen.

But, yet there remains another part toward a just state of the Controversy,
Page 2.
and that is (as he well observed) to let the World know how far these Churches
differ, as well as wherein they are agreed: But that was a Province he had no
mind to Prosecute; as being, tho more to the purpose, yet not so much to his
design. For certainly, he that will demonstrate the Agreement to be full and
exact, must either suppose there is no Difference; or if there be, that the
Difference is not considerable enough to hinder the Agreement. But if there be
a Difference, and the Difference in points Diametrically opposite and
irreconcilable, it is to no purpose to show their Agreement (were it so) to be
full and exact in others. And that this is the case, and the Disagreement far
greater than the Agreement, I shall endeavor to prove, and that not from an
Author or two, or far-fetched Consequences, and forced Interpretations, and
dubious Expressions; but from sufficient Authorities, and the avowed Principles
of both Churches. Such are the 39 Articles, the Catechism, the Homilies and
Liturgy of the Church of England. Such again, are the Councils; more
especially, the Council of Trent, A Papist Misrepres. and Represented,
Introduct.
the Catechism ad Parochos, the Rhemists Annotations, the Missal and
Breviaries; according to which, and the like, a Papist Represented, (as the
Mode of speaking has been of late) does believe.

In order to which I shall premise,

1. That there are some Articles which both Churches do in express Terms agree
in, called by our Author, the great Doctrines of Religion, Agreement. p. 2.
viz. Art. 1. of the Holy Trinity; [and so, how Socinians can subscribe the
Articles of the Church of England, (as this Author affirms) Page 2.
I understand not.] Art. 2. of the Word, or Son of God; Art. 3. of the going
down of Christ into Hell; Art. 4. of the Resurrection of Christ; Art. 5. of the
Holy Ghost; Art. 7. of the Old Testament; Art. 8. of the Three Creeds; Art. 12.
of good Works; Art. 16. of Sin after Baptism; Art. 18. of obtaining eternal
Salvation only by the Name of Christ; Art. 23. of Ministering in the
Congregation; Art. 26. of the unworthiness of Ministers; Art. 27. of Baptism;
Art. 33. of Excommunicate Persons; Art. 38. of Christian men's goods; Art. 39.
of a Christian man's Oath. Against these the Jesuit Johan. Roberti, has little
or nothing to object in his small Tract purposely written in Opposition to our
Articles. Ecclesiae Angl. Basis Impostura, Luxemb. 1619.


But of these Articles it is to be observed, there are some which each party
differs as much from the other in (when they come to explain themselves) as if
there had been no agreement in Terms. Thus it happens in Articles, 3 d, 7 th
and 15 th; as shall afterward in part be showed.

2. There are other Articles, wherein both Churches do agree in the Sense, tho
they differ in Terms; or that are not so much Controversies between Church and
Church, as between private Doctors in each Church. Apology for the Protestants,
done out of French into English, 1681. Part 4. Cap. 3. p. 135, 150.
Of this Opinion is a Learned Forreigner of the Reformed Religion, about the
matter contained in Articles, the 10 th and 17 th, of Free will; and of
Predestination and Election. Of the former, he says, The difference that our
Adversaries will object between them and us, upon this point of Free Will, is
only imaginary, and a mere cavil. Of the latter, he concludes, Since we agree
in the Fundamentals of this Doctrine (as we have already set forth); and that
our Dissent is but with a few of their Doctors, it would not be very hard (I
should think) to find out such a bias of Temperament, drawn from the Word of
God, in proposing of these Opinions, and in Terms so proportioned to their
Sublimity, as all humble and moderate Spirits would find sufficient for their
Satisfaction.

3. There are other Points which are matter of Liberty, and left undetermined
in the Church of England; And so She does receive into her Communion, as well
those that deny as affirm. But on the contrary, the Church of Rome has
determined several Points of this Nature to be Matters of Faith; and
anathematized those that do not so receive them. Thus they are accursed by the
Council of Trent, that say, Sess. 6. Can. 10, 11, 12, etc.
We are formally justified by the Righteousness of Christ [the only formal
cause of our Justification being the Justice of God; as its there declared,
cap. 8.] or that we are justified by the alone Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness: Or that shall say, Justifying Faith is nothing else than a trust
or confidence in the Divine Mercy, forgiving Sins for Christ's sake, etc. In
which, and the like, unless the Church of England will curse those whom She
does bless, and cast out of her Communion such as She receives into it, She can
no more be reconciled to the Church of Rome, than in those other Points that
for the matter of them are held and declared by her self to be false and
erroneous.

4. There are Articles which the two Churches do in whole, or in part, so
differ in, that the Doctrine of the Church of England cannot be the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome; nor the Doctrine of the Church of Rome be the Doctrine of
the Church of England. Such are most, if not all, of these following Articles;
viz. Art. 6. of the sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures for Salvation: Art. 9.
of Original Sin: Art. 11. of the Justification of Man: Art. 13. of works before
Justification: Art. 14. of works of Supererogation: Art. 15. of Christ alone
without Sin: Art. 19. of the Church: Art. 20. of the Authority of the Church:
Art. 21. of the Authority of General Councils: Art. 22. of Purgatory: Art. 24.
of speaking in the Congregation in such a Tongue as the People understands;
Art. 25. of the Sacraments; Art. 28. of the Lords Supper: Art. 29. of the
wicked which eat not the Body of Christ: Art. 30. of both Kinds: Art. 31. of
the Oblation of Christ upon the Cross: Art. 32. of the Marriage of Priests:
Art. 34. of the Tradition of the Church: Art. 35. of the Homilies: Art. 36. of
the Consecration of Bishops and Ministers: Art. 37. of the Civil Magistrates.
These, besides several others which our Articles do not expressly mention, (but
are commonly the received Principles of our Church) are the Inconcileable
Points; and which all the Wit and Charity in the World can no more thoroughly
reconcile, than Light and Darkness. How far this is true, and demonstrated to
be so in the following Sheets, I shall leave to the Consideration of every
intelligent Reader. In which I have proceeded with care and impartiality from
Point to Point; laying down first the Doctrine of each Church from
unquestionable Authorities, for my own Justification; and then for the ease of
the Reader, I have summed it up, and set each in Opposition to the other. From
all which I doubt not, but whatever Friendship may be maintained betwixt the
Members of both Churches, as we are Fellow Subjects, yet it will be evident,
that there is no possibility of Agreement between them in Matters of Religion,
or of making One Church of what are so manifestly Two.

It Is upon the last sort I am now to proceed; and the first of which in order,
is the sixth Article of the Church of England.

The Difference between the Church of England, and Rome.
The Sixth Article of the Church of England.
Of the sufficiency of the Holy Scripture for Salvation.
Art. 6.
Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation: so that whatsoever
is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any
man, that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or be thought
requisite or necessary to Salvation. In the name of the Holy Scripture, we do
understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whole
Authority was never any doubt in the Church. The Names and Number of the
Canonical Books, Genesis, etc. And the other Books (as Hierom says) the Church
does read for example of Life and instruction of Manners; but yet does not
apply them to establish any Doctrine. Such are these following, The third Book
of Esdras, The fourth Book of Esdras, The Book of Tobias, The Book of Judith,
The rest of Hester. [ And the fourteen Books commonly called Apocrypha.] All
the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do receive
and account them Canonical.

The Twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Authority of the Church.
Art. 20.
Although the Church be a Witness, and a keeper of Holy Writ; yet as it ought
not to decree any thing against the same, so besides the same ought it not to
enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation.

Homily the first, Or an Exhortation to the Reading and Knowledge of Holy
Scripture.
There is in the Scripture, whatsoever is meet for all ages and sorts of men.
These Books ought therefore to be much in our hands, in our Eyes, in our Ears,
in our Mouths, but most of all in our Hearts.

Homily second, Or an Exhortation, etc.
Surely none be Enemies to the reading of God's Word, but such as either be so
ignorant, that they know not how wholesome a thing it is; or else be so Sick,
that they hate the most comfortable Medicine should heal them: or so ungodly
that they would wish the People still to continue in blindness and ignorance of
God.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess 4. decret. de Canon. Script.
The holy and general Synod of Trent considering, that all saving Truth and
Instruction of manners, is contained in Books written and Traditions not
written, (which received from the mouth of Christ himself, by the Apostles, or
from the Apostles, the Holy Spirit dictating, delivering as it were from hand
to hand, have come even to us) following the examples of the Orthodox Fathers,
does receive and regard with the like Affection of Piety and Reverence, all the
Books, of the Old and New Testament, as also those unwritten Traditions
pertaining to Faith and Manners, dictated by Christ, as it were by word of
mouth, or by the Holy Ghost, and preserved by a continual Succession in the
Catholic Church, and has thought fit to add the Index of the Sacred Books to
this Decree, lest it should be doubted which they are, that are received by the
sacred Synod. They are these following, The five Books of Moses, Joshua,
Judges, Ruth, four Books of Kings, two of Chronicles, one of Esdras, two of
Esdras (called Nehemias)* Tobias, Judith, Hesther, Job, the Psalms, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Isaias, Jeremias, with Baruch,
Ezekiel, Daniel, the twelve lesser Prophets, the two Books of Maccabees. The
New Testament, viz. the four Evangelists, etc. And if any one shall not receive
those whole Books with all their Parts, for Sacred and Canonical, according as
they are wont to be read in the Catholic Church, and are contained in the
ancient Vulgar Latin Edition; or shall knowingly and wittingly contemn the
foresaid Traditions, let him be accursed.

So that the Church of Rome has added to the Canon of Scripture (truly and
properly so called) six whole Books, viz. Tobit, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom,
Judith, the first and second of the Maccabees, together with certain other
pieces of Baruch, Esther, and Daniel.

Council Trent, Sess. 22. Cap. 5.
Mystical Benedictions, Lights, Incensings, Garments, and many other such like
things, are of Apostolical Discipline and Tradition. The Ceremonies used in
Baptism were, without controversy, instituted by the Apostles, such as Salt,
Spittle, Exorcisms, Waxcandles, Catechism. Par. 2. cap. 2.. 59, 60, 65, etc.

[See below Articles 19th and 34th, of the Church of England.]

Sess. 4. Decretum de edit. and usu Sacr. Libr.
Furthermore, for the restraining all wanton Wits, the Synod does decree, that
no one (depending on his own Wisdom, in matters of Faith and Manners, belonging
to the Edification of Christian Doctrine, wresting the Scriptures to his own
sense) dare to interpret the Holy Scripture contrary to the sense which Holy
Mother Church has held, and does hold (to whom it belongs to judge of the
sense, and Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures) or against the Unanimous
consent of the Fathers; although such Iterpretations should never be published.

The Index of Prohibited Books, with the Rules made by the Fathers of the
Tridentine Synod, approved by the Authority of Pius IV. Anno 1564.
Regula. 4.
Seeing it is manifest by experience, if the Holy Bible be permitted to be read
every where without difference in the Vulgar Tongue, that more prejudice than
benefit does redound from thence, through the rashness of men; let it therefore
be at the pleasure of the Bishop or Inquisitor, that with the advice of the
Parish Priest or Confessor, they may grant the reading of the Bible, translated
by Catholic Authors, to such as they shall understand, will by such reading
receive no prejudice, but an increase of Faith and Piety; which License let
them have in writing. But whosoever shall without such License presume to read,
or have such Bibles, he may not have the Absolution of his Sins before he has
returned them to the Ordinary.

The same Index being enlarged by Sixtus V. and reviewed and published by order
of Clement VIII. Anno 1595. there is added the following Observation about the
foresaid Rule.

It is to be considered about the above written fourth Rule of Pope Pius IV.
that there is no new power given by this Impression and Edition to the Bishops,
or Inquisitors, or Superiors of Regulars, of granting a License to buy, read,
or keep the Bible published in the Vulgar Tongue; seeing the power of granting
such Licenses of reading, or keeping Vulgar Bibles, or any parts of them, has
been taken away by the command and use of the Holy Roman Church, and the whole
Inquisition: as also all Summaries and Historical Compendiums of the said
Bibles, and Books of Holy Scripture, written in any Vulgar Tongue, which truly
is inviolable to be observed.

So that the power of granting such Licenses, and the Liberty of reading the
Scripture in the Vulgar Tongue, is wholly taken away, and accordingly we are
told it is so ordered by the General Inquisition of Spain. Azorius Instit. Mor.
l. 8. cap. 26. ff. Quaeritur; and ff. Quaeres.


From all which we may observe,

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. Holy Scripture contains all
things necessary to Salvation.

1. All saving Truth is in Books written, and Traditions unwritten.

2. Whatsoever is not read in Scripture, nor may be proved thereby, is not to
be required of any Man to be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought
requisite or necessary to Salvation.

2. The Church does receive and regard unwritten Traditions with the like Piety
and Reverence, as the Books of the Old and New Testament. And if any one shall
knowingly contemn those Traditions, he is accursed.

3. In the name of the Holy Scripture is understood those Canonical Books of
the Old and New Testament, of whose Authority was never any doubt in the
Church. And the other [the Apochrypha] the Church does not apply to establish
any Doctrine.

3. The Books of Scripture are, the five Books of Moses, etc. Tobias, Judith,
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, the two Books of Maccabees, etc. And if any one
shall not receive these whole Books, with all their parts, for Canonical; he is
accursed.

4. The Scripture were intended for, and are to be read by all.

4. The Scriptures ought not to be read by the Vulgar.

5. The Scriptures are useful for all.

5. If the Bible is permitted to be read by all, more prejudice than benefit
does arise from it.

6. The Church is a Witness and Keeper of Holy Writ.

6. It belongs to the Mother Church of Rome, to judge of the Sense and
Interpretation of Scripture.



The 7 th. Article of the Church of England.
Of the Old Testament.
ART 7.
The Old Testament is not contrary to the New; for both in the Old and New
Testament everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only
Mediator between God and Man, being both God and Man.

The Council of Trent.
Sess. 25. de invocat.
The Saints reigning with Christ do offer Prayers to God for Men, and it is good
and profitable to invoke them.

Catech. Trid. par. 4. cap. 5. ff. 8.
The most Holy Mother of God, by her Intercession does reconcile God to Sinners;
She is the Mother of Mercy, and Advocatress of the Faithful.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. Christ is the only Mediator between
God and Man.

The Virgin Mary and Saints are Mediators in Heaven.



See more, Article 22.

The 9 th Article of the Church of England.
Of Original, or Birth Sin.
ART. 9.
Original Sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly
talk) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every Man, that
naturally is engendered of the Offspring of Adam, etc.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Basil.
Sess. 36. Anno 1439.
We do define and declare, etc. the Doctrine that declares the glorious Virgin
Mary, to have been always free from Original and Actual Sin, Holy and
Immaculate, is to be approved, retained, and embraced by all Catholics, as
pious and consonant to Ecclesiastical Worship, the Catholic Faith, Right
Reason, and Holy Scripture; and that for the future it shall be lawful for none
to Preach, or Teach the contrary.

The Council of Trent.
Sess. 5.
This Holy Synod does declare, That it is not its Intention to comprehend in
this Decree concerning Original sin, the blessed and Immaculate Virgin Mary the
Mother of God; but that the Constitutions of Pope Xystus IV. of happy memory,
are to be observed under the Penalties therein contained, which it does
enforce. Of the Sense of these two Councils in this matter, see Joh. Baptistae
de Lezana Apol. pro immacul. Concept. cap. 13.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. Original Sin is the fault and
corruption of the nature of every person naturally engendered of the Offspring
of Adam.

So that none is excepted but our B. Savior.

The Virgin Mary was free from Original and Actual Sin.



The 11 th Article of the Church of England.
Of the Justification of Man.
ART. 11.
We are accounted Righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works and deservings.
Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine,
and very full of comfort, as is more largely expressed in the homily of
Justification.

The first part of the Homily of Salvation.
Because all Men be Sinners, and therefore can no Man by his own Acts, Words,
and Deeds, (seem they never so good) be justified, and made righteous before
God: but every Man is constrained to seek for another Righteousness or
Justification, to be received at Gods own Hands, that is to say, the
forgiveness of his Sins: And this Justification, or Righteousness [the
forgiveness of our Sins] which we so receive of Gods Mercy, and Christ's Merits
embraced by Faith, is taken, accepted, and allowed of God for our perfect and
full Justification.

Faith does not shut out Repentance, Hope, Love, Dread, and the Fear of God, to
be joined with Faith in every Man that is justified, but it shuts them out
from the office of justifying [that is meritously as the Homily shows.]

The third part of the Homily of Salvation.
The meaning of this Proposition, or saying, We be justified by Faith in Christ
only, (according to the meaning of the old ancient Authors) is this, we put our
Faith in Christ, that we be justified by Him only that we be justified by Gods
free Mercy, and the Merits of our Savior Christ only, and by no virtue or good
Works of our own.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 6. cap. 7.
Justification is not only the Remission of Sins, but the Sanctification and
Renovation of the inward man, from whence a man of unjust is made just. Can. 11.
If any one shall say, That men are justified, either by the only imputation of
Christ's rightousness, or by the alone Remission of our Sins, excluding the
Grace and Love which is spread in their Hearts by the Holy Ghost, and does
inhere in them; or that the Grace by which we are justified, is only the favor
of God; let him be accursed.

Cap. 16.
Its called our Righteousness, because we are justified by it inhering in us.

Can. 9.
If any one shall say, That the wicked is justified by Faith alone, so that he
understands nothing else to be required, which may cooperate to obtain the
Grace of Justification, and that it is not at all necessary that he be prepared
and disposed by the motion of his own will; let him be accursed.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. Places the nature of
Justification in the forgiveness of Sin.

1. Says, Justification is not only the forgiveness of Sin, but also that it
is the Sanctification of our natures [ confounding Justification with
Sanctification.] and that whoever holds the contrary; is accursed.

2. Says, We are accounted Righteous only for the merit of Christ.

2. Says, We are justified by a righteousness inhering in us.



The 12 th Article of the Church of England.
Of good Works.
ART. 12.
Albeit that good Works which are the Fruits of Faith, and follow after
Justification, cannot put away our Sins, and endure the Severity of Gods
Judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring
out necessarily of a true and lively Faith, insomuch that by them a lively
Faith may be as evidently known as a Tree discerned by the Fruit.

Homily of good Works. And first of Fasting.
To have any Affiance, or to put any Confidence in our Works, as by merry and
deserving of them to purchase to our selves and others Remission of Sin, and so
consequently everlasting Life, is meet Blasphemy of Gods Mercy, and great
Derogation to the Bloodshedding of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Sermon of Salvation, part 3.
Our own Imperfection is so great, through the Corruption of Original Sin, that
all is unperfect that is within us. Faith, Charity, Hope, Dread, Thoughts,
Words, and Works; and therefore not apt to merit or deserve any part of our
Justification for us.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 6. Cap. 16.
Justified persons are esteemed to have truly deserved eternal life,

Can 32.
If any one shall say, The good Works of the justified are so the gifts of God,
that they are not also the good Merits of the person justified; or that by the
good Works which are done by him, through the Grace of God and merit of Christ,
he does not truly Merit an increase of Grace, eternal Life, and the obtaining
of eternal Life (if he shall depart in Grace) and also an increase of Glory;
let him be accursed.

The Rhemists Annotations.
Annot. in 2 Timothy 4. 8. 1 Cor. 3. 8. and Hebr. 6. 10.
This place convinces for the Catholics, that all good Works done by God's
Grace after the first Justification be truly and properly Meritorious, and
fully worthy of everlasting Life; and that thereupon Heaven is the due and just
Stipend, Crown or Recompense, which God by his Justice owes to the persons so
working by his Grace; for he renders or repayeth Heaven as a just Judge, and
not only as a merciful Giver; and the Crown which he pays, is not only of
Mercy, or Favor, or Grace; but also of Justice.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The best Works are imperfect,
and cannot endure the severity of God's Judgment.

1. The good Works of the justified, do truly merit eternal Life.

2. To put any confidence in our Works, and to think they merit everlasting
Life, is blasphemy.

2. Whosoever says they do not properly merit, is accursed.



The 13 th Article of the Church of England.
Of Works before Justification.
ART. 13.
Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they Spring not of Faith in Jesu Christ,
neither do they make men to receive Grace, or (as School Authors say) deserve
Grace of Congruity. Yea rather, for that they are not done as God has willed,
and commanded them to be done; we doubt not, but they have the nature of Sin.
See Bishop Vshers Answer to a Challange, Chap. 11.


The Church of Rome.
It was a common Opinion in the Church of Rome, that Works done before the
Grace of Christ, do make men meet to deserve Grace of Congruity, or that man by
the power of Nature can dispose himself for Justification. Of this Opinion were
Scotus, Durandus, Biel, Cajetan, etc.

Council of Trent.
Sess. 6. Cap. 7.
If any one shall say, That all Works before Justification, for whatever reason
they are done, are truly sins, or deserve the hatred of God; Let him be
accursed.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. Works done before Justification,
do not deserve Grace of Congruity.

1. Works done before Justification, do merit it of Congruity.

2. Works done before Justification, have the nature of Sin.

2. Whoever shall say, Works done before Justification are truly Sins, is
accursed.



The 14 th Article of the Church of England.
Of Works of Supererogation.
ART. 14.
Voluntary Works besides over and above God's commandments, which they call
works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety. For by
them men do declare that they do not only render unto God, as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his sake, than of bounden Duty is
required Whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are commanded
to you, say, we are unprofitable Servants.

Second Part, Of the Sermon of good Works.
Which Sects and Religions in the Church of Rome, had so many hypocritical and
feigned Works in their State of Religion (as they arrogantly named it) that
their Lamps (as they said) run always over, able to satisfy, not only for
their own Sins, but also for all their Benefactors, Brothers and Sisters of
Religion, as most ungodilly and trustily they had persuaded the Multitude of
ignorant People; keeping in diverse places, as it were Marts or Markets of
Merit, being full of their Holy Relics, Images, Shrines, and Works of
overflowing Abundance, ready to be sold.

The Church of Rome.
The Catechism.
Pars 2 de Sacram. paenit. ff. 77.
In this the goodness and clemency of God is to be praised, who has granted to
our weakness, that one may satisfy for another, etc. And such as are endued
with Divine Grace, can pay in the name of another, what is due to God.

Rhemists Annotations.
Luke 11: Ver. 35.
The works which we do more then Precept, be called Works of Supererogation; and
whereby [that is from what was abovesaid] it is also evident against the
Protestants that there be such Works.

2 Cor. 8. 14.
This place proves plainly, that the fastings and satisfactory Deeds of one
man, be available to others. Yea, and that holy Saints or other virtuous
Persons, may in measure and proportion of other Men's necessities and
deservings, allot unto them, as well the Supererogation of their Spiritual
Works, as those that abound in worldly Goods may give Alms of their
Superfluities to them which are in necessity.

Annot. on 2 Cor. 2. 10.
We infer most assuredly, that the satisfactory and penal Works of Holy Saints
suffered in this Life be communicable and applicable to the use of other
faithful men, and to be dispensed according to every man's necessity and
deserving, by them whom Christ has constituted over his Family, and has made
the Dispensers of his Treasures.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. That men may do more for Gods
sake, than of bounden Duty is required, cannot be taught without Arrogance and
Impiety.

1. That men may do Works of Supererogation, and more than is commanded.

2. That any may be able not only to satisfy for their own Sins, but also for
the Sins of others, is a most ungodly Doctrine.

2. That what they do more than is commanded, may be allotted to others, and
which such may have the benefit of.



The 15 th Article of the Church of England.
Of Christ alone without Sin.
ART. 15.
Christ in the Truth of our nature was made like unto us in all things, Sin only
except, from which he was clearly void, both in his Flesh, and in his Spirit,
etc. But all we the rest (although Baptized, and born again in Christ) yet
offend in many things; and if we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and
the Truth is not in us.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 6. Can. 23.
If any one shall say, That any one can avoid all Sins, such also as are venial,
in the whole course of his Life, except by special privilege from God, as the
Church does hold concerning the Blessed Virgin; Let him be accursed.

The Rhemists.
Annot. on Mar. 3. 34.
Our Lady had so much Grace given her; that she never sinned, not so much as
venially, in all her Life,

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. Christ alone is without Sin, but
all the rest of mankind offend in many things, none being excepted.

The Virgin Mary is excepted, having never sinned so much as venially.



The 19 th Article of the Church of England.
Of the Church.
ART. 19.
The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation on of faithful men, in which the
pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered according to
Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the
same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch, have erred: So also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their Living, and manner of Ceremonies,
but also in matters of Faith.

1. Of the Church.
The Visible Church is where the Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be
duly Ministered, in all things of necessity requisite.

The Church of Rome.
The 5 th General Council of Lateran.
Orat. Archiep. Spalat.
The Sacred Doctors have affirmed, That the Unity of the Church does consist in
two things. 1. In the Conjunction of the Members of the Church one with
another. 2. In their Order to one Head, the Vicar of Christ, according to the
saying of the Apostle, Not holding the Head.

The Catechism of the Council of Trent.
Of the Notes of the True Church.
Par. 1. de 9. Art. Symb. ff. 11.
The first Note is, That it be One. And it is called One, as there is one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism. There is one Governor, the Invisible, Christ; the
Visible, who (being the lawful Successor of Peter, Prince of the Apostles) does
possess the Roman Chair.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. The Notes of a True Church are the
pure word Preached, and the due Ministration of the Sacraments.

The necessary Note of the true Church is the being united to the Bishop of
Rome.



2. Of the Falibility of the Church of Rome.
The Church of Rome has erred, as well as other Churches, in Living,
Ceremonies, and Faith.

N. 1.
The Church of Rome has erred in Ceremonies.

The Common Prayer Book.
Rubric, Of Ceremonies, why some be abolished, etc.
Of such Ceremonies as be used in the Church, and have had their beginning by
the Institution of man, some are put away, because the great excess and
multitude of them has so increased in these latter days, that the burden of
them was intolerable. This our excessive multitude of Ceremonies was so great,
and many of them so dark, that they did more confound, than declare and set
forth Christ's benefits unto us. Furthermore, the most weighty cause of the
abolishment of some Ceremonies was, that they were so far abused, partly by the
superstitious blindness of the rude and unlearned, and partly by the unsatiable
avarice, etc.

The 2d part, Of the Homily of Place and Time of Prayer.
They have profaned and defiled their Churches with Heathenish and Jewish
abuses, with Images and Idols, with numbers of Altars, too too superstitiously
and intolerably abused, with gross abusing and filthy corrupting of the Lord's
Holy Supper, the blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood, with an infinite
number of toys and trifles, of their own devices, to make a goodly outward
show, and to deface the plain, simple, and sincere Religion of Christ.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 22. Cap. 5.
The Church has appointed Ceremonies, as mystical Benedictions, Lights,
Incensings, Garments, and such like, that the Majesty of so great a Sacrifice
might be recommended, and the minds of the faithful be excited, etc.

Ibid. Can. 7.
If any one shall say, That the Ceremonies, Garments, and external signs, which
the Catholic Church does use in the Celebration of Mass, are rather Icitements
of Impiety, than helps to Piety; Let him be accursed.

Sess. 7. Can. 2.
If any one shall say, They are injurious to the Holy Spirit, that give some
virtue to the Holy Chrism of Confirmation; Let him be accursed.

The Catechism.
Par. 2. Cap. 4. de Euchar. ff. 81.
The Sacrifice of the Mass has many, and those very remarkable and solemn
Rites; none of which is to be esteemed needless sand vain.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The Ceremonies in the Church of
Rome, were for their multitude, an intolerable burden.

1. The Ceremonies used are many, but solemn, and for the Majesty of Worship.

2. They do more confound, than set forth Christ's benefits, and do deface the
plain and sincere Religion of Christ.

2. They do recommend the Worship, and excite the minds of the Faithful.

3. They are toys and trifles.

3. None of them are needless and vain; but have a virtue in them.

4. They do profane, and defile the Churches where they are used.

4. Whosoever shall say, That they are incitements of impiety, is accursed.



See Articles 6 th. and 34 th.

N. 2.
The Church of Rome has erred in matters of Faith.
The 2d part, Of the Homily concerning the Holy Ghost.
If ye will compare the Notes of a true Church, with the Church of Rome, as it
is presently, and has been for the space of Nine hundred years and odd: you
shall well perceive the state thereof to be so far wide from the nature of the
true Church, that nothing can be more; Where is then the Holy Ghost, which they
do so stoutly claim to themselves? Where is now the Spirit of truth, that will
not suffer them in any wise to err? etc. It is but a vain brag, and nothing
else.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 13. init.
The Holy Synod delivering that sound and sincere Doctrine, which the Catholic
Church being taught by Jesus Christ himself, and the Apostles, and by the Holy
Spirit suggesting all Truth from day to day to her, has retained, and will
preserve to the end of the World; does straightly charge all the faithful of
Christ, that they dare not after this, believe or teach otherwise, concerning
the holy Eucharist, than is explained and defined in this Decree.

The Catechism.
Par. 1. de 9. Artic. Symb. ff. 18.
The Church cannot err in delivering the Discipline of Faith and Manners.

The Rhemists Annotations.
On Matthew. 16. 18.
By this Promise we are assured, That no Heresies, or other wicked attempts, can
prevail against the Church builded upon Peter, which the Fathers call Peter's
See, and the Roman Church.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The Church of Rome has erred in
matters of Faith.

1. The Church of Rome cannot err in matters of Faith.

2. The pretense of the Church of Rome to Infallibility is nothing but a vain
brag.

2. The Church of Rome is guided by the Holy Spirit from day to day, and cannot
err.



The 20 th. Article of the Church of England.
Of the Authority of the Church.
ART 20.
It is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to God's
Word written, etc. wherefore, although the Church be a witness and keeper of
Holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same: so besides
the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of
Salvation.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Constance.
Sess. 13.
Although Christ has instituted, and did Administer the Sacrament of the Eucharist
in Bread and Wine; yet this nowithstanding, the Authority of the sacred Canons,
and the approved custom of the Church, is to be preserved, that it be not
received after Supper, etc. And likewise, that although the Sacrament was received
in both kinds, in the Primitive Church, yet the custom is reasonably
introduced, that the Laics receive in one kind, etc. And we do command that no
Presbyter does communicate the People in both.

The Council of Trent.
Sess. 21. Cap. 1.
This Holy Synod being taught by the Holy Spirit, does declare and teach, That
Laymen are obliged by no Divine Precept to receive in both kinds, and that
Communion in one, is sufficient for Salvation.

Ibid Cap. 2.
Furthermore she declares, That this power has always been in the Church, that
in dispensing the Sacraments (the substance of them being preserved) she might
appoint and change those things which she does judge more expedient for the
profit of the Receivers, and the reverence of the Sacrament, etc. Wherefore
Holy Mother Church acknowledging [ avowing] this her Authority, etc. for
weighty and just causes does decree, That the Eucharist be communicated in one
kind.

1. General Council of Lateran.
Cap. 21.
We do altogether forbid Presbyters, Deacons and Monks, to contract Matrimony;
and we do determine, that Marriages so contracted be disjoined.

The Creed of Pius 4th.
In which it is declared, That the Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of
all other Churches. That the Pope is Successor of St. Peter, and Vicar of
Christ. That in the Mass is a real Transubstantiation of the Elements into the
Body and Blood of Christ, etc. And that all things professed in that Creed, are
the Catholic Faith, Out of which no man can be saved.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. Says, that it is not lawful for
the Church to ordain any thing contrary to God's written Word.

1. The Church of Rome has ordained things contrary to God's written Word; as,
in requiring the Sacrament to be administered in one kind; in forbidding and
disannulling the Marriage of Priests.

2. The Church ought not to enforce any thing besides the written Word to be
believed for necessity of Salvation.

2. The Church of Rome does require things, at least, besides the Word, to be
believed as necessary to Salvation: As that the Pope is vicar of Christ, and
St. Peter's Successor; that there are properly and truly Seven Sacraments
instituted by Christ, etc



The 21. Article of the Church of England.
Of the Authority of General Councils.
ART. 21.
General Councils may not be gathered together without the commandment and will
of Princes: And when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an
Assembly of Men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and Word of God)
they may err, and sometime have erred in things pertaining unto God. Wherefore
things ordained by them, as necessary to Salvation, have neither strength nor
Authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of Holy Scripture.

The Church of Rome.
Council of Trent.
Sess. 11. Bulla resump. and Decretum de resum. Conc.
It belongs to the Popes to call and direct General Councils.

Sess. 21. init. and cap. 1.
The Holy, Universal and General Synod of Trent, lawfully gathered together in
the Holy Ghost -- taught by the Holy Spirit, which is a Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, etc. does declare and teach.

The Rhemists Annot.
Rhem. Annot. Joh. 16. 13.
To teach all Truth, and preserve in Truth and from Error, the Holy Ghost is
promised and performed only to the Church, and the chief Governor and General
Councils thereof.

The Rhemists Annot.
On Acts 16. 28.
The Holy Councils lawfully kept, etc. have ever the assistance of God's Spirit,
and therefore cannot err in their Sentences and Determinations concerning the
same, because the Holy Ghost cannot err, from whom (as you see here) jointly
with the Council, the Resolution proceeds.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. General Councils may not be
gathered without the Command and Will of Princes.

1. It belongs to the Pope to call General Councils.

2. General Councils have erred, and may err.

2. General Councils called by the Pope cannot err.



The 22. Article of the Church of England.
Of Purgatory.
ART. 22.
The Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping and Adoration,
as well of Images, as of Relics, and also Invocation of Saints is a fond
Thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather
repugnant to the Word of God.

1. Purgatory.
THE Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory, is a fond thing, vainly invented,
and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, etc.

3d part, Of the Homily concerning Prayer.
If we will clean only unto the Word of God, then we must needs grant, that we
have no Commandment to pray for them that are departed out of this World. For
the Scripture does acknowledge but two places after this Life. The one proper to
the Elect and blessed of God, the other to the Reprobate.

There is no place for Repentance, nor yet for Satisfaction. -- As the
Scripture teaches us, let us think, that the Soul of Man passing out of the
Body, goes straightways to Heaven, or else to Hell, whereof the one needs no
Prayer, the other is without Redemption.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 25. Decret. de Purgat.
Seeing it has been lately taught in this Universal Synod from Scripture, etc.
That there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there detained, are helped by the
Suffrages of the Faithful, but most of all by the acceptable Sacrifice of the
Altar; the Holy Synod does command the Bishops, that they take diligent care,
that the sound Doctrine concerning Purgatory, be believed, taught, etc.

Sess. 6. Can. 30.
If any one shall say, That the fault is so remitted to every penitent Sinner,
that there remains no guilt to be paid for in Purgatory, before there be an
entrance granted into the Kingdom of Heaven; let him be accursed.

Sess. 22. Can. 3.
If any one shall say, that the Sacrifice of the Mass ought not to be offered
for the Dead, etc. let him be accursed.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The Romish Doctrine concerning
Purgatory is a fond thing, vainly invented.

1. The Doctrine of Purgatory is necessary to be believed, and whosoever does
not believe it, is accursed.

2. It Is grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather is repugnant to it.

2. It Is taught from Scripture.



2. Pardons.
THE Romish Doctrine concerning Pardons is a fond thing, vainly invented, etc.

The Church of Rome.
Rhemists Annotations.
On Mat. 16. 19.
To restore Offenders to the Churches Sacraments and Communion of the Faithful,
to pardon also, either all, or part of the Penance enjoined, or what Debts
soever Man owes to God, or the Church, for the satisfaction of his Sins
forgiven, is called Indulgence.

1. General Council of Lateran.
Can. 11.
We do grant Remission of their Sins, to whosoever do go to Jerusalem, and shall
efficaciously afford their help to oppose the Infidels.

4. General Council of Lateran.
Can. 3.
The Catholics, that having taken upon them the Character of the Cross, shall
address themselves to the destruction of Heretics, enjoy that Indulgence, and
are armed with the same privilege which is granted to those that go to the
relief of the Holy Land.

The Council of Constance.
Sess. 16.
The Holy Synod does grant to every one that goes in the appointed Procession,
an hundred days of Indulgence, etc. And to those that once a Day say devoutly a
Pater Noster, and Ave-Maria, for the safety of the Emperor, 40 Days of
Indulgence, in the accustomed form of the Church.

The Council of Trent.
Sess. 21. Cap. 9. Sess. 25. Decret. de Indulg.
Indulgences are the heavenly Treasures of the Church. Seeing the power of
Indulgences has been granted by Christ to the Church, this Holy Synod does
teach, That the use of them is very wholesome to Christian People, and does
command that they be retained in the Church, and does condemn them by an
Anathema that affirm them to be unprofitable, or deny that the Church has a
power to grant them.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The Romish Doctrine concerning
Indulgence is grounded upon no warrant of Scripture.

1. The Power of Indulgences was granted by Christ.

2. It Is a fond thing, and vainly invented.

2. They are wholesome to Christian People; and whosoever shall affirm them to
be unprofitable, is accursed.



3. Of Images and Relics.
THE Romish Doctrine concerning the Adoration, as well of Images, as of
Relics, is a fond thing, vainly invented, etc.

2d part, Of the Homily against Idolatry.
Images and Image worship, were in the Primitive Church (which was most pure
and incorrupt) abhorred and detested, as abominable and contrary to all true
Christian Religion.

3d part, Of the Homily against Images, etc.
Let such as fall down before Images of Saints, know and confess, that they
exhibit that honor to dead Stocks and Stones, which the Saints themselves,
Peter, Paul, and Barnabas, would not be given to them when alive, etc.

In this they pass the folly and wickedness of the Gentiles, that they honor
and worship the Relics, and the Bones of our Saints; which prove, that they be
mortal men and dead, and therefore no Gods to be worshipped, which the Gentiles
would never confess of their Gods for very shame; but the Relics we must kiss
and offer to, especially on Relics Sunday.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 25. de Invocat.
The Holy Synod does command all Bishops, and others, whose office it is to
teach, That they instruct the Faithful, according to the use of the Catholic
and Apostolic Church, received from the first times of the Christian Religion,
concerning the honor of Relics, and the lawful use of Images.

The Synod does decree, That the Images of Christ, the Virgin Mother of God,
and other Saints, are to be had and retained especially in Churches, and that
due Honor and Veneration be given to them, etc. and when we kiss them, uncover
the Head, and fall down before them, we do adore Christ, and venerate the
Saints, whose Similitude they bear.

They are altogether to be condemned, and the Church does condemn them, that do
deny the Bodies of the Saints and Martyrs are to be venerated by the Faithful;
and that affirm that Veneration and Honor is not due to their Relics, or are
unprofitably honored, etc.

Whosoever shall teach or think any thing contrary to those Decrees, let him be
accursed.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. Image Worship was abhorred in
the Primitive Church.

1. Image Worship was received from the first Times of Christianity.

2. The Romish Doctrine of worshipping Images and Relics, is a fond thing, etc.

2. The Relics of the Saints are to be venerated; and such as affirm they are
not profitably honored, are to be condemned.

3. It Is grounded upon no Scripture, but is repugnant thereto.

3. Whosoever shall teach or think they are not to be venerated, is accursed.



4. Invocation of Saints.
INvocation of Saints is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no
warranty of Scripture, etc.

2d part, Of the Homily concerning Prayer.
There are certain Conditions most requisite to be found in every one, that
must be called upon, which if not found, our Prayer does avail us nothing. As,
1. That he to whom we pray, be able to help us. 2. That he will. 3. That he
hear our Prayer. 4. That he understand better than we our selves what we lack.
If these things be to be found in any other, saving only in God, then may we
lawfully call upon some other besides God. But what Man is so gross, but that
he well understands that those things are only proper to him which is
Omnipotent, and knows all things? That is to say, only to God alone; whereof
it follows, that we must call neither upon Angel, nor yet upon Saint, but
only and solely upon God.

3d part, Of the Homily against Idolatry.
If answer be made, that they make such Saints but Intercessors to God, etc.
That is, after the Gentiles Idolatrous usage, to make them of Saints, Gods,
called, Dii medioximi, etc.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
The Holy Synod does command Bishops and others, Sess. 25. de Invocat.
that have the office of teaching, that they teach the faithful, that the
Saints reigning with Christ do offer Prayers to God for Men, and that it is
good and profitable to invoke them; and for the obtaining of benefits to have
recourse by Jesus Christ, our only Redeemer, to their Prayers, aid, and help.
But those that deny that they are to be invocated, or affirm that they do not
pray for us; or that the Invocation of them, that they may pray for every one
of us, is Idolatry; and is contrary to the Word of God, and the Honor of one
Mediator Jesus Christ, do think wickedly.

If any one does think or teach contrary to these Decrees, let him be accursed.

The Catechism of Trent.
Par. 4. Cap. 5. ff. 8.
We do fly to the most Holy Mother of God, that by her Intercession she may
reconcile God to Sinners. -- We ought to call upon her, the Mother of Mercy,
and Advocatress of faithful People, that she may pray for us Sinners, etc. of
which no one can, unless impiously and cursedly, doubt.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. Invocation of Saints is a fond
thing.

1. Invocation of Saints is good and profitable.

2. It Is repugnant to the Word of God.

2. They who say it is contrary to the Word of God, think wickedly.

3. To make them Intercessors, is Idolatrous.

3. Whosoever shall say it is Idolatry, thinks wickedly, and is accursed.



The 23. Article of the Church of England.
Of Ministering in the Congregation.
The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. ART. 23.
It is not lawful for any Man to take upon himself the Office, etc. of
ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called,
and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge lawfully called and
sent, which be chosen, and called to this work by Men who have public
Authority, etc.

In necessity, any of the People may baptize, whether Men or Women, of
whatsoever Sect, Jews, Infidels, and Heretics; if they intend thereby to do
that which the Catholic Church intends to do. Cathechism of Trent, par. 2. cap.
11. Sect. 24.



The 24. Article of the Church of England.
Of speaking in the Congregation in such a Tongue as the People understands.
The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. ART. 24.
It is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the Custom of the
Primitive Church to have public Prayer in the Church, or to minister the
Sacraments in a Tongue not understood of the People.

It seemed not fit to the Fathers, that the Mass be every where celebrated in
the Vulgar Tongue. Wherefore the Ancient Rite is every where to be retained.
Whosoever shall say, That the Mass ought to be celebrated only in the Vulgar
Tongue, let him be accarsed. Council of Trent Sess. 22. Cap. 8. and Can. 9.



See the Homily of Common Prayer, and the Sacraments.

The 25. Article of the Church of England.
Of the Sacraments.
ART. 25.
There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

See the Homily of Common Prayer and the Sacraments.
Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Auction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of
the Gospel, being such as have grown, partly of the corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly are states of Life allowed in the Scriptures, but yet have not
like nature of Sacraments with Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, for that they
have not any visible Sign or Ceremony, ordained of God. The Sacraments were not
ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried about, but that we should
duly use them. And in such only, as worthily receive the same, they have a
wholesome effect or operation, etc. There shall be no Celebration of the Lord's
Supper, except there be a convenient number to Communicate with the Priest,
etc. Rubric after the Com. Service.


The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 7. Can. 1.
If any one shall say, That the Sacraments of the new Law, have not been all
instituted by Christ, or that they are more or fewer than seven, viz. Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony; or
that any of these seven, is not truly and properly a Sacrament; let him be
accursed.

Can. 8.
If any one shall say, That Grace is not conferred [ex opere operato] by the work
done in the Sacraments of the new Law; but that only Faith in the Divine
Promise is sufficient to obtain Grace; let him be accursed.

Sess. 22. Cap. 6.
The Synod does approve and commend those Masses, in which the Priest does
communicate alone; forasmuch as they ought to be esteemed truly common; partly,
because the People do spiritually communicate; and partly they are celebrated
for all the Faithful by a public Minister of the Church.

Can. 8.
If any one shall say, That the Masses, in which the Priest alone does
sacramentally communicate, are unlawful, and so to be abrogated, let him be
accursed.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. There are but two Sacraments
ordained of Christ.

1. There are seven Sacraments truly and properly.

2. The other called Sacraments, are either Corruptions or States of Life; but
have not the nature of Sacraments.

2. Whosoever shall say, That any of the seven are not properly, and truly
Sacraments, is accursed.

3. The Sacraments in such only as worthily receive the same, have a wholesome
Effect and Operation.

3. The Sacraments do confer Grace Ex opere operato, and whosoever denies it,
is accursed.

4. The Sacraments were not ordained to be gazed upon, but to be used.

4. Masses in which the Priest alone Sacramentally Communicates, to be
approved. And whosoever does say, They are unlawful, is accursed.



The 28. Article of the Church of England.
Of the Lord's Supper.
ART. 28.
Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the
Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ; but it is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many Superstitions. The Body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Supper only, after an heavenly and spiritual manner. And the mean,
whereby the Body of Christ is received, and eaten in the Supper, is Faith.

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, was not by Christ's Ordinance reserved,
carried about, lifted up and worshipped.

Rubric at the end of the Communion Service.
Do Adoration ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine,
there bodily received, or unto any corporal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh
and Blood. For the Sacramental Bread and Wine, remain still in their very
natural Substances, and therefore may not be adored (for that were Idolatry to
be abhorred of all Faithful Christians.) And the natural Body and Blood of our
Savior Christ, are in Heaven, and not here; it being against the Truth of
Christ's natural Body to be at one time in more Places than one.

The Church of Rome.
The 4 th General Council of Lateran.
Can. 1.
The Body and Blood of Christ are truly contained in the Sacrament of the Altar,
under the Species of Bread and Wine; the Bread being transubstantiated into the
Body, and the Wine into the Blood, by the Power of God, etc.

The Council of Trent.
Sess. 13. Cap. 1. and Can. 1.
Whosoever shall deny that the Body and Blood, together with the Soul and
Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so whole Christ, is contained in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist; let him be accursed.

Cap. 4. and Can. 2.
Whosoever shall deny that wonderful and singular Conversion of the whole
Substance of the Bread into the Body, and of the whole Substance of the Wine
into the Blood, the Species only of Bread and Wine remaining: which Conversion
the Catholic Church most aptly calls Transubstantiation; let him be accursed.

Can. 4.
If any one shall say, That the Body and Blood of Christ is only in use, not
before and after; and that the true Body of Christ does not remain in the
particles of it, reserved after the Communion, let him be accursed.

Can. 6.
If any one shall say, That Christ is not to be worshipped in the Eucharist with
Divine Worship, etc. or that he is not solemnly to be carried about, and showed
to the People that he may be worshipped, and that the Worshippers are
Idolaters, let him be accursed.

Can. 8.
If any one shall say, That Christ is only eaten spiritually, let him be
accursed.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The Sacramental Bread and Wine
after Consecration, remain in their very natural Substances.

1. There are after Consecration, only the Species of the Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist; and the Substance of Bread and Wine is converted into the Body and
Blood of Christ.

2. The natural Body and Blood of Christ are in Heaven, and not here.

2. The Body and Blood of Christ, together with his Soul and Divinity, is
contained in the Eucharist.

3. Transubstantiation is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, etc.

3. Whosoever shall deny Transubstantiation, is accursed.

4. The Body and Blood of Christ is in the Supper only eaten after an heavenly
and spiritualmanner.

4. Whosoever shall say, Christ is eaten only spiritually, is accursed.

5. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was not by Christ's Ordinance reserved.

5. Whosoever shall say, That the Body and Blood of Christ is only in use, and
remains not in what is reserved, is accursed.

6. The Sacramental Bread and Wine may not be adored, for that is Idolatry.

6. If any shall say, The Host is not to be worshipped, or that to worship i^
is Idolatry; he is accursed.



So that the Church of England is upon this Article under six Anathema's at
least, of the Church of Rome, as appears.

The 29. Article of the Church of England.
Of the Wicked, which eat not the Body of Christ in the use of the Lord's
Supper.
The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. ART. 29.
The wicked, and such as be void of a lively Faith, although they do carnally and
visibly press with their Teeth (as St. Augustine says) the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ; yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, etc.

Ill Men receive the Body and Blood of Christ, be they Infidels, or Ill Livers.
Rhem. Annot. in 1 Cor. 11. 27.



The 30. Article of the Church of England.
Of both kinds.
ART. 30.
The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay People. For both the parts
of the Lord's Sacrament ought by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, to be
ministered to all Christian Men alike.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 21. Cap. 3.
Although our Redeemer has instituted the Sacrament in his last Supper, and has
delivered unto the Apostles in both Kinds; yet it is to be confessed, that
whole and entire Christ, and a true Sacrament is taken under one kind only; and
furthermore, that as to the benefit of it, they are defrauded of no Grace
necessary to Salvation, who receive only in one kind.

Cap. 2.
The Synod has decreed, That it should be received for a Law, that the
Sacrament be administered in one kind.

Can. 1.
Whosoever shall say, That by the command of God, all the Faithful ought to
receive in both kinds, let him be accursed.

Can. 2.
Whosoever shall say, That the holy Catholic Church has not been induced for
just causes and reasons, to order that Lay People, and Priests not officiating,
should communicate only under the Species of Bread: or that she has erred
therein; let him be accursed.

Can. 3.
Whosoever shall deny whole and entire Christ, to be taken under one Species,
let him be accursed.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The Cup is not to be denied to
the Lay People.

1. The Cup for just Reasons is denied to the Lay People.

2. The Ministration in one kind is but part of a Sacrament.

2. Whole Christ and an whole Sacrament, is under one kind alone.

3. The Sacrament ought to be administered in both kinds, according to Christ's
Commandment.

3. Whosoever shall say, that the People ought to receive in both kinds by the
Command of God, is accursed.



The 31. Article of the Church of England.
Of the one Oblation of Christ, finished upon the Cross.
ART. 31.
The offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption, Propitiation, and
Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World, both Original and Actual, and
there is none other satisfaction for Sin, but that alone. Wherefore the
Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it is commonly said, that the Priest did
offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have Remission of pain or guilt,
were blasphemous Fables, and dangerous Deceits.

The Church of Rome.
The Council of Trent.
Sess. 2. Cap. 2.
Because in this Divine Sacrifice, which is performed in the Mass, the self-same
Christ is contained, and unbloodily offered, that offered himself once upon the
Altar of the Cross; the Holy Synod does teach, That that Sacrifice is truly
Propitiatory.

It is rightly offered, not only for the Sins, Punishments and Satisfactions,
and other Necessities of the Faithful living, but also for the dead in Christ,
not as yet fully purged, according to the Tradition of the Apostles.

Can. 1.
If any one shall say, That there is not offered to God in the Mass, a true and
proper Sacrifice, let him be accursed.

Can. 3.
If any one shall say, The Sacrifice of the Mass is not Propitiatory; and that
it profits him that takes it only; and that it ought not to be offered for the
living and dead, for Sins, Punishments, Satisfactions, and other Necessities,
let him be Accursed.

Can. 4.
If any one shall say, That by the Sacrifice of the Mass, there is Blasphemy
offered to the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross; or that thereby any thing is
derogated from him, let him be accursed.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The offering of Christ as a
Propitiation, was but once.

1. In the Mass there is a Propitiatory Sacrifice offered daily.

2. To say, that the Priest offers for the living and the dead in the Mass, is
blasphemous Fables, and dangerous Deceits.

2. Whoever denies that Christ is offered for the living and dead, or shall say
Christ and his Sacrifice is thereby blasphemed, is Accursed.



The 32. Article of the Church of England.
Of the Marriage of Priests.
ART. 32.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded by God's Law, either to vow
the estate of single Life, or to abstain from Marriage; therefore it is lawful
also for them, as for all other Christian Men, to Marry at their own
Discretion, as they shall judy the same to serve better to Godliness.

2 d. Part of the Homily of Good Works.
This Pharifascal and Papistical level, of Man's feigned Religion [in
Monastical Vows] which although it were before God most abominable and contrary
to God's Commandments, and Christ's pure Religion, yet it was praised to be a
most Godly Life, and the highest State of Perfection.

The Church of Rome.
1. General Council of Lateran.
Cap. 21.
We do altogether forbid Presbyters, Deacons, and Monks, to have Concubines, or
to contract Matrimony; and according to the Definitions of Sacred Canons, we do
decree that Marriages so contracted be separated, and that the Persons ought to
be brought to Penance.

The 2. General Council of Lateran.
Can. 6.
We do decree, that they who being in the Order of Subdeacon, and above, have
Married Wives, and had Concubines, shall not have an Ecclesiastical Benefice;
for seeing they are the Temple of God, etc. it is a shameful thing that they
should serve Beds and Uncleannesses.

The Council of Trent.
Sess. 24. Can. 6.
If any one shall say, That Matrimony confirmed, not consummated, is not
dissolved by the solemn profession of Religion of either Party, let him be
accursed.

Can. 9.
If any one shall say, That Clerks in Holy Orders, or Regulars, having solemnly
professed Chastity, may contract Matrimony, and that so contracted it is valid,
notwithstanding an Ecclesiastical Law, and Vow, etc. And that all may contract
Matrimony, who perceive they have not the gift of Chastity, though they have
vowed it; let him be accursed.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The Marriage of Priests is
lawful.

1. Priests ought not to Marry; and if they Marry, are to be separated.

2. The Marriage of Priests may serve to godliness.

2. The Marriage of Priests is a defiling the Temple of God.

3. To Vow against Marriage, especially upon the account of Perfection and
Purity, is a feigned Religion, and contrary to God's Commandment.

3. Vows against Marriage do oblige, though the Persons have not the Gift of
Continency.



The 34. Article of the Church of England.
Of the Traditions of the Church.
ART. 34.
It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one of
utterly like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversity of Countries, Times and Men's Manners, so that
nothing be ordained against God's Word.

Every particular or national Church has Authority to ordain, change, and
abolish Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church, ordained only by Man's Authority,
so that all things be done to edifying.

2 d Part of the Sermon of Good Works.
Let us rehearse other kind of Papistical Superstitions, and Abuses, as of
Beads, Lady-Psalters, Rosaries, Purgatory, Masses, Stations, and Jubilees,
feigned Relics, and hallowed Beads, Bread, Water, Candles, etc.

See before Article 6, and 9.

The Council of Trent.
Sess. 4. Decret. de Canon. Script.
The Holy Synod does receive and regard with the like affection of Piety and
Reverence, the Old and New Testament, and also those unwritten Traditions
dictated as it were by word of Mouth by Christ, and preserved by continual
Succession in the Church: Sess. 14. Cap. 1.
The matter and form of Extreme Unction; Mass for the Dead; Sess. 22. Cap. 2.
and 5.
The pronouncing the Mass sometimes with a loud, at other times with a low
Voice; Mystical Benedictions; Lights; Incensings; Garments; and many other such
like things, are from Apostolical Discipline and Tradition.

Can. 9.
If any one shall say, that the Rite of the Roman Church of saying some part of
the Canon of the Mass in a low Voice is to be condemned, let him be accursed.

The Catechism of Trent.
Par. 2. Cap. 7. ff. 14.
The Shaving of the Head like a Crown, is from Apostolical Tradition.

Cap. 4 ff. 81.
None of the Rites in the Mass are useless and vain.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. It is not necessary, that
Ceremonies ordained by Man's Authority be in all places alike, and such may be
changed.

1. Unwritten Traditions are equally to be regarded as Scripture, such are
Lights, Incensings, Shaving the Head, etc. and so to be every where, and always
retained.

2. Lights, and other Ceremonies of the Romish Church are superstitious, and
abuses.

2. None of the Ceremonies used in the Mass, as Lights and Incensings, are
useless and vain.



The 35. Article of the Church of England.
Of Homilies.
ART. 35.
The homilies contain a Godly and wholesome Doctrine, etc.

The Homilies charge the Church of Rome, with Error, Superstition, Idolatry and
Usurpation.



The 36. Article of the Church of England.
Of Consecration of Bishops and Ministers.
ART. 36.
The Book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests
and Deacons, lately set forth in the Time of Edward the Sixth, and confirmed at
the same Time by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to
such Consecration and Divering. And therefore, whosoever are consecrated or
ordered, according to the Rites of that Book, or hereafter shall be consecrated
or ordered according to the same Rites. We decree all such to be rightly,
orderly, and lawfully consecrated and ordered.

The Church of Rome.
Council of Trent.
Sess. 23. Cap. 1.
A Sacrifice and Priesthood, are so conjoined by the Ordinance of God, that both
have existed in every Law.

Catechis. par. 2. cap. 9. ff. 11, 12.
From the very beginning of the Church, there were the Names of the following
Orders, the lesser, viz. Acolythi, Exorcists, Readers, and Door-keepers. The
greater and sacred, viz. the Subdeacon, Deacon, and Priest.

Rhemists Annotations.
On Joh. 10. 1.
Whosoever takes upon him to Preach without lawful sending; to Minister
Sacraments, and is not Canonically ordered of a true Catholic Bishop to be a
Curate of Souls, etc. he is a Thief and a Murderer. So came in all Heretics,
and all that succeed them in Room and Doctrine.

It Is the common Opinion of the Members of the Romish Church of our Nation,
that our Bishops, etc. are none.

Erastus Senior Preface. Anno. 1662.
In the Church of England, there are no Bishops, no Pastors, and so their's is
no true Church.

A Paper in the Vindication of Ordination, etc. Anno 1677.
The Ministers of the Church of England are no Priests, because they want an
essential part, which is to offer Sacrifice, etc.

Of this Mind were Harding, Stapleton, Sanders, Bristow, Champney, etc.
formerly. See Mason's Vindiciae Eccles. Angl.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. Besides Bishops, there are but
two Orders, viz. Priests and Deacons.

1. Besides Bishops, and the four lesser Orders, there were always three, viz.
Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons.

2. Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are rightly, orderly, and
lawfully consecrated and ordered in the Church of England.

2. Such Bishops and Priests as are consecrated and ordered in the Church of
England, are no Bishops nor Priests.



The 37. Article of the Church of England.
Of the Civil Magistrates.
ART. 37.
The Queen's Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does appertain; and is
not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The 3d part, Of the Sermon of Obedience.
The usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome, which he most wrongfully challenges,
as the Successor of St. Peter, is false, feigned and forged.

The Bishop of Rome teaches, That they that are under him, are free from all
Burdens, and Charges of the Commonwealth, and Obedience toward their Prince,
most clearly against Christ's Doctrine, and St. Peter's. He ought therefore
rather to be called Antichrist, and the Successor of the Scribes and Pharisees,
than Christ's Vicar, or St. Peter's Successor.

St. Peter does not say, Submit your selves unto me as the Supreme Head of the
Church, neither says he, submit your selves from time to time to my Successors
in Rome; but says he, submit your selves to the King, the Supreme Head.

The 2d. part of the Sermon of Obedience.
Wicked Rulers have their Power and Authority from God, and therefore its not
lawful for their Subjects to withstand them, although they abuse their Power.

The necessary Doctrine and Erudition for any Christen Man; set forth by Hen.
8. and compiled by Cranmer, etc.
On 5 th Commandment.
Subjects be bound not to withdrawn their Fealty, Truth, Love and Obedience
toward their Prince for any cause whatsoever it be; ne for any cause they may
conspire against his Person, ne do any thing toward the hinderance, or hurt
thereof, nor of his Estate.

3d Part of the Sermon against wilful Rebellion.
The speedy overthrow of all Rebels of what Number, State, or Condition soever
they were, or what Color, or Cause soever they pretended, is and ever has
been such, that God thereby does show that he allows neither the Dignity of
any Person, nor the Multitude of any People, nor the Weight of any Cause as
sufficient for the which the Subjects may move Rebellion against their Princes.

See the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.

The Church of Rome.
. 1. Of the Authority claimed by the Church of Rome.
1. The Roman Church is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches. So the 4th
General Council of Lateran, Can. 2. The Council of Trent, Sess. 7. Can. 3. etc.
This is made an Article of Faith in the Creed of Pope Pius the 4th.

2. The Roman Bishop is the Vicar of God and Christ, the Successor of St.
Peter, and has the Supreme Pastorship over the Universal Church. So the
Council of Trent, Sess. 6. de reform. cap. 1. Sess. 14. cap. 7. etc. This is
also an Article of Faith in the aforesaid Creed.

. 2. Of the Exercise of this Authority.
1. The Church of Rome does take upon her to command Sovereign Princes. So it is
the Phrase of their Councils; We do enjoin Princes, we do peremptorily require
Kings, etc. So the 4th General Council of Later. cap. 67, 68. The 5th General
Council of Later. de pragmat. Sanct. The Council of Trent.

2. She does overrule what Sovereign Princes have commanded. So the Council of
Constance: Sess. 19.
Notwithstanding the safe Conducts granted by Emperors and Kings, etc. Yet,
Heretical Wickedness may be enquired after, by a competent Judge; and the
Persons guilty, be punished; although they should come to the place of Judgment
considing in the safe Conduct, and otherwise would not have come.

3. The Church of Rome has excommunicated such Sovereign Princes as have not
submitted to what she has commanded; and has deposed such as have been thus
excommunicated and continued refractory; and absolved their Subjects from
Allegiance to them when deposed. So

The 3 d. General Council of Lateran.
Cap. 27.
We do forbid under an Anathema, That any one presume to keep or maintain
Heretics in their Houses or Land, or to exercise commerce with them. And if
they shall dye in this Sin, there shall no Oblation be made for them.

And let Subjects know, that they are released from all Debt of Fealty and
Homage, and all Obedience.

The 4 th General Council of Lateran.
Can. 3. de Haereticis.
Let secular Powers, whatsoever Offices they execute, be admonished, persuaded,
and if it be necessary, compelled by Ecclesiastical Censure, That as they
desire to be reputed and accounted Faithful, so they would publicly take an
Oath for the defense of the Faith, that they would endeavor in good Faith,
according to their power to destroy [exterminate] all Heretics marked by the
Church, out of the Lands of their Jurisdiction. But if the Temporal Lord being
required and admonished, shall neglect to purge his Land from this Heretical
Filthiness, he shall be Excommunicated by his Metropolitan, and the other
Bishops of the Province. And if he shall refuse to give satisfaction within a
Year, let it be signified to the Pope, that he may forthwith denounce his
Vassals absolved from their Allegiance, and expose his Land to be possessed by
Catholics; who, having destroyed the Heretics, may possess it without
contradiction, and preserve it in the purity of the Faith, saving the Right of
the Principal Lord, whilst that he does make no hindrance to it. Nevertheless
the same Law is to be observed toward them who have No principal Lords.

The General Council of Lions. Ann. 1245.
Sess. 3.
In this, Pope Innocent the 4th deprived the Emperor Frederick the 2d, after
this manner: We, after diligent deliberation had with the Sacred Council, do
declare and denounce, That he is deprived of all Honor and Dignity, and by our
Sentence do deprive him; and do for ever absolve them from their Oath, who have
sworn Allegiance to him; firmly forbidding by our Apostolical Authority, that
any one from henceforward, obey him as Emperor or King, etc. And let those to
whom the Election belongs, freely choose a Successor in that Empire.

The Council of Constance.
Sess. 17.
It is decreed, That all that should hinder the Emperor Sigismund from meeting
the King of Arragon, of what Quality soever, though King, Duke, etc. they be
Excommunicated, and deprived of all their Secular Honor and Dignity.

Sess. ult.
And in the Bull of Pope Martin the 5th, read and approved in that Council, All
Professors of the Christian and Catholic Faith, the Emperor, Kings, Dukes,
etc. are required to expel all Heretics out of their Kingdoms, and Provinces,
according to the Canon, Sicut ait, etc. That is, the abovesaid Canon of the 3d
Lateran Council.

The Council of Trent.
Decret. de Reform. Cap. 12.
The Emperors, Kings, Dukes, etc. and all Temporal Lords of what Title soever,
who shall grant a place for Duelling among Christians within their Lands,
should for that Cause be deprived of the Dominion of the City, Castle, or Place
in which they permitted the Duel to be.

4. The Church of Rome does exempt the Clergy from Temporal Jurisdiction. So

The 3 d General Lateran Council.
Cap. 14.
Because some Laics do compel Ecclesiastical Persons, and also Bishops
themselves, to appear before their Judgment Seat, We do therefore decree, that
such be separated from the Communion of the Faithful, who shall presume from
henceforward so to do.

The 4 th General Council of Lateran.
Can. 43.
Some Laics do too much usurp upon Divine Right, when they do compel
Ecclesiastical Persons, holding nothing Temporal from them, to take an Oath of
Allegiance to them. But because, according to the Apostle, the Servant does
stand or fall to his own Master, We do forbid by the Authority of the Sacred
Council, That such Clerks be compelled to take this kind of Oath to Secular
Persons.

Sess. 9. Sess. 25. De Reform. Cap. 20.
See further the Bull of Pope Leo the 10 th, read in the 5 th General Council of
Lateran. And the Council of Trent, which does ratify all Canons, made in their
favor.

The Opposition.
The Church of England. The Church of Rome. 1. The King has chief power.

1. The Pope has Power over Kings, to Excommunicate, Depose, etc.

2. The King has power over all persons.

2. Ecclesiastical persons are exempted from Secular Jurisdiction.

3. The Bishop of Rome has no power in the Kings Dominions: And the power he
challenges is usurpation.

3. The Bishop of Rome is the Universal Pastor.

4. The King is not to be resisted.

4. The Pope can give power to resist Sovereign Princes, and can absolve
Subjects from their Allegiance.



As the Opposition in this matter is evident betwixt Church and Church; so we
look upon the one to be no less the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, than the
other is the Doctrine of the Church of England.

For 1. It Is notoriously manifest, That the Church of Rome has both owned such
Principles, and proceeded according to those Principles in Excommunicating and
Deposing Kings, in limiting their Jurisdiction, and Absolving Subjects from
their Allegiance.

2. It is manifest, That the several branches of Authority forerecited, and
claimed by that Church, are grounded upon the Canons of what they call General
Councils. And that all in the Communion of that Church are bound to own and
receive these Principles, is evident, since they are decreed by the same
Councils, and after the same manner as the Doctrine of Transubstantiation it
self; and so are equally to be received with it, by all the Members of that
Church.

Thus far I have traced the Disagreement between the Church of England and
Rome, according to the order observed in the 39 Articles; and I might proceed
to show the Opposition between them in many other points; such as the
sufficiency of Attrition with Absolution; the necessity of Auricular
Confession; the Adoration of the Cross; the Images made of God and the Trinity;
the Guardianship ascribed to Angels and Saints over Places, Professions, etc.
The Pilgrimages to Images and Relics; the Miracles pretended to be wrought by
them; The Religious states of Life, and their Vows of Poverty and Obedience;
Their particular Ceremonies in the Mass and Baptism, their Limbus's, etc. But
this will be too tedious, and indeed somewhat unnecessary, considering how
evident it has been already made, not to say with some clearness demonstrated,
that there is an irreconcilable difference between the two Churches, about
those points (to use our Authors words) Agreement, Preface.
wherein the very life of Popery consists, and the whole System of that
Religion is founded. And as now I may leave it to his skill to try, whether he
can with a Dictum factum, patch up a Cassandrian Peace, presently between them:
So I shall leave it to the Readers Judgment, even those he calls the unwary
Readers of Books, whether we have left us nothing but the name and shadow of a
Protestant Church of England, as he affirms; Ibid.
or whether the Doctrine of the Protestants be any where to be found, if not in
the Church of England. And for this purpose, I shall present the Reader with
the sum of what has been said upon this Argument.

A brief Scheme of the Difference betwixt the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome, as set forth in the foregoing Treatise.
Sufficiency of Scripture.
The Church of England teaches.
THe Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be received as an Article of Faith, or be
thought requisite or necessary to Salvation, p. 15.

The Church of Rome holds.
THe Holy Scripture does not contain all saving Truth; but there are certain
Traditions not written, which the Church is to have recourse to for it, as well
as the written Books. And such Traditions are to be received, and regarded with
the like Piety and Reverence, as the Books of the Old and New Testament.

Canonical Books.
The Church of England teaches.
No Books are to be received as Canonical, but Genesis, etc. that is, the 39
Books of the Old Testament, and the New. And, as for the 13 Books, commonly
called Apocrypha, tho the Church does read them for Example of Life, and
Instruction of Manners; yet She does not apply them to establish any Doctrine.

The Church of Rome holds.
The Books commonly called Apocrypha, viz. Tobias, etc. are as Canonical, and
as truly the Word of God, as the five Books of Moses, etc. And whosoever does
not so receive them, is accursed.

Scripture in a known Tongue.
The Church of England teaches.
There is in Scripture, whatsoever is meet for all ages and sorts of Men; and
so the Books of it ought to be much in their Hands, Eyes and Hearts. And none
are Enemies to the reading of it, but such as are ignorant or ungodly, that
would wish the People still to continue in blindness and ignorance of God, p.
15.

The Church of Rome holds.
If the Scripture be permitted to be read every where in the Vulgar Tongue,
more prejudice than benefit does redound from it. And therefore, it is fit that
the People be deprived altogether of it, nor so much as suffered to have
Summaries, or Historical Abridgments of it.

Church Authority.
The Church of England teaches.
The Church, tho a Witness and Keeper of the Holy Writ, yet ought not to decree
any thing against the same, nor to enforce any thing besides the same to be
believed for necessity of Salvation, p. 37.

The Church of Rome holds.
It belongs to the Church of Rome to judge of the Sense of the Scripture; and
it is in her Power to forbid receiving the Sacrament in both kinds, tho Christ
so instituted and delivered it.

The Fallibility of the Church.
The Church of England teaches.
As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria and Antioch, have erred: So also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their Living, and manner of Ceremonies,
but also in matters of Faith: So that their claim of Infallibility is but a
vain brag, and nothing else, p. 31, 35.

The Church of Rome holds.
The Church of Rome cannot err, being taught by the Holy Spirit, suggesting all
Truth from day to day.

General Councils.
The Church of England teaches.
General Councils may not be gathered together, without the Commandment and
will of Princes: And when gathered, may err, and sometimes have erred in things
pertaining to God, p. 39.

The Church of Rome holds.
It belongs to the Pope to call and direct General Councils; and being so
gathered, they have ever the assistance of Gods Spirit, and so cannot err.

Christ the only Mediator.
The Church of England teaches.
Christ is the only Mediator between God and Man, being both God and Man, in
whom alone the Conditions requisite in an object of Worship, are to be found;
whence it follows, that we must call neither upon Angel nor Saint, but solely
upon him, as our Mediator: And to make them Intercessors to God, is after the
Gentiles Idolatrous usage, p. 19, 41, 46.

The Church of Rome holds.
There are other Mediators of Intercession in Heaven besides Christ, such as
Angels and Saints, and more especially the Virgin Mary, who is the Mother of
Mercy, and Advocatress of the Faithful; and it is good and profitable to invoke
them, and to have recourse to their prayers, aid and help. And those that deny
they are to be invocated, or affirm the Invocation of them is Idolatry, are
accursed.

Original Sin.
The Church of England teaches.
Original Sin is the Corruption of the nature of every man, naturally engendered
of the offspring of Adam: And all offend in many things, Christ only excepted,
p. 20, 30.

The Church of Rome holds.
The blessed Virgin is not comprehended in the decree of Original Sin, and
never sinned so much as Venially, in all her Life.

Images.
The Church of England teaches.
Image Worship was abhorred in the Primitive Church, as abominable, and
contrary to all true Christian Religion: And to fall down before Images, etc.
is to give that honor to Stocks and Stones, which the Saints themselves
refused when alive, p. 44.

The Church of Rome holds.
The Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, are to have due
honor given to them, by kissing them, uncovering the head, falling down before
them, lighting up Candles to them, etc. by which Christ is adored, and the
Saints are venerated.

Relics.
The Church of England teaches.
To worship and honor the Relics of Saints, is to pass the folly and
wickedness of the Gentiles. The Romish Doctrine concerning Worshipping and
Adoration of Images and Relics is a fond thing, grounded upon no warranty of
Scripture, but rather repugnant to it, p. 44.

The Church of Rome holds.
The Relics of the Saints are to be venerated. And all that hold the contrary,
are accursed.

Purgatory.
The Church of England teaches.
There are two places only in the other World, the one proper to the elect and
the blessed of God; the other to the reprobate. And the souls of men passing
out of the body, go to Heaven or Hell. And the Romish Doctrine concerning
Purgatory is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no Warranty of
Scripture, but rather repugnant to it, p. 41.

The Church of Rome holds.
There is a Purgatory or place of Torment in which the Souls of good Persons,
not sufficiently purged, have their Sins expiated, and they thereby are
prepared for the Kingdom of Heaven. And the Souls, there detained, are helped
by the Masses, Prayers, Alms, and other good Works of the Living. And if any
one shall say there is not such a place, or that there remains no guilt to be
expiated by penitent Persons in Purgatory, or that those that are there are not
helped by Masses, etc. he is accursed.

Merits.
The Church of England teaches.
The good works are pleasing unto God, yet to put any confidence in them as by
merit, and deserving of them to purchase to our selves or others remission of
Sin, and everlasting Life, is mere Blasphemy, and great derogation to the
bloodshedding of our Savior Jesus Christ, p. 24, 25.

The Church of Rome holds.
Justified Persons truly deserve eternal Life, and the good Works of such are
truly and properly Meritorious, and are fully worthy of Eternal Life: And
whosoever thinks otherwise, is Accursed.

Supererogation.
The Church of England teaches.
Works of Supererogation, or such as are over and above God's Commandment,
cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety; and it is an ungodly practice to
make sale of them, and to persuade the people that thereby the Sins of other
men might have satisfaction made for (...), p. 27, 28.

The Church of Rome holds.
There are Works of Supererogation, which are done more than Precept; and a
Person endued with Divine Grace may satisfy for another, and pay in the name
of another what is due to God; and the value of such Works is to be so disposed
of for that purpose by such as Christ has made dispensers of his Treasures.

Indulgences.
The Church of England teaches.
The Romish Doctrine concerning Pardons is a fond thing, vainly invented, and
grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but is rather repugnant to it, p. 41,
42.

The Church of Rome holds.
The Church has a power from Christ to pardon Offenders, and whatever Debts,
here or hereafter in Purgatory, a man owes to God for the satisfaction of his
Sins, may be remitted by the Indulgence of the Church; and whosoever says that
the Church has no such Power, or that such Indulgences are unprofitable, is
Accursed.

Prayers in a known Tongue.
The Church of England teaches.
It Is a thing plainly repugnant to the word of God, and the Custom of the
Primitive Church, to have public Prayers in the Church, or to minister the
Sacraments in a Tongue not understood of the People, p. 49.

The Church of Rome holds.
It Is fittest every where to have the Mass Celebrated in Latin, or a Tongue not
understood by the People; and it is for that reason so enjoined. And whosoever
says it ought to be otherwise, is Accursed.

Sacraments.
The Church of England teaches.
There are only Two Sacraments Ordained of Christ, viz. Baptism; and the Supper
of the Lord; and the other Five commonly called Sacraments in the Church of
Rome, are not Sacraments, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt
following of the Apostles (as Extreme Unction, etc.) partly are states of life
allowed of in Scripture (as Matrimony) but have not the like nature of
Sacraments with the other, p. 50.

The Church of Rome holds.
The Sacraments instituted by Christ, are no fewer than seven, viz. Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony.
And whosoever shall say, that they are more or fewer than seven, or that any of
these seven is not truly and properly a Sacrament, is accursed.

Opus Operatum.
The Church of England teaches.
The Sacraments have a wholesome effect or Operation in such only as worthily
receive them, p. 50.

The Church of Rome holds.
The Sacraments do confer Grace, ex opere operato, by the Work done; and if any
say otherwise, they are accursed.

Solitary Masses.
The Church of England teaches.
There is to be no Celebration of the Lord's Supper, except there be a
convenient number to communicate with the Priest, ibid.

The Church of Rome holds.
Those Masses are to be approved and commended, where the Priest communicates
alone: And if any one shall say such are unlawful, and to be abrogated, he is
accursed.

Transubstantiation.
The Church of England teaches.
Transubstantiation, or the change of the substance of the Bread and Wine into
the very substance of the Body and Blood of Christ, is repugnant to the
Scripture, and overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, p. 52.

The Sacramental Bread and Wine remain in their very natural substances: And
the natural Body and Blood of Christ are in Heaven, and not here.

The Church of Rome holds.
There is a Transubstantiation, or a Conversion of the whole Substance of the
Bread into the Body, and of the whole Substance of the Wine into the Blood of
Christ; and whosoever denies it, is accursed.

The Species only of Bread and Wine remain in the Eucharist; and the Body and
Blood of Christ, together with his Soul and Divinity, and so whole Christ, are
contained therein. And whosoever denies it, is accursed.

The Body of Christ.
The Church of England teaches
The wicked and such as be void of a lively Faith, in no wise partake of
Christ, p. 55.

And the Body of Christ is taken and eaten only after an Heavenly and Spiritual
manner: And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten, is
Faith, page 52.

The Church of Rome holds.
Ill men receive the Body and Blood of Christ, be they Infidels, or Ill-livers.

Christ is not only eaten Spiritually; and whosoever shall so affirm, is
Accursed.

Sacrament in both kinds.
The Church of England teaches.
The Cup is not to be denied to the Lay People: For both the parts of the
Sacrament ought by Christ's Ordinance to be ministered to all, p. 55, 56.

The Church of Rome holds.
Though Christ instituted the Sacrament in both kinds, yet it is to be
administered in one: And whosoever shall say, That it ought by God's command to
be received in both; or that the Church has not for just Reasons required it
to be in one kind, etc. he is Accursed.

Adoration of the Host.
The Church of England teaches.
The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was not by Christ's Ordinance reserved,
carried about, lifted up and worshipped: And no Adoration ought to be done
thereunto, p. 52.

The Church of Rome holds.
Christ is to be worshipped in the Eucharist with Divine worship, and to be
solemnly carried about, and to be showed to the People, that he may be
worshipped; and whosoever does deny this, or says, That the worshippers are
Idolaters, is Accursed.

The Sacrifice of the Mass.
The Church of England teaches.
The Sacrifice of the Mass, in which its commonly said the Priest offers for
the Quick and Dead, to have remission of Pain and Guilt, are blasphemous
Fables, and dangerous Deceits, p. 57.

The Church of Rome holds.
In the Sacrifice performed in the Mass, the self-same Christ is contained and
unbloodily offered, that offered himself on the Cross; and this Sacrifice is
truly Propitiatory, and is rightly offered for the sins, punishments, and
satisfactions of the Living and Dead. And if any one shall deny this, or say
it is Blasphemy, he is Accursed.

Traditions and Ceremonies.
The Church of England teaches
The burden of Ceremonies in the Romish Church is intolerable for their excess
and multitude; and by reason of their obscurity they more confound than set
forth Christ's benefit to us, and deface the plain, simple, and sincere Religion
of Christ; and as they are vain in themselves, so are abused to gross
superstition, p. 33, 61.

The Church of Rome holds.
The Ceremonies used in the Mass, etc. are of Apostolical Tradition and
Institution, and which serve for the Majesty of so great a Sacrifice, and are
for the exciting of the Faithful. And tho they are many, yet none of them is to
be esteemed needless and vain; and if any one shall say that they are rather
inticements to impiety than helps to Piety, he is accursed.

Of the Consecration of Bishops, etc.
The Church of England teaches.
There are no other Orders in the Church than Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

And these are rightly consecrated and ordered in the Church of England, p. 63.

The Church of Rome holds.
There are Seven Orders in the Church, Bishops, Priests, Deacons Acolythi,
Exorcists, Readers, the Door-keepers, Subdeacon, Deacon and Priest.

Those consecrated and ordained out of the Church of Rome are no Bishops or
Pastors, but thieves and murderers, p. 64.

Priests Marriage.
The Church of England teaches.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons may lawfully marry, and are not commanded by
Gods Law, either to vow the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage:
and therefore the Monastical Vow of single life, accounted the highest state of
perfection, is the leven of man's feigned Religion, and abominable to God, p. 59.

The Church of Rome holds.
It is not lawful for Bishops, Priests, and Deacons to Marry; and if married,
they are to be separated, and to be brought to Penance; and if any one shall
say, that such as have professed Chastity may contract Matrimony, or that such
Matrimony is valid, because they have not the gift of Chastity, he is Accursed.

The Supremacy.
The Church of England teaches
The King in all his Realms has Supreme power in all Causes whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil. And the Bishop of Rome has therein no Jurisdiction,
and can release none from subjection to their Prince. For God allows neither
the dignity of any person, nor the multitude of any people, nor the weight of
any cause as sufficient for the which Subjects may Rebel, p. 65.

The Power the Bishop of Rome challenges or Successor of St. Peter, is false
and feigned.

The Church of Rome holds
The Pope is the Vicar of Christ, Successor of St. Peter, and the supreme
Pastor over all the World. He may command Sovereign Princes, overruled what
they command, Excommunicate and Depose them, if they contradict his Commands;
and absolve their Subjects from Allegiance, and exempt the Clergy from their
Jurisdiction, p. 67, 70.

Lastly, The Church of Rome does hold all things delivered, defined and
declared by the sacred Canons, and General Councils, and especially that of
Trent, etc. And that this is the true Catholic Faith, out of which none can be
saved, [ Creed of Pius IVth.]

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by S.
Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3. Verse. 15. 4 to.

The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scripture Asserted. 4 to.

A Short Summary of the principal Controversies between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome; being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [ Protestancy destitute of Scripture
Proofs] 4 to.

Two Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

An Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy of the Church of England concerning one Special Branch of the King's
Prerogative, viz. In dispensing with the Penal Laws] 4 to.

The Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined and
confuted. 4 to.

Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper of which she died.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome.

A PRIVATE PRAYER to be used in Difficult Times.

A True Account of a Conference held about Religion at London, Sept. 29. 1687.
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Tho. Tennison, D. D. as also of that which led
to it, and followed after it. 4 to.

The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit, Schoolmaster in the Savoy, together with some
Account of his Discourse with Mr. Meredith.

A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer Side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the
surest Way to Heaven. 4 to.

Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, wherein is showed, that the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion.

A Discourse concerning the Pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction, with an
Account of the occasions and beginnings of it in the Western Church. In three
Parts; With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.


