Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Sab. 30. Jun. 1662. Geo: Stradling, S. Th. P. Rev. in Christo Patri
Dno GILBERT, Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.

TRUTH VINDICATED, AGAINST Sacrilege, Atheism, and Profaneness, And likewise
against the Common Invaders OF THE RIGHTS of KINGS, AND DEMONSTRATING THE
VANITY of MAN in General.

By GRYFFITH WILLIAMS now Lord Bishop of OSSORY.

LONDON, Printed for Randall Tailor at the Three Crowns in Little-Britain, and
in Westminster Hall, M.DC.LXVI.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
I Do most humbly beseech your Majesty, to give leave unto your Father's most
faithful servant, and Your most Loyal Subject, to tell you, of what you cannot
choose but know, and what I assure thy self you do most thankfully remember,
that, besides the many-many great blessings, which the great and good God has
often showed unto your Majesty; He has conferred and fastened two
Extraordinary signal Favors upon you,

1. To preserve your life, after Worster-fight, from those Vulturs that did so
greedily thirst after your blood.

2. To render unto Caesar what was Caesar's, that is, by taking away from those
many potent and tenacious Tyrants, and Usurpers, what they unjustly held, and
restoring your Kingdoms, and setting your Crown upon your Majesty's head;
where, our daily prayers are, that it may long and long flourish.

And, as the Prophet David, that had received the like blessings, and favors
from God, says, Quid retribuam Domino? So let me, as the Ambassador of God,
most humbly supplicate your Majesty, To render unto God what is God's. And as
your Majesty, beyond example, to the exceeding comfort of us all, has most
graciously and Religiously, like the Son of your most pious, and now most
glorious, Father, so freely and so bountifully rendered the Revenues of Jesus
Christ, vested in your Majesty, to his Church; So, by your Royal Edicts, to do
what in you lies, to cause all others to do the like; that is, To render unto
God what is Gods; which is but the duty of all, and is now neglected almost of
all; for, besides the other things, which we owe, and render not to God, Manus
auferendi, the Sacrilegious hands, have laid fast hold upon Gods right: And not
only so, but the great Leviathan makes it his pastime, to cause his whelps, to
swallow up whole Churches, and, as it were Lege agraria, to take away the
Lands, and Houses of the Lord into their possessions: and to make the poor
Levite, that serves at Gods Altar, to lie in the streets, or to lodge in an
Irish Cabin; like the Israelites in the Wilderness, when they dwelt in booths,
covered over with a few boughs.

I know, your Majesty knows, what the Prophet says of many, that speak
friendly unto their neighbors, but imagine mischief in their hearts; so, many
Gentlemen, Soldiers, and others will speak very fair, and say to your Majesty,
and to us; God forbid, that they should wrong the Church of God, or take any
thing from the Church: and yet the mischief that they will do, if they may have
their minds, is more than I can divine; For their Covetousness and greedy
desire of the Ecclesiastical Revenues, projecteth no less, then that this your
Kingdom of Ireland should be full of darkness, and that the poor people should
cry for bread, even the Bread of Life, and there should be none, as now we have
but few, or few able, to give it them; when they, that should give it them,
have scarce bread enough to put into their own mouths; and less shall have, if
the nefarious Violators of Holy things shall have the least countenance from
your Majesty to effect their Sacrilegious wills.

But to let your Majesty see how earnestly, and eagerly, your
Commissioned-Officers in 49. do strive to take away the Houses and Lands of the
Church and Prebends, I thought good to insert their Letters in this place.

To our very good Friends the Commissioners, appointed for Setting the
forfeited-Houses etc. in the City of KILKENNY.
Gentlemen,
YOurs of the 16th. Instant we have Received, acquainting us that the
Corporations in your Commission mentioned, do persist to Claim more then their
right. And propounding that (for better distinguishing our Interest therein)
you may be by us Empowered to set the same to such a number of your selves, as
you shall think fittest, in order to the due Trial, and Ascertaining our said
Interest, and as are best able to manage that Affair; As also signifying, that
the Clergy in the said Corporations, do equally refuse and disappear; and
therefore desiring our Resolves, and like Order concerning both: which having
duly considered; We do hereby acquaint you, that it is our Unanimous Resolve
and Direction, both for the Corporation and Clergy-part, wherein you are
Concerned; That you forthwith give notice to the Inhabitants, and Tenants
respectively; That if they will not Treat with you, and take out Leases of
their several Holdings (at moderate Rents to be by you imposed) within two
days after such your notice, that then you have (And we do hereby give, and
grant unto you, or such a fitting number of you, as shall be amongst your
selves agreed upon) full power to become Tenants to such Holdings, and to enter
upon, and possess the same, or otherwise dispose thereof agreeable to your
Instructions, and as may be for our best advantage; And as to the Clergy-part
refusing, or opposing as aforesaid, you are to Set and Let all Fee-farms, And
we must believe them what Houses were set in Fee-farm.
by the Church formerly granted of any the premises, or to Impose a
Considerable Rent as you see fittest, reserving to the Church the chief Rents,
payable thereout respectively; And of the Rents by you reserved, and other
particulars relating to the premises, you are to give an exact and speedy
Account unto

Your very loving Friends Hen. Tichburn. Joh. Stephens. Hans. Hamilton. Ran.
Clayton. Alex. Piggot.

According to the purport of the above Letter; We do hereby give notice unto
all persons Concerned, that Friday next being the 30th. of this Instant May, We
do intend to set, and dispose of, all such Houses, etc. Which Letter, we have
thought fit to publish, that so none might plead Ignorance,

Dated the 26th. of May. 1662. Tho. Evans. Rob. Lloyd. Ol. Wheeler. Will.
Hamilton. Hen. Brenn.





Whereby, all men may see how the Church, and poor Bishop of Ossory, do seem to
stand in the hands of Scyron and Procrustes: The Soldiers of the Usurpers,
that fought against their King, and do still detain the Church-land from the
Bishop; And now (like that in the Canticles, wounded in the house of our
friends.) the Soldiers in 49. that were most faithful unto your Majesty, do
still seek to take away our Houses from the Church. And if we lose both House
and Land, we may go to live in the Church, and lie with the Levite in the
Streets.

But, as your Majesty has been most Gracious to the Bishops, and to all the
Clergy so bountiful, as to grant them almost as much as we could desire; so
our hope and humble Request is, that you will not suffer these men to take from
us, so much as they desire.

For the preventing of which desire of theirs, if it may be; I have endeavored
to arm my self with a resolution, neither to fear nor flatter any man; (...):
for they that fear the smoke, may fall into the fire, Et qui timet pruinam,
opprimetur a nive; that is, as S. Gregory moralizeth it, He that fears the
frost of man's anger, which he may tread under his feet, may be overwhelmed with
the hail and snow of God's wrath, which shall fall upon his head, so that he
can not escape it: And I have studied not to prepare sweet and savory meat unto
my Readers, but salubria medicamenta, those medicines, that shall be most
wholesome for their Souls. And because the ears of all Church-robbers, are like
the ears of the deaf Adder, that will not be charmed, and the walls of this sin
of Sacrilege are like the walls of Jericho, that cannot be tumbled down,
without the shrill sound of Trumpets and Rams horns; I have sharpened my Pen,
and, in the bitterness of my soul, for the havoc that I see made of the
Patrimony of God's Church, I have endeavored to speak, not in the mild voice
of El^ to his sons; but with the rough speeches of Joseph unto his brethren,
that had slept so many years in their sins, as our people have done in their
Sacrilege; and yet think it to be no sin.

And I doubt not, but that this my Discourse will prove as the waters of gall,
and as bitter as wormwood unto those men's stomachs, that are so greedy, as we
see men are, to get away the lands and possessions of the Church, and my self
to be maligned and envyed to the full; But I assure them, Non flocci facio, I
weigh it not a rush; for I have hardened my face like an Adamant, and as the
Lord says to Ezechiel, Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, I
will speak what I conceive to be truth; and nothing but what my Conscience
tells me is truth. And if in any thing I shall mistake, it is not amor erroris,
the love of error, or the hatred of any of those Sacrilegious persons that rob
the Church; but it is error amoris, the error of my love to the Church of
Christ, and unfaigned desire, to promote the service of God, and the good of
the poor and honest Irish of this Kingdom; and so if I have offended, I shall
humbly crave your Majesty's pardon, and most willingly submit my self to the
censure of the Church; and with my morning, evening, and noon-daies prayers for
your Majesty's long-life, and much happiness, I rest.

Your Majesty's most humble, devoted, and most faithful Loyal Subject,
Gryffith Ossory.

To all the COMMISSIONED OFFICERS of the KINGS ARMY, in the year 1649.
Noble and Worthy Gentlemen,
WHose true faithfulness to your King, and great Valor in the Wars undertaken
to defend the best King on Earth, And to say the truth, I blame not all the
Soldiers, and Commissioned Officers, when I found very many of them very
honest, and very religious men; and some of them have told me, they would not
meddle and wished that the rest of the Soldiers would not meddle, with the
lands or houses of the Church.
and to preserve his undubitable Right unsnatched from him, by wicked Rebels;
does undoubtedly merit, in the judgment of all wise and honest men, no small
Reward, far more than the reach of my understanding can express. Yet, ye must
give me leave to tell you, That I should be heartily sorry, that any man could
justly say, That your great Deserts were any ways stained with the tincture of
Sacrilege; which, I assure my self, you would never permit, if you conceived
any thing that you do, to have the least affinity with that ugly Bastard-Brat.

Therefore I have undertaken, in the sincerity of my Conscience, and according
to the best and uttermost of my knowledge, without the least ill thought of any
of you all, or the least covetous desire, to take any thing from you, that is
inoffensively your due: but to discharge the duty, that I owe to God, and his
Church, to compose this subsequent Treatise, concerning Sacrilege, and to
show, how horrible and how odious a sin it is in the sight of God; how
derogatory and prejudicial it is to the Honor and Service of Jesus Christ; and
how dangerous, and how it damnifieth those that commit it; the same being a
Canker, that will eat, and consume, all that they have, before many Generations
pass away; a sword, that will cut down their posterity from off the earth, and
a sin that obliges them to eternal damnation; without the great mercy of God
to accept their great and unfeigned repentance for the same. And what you
imagine I do herein against you, I do assure you, if you will believe me, it is
not so much to get either lands or houses from you, as to hinder you, as I
conceive, so deeply to wound your own selves: For, Better is a little that is
duly gotten, without blame, and brings a blessing with it; than a great deal,
that is unjustly obtained, with a curse at the heels of it. But you will say,
That you do nothing but what you justly may do by the Laws of our Land, and
what others do, and have done before you. And truly I do think so too: But I
have fully answered this Allegation, and, as I suppose, whatsoever else can be
said, in this Treatise; And I ask of you, Whether you conceive, that Humane
Laws, and Acts of Parliament, made by powerful Commands, and either through
fear or error; can make that which is against the Will, and contrary to the
Law of God, to be no sin? or free the sinner from God's wrath? Or, do you
think, that I stand against so many well-deserving Gentlemen, of such means and
friends, and power, as you are, only for covetousness, to gain the Rent of a
few houses; and no longer, than the remainder of a poor old man's life? Surely,
not any one, that had but the least inch of worldly wisdom, would do so: For,
besides my pains and labor, I have spent already, and shall spend yet, before
the Church shall lose them, perhaps ten times more than my span-long life shall
gain by them: And what of that? I have done my best, when I have lost them, Et
liberavi animam meam, and shall leave to God Causam suam, Let him arise and
defend his own Cause; but let men take heed, how they strive against God, or
seek to obstruct his Service, and cause the diminution of his Worship: which, I
hope, your Piety will never suffer any one of you to do. And I shall pray for
you all, and assuredly remain,

Your affectionate friend, and servant, Gryffith Ossory.

THE CONTENTS of the Chapters.
Chap. I. AN Introduction, showing the occasion of this Treatise, and what the
Author does therein. Page 1. Chap. II. Of Sacrilege, what it is; how manifold
it is; and how it has been always punished, and never escaped the Hand of the
Divine Vengeance. p. 4. Chap. III. The diverse sorts and kinds of Sacrilegious
persons: And first, of those that do it under color of Law, and upon the
pretense of Reformation, whereby they suppose their Sacrilege to be no
Sacrilege at all, p. 15. Chap. IV. Of two sorts of Sacrilegious persons, that
rob the Church of Christ, without any color or pretense of Law; but indeed
contrary to all Law. p. 21. Chap. V. The words of King David, in the 2 Samuel
7.1, 2. and their divisions; When they were spoken; And how, or in what sense
Sitting and Standing are commonly taken in the Scriptures: And of the two
Persons that are here conferring together. p. 27. Chap. VI. What the Rest, and
peaceable times of King David wrought. The Prince's authority in causes
Ecclesiastical; and how they should be zealous to see that God should be justly
and religiously served. p. 31. Chap. VII. The Objections of the Divines of
Lovain, and other Jesuits, against the former Doctrine, of the Prince his
Authority over the Bishops and Priests, in Causes Ecclesiastical, answered; And
the foresaid truth sufficiently proved, by the clear testimony of the Fathers
and Councils, and diverse of the Popes and Papists themselves. p. 37. Chap.
VIII. That it is the Office and Duty of Kings and Princes, though not to
execute the Function, and to do the Office of the Bishops and Priests; yet, to
have a special care of Religion, and the true Worship of God, and to cause both
the Priests and Bishops, and all others, to discharge the duties of God's
Service. And how the good and godly Emperors and Kings, have formerly done the
same from time to time. p. 41. Chap. IX. Of the ^^iefest Parts and Duties of
Kings and Princes, which they are to discharge for the maintenance of Gods
Service, and the True Religion; and the necessity of Cathedral-Churches and
Chapels, for the people of God to meet in, for the Worship and Service of God.
p. 46. Chap. X. The Answer to the Two Objections that the Fanatick-Sectaries do
make. 1. Against the necessity. And 2ly against the Sanctity, or Holiness of
our Material Churches, which in derision, and contemptuously, they call
Steeple Houses. p. 53. Chap. XI. The Answer to another Objection, that our
Fanatick-Sectaries do make against the Beauty, and Glorious Adorning of our
Churches; which we say should be done with such decent Ornaments, and
Implements, as are befitting the House and Service of God. The Reasons why we
should Honor God with our goods: and how liberal, and bountiful both the
Fathers of the Old Testament, and the Christians of the New Testament, were to
the Church of God. p. 58. Chap. XII. The Answer to another Objection, that our
brainsick Sectaries do make for the utter overthrow of our Cathedrals and
Churches, as being so fowly stained and profaned with Popish Superstitions; and
therefore being no better than the Temples of Baal, they should rather be quite
demolished, than any ways adorned and beautified. p. 63. Chap. XIII. That it
is a part of the Office and Duty of Pious Kings and Princes, as they are God's
Substitutes, to have a care of his Church, to see, that, when such Cathedrals
and Churches, are built and beautified as is fitting for his Service, there be
Able, Religious, and Honest, painful, and faithful Bishops, placed in those
Cathedrals, that should likewise see Able and Religious Ministers placed in all
Parochial Churches; and all negligent, unworthy, and dissolute men, Bishops or
Priests reproved, corrected and amended; or removed and excluded from their
places and dignities, if they amend not. p. 67. Chap. XIV. Of the maintenance
due to the Bishops and Ministers of God's Church, how large and liberal it
ought to be. p. 75. Chap. XV. That the payment of Tithes unto the Church, is
not a case of Custom, but of Conscience; Whenas the tenth by a Divine right, is
the Teacher's tribute, and the very first part of the wages that God appointed
to be paid unto his Workmen; and therefore, that it is as heinous a sin, and as
foul an offense, to defraud the Ministers of this due; as it is to detain the
meat, or money of the labouring-man, which is one of the four Crying-sins. p.
82. Chap. XVI. The Answer to the choicest and chiefest Objections that the
School of Anabaptists have made, and do urge against the payment of Tithes now,
in the time of the Gospel. p. 91. Chap. XVII. What the ancient Fathers of the
Church, and the Councils (collected of most Learned and Pious Bishops) have
left written concerning Tithes: And of the threefold cause, that detains them
from the Church. p. 98. Chap. XVIII. Of the second part of the Stipend, Wages,
and Maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel; which is, the Oblation,
Donation, or Free-wil-offering of the people, for to uphold, and continue the
true service of God, and to obtain the blessings of God, upon themselves, and
upon their labors; which Donations ought not to be impropriated, and alienated
from the Church, by any means. p. 105. Chap. XIX. That it is the duty of all
Christian Kings and Princes, to do their best endeavors, to have all the
Impropriations restored to their former Institution; to hinder the taking away,
and the alienation of the Lands, Houses, and other the Religious Donations of
our Ancestors from the Church of Christ; and to suppress and root out all the
Unjust and Covetous subtle customs and frauds, that are so generally used, and
are so derogatory to the service of God, from amongst the people, and
especially from this Kingdom of Ireland, where most corruption is used, and
most need of Instruction unto the people. p. 114. Chap. XX. The Author's
supplication to Jesus Christ, that he would arise and maintain his own cause,
which we his weak servants cannot do, against so many rich, powerful, and
many-friended adversaries of his Church. p. 117.
A DECLARATION Against SACRILEGE.
CHAP. I.
The Declaration of the Bishop of Ossory, exhibited to the High Court of
Justice before Jesus Christ, the righteous Judge, against the most horrible sin
of Sacrilege and all sacrilegious persons, that detain the Tithes, rob the
Church, and take the Lands and Houses of God into their own possessions.
Together, with his most humble Petition, to the Eternal and Almighty God, his
most gracious Redeemer, and his most loving Master, Jesus Christ, that he would
arise and maintain his own cause, and smite all his Enemies upon their
cheek-bone, and put them to perpetual shame, and root out their memorial from
off the earth.

Shows,
THAT, by Your most glorious Martyr, the strenuous defender of the true
Christian Faith and his most gracious Master, Charles the I. of ever blessed
memory; he was called and appointed to be the Bishop of Ossory; and to enable
him the better to discharge his duty in the service of God, the instructing of
his people, and the governing of that Diocese commended to his care, he was
invested and admitted to have, and to enjoy, all the rights, interests,
privileges and prerogatives of that Bishopric.

But the Irish Rebels, through the persuasions of their Popish Priests, and
suggestions of Satan, have expelled him, and detained all his dues and rights
from him, about 19 years together; And when the goodness of God was pleased to
restore the gracious Son of that glorious Martyr, unto his Crown and Dignity,
his Majesty imitating the pious steps of his most Religious Father, restored
all the Reverend Bishops, and the rest of the Learned and Loyal Clergy, unto
their ancient rights and pristine dignities; the malicious enemy of all
goodness, Satan now deals with the Church of Christ, as he did with the Church
of the Jews after their captivity. Ezra. 4.7. Neh. 6.1.
the Devil and Satanas still envying the Honor of God, and by all means
striving to obscure the Glory of his Church, and the happy Restoration of his
service; As formerly, after the captivity of the children of Israel, the Jews
in Babylon, when, they were happily returned unto their own Land, which the God
of their Fathers had bestowed upon them and their posterities for ever, and
were now beginning to re-edify their Temple for the honor of their God, and
the place of his Worship for his people, he stirred up Bishlam, Mithredath,
Tabeel, Samballat, Tobiah, Geshem, and the rest of their companions, the
enemies of Gods people, to hinder all their proceedings in setting forwards the
true service of their God, by writing false Letters unto the King; and upon
their unjust informations, procuring letters from the King, to obstruct the
building, and working of Gods House, to the great prejudice and grief of those
Holy men, that aimed at nothing more then to promote the glory of God, and the
good of his people; So now, he stirred up many Armed men, or men of Arms, and
Commanders of men, men of Renown, that in the year 49 showed themselves very
active, and serviceable for their and our undubitable King, his now gracious
Majesty, and whom his Majesty for that their faithfulness and service, did most
graciously, and justly according as they had deserved, most Royally, and like a
King, reward them, with Cities, Lands, Houses, Gardens, and the like evidences
of his Royal bounty, under the pretense of this his Majesty's grant and gift,
to labor and strive to swallow down the Lands and Houses, which I am sure do
of right belong unto the Church of God, and am confident his Majesty is so
pious that he never intended to reward his servants with any of those goods,
Why Lands dedicated for the service of God should not be alienated. Romans 2.22.
of what nature soever they are, that were dedicated and set apart for the
service of God; because the alienating of any things set apart and consecrated
for Gods service, and dedicated to that end, is no less then sacrilege; and
Sacrilege is a sin of such a transcendent nature, as is far more odious and
abominable in the sight of God then most of all other sins: for St. Paul
demands, If thou, that abhorrest Idols, wilt commit sacrilege? And you all
know, what a horrible sin Idolatry is: and how highly the Lord God was
offended, and how grievously he punished and plagued the Israelites for the
same, Exodus 32.28.
as when he slew 3000 men, for their Idolatry in worshipping the golden Calfe.

Why sacrilege is more abominable and a greater sin then idolatry.
And yet St. Paul shows herein, that sacrilege is far more odious and a more
abominable sin in the sight of God; because by Idolatry, we do but give the
honor of God to that which is no god; but by our sacrilege, we rob the true
God of that honor which is due unto him, and we deprive him of that worship,
and service, and thanks, that he should have from many men, if they were not
deprived, and robbed of their estates by that sacrilege, which makes them
unable to do that service, and to bring others to do that service unto God,
which they ought to do.

And therefore most justly has that sacrilege, which is the diminution of the
revenues of the Church, been ever accounted the highest, the boldest and the
most damnable sin in the World. For our Religion is the very ground of all our
happiness, and the chiefest of all our comforts: and the riches, honors, and
Revenues of the Church, the Tithes, Oblations, and Donations of Religious men,
are, as I shall fully show unto you in this Treatise, the very main outward
props of our Religion; and if with Sampson you take away the pillars, you
overthrow the House, and sublatis studiorum praemiis ipsa studia pereunt, says
Seneca; so, take away the props of Religion, and your Religion, like a
tottering wall, will soon fall unto the ground; and when you have supplanted
our Religion, yo^ have dissolved all the ties and associations betwixt God and
men, and left us all as aliens and strangers, and which is worse, enemies unto
God. And therefore when other mischiefs have their limits, and so hurt but one
or other, and there is an end, yet this sin of Sacrilege strikes at Goodness
and Godliness it self, it sets the world besides its hindges, and sweeps away
our peace and all our happiness from off the earth, when as God, and the King,
and all of us are thereby unexpressibly damnified.

And therefore he is no better then a savage beast, and has a heart of iron,
and Cyclopick breasts, quae genuere ferae, that can invade heaven, and rob God,
and put down the Prerogatives of his King, and spoil mankind of all safety:
which made the very Heathens themselves to have always an exceeding great
reverence of the things, that were dedicated unto their gods; and, to violate
the Religion of other Countries, which they thought much more vain then their
own, they conceived to be so monstrous, that it was always accounted
inauspicious: and the wrongs done to a false deity carried an horror with it,
and was usually revenged by the true God.

Yet these men, being many, rich and powerful, both in wealth, wit, What the
men of the year 49 do say.
and Friends, would persuade our good King and all others, but not aright, that
they are most zealous for the Church of Christ and the service of God, and what
lands and houses they seek to take from us belong not to us, nor to the Church
of God; and therefore that it is no sacrilege, nor any ways unjust in them,
to take from us what the King has justly bestowed on them; but it is a soul
imputation most uncharitably cast upon them by me, to blemish their sincerity
in the service, and for the honor of God.

And therefore seeing that in foro poli, I am, like Troylus, What the Author
does in this c nflict about the ights of the Church. 1. Thing.
impar congressus A hilli, Infoelix puer, too weak every way to contest with so
many magnanimous men of Arms, that are encompassed with so many heroic
friends, I must

1. Appeal to thee, O my God, and sweet Savior Jesus Christ; and desire thee
with the words of, the Psalmist, Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause; or, as
our last Translation has it, plead thine own cause; Psalm. 74.23.
for I am not able to maintain it, unless thou will arise to plead the cause of
the helpless, and pluck thy right hand out of thy bosom to consume the enemy,
and let not man have the upper hand, but do thou to them, as thou did unto
the Midianites, unto Sisera, and unto Jabin, at the brook of Kison, which
perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth, which say, Let us take
to our selves the houses of God in possession; and especially to them that not
only say, but also do violently and sacrilegiously mis-inform good and pious
Princes, and take both the houses of God and the lands of the Church into their
possessions. O my God, make them like a wheel, that is always tottering and
turning, and as the stubble before the wind, Psalm. 83.12.
that is ever shaking and never at rest, and like as the fire that burns up
the wood, and as the flame that consumes the mountains; persecute them even so
with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storms, that they may
understand, what a heinous sin it is to commit Sacrilege and to rob the living
God, by hindering and disinabling his servants to do him service, and to
ascribe the honor due unto his name.

2 I must and will, to the uttermost of mine ability, 2. Thing.
demonstrate unto all Church-robbers the heynousness of this sin, and the
fearful punishment thereof; and to that end,

1. I will here set down what I have written, above 45 years agone, concerning
sacrilege, and what you may find in the True Church l. 3. c. 2. page 429. with
some amplification and explication thereof.

2d. Thing.
2. I will, upon the resolution, and religious intention of the good and godly
King David, to build God an House for his servants to meet in it to worship
him, show unto you the necessity and use of Cathedrals, and Churches for Gods
Worship, and the duty of all Christian Kings and Princes therein; and the full
description and detestation of this horrible and most odious sin of Sacrilege.
And I will do my best, to enlarge this point unto the full; that so, my Reader
may reap the full benefit of this my Discourse, and the easier retain in his
memory, what he reads in it: and that the same good Doctrines and
Instructions, the oftener, and the more usually they are published, and in the
more large Volums they are printed, may the more likely have their fate to
continue, when as small Treatises, especially not methodically digested, are
the sooner neglected, and do suffer, through the iniquity of time, to be buried
in oblivion.

CHAP. II.
Of Sacrilege, what it is; How manifold it is, and how it has been always
punished, and never escaped the Hand of the Divine Vengeance.

Sacrilege, what it is. R^i sacrae violatio aut usurpatio.
1. Sacrilege which the Greeks call (...), and the sacrilegious person (...),
is, the usurpation, or the violation of any sacred thing: and this violation of
it, is to be understood for any kind of irreverence or dishonouring of it; and
Sacrilegium dicitur qua si sacrilaedium, says Innocentius: Thom. primae
secundae q 99. Prove. 20.25.
and as Aquinas says, All that is sacrilege, which is done to the irreverence
of any sacred thing. And Solomon says, It is an abomination to the Lord to
devour things that are sanctified: Et, non omne quod displicet dicitur
abominatio; And not all things that displease God are said to be abominations;
sed quod valde d^splicet, but the things which do most highly and exceedingly
displease the Lord, Peraldus, Summa Vitiorum.
is said to be an abomination, says Peraldus.

2. You may observe, that this high displeasing sin of Sacrilege, is manifold;
Sacrilege threefold, and committed 3. ways. 1. Way, against sacred persons.
but especially it consists in these three things:

1. The violation and abuse offered to Sacred persons, such as are Kings and
Queens, that are called and appointed by God to be nursing Fathers, and nursing
Mothers unto the Church of Christ, and the Bishops, Priests, and other
Ministers, that are consecrated to serve God at his Altar. Whosoever does
irreverently abuse any of them, either in word or deed, commits sacrilege,
because they are sacred persons. And so Agesilaus was wont to say, That he did
greatly wonder, why any man should think, that they are not worthily accounted
in the number of sacrilegious persons, qui laederent eos, qui diis
supplicarent, vel Deos venerarentur, which did any ways hurt or wrong those
which did supplicate or intercede for us, and worshipped God; whereby that most
prudent Prince signified, Eos non tantum sacrilegos esse, Aemilius Probus.
qui Deos ipsos aut Templorum ornatum spoliarent; sed eos maxim, qui Deorum
mini^tros and prae^ones contumeliis affi^erent, says Ae^ili^^ Probus; Luke
10.16.
because, that as our Savior says, He that despises you, despises me; and
be that despises me, despises him that sent me.

2. Way, against sacred places.
2. The profaning of the Church, or the abuse of any places consecrated for to
be the places of Gods service, is no less than sacrilege.

3. That is sacrilege, and he is a sacrilegious person, 3. Way, against sacred
things. 1. Sacraments. 2. Vessels. 3 Ornaments. 4. Goods (1) Lands, Houses, etc.

which not only dis^onoureth and irreverently uses the sacred persons, or
prophaneth the holy places, but does take away any sacred thing, or any other
thing feloniously, by way of stealth, from any sacred place; Quia tale furtum
Sacrilegium est. Because such a theft is termed sacrilege; which every other
stealth, or unjust taking, or detaining of our neighbors goods is not so. Nam
undecunque tollere, non est Sacrilegium committere; for all stealth, and every
unjust taking away of goods, is not sacrilege; but he that takes away any
thing that is sacred, or consecrated and dedicated for the service of God, is a
robber of God, and a sacrilegious person, says S. Augustine; and so S. Hierom
says, Amico rapere furtum est, Augustine super Johan. and habetur. 23. q. 4.
Sacrilege, how different from Theft. Hierom. Ep. 34.
sed Ecclesiam fraudare Sacrilegium est, To steal and take away the goods of
our friend or neighbor, is theft; but to take away the goods, or to defraud or
cheat the Church of Christ of any thing that belongs unto the Church, is
Sacrilege: Yea, voluntas sola quoad ecclesiam punitur. As he that looks on a
woman to lust after her has committed Adultery, and as the intention of
Treason against the King is Treason; So he that has a will and a sacrilegious
intent, or but an itching desire, to defraud the Church, is a sacrilegious
person, and shall no ways escape unpunished.

And here I will briefly examine Doctor Burges his Description of Sacrilege,
whereby he would fain prove, That the taking away, Doctor Burges his
Description of Sacrilege, and his inference thereupon discussed; and the
iniquity thereof plainly showed.
or selling of the Donations of holy men unto Christ and his Church, is neither
Sacrilege, nor Sin; especially the Lands of the Cathedral Churches: because,
says he, Sacrilege is the robbing of God, either by alienating, detaining,
purloyning, diverting, or perverting, that which is Gods own by Divine r^ght,
and therefore due to Christ, and thereby to his Ministers, whether the things
be set apart by express Command, or voluntarily given according to Gods special
Warrant and Direction: But, says he, The Lands given to the Bishop, and
Cathedrals, are not Commanded by God to be given, Page 8.
neither had the Givers any special Warrant or Direction from God to bestow
them: therefore no Sacrilege nor sin to take them away.

Where I beseech you to observe,

1. The error and mistake of the man; 1. The ignorance of Doctor Burges.
for I need not have any special Warrant to do that which God gives a General
allowance for any man to do.

2. Mark the malice and the madness of the man against the Bishops, 2. The
malice of the Doctor against the Bishops.
and the Cathedral Lands; for he would persuade you to believe, that these were
not given according to Gods will, but without his Warrant and Direction: But I
have, and shall show unto you, That those holy men, which vowed and dedicated
them to God, The special ends for which the lands were given to the Bishops
and Cathedrals; which being taken away, alienated, and sold, these services of
God cannot be performed. Whereby you may perceive the great dishonor that is
done to God by this Sacrilege.
gave them not only for the proper use of the Bishops, to make themselves, like
Dives, to be clothed in Scarlet, and to fare deliciously every day, and to
make their wives like Ladies, and their children great in this world: but they
bestowed them for these four special ends:

1. To maintain the Bishops and their families in a fair and competent manner,
and to furnish themselves with those necessaries whereby they might be enabled
to preach and publish the Gospel of Christ every way, by words, writing, and
printing it unto his people.

2. To edify, repair, and beautify, Synagogues, Temples, and Churches, for
the people of God to meet in, to serve God, and to be instructed in the Faith
and Doctrine of Christ.

3. To relieve the poor, clothe the naked, feed the hungry, help the
fatherless and widows, and the like.

4. To keep hospitality, to relieve Strangers, to redeem Captives, and to do
other works of piety and charity, which the Bishops in their wisdoms shall
think fit and requisite to be done, according to the will and good pleasure of
God: And the Bishops are but entrusted as Gods Stewards to see these things
faithfully discharged.

And I would gladly understand, Was it ignorance or malice, in this fellow, to
amuse and stagger the simple Readers of his Pamphlet, and to make them doubt,
whether Lands given to Cathedrals, to these ends, and for these purposes, have
any allowance from God, and Warrant to be agreeable to his will? when as all
men know how often and how earnestly God commands all and every one of these
things to be done: especially considering that his Grand Master, Cartwright,
confesses, That now in the time of the Gospel, whatsoever is either
established by Law, or conferred by man's liberality for the uses of Gods
service, is all to be accounted sacred or holy; and for this cause, both the
taking away of the whole, or the diminishing of any part of such holy things,
is sacrilege condemned in Deuteronomy. 23.21, 22, 23. and never any honest man said
otherwise.

And this sin of Sacrilege, being so abominable, and so hateful in the sight
of God, Distinct. 19. Q. Curtius l. 7.
it must needs be plagued with intolerable punishments: and no marvel; for as
Q. Curtius says, Cum diis pugnant sacrilegi, The sacrilegious persons do fight
and wage war with God himself, and by all means seek to deprive him of his
honor and service: Lucan Phars. l. 3.
And as Lucan says, -- Quis enim laesos impune putaret
Esse deos?
Who can imagine that sacrilegious persons shall escape unpunished? For if the
gods should not revenge their own wrongs, Who should do it? says the Heathen
Poet: but they that were the Idols of the Heathens have done it among the
Gentiles, and the true God will do it among the Christians: For as Juvenal
says, Juvenal ^atyra. 4.
Nemo malus foelix, minime corruptor and idem
Incestus, cum quo nuper vittata jacebat
Sanguine adhuc vivo terram subitura sacerdos.
The sacrilegious Nuns were to be interred, and thrown alive into the pit.

Gods usual dealing with men.
And this is the usual course and practice of God, to cause those that by the
sweet promises of his mercies cannot be allured to pay their duties unto his
Church, and to use a good conscience, to be frighted from robbing and abusing
his Church, by the terror of his most fearful vengeance executed upon the like
offenders; that such as will not be led by his mercies, might be drawn by his
judgments: Because that, as Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore. Good men will
not wrong the Church, for the love of God; So many times, Oderunt peccare mali
formidine poenae. Many evil men, at least not very good, will forbear to rob
and destroy the Church for fear of the punishment of Church-robbers. And
therefore as Absalom, 2 Samuel 10.
when he could not by promises and persuasions win Joah to be of his side; by
firing his barly-fields, he forced him to do what he pleased: So, when the
still and sweet voice of God can do no good to make Jonah to obey the Lord's
command, a tempestuous whirlwind, tumbling him to the bottom of the Sea, will
bring him back to his obedience. So it may be when the promising of Gods
blessings can work no Reformation, nor get any satisfaction for wrongs done
unto the Church, Gods coming to visit them with the Rod, and to whip their
sacrilege with scourges, to fill their faces with shaeme and confusion, and to
give them fine and brimstone, storms and tempest to be their portion to drink,
may a little frighten the sacrilegious Soldiers, from laying an insupportable
weight of miseries, or committing a most intolerable Sacrilege against the
Church of Christ.

Therefore, I thought good, to show unto all sacrilegious persons, That as the
Lords mouth has very often, and very much spoken against this sin of
Sacrilege; So the Lords hand has neither a little, nor seldom stricken it;
and that very few men have fostered Sacrilege in their heart, and laid hold of
it with their hands, but they have also born and felt heavy judgments upon
their backs, either in this life, or in that which is to come.

As the Sacrilege of Achan was the Beesom that swept away the whole House of
Achan, The punishment of Sacrilegious persons. Josh. 7.
and the Axe that has cut down both him and all his posterity in one day. So
the Sacrilege of Gebe^i, that must needs have Silver and Raiment from Naaman,
for the favor that his Master had done unto him, 2 Reg. 5.
was the Porter that brought the incurable loathsome scab of Leprosy upon him,
and upon all his seed for ever. And so the Sacrilege of Shishak, King of
Egypt, that came up against Jerusalem, and took away the Treasures of the
House of the Lord; and the Treasures of the Kings House, and the Shields of
Gold that Solomon had made, was sufficiently recompensed by the Thracians, that
invaded, subdued, 1 Reg. 14.25, 26.
and harrased, all his Dominions, So likewise, the Sacrilege of Johash King of
Israel, that drew a great booty out of Gods Temple, 2 Reg. 14.14.
brought such a vengeance upon him, as ended his accursed life with deadly
poison. And Senna^herib that came with a full intent to rob and plunder the
Lords House in the days of Hezechias, was sent home with a hook in his nose,
and a bridle in his lips, by the same way that he came: And, as if this was not
punishment enough for emptying the Lords Exchequer, and his purpose to take
away all the Treasure of the Temple; not long after his arrival home, his own
sons Adramelec and Sharezzar, 2 Reg. 19.37.
slew him in the Temple of his god Nisroch. And Belshazzars Sacrilege, in
abusing the holy vessels of Gods House, that his father had taken away from the
Temple, was well enough recompensed, Dan. 5.23, 25, and 31.
as you find in Dan. 5.31. These things are Registered in the Holy Scriptures.

And it is recorded in the Gentile-Writers, how that the Grecians, which of all
others formerly were most Victorious; yet after they had once become
sacrilegious, and offered violence to the Temple of Palla^, they lost all their
hope, and never thrived any more. For so Virgil says, Corripuere sacram
Effigiem, Virgil. l. 2.
manibusque cruentis
Virgineas ausi divae contingere vittas.
And thereupon he infers, what I do now enforce, and what Carulus sets
down more generally: Ex illo fluere, ac retro dilapsa referri
Spes Danaum --
They ever slid and slipped and failed, after that impious Tydides, scelerumque
inventor Ulysses, and Ulysses the inventor of mischiefs, had taken away the
Palladium, and killed the Ministers of the Temple. Justin. trist. l. 4.
And so Justin says, That Philomenes, a most brave and valiant Captain, after
he became Sacrilegious, Primus inter confertissimos d^micans, cecidit, Fighting
first amongst the most excellent soldiers, he was killed; and so, says mine
Author, Sacrilegii poenas impio sanguine lu^t, he paid for his Sacrilege with
his ungodly blood; and let other Sacrilegious Captains and Soldiers fear the
like fate. Lactant. de origin error. c. 4. etc. 8.
Lactantius also reports how Fulvius, the Censor, for taking away Marmoreas
tegulas, Marble-tiles from the Temple of Juno Lacinia, as the long-Parliament
men took away the Tiles of the Cathedral Church of St. Keney; And Appius
Claudius for alienating things dedicated to Hercules, were most miserably
plagued by the gods; the one lost both his ears, and the other was distracted
of his wits: a heavy punishment! therefore for no leight sin, you may be sure.

But the time would be too long, and my papers too short for me to declare at
large unto you, Aulus Gell. noct. Artic. l. 3. c. 9.
what Aulus Gellius sets down, how that when Quintus Cepio the Consul had
taken and spoiled the Town of Tolouse in France, and found there very much gold
in the Churches and Temples of that City; it so fell out by the just judgment
of God, that whosoever laid hands or lightly touched the gold that was taken in
that spoil, misero cruciabilique exitu periit, says mine Author, he perished
most miserably, so that it grew to be a proverb among all Nations, when any
general plague and grievous destruction happened for any sin, it was Sicut
aurum Tolosanum, like the gold of Tolouse, that destroyed all that meddled with
it: Or to show unto you, how Pyrrhus and all his men were drowned for robbing
the Treasury of Proserpina; Or of the 400 soldiers of King Xerxes, that were
burnt with thunder and lightning, just as they were spoiling the Temple of
Delphos; Or of Brennius, that ever before was most victorious and had sacked
Rome, but had his whole Army most miserably spoiled after the ransacking of the
same Temple, Et Dei voluntate in se manus vertit, as Valerius Max. says. Val.
Max. l. 1. c. 2.
Or of the Scythians, that were most miserably plagued with many and most
grievous diseases, called Enareas, that is execrable and accursed, for their
Sacrilege in sacking the Temple of Venus Urania. Vide Theat. judicii divini p.
439.
Or of Alexander the great; that, for abusing the consecrated vessels of
Hercules, in the very same City, and in the self same manner, as Belshezzar had
abused the vessels of Gods Temple in Jerusalem, before him; Herodotus l. 1. p
51. Agl. fol. 33. 2. p.
was so suddenly stricken in the midst of his banquet, even as he was drinking,
that he groaned and cried out so as if he had been shot with a most deadly
dart. Or of Antiochus Epiphanes, that died most miserably, and at his death
confessed it was for his sin of Sacrilege, because he had taken away the
vessels of gold and the vessels of silver, Dan. 5.2, 3, 4.
that were in the Church and House of God in Jerusalem, Q. Curtius. l. 10. p
415.
1 Match. 6. Or of Heliodorus, that being sent to rob the Temple, there appeared
unto him two men, sent from Heaven, which whipped him continually so long and
so much, that he fell down in the Temple, and there lay grovelling and destitute
of all help, until at the request of his soldiers, the Priests of God prayed
for him: Or of Pompeius Magnus, Match. 2.3.
who is noted by Titus Livius and Cicero, to be one of the most fortunate and
most successful Soldiers in the World; yet after he had robbed the Temple of
the Lord in Jerusalem, and spoiled those sacred things, that belonged unto the
Church, he never prospered; but, sicut unda supervenit undam, as one wave
follows after another, so ill successes, losses, and misfortunes followed and
succeeded one after another to him, until at last he made an end of an unhappy
life by a miserable death, when he was most perfidiously slain by Achillas: Or
of Ananias and Saphira who, because they did secretly withhold some part of
thar, which they had voluntarily once resolved to dedicate for Gods service,
and the maintenance of his servants, they were presently stricken with sudden
death: Or, if I should speak of many more, whose tragical ends Eusebius,
Josephus and other writers both Ecclesiastical and profane have set down,
Aulus Gellius l 3. c 9. Sacrum sacrove commendatum qui dempserit rapue^itque
parricida esto:
we shall find, that whatsoever they got and pillaged from the Church and
Temples of the gods, it is like aurum Tolossanum, the gold of Tolossa, the
which whosoever touched did most miserably perish, as I showed to you before;
for it fares with them as it did of old with the Eagle, whereof the Christian
Poet says, Victima sacra Deo comburitur, abripit offam
Hinc aquil^, ad pullos fertque benigna suos.
Fatali igniculus praedae imperceptus adhaesit,
Sacrilegaeque sacer devorat ignis opes.


The which my Countryman thus excellently translates; The sacred Offering
broils the Eagle spies, Roberts in his book of tythos.

A gobb she lurcht, and to her young she flies:
A spark unseen lurkt in the fatal stealth,
Befir'd her neast, and burnt up all her wealth.


And so the gain of a little, unjustly gotten, proved to be the loss of all
that she might justly have enjoyed.

Sic metuat quicunque Dei violare ministros
Et sacras audet despoliare domos.
So let him fear who e're he be that dare
Purloyn God's tribute, and the Churches share.
And, as the best Poet, in the best Verse of all his works, by the testimony of
Apollo his Oracle, says Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere divos.
Virgil. Aeneid. l. 6.


The sacrilegious persons were best to learn to be just, and not to despise the
gods, and spoil the goods, that are dedicated to their service; because, as
Seneca says, Sacrilegi dant poenas, Seneca de benefic. l. 5. c. 12.
quamvis nemo usque ad Deos manus porrigat; the sacrilegious persons and
robbers of the Church-rights shall never escape unpunished, though no man
should lift up his hands and cry to the gods against them, as it appears
sufficiently by the examples before cited.

But it may be some will say, gods whose examples you forecited, and their
Temples were no Churches, nor houses of the true God, but of mortal wicked men
and women, whom the Gentiles, that knew not God, deified and adored them for
gods; and therefore that could be no sacrilege, to take away things dedicated
to Idols, and consecrated for the service of Devils, and not of God; and their
punishment, for whatsoever it was, was not, and could not be supposed to be for
sacrilege, when as the robbing of those Temples and those false gods cannot be
said to be sacrilege: Which is rei sacrae violatio, as I said before.

I answer, That, Paul would not have the Christians to eat of that which is
offered in Sacrifice unto Idols, 1 Cor. 10.28.
because it was consecrated for the Idol, and so dedicated to the false god,
The Temples of the false gods not to be violated, and why.
which the Apostle says was none other then the Devil, verse. 20. whom
notwithstanding they deemed and worshipped for the true God; So Lactantius
says that the true God would not have those things, that belonged any ways to
any, taken for a deity, though they were but false gods, and no gods, but only
supposed deities, as all those aforenamed were supposed and believed to be by
the Gentiles to be any ways profaned and abused by wicked men, especially by
those, that took those idols to be gods, as all those sacrilegious persons
aforementioned, Tydides, Ulysses, Philomenes, Fulvius, Appius, Cepio, and the
rest, took Pallas, Venus, Juno, Jupiter, Apollo, and the like, for their gods
and goddesses to be worshipped; therefore, whatsoever the robbing of those
Temples had been unto the Christians, that knew them to be the houses of Devils
and not of God; yet, to these men, and to all others, that believed them to be
gods, the robbing of them and their Temples, could be judged no less then
Sacrilege; and therefore that they ought to suffer the just and severe
punishment of Sacrilege: And besides, God would not suffer these men to escape
the hands of justice for their Sacrilege, and the spoiling of these false
gods, lest that by the like robbers, his own Church and servants might be
oppressed and spoiled, as they are in many places under this pretense, that our
Churches are not the Houses of God, nor we the true servants of Jesus Christ.

But let these men take heed, lest the like judgments fall on them, as have
befallen on the like Sacrilegious persons; for God is still the same, and has
still the same care of his service and servants: and I have heard his name, A
true story very remarkable.
that, riding through Saint Paul's Church yard, in the days of King Henry the
8th. looked up toward the top of the Church, and said, I hope I shall see that
lead turned into silver and gold into my purse, ere it be long. And a poor
woman said, I hope, I shall see thee hanged first. A rash speech, and a harsh
hope; yet, it happened right; for within a few years after, the gentleman was
executed and ended his life at Tiburn; and Saint Paul's Church stands yet
unbestript of her clothing: Sic pereant inimici tui Domine; So let all thine
enemies perish, O God, that say unto themselves, let us take the Houses of God
in possession; make them (O Lord) like Oreb and Zeb, Ps. 74.10, 11.
and like unto the dung of the earth, as the Holy Prophet speaks.

In the life of St. Elzear. p. 26.
And I say to these Sacrilegious persons as the holy woman Delphina said to her
husband Saint Elzear, Count of Sabran, Take heed that you attempt not to lay
your hands on that which is vowed to God; or dedicated to his service: because
God will not be mocked, he cannot endure to be robbed, or suffer his service to
be prejudiced and abated, by taking away the means that should maintain it; but
he will punish them, and power down vengeance upon the heads both of them and
of their posterity, that take away the Lands, Houses, and Possessions of the
Church, that were vowed and dedicated to Jesus Christ to relieve his members,
and to uphold his service: as you may well understand, if you do but consider
it by that memorable example of As I remember.
William Earl Marshall of this Kingdom of Ireland; Dr. Hanmer in the History of
Ireland.
who, when he had appeased the Rebellion, that then rose in his time, took a
great deal of the lands of the Church into his own hands; and the Bishop,
because he would not restore it unto the Church, excommunicated him for the
same, and he went to the King and complained; but before the Bishop could come
to his answer he died, and was buried in that Excommunicated estate; yet, his
son entreated the King to cause the Bishop to absolve him, which he did
conditionally, that his son would restore those lands unto the Church, which
the son denying, God denied his blessing to his posterity, that there is not
one heir Male of him left upon the face of the earth, to enjoy those lands,
that he Sacrilegiously took away from the Church.

Neither do I see, how it can be otherwise; for the very Heathens that had not
the knowledge of Gods laws, nor of Jesus Christ, could say, that vulgo creditum
est, it was generally by all men believed, some fatal and fearful punishment
must needs be imminent to that man, qui sacris rebus ac Deo dicatis manus
injiceret, aut qui pios homines, aut certe fungentes sacris ministeriis,
oppugnaret; which should lay his hands to take away any sacred thing, or offer
any injury to any godly man, or oppose and wrong them especially that
administer holy things: and to that end, to confirm this truth they did
proverbially recite that Homerical distich, (...), Homer Il. ^.

(...).
Which in effect, signifies thus much, that, Cum divo tertare viro simul atque
c^pit quis, Cu^que deus been vult; damnum certe huic imminet ingens. Pro
mensura delicti, erit plagarum modus.
although God wishes well to every man, and takes no pleasure in the
destruction of his Creatures, which he made, that they might have their being,
and be happy, if they did not offend; yet, if any man will be so wicked, as by
his Sacrilegious doings, to strive with God, to despise his maker, and to spoil
his servants, whom God wishes well unto; then certainly, damnum huic imminet
ingens; a mighty mischief, and some fearful evil does hang over such a man's
head, and he shall not escape it.

And therefore, let all men take heed and beware of Sacrilege, for though it
may seem a sweet spoil; yet, Josh. 7.25.
it will prove at last to be as pernicious, as Achan's wedge, or as fatal as
Turnus his luckless belt, that bereaved him of his life, which otherwise, he
might have enjoyed, and have received pardon; when Christ, beholding the
stolen cognizance of his beloved spouse, shall take away his mercy, and shut
up his loving kindness in displeasure, (which otherwise he would have
graciously showed); Infoelix humero cum apparuit ingens Balteus, and notis
fulserunt cingula bullit Pallanti ^puert. Virgil. l. 12.
and shall add some further vengeance, saying, as Aeneas did to Turnus, when
he beheld the belt, -- Pallas te hoc vulnere, pallas
Immolat, and poenam scelerato ex sanguine sumit.
This is laid on thee for thy Sacrilege, one torture more for that; for I
would heartily wish, that all Sacrilegious persons Lords, Soldiers, Knights,
or Gentlemen, would diligently mark and weigh, and never forget the manner of
Christ his behavior, when he came into the Temple, Joh. 2.14.
how different it was from his usual carriage at all other times; for he that
was the Instrument of Mercy, and descended from Heaven, cum amore, non
flagello, and came to pardon, and not to punish; yet he, that was so ready, and
so willing and well-pleased to pardon Thieves, Adulterers, and other wicked
nefarious fellows, and called all such as were weary and heavy laden with the
burden of their sins, and promised that he would ease them; When he saw how his
Sanctuary was abused, Matthew. 11.28.
by those sacrilegious Merchants that bought and sold therein, He puts on
Justice and Severity; and, as it appears, more angerly than ever he seemed to
be, while he walked here on earth, tumbled down the tables of those
Money Changers, and the violators of holy things, and chaced them with a
whip-cord, both from Himself, and from his Temple; And he tells them the reason
why he was so exceedingly angry, which was, because they had so highly, and so
vildly transgressed, in making his House, which was the House of prayer, to
become, by their sacrilege, a den of Thieves. O consider this, all ye that
commit Sacrilege, and forget God; lest he tear you in pieces, while there is
none to help you. And you that are brave Soldiers, and commit Sacrilege,
consider also, what Charles the Great, that was as great, and as brave a
Soldier, as any that was in the World in his days, says to you all: Verba
Caroli Magni, in capital. Catul. tit. 7. c. 104.
Novimus multa regna and reges eorum propterea cecidisse, quia Ecclesias
spoliaverunt, resque earum vastaverunt, alienaverunt vel diripuerunt;
Episcopisque and Sacerdotibus, atque, quod majus est, Ecclesiis eorum
abstulerunt and pugnantibus dederunt; quapropter nec fortes in bello, nec in
fide stabiles fuerunt, nec victores extiterunt, sed terga multi vulnerati and
plures interfecti verterunt, regnaque and regiones, and quod pejus est regna
coelestia perdiderunt, atque propriis haereditatibus caruerunt and hactenus
carent. And it will be worth your labor, to remember, what commands that wise
and strenuous Earl of Strafford delivered for his children, The Earl of
Straffords speech at his death.
(i. e.) to his son William Wentworth, commends himself, Gives him charge, to
serve his God, to submit to his King, with all faith and alleagiance in things
temporal, to the Church in things spiritual; Gives him charge, as he will
answer it to him in Heaven, never to meddle with the Patrimony of the Church,
for it will be the canker that will eat up the rest of his estate: Again,
charge him, as he will answer him in Heaven, never to meddle with it.

And yet notwithstanding all the sayings and persuasions of wise men, and the
severe punishments threatened against all, and executed upon so many
sacrilegious persons, as we read of in all Histories; we find, as S. Bernard
says, Bernard Epist. ^2^.
The houses of the Bishops, and the Revenues of Gods servants, have, against
all Law and Right, been heretofore given to Soldiers, and others, Vict.
Vticen. de Hist. Vandalerum. l. 1.
that were Rebels, to be inhabited. And as Victor Vticensis says, The richest
Robes and Furnitures of the Church and Church-ministers, were taken to make
shirts and breeches for wicked and most bloody men: And the Church it self,
which is Domus orationis, the House of prayer, the House of God, Psalm.
Polycrat. l. 7. c. 21. Stipendium militum, dispendium innocentium.
and the place where his Honor dwells, to be made Stabulum opilionis, a
storehouse for the wool, and a stable for the horses of the Church-robbers: as
Johannes Sarisbur, says.

And have we not seen all this, and much more done, now of late, during the
reign of the Great Antichrist, the long Parliament, and that vile Usurper
Crumwells time? Nay, Have I not my self seen, the Chancel of a Church made a
kitchen to dress meat in it? and the Church it self an Alehouse, to intertain
Drunkards; and the children digging up their fathers bones out of their
Sepulchers? Which Suidas calls (...), The removing of such things, that
should by no means be removed. Let the lamentable and most shameful
devastation, throwing down of Tombs, and digging up of Sepulchers of the most
stately, and formerly beautiful Cathedral-Church of Kilkeny, and the
dilacerating of the Bishops Lands, and distributing it among the Soldiers,
that still detain it from the Church to this very day, and the greedy desire of
the Soldiers to take more and more from it, be a witness of the Sacrilege of
these times.

And yet, as Dionysius Senior, that Arch-robber of Temples, when he had taken
away the Golden beard of Aesculapius, said, It was unfit that Apollo should be
without a beard, and Aesculapius his son to have one; when, according to the
Gentiles divinity, they feigned Apollo beardless, and Aesculapius with a long
grave beard, because every good Physician should be a man of great experience,
and of much knowledge in many things. Vide Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 2. de Potitio
non observante sacra. etc. Justin. l. 21.
And when he took away the golden Coat from Jupiter Olympius, and instead
thereof bestowed upon him a woollen cloak, he said, That a golden Coat was too
heavy for the Summer, and too cold for Winter; but his cloth Coat would fit
both times far better. And so when he spoiled the Temple of Proserpina, and
immediately after had a very prosperous wind for his Navy to sail withal, he
jeeringly said, You see what a prosperous sail the gods do grant to
sacrilegious persons: thereby signifying, that either he believed, that there
was no god, or that god cared not what Sacrilege should be committed; and yet
he thrived and prospered in all his wicked courses. Even so our Church-robbers
do spend their days in wealth, and pass their times in pleasure, and their
seed seems to be established after them; and therefore thinking themselves
sure, and their Sacrilege to be no sin, and so neither caring for Gods
Service, Et hoc modo sacrilegia minuta puniuntur, magna vero in triumphis
feruntu^. Vt ait Seneca Epist. 87.
nor fearing any of Gods threatenings, nor regarding the examples of Gods
vengeance, executed for less Sacrilege, they go on in their purposes, to
devise new sleights, and by a strong hand, and great friends, to rob Gods
Church, and to impoverish his servants, by taking away their lands, houses, and
possessions from them, and threatening them, if once they dare say, that this
their doings is any Sacrilege, or any ways amiss.

And thus, as the Harlot commits Adultery, and then wipes her mouth and is
clean; so these men commit this horrible sin, and prospering in the world, they
think themselves safe and free from all blame. But I will answer these men with
holy Job, that it is very true, that many times the tabernacles of robbers do
prosper, and wicked men continue rich, Job 12 6. etc. 21. verse. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13.
as the rich Glutton did to his dying day: their Bull gendereth and fails
not, their Cow calveth and casts not her Calf, they send forth their little
ones like a flock, and their children dance; they take the Timbrell and Harp,
and rejoice at the sound of the Organ; and so they spend their days in mirth,
and have all the felicity that this world can afford them; health, wealth,
honor, and prosperity. And the Prophet David, speaking of the same kind of
people, says, They are enclosed in their own fat, Psalm. 17.10, 14.
and their mouth speaks proud things, they have children at their desire, and
they leave the rest of their substance for their babes. And in another place he
says, They are in no peril of death, but are lusty and strong, and are
victorious over their enemies; Yea, they come in no misfortune like other folk,
neither are they plagued like other men; but their eyes swell with fatness, and
they do even what they list; Lo, these are the ungodly, these prosper in the
world, Psalm. 73.4, 5, 7, 12.
and these have riches, Yea, and our lands and houses, even the lands of the
poor innocents, that never offended, in possession. And so you see, how many
times, the most wicked worldlings, hypocrites, idolaters, and sacrilegious
persons, may have exemption and freedom from all evil, for they come in no
misfortune like other folk; and may have an accumulation of all good things;
for they prosper in themselves, in their offspring, and in their fortunes. And
the experience of all times, and especially of our own time, in what we see,
does make this plain unto us, that for a time they do, and may prosper.

But do you think, The prosperity of the wicked a most heavy judgment of God.
that this prosperity in their wickedness is any happiness unto them? No sure,
it is the heaviest judgment that could fall upon them, to be freed from
punishments, when they have so highly transgressed God's Commandments; because,
all this time of their flourishing prosperity, God forgets not their impiety,
but has it sealed up among his treasures, and remits not their punishment, but
transfers it to another time: When, as the usurer makes his debtor pay dear for
his forbearance; so these transcendent offenders shall reap no benefit by God's
patience, unless that brings them to repentance: But, as it had been far better
for Dives to have had his punishment in this life, than to be here in perpetual
happiness for a short time, and after that, to be eternally tormented: So it
were far better for Murderers, Oppressors, and Church-robbers, to have their
punishment in this life, than pay so deer for the use of their prosperity, and
the deferring of their just deserved punishment for the life to come.

And therefore we ought to distinguish, Hesiodus, l. 1.
and to put a difference as Hesiod says, betwixt (...), and (...): that is
riches and possessions taken by violence, and riches given by Gods benevolence.
Alciat. Erubl. 128. page 461.
And as another says, (...); It is good to be rich by Gods gift, that needs
not fear Gods curse; But it is very evil, to grow great, and to become rich by
rapine, and snatching goods and lands from God and man; for that shall never
escape the just deserved punishment: And therefore Euripides says, (...)
(...)
(...).
That is in effect, Procure not to thy self any wealth, by any unjust means, if
thou would have them to continue with thee without punishment; because that
whatsoever thou gatherest unjustly and bring to thy house wrongfully, either
from God or man, Prince or peasant, it can not be safe; Yea, though thou
should seem for a long time to be in peace and free from all danger; for, as
Optatus says against the Donatists, An quia c^ss^t talis modo vindicta, ideo
tibi cum tuis vindicas innocentiam? Are you therefore innocent; because God
does not presently punish you? so may I say to all Sacrilegious persons, and to
all other opp^essors and unjust men whatsoever; Do you think your selves happy,
and free from all blame and deserve no punishment, because you do enjoy your
spoils and Church-goods or lands peaceably? by no means: Quia aliud
misericorditer dat Deus, aliud habere sinit iratus, Glossa ordinar: in Job 12.
because it is one thing when God bestows Wealth, Honors, and Lands upon us
in mercy, and out of his love to us; and it is another thing when he suffers
us to enjoy them, when he is angry, and most wrathfully displeased with us; and
though we may and ought to be glad and rejoice for the one, yet ought we to be
sad and sorrowful for the others; because all the wealth in the World is not
answerable to the wrath of God, but I had rather be a beggar with his love,
then to possess the wealth of Croesus and the honors of Augustus with his
anger; and angry he must needs be with them, that take away the Lands and
Houses of his servants, that serve him at his Altar; whereby they are disabled,
either to serve him, or to teach his people, which must therefore perish,
because thou do rob the Church, and unjustly take away that, which is none
of thine; for seeing, as S. Augustine says, Hoc jure possidetur quod just,
and hoc just quod been; igitur omne quod male possidetur alienum est; That is
rightly possessed, which is justly gotten; and that is justly gotten, which is
well gotten, without fraud without violence: therefore all whatsoever is
naughtily gotten, that is unjustly possessed, and is none of thine; and
whatsoever we do hold and enjoy, that is none of our own, though we should
possess it never so long, and enjoy it never so peaceably without punishment,
and without being once questioned for it; yet at last, the just God, that uses
to bear with offenses long, Quia saepe Deus hic parci^, ut illic saeviat.
will require a strict account for our unjust taking, and more unjust detaining
thereof; and he will then recompense his long forbearance with severity of
vengeance, and our punishment shall be the sorer in the next life, because
that, like Dives, we have escaped all punishment in this life. De male
quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres.
And for those lands and goods thus sacrilegiously gotten, and unjustly
possessed, we may truly say, That his posterity, for whose enriching he
underwent the wrath of God, shall not likely enjoy them long. But as the Ark of
God, when it was taken from the Levites, could find no resting place among the
Philistines, but was removed from Asdod to Gath, and from Gath to Ekron, and so
from one place to another, till it came to its own proper place; so God may
deal, and commonly does use to deal, with them that take away the goods, Petrus
Blesensis Epist. 10.
lands, and houses of his Church, Quae malign contraxit pater, pejori luxu
refundet filius. That which the father has sacrilegiously snatched, and most
wickedly scraped together, And were it not that I am loath to disgrace the
present posterity of sacrilegious parents, I could show you many brave families
in England that came to utter ruin, since the time of Henry the Eighth, for
this very sin of Sacrilege.
the son, or at least the grandchild, shall as loosely scatter it abroad; and
so it shall pass and repasse from one to another, until it be far enough from
him and his, for whom it was at first collected: and the sacrilegious father
shall gain nothing by his wicked sacrilege, but the wrath and judgment of God
against himself, and the curse of God to remain upon his posterity: because God
has threatened, to visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate him: and I think none hates him,
if the sacrilegious persons love him, that do both rob, and as I showed before,
war against him.

CHAP. III.
The diverse sorts and kinds of Sacrilegious persons: And first, of those that
do it under color of Law, and upon the pretense of Reformation, whereby they
suppose their Sacrilege to be no Sacrilege at all.

BUt having heard of the odiousness, and punishment of this horrible sin of
Sacrilege, we may do well to take notice of the diverse kinds of sacrilegious
persons; and I find them specially to be of two sorts: 2 Sorts of sacrilegious
persons.
That is 1. They that do it under the color of Law, and upon pretense of
Reformation of the Church, and abuses crept into the Church. 2. They that do it
against all Law, without any color of right, and to the rooting out of all
Piety and Religion.


1. It is reported, that when Constantine became a Christian, 1. Legal
sacrilegious persons
and endowed the Church of Christ with large Revenues, a voice was heard from
Heaven, saying, Hodie venenum intravit in Ecclesiam; How they say, Poison
entered into the Church; and how ill it is now cured.
This day is poison poured out into the Church, which was indeed from Hell,
when the envious man, that holds it for a Maxim, Quod non oportet Christum
ditescere; That Christ which was born poor, should not become rich: and much
less, should the servants become wealthy, when the Master is always poor. But
he might have as well said, This day is honey entered into the Church; for, as
of wealth, if you have too much, it may prejudice you; so of honey, if you eat
too much, it will make you to vomit, says Solomon: Prove. 25.16.
When as a competency of either, may do much good, and no hurt: but his poison
is always bad, and seldom does any good, unless it be very well and wisely
tempered with good ingredients. But howsoever, so it happened to the Church,
and to the servants of Christ, that the world and worldly men said, how truly I
cannot judge, This wealth and promotion, brought ease, and pride and luxury
amongst them; which might be so to some of them, but questionless not to all,
nor to most of them: yet however, as swelling waters, when they are at the
highest, must needs fall and be scattered; so say the men that either envied at
the Prosperity of the Church, or desired the Reformation of what they conceived
amiss, This poison must be purged, or the honey vomited, before the Church
could be healed of her infective tumors, or the Clergy cleansed from their
pride, and luxury. And therefore an Antidote must be sought, and a Remedy must
be found, to allay that evil, which the Good abused had produced forth: but how
this should be done, the Physicians, either through ignorance knew not, or
through envy and malice to the Church and Churchmen, would not know, what was
best, for the good of the Church, or the Glory of God, and the propagation of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, but what through Pride, Ambition, and Covetousness,
they thought best and most available for themselves.

V^strum ocul^m malevolus error insulam p^leum inducit: nam and ^^^^cum ibi
cito videretur, si and esse veletis. Aug. contra Faust. Man. l. 5. c. 22.
And therefore, as the Manichees condemned all Christianity, because there were
some evil men, that went under the name of Christians; to whom Saint Augustine
answers, that if their malice did not blind them, they might have seen wheat
as well as chafe upon the floor of Gods Church; so might the Reformers have
seen many pious Bishops, and other famous Clergymen that had done very many
good deeds, erecting Colleges, building Churches and Hospitals, and relieving
many of the members of Christ, with the revenues of the Church, as well as some
few proud and ambitious Prelates. Or else, as the Donatists refused the blessed
Sacraments, because some of the Priests that administered them were wicked; Hom
contr lit. Petiliani. l. 2. c. 30.
to whom also, the same Saint Augustine answers, that they must needs err,
when they will violate the Sacraments of God for the sins of men, or refuse his
gifts, because they like not the bearers; for who would reject a precious Jewel
sent him from his Majesty, What the Reformers did in the Usurpers time.
because he liked not the messenger that brought it? Or rather, as Lycargus
rooted up all the Vines in his Country, because he saw many men were made
drunk and mad with wine, to whom Plutarch answers, that he might have seen
many more good men, without any offense, cherished and refreshed with wine; and
therefore he should have rather dug some wells near unto the Vines, to mix
the wine with some water, and so to take away the abuse of the wine, and to
prevent drunkenness, and not to root up the Vines, to deprive the good and
sober men from the use and benefit thereof: Even so did the pretended Reformers
of the Church imitate Lycurgus to a hair, rob the Church and left her a beggar,
Paupertatem s^m^^is ingeniis obesse, ne provehantur.
to take away as they said her pride; they did not wash away the stains of her
garment, but took her clothes quite away, and left her naked unto the World,
in steed of pride for her former glory, to be now ashamed for her present
misery, when she is rather scorned then respected or reverenced, by all
worldlings and the enemies of the Church, as are also both her Ministers and
her Children; Alciat. Embl. 120. And as Juvenal says. Nil habet infoelix
paupertas durius in se, Quam quod ridiculos homines facit. Neither 1. G d, nor
2. Christ, nor 3. Reason, teach us to reform abuses, as Sacrilegious persons do.
whereby they might say with Alciat, Dextra tenet lapidem, manus altera
sustinet alas
Vt me pluma levat, sic grave mergit onus.
Ingenio poteram superas volitare per arces,
Me nisi paupertas invida deprimeret.


But to this we do answer, that neither God, which is the God of justice; nor
Christ, which left his actions for our instructions; nor ratio sana, Reason it
self, which should guide all wise men, in all their doings; have ever taught us
this preposterous course, and most impious lesson, For the abuse of good
things, especially in Gods service, to take away the things themselves that
should preserve and uphold the service of God. For

1. When Saul abused his state and his whole Kingdom, Samuel says not, 1 Samuel
15.
the Lord will annihilate and bring to naught the Kingdom of Israel; but he
says, 1 Samuel 31.35.
He has rent thy Kingdom from thee, and he has given it to thy neighbor
which is better then thou: And when Eli the Priest, abused his place and
neglected his office and the service of God, 1. How God deals with things
that are abused.
the Lord says not, I will cut off the Priesthood from Israel, or I will
deface the glory and beauty of it; but, I will out off thine arm, and the arm
of thy Fathers house, and I will raise me up a faithful Priest, that shall do
according to that, which is in mine heart, and in my mind, and I will build him
a sure house, and he shall walk before mine Anointed for ever. And I would to
God the reformers of abuses in Religion would have imitated the doings of God
herein, when they can never have a better pattern, that is, to remove those
Bishops of Priests that do indeed neglect their duties or abuse their Offices;
(and not take away the means and maintenances of their places) and put other
better, and more careful men in their rooms: for here you see we are taught,
that God does not, as the Romans did, alter the whole state of their Government
for the wickedness of Tarquinius, and the rest of their tyrannous Kings, Titus
Livius l. 1.
I say God does not for the sins, either of Prince or Priest, change the manner
of Government, or abrogate the Privileges, or lessen the demaines of either
Office, but he Translateth the Office with all the dignities and appurtenances
to a worthier person, that should bring forth more and better fruits to the
glory of God; and I wish King Henry the 8th. had done, and all other Kings and
Princes would do, the like.

2. When our Savior found such gross abuses in the Temple, 2 How Christ dealt
with the Temple when it was profaned. Matthew. 21.12.13.
so that they had made the House of God a den of thieves; yea, Sacrilegious
thieves; yet he does not offer to pull down the Temple, and to turn it to
Profane uses, though they had profaned it; or transfer it to build them
houses, as our men do, with the ruins of Gods House; or to take away the
lands, tithes, and revenues of those Priests, by whose neglect and default, the
Holy Temple became thus grossly abused, either to maintain their lawful Wars,
or to continue their unlawful delights; but he deals better and takes away
the abuse, by driving away the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and out of
the Courts of the Lords House, and overthrowing the tables of the money
changers, and the seats of them that sold Doves; and so he restored the House
of Prayer to its old use and Pristine Dignity, to be a fit House for Gods
service: and so should we restore things abused, to their old and good former
use; and not take them to our selves, or give them away to others.

3. Reason it self teaches us to take this course, 3. What Reason teaches us
in this case, of good things abused.
and to distinguish betwixt that fault, which proceeds, ex natura facti, out
of the nature of the fact, and that which springs, ex abusu boni, from the
abuse of that which is good; for if the thing be simply evil, no circumstance,
no dispensation can make it good; and therefore it should be wholly rejected
and abolished; because, as Aristotle says, Cujus usus simpliciter malus est,
Arist. Topic. 1. Si usus principalis alicujus rei sit mortifer, mortiferam
quoque rem ipsam efficiet.
ipsum quodque malum esse, necesse est; that thing, whose use is simply evil,
must needs be likewise evil of it self; but if the fault be not in the thing it
self; but adventitious, in usu agentis, in the use, or rather in the abuse, of
the agent; then certainly the thing it self, as being good, ought to be
retained, and the abuse only is to be removed or amended.

And therefore the endowing of Gods Church with means to maintain Gods service,
or the giving of our goods to the use of Gods Worship, whether it be praying to
him, or preaching to his people, Navar. Enchi^id. c. 14.
or relieving his members; being not only simply good, but also most
excellently good, both commanded, and commended by God himself, it is a Maxim,
Things once dedicated to God, may not at any time, by any body, be alienated
from the Church.
even in nature, and confirmed by mere reason, that Semel Deo dicatum, non est
ad usus humanos ulterius transferendum, that which is once given and dedicated
for, and to Gods service, which is a service acceptable to God, ought not
afterward by any means be any more transferred to man's uses; because, as Plato
says, Quae recte data sunt, eripi non licet; those things, that are well
given, ought not to be taken back again; and because, as the Fathers say, Bis
Dei sunt, quae sic Dei sunt; God has in all dedicated things, that are given
to uphold his service, a double right and interest.

1. As his own Creatures, and gift given to man. And

2. As in a thankful acknowledgment of Gods goodness, the gift of man back
again to God; which twofold cord tieth them so strong, that this sin deserves
no less, than the heavy curse of Anathema, for any one, not consecrated, to do
the service of God, to challenge them and to take them away from Gods service,
and the donors first institution; whereupon, not only the Divines but also the
Philosophers and Canonists have concluded, 6. Decret. de reg. juris. Plato
Phileb. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. Plin. 2. Ep. l. 10. Epist. 74, 75.
that, Si facta aedes sit, licet collapsa sit jam, religio tamen ejus occupavit
locum: If an house be once dedicated to God, though afterward it should fall
down, and be utterly demolished, so that the ruins of it could scarce be seen;
yet, the soil and ground of it is still holy and religious, and not to be
employed to any civil or profane uses.

And therefore I say that those men, which have or do or shall, under the
color of Reforming the Church, and the pretense of any law, rob the Church,
and deprive either the Bishops or Ministers of their houses, lands, or tithes,
or any other portion, which has been given to the Church, and for the service
of God, are Thieves, and Sacrilegious thieves, be they who you will, and their
pretenses what they will.

Two sorts of men guilty of Sacrilege under pretense of law.
And here I must tell you, that I find two sorts of men, that may be questioned
for being guilty of this sin of Sacrilege.

1. The Spirituall-men, the Bishops and other Priests, the Ministers of Gods
Church, that have made away the lands, houses, and goods of the Church.

2. The Lay-Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, and others that take away the goods,
lands, and houses of the Church; and all, as both these sorts of men pretend,
by the right and benefit of the Law, and therefore no ways offending, and so
not to be taxed for any Sacrilege.

But to discuss these points, and to find out the truth, I say, that although
the Pope be not the (...), the great Antichrist that was expected to come into
the Church, as I have fully showed in my book de Antichristo: yet, I doubt not,
but that he is (...), the great Sacrilegus, and the chiefest Sacrilegious
person, that ever these Kingdoms saw; as hereafter, I shall more fully declare
unto you.

1 Spiritual men Sacrilegious, and how.
Next I say, that others, Bishops and Priests especially of his Church; may be
as indeed many of them have been, very Sacrilegious, and robbers of the Church
of Christ; as when they let out either by Lease or fee-farm, to their children,
friends, or for fine, the lands, houses, or any other goods and possessions of
the Church, to the loss and prejudice of the Church, and to disinable their
successors, to discharge their duties and the service of God as they ought to
do.

Paul that, Where no Law is, there is no transgression; Romans 4.15.
and there was no Law to inhibite them to lease out their lands to whom they
would; nay, the Law gave them leave and empowered them to do it; and therefore
no Sacrilege nor offense in them in all that they did, when they did nothing
but according to Law.

Human law must not entrench, nor can infringe the law of God, nor any ways
allow the thing, that should prejudice the service of God; neither do I
believe, that the laws of our Christian Kings, and Princes ever intended so to
do; for it is an old rule in law, that, Praelatus ecclesiae statum, and
possessiones meliorare potest, sed deteriorare non potest, nec debet.

But when it was alleged and manifested in Parliaments that the houses
belonging to the Church, being ruined or far out of reparation, and the lands
either wast or not well managed, could not be improved to the best advantage
and benefit of the Church, without the Tenants and present Occupiers thereof
had some competent time therein: therefore the pious Kings enacted their laws,
not to force but to license Cathedrals and Colleges to lease out their lands
and possessions, Why Bishope and Clergymen we^e permitted to grant le^ses of
the lands and revenues of the Church.
not to make their children and friends Knights and Ladies, or to fill their
own coffers with fines, to the great prejudice of their successors, and the
neglect and treading down of Gods service, but that the revenue, and the
inheritance of the Church might be improved, and the best advantage made of it
for the glory of God and the furtherance of Gods service, by the instruction of
his people, and relieving his poor members, for which ends it was first
dedicated unto God.

Therefore, when either Bishop or any other Clergy man, from the letter of the
law, does pervert the end and abuse the meaning of the law; I make it a case of
Conscience and demand, Whether such men, as do let out the lands and houses of
the Church for their own private gain, and not for the benefit of Gods Church
and the advancement of Gods service, do not commit this horrible sin of
Sacrilege? For my part, I conceive them to be the worst and most Sacrilegious
persons of all others, that should know the truth, and not give such ill
examples both of Covetousness and Sacrilege unto their neighbors: How the
Bishops and other Clergymen may lease their Lands without Sacrilege.
but let them lease what they will for the benefit of Gods Church, the
furtherance of Religion, and the no-prejudice of their successors, and they
shall never find me to oppose them; But otherwise, to lease the lands of the
Church, that is better worth then a 100 l. per annum, for less then a 100 s.
for to make our children great and the Church poor, to benefit our selves and
to prejudice Gods service, and to say, We have a law, that warrants us to do
it; We have Acts of Parliament that allow it, and have the practice and
presidents of other Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, that have done it; is but to
say, as the Jews said to Pilate, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die.
And ought he therefore to die, think you, because, these Jews had such a law? I
verily think, not so; and I think likewise, that though you have, or should
have, a law to take away and alienate the rights of the Church; yet you should
not do it, if you love the Church, or do any ways fear God.

And for the practice of some other Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, I confess
heretofore many of them have done bad enough, and worse, in my mind, then the
worst of lay men; for them to sell the rights of the Church, and so, with
Judas, to betray their Master Christ; but Vivitur praeceptis non exemplis; if
the practice and presidents of others, would or could excuse our faults, then
Drunkards, Whore-masters, and Murderers might easily find presidents enough to
excuse their wickedness: and so I know the Sacrilegious persons may as easily
find the like.

But I shall hereafter show you how and by whose power and by what means, these
our Laws and Acts of Parliament, for the alienating, By whose power the laws
for leasing and passing away the Church Lands came to be made. Consider that.
leasing and selling of the revenues of the Church came to be made, and leave
it to any pious mind, and conscientious man to consider, Whether they ought, in
the strictness thereof, to be observed or not: and not rather commend the care
and great piety of our late most gracious King, and now glorious Martyr Charles
the I. Who a little to curb the extravagancies and large extent of our laws, by
his regal Authority wrote his letters to all Bishops, Deans, and Chapters,
that they should lease out their lands for no longer term, then 21 years, as it
appears by this his most gracious and pious Letter, directed unto my self,
the Dean, and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of Bangor; which, for the honor
and praise and our thankfulness to so pious and so Religious a King, for his
care and love to the Church and service of God, I thought it my duty to insert
it in this place.

To our Trusty, and wel-beloved, the Dean of Bangor. Charles Rex.
TRusty and welbeloved, We greet you well. We have lately taken the State of
our Cathedral and Collegiat Churches into our Princely Consideration, that We
may be the better able to preserve that livelihood, which as yet is left unto
them. Upon this deliberation We find, that of later times, there has not risen
a greater inconvenience, then by turning Leases of one and twenty years into
Lives; for by that means, the present Dean and Chapter put great Fines into
their Purses, to enrich themselves, their wives and children, and leave their
Successors, of what deserts soever, to Us, and the Church, destitute of that
growing means, which else would come in to help them. By which course, should
it continue, scarce any of them could be able to live and keep house, according
to their Place and Callings. We know the Statute makes it alike lawful for a
Dean and Chapter to let their Leases for the Term of one and twenty years, or
three Lives; but time and experience have made it apparent, that there is a
great deal of difference between them, especially in Church-Leases, where men
are commonly in years before they come to those Places. These are therefore to
will and command you, upon peril of Our utmost displeasure, and what shall
follow thereon, that notwithstanding any Statute, or any other pretense
whatsoever, you presume not to let and Lease belonging to your Church into
Lives, that is not in Lives already. And further, where any fair opportunity is
offered you, if any such be, you fail not to reduce such as are in Lives into
Years. And We do likewise will and require, that these our Letters may remain
upon Record in your own Register-Books, and in the Register of the Lord Bishop
of that Dioces, that he may take notice of these our Commands unto you, and
give Us and our Royal Successors knowledge, if you presume in any sort to
disobey them. O that the mind and piety of this most godly King, expressed in
this Letter, had bin observed by all our Predecessors, Bishops, Deanes, and
Chapters; the which I will do, and punctually observe it, by the grace of God.
And further, whereas in Our late Instructions, We have commanded all our
Bishops respectively, not to let any Lease, after We have named any of them to
a better Bishopric, but did not in those Instructions name the Deans, who yet
were intended by Us: These are therefore to declare unto you, that no Dean
shall presume to renew any Lease, either into Lives or Years, after such time
as We have nominated him either to a better Denary, or a Bishopric, having
observed, that at such times of remove, many men care not what, or how they
let, to the prejudice of the Church and their Successors. And this is Our
express Command to you, your Chapter, and your Successors, which in any case
We require both you, and them, strictly to observe, upon pain of Our high
displeasure, and as you and they will answer the contrary at your and their
utmost perils.

Given under Our Signet at Our Manor of Greenwich, the Two and Twentieth day
of June, in the Tenth year of our Reign.

Whereby you may perceive, that the same holy Spirit that led this blessed King
to be of this mind, does now likewise lead me to be of the same mind; that no
Bishop, Dean, or Chapter, ought to Lease ou^ the Lands and Revenues of the
Church, for any longer Term than 21. years; For if they could not Lease them
for three Lives, though set to the utmost value, without a great deal of wrong
and prejudice to their Successors, as this Blessed and most Pious King, did
most rightly conceive, then certainly, they might not Set and Lease those Lands
for a 100. shillings, that were well worth a 100 pounds per annum, and that for
a 100. or a 1000. years, without much more wrong and prejudice done unto their
Successors, and a very ill example of covetousness and injustice unto all
others.

2. 2. The lay sacrilegious persons: and why.
The other sort of sacrilegious persons that do commit this horrible sin, and
yet shelter themselves under the shadow of Law, are those lay Lords, Knights,
and Gentlemen, that have received these Ecclesiastical Rights and Revenues,
from the former sacrilegious persons, and these think themselves most innocent,
because they have both Law to countenance them, and the Churchmen to confirm
them in what they do: Yet you know, that, if the Thief which steals the
goods, cannot be freed, the Receiver of those stolen goods cannot be justified.
But I shall, by Gods help, hereafter more fully show the Sacrilege of these
men, that have so unjustly received these goods and possessions of the Church
from those that were far more unjust than themselves, and are therefore like
Simeon and Levi, brethren in this evil, and so liable to the like punishment.

CHAP. IV.
Of two sorts of sacrilegious persons that rob the Church of Christ, without
any color or pretense of Law, but indeed contrary to all Law.

SEcondly, for the other sort of Thieves and Sacrilegious persons, 2. The
sacrilegious persons contrary to all Law, of two kinds.
that rob the Church of God, without any the least pretense of Right or Law,
but apparently contrary to the Law both of God and man; I find them to be of
two special kinds: That is, 1. Impious Patrons, whether Clergy or Laity, that
do sell the Ecclesiastical Dignities, or any wages sinisterly bestow them. 2.
Vnj^st Parishioners, that do fraudulently detain, or most maliciously deny the
Tithes, and other just Duties of the Church.


1. In former times, Patrons were appointed to be, 1. Patrons.
as their names import, Fathers and Guardians unto the Church of Christ; to see
good men and able scholars placed and planted in all Parishes, Impious
Patrons, to whom likened.
to teach the people of God; and so they were, as the Ecclesiastical Stories do
record unto us: But now, such is the corruption of our times, that our Patrons,
for the most part, I fear, cannot be said to be, like Augustus Caesar, that
found Rome a City of Bricks, and left it of Marble, to cause their Parishes to
be supplied with better and abler men than they were. But they are rather like
Reh^boam, 1 Reg. 14.27.
the son of Solomon, that found in the Temple of God, Shields of Gold, but left
in it Shields of Brass: So do many Patrons, present men worse and worse; What
they do.
for when any golden-mouthed Chrysostom is banished, or any learned Augustine
is dead, or pious Bernard removed, they will presently name Priests of Brass,
and brazen-faced Priests unto the Churches, that deserve no better than Brass
for their Ministry, and the G^ld they will reserve for themselves. Numbers 22.
And Balaams ass, if he can but speak, and come laden with Coin, shall be
preferred: And, as the Poet says, Si nihil attuleris, ibis, Homere, for as.
Though Homer comes to seek the Place that shall be void, if he comes with
nothing to give, he shall get nothing of them. For, who knows not the practice
of our times to be, The usual practice in these times:
for the Priest, that seeks the Living, either to pay some good sum of money
for it, or to compound for the greater, or some part of the Tithes, or to marry
either kinswoman or servant, before the poor Clerk, or rather simple Clerk, can
be presented to any Church.

Exodus 5.11.
The Egyptians took away the straw from the Israelites, and yet required of
them, the whole tale of Bricks as formerly; which was a hard task, and a great
tyranny: But these Patrons take away the corn, and leave for the poor Priests
nothing but the straw. They will have all the Gleablands, and the Priests shall
glean for their maintenance; and these Grand Masters commonly must have the
greater Tithes, or at least some part or parcel thereof, Virgil. Aeneid. l. 2.
and the Priest shall have but Reliquias Danaum atque immitis Achillis, what
these Canker-worms shall leave them, a cloud for Juno, and a shadow instead of
a Water-Nymph. And yet they must exceed in the tale of their Bricks, and bring
far more than their Predecessors brought, they must study more, and preach
oftener, than ever was done in former times; which is a hard case, and yet as
true a case as any that you shall find in all Sir Edward Cook's Reports.

But though, like Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that erected an Altar against the
Altar of God, and made Priests, to serve at that Altar, of the lowest, the
meanest, and basest of the people, that the greatest gain might redound into
his own hands, because none buys deerer, and gives larger, than the greater
dunse: So our Patrons of Ecclesiastical preferments, in many, I dare not say in
most places, are resolved to sell their Churches, as Judas sold his Christ, and
his Savior, to them that will give most for them; yet because, Gregor. and
habetur 1. q. 1. Q^isquis.
as S. Gregory says, Partem habebit cum Simone, qui contra Simonaicos, pro
officii sui loco vehementer non exarserit: He shall have his portion with Simon
Magus, the Proto-Simonist, the first unlawful buyer of holy graces, which,
according to his place, does not do his best to suppress the sin of Simonie,
that is, the buying and selling of spiritual graces and promotions; I will a
little unfold the heynousness of this sin, that, as many of them, I fear, are
settled in their resolutions, to continue the doing of it, so they may the
better know hereby, what they do, and what a horrible sin they do commit, to
the great dishonor of God, and the damage of the Church of Christ.

Simonie usually practiced in Rome, and by former Popes.
And I say, that the Pope is the prime and principal father of this
Bastard-brood, and that nothing was wont to be rifer at Rome than this sin of
Simonie, which did therefore seem the less sinful, because it was acted by the
more powerful Patron. And though we read it in their own Decrees, that,
Tolerabilior est Macedonii haeresis, qui asserit Spiritum Sanctum esse servum
patris and filii, quam haec Symonaica pactio; quia isti faciunt Spiritum
Sanctum servum suum: ut ait Terasius, Patriarcha Constantinopolitanus: This
selling of Church Livings is more intolerable than the heresy of Macedonius,
who said, That the Holy Ghost was the servant of the Father and of the Son,
Bern. in Convers. Pauli, Sermon 1.
because they make the Holy Ghost to become their servant, as Terasius says to
Pope Adrian. Yet S. Bernard, that saw much, but not all, says, Sacri gradus
dati sunt in occasionem turpis lucri, and quaestum aestimant pietatem, Holy
Orders are now become the occasion of filthy lucre, and gain is counted
godliness: And this Simonie is Sacrilege indeed; and not only Musculus cites
these Verses that were made of Pope Alexander, Musculus in cap. 6. Johan.
Vendit Alexander claves, altaria, Christum;
Vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius.
but Durandus also says, That Simonie does so reign in the Church of Rome,
Durand. de modo celebrandi Concilii. Extra de officio judicis delegati ex part
N. in Glossa.
as if it were no sin at all:

And their Canonists, as Bartolus, Felinus, Theodoricus, and some others of the
Pope's parasites, are so impudent as to averr, that the selling of these
things, and taking money for Ecclesiastical promotions, can be neither
Sacrilege nor Simonie in the Pope, because he is the Lord of them all, and
accounts them all his own.

But since we have bidden Adieu to him and his corruptions; his Simonie and his
Sacrilege, blessed be God for it, does not so much prejudice us: and
therefore, letting him to do what he will with his own, and either to stand or
fall to his own Master; I will address my self to show the manifold evils and
wickedness of our own Sacrilegious and Simonaical Patrons, that sell those
Benefices, which they should freely bestow. And I say,

1. The selling of Ecclesiastical-Livings, against all Laws. 1. Of Moses: Genesis
47.22.
That this buying and selling of Church-goods (for both these acts are
relatives, and to be put in the same predicament, when as nothing is sold that
is not bought, and e contra) is a thing contrary to all Laws, and to the
judgment of all good men; for,

1. The Laws of Moses provided so liberally for the Priests and Levites, that
the buying and selling of Priests places was never known nor heard of among the
Jews, until Jeroboam's time; who, as he sold them, so he sold himself to do
evil, and to commit wickedness.

2. Pharaoh was so religious, that when in the great Dearth, 2. Of the Gentiles.
all the land of Egypt was sold, the Priests had such a portion of Corn
allotted them, that they needed not to sell one foot of their land; and
therefore I doubt not but Pharaoh will rise in judgment against all those that
take away the lands of the Priests, as our Gentlemen, and Soldiers strive to
do, or do sell the Spiritual promotions unto the Priests, as our Simonaical
Patrons do.

3. The Law of Grace says, Freely have you received, that is, 3 Of grace.
all the graces and gifts of God, therefore, freely give, Math. 10.8.
especially what you give to God, and for the Service of God, and sell it not.

4. The Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws forbid nothing more, 4. Of the Civil and
Canon Law.
and with greater care, than the buying and selling Of Spiritual Offices: And
the ancient Fathers, learned Schoolmen, and all the later Classes of Casuists,
Jesuits, and of our zealous purest Protestant Writers, together with the
wisest Princes and Statesmen, that have established many Statute-Laws against
this sin, are all infinitely deceived, if this buying and selling of
Ecclesiastical preferments, be not infinitely prejudicial to the Church of God,
and therefore a most heinous and a horrible sin against the Law of God.

2. I say, that this buying and selling of Church Livings, 2. This selling and
buying of Church Livings will be the decay of Learning and Religion.
will be the diminution of all Learning, and the lessening of the number of
Learned men: for when the world sees, that after a man has spent his time,
first in School, where he suffers a great deal of sorrows, and thinks no
creature more miserable than himself, when he sees all others free, and
himself only (as he supposes) bound under the rod; then in the University,
where most of the Scholars are, as Phalaris says to Leontides, (...), needy
of all things but of hunger and fear; How difficult it is to become a Scholar.
or else, if they escape these rocks, the better part, do, with continual
watching and studying wear their bodies, and tire their spirits, and spend all
the means they can procure from their friends for many years together, and in
the end, after all this, cannot get a poor Parsonage or Vicarage, unless they
pay for the lease of their wearied and almost worn out life, to the hazarding
of their souls, and all other Preferments when the truth of their buying is
made known; What Fathers will be so ^^provident; I had almost said, so
irreligious, I may truly say, so unworldly wise, or so little prudent in
managing of their estates, as to cast away their means and their sons upon such
sourges? I think I may say with the Poet, Invitatus ad haec aliquis de ponte
negabit.

A beggars brat, knowing these inconveniences, would scarce accept these
Offices, and discharge those duties they do owe, upon these conditions.

ought not, to respect our own gain, and look after our own profit; but, as the
Apostles and servants of Christ, our chiefest care should be for the peoples
good; because our reward shall be great in Heaven.

Commonwealth, we owe our selves and our service wholly unto our Prince, and
to our Country; yet, some convenient reward will make us the more willing to
serve. So in the Church of God; though I must preach willingly, and woe is me,
being called to that office, if I preach not so, and discharge all other
Priestly offices cheerfully, rather for the gain of Souls then for any other
the greatest gain in the World; yet, necessary maintenance will enable me, or
any other, to do my duty the more cheerfully, and with the more encouragement:
no man can deny the same; Luke 10.17. Matthew. 10.10.
and our Savior tells us, The workman is worthy of his hire: and therefore, as
the Ministers of Christ do give unto you spiritual things, so reason shows,
what the Apostle sets down, that you should give unto them, and not sell
unto them, these temporal things: that so not only we which are already entered
into this calling, may discharge our duties the more joyfully; The reward of
learning, is the best means to increase, and to continue learning.
but also others, which as yet are not of this calling, may, by the reward of
learning, be induced to undertake the Ministry, that otherwise is despicable
enough in the world, the more willingly; because, as Symmachus says, Virtus
aemula alitur exemplo honoris alieni; virtue is cherished, and set forward,
with the example and sight of other men's honor; as Alcibiades, with the glory
and honor given to Miltiades, was spurred forward to the like achievements,
that he might attain unto the like glory; whereas otherwise, as it is a Maxim
in warlike Affairs that exprobrata militia creditur, Take away the reward, and
learning perishes.
quae irremunerata transitur; that service is thought base, and that warfare
not worth the following, which is unworthy of any reward; so it is true in
Academical sciences and all other Arts whatsoever, that Inhonorata virtus
languescit, Virtue despised and left unrewarded will soon faint and languish;
and all good Arts, even of themselves without pressure, will speedily decay;
which was the only course, and the most spiteful, that Julian took, to root
out Christianity, to take away the maintenance of the Ministers; for he knew
that, as both Seneca and Tacitus says, Sublatis studiorum praemiis, ipsa
studia pereunt.

3. The buying and selling of Church livings, will be the decay of all
hospitality.
3. I say that this buying and selling of spiritual promotions in the Church of
God, will be, (as it is indeed, and has been of a long time, ever since the
birth of this bastard brat) the extirpation of all hospitality among the
Clergy: The Apostle tells us that a Bishop should be given to hospitality, and
Saint Augustine to enforce this duty, the sooner to be observed; says, Aug. de
verbis Domini sermon. 25.
Foecundus est ager pauperum, cito reddit dominantibus fructum. Dei est pro
parvis magna pensare: the field of the poor is very profitable, and yields
his fruit very quickly, and that plentifully, because it is the property of
God, How our g^od works do further Faith in others.
to render great things to us, for the small things that we give to him. And
Saint Gregory says, Egentis mentem doctrinae sermo non penetrat, si hunc (vel
illum sermonem) apud ejus animum manus m sericordiae non commendat: the Word of
God Preached does not pierce the heart of a needy man, If they take away our
lands, and sell our livings, how can we relieve the poor?
unless the hand of mercy does commend that Word and reach it home unto him;
which is a very excellent, true, and most worthy saying; worthy, to be
remembered, and to be practiced of all Divines: And yet now, in these times, and
amongst us, that, I fear, is true, which the poor complain of; That there is
but small hospitality among the Clergy.

But they ought to consider, what the Philosopher says, Nihil dat quod non
habet, he that has but scarce enough to maintain himself, can spare but very
little to relieve others: and therefore, seeing a Minister must not get his
living by any other means, then by the means of his Ministry; and that, by his
calling to be a Minister, and all his pains and diligence in his calling, he
can get no means, unless he buys his living; and when he buys it, he is
commonly set so far in debt, that, in haste, The poor are not able, to relieve
the poor.
he shall not be able to recover himself out of his creditors books; How is it
possible that a Minister, Parson or Vicar, should be able to be hospitable unto
others, when, as the Popish Priests were wont to say dirge's for their dinners;
So these poor Preachers must read Lectures for their maintenance; which is many
times, as I have seen it, in some places, made up out of the poor men's box; and
the Lecturer must preach placentia, lest his voluntary benefactors, if he be
too bold in their reproofs, should substract the pittance of their
contribution. A most lamentable thing, that a Preacher of Gods Word, that ought
freely to speak the truth, must be thus fettered, for want of means; and that
they, Ministers in some places, and at some times relieved out of the poor men's
box.
which should have plenty that they might be enabled to relieve the poor,
should be brought to that scantling and penury, as to be forced to be relieved
themselves, out of the portion of the poor: O consider this, all ye
Sacrilegious patrons, that sell your livings, and forget God, lest he remember
you, and tear you to pieces, while there is none to help you.

4. If the observation of precedent things may presage any future thing, 4. The
buying and s^lling of Church livings, is the presage of some great evil unto
the Church.
I say that this buying and selling of Church Livings does portend and
fore-signify some great and imminent evil, both to the Church and state; for
Socrates in his Eccles. Hist. tell us, that when some wicked Soldiers had
profaned the Church, and had Sacrilegiously robbed her Priests; as now our
soldiers strive and study how to do the like: one standing by, said (...):
This abuse of Gods house fore-sheweth no good thing to come: and Socrates
says, he was not deceived, because that in a very short time after, it
happened according as he feared; and Alphonsus de castro says, as he is cited
by the Bishop of Oxford, that the flourishing Churches of Greece and Armenia
were forsaken of God, and had their Candle-sticks that upheld the light of the
Gospel removed, when they began to maintain, that it Was lawful to buy and
sell the lands, goods, and revenues of the Church.

And therefore I advise and wish all that hunger and thirst after the Church-
lands, houses, and goods, and all covetous Patrons to take heed of this sin, of
buying and selling what belongs unto the Church; or to take away the lands or
houses of the Church, which is a sin, so dangerous to themselves, so
prejudicial to the Church, and so ominous to the Commonwealth* And let them
remember what I said before, that if Pharaoh, in the time of that great famine
which was in Egypt, Genesis 47.
made such provision for the Priests, that although all the other his subjects
were constrained to sell their lands for sustenance; yet, the lands of the
Priests were not sold, neither had any of them any need to sell them: and if
Popish Priests that either preached not at all, or preached their own
traditions, or some fabulous narrations and fictions out of their legends, were
so richly kept, and still are, in France, Spain, and Italy, on Saint Peter's
patrimony; Why should they deal so hardly and so niggardly with the Ministers
of the Gospel, that do sincerely Preach the truth of Jesus Christ unto their
people, as to sell unto them or take away from them that little, which is left
and is most due unto them.

Or if all this will not serve to withdraw them from this sin, let them take
heed of the Prophets woe, that cries out against all such dealers, saying Vae
accumulanti non sua: Woe be to him that heapeth together those things that are
none of his own; Hab. 2.6.
and especially those things, that are the Churches goods; for he shall find
that this gain does ever bring a rod at its back. When as Zophar says, God
shall cause him to vomit up that, which he has devoured, Job. 20.15.
and shall cast them out of his belly; and render vengeance to him, for the
detriment and injury, that he has done to his Church and servants.

The punishment of Sacrilege greater then the punishment of Idolatry. Exodus 20.
2 Reg. 5.27.
And this vengeance, Saint Augustine notes to be more grievous than the
punishment of Idolatry: for whereas God threateneth to punish Idolaters but to
the third and fourth Generation; we find that the Sacrilege of Jeroboam, in
selling the Priests Office, provoked God to root out his house, and all his
posterity from off the earth; and the simony of Gehezi was punished with such a
Leprosy, as stuck both upon himself, and upon all his whole seed for ever.

Why Sacrilege is so odious to God, and so prejudicial and infestuous to man.
And no marvel that this sin of Sacrilege should be so odious unto God, and so
infestuous and pernicious unto man; because that, although other, sins, as
Idolatry, Murder, Adultery, Theft, and the like, may be be said to be but, as
it were, private and particular sins, that infect none, or but few, besides the
doers of them; yet, this sin of Sacrilege is a public and a far-spreading
sin, not only against some particular persons, but against a multitude of men
and against the whole body of Religion, when by defrauding and taking away the
maintenance of the Ministers, the whole Ministry of Gods service is impaired,
and suffered, nay caused, to be neglected and decayed; How Sacrilege brings
forth ^theism, Idolatry and all Wickedness.
whereby not only Idolatry, and false worship has an open gap, and a broad way
of entrance into Gods Church, but also Atheism; and no worship of God, but all
corruption and lewdness must be the chiefest fruit that can grow upon this
accursed tree of Sacrilege; when either the Soldiers or any others, of the
Lords or Gentry, take the lands and houses of God into their possessions, or
the covetous Patrons do sell and make Merchandise of any Ecclesiastical
preferment.

2. The Sacrilege of the people.
2. As the irreligious Patrons do offend in selling the Ministers living, that
he should freely bestow upon him; so the Parishioners are as ready and as
greedy to detain and keep back that right, which is due to the Priest by Gods
law, and the Minister has also bought from his Patron, as the Patron was to
sell what he should give; And it is strange to think, how witty they are to go
to Hell, if God be not the more merciful unto them, to hold them from it! What
shifts and tricks they have to hold back their hands from paying their Tithes;
and how loath they are to set out their Tithes and think all that lost that is
laid out for the Priest.

But alas, they should know, that herein they deceive not us alone that are the
Priests, but their own souls also, that are more damnified by this their
Sacrilege, then the Priests can be by the loss of their Tithes; because that
hereby they rob not men, but God himself; for that the Priests (...) but the
Lords Receivers and his Rent gatherers, The Ministers are Gods Rent gatherers.
of that small acknowl^dgment, which he requires from us, his Tenants at will
for all the great things he gives to us, to be repaid to him again, as the
testimony of our duty and thankfulness, and the stipend that he has allotted
to them, that are to serve him at his Altar; And therefore, when the Israelites
gave unto their Levites, as our people in many places do give unto their
Preachers, the blind, the lame, and the maimed, the leanest Lamb and the
leightest Sheave, the Lord complains, Mal. 3.8, 10. Lev. 27.30.
that they robbed and spoiled him in Tithes and Offerings; because the Lord
says directly, that all the Tithe of the Land, is the L^rds: and all that, is
Holy unto the Lord.

But seeing that this Sacrilegious Age, has produced and brought forth tot
manus auferendi, so many hands to take away the rights of the Church, and so
many tongues to speak against, and adversaries to oppose the truth of the
Doctrine of Tithes, and to take away the Lands, Houses, and Possessions of the
Church:

I shall leave it to be more fully handled toward the latter end of this
discourse and Declaration against Sacrilege.

CHAP. V.
The words of King David, in the 2 Samuel 7.1, 2. and their division; when they
were spoken: And how, or in what sense Sitting and Standing are commonly taken
in the Scriptures: And of the two persons that are here conferring together.

IF you look into the 2 of Sam. 7.1, 2. verses, you shall find it thus written.

Afterward, When the King sat in his House, and the Lord had given him rest
round about from all his enemies: The King said unto Nathan the Prophet,
Behold, now I dwell in a house of Cedar trees, and the Ark of God remaeineth in
the Curtains: and so forth.

For the better understanding of which words, you may observe that the sum of
this whole Chapter is 3. fold, and contains these 3. parts.

1. David's deliberation. The sum of the Chapter 3. fold.
2. Nathans replication. 3. David's gratulation.
1. The Deliberation is about an Oratory and Temple, 1. The Deliberation.
or House to be Erected and Dedica^^d to God, for his servants to meet in, to
worship him, and this is delivered unto us in the two first verses here set
down.

2. The Replication of the Prophet is two fold. 1. Affirmative, and erroneous
or mistaken, verse. 3. 2. The Replication.
2. Negative, and right; from the 3. verse. to the 18.


3. The gratulation is in an humble acknowledgement, 3. The Gratulation.
and a grateful remembrance of the fore-passed benefits of God, with an
earnest, and hearty prayer, put up to God for the continuance of his favor
unto him, from the 18. verse, to the end of the Chapter.

And I shall here treat of no more than of the deliberation, or the P^^phets
consideration, what he intended to do; touching which, we are to observe these
three things: The 3. things observable in the deliberation.
1. The time, which has a twofold manifestation of it, 1. When he sat in his
house. 2. When he was safe from his enemies.
2. The Persons deliberating, and they are 2. 1. David, the King. 2. Nathan,
the Prophet.
3. The matter deliberated, and considered of, betwixt the Prince and the
Prophet; and that was, the meanness and baseness of the then House of God; and
therefore he would be at the cost and charges to make it beautiful, and to
erect him an House befitting the Majesty and greatness of God.


And this his good intention he justifies and confirms, the same to be both
honest and good, by the consequent of Congruity, that it was fit it should be
so, in respect of a double comparison.

1. Of himself with God. 2. Of his Court with God's Ark.
poor creature, have an house to dwell in, and God that is the Creator of all
the World, has not an House to put his Ark in and for his servants to meet in,
to hear his Laws, and to 'do him service.

Court is stately covered over with Cedars, but the Ark of God is but very
meanly and basely covered over with a Canopie of skins, to shelter it from the
wind and the weather.

And therefore, conceiving this to be very preposterous, and a far unbeseeming
thing, for him to be better provided for, than his God, he conferreth with the
Prophet, and tells him, he intends to rectify this obliquity, and to build God
an House, more agreeable to his Majesty. These are the parts and parcels of the
Kings deliberation and conference with the Prophet and his Bishop Nathan. And

1. The time of this deliberation. How Sitting and Standing are commonly
interpreted.
1. For the time; It is said, when the King sat in his house, and the Lord had
given him rest round about, from all his enemies. So you see,

1. It was when the King sat in his house; and these relative words sitting
and standing, are noted by Divines to have some difference of sense and
acceptance: As, standing being commonly taken in good part, and sitting in the
evil and worser sense: as in these places, where standing is well spoken of,
Ezech. 3.24. 1 Cor. 10.12. 2 Cor. 1.24. Ephesians. 6.14. 1 Pet. 5.12. Ps. 135.1, 2.
Ps. 122.2. 2 Reg. 3.14.
The Spirit entered into me and set me upon my feet; and he that thinks he
stands, let him take heed lest he fall; and stand in the Lord as dear
children; and by faith ye stand; and, stand having your loins girt about with
truth; and, this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand; and, praise the
Lord, all ye his servants, ye that stand in the courts of the Lords House; and,
our feet shall stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem; and, the Lord of Hosts lives,
before whom I stand. In all which quotations, and the like, the word standing,
has reference unto good, and is taken in the better sense, and so to be
interpreted. And in these places, and the like, where the name of sitting
runs into obloquie, and is attributed to iniquity: Iniquity sits on a
talent of lead; Zach: 5.7. Ps. 119. Ps. 1.
and, Princes sit and speak against me; and Blessed is the man that has not
sat in the seat of the scornful; and the ungodly person sits lurking in the
theevish corners of the streets; and so in may other places, it is interpreted
in the worse sense.

How the word sat, is here taken.
But here the word, sat in his house, is of a milder meaning, and of
indifferent acceptance, and rather to be interpreted in the better sense, as
betokening the government of the King: for so [the King sat in his house]
signifies, that he sat in his Seat of Government; and this sense has been
ancient and obvious in our reading, as, where the Poet says, -- Celsa sedet
Aeolus arce. King Aeolus fitteth in his high Tower, and manageth his
State-matters; and in the Germane speech, they say, that to sit, signifies to
reign: as the Emperor sat, that is, reigned so many years. And this is the
modern meaning of this phrase even amongst us; for when we would show, how
long any one has exercised the Office, and discharged the Place of a Bishop,
Judge, or Prefect amongst us, we are wont to say, he sat in that place so
long. And to sit, commonly signifies to be in rest and quiet; and is opposite
to, affairs and business: As where it is said, Shall your brethren go to
battle, and you sit still? And, where the Poet says, -- Sedeant spectentque
Latini: Let the Latins sit still and look on. And in both these senses, King
David may be said to sit in his house, without any great matter in which sense
we understand the word; though I rather take it in the later way, because, that

2. The next adjunct of the time is, 2. When wa^ the time, that David had rest
from all his enemies.
when the Lord had given him rest from all his enemies: for this varieth little
or nothing from the former, when he sat in his house: And therefore we may
very well compose them, and confound them together, and put than to signify
the same thing.

But about this rest that is here spoken of, the Expositors cannot all agree,
when it was: whilst they do consider the many Battles that he fought after
this conference that he had with Nathan; and therefore, though some take it for
the peace he had at this present time, yet others, of a quicker sight, do
assign it after the second Victory he had against the Philistines, when he was
such an hammer, so terrible to all the neighbour-Nations, as that the very name
of David and his doings, made them afraid, and glad to sue unto him for peace,
and to take bands of resolution with themselves, to be of good behavior
toward him, and never to provoke him any more. And of this we read in 1 Chronicles.
14.11. when the Philistines came up to Baal-Perazim, and David smote them, and
said, God has broken in upon mine enemies by mine hand, like the breaking
forth of waters; and afterward when they spread themselves abroad in the
valley, 1 Chronicles. 14. v. 16, 17.
and David smote them from Gibeon even to Gazer, and the fame of David went out
into all Lands, and the Lord brought the fear of him upon all Nations.

2. For the persons, that are here conferring together, 2. The persons
deliberating and conferring together.
they are said to be David and Nathan, the King, and the Prophet; two great
Persons, and high Offices, that formerly were contained in one Person, as
Melchisedech was the Priest of the Most High GOD, and King of Salem. And as the
Poet says, Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos. Virgil. l. 3.
And when God divided and distributed these several Offices to several persons,
he conferred them upon two brothers, that is, Moses and Aaron; that so the King
and the Priest might live and love one another like brethren, as I have more
amply showed in my Treatise of The Grand Rebellion. And so King David here
discharges that his duty accordingly: And so likewise, not only the Heathen
Kings, but also the Jewish Kings, the Kings of Israel, and all good Christian
Kings disdained not the friendly familiarity and conference with their Bishops
and Priests, The greatest Kings and P^inces were most familiar with the Priests
O^^tors, and Philosophers.
especially when they consult and deliberate of Religion, or any point that
concerns the Worship and Service of God. For as King Croesus conferred with
Solon the Philosopher: and Alexander King of Macedon consulted often with
Aristotle, and sometimes with Diogenes the Cynick: and King Pyrrhus with his
dear friend Cineas: So Pharaoh King of Egypt called and consulted with his
Priests, that were the Magicians, and deemed the wise men of Egypt, when Moses
came to treat of God's Service. And though Moses appointed 70. men of the
choicest, gravest, and wisest men, that could be found of all the Elders of
Israel to be the Sanhedrim, and as it were a standing Parliament to end all
controversies, and all the civil affairs of the Kingdom; Yet, when the Case of
Religion came in question, and the differences about God's Worship came to be
decided, neither the Kings of Israel, nor the Kings of Juda, to whom the
principal care and custody of God's Laws and Service was committed, did ever
commend the same unto the Sanhedrim to be concluded and settled. But, as King
David here calls and consulteth with Nathan the Prophet, about the building
of God's House; so when Religion was corrupted, and the Service of the True God
neglected, in the time of King Ahab, he calls not the Sanhedrim to rectify
and redress the same; but he leaves the same to be determined and adjudged,
betwixt the Priests of Baal, 1. Reg. 18.17, 18.19, 20. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. and 8,
etc.
and Elias the true Prophet of the Lord; And so did King Asa, Jehosaphat, and
Ezechias, consulted not with their lay Lords, or the Sanhedrim, but with
Azariah the son of Oded the Prophet, and with Esaias, and the rest of God's
Prophets. Nay, when the Wisemen came to inquire for Christ; M^th. 2.4.
Herod, that sought to destroy Him, and his Religion, inquireth not of any, but
of the Chief Priests and Scribes, Where Christ should be born. And so all the
Wise and Christian Emperors, Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, and the rest,
as you may find it in Eusebius, Socrates, Zozomen, and other Ecclesiastical
Historians, had always some special Bishops, with whom they conferred and
consulted about matters of Religion; as Charles the Fifth did with Cassander;
and Henry the Eighth with Bishop Crammer. For they conceived that their Crowns
had the greater Luster when it was in conjunction with the Miter: And therefore
in no great Council was the Man of God ever baulked; but, that they might be
sure to serve God before themselves, and he assured, that while the Church
prospered, the Bishops directed, and they had God and his Messengers amongst
them, all would go right and be safe; and therefore in all, or most Courts of
Conscience, where the Law reached not, they thought none so fit as these men of
conscience, to decide all differences.

Neither could I ever find, that the Church of God was so much pestered with
miseries, and poisoned with Errors, Heresies, and Sects, or Divisions, until
the lay Lords and Gentlemen, like the Long Parliament, neglected their proper
Offices; to look into the affairs of the Commonwealth, and to see Justice and
Judgment truly executed among the people, and began, immittere falcem in
alienam messem, to thrust their sickles into other men's harvest, Esaias. 1.12.
The Church of God never became more miserable, then when the lay people
undertook to conclude and determine points of Religion.
and to intermeddle with that, which concerns them not; as to chop and change
Articles of Religion, and to set down and compose points of faith, when the
Lord says, Quis requisivit haec? Who has required these things at your hands?
It is your duty to come into the Temple, and to perform the service, that David
and Nathan, the King and the Bishops shall prescribe unto you; and to confirm
those Articles of Religion, and cause them in all things to be observed, as the
Parliament did in Queen Elizabeth's days, the 39. Articles of our Religion,
when they are, as those were, settled and concluded by the Bishops, and the rest
of the Clergy in their Convocation: for the Lord tells us plainly, That the
Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they, (that is, the people, be they
what, and whom you will, Sanhedrim of the Jews, or Parliament of any other
Nation) should seek the Law, that is, the Law of God, at his mouth; because he
is the M^ssenger of the Lord of Hosts, that is, to declare his will, and to
expound his Laws unto the people.

But what says the Lord in this Case when the people, be they what you will,
shall usurp the Priests Office, and begin to make new Orders and Ordinances,
for the Service of God, that never required such things at their hands? He
tells them plainly, You are departed out of the way, and you have caused many
to stumble at the Law, that is, by your false glosses, and enjoined
observations thereof; and you have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, says the
Lord of Hosts; that is, you have wronged, and quite thrown out, the Bishops and
Priests from their Offices, which is, to consult with the King to see God
rightly worshipped. And therefore, says the Lord, Malach. 2.7, 8, 9.
I have also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as
you have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law, that is, by
making Religion and my Service, like a nose of wax, to turn which way you
please, when as every one should do the duties that belong unto him; Curabit
praelia Conon.

CHAP. VI.
What the Rest, and peaceable times, of King David wrought. The Prince's
authority in causes Ecclesiastical; and how they should be zealous to see that
God should be justly and religiously served.

THirdly, having seen the times, and the persons, 3. The matter about which
they consulted.
that consulted and conferred together, we are now to consider the fruits, and
effects that this quiet sitting at rest, and peaceable times, wrought in David,
and what was the matter, that these two grave and great Persons do so seriously
deliberate and consult about; And most commonly we find, What peace and
prosperity usually produce.
that rest and peace have been the bane, and surfeit of the mind, to puff it up
with pride; and prosperity has often choked piety, and plenty has made
Religion to pine away, and to be cast upon a bed of security, as Jezabel was
cast upon a bed of fornication. For so Moses says of the Israelites, Dilectus
meus impinguatus recalcitravit; My beloved, fed, fatted, and enlarged, Deuteronomy.
32.15.
kicked with their heels; or, Jesurun waxed fat and kicked, and then he forsook
God that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. And as the
Poet says, Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis, Ovid de art Am. l. 2.

Nec facile est aequa commoda mente pati.
Our hearts do swell, and our minds grow luxurious and riotous, when our
affairs do prosper, and all things succeed as our hearts desire, Our peace and
plenty made us wanton; and our wantonness brought our wars upon us.
and have rest and peace, as now David had, round about us. And so indeed it
fell out with our selves in these Kingdoms now of late; our peace and our
plenty, has undone us, by making us too wanton, to rebel against our King, to
provoke our God to scourge us for that our Wantonness and Rebellion. And
therefore S. Augustine says most truly, Magnae virtutis est cum faelicitate
luctari, ne illiciat, ne corrumpat, ne ipsa subvertat foelicitas; it is a point
of great virtue, to strive with felicity; lest, it inticeth us, corrupts us,
and overthrows us; and so it is a great felicity and happiness, not to be
overcome with felicity, or, not to be undone with prosperity; as many Men,
Towns, and Kingdoms have been many times: for as the said Poet says, Tum, cum
tristis erat, defensa est Ilion armis,

Troy in her adversity was well defended; but alas Militibus gravidum laeta
recepit equum.

Quam facile tadunt splendidae fortunae.
But sitting and jocond she was destroyed. And so it is with many, (...); Their
fair fortunes makes them to fall.

How king David's peace and plenty increased his Piety.
But it was not thus now with King David; for his Rest begat Religion in him;
and his peace, plenty, and prosperity increased his Piety: and as he delights
to recount Gods benefits, so he considers how he may show his thankfulness
for them; and therefore he thus museth and meditateth on the matter.

The sum and substance of David's deliberation.
God has given me a Kingdom, and a Royal stately House; built of Cedars in
that Kingdom. Therefore I will build an House for him, and he has given me
rest round about; therefore I will prepare a place for his Ark, which he
ordained to be the sign and symbol of his presence; and which hitherto has
had no resting place, but many a sad and wearisome perambulations, that now at
last it may rest and be more forced to be transported and carried from place to
place. For though, Enter, praesenter, Deus est, and ubique potenter, God
himself, has an ubiquity of presence, being essentially full, and filling all
places, Supra coelos non elatus, and subter terram non depressus; non exclusus,
nec circumscriptus; yet because his gracious and his powerful presence is
promised to be, 2 Chronicles. 6.41.
and to be showed and extended in a special manner in some places more, and
rather, then in other places, and that place specially is, Exodus 30.26.
where his Ark resideth, and which is called the Ark of his strength, and the
Ark of his Covenant, and the Ark of the Testimony: because he Covenanted and
promised by the tables of that Covenant, Hebr. 9.4.
and the other symbols of his presence, that were kept in that Ark, to be
present and assistant, and most powerfully to bless, and protect, all those
that kept the Covenant, and observed those Testimonies that were preserved in
that Ark; therefore says David, In requital of Gods favors showed unto me, I
will build a House for Gods Ark; that so, the tables of the Covenant, betwixt
God and his people, and the Manna, and the rod of Aaron, which were to be kept
in the Ark, might be the more safely preserved, and rest in one place without
any more wandering, and the people and servants of God which are obliged and
commanded to come to serve God, and to bring their offerings and oblations to
offer unto God before the Ark where it should be, might be the more certain of
the place of its residence, and might with the more convenience, and in a far
better manner, perform their duties, and discharge their service unto God; then
while the Ark wandered from place to place. And this was the result and sum of
David's deliberation, and conference with the Prophet Nathan.

The excellency of Religion, which is the preserver of all happiness.
And it is no wounder, that King David was so Religious, and so punctual, in all
particulars appertaining to Religion and the service of God; because Religion,
as one truly says, is, as the Poles of the World, the Arctick and Antarctick,
or that Mount Atlas, which (the Poets say) holds up Heaven for it stands on
earth, and it reaches to God in Heaven, and it is that which poyseth all
Societies, and all states here below; for, without the faith and belief of Gods
Providence, to oversee our actions, and then to reckon for our transgressions,
and to punish the delinquents, might, craft, and falsehood would sway in the
World alike with men, as it is with the Beasts of the field, and the Fishes of
the Sea; and the Conscience of good and evil would be all one: and Religion, is
that which en^bleth the noblest man, erects his affections, and estates him in
a state of happiness, far above nature; and, in a word, this procures all
blessings to light upon us. So that whether you aim at the spiritual, true,
and eternal felicity, or the civill-Weale and temporal happiness only; yet,
Religion is, and ought, mainly to be magnified and preserved; and therefore the
King did most wisely and Religiously call the Prophet, to consult about the
building of an House for the Ark, and for the service of God. What David's
example should teach all other Princes.


And this practice of King David is a pattern and a looking-glass for all Kings
and Princes, whereby they may see, how to spend the times of peace and
prosperity to their best profit and advantage; and that is,

1. Not to spend their whole time, either in idleness, or vain pastimes,
because, as Hesiod says, Illi pariter indignantur dii and homines, quisquis
otiosus both the gods and men detest him that is idle, Matthew. 20.6.
and therefore Christ demands of them that did nothing, Why stand ye here all
day idle? and for pastimes and recreations, Ludendi modus retinendus est; a
mean or measure, and certain ends and rules, ought to be observed therein.

Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere virtus. Horat.
For so do we read of the Roman Scevola, he used to recreate his spirits,
Valor. Max. l. 8. c. 8.
after he had wearied himself in the weighty Affairs of the Commonwealth; but,
as it is said of Scipio Africanus that he was, Not to spend all their time in
pleasures.
Non minus otiosus quam cum otiosus, never less idle then when he was idle;
Quia semper in otio de negotio cogitavit; because, that when he had nothing to
do, he was still thinking and considering what he should do, even as King David
here When he sat in his house and was at rest, and took his ease, and was
quiet from all Wars, he bethinks himself of building Gods House; So should all
other Kin^s and Princes do: to give unto the very times of tranquillity their
proner task and share of their Affairs; because, as Homer brings in God
telling Agamemnon, that Non decet principem solidam dormire noctem. Homer. Il.
(...).
It beseems not a Prince to take a sound sleep all night long, Quint. Curt.
as Alexander did on that night, when he was on the next very day to fight with
Darius. Which might have lost him the field, Ezech. 2.9.
had not his fortune been better then his foresight. For God puts a Scroule
into every Prince his hand, semblable to that schedule of Ezechiel, wherein all
their charge and duties are set down at large, with this inscription, Gesta
illos in sinu; Bear all these always in thy bosom, and let them never depart
one of thy mind; and as the Egyptians Hieroglyphic painted, Oculum cum Sceptro,
an Eye with the Crown or Scepter, to betoken a prudent Prince; so should every
King have an eye in his head, as well as a Scepter in his hand, or a Crown upon
his head, and to use Vigilance as well as Authority over his people.

And so Augustus Caesar, that found Rome of brick, and left it of Marble, The
great care of August Caesar for the good of the Common-we^lth.
is made famous by the Historians for his great and extraordinary care and
vigilance which he always used for the good of his Empire; when as he gave
himself no rest, nor suffered any one day to pass over his head, in quo non
aliquid legeret, aut scriberet, aut declamaret, but he either read, or writ, or
made some speech unto the people; and when he heard of a certain Gentleman of
Rome, that was very deeply indebted, and yet slept most securely, without care
to pay his debts, and without fear of any danger, he desired that he might buy
the bed, A careless Gentleman.
whereupon he rested, because the debts that he stood bound for, both to God
and to the Commonwealth would never suffer him to sleep so secure, when as it
is ars artium the chiefest of all arts, and the heardest of all things, to Rule
and Govern an unruly people; so difficult, that the Prophet David compares it
to the appeasing of the raging Seas; saying, Thou stillest the rage of the Sea,
and the noise of his waves, and the madness of his people; because, as Seneca
says, Nullum morosius animal, nec majori art tractandum, quam subtilis homo;
There is not any living creature so froward, and so hard to be tamed and ruled,
as a subtle and crafty man.

Reges fatui quibus similes.
But those Kings and Princes, that think the Commonwealth to be made for them,
and not themselves for the Commonwealth; and do spend their time, not much
better, then that Romans Emperor; who, when he was in his privy Chamber,
sported himself in catching flies, and to pull out their eyes with a pin; for
which he became so ridiculous, that o^tentimes, when any demanded Who was with
the Emperor? his servants would answer, ne musca quidem, truly not a fly,
they are said to be tanquam simiae in tecto, like Apes on the top of a house,
that delight themselves to spoil, and to untile the house. And God made them
Kings and appointed them for other ends, and not to destroy his people, as many
Tirants do; which we deserved, for being so unthankful to God, and so
undutifull to our King, that was so pious and so gentle, like King David, and
so good as the best that ever England had.

David spent not his time like Domitian in catching of flies, nor like
Heliogabalus in following after his pleasures, That king David's chiefest care
was for Religion and to promote the service of God.
but like Scipio and Augustus for the good of his Kingdom; So here you may see
the chiefest good he aimed at was to erect an House, and a House of Beauty and
Majesty for the Majesty of the God of Heaven; for his thoughts conceived it not
a sufficient discharge of his duty, to provide for the peace of his Kingdom,
and the happiness of the Civil State, unless he did also take a special care
for the honor and service of God, and see the works of Piety performed, as well
and rather then the duties of equity and civility: for he understood it full
well, that God ordained Kings to be, not only Reges murorum, for the
preservation and defense of walls and Cities, and the outward prosperity of
their people; but also Reges sacrorum, to see the holy duties of Religion, and
Gods worship duly performed.

And therefore, as God had made him a Monarch over men, and had given him an
House of Cedars, so he was desirous to become the Priest of God, and to build
him an House for his service.

What all kings and Princes ought to do.
And this should be a good lesson for all other Kings and Princes, to imitate
this good and godly King in the like sweet harmony of policy and piety, and to
have a greater care to provide for the Ark of God then for the Kings Court;
because Religion is the basis and pillar that must bear up their Kingdoms. And
therefore all good Kings ought not only, with Moses, to rescue their people and
to set them at liberty from the Egyptian bondage, and out of the hands of
Usurping Tyrants, as our gracious King has now done; or with Sampson to fight
for them against the forces of the Philistines; Judges 15.
or with Augustus to make their Cities abound with all kind of prosperity; or
with Ezechias to set up an exchequer for silver and gold, and precious stones,
2 Chronicles. 32.27.
and for shields, and storehouses, for to keep Wheat and Wine, and Oil, and
stables for Horses and all Beasts of service; that is to strengthen their
Kingdoms, with Meat, Money, and Ammunition, and all other necessaries both for
War and Peace: but they ought also with David to bring home the Ark of the Lord
into the House of God, 2 Samuel 6.17.
and to set Levites to do the serv^ce of the Tabernacle; that is, good and
godly Ministers and Bishop (...) attend the Church, and to teach the people; 1 Chronicles. 16.4. and 37 etc.
and with King Asa to overthrow the Idols and Altars, and all other monuments
of Idolatry, and false worship of God; 1 Reg. 15.12.
and with Jehu to slaughter all the Priests of Baal, and to root out all
Heretical, Schismatical, and false teachers from the Church of Christ. 2 Reg.
10.25.


And to make this more apparent and clear, That all good kings and Princes
ought to preserve and to promote Gods true Religion.
that all good Kings and Princes ought to take care of Religion, and to see
that Gods service should be duly exercised within their Dominions; you shall
find that, when through the profaneness and negligence of King Saul to
discharge his duty, and the desidiousness and carelesseness of the Priests and
Levites, many abuses crept into the Church, as the Tabernacle was broken and
lost, the Ark of God was out of the Temple, out of the proper place of it, and
was obscured and hemmed, and, as it were, imprisoned in private houses, so that
the people had no public place of Assembly; to here the law and to offer
Sacrifice unto God, but every one had his Chapel of ease, and his private
Oratory by himself; to serve God as he listed; as now of late it has been with
us; David, as soon as ever he was chosen to be King in Hebron, the first work he
did, was to consult with his Captains, and all the Congregations of Israel, to
cite and summon the Priests and Levites, and all the Clergy that were for the
service of the Tabernacle, to appear before him, 1 Chronicles. 13.1. and 3.
and to cause the Ark of God to be brought again unto them, that they might
inquire at it, which they did not, nor could do, in the days of Saul; and when
he had assembled the Children of Aaron and the Levites, 1 Chronicles. 15.4. and 12.
Verse. 11.
he showed them the abuses, that Religion had sustained in the days of Saul,
and he caused the Ark to be carried upon the shoulders of the Levites, unto the
place that he had prepared for it: and when he had called for Zaedok and
Abiathar the Priests, and for the Levites, for Vriel, Asaiah, and Joel,
Shemaiah, and Eliol, and Aminidab; he did set down which of the Levites should
serve, and in what order they should Minister before the Ark, 1 Chronicles.
16.39.41. and 42.
and he enjoined the sons of Aaron that were Priests, how they should go
forward every one in their course.

And so, according to this Practice of King David, King Solomon his son, and
all the succeeding Kings, that were good and godly, did the like; for of
S^lomon it is recorded, that he appointed according to the order of David his
father, the courses of the Priests to their service, and the Levites to their
charges to praise and Minister before the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 8.14.
as the duty of every day required; the Porters also, by their courses at every
gate; for so David the man of God commanded. And it is further Chronicled of
King Solomon, that what his father here projected, and consulted about, the
building of an House to the Lord, he really performed; 2 Chronicles c. 5. etc. 6.
etc. 7.
and when he had built it, he made a very godly speech, and a most excellent
Oration unto the people, touching the Worship of God and his Religion; and he
deposed Abiathar, and set up Sadoc in his place, and Sanctified the Temple, and
placed the Ark of God therein; and offered burnt offerings and Sacrifices, and
directed the Priests and Levites in all their proceedings, even as his father
David had done before him; and that which is very observeable, it is said, that
the Priests and Levites left nothing unobserved, but did all things, according
as they had received in commandment from the King.

So likewise King Jehosophat is highly commended for his piety and Religious
care of Gods Worship; for it is recorded of him, that he appointed and disposed
the Priests and Levites to do the service of the Tabernacle; and that by order
of his Authority the Woods, and Groves, and High places, which were the lets
and hindrances of the true Religion, were quite removed and taken away,
because the people by their private Meetings and Conventicles in those places
to serve God, as they now adays: do with us, wholly neglected the Cathedral
and Mother Church, which ^as at Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9.
and to which they were, from every corner of the Kingdom, yearly to repair.

And when the Service of God was corrupted, and the Temple most filthily
defiled, through the negligence and sinfulness of the Priests, King Ezechias
commanded it to be purged, 2 Chronicles. 29. per totum.
and he caused lights to be set up, incense to be burned, Sacrifices to be
performed, and the Brazen Serpent, that was become an Idol and worshipped by
the people, to be broken down, and consumed to ashes.

So King Joas reproved the Priests, of his time, for their excessive abuses,
and the insolent behavior that was seen in them; for he sequestered the
oblations of the people, which the Priests had unjustly and wantonly taken, and
appropriated to themselves, 2 Reg. 12.7.
and by his Royal Authority, caused them to be converted for the reparation of
the Temple.

And King Josias, to his everlasting praise, showed himself most careful to
suppress the Idolatrous Priests, to purge the Church from all Idolatry and
Superstition, and to put the Priests and Levites in mind of their duties; as
you may see in 2 Reg. 23. 2 Reg. 23. Obj.
per totum.

And if our adversaries of the Roman Church, do object and say, Quid Imperatori
cum Ecclesia? What has the Emperor or any lay-Prince to do with the Church?
let him rule the Common wealth, and leave Religion and what belongs to God's
Worship, to be ordered and observed by the Pope, Bishops, and Priests, whose
Office and Calling is, to take care, and to see the Church of God should be
sufficiently served, and all holy duties holily performed. And the examples
alleged, infringe not the force of this Objection: because David was a
Prophet, even as Moses was; and his ordering the affairs of the Temple, and
settling the Service of the Church, was done by virtue of his Prophetical, and
not of his Princely-Office. And Solomon was Divinely inspired by God's holy
Spirit, both for the building of the Temple, and the ordering of the Priests
and Levites for the Service of the Temple. And as Jehu had the direction of the
Prophet Elisha, for the suppression of the Priests of Baal, so had Ezechias the
prophet Esaias to direct him in the purging of the Temple, and Reformation of
those abuses, that had crept in into the Service of God.

Joshua the Prince, was required to go in and out at the word of Eleazar the
Priest, so we yield, that the King ought to hearken to the counsel and
direction of his Bishop and Priest, as David here did consult with Nathan, and
Ezechias with the Prophet Esaias. And while Religion is purely maintained, the
people truly instructed, and the Church rightly and orderly governed by the
Bishops, and the rest of the Ecclesiastical Governors, the Prince needs not to
trouble himself with any Reformation, or to meddle with the matters of
Religion: But the King, Prince, and Supreme Magistrate ought to see, that all
the aforesaid things are so; and if they be not, to correct the Priest, when he
is careless, and to cause all the abuses, that he sees in the Church, and in
Religion, to be Reformed: Augustine. contra Cresconium l. 3, c. 51.
Because, as S. Augustine says, In hoc reges Deo serviunt, sicut iis divinitus
praecipitur, in quantum sunt reges, si in suis regnis bonae jubeant, and mala
prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verumetiam quae ad
Divinam religionem. In this Kings and Princes do serve God, as they are
commanded by God, if they do command, as they are Kings in their Kingdoms,
those things that are good and honest, and prohibit the things that are evil,
not only in causes, that do properly appertain to civil society, but also in
such things as belong and have reference to Religion and Piety. And when they
do so, the Bishops and Priests, be they whom you will, should observe their
Commands, That the Bishops and Priests ought to submit themselves to the lawful
commands and di^ections of their Kings and civil Governors.
and submitt themselves in all obedience to their Determinations and censures.
For Moses was the civil Magistrate, and the Governor of the people, and, as he
received them from God, so he delivered unto the people all the Laws, Statutes,
and Ordinances that appertained to Religion, and to the Service of God: And
when Aaron erected, and set up the golden Calf, to be worshipped, and so
violated the true Religion and Service of God, Moses reproved and censured him;
and Aaron, though he was the High Priest of God, and the Bishop of the people,
yet as a good example for all other Priests, and Bishops, he submitted himself
most submissively unto Moses the chief Magistrate, and said, Let not the anger
of my Lord wax hot. Exodus 32.22.
And I would the Pope would do so likewise.

And therefore, though we say the Judge is to be preferred before the Prince,
in the knowledge of the Laws; and the Doctor of Physic in prescribing potions
for our health, and the Pilot in guiding his Ship, which the King perhaps
cannot do: Yet it cannot be denied, but the King has the commanding power to
cause all these to do their duties; and to punish them, if they neglect it. So,
though the King cannot preach, and may not administer the holy Sacraments, nor
intrude himself with Saul and Vzzia to execute the Office of the Priest or
Bishop; yet he may and ought to require and command both Priests and Bishops to
do their duties, and to uphold the true Religion, and the Service of God, as
they ought to do, and both to censure them, as Moses did Aaron, and also to
punish them, as Solomon did Abiathar, if their offense so deserve, when they
neglect to do it; and both Priests and Bishops ought, like Aaron and Abiathar,
to submit themselves unto their censures.

CHAP. VII.
The Objections of the Divines of Lovaine, and other Jesuits, against the
former Doctrine, of the Prince his authority over the Bishops and Priests, in
causes Ecclesiastical, answered; And the foresaid truth sufficiently proved by
the clear testimony of the Fathers and Councils, and diverse of the Popes and
Papists themselves.

BUt against this Doctrine of the Prince his authority to rectify the things
that are amiss, and out of order in the Church of God, Jesuits and their
followers tell us, Spirituales dignitates praestantiores ess^ secularibus seu
mundanis dignitatibus; That the Spiritual Dignities are more excellent than
those that are worldly. When as these two Governments, Genesis 1.16. Romans 13 1^.
And though the light of the Church be the greater; yet that proves nor but that
the King should be the prime and chief Governor of the Church.
the one of the Church, and the other, of the Commonwealth, are like the two
great Lights, that God has made, the greater light to rule the day, and the
lesser light to rule the night; and the Government of the Church must needs be
acknowledged to be the Day, and to have the greater light to guide and to
direct it. The Apostle telling us plainly, that now the Gospel being come, and
the Church of Christ established, the night is past, or far spent, and the day
is at hand, and come amongst us. And the Government of the Secular State, is
like the Moon, that rules the Night, and receives her cleerest light from the
Sun; as all Christian Kingdoms do receive their best light, and surest Rules of
Government from the Church of God, which is the pillar and the ground of truth:
But,

To these, that thus make the Civil Government subordinate to that, which is
Spiritual, as both the Papists and our Fanatick-Sectaries here amongst us, like
the old doting Donatists, would do; and so abridge and deprive the Christian
Prince of his just right and jurisdiction over the affairs and persons of the
Church: I answer,

Symbolical propositions, examples, parables, comparisons, and similitudes, can
prove nothing; they may serve for some illustrations, but for no infallible
demonstrations of truth.

Isidorus in Glossa in Genesis ut citatur. In the Scourge of Sacrilege.
2. I say, that Isidorus, a popish Doctor, prefers the Government of the
Kingdom, before the Priesthood, by comparing the Kingdom unto the Sun, and the
Priesthood unto the Moon.

3. I say, that Theodore Balsamon, a good School-man, says, Nota Canonem:
Dicit Spirituales dignitates esse praestantiores secularibus; sed ne hoc eo
traxeris, ut Ecclesiasticae dignitates praeferantur Imperat^riis, quia illis
subjiciuntur. You must note, that when the Canon says, the Spiritual dignities
are more excellent than the Secular, Balsamon in Sexta Synodo Canone 7.
you must not so understand it, as to prefer the Ecclesiastical Rule or
Dignities, before the Imperial State, because they are subject unto it, and so
to be ruled by it.

4. And lastly, I say, that the Regal Government, or Temporal State, and civil
Government of the Commonwealth, is not merely secular and worldly, as if Kings
and Princes, and other civil Magistrates, were to take no care of men's souls,
and future happiness, which they are bound to do; and not to say with Cain,
Nunquid ego custos fratris, Am I obliged to look what shall become of their
souls? But they are called Secular States, and civil Government, because the
greatest, though not the chiefest part of their time and employment, is spent
about Civil affairs, and the outward happiness of the Kingdom, even as the
Ecclesiastical persons are bound to provide for the poor, and to procure peace,
and compose differences among neighbors, and the like civil offices; though
the most and chiefest part of their time and labor is to be spent in the
Service of God, and for the good of the souls of their people. And so Johannes
de Parisiis, another man of the Roman Church, Johannes de Parisiis Can. 18.
does very honestly say, Falluntur qui supponunt, quod potestas regalis, sit
Corporalis, and non Spiritualis, and quod habeat curam corporum and non
animarum, quod est falsissimum: They are deceived, which suppose that the Rega^
power is only corporal, and not spiritual, and that it has but the care and
charge over the bodies of his Subjects, and not of their souls; Which is most
false.

similitudes, and examples nihil ponunt in esse, and are no apodictical proofs
for any weighty matters, especially the examples of the o^d Testament, to
confirm the doing of the like things under the new Testament; because, that for
us to be guided and directed by the examples of the old Law, is the highway to
lead us to infinite inconveniences.

Therefore it follows not, that because the Kings of Israel and Juda did such
things, as are fore-shewed, unto the Priests and Levites, and the settling of
the Service in the Temple; therefore our Modern Princes should have the like
Authority, to do the like things unto the Bishops and Priests of the new
Testament, about the Worship of God, and the Government of his Church; and
especially in the censuring of them, that are appointed by Christ to be the
Prime Governors, of the same.

Petitio principii, and a begging of the Question; for we say, that although,
for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.12.
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying or building up of the body of
Christ, that is, the Church, God has set in his Church, first Apostles, 1 Cor.
12.28.
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers; and so Bishops and Priests primarily
and principally, to discharge the aforesaid Offices and Duties: yet this
proves not that they are simply and absolutely the Prime Governors, and Chief
Rulers of the Church; but that the Kings and Princes; In what sense the Bishops
and Priests, and in what sense Kings and Princes may be said to be the prime
Governors of the Church. Esaias 49.23.
in the other respect aforenamed, may be justly said to be the Prime and
Supreme Governors, as well in all causes Ecclesiastical, as Temporal; for the
Prophet Esaias, speaking of the Church of the Gospel, says, That Kings should be
her nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers. And I hope you will yield,
that the fathers and mothers, are the Prime and Supremest Governors of their
children, rather than their Schoolmasters and Teachers.

But, though the progeny of the Pope, and our frantic Sectaries, would fain
thrust out the eyes of the politic Prince, and make him just like Polyphemus,
that had a body of vast dimensions, but of a single sight, scarce able to see
his ways, and to govern himself; yet I shall, by God's assistance, make it
most apparent unto you, by the testimony of the Fathers, Councils, and some
Popish Authors, that the Sovereign Prince has, and ought to have, always a
peremptory Supreme power, as well over the Ecclesiastical persons, and causes
of the Church, as over the Civil persons and causes of the Temporal State and
Commonwealth; For,

1. S. Augustine writing against Parmenian, the Donatist, that would, 1. The
testimony of the Fathers. Aug. p. 1. Cont. Epistolam Parmon.
with our Disciplinarians, that are the very brood of those Donatists, unarme
the King of his Spiritual Sword, says, An forte de Religione fas non est ut
dicat Imperator, vel quos miserit Imperator? Cur ergo ad Imperatorem vestri
venerunt legati? Cur eum fecerunt causae suae judicem? Is it not lawful for the
Emperor, (and so the Prince) or whomsoever he shall send, to treat and
determine matters of Religion? If you think it is not, Why did your Messengers
then come unto the Emperor? And why did they make him thy Judge of their
cause? Whereby you see S. Augustine judges the Emperor, or any other Supreme
Prince, to have a lawful power to hear, and to determine the points and matters
controverted among the Bishops, and so to have a Spiritual jurisdiction as well
as a Temporal.

Nicephorus also, in his Preface to the Emperor Immanuel, says, Nicephorus in
praefatione ad Immanuel. Imperat.
Tu es Dux professionis fidei nostrae, tu restituisti Catholicam Ecclesiam, and
reformasti Ecclesiam Dei a mercatoribus coelestis Doctrinae, and ab haereticis,
per verbum veritatis: Thou art the Captain of our Profession, and of the
Christian Faith, and thou have Restored or Reformed the Catholic Church, and
cleansed it from those Merchants of the heavenly Doctrine, and from all the
Heretics by the word of Truth. And I think nothing can be said fuller and
clearer than this, to justify the Spiritual jurisdiction of the Prince, and
Supreme Magistrate in causes Ecclesiastical. Theodoretus l. 1 c. 7.
Yet Theodoret and Eusebius say as much of Constantine the Great.

2. You may read in the Council of Chalcedon, 2. The testimony of the Councils.
That all the Bishops and Clergy, that were gathered together to that place,
(as the Members of our Parliament use to do) were wont to lay down the Canons
they had agreed upon in the Council, until the Emperor should come to confirm
them with his Royal assent; and when the Emperor came, they said, These
Decrees seem good unto us, if they seem so to your Sacred Majesty. And the
Bishops of the Council of Constantinople, that was after the first Council of
Ephesus, Council. Chalcedon. Artic. 1. page 831.
wrote thus submissively unto the Emperor Theodosius, We humbly beseech your
Clemency, that as you have honored the Church with your Letters, by which you
have called us together, Ita finalem conclusionem decretorum nostrorum
corrobores sententia tua and sigillo, So you would be pleased to strengthen and
confirm the last conclusion of our Decrees, by your Royal Sentence and Seal.

3. 3. The testimony of Popes and Papists.
As the Fathers and Councils do thus acknowledge the Emperors right in the
Spiritual jurisdiction; So many of the Popes and Papists themselves have
confessed the same truth, and yielded the same right unto the Emperor, and other
Sovereign Magistrate, in the Church and Church Matters, and over all the
parso^s belon^ing unto the Church; for Platina, that was Library Keeper unto
the Pope, I^aira in severino papa
says, that, Without the Letters pattents of the Emperor to confirm him, the
Pope is no lawful Pope; and Zabarel, a great Scholar, says, The Pope may be
accused before the Emperor, of, and for any notorious crime, Z^barella de
Schismate and Concilus.
and public scandalous offense; and Imperator potest a papa requirere rationem
fidei; and the Emperor may inquire, and call the Pope, to yield an account of
his faith and Religion.

And so many of the better Popes were not ashamed to confess the same: for
Saint Gregory, who for his great learning and piety was surnamed, the Great,
writing unto Mauritius, the Emperor, says, Imperatori obedientiam praebui,
Theodoret l. 2. c. 16.
and pro Deo quod sensi minime tacui; I have yielded all obedience unto the
Emperor, and what I conceived to be truth and for God, I concealed it not: 2
q. 4. Mandastis.
and, before Saint Gregory's time, Pope Liberius, being convented to appear
before Constantius, denied not most readily to obey his summons. So did Pope
Sixtus upon the like complaint, appear to purge himself before Valentinian; 2.
q. 7. Nos si.
and Pope Leo the third, before Charles the Great. And it is registered that
Pope Leo the 4th. wrote unto the Emperor Lodouick saying, Epist. Eleuth. inter
leges. Edovard.
Si incompetenter aliquid egimus, and justae legis tramitem non conservavimus,
admissorum nostrorum cuncta vestro judicio volumus emendare; If we have done
any thing unseemly and amiss; and have not observed and walked in the right
path of the just law, we are most ready and willing to amend all our
admissions, or whatsoever we have done amiss according to your judgment;
Theodoretus, l. 2. c. 1.
and Pope Eleutherius says to Edward the I. of England, V s est is Vicarius
Dei in Regno vestro, that he (and so every other King) is Gods Vicar in his
Kingdom. This was the mind and sense of these Popes, and many other Popes in
former ages were of the same mind, until pride, avarice and ambition corrupted
them, to be as now they are.

How the Emperor and K^n^^ executed the power that God had given them.
And, as God has given this power and required this duty of Kings and Princes,
to have a care of his Church, and to reform Religion, and the Fathers and
Councels have confirmed this truth, and diverse of the very Popes themselves,
and P^pists have yielded, and submitted themselves unto their spiritual
jurisdiction even in the Ecclesiastical causes; so the Emperors and Kings
omitted not to execute the same from time to time, especially those that had
the master power and ability to discharge their duties: Id^m. l. 1. c 7.
for Theodoret writes that Constantine was wont to say, Si episcopus t^rbas
det, mea manu coercebitur, If any Bishop shall be turbulent and troublesome, he
shall be refrained and censured by my hands: and both Theodoret and Eusebius
tells us how he came in his own person unto the Council of Nice, Soz^m. l. 4.
c. 16.
Et omnibus exsurgentibus, ipse ingressus est medius, tanquam aliquis Dei
coelestis Angelus, the whole company of the Bishops and all the rest arising,
he came into the midst amongst them, as it were an Heavenly Angel of God; And
Sozomen writes how that ten Bishops of the East, and ten others of the West,
Conciliorum, Tom 2. In vita Sylvani, and vigila.
were required by Constantine to be chosen out by the Convocation, and to be
sent to his Court, to declare unto him the decrees and canons of the Council,
that he might examine them, and consider whether they were consonant to the
Holy Scriptures. And the Emperor Constantius deposed Pope Liberius of his
Bishopric, and then again he deprived Pope Foelix, and restored Liberius unto
the Popedom; and in the third Council, at Costantinople, he did not only sit
among the Bishops, but also subscribed, Council. Boni. 3. c. 2.
with the Bishops, to such bills as passed in that Council, saying, Vidimus
and Subscripsimus, we have seen these canons and have subscribed our
approbation of them. And King Odoacer, touching the Affairs of the Church
says, Miramur quicquam tentatum fuisse sine nobis, We do admire, that you
should attempt to do any thing without us: for, while our Bishop lived, (that
is the Pope) sine Nobis nihil tentari oportuit, Nothing ought to be done
without us; much less ought it to be done, now, when he is dead. And the
Emperor Justinian does very often in Ecclesiastical causes, Authent. Coliat. 1
tit. 6.
use to say, Definimus and jubemus, We determine and command, and we will and
require, that none of the Bishops be absent from his Church, Quomodo oportet
Episcop.
above the space of a year; and he says further, Nullum genus rerum est quod
non sit penitus quaerendum Authoritate Imperatoris; there is no kind of matter,
that may not, or is not to be inquired into, by the Authority of the Emperor;
Authent. Collat. Tit. 133.
because he has received from the hands of God the common government and
principality over all men. And the same Emperor, as Balsamon says, Balsamon
de Peccat Tit. 9. Idem in Calced. Council c. 12. Idem de fide Tit. 1.
gave power to the Bishop to absolve a Priest from penance, and to restore him
to his Church: And the same Author says, that the Emperors disposed of
Patriarchal seats, and that this power was given them from above: and he says
further, that the Emperor Michael, that ruled in the East, made a law, against
the order of the Church, that no Monk should serve in the Ministry, in any
Church whatsoever.

And we read further, how that diverse of the Emperors have put down and
deposed diverse Popes, as Otho deposed John 13. Evodius inter decreta Bonifac^^.
V^s^ergen anno 1045.
Honorius deposed Boniface, Theodoricus deposed Symma^hus, and Henry removed
three Popes that had been all unlawfully chosen: and in the Council of
Chalcedon, the Supreme Civil Magistrate adjudged Dioscorus, Juvenalis, and
Thalassus, three Bishops of Heresy, and therefore to be degraded, and to be
thrust out of the Church.

And so you see how the Emperors; ^ings, and Civil Magistrates behaved
themselves in the Church of God, and used their power and the Authority that
God had given them, as well in the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Affairs of the
Church, and points of Faith, as in the Civil Government of the Commonwealth.

CHAP. VIII.
That it is the Office and Duty of Kings, and Princes, though not to execute
the function, and to do the Offices of the Bishops and Priests; yet, to have a
special care of Religion, and the true Worship of God, and to cause both the
Priests and Bishops, and all others; to discharge their duties of Gods service.
And how the good and godly Emperors, and Kings have formerly done the same
from time to time.

BUt, as God has given unto the Kings and Princes of this world, a Power and
Authority as well over his Church, and Churchmen, be they Prophets, Apostles,
Bishops, Priests, or what you will; as over the Common wealth, and all the lay
persons of their Dominions; So they ought and are bound to have a special care
of Religion, and to discharge their duties for the glory of God, the good of
his Church, the promoting of the Christian Faith, and the rooting up of all
Sects and Heresies, that defile and corrupt the same: for, as Saint Augustine
says, and I showed you before, In hoc Reges Deo serviunt, herein Kings and
Princes do serve God; if, Aug. contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 51.
as they are Kings, they enjoin the things that are good, and inhibit those
things that are evil, and that Non solum in iis quae pertinent ad humanam
Societatem, sed etiam ad divinam Religionem; and again he says, Idem Epist. 48.
that Kings do serve Christ here on earth, when they do make good laws for
Christ: and Athanasius said unto the Emperor Jovinian, Conveniens est pro
principe studium and amor rerum divinarum, It is meet and convenient for a good
Prince to study and love Heavenly things, because that in so doing, his heart
shall be always, Theodoret, l. 4. c. 3.
as Solomon says, in manu Dei, in the hand of God; and Saint Cyrill tells the
Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian, that Ab ea quae erga Deum est pietate,
Prove. 21.1.
reipublicae vestrae status pendet, the state and condition of their
Commonwealth does wholly depend, according to that piety and Religion which
they bear toward God. Cardanus de sapientia lib. 3.
Because, as Cardan truly says, Summum praesidium Regni est justitia ob
apertos tumultus, and Religio ob occultos, Justice is the best defense of a
Kingdom, and the suppressor of open tumults, because, righteousness exalts a
Nation; and Religion is the only Protector and safely against all secret and
privy Machinations; Minut. Fael. in O^tav.
because, as Minutius Foelix says, What the Civil Magistrate does with the
sword of justice, to suppress the nefarious doers and actours of wickedness,
Religion rooteth out and suppresseth the very thought of evil, The want of the
fear of God the only thing that makes Rebels.
which a Godly and a Religious man fears as much, and more then a wicked and
profane man does dread the punishment of his offense; and so Religion, Piety,
and the fear of God keeps the very hearts and souls of the subjects from
swelling against their Sovereign, and from the least evil thought of Rebellion;
and it is the want of the fear of God, and true Religion, whatsoever men
pretend, that makes Rebels and Traitors in every place; because the true
Religion tells us plainly, Romans 13.1.
that every soul, that is, every man, unfainedly from his heart, should be
subject to the ^^gher Powers; And the true Religion teaches us as Tertull,
Tertul. ad Scapul.
says, Colere Imperatorem, ut hominem a Deo secundum and solo Deo minorem, To
acknowledge, and to serve the Emperor, and so our King and our Prince, as the
next person to God, and inferior to none, but to God. When as he is Omnibus
major and solo Deo minor, above all men, and below none, but only God.

How requisite it is for Kings to have a care to preserve Religion.
And therefore it is most requisite, that all Kings and Princes should have care
of the true Religion and the service of God; and with the Prophet David to
build Temples and Churches for him, that has given their Crowns and Thrones
unto them: and to provide maintenance for those servants of God, that serve at
his Temple, as they do for those that serve themselves; and so, both to be
Religious themselves, and to see that their subjects, so far as it lies in
them, should be so likewise; and this their own piety and goodness in the
service of God, will make them famous amongst all posterities, and their names
to shine as the Sun; when, as Saint Ambrose says, Ambrosius Epist. 32.
Nihil honorificentius quam ut Imperator filius Dei dicatur, nothing can be
more honorable, then that the Emperor or King should be named and called the
Son of God; The fruits and benefits of maintaining true Religion in a kingdom.
which is a more glorious Eulogie, then Homer could give to the best Heroes of
all Greece; or that Alexander, Julius Caesar, or the like, could atchieve, by
all their military exploits, or the best domestic actions that they have done;
and their making provision for the Teachers of the true Religion, and the
promoters of Gods service, the Bishops and Ministers of Christ his Church,
which makes their subjects both Loyal and obedient unto them, and also
Religious toward God, will preserve the peace and procure the happiness of
their Kingdoms.

How many former kings were very zealous to uphold Religion.
And according as God has given this Authority, and laid this charge upon all
Kings and Princes, to have a care of his Religion, and the Ministers of his
Church; so we find very very many, both in former times, and also of latter
years, and so both of Gentiles, Jews, and Christians that were exceeding
zealous for the Honor of God, and the upholding of them that served at his
Altar; 1. Gentile kings.
as,

1. The Gentile Kings, as Pharaoh King of Egypt, that in the extremity of that
dearth, which swallowed the whole Land, he made provision for Gods Priests, The
great bounty of king Croesus to the god Apollo and to his Priests.
so that they neither wanted means, nor were driven to sell their Lands.

And so Croesus King of Lydia, was so wounderfull zealous of the Honor and the
worship of the god of Delphos, and so bountiful to Apollo's Priests that
Herodotus says, that he made oblation of three thousand choice Cattle, such as
might lawfully be offered; and caused a great stack of wood to be made; wherein
he burnt Bedsteads of Silver and Gold, and Golden Maysors with purple raiment,
and Coats of exceeding value; and he laid the like charge upon the Lydians,
that every man should consecrate those Jewels, which he possessed most costly
and precious; from which their Sacrifice, when as the streams of liquid and
molten Gold distrained in great abundance, he caused thereof to be framed half
flates, or sheards, the longer sort, as he entitled them, of six handful; the
shorter of three and a hand breadth in thickness; amounting to the number of an
hundred and seventeen. Whereof four were of fined Gold weighing two Talents and
a half; and the rest of whiter Gold, that weighed two Talents likewise; he gave
also the similitude of a Lion, in tried and purged Gold, and two Books very
fair and stately to see to, the one framed of Gold, weighing eight Talents and
a half, with the additionall of twenty four pounds; and the other of Silver:
And he presented likewise four silver Tunns, two drinking Cups, the one of Gold
and the other of Silver; and silver Rings, with the shape and form of a woman
three Cubits high; and withal he offered the Chains, Girdles, and Wastbands of
the Queen, his wife; and to the Priests of Amphiaraus he gave a shield, and a
spear of solid Gold, and a quiver of the same metal: all which, says mine
Author, he offered in hope to purchase thereby unto himself the gracious favor
and good will of that god: and, Herodotus, l. 1 clio.
if he was so magnificent and bountiful to the Priests and Temple of that god,
which was no god; how Royal, think you, would he have been, if he had known
the true God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

So Cyrus and Darius KingS of Persia and of Babylon, made such royal decrees
for the re-edifying of the Temple at Jerusalem, Ezra. 1.7. etc. 6.5. etc. 8.9.
and the Worshipping of the God of Daniel, and his three companions Sidrac,
Misach, and Abednego, which was the true God, that they are registered in the
Book for their perpetual honor and praise, to this very day; and shall
continue longer then the stately Piramides of Egypt, even to the end of the
World; when as most others of their laws and actions are shut up in silence,
and buried in the grave of forgetfulness.

So Artaxerxes Mnemon, the son of Darius Nothus, formerly called Ochus or
Achus, that in the Persian language signifies a Prince; was very zealous for
the building of Gods House, and the inabling of the builders thereof with all
things necessary for the work; and as his father Darius said, Let the work of
this House of God alone, and let the Governor of the Jews and the elders of
them, build this House of God in his place: Moreover I make a decree, (and it
was a most Royal decree) what you shall do to the Elders of these Jews, for
the building of this House of God, that of the Kings goods, even of the tribute
beyond the River, forthwith expenses be given to these men that they be not
hindered: and that which they have need of, both young Bullocks and Rams, and
Lambs for the burnt offerings of the God of Heaven; Wheat, Here is a glorious
zeal and a brave Resolution for the honor and service of God.
Salt, Wine, and Oil, according to the appointment of the Priests; let it be
given them day by day without fail, that they may offer Sacrifices of sweet
savours unto the God of Heaven, and pray for the life of the King and of his
Sons, that were four, 1. Artaxerxes. 2. Cyrus, the younger. 3. Atossa, called
also Arsacas. 4. Oxendra.


And I have also made a decree that Whosoever shall alter this word, Ezra. 6.7,
8, 9, 10, 11.
let Timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged
thereon, and his house be made a dunghill for this: So the son, following the
steps of his father (as our Most gracious King does, in like manner) made a
Decree to all the Treasurers that were beyond the River, That whatsoever Ezra
the Priest shall require of you, it be done speedily; Also, we certify you,
that touching any of the Priests and Levites, Singers, Porters, Nethinims or
Ministers of the House of God, Ezra. c. 7. 21.24.
it shall not be lawful to impose Toll, Tribute, or Custom upon them: a thing
clean contrary to the practice of our times, when the greatest Toll, Tax, and
Imposition, is usually laid upon the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ: to show
unto you, how far short our Christians now are in piety and zeal of Gods
Worship, to these Heathens that knew not Christ: and therefore no doubt, but
that they shall shall rise in judgment against us, that profess to honor
Christ, and yet think we can never take enough from his Church, nor lay Taxes
and Loads enough upon his Ministers; And how this will be answered before
Christ at the last Day, let the sacrilegious persons that labor so much, and
strive so eagerly to take our houses from us consider it; for I know not how to
do it.

2. The Kings of Israel and Juda.
2. As these Heathen Kings and Monarchs were thus zealously affected to the
House and Service of God, and thus religiously given to provide maintenance for
the Priests and Ministers of the Temple; So the Kings of Israel and Juda were
no whit inferior unto them: but in a far righter way, and to a truer God than
most of the Heathens did: For here you see King David adjudged it to be as
needful to build a Temple for God, as to erect an house for himself. And so the
Books of the Kings, and the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Juda, do
sufficiently set down, how Solomon did most relig^ously build God's House, and
offered Royal Sacrifices in that House, and most orderly settled the Priests and
Levites, to do the Service of God in this Temple, that he had built. And so
Jehosophat, Ezechias, Josias, and all the rest of the good Kings of Juda, did
execute the power that God had given them, in the settling and establishing of
His Religion, and the True Worship of God, as you may most amply read in their
lives: And those Kings that did not care for the preservation of the True
Religion, and Gods Service, and his Houses, as Jeroboam, Baasha, Ahab, and the
like, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, that he rooted them and
their posterity out of their own house, because they neglected the Service and
the House of God. And so he will do to all those Kings and Princes, that will
imitate them in profaning his House, neglecting his Service, and abusing his
servants, because that with Him there is no respect of persons, but He will
bind Kings in fetters, Psalm. 148.
and their Nobles with links of iron.

3. The Christian Kings.
3. The Christian Emperors and Kings, are not left un-Chronicled for their
great zeal, extraordinary care, and Royal bounty toward the Bishops and
Ministers of Christ, to propagate and uphold the Christian Religion. For it is
Registered in the Writings of those times, that Constantius the father of
Constantine the Great, was wont to say, That he respected the Preachers of the
Gospel, more than the Treasures of his Exchequer. And his son Constantine was
called Great, as well for his Piety, that made him like John Baptist to be
Magnus coram Domino, Great in the sight of the Lord, as for his Potency, that
made him Great among men. And Eusebius, (that wrote the Life of Constantine,
and sets down his Piety) says, The Court of the Emperor Valerian, was so
replenished with godly men, and religious Christians, that it seemed to be the
Church of God rather than the Kings Court: So great a care had he of Religion
and the Service of God, that, as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 101.9.
says, none should be his servants, that served not God, but whosoever leads a
godly life, he shall be my servant, said this good Emperor, as good King David
said before him.

And the Emperor Jovinian, that succeeded Julian the Apostate, who withdrew
very many from the Christian Religion, to embrace the idolatrous service and
superstitions of the Heathens, when he attained unto the Empire, said to the
people, That he would be a King of Christians, or he would be no King at all.
And Alphonsus, King of Arragon, is made Famous in all Chronicles, for the great
love he bare to Learning, and especially for the great zeal he had to the
Christian Religion, and the great care he took to promote the Gospel of Christ,
and to provide for his servants: and when some other King said unto him, That
it was too base an office for a King to trouble himself with such affairs;
Alphonsus answered, Vox ^ovis ista est potius quam regis, That voice seemed to
him to be the voice of an Ox, rather than of a King. And as Theodosius and
Valentinian, very Christian like, called themselves the ^ass^ls of Christ; so
Constantine was wont to say, That he gloried more to be the servant of Christ,
than in being the Emperor of the World.

And as those pious Kings, and godly Emperors were thus zealous to maintain
the Christian Religion, which bare up the Pillars of their Dominions, and makes
their names now, to live glorious, though they are dead; So the Throne of this
Empire and Kingdom of Great Britain, That this our kingdom had many zealous,
and most godly Kings.
has not wanted devout Princes, and most worthy Kings, that have trod in the
steps of King David, to provide Houses for God's Service, and to imitate the
examples of the best of the aforesaid pious Princes, to see the Religion of
Christ, and the True Faith purely maintained within their Kingdoms: as you may
find it in our Chronicles, and the Statutes of King Inas, King Alfred, King
Edward, that for his devotion and zeal to the Christian Religion, was rightly
called Saint Edward, King Ethelstane, Vide Speed. lib. 8. c. 3.
and King Canutus the Dane, that laid the foundation of his Building, to
compose the differences of Religion, and to rectify whatsoever he found amiss
therein, before he entered upon the causes of the Commonwealth; For I read it
Registered, that after sundry Laws inacted, touching our Religion, and the Faith
of Christ, as the celebration of certain Holy Days, the right form of Baptism,
the duty of Fasting, the teaching of the Lords Prayer unto the people, the
administration of the C^mmon-prayer, and the celebration of the blessed
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ thrice every year, and some other
Duties of our Religion, this Title follows, Jam sequitur institutio legum
saecularium, which, as Speed shows, Speed quo supra, page 384.
are most excellent for the execution of Justice. And it is Recorded, that
William the Conqueror, in one of his Parliaments, said, That he being
Vicegerent to the King of kings, holds his Kingdom to this end, to defend
his people, and especially the people of God, and his holy Church, that is, the
Bishops and Priests to teach the people, and to perform the Worship and
Service of God in his Church.

And even, in our own days, (the Holy Name of God be for ever blessed and
praised for it) we have had such pious Kings, as, I believe, I may justly say,
The Christian World, for Piety and Religion, for love to God's Ministers, and
the care of God's Worship, could show but very few like them, and none to
precede them therein; and that is, King James, and King Charles the First,
whose glorious name, above all other Kings, since Christ, The rare and just
commendation of King Charles the First.
I shall ever honor and extol, as the most constant Defender of the Christian
Faith, the most loving Patron of God's Ministers, the Bishops and Preachers of
his Word, and the most faithful Witness and Martyr, that lost his life for the
preservation of God's Church, and the Religion of Jesus Christ, with whom I do
always, when I think of him, behold and see him Crowned with Eternal Glory:
The most Blessed of all our Kings, and the Best of all our Saints.

CHAP. IX.
Of the chiefest Parts and Duties of Kings and Princes, which they are to
discharge for the maintenance of God's Service, and the True Religion; and the
necessity of Cathedral-Churches and Chapels for the people of God to meet in,
for the Worship and Service of God.

YOu have heard, how that God has given the Power and Authority unto Kings and
Princes, to be the Supervisors, Directors, and Reprovers of things amiss, as
well in the Church, as in the Commonwealth: And how he requires and
commands them, to discharge those Duties accordingly; and to have a care to
preserve his Religion, as they do regard their own Salvation. You have likewise
heard, how all Kings, both Heathens, Jews, and Christians, did execute that
power, and, according to their ability, discharged their Duties, as well in the
Spiritual jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical causes, as in the decision of Civil
causes. It rests, that I should show unto you, the chiefest Parts and Duties,
that they owe to God, and are to discharge, for the promoting of his Service,
and the Religion of Jesus Christ. And I conceive them principally to consist in
these Four Points, The four chiefest things that Kings and Princes ought to do
for the upholding of God's Religion, and the Service of Jesus Christ.
which may be like the four Rivers of Paradise, to water the Garden of God's
Church, to make it to bring forth plenty of fruits, to the glory of God, and
the salvation of men's souls. And they are,

1. To take care, and to cause, that there should be Cathedral-Churches and
Chapels fairly built, and decently trimmed and adorned, as befits the Houses
of God, for his people to meet in, for the Worship and Service of God.

2. To see that able, honest, and religious Bishops be placed in those
Cathedrals, and others the like pious and painful Ministers, be appointed in
all the Parochial Churches and Chapels, to perform the true Service of God as
they ought to do; and to see those Drones that neglect it, and those factious
Sectaries and Heretics that defile and corrupt it, and those scandalous
livers, that do much prejudice unto their holy Calling, to be punished, and
removed, if they amend not, for their negligence and transgressions.

3. To provide, by their good Laws such maintenance, revenues, and means for
the Reverend, and godly Bishops, and the rest of the worthy Clergy, whereby
they may be enabled with joy and comfort, to discharge their duties in God's
Service, to his glory, and the good of his people.

4. To put a bar, and to hinder by their Regal power and authority all the
sacrilegious violaters of holy things to rob the Church of Christ, and his
servants, and to commit the horrible sin of Sacrilege, which is so
transcendently abominable in the sight of God, and so infinitely destructive to
the souls of men.

1. The necessity of Cathedral-Churches and other Parochial Chapels for the
S^rvice of God.
These things ought to be done, as I conceive, by all good and godly Kings and
Princes; and whosoever does these things shall never fail. And.

1. In defense of Cathedral-Churches, we have to allege, that till the time
of Euaristus and Dionysius, Popes of Rome, no other kind of ministerial Church
was ever heard of, from the beginning of the World; for from Adam unto Moses,
men did call upon the Name of the Lord, and offered Sacrifices, but without any
ministerial Church at all. And in Moses time, Platina de vitis Pontif. Carrion
annal. Monarch. Exodus 25.46. Acts 7.44. 2 Samuel 7.6. Acts 7.47.
God commanded him to erect a Tabernacle, which stood instead of a Church for
all the Land of Judea, and that was Templum portatile, as Josephus calls it, to
be carried up and down, until the days of Solomon. But Solomon erected a
Temple, as a standing Church at Jerusalem, to be in the place of the
Tabernacle. And then, until the time of the Gospel, there was no other Church
for God's people, (I speak not of the Gentiles idolatrous Temples) throughout
the whole World. And that Metropolitan Church of Jerusalem was more than
Diocesan or Provincial, for it was National, for the whole Kingdom of Jury. And
after the Gospel was preached unto the Gentiles, and all Nations began to be
converted, then sundry ministerial Churches were erected, according to the
number of their Bishops, so that every particular Bishop had his particular
Church, after the manner and in imitation of the Jews, which having but one
Bishopric, and one High Priest, or Bishop, had likewise but one
Cathedral-Church for that whole Nation. And afterward, when the Bishops saw
the multitude of Christians exceedingly increasing, Evaristus first, Titulos
seu Paraesias in urbe Roma presbyteris divisit, and post eum Dionysius idem
fecit; And after him Dionysius the Pope, devised Parochial Congregations, and
divided every Bishopric into particular constant Congregations, which were but
Members, and their Churches but the Chapels, of the Diocesan and Provincial
Churches. And the use for which both the Cathedral and Parochial Churches do
serve, was and is, for the serva^^s of God to meet in them for to worship God;
and this, besides the practice of all times ab origin to this very day, do
sufficiently conclude the necessity of them.

1. For as the body politic, or the whole multitude of the Commonwealth, is
to be divided into his several Limits, Provinces, Counties, 1. Public prayers
are more prevalent with God than the private prayers.
Baronies, and the like; so the collective and mystical body of God's Church,
is to be distributed into several Congregations, as the body natural is to be
distinguished by the several parts and parcells thereof: and though as we are
private and particular men, the place, and time, and form of prayer and service
of God are in the choice of every particular man, according to the condition of
his necessity and private occasion; yet as every particular man is a member of
the public State, either Temporal or Ecclesiastical, Church or Commonwealth;
so the service that he owes, and ought to perform, either to the King, or to
God, must needs be public, and together with the rest of the members of the
State; and so the public Service is so much worthier than the private, and
excels the same, as much as a Society or Congregation of men, is worthier
and excels one particular man.

And S. Chrysostom, to show the excellency of the public Service of God, S.
Chrysostomes example to show the benefit of public prayer, and how it
excels the private.
and Common Prayer before and above any private prayer or service, says, That
as the coals of fire being scattered do yield but little heat, and will soon
die; but when they are close heaped together, they will yield much heat, and the
fire continues long; So a multitude of devout and faithful men gathered
together, and with one heart and one soul pouring forth their prayers and
petitions unto God, their prayers are a great deal more prevalent, and more
likely to obtain their request from God, then when they are severed, and
offered up by every single person; as a twisted thread, like a threefold cord,
is far stronger than any two single ones: So, though the prayers of one man be
but weak, yet the supplications of many men are very mighty, and like unto the
loud sound of thunder, or the noise of many waters, as S. Basil says; and the
consent of desires, the concord betwixt them, and the united love of joint
Assemblies, are so well-pleasing unto God, that as a ho^y Father says,
Impossible est multorum preces non exaudiri, It is almost impossible, but that
the prayers of such associated Congregations should be heard; because, as S.
Ambrose says, The public meeting of Gods people has a special promise of
Gods presence to be with them, as where Christ says, Matthew. 18.20.
When two or three are gathered together in his Name, he will be there in the
midst of them.

And therefore the King of Niniveh called his people together, to join with him
in prayer to God, that they might not be destroyed; and so besetting God, Jonas
4.11.
or besieging God, as Tertullian says, like an Host of men, their prayer was
heard, and they were received into grace. And S. Paul, though he might have
confidence his prayer should speed with God as soon, and obtain as much, as any
other; yet does he confess, that the prayers of the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor.
1.11.
together with his own prayers, did much help and further his deliverance from
those great troubles that he suffered in Asia.

2. Public prayers more justifiab e then the private.
2. The public prayers and service of God has this prerogative above the
private, that they do assure us they are more lawful, and shall sooner be
heard of God; because the things prayed for, and deprecated, are judged to be
good and needful, and are so approved of by the general judgment of the whole
Congregation, when we hear them deprecated or desired by the common consent of
all the people.

3 Our devotion and zeal are more and more strengthened in the public
Congregation.
3. The convention or meeting of the people in such public places to serve God,
does sharpen the edge, and as it were give life and strength to every
particular man's devotion; for when, through the frailty of our flesh, our
spirit waxes dull, and our zeal begins to grow sloggish to perform these
Holy duties, the fervor, that we see in the rest of the Congregation, will
mightily serve to stir up our thoughts, and to quicken our devotion to sail
along with our brethren to the conclusion of those godly exercises.

4. They are helped by the good examples of others.
4. As every particular man is bettered, and much furthered in his devotion and
service of God, by the good examples that all the Congregation does show unto
him; so the whole company that considers it, is not a little damnified and
offended at the waywardness, and neglect of those particular persons, that come
not unto the public service of God: and so, whereas the neglect of our private
devotion is only hurtful to our selves, our refusal or remissness to come to
the public exercises of our Religion, does prejudice many, and gives offense
to the whole Church; and you know what our Savior says, Matthew. 18.7.
Woe to that man by whom offense comes; and therefore woe to him that
despises the public exercises of Gods Church, and refuses to come unto them.

And for the preventing of this woe, and the rest of the reasons formerly
showed, Psalm. 26.12.
the Prophet David did so earnestly desire to praise the Lord in the
Congregations; yea, in the great Congregations, and among much people and so
affectionately to say, Psalm. 35.18.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require, Psalm. 27.4.
even that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to
behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.

And therefore, seeing it is so necessary, that the people of God should
publicly meet, and be gathered together to serve God; it is most requisite and
necessary, there should be Cathedralls and Parochial Churches, for them to
meet in, for to do the public service of God.

those Assemblies, rather then from any private serving of God, does no ways
prove the necessity of having Cathedralls and material Churches: because the
presence of a company of Christian people, wheresoever Assembled, and the
offices of Religion, as Preaching, Prayer, and Administering the Sacraments,
performed; makes the meeting public: and the peoples exercising these duties
makes them to be a Church of God. As the presence of the Prince, and his
followers; makes any man's private house to be the Kings Court.

To this Objection I have fully, and very largely answered, Great Antichrist
revealed, page 84. and deinceps. And therefore I shall referr my Reader thither
to be fully satisfied; yet, here I say, that it is not the Assembly, or the
popular conflux of a multitude of men, or the duties that they do though they
be the very duties of Religion, that makes the meeting lawfully public, or the
place of Gods public service; but it must be a Convention, and a gathering
together of the people, into such a place, that is assigned and Consecrated for
Gods public service, which makes the public meeting justifiable and lawful;
otherwise, it is but a private conventicle, altogether unlawful, though it
should consist of never so great a company of men: unless it be, as it was in
the Apostles time, in the days of persecution, or that the people have such
lawful lets and hindrances to come to the Consecrated place of Gods service,
as I have set down in the book afore-cited. At all other times, the public
service of God must be performed in a public Consecrated place, as it is meet
the Holy service should be done in a Holy place; and you must know, that the
ubiquity of Gods presence in every place makes not all places alike sacred;
even as the Lord shows unto Moses, when he bids him to pull off his sh^es
from his feet, because the place, where thou stand is Holy ground; Exodus
3.15.
for the presence of God is either, 1. Ordinary, The presence of God twofold.
or 2. Extraordinary.


And as the extraordinary works of God have distinguished the times, to make
some times more Holy then other, so the extraordinary presence of God has
sanctified some places more then others; and the place that he Sanctifies with
his most special presence, is the place, which he appoints to his servants,
for their public meeting, to do his service; and he has not left it in the
liberty of every man to run at random, to serve the Lord where he pleased; but,
as he designed the time, when they should serve him, so he appointed the place,
where they should come to serve him. And so Adam in that short time, which he
had in Paradise, wanted not a place (appointed, no doubt, and usual) to stand
before the Lord and to Communicate with him; and the sons of Adam, being out of
Paradise, Genesis 3.8.
knew the place, where God appointed, and expected they should repair to offer
their Sacrifices and oblations unto him; and so the Lord tells the Children of
Israel that they should not discharge their duties and perform his service in
any place that they pleased, Deuteronomy. 12.5. and 14.
but they should seek the place which the Lord their God should choose, out of
all their Tribes, to put his name there to dwell; and there they should come,
with their oblations and offerings to serve him.

And so, when the Israelites had quite vanquished the Canaanites, and subdued
the Philistines, and the other their enemies round about; and, as the Text
says, given rest unto his people, the time was come, that the Lord God thought
fit to choose the place, to put his name there, and where all the people should
publicly meet, to do him service; and the Lord marked out Jerusalem for
himself, and in Jerusalem he chose Mount Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 6.7.
the very place where Abraham was to sacrifice his son Isaac, to be a standing
and a permanent place for his name, saying, This shall be my rest for ever,
here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein and there David now resolves
to build his Temple, to be a Cathedral and the Metropolitan Church for the
High Priest, to offer Sacrifice and burnt Offerings unto God, and for the rest
of the people there publicly to meet to serve the Lord; and his heart was
mightily inflamed with zeal and desire to do it; but the Lord accepted of his
resolution, and by Nathan his Prophet told him, that, because he was a man of
War, and had shed much blood, (and his Church must not have her foundation
laid, nor her walls erected in blood) he should not build his Temple, but
Solomon his son, that was a Prince of Peace, should erect it in the Place that
he appointed, and with the materials that he had provided; and so he did, as
you may see 2 Chronicles. c. 3. 4, and 5.

And when this Temple was destroyed, and the people, for their sins and neglect
of Gods service, and profanation of this House of God, were led Captives into
Babylon, and when, after the time of their Captivity was expired, that is, the
full space of 70. years, they were permitted to return into their own Land, the
Lord did put it into the heart of Cyrus King of Persia, (as the Prophet Esaias
fore-shewed he should do, long before the birth of Cyrus) to cause Ezra,
Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, and the rest of the Elders of the Jews, to build another
House and Temple unto God, in the same place, where Salomons Temple did stand;
and when the enemies of Gods people, and the prophaners of Gods House, like our
malignants, sought to hinder the building of it, the Lord put it in the heart
of Darius and his son Artaxerxes to cause it to be finished, Ezra 6.15.
according to the decree of King Cyrus. And the Jews were so zealous to do it,
that they made an end of the work in five years: and so, by reason of their
enemies and their haste, it was far disproportionable and different from the
former, which made the old men, that had seen the glory and beauty of the
first, to weep and lament at the mean aspect of the second. And yet it was not
so mean, but that it might be admired for the beauty and majesty of it,
Josephus Antiq. l. 15. c. ult.
especially after that Herod, surnamed the Great, had repaired, enlarged, and
so magnificently beautified the same; Mark. 13.1.
so that one of his disciples, in admiration of the work, says to Christ,
Master, See what manner of stones and what buildings are here! Matthew. 24.1.
And the Jews tell him, that it was forty six years in building, Joh. 2.20.
before it was brought to that perfection, which Zorobabel did unto it.

Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 4.
Cum inchoatum erat in secundo anno Cyri, qui regnavit annis 30. Et post eum
Cambyses, regnavit annis 8. Et absolutum erat Darii Histaspis anno 9. Et sic
dempto primo anno Cyri, remanent anni sicut Judaei dicunt. 46.
For of this Temple the Jews here do speak, as Theophlact, Tolet, and Calvin
do observe.

Exodus 23.17. and 34.23. and 24.
To this Temple and Metropolitan-Church, the Jews were all required to meet, and
to appear before the Lord, to do him service, three times every year: and
because these times were too seldom, and the ways too far for them to come,
from all the parts of Jury any oftener, they had from time to time many
Synagogues and Chapels, Act. 13.27. etc. 15.21.
like our Parochial Churches, wherein they might publicly meet, as they did,
every Sabbath to serve the Lord; and because this Cathedral Church, the Temple
of the High Priest, though very large and spacious, Origo earum tempore
captivitatis Babylonicae cepit. Sigon. de rep. l. ^. c. 8.
yet was not sufficient to contain the many thousands of people that were in
the great City of Jerusalem, they had very many Synagogues set up in this City,
and Paulus Phagius recounteth no less then 400 of them. And Sigonius says,
there were 480. And out of Jerusalem, they had many Synagogues in other Cities
and Provinces, as there were Synagogues in Galilee, Matthew. 4.23. Synagogues in
Damascus, Sigon. de repuh. Heb l. 2. c. 8. Maimon. in Typhil. c. 11. Sect. 1.
ex Goodw.
Act. 9.2. Synagogues at Salamis, Act. 13.5. Synagogues at Antioch, Act. 13.14.
And their Tradition is, says Maimonides, that wheresoever ten men of Israel
were, there ought to be built a Synagogue: and the Jews acknowledged it a great
favor, and were very thankful to any man, that built them any of these
Synagogues; as the Elders of the Jews besought Christ to heal the servant of
the Centurion, Luke 7.5.
because He loved their Nation and had built them a Synagogue. And I would our
men would be as glad and as desirous to have our decayed Churches built, and
not to make such havoc to destroy them, as they do, and that without any cause
in the World: For

You may see how Christ himself and his Apostles, came and taught very often
not only in the Temple, but also in these l^sser Synagogues of the Jews: and it
is admirable to consider how the primitive Christians, Eusebius. l. 10. c. 3. and
4.
as Eusebius records, erected such Oratories and Basilicaes, that is,
Royall-houses and Churches, as stately as any Kings Palace, and beautified the
same with excessive charges, to make them fit places for the public meetings
of the Christians, to serve their God; and so the Church of Saint Paul in
London, and of Saint Peter in Westminster, and the rest of the Cathedral
Churches throughout England, and Ireland, (to pass no further) can bear
sufficient witness of the zeal and devotion of our Christian predecessors to
erect such Great, and adorn such Beautiful Houses unto God, Magnos magna
decent.
as became so great and so glorious a God, (as our God is) to have.

And as the number of the Christians waxed daily beyond number, and increased
more and more, as you may conceive, by the increase, which a few weeks time
has wrought after the ascension of Christ; when St. Peter's sermon converted
3000. souls in one day; so it caused the distinction of Assemblies, and the
number of Churches to be increased and multiplied in all Countries and Cities
more and more. So that in Rome, about a hundred year after Christ, the
Congregation of the Christians, became so huge great, that Evaristus then
Bishop of Rome, for the avoiding of confusion, and the easier and better
instruction of them, caused them to be distributed and parted into fifteen
particular Parishes, and assigned fifteen several Presbyters to instruct and
govern them: the Presbyters then being honest men, and no ways contradicting
Evaristus.

And to prove that the first Christians, who lived under persecutions, The
first Christians had some kind of Churches.
even from the Apostles time, had some kind of Churches; though as then not so
magnificent, you may see in 1 Cor. 12.18. and 22. etc. 14.19. and 23. And so
the most ancient of the Fathers do bear witness, as Clemens, Tertullian,
Socrates, and Eusebius, proves the same out of the book of Philo Judaeus, lib.
2. cap. 17. And Lactantius, In carminibus de passione Domini: says, Quisquis
ades, mediusque subis in limina Templi,
Siste parum. --
Whosoever thou art, that come to the House of God, stay a white, that is, to
consider whither thou go, and, as Solomon says, To keep and look to thy
foot, when thou go to the House of God, which is, as God himself expounds
the meaning thereof unto Moses, saying, Exodus 3.
Put off thy shoes from thy feet; that is, to make clean thy ways, and bring
no filth, nor any carnal affections, nor worldly desires into the House of
God; because, The place whereon thou stand is Holy ground; that is, by
reason of Gods gracious and special presence in that place, where Moses stood,
and where God is prayed unto, and praised by the Minister, and Worshipped by
the rest of his faithful servants. And if any man desires fuller proofs of
this truth, I refer him to Cardinal Bellarmin, and to that excellent and
Learned Sermon of Master Mede upon the 1 Cor. 11.22.

Yet I deny not, but the prime Primitive Christians, The prime primitive
Christians had no stately Churches: and why.
and the Church which was at Jerusalem, and received that Religion, that is,
the Faith of Christ, which the Scribes and Pharisees and their laws did not
allow of, were constrained, many times, to hide their heads in desolate places,
and were enforced by stealth to exercise and discharge the duties of their
profession in vaults and private houses, where they might be most safe, though
the places were not suitable to their service; the swords of their enemies were
so sore against them.

But at length, between times, by sufferance and connivency, and sometimes
through favor and protection, they began to be imboldened, and to rear up
Oratories and Churches, though but simple and of mean aspect, because the
estates of most of them were but mean and very low, as S. Paul shows, 1 Cor.
1.26.
Not many Rich, not many Noble are called; which was indeed a good way to
suppress the danger of malignity, that looks not so much after poor estates;
and a good way to increase their number, and propagate their design with more
safety. And as by this means the Church began to take root, and to grow
stronger; and the wealthier, nobler, and wiser men began to be in love with the
Christian Religion; So then they loved nothing more than to build Churches
answerable for their beauty, How zealously the fi st Christians were affected,
and how bountifully they contributed toward the building of their Churches.
to the dignity of their Religion, and for their greatness to the number of
their Professors; And the devotion of these Christians was so large, and did so
liberally contribute toward the erecting of their Churches, as the Israelites
in the days of Bezaliel did cheerfully present their Gifts and
Free-will-offerings toward the setting up of the Tabernacle: no man was
backward, and no man a niggard in this work, which they conceived to be so
profitable and so necessary for them to do: and that in two special respects.

1. The good that is effected, 2. The evils that are prevented
by the public meeting of the people in these Churches.

The double benefit that we reap by our coming to the Public meeting in the
Church.
1. The meeting of the Congregation publicly in a lawful place, and a
consecrated Church, assures them they offend not the Laws, either of God or
man, and so secures them from all blame, and prevents the occasion to traduce,
and to suspect the lawfulness of the holy Duties, that we perform; when as
Veritas non quaerit angulos, Truth and the performance of just things and holy
actions, need not run and hide themselves in private, hidden, 1. Benefit.
and unlawful places, but may show themselves and appear so publicly, as they
might not be subject to any, the least unjust imputation.

2. Benefit.
2. The meeting in a public consecrated Church, and not in a private
Conventicle, escapes those dangerous plots and machinations, that are very
often invented and contrived in those Conventicles, that are veiled for that
purpose, under the mantle and pretense of Religion; And it freeth the comers
unto the Church from those seditious Doctrines and damnable Divinity, which the
Sectaries and Heretics do scatter and broach in those unlawful Conventicles,
which are the fittest places for them, to effect their wicked purpose, and must
needs be sinful, and offend both God and man: because, they are contrary to the
Laws, both of God and man; Whenas the coming unto the Church quits my
conscience from all fear of offending, because that herein I do obey, and do
agreeable to the Laws both of God and man. And who then that has any dram of
wit, would not avoid private and forbidden meetings, and go to serve God, unto
the public Church, which is the House of God, erected and dedicated for his
Service?

CHAP. X.
The Answer to the Two Objections that the Fanatick-Sectaries do make. 1.
Against the Necessity. And 2ly against the Sanctity, or Holiness of our
Material Churches, which in derision, and contemptuously, they call
Steeple Houses.

ANd yet for all this, and all that we can say for the Church of God, I find
Four sorts of Objections, 4 Sorts of Objections against our Material Churches.
that are made by our Fanatics and Skenimastices against our Material
Churches. As, 1. Against the Necessity. 2. Against the Sanctity. 3. Against the
Beauty and Glory 4. Against the impurity and Impiety
of them.

1. They do object, 1. Objection against the necessity; that we have no need of
Churches.
there is no Necessity of any Material House or Church of God for his servants
to meet in to serve God; because the woman of Samaria, discoursing with Christ
about the place where God would be worshipped, Whether in that Mountain, where
the Fathers worshipped, or in Jerusalem, which, as the Jews said, was the
place where men ought to worship; Our Savior tells her plainly, They
worshipped they knew not what; for the hour comes, when ye shall neither in
this Mountain, nor yet in Jerusalem, worship the Father; but the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; because, God is a
Spirit, John 4.20, 23.
and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth; and such
worshippers the Father seeks, and such he loves.

And therefore, so we have clean hearts, and pure consciences, and worship God
with our souls and spirits, faithfully to pray unto him, and to praise his
Name, it is no matter for the place where we do it, in a Church, or in a Barn;
because God looks rather to the inward heart, than to the outward place where
we stand.

To this I answer, Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum, no color to extort
such consequences, and to draw such conclusions from them; for the words are
plain enough, that although formerly, before Moses his time, Jacob had a Well
near Sichar, and he with the other Fathers, worshipped God in that Mountain,
and afterward God required them to worship him in the place, that he should
choose to put his Name there, which, after the time of David, and the building
of his Temple by Solomon, was to be Jerusalem, and no where else, to perform
the commanded Public Service of God, under the punishment of cutting off that
soul from his people, that should do otherwise.

Yet the hour comes, and now is, that is, coming, or beginning to come, that
the Partition Wall betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles shall be broken down, and
the bounds and borders of Gods Church, and the true worshippers of God, shall
be enlarged, and they may lawfully, without offense, worship God, not only in
Jury, where God was only formerly known aright; but also in all the Nations,
and in any Kingdom of the World, so they worship him in spirit and in truth, as
they ought to do: But here is not one syllable, intimating, that they should
not, or needed not, to meet to serve God in the Public Church, but that
whenever, and wheresoever, in any Kingdom of the Earth, they should gather
themselves together in the Public Church, to worship God, they should worship
him in spirit and in truth, otherwise, their worship is to no purpose, and will
avail them nothing, though they should do it publicly in the Church. This is
the true meaning of our Saviors words.

another sort of Sectaries, that yield it requisite and convenient for the
Saints and servants of God to meet and gather themselves together for the
Service of God, and do acknowledge the great benefits, that may accrue and be
obtained in a Congregation, rather than by any single person; but they think
there is no necessity of their meeting in a Material Church, or a
Steeple-house, as they call it, rather than in a house, or a chamber, or a
barn, or any other place, where they shall appoint to meet; because God has
made all places, and there is no real Sanctity in any one place, more than in
any other; but the sanctity or holiness must be in the hearts of the men, and
not in the place, which is not capable of any sanctity; and therefore, it is
rather our superstition, than Gods injunction, to require and command men to
come to such Material Churches, as to the more sanctified places, rather than
to such private houses, where these Saints do publicly meet to serve God.

Earth, as if to be holy, were nothing else, but to be pure and clean, and
separated from all earthly touch: And it is taken two ways.

Holiness taken two ways.
1. (...). Simply. 2. (...) In some respects:
And,

only is Holy, and the Author of all Holiness; and as the Blessed Virgin says,
Holy is his Name: And therefore those Seraphims, which Esaias saw, Esaias 6.3.
and those wondrous creatures which S. John saw, did cry, Apoc. 4.8.
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, three times together, which we do not
read of any other Attribute of God. And the Lord himself, in that golden Plate,
that was to be on Aarons forehead, caused these words to be engraven, (...),
Holiness is of the Lord, as Tremellius reads it; or, Sanctum Domino, Holiness
belongs to the Lord, as the Vulgar has it.

Many other things are styled holy, by communication of holiness, and receiving
their holiness from this Fountain of Holiness: And so, 1. The Man Christ Jesus,
2. The faithful Members of Christ, 3. The Outward Professors of the Christian
Religion, 4. All things Dedicated, and that have relation to Gods Service; as
Times, Persons, Places, and Things,
are termed holy, sanctitate relativa.

1. The Man Christ is perfectly, and singularly Holy, as Beda says; And that,
1. By reason of his Hypostatical union with the Godhead. 2. By reason of the
most perfect qualtity of Holiness impressed by the Holy Ghost into his Humanity.


2. The true Members of Christ are truly styled holy, by reason of that
holiness which the Holy Spirit of God works in them, and they practice in
their lives and conversations.

3. All those that do outwardly profess the holy Religion of Jesus Christ, are
called Saints by the holy Apostles: Romans 1.
and so they are in respect of all others, that either do profane, abuse, or
neglect the same.

4. All the things, that are Consecrated by the prayers of the Bishop for the
Service of God, and those things that are Dedicated and given for the
furtherance, and maintenance of God's Worship, as Lands, Houses, and the like,
are by a relative sanctity, rightly termed holy things; because, they are
separated and set apart, as S. Paul says of himself, ((...).) for holy uses,
to bring men to holiness, to honor, serve, and worship God that is Holiness it
self.

And in this respect, we say, that the very ground, walls, windows, and timber,
of the Material Church, that are set forth, Dedicated, and Consecrated for
God's Service, are holy things; not by any inherent real sanctity infused into
them; but by a relative holiness ascribed and appropriated unto them, by their
Dedication and Consecration for God's Worship, which makes them more holy, and
so to be deemed, than all other earthly things whatsoever.

And though I will not lose my time, and waste my paper, to show the folly and
vanity of that ridiculous deduction of the Confuter of Will. Apollonius, in the
29. page of his Grallae, Grallae page 29.
against secondary or dependent holiness; yet I will justify the holiness, and
religious reverence, that we owe, and should render, unto all the Material
Churches, that are Consecrated for Divine-Service, against all prophaners of
them, Independents, and Fanatics, whatsoever. And for the satisfaction of
every good and sober man, that is not drunk with a prejudicate conceit against
God's House, I shall desire him to look into 2 Chronicles. 3.1. and chap. 6. where
he may find the Consecration of God's House, and the prayer that Solomon made
at the Consecration of it, and the benefits, the manifold benefits, that they
should reap which served God in that House: And if he reads over that Chapter
at his leisure, and read it often, and then seriously consider it, and withal
remember, that of this House, and the like Consecrated places, that are
Dedicated for God's Worship, the Lord himself says, Esaias 56.7. Matthew. 21.13.
Jerem. 7.10. Psalm. 132.15.
My House shall be called the House of prayer for all people: and our Savior
Christ confirms the same, that the Church, which is the Public place, or
place of Public Prayers, is rightly called, the House of God, and the House,
which is called by his Name; and of which he says, This shall be my rest for
ever, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein; Will he not confess,
that Gods House, and the Place where he dwells is Holy? The Confuter of
Apollonius confesses, That so long as a Prince is, Grallae page 26.
and remains in his house, because of his Majesty and pomp, there is nothing
in the house, which derives not thence some dignity and splendour; and will you
deny that privilege to Gods House, which you will yield to the Palace of an
earthly Prince? No, certainly it is an holy place. Vide the Great ^ntichrist
Revealed. l. 2. c. 5. page 88.


Therefore, as God will be served in the time that he appoints, and by the
persons that he chooses, and after the manner that himself prescribes; so he
will be worshipped, not where every one pleases, but in the place, which is
Consecrated and Sanctified for our Holy God to come and to be present with us:
as you may see in Levit. 17 8. Exodus 23.19. and chap. 25. 8. where the Lord
charge his people, to make him a Sanctuary, Exodus 25.8.
or a Tabernacle, that is, an holy House or Temple, that he might dwell among
them.

And therefore the Prophet David desired, that he might dwell in Gods
Tabernacle, and was glad, when the people said, Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 122.1. Joh.
18.20.
We will go into the House of the Lord. And Christ says, I ever taught in the
Synagogue, and in the Temple, that is, for the most part, and ordinarily, and
always when he came to the Temple, and opportunity offered him occasion so to
do. And S. Matthew says, The blind and the lame came unto him in the Temple,
Matthew. 21.14.
and he healed them. And so must we come unto him into his Temple, if we desire
to be healed of our infirmities. And so the Apostles and Disciples of Christ,
after his Ascension into Heaven, met and worshipped God in the Temple. And when
the Christians began to be mult^plied, they presently erected Oratories and
Churches, and consecrated them, as Solomon did the Temple, for God's Service;
as you may see in 1 Cor. 11.22. and from the 14. Chapter of the said Epistle,
where the Apostle bids the women to be silent in the Church; for that must not
be understood of any other private house or meetings of men, where the women
may as lawfully speak as men, or the Apostle had laid too great a burden upon
them, and such as they neither could, nor would have born; but his meaning is,
that the women should be silent in the Congregation, that publicly meets in
Gods (...) for the service of God.

And because That material house was erected and set a part from (...) Profane
uses, for to pray to God, to Preach unto the people, and to do all other
exercises of Religion, as, Administering the Sacraments, Catec^ising the Youths,
Collecting the Alms for the Poor, and the like services of the Lord, and was
hallowed and Santified by the prayers and Consecration of the Bishop, ^ Chron. 6
to be used only for that end, and that God has promised his more special
presence for our help and assistance, in a most special manner in that House,
Matthew 18.10.
more and rather then in any other place, as you may see by Solomon's prayer,
and by the words of Christ; therefore the true Saints and servants of God, that
understood the difference betwixt Holy and Profane things, did ever Honor and
show a great deal of respect and Reverence to this very place, of Gods Worship;
more then to any Chamber of presence of the greatest Monarch of the World: And
why not? For if we must be Bare-headed in the Kings Chamber, or the Lord
Lieftenants Chamber of Presence, why should not Gods Chamber of Presence have
the like Reverence? Surely none, but profane Atheists, wicked Heretics, and
the members of the beast, that is, the Great Antichrist; that are worse then
the worst of worldlings, have ever denied it, or abused, profaned, or
blasphemed these, or any of these, material Churches, whereof the Prophet
says, sal. 93.6.
Holiness becomes thy House for ever. For,

Though, as I said before, originally and in respect of their own nature, there
is no inherent or innate Sanctity in one place more then in another, In what
sense all things are a^ike Holy.
but all places are alike Holy, and so are all days, and all meats, and all
other things, that are ejusdem speciei, of the same kind; they are all alike
Holy, and there is no difference, nor any more Sanctity in any one than in the
other, Genesis 1.31.
they being all alike created Holily by God, who beheld All the things that he
made, and behold, they were all exceeding good:

In what sense some things are more Holy then other things.
Yet, if we consider Gods designation of any of these things, and the
Sanctification of the same, by Gods own appointment, for such and such ends and
uses in the service of God; then you shall find a great deal of difference
betwixt the one and the other, and a great deal of a relative and accidental
Holiness in and belonging to the one more then to the other: otherwise, And for
the further clearing of this point, you may look into Mr. Medes learned
discourse De Sanctitate relativa; and his answer to Dr. Twisse, p. 660. and in
Levit. 19.30.
what difference will you make betwixt the common bread that we ear of the
finest Wheat Flour, and the most Holy and blessed bread of the Holy Eucharist,
or the Lords Supper? But the Sanctifying of this bread by our prayers to this
end, and for this use, to be the body and blood of Christ, makes all the
difference; so that now after the words of Consecration of it, which are the
words of Christ, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body; we cannot, without
profaneness and a mighty offense, give the same to dogs, or unbelieving Jews,
or to any other, whom we do know to be altogether unworthy of it, as we can
give the other bread, that is made of the same lump to either of these, without
any fault or offense at all. Or what difference is there betwixt one day and
another? but because the Lord has designed the seventh day to be set apart for
his service, and hallowed it for that end; therefore it is more Holy then the
other six days: and so are the days and feasts, that are appointed by the
Church to Honor God in them, as the commemoration of Christ's Nativity,
Circumcision, Resurrection, Ascension and other days of Thanksgiving for some
special blessings and extraordinary favors, which, as on those days, we have
received from God; which days none will profane, but the neglecters of Gods
Honor, and the prophaneners of his service. So what difference, or what
holiness is there naturally in one man more then in another? none, or little at
all: but when the Lord calls and chooses one man before another, to be his
servant and to be sent, and his Ambassador, to Preach his Word, to Administer
his Sacraments, and causes him to be Consecrated by prayers, and imposition of
hands for that purpose, as he called Simon Peter, before Simon Magus; then
there is a great deal of difference betwixt them, and much relative and
additionall Holiness in the one more then in the other, insomuch that our
Savior says of these men, which he says not of all other men, Luke 10.16.
He that receives you receives me, and he that despises you despises me,
and the Lord says of them, which he says not of all other men, Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye.

And you may see this d fference in the Ambassadors, and other Officers of
Kings, Princes, and Potentates, whom we Honor and Reverence more then others;
because, they are deputed and Authorized to be our Judges, Sheriffs, or other
Officers of the Kingdom, where they are designed so to be.

And so likewise, what difference, or what Holiness is there in one place more
then in another? In a Stone-Church ground, more than in a Thatchbarn- floor?
Surely, not any at all originally, in respect of themselves, simply considered;
but, when such a piece of ground is designed, and dedicated for the Worship of
God, and Consecrated by prayers for that purpose, and God promises his
presence, and favor, to be more especially showed there for our Instruction
and Consolation, than in any other ordinary place whatsoever; Then certainly
there is a great deal of difference, and a great deal of Holiness in that
place, and much more Reverence ought to be showed to it, and in it, than in any
other place or common ground; though it were the Kings Palace. And I say this
is but a sign and a point of true Religion and no branch of Superstition.

Therefore Jacob, that was no ways Superstitious, said of that place, where
God showed his presence to him, This is Gods House and the gate of Heaven; Genesis
28.17.
and the Lord said unto Moses, Put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place
where thou stand is Holy ground; Exodus 3.5.
and why was that ground more Holy than any other ground? Not in respect of any
innate holiness, but because the Lord reveiled himself there to Moses, more
visibly and more graciously than in any other place.

And I pray you look what the Spirit of God advises, and injoyneth us to do,
when we come into the House of God; To keep thy foot, Eccl 5.1. For this phrase
is a Synechdoche of the part for the whole, of the foot for all the members of
the body which in the Church of God ought to be framed to a Religious decency,
as to bend the knee, lift up our eyes, uncover the head, and the like.
and much more thy heart, and thy head, as thou ought to do; decently and
Reverently, when thou go to the House of God; and therefore much more
Reverently, when thou art and stand in Gods House; And be more ready to
hear, then to give the Sacrifice of Fools; which they do, that despise this
House of God, which none but fools will do; for if we make no difference of
these things, but that every man that will, may intrude himself to do the
service, which God requires to be done by another, and he may do that service
any where, in any one place as well as in another, in a common barn, as well as
in an Holy Church; then surely we need not observe any time, when any one day
is as good, and as Holy as another, the Monday as well as the Lord's Day; and so
confounding persons, times, and places, we shall confound all Religion, and we
shall suddenly bring Atheism, and all Profaneness among the people.

CHAP. XI.
The answer to another Objection, that our Fanatick-Sectaries do make against
the Beauty, and Glorious Adorning of our Churches; which we say should be done
with such decent Ornaments, and Implements, as are besitting the House and
Service of God; The reasons why, we should Honor God with our goods: and how
liberal, and bountiful both the Fathers of the Old Testament, and the
Christians of the New Testament, were to the Church of God.

Against the beautifying of our Churches.
THirdly, There be another sort of close-handed, and covetous-hearted Fanatic
Sectaries; that are much offended at our Beautifying, and Adorning our
Churches, so as is fitting and meet for the Houses of God; And they do Object,
that God is a Spirit, and will be served in spirit and in truth; and therefore
he requires not our goods, our gold, and our silver, which he has no need of,
Psalm. 50.10.
or our Cattle, when as all the beasts of the Forest are his, and so are the
Cattle upon a 1000. hills, and he delights not in burnt offering: and so the
Prophet shows, when he demands, Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of
Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? No, no, the Lord cares for no
such things, we may keep them all to our selves: Mich. 6.7.
for he has Showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord does require
of thee, and that is, To do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God. And therefore the Lord says not, Give me your gold, to make me
Palaces; or your silver, to adorn my house, wherein I dwell not; but give me
your hearts, wherein I delight to dwell, if they be pure and clean, and void of
the filthiness of sin and corruption, Quia deliciae meae cum filiis hominum;
because, my delights are, to be with the sons of men: and I desire no more of
them, but, To fear the Lord their God, to walk in all his ways, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
and to love him, and to serve the Lord their God withal their heart, and
withal their soul.

And from these and the like premises our Fanatics do conclude, that as God
was never better served, then when his Churches and Oratories were no better
then poor men's Cottages; and when the Christians answered their persecuters, in
the time of Julian; who said, their service was not so Solemn, nor their
Temples answerable to the Majesty of God, that the best Temples which they
could dedicate unto God, were their Sanctified souls, and clean hearts; so they
would have our times to be the like, and our Churches to be no fairer, nor any
otherwise beautified then they were in those times of poverty and persecution.

Holiness of the hearts of them that serve him, then in the honor and beauty of
the place where he is served. In the time of necessity God accepts our
service any where.
But, though Moses in the mountain, Job on the dunghill, Jeremy in the mire,
Daniel in the Lions den, Ezechias in his bed, and the Apostles in the stocks,
called upon the name of the Lord and he heard them, and so Christ preached on
the Mount, and in the Valley, on the Seashore, and in the Ship; and Saint Paul
did the like in an upper Chamber, and the people heard them, as well then as in
the Temple, and God accepted of their service.

Yet, as Saint Paul demands of the Corinthians, whether they thought it seemly,
that a woman should be bare-headed in the Church; so I demand of these men, as
the Prophet Haggai demands of the Jews, Is it fit that you should dwell in
sieled houses, and let the House of God lie wast? or, is it meet and Religious
that the Church of Christ should be no better beautified then a husband-mans
barn? And I may ask of any rational man, if the Sanctity, and Celebrity of the
place where God is usually and publicly served, does not animate the devotion,
and stir up pious thoughts in all good Christians, Psalm. 56.9.
when they come there to Worship their Savior in that beauty of Holiness, as
the Prophet speaks.

Therefore the good and godly King David, when he intended to build God an
House, says, That because the Palace was not for man, but for the Lord God; I
prepared with all my might for the House of my God, 1 Chronicles. 29.1, 2, 3.
the Gold for the things that were to be made of Gold, the Silver for things of
Silver, and the Brass for things of Brass, the Iron for things of Iron, and
Wood for things of Wood, Onyx stones, and stones to be set, How liberally King
David gave to build and beautify Gods House.
glistering stones and of diverse colors, and all manner of Pretious-stones,
and Marble-stones in abundance; moreover, because I have set my affection to
the House of my God, I have of mine own proper goods, of Gold and Silver which
I have given to the House of my God, over and above all that I have prepared
for the holy House, even three thousand Talents of Gold, of the Gold of Ophir,
and seven thousand Talents of refined Silver, to over-lay the walls of the
house withal; The Gold for things of Gold, and the Silver for things of
Silver, and for all manner of work to be made by the hands of the Artificers.
And so the chief of the Fathers and Princes of the tribes, and Captains also
offered most willingly and gave for the service, the building and beautifying
of the House of God, of Gold five thousand Talents, and ten thousand drams, and
of Silver ten thousand Talents, 1 Chronicles. 39 7:
and of Brass eighteen thousand Talents, and one hundred Talents of Iron.

And not only this good Kings heart, and his people, The Fathers before David's
time did the like.
were thus enlarged so freely to offer their goods for the building,
beautifying, and adorning of Gods House; but also all other faithful servants
of God, that were zealous of Gods Worship, both before and after David's time did
the like: for, if you consider the building of the Tabernacle, and the
furniture that belonged unto it, in the time of Moses; you shall find, that,
although the people were but wanderers in the wilderness, and therefore could
not be very wealthy, nor have any more riches, but only what they brought out
of Egypt; yet this was the free and voluntary dedication of the Altar (in the
day when it was anointed) by the Princes of Israel: Twelve Chargers of silver,
twelve silver Bouls, twelve Spoons of Gold; each Charger of silver weighing one
hundred and thirty shekels; each Boul seventy cicles, or shekels; all the
silver vessels weighed two thousand and four hundred shekels, after the shekel
of the Sanctuary; the golden Spoons were twelve, full of incense, weighing ten
shekels a piece, after the shekel of the Sanctuary; Numb. 7.84, 85, 86.
All the Gold of the Spoons was one hundred and twenty shekels: every shekel
weighing half an ounce. Whereby you may perceive, what care they took in that
infancy of the Church, to have all the appurtenances of the House of God so
fair and so specious as they could possibly make it, even to the uttermost of
their abilities.

And so after David's time, besides the foresaid moneys, that David left for the
use of Gods House, (which came to the rate of eight thousand Talents of Gold;
and of Silver, seventeen thousand chikars: and every chikar containing one
thousand and eight hundred cicles, and weighing nine hundred ounces,) King
Solomon was so bountiful, and his donation so exceeding large, that it can
very hardly be valued; for, besides the stuffes that he laid in of Timber,
Marble, Stone, Brass, Iron, Copes, and Pretious-stones, he overlayed the
greater House, which he sieled with Firr-trees, with fine Gold, and the
garnishing of the House with Pretious-stones for beauty, and the Gold was the
Gold of Parvaim; and he overlayed the House, the beams, the posts, and the
walls thereof, and the doors thereof with Gold* and graved Cherubims on the
walls; and he over-laid the most ho^y House with fine Gold, amounting to six
hundred Talents, and the weight of the nails was fifty Shekels of Gold; and he
over-laid the upper Chambers with Gold, and the two Cherubims he over-laid with
Gold; and he made ten Candlesticks of Gold, and a hundred Basins of Gold; and
the Flowers, and the Lamps, 2 Chronicles. 3. and 4.
and the Tongs, made he of Gold, and that perfect Gold; and the Sn^ff^rs, and
the Censers of pure Gold; and the Entry of the House, the Inner-doors, and the
doors of the House of the Temple, were of Gold.

And when all these unvaluable Treasures and Furnitures of this House of God
were ransacked and carried away by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon; and Cyrus,
after their 70. years Captivity, gave the Jews leave to Return, and gave them
power and license, to re-edifie and to build the House of God again; these
captive Jews, newly returned out of bondage, beyond their ability, were most
bountiful in their contributions for the setting up of another Temple: which
though for Beauty and Majesty it was not correspondent to the former Temple,
yet was it very glorious, and finished most readily, and the free Donations of
the people were so large, that when all the work was finished, the surplusage
of their Gifts, that remained to beautify the same and provide ornaments for
it, and to defray other future reckonings, amounted to 650. Chichars of Silver,
and a 100. Chichars of Gold. And to this Nehemias the Tyrshatha gave to the
Treasure a thousand drams of Gold, Nehem. 7.70.
fifty Basins, and five hundred and thirty Priests Garments. And so likewise
some of the chief of the Fathers and Heads of houses were not behind, Verse
71.72.
to build and beautify this House of God, but gave to the Treasure of the work
twenty thousand drams of God, and two thousand and two hundred pound of
Silver; and that which the rest of the people gave, was twenty thousand drams
of Gold, and two thousand pound of Silver, and sixty seven Priests Garments.

Thus you see how the Jews, both in the time of David, and before David, and
after David, and both in their prosperity and in their adversity; when they
were full, in the days of Solomon, and when they were empty and weak, after
their return from Captivity; were most zealously affected to build and
beautify the House of God, and to spare neither Gold nor Silver to adorn the
same, as it ought to be.

And what do we? Surely change the case, instead of giving to build and
beautify the Church, and the maintenance of the Service of God's House, we
take away the states and timber, and all the Furniture of the Church, and, as
the Psalmist prophesied of our times, all the carved works thereof; and the
goodly Monuments of our pious forefathers, we break down with axes and hammers:
and instead of providing the Priests Vestures for the Church Service, we are
more ready to take their garments from their backs, and their bread out of
their mouths.

Jews, which so adorned their Temple, as you showed before, and their Religion
consisted in outward pomp, and carnal Service, whereas we are Christians; and
the Kings Daughter, which is the Church of Christ, is all glorious within; and
her service to God consists not, either in carnal Ceremonies, or external
Glory, but, as Christ faith, in spirit and in truth.

chiefest Glory of the Kings Daughter, is within, in a pure heart, and a
sanctified soul; but her clothing is of wrought Gold, and her outward raiment
is of needle work, and her vesture is of pure Gold, wrought about with diverse
colors, very fair and glorious to behold. So our Religion and our zeal to
God's Worship, must not only rest and reside in the heart, but it must bud
forth, and appear in all our outward actions; and God will be served, not only
inwardly with our hearts, but also outwardly with all the other parts of our
bodies, Quia per exteriora cognoscuntur interiora, and our zeal to Gods Honor
must show it self by our zeal to God's House; for so King David said, and so
Christ said, Psalm. 69.9. John 2.17.
The zeal of thine House has eaten me up.

And therefore, not only the Jews, but the Christians also, were most liberal
and bountiful in their gifts and contributions for the erecting of Oratories,
and the adorning of Gods Church; And although, that while they were under the
Sword of persecuting Tyrants, their state and condition permitted them not to
have stately Churches, yet when their persecution ceased, and they became into
a better case, and had rest, their Churches became sumptuous, and no cost was
spared to make them both fair and beautiful.

And we find, that before the time of Constantine, in the reign of Severus,
Eusebius. l. 8. c. 1. and 2. Idem. l. 9. c. 1.
Gordian, Philip, and Galienus, there were many goodly and spacious Churches
builded, which Dioclesian by a public Proclamation caused to be thrown down;
but M^ximinus hypocritically permits them to be reedified, and made up in a
greater height, and more beautiful than they were before, as they were indeed
exceedingly bettered, immediately after the death of Maximinus, as it appears
by that Solemn Sermon, that was made in praise of the building of Churches,
Idem. l. 10. c. ^.
and expressly directed to Paulinus Bishop of Tyrus. And Theodoret says, That
the Emperors Constantine, and his son Constantius, bestowed many rich and
precious vessels upon the Church. And when S. Basil had converted Valens to
become a Christian, he bestowed certain lands and possessions unto the Church.
And Nicephorus says, That Theodosius and his Wife Eudoche, sent moneys very
bountifully to the Bishop and Church of Rome. And Valentinian and Gratian, are
exceedingly praised in the Chronicles of the Church, for their care, and the
provision that they made for the Churches of Christ. And Sozomen relates, how
Constantius bestowed upon the holy Church, great sums of moneys that did
arise to him, out of the Images that were molten, and otherwise by way of Taxes
and Tributes; And diverse of the Christian Emperors provided, that the lands,
houses, and possessions of the Church, and the goods of other Christians that
had been taken from them, in the times of persecution, should be restored and
re-delivered unto the Bishops and Church again. And I hope our most gracious
and religious King, will do the like, that, as he is not inferior to them in
piety, so he will be no less in the Rules of Equity, and as, blessed be God
for it, he has most graciously restored very much, and more than any other
has done, already.

And what shall I say more? It is most apparent to any one, that will read
Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, and other Ecclesiastical Writers, how
the first and best Christians, as they grew in strength, wealth, and power, so
they studied and strived to exceed both Jews and Gentiles, in their care and
zeal to promote the Honor of God, and to manifest the same unto the World by
all the possible ways they could devise; And because that, as nature teaches
us, to provide good things, so wisdom and policy shows how we should do our
best to procure the permanent state and perpetuity of those good things. And so
Religion likewise teaches us, to follow the same course, to perpetuate the
Service and the Honor we yield unto our God: and the Saints and servants of
God conceiving no Donation of honor to be more permanent and lasting than
Churches and Temples, magnificently erected, and sumptuously maintained;
therefore, they were no niggards, and spared no cost to build their Oratories
and Churches, that the Worship and Honor of God, might be perpetually
continued.

Reasons to prove that we sh uld honor God with our riches.
And very many Reasons might be produced to show, that they should, to the
uttermost of their power, honor God with their riches, and to make the
benefits they bestow for his Honor, to be permanent and durable: For,

heart, it requires the uttermost extent that unfaigned love and affections
can afford and show toward God; And, as S. Gregory says, Probatio dilectionis
exhibitio est operis, Our inward love and affections are to be opened and
manifested by the outward effects: And therefore, wheresoever the true Religion
swayeth in the hearts of men, as it ought, the outward devotion and zeal
toward God's Church, and the Service of God in his Church, will be showed, so
far forth as they are enabled to do.

Nature teaches us to honor God with our goods: which is, not only honestly
and inoffensively to use them; but also to alienate, separate, and set apart
some portion of them from our own occasions, Quia ^fferimus Deo bona nostra ut
signa gratitudinis pro illis donis quaed Deo recepimus. Irenaeus. l. 4. c. 34.
to the use and service of God, not as gifts or supplies of his wants, that is
the Lord of all things, but as the signs of our thankfulness and
acknowledgement, that he is the Donor and Giver of them all to us, and as the
means to set up, and to show forth his Honor, by the erecting and beautifying
his Churches, and the maintenance of his Worship and Ministry in those
Churches: For why should any man think, that God has given us such variety of
all good things, as Gold, Silver, Cattle, Wine, Oil, and abundance of most
excellent beauty, to be employed only upon our selves, and for our pleasures,
and, it may be, in mere vanities, without any regard or reservation of any of
them to be bestowed, for the upholding of his Honor, Prove. 3.9: Malach. 3.20.
and the Duties of his Service? When as Solomon says, That he will be served
with the chief of thine increase: And the Lord himself bids thee to bring all
the Tithes, or Tithes of all kinds into his House: And therefore Origin, the
greatest Clerk that lived in his days, says, Qui colit Deum, Origin. in Numb.
c. 18. Hom. 11.
debet donis and oblationibus agnoscere eum esse Deum omnium, He that
worshippeth God, must by his gifts and oblations unto God, acknowledge him to
be the God and Giver of all things.

with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase, Prove.
3.9.
and to testify thine inward love, by thine outward gifts and oblations to
him; you know then, that the greatness and goodness of our gifts does set forth
and show the greatness of our love, and the sincerity of our affection toward
God: For, Juxta mensuram honoris erit mensura donationis, According to the
quality and condition of the person, whom we honor, so should our gifts and
our presents that we offer him be; as the greater they are, whom we honor, the
greater regard we should make of the gifts and oblations that we offer unto
him: As it is unseemly, and a shame for us, to present unto our Kings and
Princes, or any other person of Honor, any poor, mean, base, or paltry
present; So it is, if we do the like to God: And therefore the Prophet Malachy
demands, If you offer unto God the blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil? and
if you offer the lame and the sick, Malach. 1.8.
is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee?
says the Lord of Hosts. So, the Lord was no ways pleased with Cains offering,
because, that having enough, and all good things from God, he kept the best for
himself, and gave a little of the meanest and worst unto God: And you know what
God says, Cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth
and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing, and so, like unto Cain, keeps
the best for himself; for I am a Great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my
Name is dreadful among the Heathen, Verse 14.
and therefore you should not offer unto me the poorest and the basest things
you have, but the best and the greatest of all your substance.

Therefore the Gentiles, by the light of nature, and the Jews, How that the
Heathens, Jews and Christians, e^ected great and glorious Houses for the Great
and Glorious God. And Plutarch sets down what an infinite charge it cost
Tarquinius Sylla, Vespasian and Domitian, to build the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus in Rome. Plutarch in the Life of Publicola. page 107. and 108.
by the example of Moses, David, Solomon, and the rest of Gods Prophets, that
were inspired by Gods Spirit, and all the godly and zealous Christians, that
were illuminated by the light of truth, considering the greatness and the
glorious Majesty of our Great God, that is Optimus Maximus, The Best and the
Greatest of all the things that you can imagine, and is most wonderful in all
his Works, conceived it fitting to erect and build such great, magnificent, and
most glorious Temples, and Churches, as might seem fitting, and, so far as they
were able, to make them correspondent to the Greatness, and the Glorious
Majesty of that Great God, for whose Honor, Worship, and Service, they erected
and dedicated the same. And such were the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, of Diana
at Ephesus, of Amphiaraus, and Jupiter Olympus, and the Temple of Solomon in
Jerusalem, and the Churches of S. Paul in London, and S. Peter in Westminster,
and abundance more, which you may see in these Kingdoms, that our most zealous,
religious, and godly forefathers built, and spared no cost nor charges to
adorn and beautify them most gloriously with all necessary Furnitures, for
the Honor and Wo^ship of their God, and the Service of Jesus Christ.

And shall we throw down these Houses, and lay waste these Temples of God, or
think much to bestow a little of our wealth, that God has so liberally
bestowed upon us, to keep them up, and to have them competently trimed and
beautified? God forbid, that our love to God's Honor, and our thankfulness to
Jesus Christ, should be so little, as to do so.

CHAP. XII.
The Answer to another Objection, that our brainsick Sectaries do make for the
utter overthrow of our Cathedrals and Churches, as being so fowly stained and
profaned with popish Superstitions; and therefore being no better than the
Temples of Baal, they should rather be quite demolished, than any ways adorned
and beautified.

FOurthly, 4. Objection against the being of our Churches. Psalm. 137.7.
we have some other Sectaries more brainsick than the former; and these, under
the pretense of zeal to the purity of Religion, do hotly plead for the
destruction of our Churches, and cry out in the language of the Edomites, Down
with them, down with them, even to the very ground; for they have been defiled
and profaned by the Idolatries and superstitions of the Popish Bishops, and
their Mass-Priests: and therefore as the Lord, by a flat Precept, commanded the
Israelites, saying, You shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the
Nations, which ye shall possess, served their gods, upon the high Mountains,
and upon the Hills, and under every green Tree; and you shall overthrow their
Altars, and break their Pillars, Deuteronomy. 12 2, 3. 2 Chronicles. 17 6. 2 Reg. 18.4.
and burn their Groves with fire; and you shall hew down the graven Images of
their gods, and destroy the names of them out of the place: And as Jehosaphat,
according to this Precept, took away the High Places, and Groves out of Juda;
and Hezechias also, removed the High Places, and brake the Images, and cut down
the Groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses had made, because
the children of Israel did burn incense to it: So should we subvert, and throw
down all the Monuments of Idolatry and Superstition, and all the places where
the true Religion, and the Service of God have been abused: And accordingly,
these frantic Zelots have, wheresoever they came, and could do it, thrown down
many of our Churches, and brake in pieces the Fonts wherein they were Baptized,
and threw down the Tombs and Monuments of their Forefathers, and made such
havoc of Gods Houses, and destroyed all Holy places so, as is lamentable to
consider it: And they tell us most impudently, that to hold up such places to
serve God therein is nothing else but with King Saul, to reserve the execrable
and accursed things for Gods Worship, which is abominable in the sight of God.

Sol. 1.
To this I Answer, 1. That it is better to serve God in those places that have
been superstitiously abused, (as formerly all places were Idolatrously defiled
by the Heathens) than not to serve him in any place; for as when certain
Christians found a vacant and a void place in the City of Rome, where they
thought they might conveniently build a Church, and certain loose companions,
that were Victuallers, made claim, and pretended a Title unto it, and told
Alexander Severus, it was not so fit, to make a House to serve God in, as it
was for them to sell and vent their commodities; the Emperor, The discreet
answer of Alexander Severus.
led by the light of nature, being no Christian, answered most Christian-like,
that he thought it better, God should be Worshipped any way, and in any place,
rather then that they should have their way, to make it a place for their
shambles: so say I, that it is a great deal fitter, to serve God in these
Houses, that were so Zealously erected and so Religiously Consecrated for Gods
service, howsoever they were afterward soyled with some vanities, and perhaps
defiled with some Idolatries, then that they should be thrown down, or be made
a Stable for their Horses, or a Kitchen to dress meat for their tables, as some
of these Sectaries have made these Houses of God to be.

2. I say that there is no more affinity or likeness between those times of the
Israelites and our times, and betwixt that people, who were Jews, and us, that
are Christians, then is betwixt Simon Peter, and Simon Magus, or Philip the
Apostle, and Philip King of Macedon; for we are not commanded, to do against
Idolaters, as they were commanded to do against the Canaanites: as, they were
forbidden to make Covenants of peace, or to have any commerce with the
inhabitants of that place, and they were comm^nded to root out and to destroy
all that people, and we have no such injunction, to prohibit us to trade and
traffic, either with Papists, Jews, or Gentiles; neither may the Reformed
Churches and Protestants put others their neighbors to the sword, only because
they are Idolaters, or of a contrary Religion, but they are rather to labor
for their Conversion, as St. Paul did the Idolaters of Athens, and not to work
their destruction.

3. I say, that the examples of Jehosaphat and Hezechias, are no commanding
precepts, and have not the force of laws, and you know that Vivitur praeceptis
non exemplis, men are to live by laws, and not by examples, whereof we have
more bad then good; but were they never so good and so godly, yet are they no
Commanders but Counselors, and no laws to enjoin us, but less ns to direct us,
and that in the like cases; for where the proportion and the equality, betwixt
the example and the following of it, fails, there we must likewise fail to
follow it; and we find a great deal of disproportion and inequality betwixt the
groves and high places of the Jews, and our Cathedrals and Churches, that were
the Papists; because their groves and high places were very dangerous to be
left, for the just fear of a secret access and coming unto them, by the
superstitious Jews, that were always so apt and so ready to fall into
Idolatry; and our Cathedralls and Churches are freed from this fear, when as
they are thoroughly cleansed and purged from all the former superstitions by the
pure Preaching of the Word of God, and no Idolatrous Papist comes unto them,
nor any other, but only those that profess themselves to be of the pure
Religion.

And therefore learned Zanchius says, Hieron. Zanch. de operibus redemptionis.
l. 1. c. 12.
that Vbique locorum in omnibus fere Regnis and Provinciis, quae amplexae sunt
evangelium, Templa ipsa in quibus Idolatria admissa fuit, tot annos retenta
sunt; In every place, and in all Kingdoms and Provinces wel-nigh, which have
embraced the Gospel, the Churches themselves, where Idolatry has been
committed, have been retained so many years together.

And why should they not be still used? For what evil have the Churches
committed, that they, which were dedicated to such an Holy use, as is the true
service of God; should be now so severely handled, as to be either quite
demolished, or diverted and turned to any other purpose? For the senseless
creatures cannot be said to be sinful and so not to be censured; and therefore
the Leprous man's house was rather to be purged then to be pulled down; and
where the malady is uncurable, there, as the Poet says, -- immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum, ne pars syncera trahatur.
The part only infected and putrified, is to be cut off, and not to cast away
the whole; and so the wiser Divines threw down the Altars of those Churches,
where Idolatry and superstition were most used, but they thought good to keep
the Churches still to their former uses.

And so, when the two hundred and fifty men offered incense unto the Lord, in
the Rebellion of Kora; God himself bade Eleazar the High Priest, not to throw
away those brazen Censers, which those men offered, but to employ them for his
service, Numb. 16.38.
and to make of them Broad plates for a covering of the Altar. And when Jericho
was taken by the Israelites, Joshua caused the Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron
that were execrable goods, not to be thrown away, but to be brought into the
House of the Lord, and put into the Treasury of Gods House. And it is very well
worth your observation, Josh. 6.26.
to consider what the Lord himself commands Gedeon to do; namely, to take his
Fathers young Bullock, even the second Bullock of seven years old, (that was
fed to be offered unto Baal) and throw down the Altar of Baal, and cut down the
grove that is by it, Judge. 6.26.
and Build an Altar unto the Lord thy God, upon the top of this rock: and Take
the second Bullock and offer a burnt Sacrifi^e, with the wood of the grove,
which thou shall cut down.

And according to these Presidents the Law provided, Cod. l. 1. tit 8. Valent.
Mart. tit. 12. leg. 11. Honor.
that the houses wherein the Heretics did meet, and broached their damnable
Divinity, should be adjudged to be united to the Orthodoxal Churches, as were
also the houses and habitations of the Caelicoles that were Heretics so
called: and in Saint Augustines time, the Churches that the Donatists
possessed, were not destroyed but they were taken from them, (as we took ours
from the Roman-Priests) and were given to the Catholic Bishops.

And therefore, why should not we use those Churches, that were Religiously
dedicated, and Holily Consecrated for Gods service, and could not themselves
commit any ^ffence, nor be so Profaned, as the accursed things of Jericho, or
the Bullock and groves of Baal, or the Churches of the Arians and Donatists, to
be the Temples and Sanctified Houses, wherein our people should meet to hear
Gods Word, to pray unto him, and to receive his Holy Sacrament?

But I remember Plutarch, Plutarch. in vit. Publicolae. page 113. and Tit.
Livius. l. 2. page 57.
and Titus Livius tell us how that the Romans after they had expelled
Tarquinius Superous, when his son Sextus Tarquinius had most shamefully
ravished Lucretia, they all took a Solemn oath, they would never suffer any
King to Reign over them; and because this was not sufficient to free them from
the fear of a Regal Government, the Consul B^utu^, in the behalf of the people,
make^ a solemn Oration to his fellow Consul Tarquinius Colla^nius, to give over
his Consul^^^p, and to depart the City, to free the people from that fear;
because that, although he was a very honest man, and was a principal actor, in
expelling (...) quin^us Superbus, and they could lay nothing to his charge,
that ever he did or said against the liberty of the people, or for the
Government of Kings* yet seeing his name was Tarquinius, the freedom of the
City could not be fully secured, nor the men free from the fear of Tyranny so
long as a person of that name, how just and innocent so ever he were, continued
within the City: So I believe, it is not for any evil, that these men can, or
could ever espy in our Churches, they cry so much, and yell like Wolves against
them; but only for the name, that they are said to be built by Roman
Catholics, and that Popish Priests have served in them: but it is nothing to
us, who built them, or who served in them, so we serve God aright in them; this
is all that we are to look unto.

For so we find, that our Savior Christ and his Apostles, in their time
frequented the Temple, not that which Solomon built, nor that which Zorobabel
erected; ^^^^ph. Antiq. l. 15. c. 14.
but that which Herod, that sought our Saviors life, build d and beautifi^d;
and that which the Scribes and Pharisees had, as much as in them lay, defiled
with their false-gl^sses, and the other Jews had made it a den of Thieves:
Matthew 21.13.
and though Castor and Pollux were become Idols, and worshipped as gods among
the Heathens; yet Saint Paul refused not to sail in a Ship, whose badge was
Castor and Pollux; and Saint Luke is not afraid to set down those ^itles of
the Paganish Idols.

^ocrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 33.
And therefore, as Eunomius was most foolish for refusing to enter into the
Temples of the Martyrs, lest he should be thought to worship the dead; and
E^stathius was most fantastical, for detesting all public Churches, and
leading his Scholars to private Conventicles in ordinary houses, for fear they
should be defiled with the memorial of the Saints, that were mentioned in the
Churches; so these our brethren of the Separation are most simple, for
disclaiming our Churches, Prayers, and Ministry; and, like the Elder brother in
the Parable, hearing afar off, the melody of our prayers, and understanding of
our intertainment into our Fathers House, are very angry, and will not come
into Gods House for fear of infection, but will convene in private houses, and
run abroad into the fields like Esan, to hunt there for the blessing, which
with Ja^^b, they might get nearer home, in their Fathers House; and when we
would, according to our inj^nction, seek to compel them to come, out of the
Highways and Hedges, to the marriage of the Kings son, they will waste their
wealth, leave their mansions, and, like Heliodorus the fool of Athens, sail
beyond the Straights of Gibraltar, and make Ship-rack before the Tempest;
rather then they will come into Gods House, whereby they might fit still, under
their own V^nes, enjoy the food of their Fathers House, the safe-gard of their
wealth, and the safety of their souls: which they do hazard, by their own
simplicity, in being like the Jews, zealous, but not according to knowledge.

CHAP. XIII.
That it is a part of the Office and Duty of Pious Kings and Princes, as they
are God's Substitutes to have a care of his Church, to see, that, when such
Cathedralls and Churches, are built and beautified as is fitting for his
service, there be Able, Religious, and Honest, painful and faithful Bishops
placed in those Cathedrals, that should likewise see able and Religious
Ministers placed in all Parochial Churches; and all negligent, unworthy, and
dissolute men, Bishops or Priests reproved, corrected, and amended; or removed
and excluded from their places and dignities if they amend not.

IT is well and truly observed, as the holy Scripture shows; That although
the wise God has most mercifully decreed, and accordingly exhibited and gave a
Savior, in himself altogether sufficient, for the saying of all Mankind, and
all the lost sons of Adam; and he has most wisely and graciously taken a
course, on his own part, and in it self also, fully sufficient; and appointed a
course and order on man's part, that, being duly observed, might make the same
sufficiently effectual unto all: yet, it so falls out, Men's destruction.
that very many men attain not to that end, for which God did send his Son, to
save them, but are seized on by Gods Justice, and cast to eternal condemnation.
And that chiefly by man's own default, and, partly in some respects, through the
default of his Rulers and Teachers; yet so, that he dies and suffers only for
his own sins.

1. Through their own default, when Kings and Princes, 1. By their own fault.
whom God has appointed and set to be their Governors and Rulers, do by their
under-Magistrates, and their just laws prohibit them from all evil and
wickedness; and require them to embrace all virtues and godliness of life, and
to this end, do appoint their substitutes, the Bish ps and other Teachers to
guide them, and to instruct them, to let them know what is good and what is
evil; and so what they ought to believe, and what not: and these do faithfully
discharge these Offices, as Moses and Aaron, David and Nathan, and many other
godly Kings and Bishops did; yet, men will not obey their Governors, but Rebel
like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and, as of late, we have done; Jer. 11.21.
they will not hearken to the voice of their Teachers, but say to the Prophets,
Prophesy not unto us, and say to God himself, Depart from us, Job. 21.14.
for we desire not the knowledge of thy Laws: or they rely upon their own
wisdom, and account the Preaching of the Gospel of the cross of Christ
foolishness; 1 Cor. 1.18.
or they follow the ill examples of their Fathers, and do worse than their
Fathers; Jer. 18.12. etc. 16.12.
or they do addict themselves to the pleasures and vanities of this World, that
do choke the seed of Gods Word in them; or when crosses, afflictions, and
persecution come, they are offended, Matthew. 13.^2.
and start aside like a broken bow.

Then, God seeing these courses that they take, contrary to the course, that he
had set down for their Salvation; he complains of them, that His people would
not hear his voice, and Israel would not obey him, therefore He gave them up
unto their own hearts lusts, Ps. 81.12, 15.
and let them follow their own imaginations.

2. Men's destruction much furthered, by the default of their Governors.
2. Though all wicked men do thus chiefly work their own destruction, yet many
times, their fall and ruin is much furthered by the default and apostasy of
their Prime-Governours, or at least through their neglect, and the neglect of
their subordinate Magistrates and Ministers, the Bishops and Preachers that are
under the Kings and Princes, the Governors of God's Church. For God, having
set these Rulers, the Supreme and subordinate, to be the Watchmen and Shepherds
over his people, to govern them, and teach them, how to live justly and holily,
that they might attain to eternal life: if by their default, their misleading
of them out of the way, or neglect to show them the right way, the people do
miscarry, the men, so misguided, and not instructed, Ezech. 33.8.
shall die in their iniquity, and God will require their blood at the Shepherds
and Watchmens bands.

And yet Cain, a principal Ruler of, and over his Posterity, misleading, and
not teaching them the right Worship of God, perished himself, and brought all
them that followed him, and his ways, to the like perdition. And so Nimrod,
Esau, and Ismael, falling away from God, and Jeroboam setting up his golden
gods, and many other Kings and Princes, neglecting their duties, apostatizing
from God, and misleading their people, brought them in like manner to their
utter ruin;

And as many times the people are brought to their ruin, by the evil example,
Scilicet in vulgus manant exemplaregentum, utque ducum lituos, sic mores castra
sequuntur. Claud. 1. Stilic.
and wicked Government of their Prime-Leaders, when as the Poet says, Regis ad
exemplum totus componitur orbis. And the Soldiers would imitate Alexander in
his stoopings, and in his vices, as well, and sooner, than in his virtues; So
many times, and oftener too, they are brought to the same pass, the same paths
of perdition, through the lewd examples and neglect of the subordinate
Magistrates of the Commonwealth, and the Governors and Ministers of the
Church of God: As, when the Princes, Esaias 1.23. Zephant 3.3.
or Nobility, are rebellious, and companions of Thieves, or, as Zephany says,
like Lions, and the Judges are evening-Wolves, that judge not the fatherless,
neither does the cause of the widow come unto them: And when the Prophets are
leight and treacherous persons, and the Priests have polluted the Sanctuary,
and have done violence to the Law, either by corrupting it, Prove. 29.18.
with their false glosses, or locking it up in prison, and not publishing the
same unto the people; for, where there is no vision, the people perish, says
the Wiseman. And so by their false teaching, or no teaching, they thrust
forward the poor people into perdition.

And therefore, Kings and Princes, to whom God, in the first place, has
committed the Sovereignty and Charge both of Church and Commonwealth, Exodus
18.21.
ought, not only to choose such Judges and Magistrates, as Jethro described unto
Moses, Able men, fearing God, men of truth, and hating covetousness: But, when
the Cathedrals and Parochial-Churches are built and beautified for God's
Worship, and for the people of God to meet in them, to serve God, What manner
of Judges and Bishops, Kings ought to choose
as they ought to be, they should also take care and see, that such Bishops and
Priests, as S. Paul describes, in 1 Timothy 3.2, etc. be settled in those
Churches, to worship God, and to bring the people to do their duties, that they
may attain to eternal life: Lest that which S. Hierom complained of in his
time, should be true in our time, That the Altars shined with Gold and precious
Stones, Bernard. ad Abbat. Cluniacen.
Sed ministrorum nulla erat electio, There was no good choice made of good
Ministers; whereby it was said, That they had golden Chalices, but wooden
Priests, as S. Bernard says, it was, not much better in his days; there was
not such care taken for good Ministers as they should do. For as in Nature, we
see every thing for its Creation requires a Divine hand, and a Miraculous power
to produce it; but the same being once produced, God's hand is not so
conspicuous, but he leaves it to the soil, as it were, to stand and grow by the
innate virtue planted in it; So it seems to fare with Religion it self, which
is such a superstructure above Nature, that although it be planted by God, as
both the Jewish and Christian Religion were, with signs and wonders, and a
strong miraculous hand, yet men must now conserve it by those ordinary means,
that God appointed: the Church of Christ, being like the Garden of God in Eden,
which the Lord made, and then set it to our Parents, to keep it, and to dress
it.

And, though this Religion, which at first is thus powerfully planted by God,
and is the principal Pillar that upholdeth States, and makes all Kingdoms
happy; yet, after the inward virtue of the Doctrine of Christ, the Bishops and
Priests, are the main props, and the ordinary means, that God has appointed to
uphold his Religion, and to continue his Service in his Church; because,
Religion can neither plant it self, nor sustain it self alone, and what support
soever it has from the Prince or the Laws of any Nation; yet the Bish^ps and
Priests are, as it were, the soul of that power, in the execution thereof, when
as all the substance, circumstance and ceremonies, have their life from them;
and our consent and belief in their holy Calling, is that, which does, and
should keep us, from the singularity of our own misguided imaginations.

And therefore that Prince, that is truly religious, Kings ought to have a
special care to choose good Bishops.
and has a special care of God's Service, must likewise with King David, (and
as good King Charles ever had) have a special care to see that godly and
learned Bishops and Priests, be appointed in God's Church to instruct his
people.

And you know what S. Paul says, That a Bishop must be blameless, the husband
of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to
teach, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient,
not a brawler, not covetous, one that rules well his own house, having his
children in subjection with all gravity, not a novice, (or a young new Divine)
lest being lifted up with pride (as young men commonly are) he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil: Moreover, 1 Timothy 2.1.2.2, 4, 5, 6, 7.
he must have a good report of them that are without, lest be fall into
reproach, and the snare of the Devil. All which large description of those
parts and virtues, that every Bishop, and faithful Minister of God's Church
ought to have, may for order and method sake, be reduced into these two Heads,
Levit. 8.8.
which are the Vrim and the Thummim, that Moses put upon the Breast Plate of
Aaron, and for which he did so earnestly pray that God would grant them unto
all the Tribe of Levi, saying, Let thine Vrim and thy Thummim be with thy holy
one, or with the man of thy mercy: And they signify, The two special virtues
that ought to be in every Bishop and Priest.
1. The uprightness of his life and conversation. 2. The sincerity of his
doctrine and teaching of his people.


For so Moses shows, that Levi did, as every Bishop and Priest should do.

1. Carry himself most dutifully and obedient in his life, and all his actions
proved him at Massa, and strove with him at the waters of Meriba, he said unto
his father and to his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge
his brethren, nor knew his own children; Verse 9.
but he observed Gods word, and kept his Covenant, and preferred the keeping of
God's Laws, and walking dutifully according to his will, before father or
mother, wife or children, which every Christian, and especially every Christian
Bishop, and true Levite, ought to do.

2. To te^ch Jacob the judgments of God, and Israel his Laws, to put incense
before the Lord, and whole burnt-Sacrifices upon his Altar; which is the second
duty of every Bishop, and every faithful Minister of Christ, Verse 10.
to teach the people of God, and to administer his holy Sacraments: For his
first care and chiefest duty should be to look to himself, (...), to be
blameless; 1 Timothy 3.2.
And his second care is (...), to be apt and able to teach the people: And so
S. Paul tells, and advises all the Clergy of Ephesus, that they should first
look and take heed unto themselves, and then to all the flock, whereof the Holy
Ghost has made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God, Acts 20.28.
which he has purchased with his own blood; And therefore,

1. How blameless Bishops and Ministers should be. Luke 1.6.
1. A Bishop, and a Minister of Christ, must have a special care to carry, and
behave himself so, as that his life and conversation may seem blameless in the
World, like unto Zacharias, the father of John Baptist, that walked in all the
Commandments of God without reproof. And S. Hierom says, That talis, and
tanta, debet esse conversatio and eruditio Pontificis, ut omnes motus and
egressus, and universa ejus opera notabilia sint, veritatem mente concipiat,
and eam toto habitu resonet and ornatu; Hierom. in Epist 43.
ut, quicquid agit, quicquid loquitur, doctrina sit populorum: The life and
conversation of a Bishop, and so likewise of every Minister of the Gospel,
should be such, so grave, and so holy, that all his motions, and progressions,
and all other his works, should be notable and worthy to be observed; he should
conceive the truth in his mind, and sound out the same by his habit and
ornament, that whatsoever he does, The mischief that the evil examples of
Bishops and Ministers do produce.
and whatsoever he says, may be a lesson of instruction unto the people, who
do look more unto the examples that we give them, and the actions that we do,
than to the Precepts that we preach, or the Doctrine that we declare unto them.
And another Father says, that, Nemo plus in Ecclesia nocet, quam qui perverse
agens, nomen vel ordinem sanctitatis habet: delinquentem namque hunc redarguere
nullus praesumit; and in exemplum vehementer culpa extenditur, cum pro
reverentia ordinis peccator honoratur: No man does, or indeed can do, more hurt
in the Church of God, than he that does wickedly, and lives dissolutely, and
has the name or order of holiness, that is, holy Orders; because no man
presumes, or dares to reprove such an one, when he offends, and his fault
exceedingly reaches to the example of others to do the like, when, for the
reverence of his Order, they see such a wicked man so honored;

And therefore, I may say to such a one, as Claudian says to Honorius,
changing only but one word, Hoc te praeterea crebro sermon monebo,
Cla^dian. de 4. C^nsolat. Honorii.
Vt te totius medio telluris in orb
Vivere cognoscas; cunctis tua gentibus esse,
Facta palam, nec posse dari praesulibus unquam
Secretum vitiis; nam lux altissama fati
Occultum nil esse sinit, latebrasque per omnes
Intrat, and abstrusos implorat fama recessus.


For such men are like a City that is set upon a Hill, and all men's eyes are
upon them: and therefore, their lives and their actions, cannot be concealed;
but their doings are more conspicuous, and their danger far greater, than any
other men: And that, as Aquinas says, in a threefold respect.

First because, the Dispensers of the holy Sacraments and the holy Word of God,
which ought not to be handled but by holy men, in which respect a holy Father
says, Mallem sustinere poenam Caiphae, Pilati, and Herodis, quam Sacerdotis
indigne celebrantis, That he would rather choose to suffer the punishment of
Caiphas, and of Pilate, and of Herod, than of a wicked Bishop, or Priest, that
does unworthily administer the Blessed Sacrament.

Secondly, because these men are to render their account more strictly, being
looked into more narrowly than other men; because, as S. Bernard says, Those
faults and transgressions, quae in aliis nugae sunt, Cuj^s vita despic^tu
resta^ ut ejus praedicatio contemnatur. Gregor. super Evangel. l. 1. Hom. 6.
in Sacerdotibus sunt blasphemiae; And those ^i^s that in others seem to be but
steps, and triffles, and veni^^ digna, and may easily be pardoned; yet in
Bishops, and the Ministers of God's word, they are heinous offenses, and worthy
to be punished heavily, with many stripes, seeing they knew their Masters will,
and did it not.

And thirdly, because that by their Places, and Offi^es, they are to teach
other men, not to offend; and to answer for then sins, if through their neglect
they do offend: and yet by their ill lives and examples, they teach them to
offend.

2. As they are, in these respects, 2. How careful the Bishops and Priests
ought to be to teach the people. Ezech. 3.17. etc. 3.7.
to have a special care of their own lives and conversations, to live justly
and holily, as the servants of Christ ought to do; so they are likewise obliged
to be sedulous and diligent in the instruction and tuition of the people
committed under their charge; for they are made the Watchmen and Shepherds over
God's people, to teach them and instruct them, what they should do, and what
they should believe; even as our Savior says unto his Apostles, Go ye and
teach all Nations, baptizing them, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
Matthew. ult. 19.20.
and of the Holy Ghost, and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have comm^nded you. And therefore S. Paul charge Bishop Timothy before God,
and before Jesus Christ, that he preach the word, and be instant in season, 2 Timothy 4 1, 2. 1 Cor. 9.16.
and out of season, reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with all long s^ffering and
doctrine: and he says, Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel. And S. Gregory
says, Oportet ut praedicatores sint fortes in praeceptis, compatientes
infirmis, Greg. in Mor. 30. super Job 39.
terribiles in minis, in exhortationibus blandi, in ostend^ndo magisterio
bumiles, in rerum temporalium contemptu dominantes, and in tolerandis
adversitatibus rigidi: It behooves, that Preachers should be strong and strict
in their precepts, compassionate and pitiful to the weak, terrible in their
threatenings to the impenitent, smooth and gentle in their exhortations; in
showing their power and authority, humble; in despising the world, and all
worldly things, stout and domineering; and in suffering and bearing adversities
firm and constant; And the same S. Gregory says also, Idem. Moral: l. 17.
that Non debet praedicator infirmis insinnare cuncta quae sentit, nec debet
praedicare rudibus quanta cognoscit; which is a very good lesson.

And so you see partly, what the Bishops and Ministers of Christ ought to do,
and how to behave themselves in the Church of God.

Yet I must confess, we and our Predecessors, Dan 9.5.
the Bishops of God's Church, have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and
have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from God's Precepts,
and neglecting the performance of our duties; for whereas, Exemplar vitae
populis est vita regentis. And as S. Gregory says, Lux gregis est flamma
doctoris, The light whereby the flock walks, is the shining flame of the
Shepherds life; Yet many of our Predecess rs, I am sure, and I pray God that
none of our present Prelates may do the like, have given very evil examples
unto the people, if the example of covetousness, in justice, and the
obstructing and neglect of Gods Service, and the furtherance of men's salvation
be evil examples; for, letting pass what we find written of Pope Sixtus the
Fourth, of whom this Epitaph was made: Sixte, jaces tandem, fidei contemptor
and aequi,
Pacis ut hostis eras, pace peremptus obis.


And of Alexander the sixth, that made a league with the Devil, as Balaeus
says, to obtain his Papacy, and of whom it was said, as I showed before.

Vendit Alexander, cruces, altaria, Christum,
Emerat ille prius, vendere jure potest.
And of Boniface the eighth, and diverse others wicked Popes, that pretended to
be the Bishops and Vicars of Christ, but were indeed the limbs of Antichrist:
We find nearer home that what pious men and good Christians had formerly most
zealously bestowed upon the Church and Churchmen for the Honor of God, the
relieving of the poor, and the promoting of the Christian faith, many of our
own Bishops most wickedly and Sacrilegiously, either through Covetousness for
some fine, or for love and affection to their Children, friends or servants,
have alienated and made away the same from their Successors, in Fee-farm, or
long leases, some for one thousand, some for one hundred years; and some for
other longer term, reserving only some small rent for the succeeding Bishops,
as in my Diocese of Ossory, that Lordship was set for ten pound yearly, that is
well nigh worth two hundred pound; and that was set for four pound, which is
better worth then fifty pound, with many others in the like sort; whereby we
that come after them, and they that shall come after us, are neither able to
keep Hospitality, nor to feed the poor, nor scarce our selves, and our own
families; nor indeed to do any other work of piety and service of God, which
the Scripture requires us to do.

And if these things be not wickedness and a high degree of abominable
Sacrilege; mine understanding fails me; and this, being Sacrilege, I know not
what laws can make it good. Let them have what Laws and what Acts of Parliament
soever they please to justify their doings, I know not how those Laws and Acts
of Parliament will or can justify them, before the Throne of the just God.

And therefore, not to do my self, what I blame in others, lest God should
condemn me out of mine own mouth: as my good God has hitherto preserved me,
and kept my hands clean from all Corruption, and from taking any the least
bribe or gift from any man, or any service, but what I paid for, even in my
poorest state, and meanest condition, when I had not for many years together
twenty pound per annum to maintain me; so I have resolved, and do pray to God
continually to give his grace to perform it, and do hope that God will grant it
me, that I will never take either bribe for any thing, or gift from any man, or
fine for any House, Land, or Lordship, that belongs either to my Deanery, or
Bishopric, while I live, if, I should live a thousand years: but, what shall
be for the repair of the Church.

And besides all this, and many other faults in their own lives, of less
moment, I have often bemoaned one offense of some of my brethren above all the
rest, when I considered how they, not following the Counsel of St. Paul in the
Ordination of Priests and Deacons, To lay hands on no man rashly; but to see
that the persons that are to be admitted to holy Orders, should be no novices,
that is, no young Divines, because as Saint Gregory says, Nequaquam debent
homines in aetate infirma praedicare, Men ought not to Preach in their young
and tender years; Quia juxta rationis usum, sermo doctrinae non suppetit, nisi
in perfecta aetate, because that according to the use of Reason, Learning, and
Wisdom, is not attained unto, but in perfect age; Et Redemptor noster, Greg.
sup. Ezech. Ho. 2. and in Pastor.
cum Coeli sit conditor and Angelorum Doctor, ante tricennale tempus, in terra
magister noluit fieri hominum; ut videlicet praecipitatis vim saluberrimi
timoris infunderet, cum ipse etiam qui labi non posset, perfectae vitae
gratiam, non nisi perfecta aetate praedicaret: And our Redeemer, that is the
Creator of the Heavens and Teacher of Angels, would not be made the Teacher of
men here on Earth before he was thirty years of age; that so he might power
forth the force and fruit of wholesome f^^r to them that are fallen, when as he
also, that could not fall, did not preach the grace and ways of a perfect
life, but in a perfect age; and to see likewise that they should be no ways
unworthy of so high a calling, but every way qualified, both for life and
doctrine, so, as the Word of God does require: have notwithstanding, either by
the solicitation of friends, or for some other respects, and perhaps worser
Corruption, many times made young novices, illiterate men; and, which is far
worse, men of corrupt minds, and of bad lives, of loose dissolute carriage, the
Priests of the most High God, to wait at his Altar, that were not worthy to
wait on our Table. And therefore, as those Bishops that did thus, did herein
falsify their Faith to God, and betrayed his service to these unworthy men; So,
the just God has most justly suffered these perfidious men, to betray their
makers, to spit in their Fathers faces, and to combine themselves with the
enemies of Christ, to destroy the Bishops of Gods Church, and so, as the Poet
says in another kind, Ignavum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent.

This wicked brood that we our selves begat and made, would drive their Sires
from their hives, and from our offices.

And I know not by what fatality, unless it be by the just wrath of God, to
intail the wickedness of the Fathers, like the Leprosy of Gehezi, unto the
Children, for the sins and injustice of the Fathers that are so well known, and
engraven in the consciences of the Children; yet, so it is most generally
found, that the Children of the precedent Bishops, that have most wronged the
Church and their Successors, Why the sons of Bishops are most spiteful unto
the Succeeding Bishops.
are in all things most contrariant and opposites, I will not say spiteful, or
envious to the succeeding Bishops: because, as I conceive, their hearts tell
them, what injuries their Fathers did them, for their sakes, and themselves
continue therein; and therefore do conceive, that the present Bishops cannot
think well nor love them, that have so much wronged, both them and the Church
of God, and to requite them, according to their own thoughts, with hate for
hate, they are of all others most spiteful crossing and prejudicial unto them:
or else, because they do imagine, that the present and succeeding Bishops, will
be as wicked and as unjust, as their Fathers, and their predecessors were, and
therefore deserve neither love nor favor from them; As Alexander the
Coppersmith withstood S. Paul; So the last Bishops son withstandeth me, to
recover the rights of the Church,
And I heard many Parliament men say that in the Long Antichristian
Parliament, none were more violent against the Bishops, then the sons and
posterity of Precedent Bishops: I found it so.

And I have espied another fault in some of our former Bishops, not a little
prejudicial to the Honor of God, and the good of the Church of Christ; and
that is, not only to give Orders to unworthy men, but also to bestow livings,
upon unworthy Priests; for, as the old saying was, Rector eris praesto, de
sanguine praesulis esto, Or, as another says, Quatuor ecclesias portis
intratur in omnes:
Prima patet magnis, nummatis altera, tertia charis,
Sed paucis solet quarta patere Dei.


So it was their practice to bestow Livings, Rectories, Prebends, and other
Preferments, not on them that best deserved them; but, either upon their
Children, friends, or servants, or on them that could, as the story goes, tell
them, And so to the lessor and to the lessee of the Church Lands, to the
prejudice of the Church, the like curse and Anathema is due.
who was Melchisedecks Father, that is, to say St. Peter's lesson, Aurum and
argentum non est mihi, in the affirmative way; which is a fault worthy to be
punished by the Judges. For as it is most truly said, Q^icunque sacra vel
sacros ordines vendunt aut emunt, sacerdotes esse non possunt, whosoever do buy
or sell holy orders, or any holy things, cannot be Priests, Vnde scriptum est
Anathema danti, Anathema accipienti, whence it is written, Let Gods curse be to
the buyer, and the curse of God to the receiver; because this buying and
selling of Holy things, and things dedicated for the service of God, is the
Simoniacal Heresy, or Heresy of Simon M^gus; Q^omodo ergo, si Anathematizati
sunt, and sancti non sunt, sanctificare alios possunt? Habetur 1. q. 1. Can.
Quicunque.
How then, if they be accursed and no Saints, can they make others Saints, or
sanctify them? Et, cum in corpore Christi non sint, quomodo Christi corpus
tradere vel accipere possunt? Et qui maledictus est, benedicere quomodo potest?
And seeing such men are not in the body of Christ, how can they deliver or
receive the body of Christ? and how can he that is accursed himself, bless any
other?

And therefore, seeing the Word of God requires, the Bishops and Ministers of
Christ should be so Holy in their lives, and so qualified, with knowledge and
learning, for the instruction of the people, as I showed to you before, and is
typified by those Golden Bells, and the Pomegranats, that were to be set in the
skirts of Aarons robes round about, the Bells signifying the teaching of the
people; and the Pomegranats the sweet smelling fruits of a good and godly life;
It behooves the Kings and Princes, to whom God has given the prime Sovereignty,
and commands them to have a care of his Honor and the service of his Church,
to see, so far as they can, that the Bishops and Prelates, which they place
over Gods people, be so qualified, as God requires, and to enjoin these, their
prime Substitutes, to look that those Priests and Deacons, which they make, and
place in the Church, be likewise such, as I have fore-shewed; for this, God
requires at their hands; and this, David, Jehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and
all the good and godly Kings of Israel, and Juda, and all the pious Christian
Kings and Emperors did; and I do know, how zealously and carefully our late
most gracious King Charles the I. was, to place Able, Religious, and Godly
Bishops over Gods Church; which is a special duty of every King.

And because also the Prelates and Bishops are not all, or may not all be, no
more then the Apostles were all, such as they should be, but some of them may
be such, as I have showed to you before, either like Simon Magus selling what
they should freely give; or like Demas embracing this present World, or like
Baalam, loving the wages of unrighteousness, or perhaps doing worse then those,
Apostatizing like Julian, and starting aside like Ecebolius, or devising wicked
Heresies, like Arius, or renting the unity of the Church like Donatus, then, as
Solomon deposed Abiathar, and diverse of the good Emperors deposed wicked
Popes, and the godly Kings have pulled down ungodly Bishops, as our late Queen
Elizabeth did degrade Bishop Bonner, and diverse other Popish Prelates; so
should all good and godly Kings reprove and correct, and if they amend not,
expel and remove all scandalous and ungodly Bishops; and the Bishops do the
like to all deboyst and dissolute Ministers: that so the old and sour leaven
may be purged out of Gods Church, and the builders of Gods Tabernacle be like
Bezaliel, and Aholiab, such as can and will do the work of the Lord carefully
and Religiously.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the maintenance due to the Bishops and Ministers of Gods Church, how large
and liberal it ought to be.

THirdly, When the Kings and Princes, 3. To provide sufficient means for the
Churchmen.
which are the Supreme Magistrates, and, as Tertullian says, Homines a Deo
secundi, and solo Deo minores, are the men, that are next to God in power and
Authority, and therefore ought to have the prime and chiefest care of Gods
Honor, and his worship in the Church of Christ; have, as I have formerly
showed, with King David and Solomon, Colimus imperatorem ut hominem a Deo
secundum and so lo De^ minorem, Tertul. ad Scapulam.
provided that Temples and Churches be erected and beautified, as fit houses of
God, for his people and servants to convene and meet in them to Worship God,
and have likewise taken care, in the next place, to see that good men and godly
Bishops be appointed over those Churches as their substitutes, to Rule, Govern,
and Teach the people of God, how to live and to believe as they ought to do,
and to require the Bishops and Prelates also to see, that all the inferior
Clergy do the like: then, that they may be enabled, with joy and comfort, to
discharge their duties, and to perform Gods service aright; they should do
their best endeavor to see, that there should be large and liberal maintenance
provided, and set out sufficiently for them, to sustain and keep themselves and
their families, to keep Hospitality, to relieve the poor, and to do all the
other works of piety and charity, which they are enjoined to do, and which,
without such means and maintenance, they are no ways able, possibly, to
discharge. For if such liberal maintenance be not provided for them, the want
thereof will make the whole company of the Clergy men to be contemptible, their
names in obloquy, and their unworthy and poor condition will fright away the
better sort of men from embracing this calling, that in it self is so Honorable
a function, as to be the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ: for though the name of a
Bishop, and the Priest or Minister of Jesus Christ, be great, And J^venal
says, Quis enim virtu^em amplectitur ipsam, Pramia si t^llas? Juvenal. l. 4.
Satyr. 10.
and of great account in Gods book, and with the Saints of God; yet men are but
flesh and blood, whose nature is to be enticed and toled on with rewards, as
the best Sollicitors and mediators, to spur them forward to undertake any
profession; and they are most apt and ready, to undertake that, which they see
most profitable, and makes them best able to live in the world.

And therefore Cicero, the best of the Orators, said, Honos alit arts, That
Reward and Honor is the nourisher of Arts and Sciences, and makes the Scholars
to fall to their Study; and Aristotle, the chiefest of all the Philosophers,
confirms what the Orator said, and adds, that, Honos est praemium Virtutis,
Virtue and learning ought to be honored and rewarded; and when it is rewarded
it will flourish and be increased; and Martial the best Epigrammatist
justifies, what the others affirmed, saying.

Sint Mecoenates, non deerunt, Flacce, Marones;
Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt.
Which I may (with leave) thus Translate, Where Patrons well present their
Clerks, there Preachers will abound,
In every Town and Village then, good Prophets shall be found.


And therefore the wisest men, have always promised great Rewards to all that
would attempt any great Service; as Caleb said, He that smites Kiriath sepher,
Josh. 15.16. 1 Samuel 17.25. 1 Samuel 5.8.
and takes it, to him will I give my daughter Achsa to wife. And Saul promised
to do the like, to him that vanquished Gelias: And so King David promised no
small Reward to him, that got up to the gutter, and smote the Jebuzites in the
siege of Jerusalem; because the wages and reward, that men expect for their
labor, are as the spurs that drive and prick them forward, to every
profession, and to every work and great Exploit.

And on the other side, when the World sees the Ministers of the Gospel
rewarded none otherwise now, when we have a gracious King, than the Levite in
the old Testament was, when there was no King in Israel, with bare meat and
drink, Judge. 17.10.
and a single simple suite of apparel, and ten Shekels of Silver, which was his
yearly pension, for all his pains, then, as Juvenal says, -- Quis, quis
virtutem amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas? --
Who will be willing to enter into the Ministry, and to embrace this high
Calling? especially when they do thoroughly perceive, how this inexcusable
covetousness, and the unresistable power of the men of War, does still increase
more and more, to eat up, and, like a canker, to waste and consume the
possessions of the Church, and the maintenance of God's Ministers; whereby the
Honor of God is blemished, his Worship obstructed, the people deprived of the
spiritual food of their souls, and the poor of their relief and food of their
bodies; which the Bishops and Ministers of Christ, if they were made able, are
bound to bestow upon them, as the men that best know the duty of charity, how
acceptable it is in the sight of God.

Why there were no Physicians in Athens.
For, as, when it was demanded, Why there were no Professors of Physic in the
City of Athens, whereby the whole Art and Profession was decayed; the answer
was made, It was because there was no Reward or Stipend set out and allotted
for the Teachers of that Science: So when the reward and maintenance of the
Bishops and Ministers, is purloyned and taken away by Soldiers, For they are
the men that hold our lands and seek to take our houses from us.
or any others, then certainly, the Ministry of the Gospel of Jesus Christ
will insensibly decay: And how the Church-robbers will answer this to God, or
defend themselves with their swords before him, let them look unto it; I would
not be in their case, for all the lands and houses that they have.

For, as when Antigonus asked the Philosopher Cleanthes, that was Zeno's
Scholar, and had learnedly written of the Sun and Moon and Stars, and other
points of Astronomy, Why he carried water in the night, and did grind at the
Quern or Mill? Cleanthes answered, He was enforced to be thus occupied, to get
his living, when he had no other means to maintain himself. So, when God shall
demand of the Bishops and Ministers, Why they do not study to teach his people,
and bestow alms on his poor creatures, but look after their husbandry, and
follow after the affairs of the world, and to do, as many times my self have
been enforced to do, many base and servile works, for want of means to hire
other laborers, and we shall answer as Cleanthes did, This strange indignity
is done unto us, that we have no money to buy Books to study, and to relieve
the poor, and to repair thy ruinous House, nor scarce means to maintain our
selves, but by these unworthy ways to get some small means of subsistence,
lest otherwise we should be forced, with the Levite and his wife, to lodge in
the streets. And when God shall reply again, and demand, How comes this to
pass? when as the Kings, Princes, and other Noble men of the World, the more
excellent, powerful, and illustrious they are, the more excellent and
beneficial are the Places and Offices of their servants; from whence it became
a Proverb, That no fishing to the Sea, and no service to the Court. And I, that
am the Great and Almighty God of Heaven, and the King of all Kings, that do
take pleasure in the prosperity of my servants, Psalm. 35.27. Prove 3.16. etc.
22.4.
and have promised riches and honor to them that serve me, and accordingly
have allowed and commanded my Tithes and Oblations, and the free gifts and
will-offerings of my people, to be inviolably set our, and preserved for them
that serve at mine Altar; and yet, notwithstanding all this, that my Servants
and Ambassadors, that are legati a latere, should be in a poorer and a sadder
condition, than the servants of many mean Gentlemen? and we shall answer; It is
true, O Lord, that thou art the Best Master in the World, thy service is the
most Honorable, and the allowance that thou have appointed for them, is very
ample and large, and a most pentiful Royal Reward, and we know, that they which
will faithfully serve thee shall want no manner of thing that is good. Psalm.
34.10.


But the sons of Belial, the offspring of Baalam, that loved the wages of
unrighteousness, have violated the covenant of Levi, and rose up against him,
and being too strong for him, have taken away the Tithes and Oblations, the
lands and the houses of thee our God, into their possession; and left the
Church of Christ bare and naked, to cry out, P^llis and ossa sum miser; and
that is the reason, why we do not, and cannot, perform and do the service that
thou requirest, and we desire to do.

And then, let the sacrilegious persons, and the violaters of holy things, The
Soldiers that take away.
the goods and lands of the Church, see, what the Prophet says of Levi, and of
his enemies; for of Levi he says, Bless, O Lord, his substance, and accept
the work of his hands: And of his enemies, he says, Smite thorough the loins
of them that rise up against him, and of them that hate him, Deuteronomy. 33.11.
smite them thorough and through, that they rise not again. And I do wonder,
that this prayer of Moses does not make the hearts of all Church-robbers to
shake and tremble when they do consider it.

But the enemies of God's Church, that care not how much they pill and pluck
from the Patrimony thereof, and would have the Ministers and Bishops, that are
like fixed Stars in God's right hand, to be like the Planets in the Zodiac,
that have no settled place; but are carried about by an erratical and uncertain
motion: Yet cannot they endure to be termed sacrilegious; but they cry out, and
say, No, and God forbid, that they should take away any thing from the Church,
that belongs unto the Church; So, like the Jews, that cried, Templum Domini,
Templum Domini, when they profaned the same most of all; their words are
smoother than oil, when in very deed, they are very swords, and will not be
kept back, from piercing us, and Christ himself through our sides.

Therefore I will endeavor to show unto them the truth, The equity of the
large and liberal maintenance of the Clergy.
and the equity of that large and liberal maintenance, that God allows, and
is therefore due, and not to be denied, to the Bishops and the Ministers of the
Gospel: and this truth the Holy Scripture confirms many ways: As,

1. That they should have maintenance, it is manifest, and few but mad men will
deny it; because the labourer is worthy of his hire; Luke 10.7.
and the Apostle demands, Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the
fruit thereof? or, Who feeds a flock, and does not taste of the milk thereof?
1 Cor. 5.7.
And no man can deny, but the Bishops and Ministers of God's Word are the
Husbandmen, and the Dressers of God's Vineyard, and the Shepherds of his Flock.
And the same Apostle says, That they which minister about holy things live of
the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with
the Altar: Even so, has the Lord ordained, 1 Cor. 9.13.14.
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: And the other
reasons, that this our Apostle produces, are,

1. A minori, the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the corn, is not to be
muzled.

2. A majori, the Preachers of God's Word do minister unto the people spiritual
graces; therefore the people should not muzzle the mouths of their Preachers,
and keep back their carnal things from them. They are so plain and so pregnant
to prove, that Ministers should have maintenance, that our very adversaries
cannot contradict it.

fanatic spirits, void of all reason do object, That as Nehemiah, because he
feared God, spared the people from those exactions of money and corn and wine,
which other Governors had taken from them, Nehem. 5.15, 16. and v. 10, 12.
and prayed the Nobility, that they should exact no such things from their
brethren, and called the Priests also, and took an oath of them, that they
should do accordingly. So, the Bishops and Ministers of Christ should much
rather spare their people, and not exact such parts and portions from them, as
they do.

Nehemiah was a potent and a powerful man, that was able to maintain at his
Table an hundred and fifty of the Jews and Rulers, Verse 17.
besides those that came unto him from among the Heathen round about him: and
the people, newly returned from their Captivity, were very poor and miserable,
Verse 3, 4, 5.
and the exactions that were taken from them were too heavy, and very unjust;
therefore this godly Governor took pity upon them, and in piety forgave it
them.

But this particular example, is no Precept for us to obey, or Rule to follow
it; especially considering the disparity betwixt us, and Nehemiah, and betwixt
our people now, and the Jews at that time; and the great difference that is
betwixt their taking of most unjust taxations, and our requiring the just
reward and wages of them that are far better able to pay it, than we to forbear
it, for our just and great pains: Yet,

object the example of the Apostles, and especially of S. Paul, who made the
labor of his hands, the porter that brought in his living; and protested
before the Bishops and Clergy, Act. ^0.33.34.
that he coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, 2 Cor. 11.9.
or Apparel, but his hands ministered to, his necessities: and tells the
Corinthians, That in all things be kept himself from being burdensome unto them.

same spirit, the same grace, and the same extraordinary gifts of inspiration,
and in the same measure as the Apostles had; for they were immediately and
extraordinarily inspired with abilities, to preach, and to answer, whatsoever
should be demanded of them in illa hora, even in an instant, and to do
miracles, when need required: But we cannot attain to any learning or
knowledge, without industry and study, and great pains-taking: And therefore we
cannot be Preachers of Gods Word, if we be forced to be Traders in the World,
to work with our hands, and to live by our works.

Paul does not say, That he never took wages of any Church; but that he coveted
no man's Silver, and forbore to charge the Churches, when he found it was meet
and best to do so, for the Churches edification, which he spared; otherwise he
tells the Corinthins, That he robbed other Churches, taking wages of them, 2
Cor. 11.8.
to do the Corinthians service.

And to show, that their maintenance should not be sparing and niggardly, but
large, bountiful, and honorable; S. Paul says, Let the Elders, that is, the
Bishops, and Ministers of Christ, that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor, 1 Timothy 5.7.
especially they which labor in the word and doctrine: By which double honor,
S. Chrysostom understands. 1. A respect and reverence unto their persons: And
2ly a liberal maintenance for their livelihood, because honor signifies all
necessary provision, needful for the person that is to be honored: As where
the Lord says, 1 Pet. 3 7.
Honor thy father and thy mother, and Honor the King: And where the Apostle
says, Honor widows that are widows indeed; that is have such a care of them,
that a suffi^ient, and a liberal maintenance be provided for them. And so
should they do for the Bish^ps and Ministers, answerable to their Dignity,
Places, and Calling.

But all this while, we walk about the bush, and are in generals, Et in
universalibus latet error: And so, though it should be granted, that our
maintenance should be very large and liberal; yet it is not agreed, how far it
should extend, and what the same should be: But, as the enemies of the Church,
and the haters of the Bishops, do think any thing that they have, too much; and
would have them, as S. Bernard says, aedibus and sedibus effugari, to be
chased out of house and home, and have their lands sowed ^^th salt, that they
might never bring forth fruits to them, or their successors, while the world
lasts: So the best friends of ^ur Presbyterians do think, some standing
Salary or stipend, which their people conceive to be competent for them, is to
be understood by this double honor, and by all that is required in the new
Testament to be given unto them.

To this I say, God is the best Judge to determine what wages is fit for his
servants to have.
That for the provision and proportion that is to be given to the Rulers and
Teachers of the people, we yield not, that it should be arbitrated and set out
by the covetous hearts and shallow heads of them, that would rob the Church,
and denude the Spouse of Christ of her precious Garment; and with Dionysius,
give her a base woollen coat, instead of her golden Vesture: But we refer the
decision of this case to the heavenly Oracle of God himself, who best knows
what is fit for his servants to have, and what is the maintenance, that he
allows them, and admitts not other Masters, to set down the wages of his
servants, which is not usual nor tolerable among men: And therefore,

1. Let us consider what maintenance he thought meet to be sufficient for the
L^vites, and the Ministers of the Law; and by that, you may guess what is fit
for the Ministers of the Gospel: And you shall find,

1. That they had 48. Cities to dwell in, out of all the other 11. What wages
God appointed for the Ministers of the Law.
Tribes of Israel; as you may see how many they had from every Tribe in Josh.
21. per totum. And the children of Israel were commanded to set out for
glebe-lands, to be consecrated for the Church, to every City by measure from
without the wall of it on the East side, 2000. cubits; and so on every round
about, and the suburbs of their Cities should be for their cattle, Numb. 35.4,
5.
for their goods, and for all their beasts, which in a Kingdom, not so big as
Great Britain, being not above 300. miles in length from Dan to Beersheba, as
S. Hierom says, was a very great proportion.

2. They were to have the Tithes, that is, the tenth part of all profits of
yearly increase, either of cattle, fruits of trees, or lands, Vide Godwin. l.
6. c. 3. Matthew. 23.23.
of all which they were to pay their Tithes, even to Mint, Anise, and Cummin,
which, as Christ says, they ought not to leave undone; And the Husbandman paid
two sorts of Tithes: For,

1. When the Harvest was ended, he laid aside his great Theruma, Numb. 15.20.
called the first fruits of his threshing-floor; and this was of, 1. Wheat. 2.
Barley. 3. Grapes. 4. Figs. 5. Pomegranates. 6. Olives. 7. Dates: which the
Talmudists called Biccurim: And then under the same head of the first fruits of
the threshing-floore, was paid the Tithe of Corn, Wine, Oil, Deuteronomy. 18.4. Numb.
18.2.
and the Fleece, yea, and of all things else, that the earth brought forth for
man's food.

And when the first fruits of the threshing floor was paid them; 1. Tob. 1.7.
Out of the remainder, he paid a tenth part unto the Levites; and this they
termed, the first Tithe, and this was always paid in kind, and, Nehem. 10.37
as it seems, not brought to Jerusalem by the Husbandman, but paid unto the
Levites in the several Cities of tillage.

2. When this first tithe was paid, the Husbandman paid out of that which
remained a second tithe, Moses Kotsens. in tractatu de decima secunda. Fol. 199.
which he might either pay in kind, or by commutation in money, and which for
two years he was to make a Lovefeast at Jerusalem with it, and every third year
still at home; but in each place to invite the Levite, the Fatherless, the
Widow, and the Poor, unto it. Deuteronomy. 14.18.

They paid likewise the tithes of their Cattle, their Bullocks, Sheep; and of
all that passed under the Rod, the tenth was Holy unto the Lord.

Levit 27.32.
And that our Husbandmen may see what the Jews paid out of the Fruits of the
Earth; this Synopsis, taken out of Scaliger, as Goodwin says, will declare
unto them, Videlicet

The Husbandman had growing 6000. Bushels of Corn in one year, whereof 100.
Bushels was the least that could be paid by the Husbandman to the Priests for
the first fruits of the threshing floor. So 5900. Bushels remained to the
Husbandman; whereof he paid two tithes. First 590. Bushels were the first
tithes that he paid to the Levites; whereof, they paid 59. Bushels to the
Priests; which was called, decimae decimarum, the tithe of tithes. So 5310.
Bushels remained to the Husbandman, whereof 531. Bushels, were paid for his
second Tithe, to the Levite, Fatherless, Widow, and other poor men. So 4770.
Bushels remained to the Husbandman, as his own when he had paid all that was
upon him to be paid; and so 1121. Bushels are the sum of both tithes, joined
together; which is above a sixth part of the whole, and no less then 19. out of
a hundred, which the Husbandman has paid.


And what would our men say if they were in joined to pay so much? And yet,
besides all the tithes, that the Priests, and Levites were to have, without any
diminution, you may

3. Note, that the Priests and Levites were to have a special share of all the
first fruits, of their Cattle of all kinds, as of Bullocks, Sheep, Goats, and
the Fruits of their Trees, and of their Corn, both the Therumoth, and
Thenuphoth, Exodus 13.
their Heave Offering, and Wave-offering; and the firstlings or firstborn of
every man, the Lord challenged as his own; and they were to be redeemed, for
five silver shekels of the Sanctuary, which were to be paid unto the Priests
for each of them. Number. 18.15, 16.


And so you see, how God would be Honored, and how great was the portion of the
Priests, which received Gods part by the firstlings of men, and of Cattle, and
by the first fruits of the Trees, and of the Earth, in the Sheafe, in the
Threshing-floor, in the Dough, and in the Loaves: which should teach us, to
Consecrate the prime of our years, and of all that is good unto the service of
the Lord. 3. The diverse kinds of Sacrifices and Oblations of the Jews, whereof
the Priests had their part.


3. Besides all this, you must observe that the Jews had diverse kinds of
Sacrifices, and Ceremonial oblations, instituted by God, and administered by
the Priests, which were either 1. (...), Pr^pitiatory and Piacular, that was
also two fold. 1. (...), Reconciling, which the Grecians called Holocaust,
because it was wholly burnt. 2. (...), Redeeming, 1. Pro peccato 2. Pro
delicto. The 1. A sin-offering. The 2. A trespass offering.


2. (...), Gratulatory, for the manifold benefits that they had received from
God: and this their thankfulness they attested three manner of ways. 1. By
their Peace Offering. 2. By their Oblations. 3. By their Sacrifice of praise.



And out of all these things, and whatsoever things were devoted to God, in any
ways, by Oblations or Vows, for their sin-offering, Numb. 18.9, 10, 11, 12.
or trepass offering, and all the gifts of the Children of Israel, which were
heaved, waved or shaken, and the Show bread, Ezech. 44.29. and 30.
and all that was sacred and sequestered from the Common use, the portion of the
Priests must indispensably be laid out for them; Because God had given it unto
them by a Covenant of Salt for ever; and so out of every Eucharistical
Sacrifice, Levit. 24.9.
the breast and the right shoulder, were the Levites fees, and from every
Holocaust, or whole-burnt Sacrifice they had the skin.

And whenever they detained any of these, either in whole or in part, Levit.
7 8. Levit. 5.15.
the Lord required them to make a plenary satisfaction, and to offer up a Ram
for that detention.

Out of all which, it is most evident, that the maintenance of these Ministers
of the law was both liberal and honorable; and so much the better, because it
was perpetual and entailed to their posterity: whereas our means is transient,
and dies from our children when we die.

Yet you know how Saint Paul reasons, if the Ministration of death, written
and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not
steadfastly behold the face of Moses, 2 Cor. 3.7.
for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away: How shall
not the Ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? For if the Ministration
of Condemnation be glory, much more does the Ministration of Righteousness
exceed in glory; So, if their Ministry, which was the Ministration of the Law,
and of Death, had such glorious allowance for their service, I wonder how our
Ministry, which is the Ministration of the Gospel should be so meanly rewarded;
and our maintenance so far short of theirs; when, in respect of our more
glorious service, and far more beneficial unto our people, it should exceed
theirs in all glory.

CHAP. XV.
That the payment of Tithes unto the Church, is not a case of custom but of
Conscience; When as the tenth by a Divine right is the Teacher's tribute, and
the very first part of the wages that God appointed to be paid unto his Work
men; and therefore, that it is as heinous a sin, and as foul an offense, to
defraud the Minister of this due; as it is to detain the meat, or money, of the
Labouring-man, which is one of the four crying sins.

HAving seen, that it is a part of the duty and charge of all Christian Kings
and Princes, to have a special care to uphold Gods service and the true
Religion; and to that end,

1. To cause Churches to be built and Beautified, for the people to meet in
them, to serve God. And

2. To appoint Worthy men, Bishops and Priests, to supply those Churches, and
to instruct the people. And then

3. To see that those servants of God should have that allowance and wages,
which God himself has appointed and commanded to be paid unto them, for their
pains and service of his Church.

We are now to examine what their means and maintenance should be, that God
appointed for their wages: And I say that he is a most bountiful Master, that
takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, as King David speaks; The
two special portions of the Clergy. 1. Tithes. 2. Donations.

and therefore gives them a very large reward, which does chiefly consist in
these two things.

1. The Tithes, or tenth part, of his peoples goods. 2. The
Free-will-offerings, Oblations, and Donations of the people.
The 1. He commands to be paid them.

And the 2. He allows to be given them; and being given, he requires that
they should not be alienated and taken from them; no, not by the givers
themselves; therefore much less by any other.

1. That tithes are due to our Ministers.
1. That Tithes, or the tenth part of our goods and substance are due to them,
that discharge the service of God, by the instruction of his people, to Worship
God, as well under the New Testament as the Old; it may be manifested by these
Reasons.

nature and Humane Reason teaches to be justly due to any man or society of
men, Ant^ legem datam, ^acrificiorum impensis and rebus aliis ad ex^ernum Dei
cultum conservandum pertinentibus, decimae applicaban u^ Fran. Sylvius.
the same does the Scripture, both the Law and Gospel, teach to be due, and
ought to be paid unto them; Nam, sicut Deus est Scripturae, it a Deus est
Naturae, for as God is the Author of the Scripture, so he is the God of nature;
and whatsoever is true in nature, I speak not of defiled nature, but of pure
nature, the same is true in Scripture; And therefore Saint Augustine says,
that as, Contra Scripturas nemo Christianus, and contra Ecclesiam nemo
Catholicus, No Christian will speak against the Scripture, and no Catholic
will gainsay the Church; so Contra rationem nemo sobrius, No sober man will
deny, what Reason a voucheth.

But the law of Nature and Reason teaches, that no pension which is
indifferent and tolerable ought to be denied and detained from the Common use
and the good of public weal; for so Plato, and Cicero, and many more, that
knew no more, but what the light of nature showed them, do say, We are born on
that condition, not only to provide for our selves, and our offspring; but also
for our private friends, That every man is to do his best for the public good.
and especially for the public good of our Country; which is the common
parent of us all, and the examples of Theseus the Athenian, Demaratus the
Lacedemonian, Epaminondas the Theban; Curtius, Decius, and Coriolanus the
Romans; and among the Jews, Moses, Aaron, Gideon, Sampson, David, Zorobabel,
and abundance more in all Nations, that underwent all charge, and exposed
themselves to endure all adventures, for the furtherance of the common good; do
sufficiently confirm this truth unto us.

But the tenth part or portion, The tenth the most indifferent part.
that we have from the Fruits and commodities that we receive from the earth,
is of the most indifferent condition, competent for the receiver, and tolerable
for the giver, as being of a middle size, neither too little for the one to
take, nor too much for the other to pay, for the public service of God.

And this will easily be confirmed, if we compare this tenth part with the
taxes and impositions, that are of other nature, and are required and payable
in very many Nations; for the men of Cholchi, beside their subsidy of money,
were forced to deliver a hundred male Children, and as many maidens, by way of
task or tribute, unto their Princes; And Heredotus writes of very strange
distributions that do arise from the waters of Nilus, to the proper use of the
Inhabitants about that River; and of the mighty subsidies, that do grow from
thence unto the Kings. And the Egyptians have been forced to pay the fifth part
of their estate unto their Kings: The tenth compared with the taxes imposed
upon the people, in diverse Nations.
and Diodorus Siculus says, that a certain King of Egypt gave the yearly
custom of the fishes, which were taken out of the pooles of his subjects, to
find raiment and other Ornaments for his Queen, and that the same amounted to a
Talent of silver, for every day in the year. And Dion, in the life of Augustus,
relates how he levied the twentieth part of every man's estate, and of such
Donations, Legacies, and Gifts, as were bequeathed at the time of their death,
and said, that he found some Records of that custom, formerly used in the
Registers of Caesar, and it is written that the Thuringi exceeded this payment,
in the taxes that were imposed upon them: For they were forced to pay yearly to
the Kings of Hungary, not only the tenth part of their goods, but also the
tenth number of their children; and yet they that are under the Tyranny of the
Turks must ind^re a Heavier yoke, and a far greater slavery; for they pay the
fourth part of all their fruits and increase of the earth, and of their labors
in their several trades; and they pay tole-money for every servant that they
keep: the which, if their estates be not able to do, yet must they make it
good, or sell themselves for slaves to do it.

And now judge you, what rational man comparing the tithes, with these tributes
and the taxes of other Nations, will not conclude that the tenth part is the
most equal, just, and indifferent portion, that can be allotted, and adjudged
fit, to be given and paid, for such a public good, as is the service of God,
and the Ministry of the Gospel, without pressing too heavy upon the giver, or
paying too slight a portion, to the receiver.

2. Whatsoever things have their foundation, and introduction, What natural
Reason shows. 1. That public Ministers should be by the public State
main^ained.
in the Law of Nature, the same things ought still to be observed and
continued; but natural Reason suggesteth and tells every man, that is not
void of Reason;

1. That, as they which serve the Commonwealth, Kings, Magistrates, and
Governors, should live upon the taxes and Contributions of the Commonwealth;
so they that serve the Church of God as Bishops and Priests, should be
maintained by the Church: and the Histories of the Gentiles do bear witness,
that all the Nations of the World have always fully and sufficiently provided
maintenance for their Priests. Judge. 17.5.
For so M^^ha, having set up his Temple, and made an Ephod, and his Teraphim,
consecravit ministerium unius e filtis suis, he made one of his sons to be his
Priest, and implevit manum ejus, which [consecravit ministerium] signifies,
says Tremellius, in his notes upon that place, that is, to give him an estate,
and the maintenance of a Priest: and so he did to the Levite, that succeeded
him, consecravit ministerium ejus, id est, implevit manum ejus, He filled his
hand, and satisfied him with a certainty of maintenance. And Pharaoh, and the
rest of the Egyptians allowed lands and possessions, and other sufficient
maintenance unto their Priests and Magicians. And the Babylonians were very
bountiful to their Wisemen, and the Professors of the Mysteries of their
religion. And so was Jezabel also to the Priests of Baal, making them to sit at
her own Table.

2. That the Tithes are the fittest part to maintain these public Ministers,
and were so given by Jews and Gentiles before Moses time.
2. That the Tithes or tenth part of our goods and fruits of the earth is the
fittest part, and the most ind fferent proportion, that we can assign and lay
out for the maintenan^e and allowance of the Priests and Ministers of Religion:
for not only Moses, by the instinct and inspiration of God's Spirit, appointed
and commanded the tenth part to be paid unto the Priests; but also, many good
and godly men before Moses time, were by the secret instiga^ion of the same
Spirit, and the innate light of their natural reason, directed, before God
commanded the same, to give the Tithes of their whole Estate unto God, and to
deliver it into the hands of his Receivers, the Priests: Veteres ex unaquaque
re deci mam ^ffer^e diis solebant. Fran. Sylvius Insul. And Plautus says, U^
decimam solveret Herculi.
As among the people of God, Abraham, and Jacob, paid Tithes of all, and that
long before Moses time. And among the Gentiles, Plutarch records, that when
Hercules had vanquished Gery^n, King of Spain, and by a strong hand, had taken
away his Oxen from him, he made an oblation of every tenth Bullock unto God.
And it is said, that Cartalus was sent by the Carthaginians unto Tyrus, to
offer unto Hercules the tenth part of the spoils, that he had gotten in the
Isle of Sic^ly. And the Histories do relate further, That the Tithes of the
prey, that was taken in the Platean Wars, were dedicated, and offered up unto
the ^ods. And Socrates, in his Ecclesiastical Histories, says, That the Famous
Writer Xenophon, both in the sixth Book of Cyrus his Expedition, and in the
first Book of the Acts of the Grecians, Socrates Scholast. l. 7. c. 25. Titus
Livius. l. 5. page 159.
makes mention of a Town called Chysophle; which Alcibiades walled about, and
assigned a place therein for the payment of Tithes and Tribute; and so, all
that loose out of the main Sea, and sail from Pontus, and do arrive at that
place, did use there to pay their Tithes, says mine Author. And Titus Livius
writes, That when the rich City of the Veii, was besieged by Furius Camillus,
he spoke these words, and said, By thy conduct, and the instinct of thy divine
power, O Pythius Apollo, I set forward to the winning of the Town of Veii, and
now to thee I vow, the tenth part of the spoils thereof; and after the Veii
were captivated, and peace concluded with the Volscian^, and the spoils of the
City brought to Rome, Camillus said, There was one thing, that his conscience
would not suffer him to hold his peace, That out of that booty only which was
of moveable things, the tenth part was appointed to be levied; but as for the
City and ground, that was won, which also was comprised within the vow, there
were no words at all made of them: whereupon, the debating of this matter,
(which to the Senate seemed doubtful and hard) was put over to the Priests, and
Prelates; and their College, calling to them Camillus, thought good that
whatsoever the Ve^entians had before the vow was made, and whatsoever, after
the vow was made, came into the hands of the people of Rome, the tenth part
thereof should be consecrated to Apollo; and so, both the City, and the lands
were valued, and money taken out of the City-Chamber, for the payment of this
tenth; and because there was not ^ore enough to do it, the Dames of the City
consulted thereabouts, and by a common Decree made promise unto the Tribunes
Military, to supply their want; and to that end they brought into the Exchequer
their own Gold, and all the Ornaments and Jewels that they had, for the payment
of this tenth unto the god Apollo; And this was as acceptable a thing, and as
well taken of the Senate, as ever any thing had been, says Titus Livius. And
it is reported by Plinius, Plinius. l. 12. c. 14.
That the Arabians worshipped a god, whom they surnamed Sabis, and that they
used to pay the Tithes of all their goods unto that imaginary god.

And what is the cause, that these Heathens, which knew not the True God, did
these things? but that the light of reason, which the God of Nature, imprinted
in their minds, informed them, that the tenth part of their fruits and
increase, should appertain to the provision of those Priests that served their
god: And the reason, Why the 10th is the most proper number that belongs to
God.
why they conceived the tenth part to be more properly due to their gods,
rather than the eighth, ninth, eleventh, twelfth, or thirteenth, or any other
number more or less, was because the tenth number is the perfectest, and the
greatest number that is, beyond which, there is no other number, but by the
addition and re-iteration of the same former numbers thereunto, which you may
observe in all Languages; and in the Arithmetical explanation thereof, you have
no figures, as Aquinas well observes, that reach any further than 9. to which
you add the cipher 0 to make up 10. and that cipher 0, being circular and
round, is the Hieroglyphic expressing the Eternal God, which, like unto this
cipher, 0, has neither beginning nor ending, and does therefore challenge this
number, that is like himself, unto himself. And the highest reach of man's
natural reason, could not any better way acknowledge the Power and Eternity of
the God of Nature, than by assigning that quantity of their goods which they
offered to him, by this number 10. which is the highest, and the most perfect
number that is, and contains all other numbers within it; when as after 9.
you have no more figures, but adding this cipher 0. And the re-iteration of the
same figures from 1. to 9. with the ciphers unto them, it makes up all numbers
from 10. to 10. thousand thousands.

And therefore this payment of the Tithes unto the Priests, being a truth which
Nature teaches, and which I believe was the proportion of the offering and
oblation that Cain and Abel brought to God, it must needs be the truth of God,
that the Tithes are due unto the Priests by a Natural and Divine Right, and so
never to be altered nor repealed.

3. That the Priests of God, which serve at his Altar, and the Ministers
Gospel, that publish the glad tidings of Salvation unto the people, Of what
things the hire of the Priests should be paid.
none will seem so unjust, as to deny but that they ought to have their Reward,
and be sufficiently maintained: The Scripture is plain enough for that, the
labourer is worthy of his hire. But the question is, What that hire should be.
And I say,

1. That the fittest course, the most agreeable to reason, and the most
acceptable hire and pension should be paid him, of that which is justly and
honestly gotten, and with the least stain of unlawful procurement; for, as the
Lord says, Thou shall not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog,
into the House of the Lord thy God; and the reason is, Deuteronomy 33.28. Eccles.
34.18, 21.
because, these are an abomination unto him. And the son of Sirach says, Whosoever
brings an offering of unrighteous goods, or of the goods of the poor, does,
as one that sacrifices the son before the fathers eyes: So he that out of his
moneys gotten by usury, extortion, or any fraudulent ways, would pay for God's
Service, must needs be an abomination to the Lord; because that, as the very
Heathens were wont to say, Nothing ought to be given and consecrated for the
Service and Worship of God, quod prophanum, quod non purum, aut quod non suum
est, which is not pur^ and h^n^st, an^ which is no^ justly his own that gives
it:

But the fruits and increase of the earth, that arises to the honest
Husbandman, that tills his ground, fenceth his fields, and dress^th his
Vineyard, and looks for Gods blessing upon his labors, for all his pains; are
free from those corruptions, and therefore fittest to be given to God, and for
the Service of God.

prices of all other commodities, do vary and change, either according as they
are esteemed, or as they are plentiful or rare; but the increase and fruits of
the earth, being always of the same nature, the portion of the Priest, given
out of that increase, will be correspondent to the portion of the Husbandman,
more or less, as the Corn in his Barn, and the abundance or penury of his
Wine Press and fruits shall be; and according to God's blessing upon the
earth, so shall the Priest and the Husbandman be both alike partakers of God's
blessings, that both might be alike thankful unto God: Whereas, if the Priest
receives a portion always alike in money, when the fruits and increase of the
earth are plentiful the Priest has more than his due, and when scarce, then
less then is due, according to the proportion of God's blessing.

And therefore it is apparent, that the most eeven and equallest way
continually to pay the Minister his hire, and the most acceptable unto God, is,
to give it out of Gods blessing of the increase and fruits of the earth. And,

fruits of the earth, the tenth part thereof, is, not only by the dictate of
Nature, and the light of Reason, as I have already showed, but also by the Law
of Moses, and by the Rules of Christ, The Tithes are due under the Gospel.
and the Gospel, the right and due proportion, that should be set forth and
paid, for the hire and maintenance of the Priest and Minister of the Gospel:
For,

1. The Tithes are due to Christ as he is a Priest.
1. The Priesthood of Christ, is an everlasting Priesthood, both, ex part ante,
and ex part post, before his incarnation, and after his incarnation: and
Christ, as he was Priest, did always receive Tithes before his incarnation;
therefore as he is Priest, he is always to receive the Tithes after his
incarnation.

That the Priesthood of Christ, is an everlasting Priesthood, as well ex part
ante, as ex part post, the Scripture is plain enough to prove it; for the
Prophet David prophesying of Christ, says, The Lord swear, and will not
repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec. And the
Apostle commenting upon this oath and promise of God concerning Christ, proves
these two things that I speak of: 1. That he was a Priest continually, as well
before, as after his Incarnation. 2. Points proved.
2. That he received the Tithes always, as he was this Eternal Priest.


1. That Christ was a Priest before his incarnation, and after his incarnation.
2. That Christ was the Melchisedec which receive^ ^ythes from Abraham.
The 1. Point he proves; First because, that Melchisedec, which received the
Tithes from Abraham, is said to be, without father, without mother, without
descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but abiding a
Priest continually.

And 2ly, Because, that Melchisedec, which is there spoken of, and received
those Tithes from the Patriarch Abraham, was none other person, than Christ
himself, in an assumed shape and manhood for a season, though not
hypostatically united to the Divine Nature, so to remain for ever: which may
easily be proved.

1. Reason to (...)
1. Because the Apostle says, That he was greater than the Patriarch Abraham,
who is termed, the friend of God, and the father of the faithful; which
Epithete, with the words, (...). (...). Without all contradiction, the less is
blessed of the better, Heb. 7.7.
or of the greater, as the Geneva Translator reads it, does sufficiently show
Him to be Divinioris cujusdam naturae, of a far more excellent, and Divine
nature than Abraham was.

2. Because the Apostle, going about to speak of this Melchisedec, 2. Reason.
and to let them understand, who he was, says, (...), concerning whom, we have
many things to say, and hard to be uttered, Heb. 5.11.
or explained: which certainly, so great an Apostle, and so expert in all the
Jewish Rites, would never have said, had he not understood this Melchisedec to
be (...), some excellent and ineffable Person; because he does never say thus,
when he speaks, either of the Angels, or of any other of the Types and Figures
of Jesus Christ. Which you shou d mark.

3. 3. Reason.
Because the Apostle does not say of this Melchisedec [Whose death is not set
down or mentioned by Moses]; for so he might be dead, though his death were not
spoken of; but he says, (...) that David testifies or witnesses, that he
lives; to show the difference betwixt this Priest that always lives, and
those Levitical Priests, that ever died; and therefore, comparing the
Priesthood of Aaron, and of the Levites, and the Priesthood of Christ together,
he says, (...). And here, that is, among the Levitical Priests, men that die
receive Tithes; but there he, that is, Melchisedec, or Christ receives them;
of whom it is witnessed, that he lives: Wherein I would have you diligently to
observe, that the Apostle would have us to understand, 1. That Aaron and the
Levites were (...), men. 2. That they were (...), mortal men, that died:
But this Priest, by the Antithesis, must be neither man, that is, simply a
man, and no more but a man; nor mortal after the manner of other men, because
the Prophet testifies (...), that he lives; and therefore going to prove the
necessity of the change of the Law, he says, it is evident, because our Lord
sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning the
Priesthood: And he adds, that it is yet far more evident, Verse 14.
because that after the similitude of Melchisedec, there arises another Priest
who is made, (...), not after the Law, of a carnal commandment, (...); but
after the power of an endless life: and, Who has the power of an endless
life, but Jesus Christ? Therefore this Melchisedec can be none other than Jesus
Christ, because the Apostle says, he was of an endless life; or otherwise the
similitude does not hold, that Christ was of an endless life, (...), after the
likeness of Melchisedec, if his life was none otherwise endless, than what is,
or may be, collected out of Moses, touching the endless life of Melchisedec;
but the Apostle proves Christ to be so, of an endless life, not by what Moses
said, or said not, of Melchisedec; but by the testimony of the Prophet David,
which says, The Lord swear, that He (i. e.) Christ, is a Priest for ever, and
so is of an endless life, which cannot be said of that Melchisedec, spoken of
by Moses, unless that Melchisedec be Jesus Christ: Because, that if he was not
Jesus Christ, we are sure that he died, and therefore could not be of an
endless life.

4. 4. Reason.
Because the Apostle (to answer and prevent an Objection that might be made,
because, he had said, that Melchisedec. (...), was made like unto the Son of
God) means no otherwise by this (...), made like unto the Son of God, but that
he was indeed the Son of God. Hebr. 7 3.
Even as Nebuchadnezzar says, The fourth man, that walked with the three
children in the fiery-Furnace, was like unto the Son of God; Dan. 3.25.
whereby he meant, that he was none other than the Son of God, that came there
to preserve his servants: So here the Apostle, in saying that he was (...),
made like unto the Son of God; means (without question) that this
Melchisedec, or, this Christ, that met Abraham, assumed now a body of the same
likeness, habit, and countenance, as afterward he meant to unite personally
unto himself: for that it is un usual thing in Scripture, to say, that he,
which is, is like unto himself; as that Saint Paul is like Saint Paul: as where
the Apostle says, that Christ Was found in shape or fashion, Phil. 2.7, 8.
as a man, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men: that is, he was made indeed, a true, perfect, and a natural
man.

5. Reason.
5. Because Abraham did give unto this Melchisedec, the Tithe of all that was
taken from four Kings, a great booty, as perceiving under that visible shape
and form of man, an invisible deity to subsist; to whom, the tithe of all
things, is only due, and everlastingly due to him, and to none but to him (as
the Lord says himself, Levit. 27.30.
All the tithe of the land is the Lords, that is the Lord Christ's) because he
is the everlasting Priest, which Melchisedec, if he was a mortal man and not
Christ, could not be.

6. Reason.
6. Because Saint Paul, confirms the perpetuity and eternity of Christ his
Priesthood, with the testimony of the Prophet David, who, speaking of Christ,
says, Thou art a Priest forever, (...), according to the order of Melchisedec
says the Greek copy; Petrus Cunaeus de Repub Heb. l. 3. c. 3. page 402.
but, Sicut vel quemad modum Melchisedecus, even as, or in like manner, as
Melchisedec is a Priest forever, says the Hebrew text, as Aben Ezra does
expound it; and so makes it clear that that Melchisedec was Jesus Christ.

7. Reason.
7. And lastly, Because all they, which do affirm this Melchisedec, to be either
Shem, the son of Noah, or any other King of Salem, and a Mortal man, Fateri
coguntur ea omnia, quae de illo Apostolus dixit, etiam M^ssiae convenire, says
Cunaeus, are compelled to confess, that all those things which the Apostle
speaks of Melchisededec, do very well and literally agree with Christ, but
cannot agree with any other mortal man, without admitting many mystical and
figurative interpretations thereof.

And therefore I do say, that this Melchisedec, which received these tithes was
no mortal man, but the immortal son of God, to whom all tithes are due; and he,
assuming a visible shape, did appear unto Abraham, after his great victory,
which he had over his enemies; and is the first victory that we read of in the
Holy Scripture: and may typifie the spiritual Conquest of our enemies by our
Savior Christ, who offered unto Abraham, bread and wine, as the type of our
blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and it is probable, that our Savior had
respect hereunto, when he said unto the Jews, that Abraham saw his day and
rejoiced, Joh. 8.15.
that is, not only with the eyes of faith, (as all the rest of the Patriarchs,
and Prophets did see him) but also in a visible shape, This point is more fully
handled in my book of The best Religion in the Treatise of the Incarnation of
Christ.
which he assumed; like unto that, whereunto he was afterward to be united, and
which many Prophets and just men desired to see, and have not seen; God
yielding not such a special favor unto them, as herein he did unto faithful
Abraham.

And so you see the first point sufficiently cleared, that Christ was always
and continually an eternal Priest, as well before as after his Incarnation. And

2. Point, that Christ received tithes as he was Priest.
2. For the other point, that he always received the Tithes, as he was this
eternal Priest, the Scriptures make it plain; for here you see, this
Melchisedec, which is Christ, receives the tithes of Abraham: and Saint Pa^l
says, that he, whose descent is not counted from them, that is from the
posterity of Aaron, that is Christ, received tithes of Abraham; and all the
Levitical Priests, that were as then in the loins of Abraham paid tithes to
Him, to whom only all tithes are due; and the Levites to whom Moses, under the
law, commanded the tithes to be paid, were but his substitut^s and Tythe^
gatherers, and receiving what is due to him, unto themselves, for his service.

And seeing Christ himself received tithes, as due to him before the law, and
received them, by his servants, the Levites under the law, More reason to pay
Tithes now to Christ, then in the time of the Law, proved at large.
Why should he now be deprived of them, and not receive them also by his
Ministers under the Gospel? Especially considering he has now accomplished,
fulfilled, and wholly discharged, the Office of his Priesthood, which was to
offer that propitiatory Sacrifice unto God; which should fully satisfy and
appease his wrath for the sins of the people, which as then he had but only
promised, and shadowed out the same, in types and figures, unto the fathers:

Or, is it possible to imagine that they which paid him their tithes under the
law, were more obliged to him for those shadows, and the expectation of
accomplishing his promises, than we should be, for having already obtained the
real substance? Or, shall we believe the whole generation of men to be such, as
will promise any thing, and do any thing, that they can, to obtain what they
desire, and when they have obtained their desires, will do and perform just
nothing. So while Christ was desired and expected to come; men duly paid their
tithes unto him; but now being come, and having done his work, and discharged
his Priestly Office, they will pay him no tithes at all; which is the property
of ill natures, To promise any thing, while they seek, and to do nothing, when
they obtain their desires.

But the consideration of the persons, that paid their tithes to Christ, before
his Incarnation, is an unanswerable argument to prove, that all Christians
should much rather now pay their Tithes to Him after his Incarnation; for if
they, that had all things more imperfect then we have them, and but in shadows
under a vail and curtains, that were drawn over them, did then so fully and so
readily pay their Tithes to Christ, and to his servants that gathered them; How
can we now, when the night is past, and the Curtains of those Types are drawn
aside, and the substance of those their shadows are perfectly showed unto us,
be any ways excused, if we refuse and deny to pay our Tithes to him, and to
his Ministers, that gather them? Because it is an uncontrollable Maxim, To whom
much is given, of them much shall be required: And God having given us far
better, and far more perfect things, then he gave unto the Jews; he looks that
we should be more thankful, and more ready to pay our Tithes, and to do him
service, then they were; and therefore Christ says, That except our
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Matthew. 5.
we shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

And yet you know what they did, fast twice every week, and pay Tithes of all
that they had even of the smallest things, mint, and annise, and the least
herbs they had; and How does our righteousness exceed their righteousness, if
we deny our Tithes to Gods Ministers? I would we were as righteous as they were.

And as the Consideration of the Persons paying their Tithes, so the
consideration of the Persons, to whom they were paid, as to the substitutes of
Christ, as well before as after the coming of Christ, does sufficiently prove,
that we Christians have more reas^n to pay our Tithes now under the Gospel,
then the Jews had to pay them under the law; for, if the Tithes were payable,
and to be given to those servants of Christ, that were of the lower degree, and
did the meaner offices, and brought least benefit unto the people of Christ;
then certainly they should be much rather payable to those Ministers of Christ,
that are of a far higher degree, and do the more honorable offices, and bring
the rarest and the greatest benefits unto the people; but the Ministers of the
Gospel, in all the foresaid respects, do far exceed and excel the Priesthood
of the law; because, as Saint Paul shows, the Levitical Priests were but
Lecturers of the letter, which kills; but the Mininisters of the Gospel, are
the Interpreters of the Spirit, which gives life; 2 Cor. 3 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
they expounded the shadows, these the substance of Religion; and they had
committed unto them the Ministration of Condemnation, and these have the
Ministration of Righteousness and Glorification delivered unto their charge.

Therefore, seeing the Ministers of the Gospel, do thus far and in these
repects excel the Priests of the Law, there is no reason their hire and
maintenance should be less then the hire and maintenance of the Levitical
Priests but that the Tithes should be as well paid to these as the other.

. 1. de decimis. (...) est portio una ex december. Extra de decimis. Cum non sit.
Augustinus de doctrina Christiana.
And the Civilians tell you, that, Decima est omnium bonorum mobilium licite
quaesitorum, pars decima; Deo data, and Divinae constitutione debita: The Tithe
is the tenth part of all moveable goods, lawfully gotten, given unto God, and
due to be paid unto the Priests by the Ordinance of God. And Innocentius says,
that God by a special title has reserved the Tithes unto himself, in token of
his Universal Dominion, Power, and Right that he has over all. And therefore
Saint Augustine says, that the Tithes, being thus due to God, Ii qui dare
nolunt, alienas res invadunt, They that will not pay their Tithes do take away
others right, and hold that which is none of their own. And therefore Cum
decimas dando, coelestia and terrena possis promereri, pro avaritia tua
denegando, The damage of detayning our Tithes.
duplici benedictione fraudaris; When by paying thy Tithes to Gods Ministers,
thou may gain both Celestial and Terrestrial blessings, according as the
Prophet shows; thou by thy Covetousness in denying thy Tithes, do deprive
thy self of this double benefit: because this is the most usual proceeding of
the just God, That, Qui decimam non dederit, ad decimam reducetur; that many
times, the man that will not pay his Tithes, shall be reduced unto the Tithe
when either the fire, or canker-worm and Caterpiller, shall consume thy store,
or the wicked Soldier will Plunder, and take from thee, what thou would not
give to Gods Minister.

Therefore it is apparent, that no wise man, which loves his own good, will
deny the payment of his Tithes unto the Ministers of Jesus Christ: and that you
may rightly understand this case concerning Tithes, you must observe that they
are of three sorts.

That all tyth^s are of three sorts.
1. Predial. 2. Personal. 3. Neutral.
1. They are called Predial, which do naturally arise out of the fruits and
increase of the Earth.

2. They are styled Personal, which do accrue out of the fruits, gain, and
labor of the person, that gets them, either by Traffic, Warfare, Hunting,
or any other exercise of his hands.

3. They are termed Neutral, that are not simply of either of the two former
kinds, but do partly accrue from the increase and fruits of the Earth, or the
Cattle that are increased, by their feeding thereon; or otherwise are brought
up under the care of men's hands.

And all these are the Tithes that are due, and properly due to our High Priest
Jesus Christ, and ought to be justly paid to the Ministers of Christ for the
Worship and Service of God.

CHAP. XVI.
The Answer to the choicest, and chiefest Objection that the School of
Anabaptists have made, and do urge against the payment of Tithes now, in the
time of the Gospel.

BUt, though the truth of this point, that all Tithes, as well in the time of
the Gospel, as under the Law, and before the law, are continually due to
Christ, our eternal Priest; and so at all times payable, and to be given to his
Substitutes and under-Priests, is as clear as the Sun: yet, such has been and
is the malice of Satan against Christ and his Church, that he has raised up,
and stirred a whole Army of Sectaries, Anabaptists, and Worldlings, that with
might and main do fight against this Truth, and labor with all their wits, to
suppress the same, and to drive it quite out of the World: And to that end,
they do Object.

1. If all Tithes be thus due, as you say, by the Law of God, where due, and
all they do sin, and grievously offend that do detain them.

But many Countries, and some Christian Commonwealths, no doubt, pay no
Tithes at all, and are not acquainted with this fashion of paying Tithes, and
yet do sufficiently and honorably maintain their Ministers for the service of
God.

Therefore, questionless, the payment of Tithes is not due by the Divine Law.

To this Objection, I conceive Dr. Gardener does reasonably well answer, So^.
though, I think, not fully sufficient to take away the strength of this
Argument, in his large and rational discourse, which he makes in answer to this
their Objection; for he says, and that truly,

That many things are of such Nature, 1. Answer.
(though I think Tithes are not so) as will not be fitting to every place, or
all places, alike; but may, in some places, be well performed, and in some
other places be prohibited; because, as Cicero says, Cicero in Orat. pro Balbo.
the different state of Cities inforceth a necessity of different Laws: for, as
all meats are not alike pleasant to all Palats, and every air agrees not with
all Constitutions; so all manners belong not to all men: but some Laws are
suitable to some people; and some other Laws are more convenient for some other;
and all, or the same, are not expedient for all.

And as every shoe will not be drawn on every foot, We may alter the
Ceremonies of the Church, as the times and state of the Church do require.
and one kind of Medicine, is not to be Administered to every Stomach, but that
Physic, which may fit the younger age, may be unkind for the same disease when
old age has seized upon us: So one discipline may be fitting for a City, which
may not be so fitting, either for another City, or especially for a Kingdom;
and one Ceremony may sort with the Church, in times of peace and prosperity,
which holds no correspondency with the seasons of War and Persecution.

Neither should we look, that the same uniform regiment is to be observed, In
ecclesia Constituta, as in Ecclesia Constituenda, as well in an infant-Church,
as in a Church of riper age; or in a Church persecuted, when she flies with
the woman into the Wilderness, or is faign to lie desolate in the caves of the
earth, and a Church in peace when she sits as a Queen in her Throne; or in a
Church under H^athen Emperors, and a Church under Christian Governors, when
she so journeth as a captive in B^bylon, and when she dwells at liberty in
Jerusalem; for as no one garment can fit the Moon, It is hard to make a fit
coat for the Moon.
which is subject by nature to an often-change, and is sometimes in the Full,
and afterward in the Wayn, and never continuing in one stay; So the Church of
Christ, being like the Moon, sometimes high, and sometime low, often in the
Full, and as often in the Wayn; it cannot be, that the same uniform Government
should fit the Church in all places, and at all times. And therefore, the
Prophet speaking of the Kings Daughter, that signifies the Church of Christ,
says, That although her chiefest glory is within, yet her outward Attire is
likewise glorious, and it is of diverse colors; and so are the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, of diverse sorts, as the times and places do admit
them. And Musculus to the same purpose, says, Si illorum temporum mores
revocas, tum conditiones and statum quoque illorum temporum primum revoca. If
thou will call back again, the manners, customs, and practice of those times,
wherein the Apostles and primitive Christians lived; then first call back again
the state and conditions of those times; that both the times and the manners
may agree; when, as I told you before, many things may serve at one time, that
will not serve at another time; Vt musica in luctu est importuna narratio, As
Music is unseasonable in the time of mourning, says the Wiseman.

And indeed, what Tertullian says, is beyond all contradiction, Regula fidei
immobilis and irreformabilis est, The Rule and Canon of our Faith is, and must
always be, unmovable, and unreformable, not to be altered; at caetera
disciplinae and conversationis nov^tatem correctionis admittunt; Tertull. in l.
De veland Virgin.
but all other things, that appertain to discipline, and government, and
conversation, may admit the newness and change of a Reformation: And so the
Eucharist, the holy Communion, being to succeed for our Sacrament, in the room
of the Passover, it was most convenient, that it should be celebrated by
Christ at Supper-time, in the evening, because the P sseover was commanded by
the Law, to be eaten between the two evenings: And yet the Church thought it
more convenient to alter that fashion, The first Christians did many things
that we are not bound to do; and we do many ^ood thin s that they did not.
and to take it in the morning. So likewise, Christ was baptized in Jordan, and
the Apostles baptized men in Rivers, and Fountains of waters; and would you
have us to imitate their example, to forsake the Christian Assembly in the holy
Church, and to carry our Infants, with the fanatic Anabaptists, to be baptized
in the Rivers?

But seeing that in the Apostles time, the good Christians sold their lands and
possessions, and laid down the prices and moneys, that they received for them,
at the Apostles feet; I demand, Why do not our Anabaptists, that would have all
things reduced to the Primitive time, imitate them in this their Devotion, and
lay the prices of their lands at their Preachers feet? I know they will answer,
That this extraordinary Devotion, is not of necessity to be drawn into
imitation: and I confess it;

But in the Apostles time, there were no Universities, no Schools of Learning,
no Hospitals, nor Almshouses, no Book of the Holy Scriptures divided into
Chapters, nor Chapters into Verses, no distinction of Parishes, and many other
good things were not then in being; And shall we now cast them all away,
because the Apostles and the first Christians had them not? Or will not the
giddy-heads understand, that, as the Sun in the firmament, goes higher and
higher, unto the noon and perfect day; so the truth, and knowledge of the Sun
of Righteousness, and the perfection of his Service, grows more and more unto
the fullness of the knowledge of Christ: and even as Christ himself increased in
wisdom and knowledge, (...) ^.52.
and in favor with God and men; so does the Church of Christ.

And so to return, and to apply our selves to the case of Tithes, though some
places, as it may be in the Low Countries, and the Reformed Churches in France,
have their immunities by themselves, and are not charged with the payment of
Tithes, (their state and condition not admitting it) yet in lieu of their
Tithes, their Ministers are maintained with as sufficient supplies: and
necessity excuses even in greater matters, as in not praying, and not
receiving the Sacraments, as well as in not paying Tithes, when the case cannot
be otherwise. As S. Paul, for some special exigency, took no stipend of some
Churches for his labors, in the preaching of the Gospel; Yet, he tells them,
that by right he might have claimed it; and therefore infers, that what he
did for some special causes, should not be drawn into an example, to prejudice
and defraud others of that which was their due.

So we say, That in those Churches, which pay not their Tithes in kind, there
is an allowance, equivalent to the Tithes, The Ministers of the Reformed
Churches in the other Countries have no cause to complain.
given to those Ministers that have no Tithes. And as the Kings of Persia
imposed no Tribute upon those subjects, that brought in their voluntary
contributions, that increased their Exchequer more than their Tribute; So their
Preachers have no cause to complain, for not receiving their Tithes, when they
have as much, or more, than their Tithes are worth: And the example of these,
that live by their set and certain stipend, ought not to be alleged and
pleaded, to the hurt and prejudice of them, that are sustained by their Tithes.

And though all this that I have said be very true; yet, because, as I
conceive, it takes not away the strength of the foresaid Argument, which is,
That if it be a Moral Precept, that does oblige us to observe it, semper and ad
semper, then it obliges all men, and in all places, to pay their Tithes, and
they sin, that pay them not, though they do pay some other stipend, be it more
or less in lieu of them; because it lies not in man to alter or change the
Commandment of God, but to do what he commands them; Therefore,

2. I say, and yield, 2. Answer more fully.
That the Precept of paying Tithes for the Service of God, being a Moral,
perpetual, and universal Precept, it obliges all men, in all places, and at
all times, as well, before the Law, as after the Law, and as well after the
incarnation of Christ, as before his incarnation, to observe and to obey the
same, and that they sinned which did it not: for as God has imprinted it in
the heart of man, and the light of nature teaches him, that God must be
served, and a set time must be appointed for that Service, What all the
generations of men are bound to do.
and a standing proportion of our goods allotted for them, that do him service,
and teach others so to do: and God has showed unto us, that the set time for
his Service should be every seventh day, which we should Sanctify, and keep
Holy for that end; and the standing quantity and proportion of our goods, that
we ought to set forth for his Service, should be our Tithes: So accordingly,
every man, among all the generations of men, ought to do; to sanctify the
Seventh day, to serve God, and to pay their Tithes, for the performance and
continuance of his Service.

And if man, by his transgression, has obscured this light of nature, and
obliterated that impression, which God had imprinted in his heart, and through
his own negligence or forgetfulness remembers neither the day that he should
keep holy, nor that part that he should pay for his Service: Shall that make
the Commandment of God of none effect, or acquit man, for the not performance
of his duty? By no means; for you know, what the Prophet says, of the children
of Israel, Psalm. 78.11.
when God had done his wonderful works for them in Egypt, and fearful things by
the Red Sea; Psalm. 106.13.
they soon forgot what he had done, and were not mindful of his Covenant: So
did all the sons of Adam forget not only these, but also all other the
Commandments of God, especially in many, if not the chief points thereof; and
neither their negligence, nor forgetfulness, can excuse them herein from sin,
in the breach of his Commandment.

eplicatio.
But you will say, This Commandment of keeping the Seventh day, and giving the
tenth part of our goods for his Service, was never directly, and precisely, or
expressly given in terminis, until Moses time; and where there is no Law, there
is no transgression: therefore they did not sin, when they had no Commandment.

Responsio. Genesis 4.3. Chap. 4. 26. Chap. 8. 20.
I answer, That when Cain and Abel brought their Oblation unto the Lord, and
when children were born unto Sheth, and men began to call upon the Name of the
Lord; and when Noah built an Altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt-offerings
upon the Altar: And so likewise, when Abraham did the like, Else these Services
had been but (...), a Will Worship, and no ways acceptable unto God.
and called on the Name of the Lord, the everlasting God, we read of no Command
in terminis that they had, to do these things; but God had written these
Commandments in their hearts, with the Pen of Nature: And so, as the Apostle
says, having no Law, they were a law unto themselves, and having no
Commandment, they were commandments unto themselves; and whosoever transgress
the same, transgress the Commandments of God.

And therefore, these things being imprinted in man's heart by the Pen of
Nature, I say, that what Nation soever, and what Church soever have not, or do
not serve God, and pay their Tithes to Christ and his servants, for the Service
of God, and the continuance of his Service, they do transgress the Commandment
of God.

But I do not say, it must be precisely the tenth part of our goods, and no
more; for as we may keep holy some other day, besides the Seventh day, so we
miss not to keep the Seventh day; So, we may give more than the tenth for the
Service of God, if we please, so we neglect not to give the tenth. And as the
Jews having a Commandment, that they should not punish any Offender with any
more than 40. stripes, did not transgress, when for fear of misreckoning, they
never gave but 39; So when God commands us to give the tenth, we do not break
his Commandment, when for fear of giving too little, we give more than the
tenth: But,

Christ, nor his Apostles have commanded us to do, we are no ways obl^ged to
do; but neither Christ nor his Apostles have commanded us to pay Tithes: for
Christ bids his Apostles to teach the Nations and people, Matthew 28.20. Act.
20.27.
to observe all things that he commanded them: And S. Paul says, That he had
showed unto the people the whole counsel of G d: and yet in all the Sermons of
Christ, and in all the Writings of the Apostles, there is not any Precept given
for the Christians to pay Tithes.

Therefore the Christians ought not to be compelled to pay Tithes.

Tithes, is a Precept, imprinted in our hearts by the Law of Nature, and
afterward confirmed and explained unto us by the Law of Moses, Matthew. 5.17.
and practiced by many Nations of the Gentiles, as I showed to you before. And
our Savior says, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets,
that is, to give liberty, and to free men from the obedience and performance of
either of these Laws, that is, the Law of Nature, and the Moral Law, as the 19.
and 20. verses do show the same most plainly. And when John Baptist would have
hindered him to be baptized, he tells John, That it behoved them, not only
himself, but John also, and so all others, as well as John, to fulfill all
righteousness: And how shall we fulfill all righteousness, unless we render to
Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is God's? And as S. Paul says, To owe
nothing to any man, but to yield Honor to whom Honor belongs, Tribute to
whom Tribute; and so Tithes to whom the Tithes do belong.

plainly enough enjoin us to pay our Tithes; for Christ, reproving the
preciseness of the Scribes and Pharisees in paying Tithes of Mint, Anise, and
Cummin, and neglecting the greater matters of the Law, says, These things ye
ought to have done, Matthew. 23.25.
and not to leave the other undone: And if you say, These words are to be
restrained to that time, wherein the Ceremonial Law was in force, and not to
the times of the Christians; I answer, Not so: but they are rather to be
referred to the Christians, than to the Jews; for all Tithes being due to
Christ, as he is our Eternal Priest, as I have fully proved to you before, Who
should now have most right unto the Tithes, the Preachers that are followers of
Christ, or the Scribes and Pharisees that rejected him? But now, when Christ
and his Apostles preached, the Scribes and Pharisees had all the Tithes in
their own hands, and would not suffer Christ and his Apostles to take them from
them; and therefore, seeing they would neither believe and follow Christ, nor
yield the Tithes, to them that preached the Gospel of Christ, it fell out by
the just judgment of God, that when Nero sent Felix to be the Governor of
Jury, the Priests were deprived of their Tithes, Josephus l. 20. c 13.
and many of them perished with Famine, as Josephus witnesses.

3. I say, That Christ by these words, teaching them to observe all things
means not, And it was he that commanded all that they commanded.
that they should only observe what he commanded, and no more; but that they
should likewise observe what Moses, and David, and the rest of the Prophets,
yea, and what the Scribes and Pharisees commanded them to do, while they sat
in Moses Chair, and whatsoever he commanded them to do, besides all, that was
formerly commanded; because he commanded a great deal more, to make his people
more perfect then ever was commanded before his time; for you heard it was said
of old, Thou shall not commit Adultery, but I say unto you, Whosoever looks
on a woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery: Matthew. 5.27. etc.
And you heard it was said of old, Thou shall not forswear thy self; but I say
unto you, Swear not at all: So you heard it was said of old, An eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you, Resist not evil: And so you heard,
it was said of old, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy; but I
say unto you, Love your enemies, and so forth.

And therefore the meaning of Christ's words in the 28th of S. Matthew and the
20th verse, is as I said, That they should observe and do, not only what was
commanded them before, but also whatsoever he, and his Apostles by his Spirit,
commanded them besides; as, to believe in him, and to follow him, and so forth.

4. I say, That S. Paul in saying, that, as they which minister about holy
things, live of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at the Alter, are
partakers with the Altar; even so has the Lord ordained, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; does herein
fully and plainly prove, that the Tithes should be as duly, and us justly paid
to the Ministers of the G spel, as they were to the Priests and Levites under
the Law: For by the Altar, and they that wait at it, the Priesthood is
understood, and by the fruits and profits of the Altar, the Tithes and
Oblations are plainly meant; and then adding, (...), Even so, that is, in like
manner, or by the like means, which (...) signifies, the Lord has ordained,
that the Ministers of the Gospel, should have all the fruits, profits, and
benefits of the Altar, which are the Tithes and Oblations, as well, and in like
manner, as the Priests of the Law have had them.

3. They do object, if we compel the Christians to pay Tithes, we make
grievous, and their burden more intolerable than the burden of those Fathers,
that lived before the Law was given; for that in the time of the first
Patriarchs, the Tithes were never demanded as a duty, but Abraham freely, and
not forcedly, gave them to Melchisedec: and Jacob conditionally, and not
absolutely, made his vow to pay them unto God: but we ought not to make the
yoke and burden of our people now in the time of grace, more intolerable then
they were in the time of nature: therefore Tithes ought not to be required as a
duty.

Primitive times, the Tithes were not demanded, nor by any Positive Law,
commanded by God; and therefore not paid, until Abraham and Jacob had paid
them: yet this proves not, that it was not due because it was not paid; as it
is no consequent, that because God commanded not Cain and Abel to offer
Sacrifice, nor the sons of Sheth, To call upon the name of the Lord; therefore
it was not their duty to do it; for it is our duty, to do many things that we
do not. And so I have proved, It was their duty to pay Tithes, though they paid
them not.

Fathers of the first age, had many things in use, which were not answerable to
that Perfection, which Christ requires in his followers; and therefore he
enjoined us to do many things that they did not; and so did the Law it self,
both inhibite them to do some things, that they did amiss, and commanded many
things to be observed, which they neglected: and therefore that first age of
the World, being but the Infancy of Gods Church, and the days of Initiation,
they are not to be alleged, as examples for our imitation: For, when I was a
Child, I did as a Child; but when I was a man, I put away childish things:
says the Apostle.

need nor reason, for the payment of Tithes then, though they were due, to
maintain the Priests and Ministers of God, as afterward, and especially, as
now, in our times; because then the first born of every family was the Priest,
and he, by the prerogative of his Birthright, was to have a double part and
portion of inheritance; and therefore,

Patriarchs, in those times, when there was no Positive commandment, to pay
Tithes, did notwithstanding pay them even to those Priests, that had means
enough of their own to live by it, and had no need of Tithes to sustain them:
then much rather should we now pay them, to those Ministers of Christ, that
have no other maintenance, and therefore can not labor in Gods Vineyard, and
discharge the duties of their calling without them, especially considering, how
often, and how earnestly Christ and his Apostles do command us, and exhort us
to do it, and with such promises of Blessings, if we do it; and Cursings, if we
refuse it.

Commandment for paying Tithes is not Moral, but either Judicial or Ceremonial:
and we that are Christians are not obliged to observe either the Ceremonial or
the Judicial Laws of the Jews; because all the Ceremonial Laws were but
shadows, types, and predictions, showing the coming, doings, and sufferings of
Jesus Christ, and when the true light and substance of those shadows, the Sun
of Righteousness was come, all those shadows were at an end, and vanished away;
and the Judicial Laws of the Jews were only proper, and peculiar to that
people, and do not oblige other Nations to observe them. And therefore the
Christians are no ways obliged to the payment of Tithes.

some of our opposers think, to be invincible, I answer (and it may be contrary
to the opinion of many Divines, of no mean or usual Learning) and I say for
Tithes,

1. That they are due to Christ, as he is a Priest for ever, by a Divine,
Natural, and Moral right, as I hope, I have sufficiently proved to you before.

And if they do Object and say, that if the precept of paying Tithes be of a
Natural right, and a Moral precept, then the payment thereon is, or ought to
be, commanded, within one of the ten Commandments of the Moral Law; because,
all Moral precepts are comprehended within those ten Commandments: but the
precept of paying Tithes, is not in any one of the ten Commandments of the
Moral Law; and therefore it is no Moral precept.

I answer, That the payment of Tithes is commanded, in four special
Commandments of the Moral Law, as, in the first, the fourth, the sixth, the
eighth. For as the Prophet David says, Thy Commandments, O Lord, are exceeding
broad; and do comprehend abundance of things more then you see prima facie, in
the outward letter of the Commandment; as when the Commandment says, Honor
thy Father and thy Mother, it injoyneth thee, to feed him, and to maintain him,
as Joseph did his Father Jacob, when he wants, and is not able to maintain
himself; and when it says, Thou shall do no murder, it forbids us to hate, or
to be angry with our neighbor; So when the Lord says, Thou shall have none
other gods but me, he commands us to render unto God, what is God's; as well,
to maintain his outward service, by tithes and offerings unto his Priests, and
alms unto his poor members, as by serving him with our inward service of faith,
hope, love, fear, and the like; So when he commands us To keep Holy the Sabbath
day, he commands us, to do all things, that do further and do appertain to the
Sanctifying of the Sabbath and, Who can deny, but that the payment of our
Tithes to the Preacher and Minister of Christ, is one of the most principal
means to further and cause the Sanctifying of the Lords day? When, as the
Artist cannot work without his tools; Many things are included that are not so
clearly expressed in the ten Commandments.
so the Minister cannot discharge his service, on the Sabbath, unless he is
maintained all the week: And so when he bids us to Honor our Father and Mother,
he means that we should as well, or rather in the first place, Reverence, and
with our Tithes and Offerings relieve and maintain our spiritual Fathers, the
Ministers of Christ, and the Church our Mother, as our natural Father and
Mother: and so likewise, when he says, Thou shall not steal, he commands us,
not to detain and keep back the Tithes, and Offerings from Gods Ministers:
Whereby you may see, that this commandment of paying our Tithes is a Moral
precept, and implicitly contained and comprehended in the Moral Law.

And if you say, maintenance of the Ministers may be included in those Moral
commandments, to be commanded, for the performance of Gods outward service, and
to uphold and further the Sanctifying of his Sabbath; yet there is no proof,
that, that maintenance, which is implied in those precepts, must be the Tenth
part, rather then the eleventh, fifteenth, or the twentyeth part of our goods.

I answer, That I have proved already, That the very Tithe, continual due that
belongs to Christ, as he is a continual Priest for ever; and all the precepts
of Christ, and commandments of God, being Brevia, levia and utilia, very
compendious and short, that they might not be forgotten; for which cause, the
Ten Commandments are styled, The Commandments are very short that we should not
forget them.
december verba, ten words: and these ten words are contracted, into one word,
which is but one syllable, and all the Commandments of God are comprehended in
that one syllable, Love: For love is the fulfilling of the Law: There is no
reason, we should look, that all the inclusive particulars, contained in that
one word, or in those few short precepts, should or could be particularly
expressed therein. But they are always left to be understood and explained by
the Preachers and Commentators. As when he says, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, the Sanctifying of the Sabbath, you must confess, is therein concluded;
and yet, that the Sabbath shall be the seventh day, is not therein mentioned;
So when he says, Thou shall have none other gods but me, the Tithes, that are
a special means to uphold and further his outward service must of necessity be
understood, to be therein comprehended, though in direct terms, the tenth part
is not expressed. And

Further, I answer to their fourth Objection; That although a Judicial and a
Ceremonial consideration may be rendered, for the payment of Tithes among the
Jews; As, that equality might be preserved among the tribes of this people;
that, because, in the Division of the Land of Canaan, the Levites had no part
of the Land, Moses thought it fit, the Tithes, which were to be paid to God,
should be given to them out of every tribe; and that would make their estate
and maintenance proportionable to the other tribes; yet this judicial
consideration of paying the Tithes unto the Levites: does no ways infringe or
weaken the equity and morality of this precept, for the perpetual payment of
the Tithes to Christ, and his Ministers, to further and uphold the service of
God.

Any Kingdom may take laws from other Kingdoms, when they are seen good.
And, besides the equity and morality of this precept; seeing Moses was so just
and so excellent a Lawgiver, far beyond and much better then all the
Lawgivers of the Gentiles, Greek or Latin; there is no reason, why other
Kingdoms, or Nations should not use the same judicial Laws, as were used among
the Jews: for the politic powers of any Kingdom, may take Laws from any other
Kingdom, where they see the best Laws made; as the Romans took their Law of the
twelve Tables from the Athenians, and the Cities of Germany from the Venetians:
and then, Sicut leges quas Athenis Romani transtulerunt, cum ab ipsis
comprobatae and confirmatae fuissent, eas nihilominus Jus Civil Romanorum
nominarunt: As the Laws, which the Romans took from Athens, when they were
received and confirmed by the Senate of Rome, Cokus, de jure Regis Ecclesiast.
they were styled, The Civil-Laws of the Romans, says the Lord Cook: so when
any Kingdom or Commonwealth takes those Laws of the Jews, that were merely
Judicial, and not any ways Moral precepts, or the like politic Laws of any
other Nation, and confirm them for Laws, to be observed in their Territories;
they have the force of binding-Laws, and may not, with a safe Conscience, of
any of the Subjects of those Dominions, where they have their Sanction, be
voyded or violated.

CHAP. XVII.
What the ancient Fathers of the Church, and the Councils (collected of most
Learned and pious Bishops) have left written concerning Tithes: And of the
threefold cause, that detains them from the Church.

What the Fathers say of Tithes, and Oblations.
ANd now having seen, by the Testimony of the Holy Scripture, and by many
Reasons, that the Tithes are by a Divine right due to Christ, and his
Ministers; Let us hear, what the Fathers, and Councils, and the Canons of the
Church have said of this point, concerning Tithes: and I do find that Irenaeus,
Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
who was Scholar to Polycarpus, that was the disciple of S. John the
Evangelist, says, Offerimus Deo bona nostra, ut signa gratitudinis pro illis
donis quae a Deo recepimus: We offer to God our goods, that is, our Tithes and
Oblations to God, as the signs and tokens of our thankfulness unto God, Origin.
in number. Hom. 11,
for those gifts, which we receive from God: And Origin says, Qui colit Deum,
debet donis and oblationibus agnoscere eum Deum and datorem omnium: He that
Worshippeth God, must by his gifts and oblations, that is, his Tithes and
Offerings, acknowledge God to be the Lord and giver of all things: Extra de
decim: c. Cum non sit.
And Innocentius says, Deus speciali titulo decimas sibi-ipsi reservavit, in
signum dominationis and jurisdictionis super omnia, God has, by a special
title, reserved and kept unto himself the Tithes of all things, to show and put
us in mind of that Universal power, right and Dominion, that he has over all
things, Itaque Judaei decimas persolvendo testabantur, quod omnia sua, seque
adeo ipsos, Deo autori and omnium bonorum largitori deberent: And so the Jews
by the payment of their Tithes testified, that they owed all that they had, and
themselves also, to God, the Author and the giver of all good.

And what God has reserved to himself, he has resigned and given to his
Ministers, that do serve at his Altar: because, the Lord requires none other
reward from us, but what tends to his Worship, to Praise him and magnify him
for ever: And it is an argument of his Infinite loving kindness, that for all
the fruits and profits, that he bestows upon us, he requires, by way of
precept, as a Rentcharge, to maintain his public Worship, but the tenth part,
to be restored back to him again; and that only to this end, that his people
might not forget him, to be their God, and the giver of all the good that they
have.

And in that respect S. Gregory says, Cum non ab hominibus sed a Deo ipso
decimae sunt institutae, quasi debitum exigi possunt: Seeing the commandment of
paying Tithes is not from men, but from God himself, they may be required by
Gods Ministers, as due debts, that do belong unto them.

But to let pass, what I might collect from all the rest, Saint Augustine,
Decret. Greg. l. 3. tit. 30. c. 34.
that in my judgment is the most learned, and most judicious of all the
Fathers, is most plain and plentiful in this point, saying, Haec est Domini
justissima consuetudo, Si tu illi decimam non dederis, tu ad decimam
revocaberis, id est, daemonibus, quae est decima pars angelorum, associaberis,
This is the just proceeding of the Righteous Lord, that if thou will not pay
thy Tithes to him, thou shall be reduced unto the tenth, and associated unto
the Devils, which is the tenth part of the Angels, and in the interim, the mean
while, Dabis impio militi quod non vis dare Dei Sacerdoti, What thou will not
give to Gods Minister, thou shall give to the wicked Soldier, or it shall be
consumed some other way; but on the other side, Aug. de doctrina Christiana.
Si tu decimam dederis, non solum abundantiam fructuum recipies, sed etiam
sanitatem animae and corporis consequeris; sic decimas dando, and terrena and
coelestia possis praemia promereri; quia Dominus qui dignatus est totum donare,
decimas a nobis dignatus est recipere; If thou do willingly and justly pay
thy T^thes, Malach. 3.
thou shall not only reap and receive abundance of fruits, as the Lord has
promised, but thou shall likewise obtain health of body, and forgiveness of thy
sins, and eternal life, (as Rainerus observes) and so by paying thy Tithes,
thou do procure unto thy self both Earthly and Heavenly blessings; because
the Lord, which vouchsafes, most bountifully, to bestow all upon us is most
graciously pleased, to receive the Tithes from us; and that, non sibi sed nobis
proculdubio profuturas, not for any benefit to himself, but altogether, without
question, for thy profit, that thou may be instructed to serve God, and that
his Priests may pray to God for thee, when thou do work for them, that God
may bless thee, and bless all, that thou take in hand.

And what madness is it then in all covetous worldlings, to deny their Tithes
unto their Ministers, when, as I said before, Decimas dando, possint
terrestria, and coelestia promereri, pro avaritia sua denegando, duplici
benedictione fraudari? By paying their Tithes they shall receive both Earthly
and Heavenly blessings; and by denying them through their Covetousness, they
shall deprive themselves of this double blessing; and, as S. Jerome says, make
themselves liable to many judgments; for, Quia non reddidistis decimas, idcirco
in penuria and fame maledicti estis; because you have not paid your Tithes, you
are accursed, and do often perish with hunger and want, Quia dum parva
subtrahitis, ubertatem possessionium vestrarum and totam abundantiam frugum
perdidistis; Because that while you detain this small part, which is the tenth,
you lose the plenty of your possessions, and all the abundance of your fruits:
Sciatis enim vos ideo abundantiam perdid^sse, quia fraudastis me part mea; For
you may understand, that you do therefore leese your plenty and abundance,
because you have deceived and deprived me of my part: and therefore, if you
desire that I should bless your labors, Hieron. in Gloss. super Malach. 3.
Moneo, ut reddatis mihi mea, and ego restituam vobis vestra: I advise you, to
render to me, mine, and I will bless yours: which is a good counsel, for our
own good.

Thus you see what the Fathers say, concerning the payment of Tithes to God's
Ministers; Quo autem tempore, and a quibus consuetudo invaluerit, ut decimae ad
Christianas Ecclesias pervenerint, non satis certe liquet: But, at what time,
and by whom, the custom of paying Tithes, came to the Christian Churches, it is
not certainly enough known, says Fran. Sylvius. And Hermanus Gigas says,
Constantine the Great was the first that, by his Imperial Decree, commanded, Vt
de rebus omnibus decimae Ecclesiis solverentur, What the Councils and Synods do
say concerning Tithes.
That, out of all our goods, the Tithes should be paid unto the Churches. Yet,
ex Synodo Matisconensi 11. which was held about the year 587. it seems to me,
that they were usually paid by the Christians before Constantines time; for in
the 5th Canon of the said Synod, we find such a Decree, concerning Tithes,
Leges Divinae, consulentes Sacerdotibus ac Ministris Ecclesiarum, pro
haereditaria portione, omni populo praeceperunt, Decimas fructuum suorum locis
sacris praestare; The Divine Laws counselling us, have commanded all people, to
bring the Tithes of all their fruits unto the holy places, that is, the
Churches, for the Priests and Ministers of those Churches, for their hereditary
portion; ut nullo labor impediti, per res illegitimas, spiritualibus possint
vacare ministeriis, That, being no ways, or by no labor hindered, through
unlawful affairs, they might wholly apply themselves to their spiritual
Ministeries; Quas leges, Christianorum congeries, longis temporibus, (...), a
heap ot pile.
custodivit intemeratas, which Laws, the whole heap or multitude of Christians
have of long times, (therefore no doubt but long before Constantines time)
observed inviolable: Vnde statuimus, ut decimas Ecclesiasticas omnis populus
inferat; quibus Sacerdotes, aut in usum pauperum, aut in captivorum
redemptionem, prorogatis, suis orationibus pacem populo ac salutem impetrent;
and si quis contumax nostris statutis fuerit, a membris Ecclesiae omni tempore
separetur; Therefore we do ordain, that all people shall, and do, bring their
Ecclesiastical Tithes, whereby the Priests bestowing, what they can spare,
either upon the poor, or for the redemption of those that are held captives,
might by their payers, obtain at the hands of God, peace and health unto the
people; and if any man will be refractory, and not obey this our Decree, let
him at all times be separated from the Members of God's Church.

And so Duriensis Synodus, held under Charles the Great, about the year 779.
ordained in the tenth Canon, Vt decimae solvantur; and dare nolentes, non
Ecclesiasticis excommunicationibus tantum, sed a Reipublicae quoque ministeriis
coerceantur, That the Tithes should be paid, and they that would not do it,
should not only be forced by the Ecclesiastical Excommunications, but also be
compelled, by the Magistrates of the Commonwealth, to pay the same. And in the
Moguntine Synod, held by the Command of the same Charles the Great, Anno 813.
we find it thus written in the 38th Canon, Admonemus, or, as it is in some
Copies, Praecipimus, ut decima de omnibus dari non negligatur; quia Deus ipse
sibi dari constituit: and ideo timendum est, ut quisquis Deo debitum suum
abstrahit, ne forte Deus propter peccatum suum auferat ei necessaria sua: We
admonish or command, that none neglect to pay their Tithes, of all their goods;
because God himself has commanded us to pay them to him: and therefore it may
be feared, that as any man does withhold his due from God, so God will, for his
sins, withdraw from that man, those things that are needful for him.

And the Council of Aquisgrane says, Attend, diligens lector, C^ncil.
Aquisgranense. l. 1. c. 34.
quod omnes primitiae, and quicquid ad Sanctuarium oblatum est, Sacerdotis
sint, and ad jus ejus pertineant: Mark and attend, thou diligent Reader, that
all the first fruits, and whatsoever is presented and brought unto the
Sanctuary, (as all the Tithes was wont to be) pertained unto the Priest, and
does by law, and of right, belong to him.

And so Concilium Cavilionense, cap. 18. says, in one Canon, That Quicunque
decimas dare neglexerint, excommunicentur; And Concilium Ticinense, that was
held under Ludovicus Pius, has ordained, Vt non pro libitu suo, laici decimas
clericis tribuerent, That the lay people should not pay their Tithes, as they
listed, unto the Clergy: but, as the Augustane Synod says, Qui justas decimas
non solvunt, ter moniti, eis neganda est Communio: They that pay not their just
Tithes, being three times admonished, let them be denied to receive the holy
Communion.

And thus have these Councils and Synods determined concerning Tithes. Et
plurimae aliae extant de decimis Conciliorum Sanctiones: And there are many
other Sanctions and Decrees of Councils to the same purpose, says Francis
Sylvius; whereby you may see, that the Tithes are determined to be a debt due
to God, and a duty of our obedience unto him; Tithes a due debt, and neither
alms nor benevolence.
and therefore not to be detained from his Ministers, nor to be given to them,
as alms or voluntary benevolence.

1. Because, God has no need of alms, who is Lord of all things, and gives
all things unto us, and requires nothing, but what is of right due unto him
from us.

2. Because, alms do always exceed the desert of him, that receives them,
and they show the benevolence and bounty of the Giver, and not any worth or
merit in the Receiver: But the preaching of the Gospel, and the works that the
Ministers of Christ do for the people, do exceed all Tithes, and excel all the
temporal gifts and oblations, that the people can do for the Ministers: And
therefore the Apostle demands, If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great matter, 1 Cor. 9.11.
if we reap your carnal things? And therefore, seeing the Ministers gifts unto
the people, are far better, and more excellent than the peoples gifts to them,
whatsoever they give is of desert, and a due debt, and no alms or benevolence.

3. Because, the Tithes are due to Christ, as he is our Priest, and so they are
the portion of the Lord, as the Lord professes, and he gives them over to his
Ministers, that are his Ambassadors, and teach his people, Deuteronomy. 18.2.
in his stead, as the Lord himself says, I am the inheritance of the Priests.
Therefore to deny the Priests of that portion, which God says is his, and
promises to give it them, for his Service, is to mock God, and to make a
derision of his promises, as the Apostle shows, when he says, Let him that
is taught in the word, make him that teaches him, partaker of all his goods,
Gal. 6.6, 7.
and then immediately adds, Be not deceived, for God is not mocked, and will
not be mocked; intimating, that to deal otherwise with God's Ministers, is none
other thing, than to mock God; because God had promised this part and portion
to them, that stand in his stead, 2 Cor. 5.20.
as the Apostle shows.

And so you see, how the Scriptures, Fathers, and Councils, and all, conclude,
that the Tithes of all our goods, are due, and perpetually due to Christ, and
by him given over, by an indispensible Law, unto his Substitutes, the Priests
and Preachers of the Gospel.

But then I may demand with Francis Sylvius, Quomodo factum sit ut decimae, tot
Imperatorum Christianorum donationibus, and decretis Synodorum Ecclesiis (in
usus Canonicos, pios, legitimos, Francisc. Sylvius de decimis.
nempe Ministerii Sacri conservatione, Ministr^rum Ecclesiasticorum honesto
stipendio, pauperum varii generis alimonia, captivorum redemptione, and locorum
Sacrorum reparatione and sab^^ca) destinatae, ad laicorum, ut vocant, manus
pervenerint? How comes it now to pass, that the Tithes, appointed and ordained
by the Laws and Donations of so many Christian Kings and Emperors, and by the
Decrees of so many Councils and Synods to be paid unto the Churches, for such
regular, pious, and lawful uses, as to uphold and preserve the holy Ministry,
and public Service of God, the honest stipend and maintenance of the
Church-Ministers, the relief of the poor of diverse kinds, the redemption of
captives, the reparation of Churches, and other sacred places, or the erecting
and building of such places, and the like, should notwithstanding be now
transferred and carried away by lay men? Albertus Kran^zius Metropol. l. 1. c.
2.


I answer and say, That, letting pass what Albertus Krantzius relates, I find
three special authors and causes of this mischief.

3. Special causes why the Tithes are detained and alienated from the Chu chapter
1. Cause.
1. The malice of the Devil. 2. The pride and arrogance of the Pope. 3. The
covetousness, and the injustice of the wicked worldlings.
1. Satan is the Grand enemy of all mankind, and therefore labors by all
means to bring both the Service, and servants of God into contempt, and he
knows, nothing makes them more contemptible than want and poverty, quae cogit
ad turpia, which makes them unable to discharge that honorable Service, which
they owe to God, and forces them to do many base and dishonorable actions;
and because their Lord and Master Christ, which takes pleasure in the
prosperity of his servants, has very bountifully allowed them his own portion
of Tithes and Oblations, for their maintenance, whereby they might most
honorably proceed in their Profession, and so enlarge the Christian Religion;
this deadly enemy of all goodness, most cunningly and insensibly brought it so
to pass, that almost the whole portion of Christ is alienated from the Church,
and his Ministers are left like Pharaohs lean kine, poor and meager, whereby
instead of the double honor that S. Paul says is due unto them, their ears
and their souls are filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy, and the
despitefulness of the proud.

And because this mischief could not so easily be done, if he had come to do
it, like the prince of darkness; therefore he changes himself into an angel of
light; and as he persuaded Judas, the Treasurer of Christ, to betray Christ
himself; so he got the Pope, the Vicar of Christ's Church, to betray and to
undo the Church of Christ; and all under the show and shadow of Religion,
because he knew, that, as the Poet says, Tuta frequensque via est, sub amici
fallere nomen. Though, as the same Poet says, Tuta frequensque licet sit via,
crimen habet: but that was his desire: And therefore,

2. He persuaded the Pope, to become the first founder of all our
impropriations, by alienating them from their proper use, and from the Churches
of Christ, and conferring them on Monastries and Nunries, to maintain the
Abbots, Monks, and Nuns, that were the first nursing fathers and mothers of
this devouring Harpie: And as the Devil said to Christ, All the Kingdoms of the
earth will I give thee, as if he had been Lord Paramount of all the World; So
the Pope, in the pride of his heart conceiting, that, being Christ's Vicar, he
might dispose of all that is Christ's, as pleased himself, destroyed the
servants of Christ to make his own Parasites; so that he appropriated 3845. of
the fattest and largest Benefices in England, either to his outlandish and
Italian Harpies, or others his creatures, Church Lands not to be sold, page 31.
of whom, nothing could be expected, but that they would feed themselves, like
Epicures, and never take care for the Church of Christ.

And though the godly Bishops of England that saw the mischief of that
practice, by the neglect of God's Service in the Parish-Churches, and the
abominable evils committed in those Abbeys and Nunries, so plentifully set down
by Cornelius Agrippa, and others, did in the time of Henry the third direct a
suite to Alexander the fourth, Cornelius Agrippa de vanitate Scien. cap. 49.
for the restitution of those impropriations, to their proper uses, and
primitive ordination; Yet, the Devil would not permit that Pope to do that
service unto God, as to be obedient to the Ordinance of God.

And though it be against all reason, that the Tithes which are appointed for
God's Service, should be transferred to any lay person; because that where
Tithes are paid, there must be a matter of giving and receiving; as the Apostle
shows, We give unto you spiritual things, and we receive your temporal
things: but the lay men that have the impropriations do receive the Tithes, but
can give no spiritual gift unto the people. And therefore Damasus demands,
Qua front, aut qua conscientia, Damas. Decret. 3.
decimas and oblationes vultis accipere, quum vix valetis pro vobis ipsis, ne
dum pro aliis, Deo preces offerre? With what face, or conscience, can the lay
persons demand the Tithes and Oblations, when they are scarce able to pray for
themselves, much less to offer up prayers and supplications for others?

Yea, though their own Canons and Orders speak against the impropriating of
Benefices and Tithes to lay persons, as the Council of Lateran, held under Pope
Alexander the 3d, decreed, That, Qui decimas laico, C^ncil. Lateran. part 26.
c. 8. Causa 16. q. 7. c. 3. Greg. 7. Causa 19 q 7. c. 1. Periculum animae.
in seculo manenti, concesserit, deponendus est, The Priest which shall pass
away the Tithes to any secular lay man, is to be deposed: And the Canon, Si
quia a modo Episcopus, etc. says, That if any Bishop hereafter do pass away
the Tithes and Oblations to lay men, let them be numbered amongst the greatest
Heretics: And, the lay men that receive the Tithes, as to be their own proper
inheritance, either from the Bishops or Kings, do run into the danger of their
souls, says another Canon.

Yet, as if all these were but tela aranea, a Spider's web, nothing would avail
with the Pope, to make him to desist his wicked practice, of making these
impropriations to whom he pleased:

Therefore the wrath of God, being exceedingly kindled against the abominations
of these wicked houses, that were thus maintained with the Revenues of the
Church, and upheld in their wickedness by the usurped power of the Pope, the
good God, that could bring light out of darkness, could likewise punish and
destroy wickedness by wicked men: As he did profane Saul by the uncircumcised
Philistines; and Idolatrous Manasses by the idolatrous Babylonians: So now he
stirs up a King, bad enough, Henry the Eighth, to be, as Nebuchadnezzar was
unto the Jews, the Rod of his fury, to whip and scourge these idle, loose and
lewd wantons; for when the King began to be weary of the same dish, and, to
satisfy his palate, desired license of the Pope, to change meat, and to be
divorced from his old Wife, and the Pope, rather for fear of offending the King
of Spain, than any true fear of God, as some conceive, knew not how to yield to
his unlawful lust; the King, to be revenged, devises to overthrow the Pope's
former wickedness, by a greater wickedness; even as Physicians sometimes do,
allay poison with a stronger poison.

And because wickedness can never want Counselors and Abettors, the King had a
Cromwell at his elbow, a name as fatal unto the Church, as Tarquin was to Rome;
and many others, to please their Master, gave their Vote to the same purpose,
That the only way to be thoroughly revenged was, not to stand triffling about
small matters that might soon have an end: but to give such a perpetual wound,
as might not be cured; and that was utterly to destroy the delights of the
Pope, by taking away and rooting out all the Abbeys, Monasteries, Nunries, and
Religious houses, within his Dominions, so far as he could possibly reach: and
it is strange, If the Lord himself had not been on our side, that the
Cathedrals and Bishops had not been destroyed likewise.

And, lest the Pope, by the persuasions, slights, and eloquence of his
Emissaries and Clergy, should gain them to be reduced and restored, either to
these Houses, or to the Church again; the only sure way, to keep out the Popes
fingers from them, is, to bestow both their Lands and all these impropriations
upon his Nobility and Gentry; and so he shall not only perpetually be revenged
upon the Pope, but he shall also most infinitely oblige his friends and his
servants, who will be tenacious enough to detain them, and keep them, ad
Graecas calendas, from returning unto their proper sphere any more: and this
Counsel pleased the King and his Master: and though Archbishop Craumer did
what ever he could, to get these impropriations restored unto the Church, The
Holy Table, name and thing. page 148.
by his manifold persuasions unto the King, and especially by a message
purposely sent to Mr. John Calvin, by one Mr. Nicholas, to entreat Mr. Calvin
likewise, most earnestly to write to King Henry the 8th. and to persuade him by
all means to restore these impropriations unto the Church of God: And so Mr.
Bucer, and all the godly Protestants of that time, did their best, to persuade
him to restore them: yet all could not prevail, to have them restored. For
that now

3. Covetousness, and the greedy desire of wealth, and love unto this present
World, has seized upon the hearts, and filled the souls of those Lords,
Knights, and Gentlemen, and the posterity of them likewise, which had taken
hold of these impropriations, that they cannot endure to part with them any
more; But as Kites and Cormorants do seize upon a Carrion, so do they engross
unto themselves the portion of their God, and the inheritance of the Church of
Christ; and such a sweet savor and pleasant taste of Tithes, and Church goods
has been taken, ever since the birth of this monstrous Sacrilege, as that
now, many Noble men, and almost every Knight, and Gentleman of any note, has
got to themselves the Tithes, or some part of the Tithes of an impropriate
Church, for the enlarging of their Larder-house. And that you need not doubt of
this, I must here set down, what you may find in Mr. Crashaws Epistle to Mr.
Perkins second Treatise of the Duties of the Ministry, that in one County of
the Kingdom of England, (the East riding of the County of York) there are
contained one hundred and five Parishes; whereof, nigh an hundred, or the full
number of an hundred, are of this hateful name, and bastardly title of
Impropriations; and some of them are of yearly value of four hundred pounds,
others worth three hundred pounds per annum, others two hundred pounds, and
almost all worth one hundred pound a year; and yet the Minister's part is ten
pound- stipend; yea some have but eight pounds, and some but six pounds, and
some but four pounds to live upon, for the whole year; and out of the Great
Benefice of four hundred pounds a year, the Minister had but eight pound per
annum, Dr. Gardener in his Scourge of Sacrilege.
until of late, with much labor, ten pounds yearly for a Preacher. And, says
mine Author, the most of the Churches, in the properest Market Towns of this
Kingdom, are thus held and retained by our Nobility and Gentry.

And so, I found it in my Diocese of Ossory, in the Kingdom of Ireland, that
the Impropriations had so swallowed up the Tithes, and the Revenues of the
Churches; that, as I showed it in my Remonstrance to his Majesty, six or seven
Vicaridges, united together, will scarce make twenty pound a year for the
Preacher; Et durus est hic sermo, for hereby the people perish, and as the
Prophet says, The poor Children cry for Bread; and, for want of means, to
maintain the Ministers, there is none that is able to give it them.

I know, King Henry the 8th. that could cause his Parliaments, as I ever
understood, from the old Parliament men of those times, to make what Laws and
to conclude what Acts of Parliament he pleased, got many Laws to be made, and
many Acts to pass, to justify, and to make good and Lawful, the Taking away,
Leasing, Selling, and Alienating the Tithes, Lands, Houses, and Possessions of
the Church; and of our High Priest Jesus Christ, from his servants, to be
inherited by lay persons, and many other Acts of Parliaments have been made,
since that time, to the same purpose; which very thing, we conceive, as I have
showed, to be very High Sacrilege, and a robbing of Jesus Christ, and the
obstructing of his service, and we fear, the cause of the perishing of many
souls.

And therefore, how the Shield of the Pope's Authority, that was the first
Foster-Father of this execrable and accursed title, of Impropriation; or the
power of King Henry the 8th. that would expunge the Pope's Sacrilege with a
greater Sacrilege, and be the second Patron of this Bastard brood, or all the
pretenses of the now detainers of the Tithes, and portion of Christ, and the
Lands, Houses, and Possessions of the Church by these Humane Laws, can bear off
the blow of Gods wrath, and turn aside the fierceness of his vengeance; when,
in the day of his fury, he shall power out the full vial of his indignation,
upon the head of all Sacrilegious persons, and upon the children and posterity
of them, that have devoured the Lords inheritance, and laid wast his dwelling
place, I can no ways understand; neither do I know how to give them any
comfort, or counsel, but to advise them, to a full and timely Restitution of
that, which, otherwise, will be their utter destruction; Quia non remittitur
peccatum, August. ad Maced. Epist. 54.
donec restituatur oblatum, cum restitui potest; The sin shall never be
remitted, and blotted out of Gods book, until the Tithes and goods of Gods
Church be restored, when men can restore them and will not do it.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the second part of the Stipend, Wages, and Maintenance of the Ministers of
the Gospel; which is, the Oblation, Donation, or Free-wil-offering of the
people, for to uphold, and continue the true service of God, and to obtain the
blessings of God, upon themselves, and upon their labors; which Donations
ought not to be impropriated, and alienated from the Church, by any means.

YOu have heard of the first part of the Ministers maintenance; the second part
consists in the voluntary Oblations, or Free-wil-offerings of the people,
which the Lord requires should be done, according as every one, in his own
heart, thought good, to bestow upon the service of God: and what they did offer
in this kind was most acceptable in the sight of God.

For this is a Principal Branch of that Honor, which we yield unto God, by and
with our substance, which we are enjoined to do, Prove. 3.9. Because, what we
relieve the poor with, is not so much our alms, as their exigence; which, as
necessity exacts it, so it is soon passed, and as quickly perishes; but those
Donations, that were given for the service of God, as they savor of a more
inward and deeper piety, so they are of a more lasting substance; and, besides
the eternal Treasures, which men do thereby lay up for themselves, they do
provide for the perpetuity of Religion, unto the after-ages of men, and may be
justly said to Honor God, not only in themselves, but in all those likewise,
which they gain, by their Donations, to Honor him.

And it is strange, and mavelous, to consider how liberal, and how free the
people of old time, were in their Donations and Free-wil-offerings, to maintain
the Worship of God, and to do any thing, that did any ways appertain to his
service; for if you look into the 36. Chapt. of Exodus verse. 5. you shall find
how Bezaleel and Aholiab spoke unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more
then enough, for the service of the work, which the Lord has commanded to be
made; Exodus 36.5, 6, 7.
and Moses gave commandment, and caused it to be Proclaimed through the Camp,
that they should bring no more, for that they had already brought enough and
too much: So they that returned out of Babylon were as ready and as willing, to
offer up their gifts and free-wil-offerings for the service of the Temple, as
their Forefathers were, for the erecting of the Tabernacle, Neh 7.70. etc.
10.33.
as you may see it in the books of Ezra, and of Nehemiah.

But the Christians, of the Primitive Church, were so zealous herein that they
exceeded all that went before them, in their Donations and Free-wil-offerings
for the service of God, and the increase of the Christian Religion; for they
sold their Lands and Possessions, and laid the prizes thereof at the Apostles
feet; and had all things in common among themselves: And Pope Urban the I.
Platin. in Urban.
instituted, Vt ecclesias, praedia, ac fundos, fidelibus oblatos episcopus
reciperet, partireturque proventus clericis omnibus viritim, nihilque cujuspiam
privatum esset, sed in commune bonum; That the Bishops should receive the
Churches Possessions, and grounds, offered to the Faithful; and that the
profits thereof should be divided by the Clergy, man by man, and that nothing
should be of private propriety to any one, but in common amongst them all; And
Gratian tells us, that by a decretal Epistle unto all the Bishops, he decreed,
that none should presume to alienate ought of the Church- Revenues, under the
pain of Excommunication; And Pope Lucius the I. about twenty years after Urban,
directed an Epistle to the Bishops of Spain and France to the same purpose.

And though the malice of Dr. Burges toward the Bishops, will not suffer him
to yield, Vide Flor. hist. ad an. 186. Matthew. Westminster.
that King Lucius gave the Lands of the Idol-Priests unto the Christian
Bishops; yet, is it clear enough, out of Antiquit. Brit. and Armachanus, that
Lucius endowed the Christian Church with more Lands and Revenues then the
Idol-Priests enjoyed.

And afterward while it was permitted by the Imperial Laws, for every one to
Collate upon the Church, whatsoever he would, without exception, Cod. l. 1.
titulo. 5. l. 1.
their Donations were so great, that the Kings and Emperors conceived it fit,
with Moses, to grant a prohibition that they should not offer any more, nor
bestow any Lands or Goods upon the Church, without some special license and
toleration from the Civil Magistrate; for fear, that the Church, if this
freedom of Donations should still continue, would have sucked out all the
blood from the veins, and the marrow out of the bones of the politic body, and
so leave the Commonwealth deprived of their Lands, like Pharaohs lean and
evil-favoured Cows, and the Church like those, that were fat and wel-liked.

And therefore they enacted the Statute of Mortmain, that was a supersedeas
against these too-liberal contributions: and the Emperor Justinian enacted,
that no Legacy, bequeathed unto the Church, exceeding the value of five hundred
Crowns, should be good in Law, without a special license from the Magistrate;
and so, many other restrictions were made, as Rules, against such as could not
otherwise well rule themselves and observe the just rules of Reason and
moderation.

And thereupon the Church it self, and those godly Bishops that desired no man's
wealth, but what made for the glory of God, and the furtherance of the Gospel
of Christ, made Canons and cautions against such catching Covetousness, as
would too greedily incroach upon their neighbors estates, Decret. part. 2.
Cause. 12. q. 2. Can 49.
and too unreasonably hedge it in unto the Church; as that Canon, which
begins, Ecclesia rapacitatis ardore, The Church, with too much greediness,
must not snatch, and pluck unto her self, the Lands and Possessions of her
Children. The Reason of those Statutes, and Canons two fold.


And the Reason, of these Inhibitions, and Statute of Mortmain, and Canons of
the Church, seems to be two fold.

1. Because, as I said before, the zeal of those Christians was so fervent,
desire to promote the service of God, was so eager and vehement, that they
cared not how much they gave, but thought all that they gave too little, for
that service. So great was the difference betwixt their mind, and the minds of
our Soldiers and others, Gentlemen of no mean rank, and some generated and
degenerated from the Church, whose Covetousness and greedy hearts, desire
nothing more, then to pull down our Cathedrals and other Churches, and, as it
were, Romana lege agraria, by an Irresragable Law, to pluck away their Lands
and Possessions, until they be left as bare, as, in the day, wherein they were
first brought forth into the World.

2. Because that, whatsoever Lands, Houses, or Possessions were once offered
unto God, and for Gods service, could not without committing the horrible sin
of Sacrilege, be taken away by any man, or by any pretense, from God; or
indeed, because the Lands, and Houses that were given unto the Church, were
freed in those times of Popery, from all Taxes and Escheats; so that neither
the King, nor Commonwealth could have any help, or assistance from them,
toward the defraying of the public and most necessary charges of the State.

And therefore, Henry the third, and Edward the first, his son, and Richard the
second, seeing how many men, not out of any love to Religion, or zeal to Gods
service, but craftily, to cousen the King, and other chief Lords, and the
Commonwealth, did thus fraudulently convey their Lands unto the Church, and
then took Leases of them again from the Church, merely to be freed from the
Public Taxes; made those Statutes, Cap 36.
against the giving of their Lands in Mort-main, or in a dead hand, that is,
the Church; and it is enacted in the great Charter, that it should not be
lawful to any man from thence-forth, to give his Lands, to any Religious House,
and then to take the same again from the same H use: the which thing, being a
mere Collusion and an apparent wrong to the King, to the chief Lord of the Fee,
and the Commonwealth; no Bishop ever justified the same, or held it lawful for
the Church to hold such Lands as were so given, contrary to those Acts of
Parliament, and those Canons that were made against such deceitful dealings.

But, for those Lands and Houses, that were truly, Religiously, and without any
manner of deceit, or wrong to any man, given to the Church for the service of
God, and to promote the Gospel of Jesus Christ, I think them so sacred, and so
properly Gods right, that, as the Author, of the Church Lands not to be sold,
has Truly, Religiously, and most Learnedly proved; so I assure my self, that
none but the Limbs of the Great Antichrist will think otherwise. For

Before these holy men have made the Donations of their lands or houses unto
God, and to his Church, it was in their own power, and they might without
offense, either give them unto the Lord, or retain them still unto themselves
and their posterity: for so S. Peter tells Anani^, Whiles it remained, that is,
un-sold, was it not thine own? And after it was sold, was it not in thine own
power, that is, either to offer it and give it to God and his Service, Acts 5.4.
or not to give it? But now, after thou have sold it, and dedicated the whole
price of thy land for Gods Service, To keep back some part of the price, which
formerly thou had given to God's Church, is such a Sacrilege, and so
transcendent a sin, as, to lie unto the Holy Ghost, and, to rob God of that,
which now does most properly belong to God, and is no ways in thy power, to
dispose of it: And so it is in any other man's case, Before thou give thy
land, house, or utensil unto the Church, and for the Service of God, it is
thine own, and thou may lawfully do, what thou will with thine own, either
give it unto God, or not give it: but, after thou have once given it, and
consecrated it for God's Service, it is none of thine, and neither thou, nor
any man else, can make an alienation or impropriation thereof, without lying
unto the Holy Ghost, and a robbing of God of his right: For so the Law says,
Jastinian lib. 2. Tit. 1
Nullius sunt res Sacrae: nam quod Divini juris est, nullius in bonis est, The
Sacred and Dedicated things, that are of Divine property, are of no private
man's right: but, God being the sole owner of them, none but such as are his
servants and assigns, can have any thing to do with them. So Charles the
Great, that was as good as he was great, says, Bona Ecclesiae Deo sacrata
sunt, Capit. Car. l. 6. c. 28.
Whatsoever we give unto the Church, we offer and dedicate unto the Lord our
God. And so the style of all the Graunts in our Magna Charta runs, Magna
Charta. c. 1.
We have given such and such lands or things unto God, both for us, and for our
heirs for ever. And again, the same Magna Chartae says, Privilegium Ecclesiae
debet esse immune. And so the Law of God says, The field when it goes out in
the year of Jubilee, shall be holy unto the Lord, as a field devoted, the
possession thereof shall be the Priests; because, Levit. 27.21, and 28.
as the Lord says verse 28. No devoted thing, that a man shall devote, or give
unto the Lord of all that he has, both of man and beast, and of the field of
his possession, shall be sold or redeemed; because every devoted, dedicated, or
consecrated thing, is most holy unto the Lord; and the Lord has given the same
unto the Priests, verse 21. And so the ancient Style of all Grants and
Charters, for these matters, was, Domino Deo nostro off^rimus and dicamus, and
cetera, We give such and such things unto our Lord God. And under the Law, as
God instituted the Tithes and lands of the Priests for his Service; so he takes
the Gifts and Donations and Oblations of the people unto himself, saying, Thou
shall give them me, Exodus 22.30. So he calls the Church his House, Matthew.
21.13. and the Tithes his Tithes, saying, Will a man rob his God? yet you have
robbed me, in Tithes and Offerings. And for lands he says, You shall offer
unto the Lord an holy portion, Ezech. 45. 1. And the same Law, S. Paul presses
under the Gospel, as you may see in 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. and 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. For,
though we have some differences in the manner of God's Worship, when as the
Sacrifices and several Ceremonies are abolished; yet there is the same
substance for the Guides in God's Worship, which is the reason of the Law; as
the Prophet Esaias, in the Name of the Lord, has foretold us; when as,
prophesying of the state of Christ his Church, and the Ministers thereof, he
says, And I will also take of them for Priests and Levites, Esaias 66.21.
says the Lord; and not laymen. And therefore these things may not be sold
away, or alienated and impropriated from the Priests; because that now, God
has the best Interest therein: and, though before they were devoted and given
to him, you might have told them, alienated them, or put them to what use you
would; yet now, being God's proper goods, even by your own Donation, you may
not, without God's consent, impropriate them, from God, and from his Service.
For,

As in the case of Marriage; before the Marriage, both the man and the woman
are free, to do what they please, to marry, or not to marry, and consensus
partium, and both their consents, publicly attested by the Priest, makes up
the Marriage: but, after they are Married, let them both consent as they will,
and as often as they will, yet there desire and consent cannot dis-joyn them,
and dissolve the Marriage; because, that now God had a hand in the Marriage,
and whom God has joined together, neither they themselves, nor any man else,
may put assunder: Even so it is in the case of devoted and consecrated things,
lands, houses, or what you will, offered up, as a Free-will-offering unto God;
Before you make your Oblation of them, you may do with them, what you please,
give them, or not give them, as the man might marry this woman, or not marry
her; but when once they are offered and given unto God, you must not make a
mock of God, and alienate, or impropriate them from Him, and his Service: or if
you do, Solomon will tell you, It is destruction and a snare to the man, Prove.
20.25.
which devoureth that which is sanctified, or given to God, and after vows to
make inquiry, and search for ways to deprive God of them; as now, our men of
War, and many others do.

But if men gave 5 pound, or 10 pound, or other sum, furtherance of God's
Service; and, to secure the same, appointed lands worth 50 pound, or a 100
pound, to pay it unto the Bishop, or other Ministers of the Church; Will you
have the lands, and not rather still accept of the money, that was to be paid
out of those lands? and was the true meaning of the Donor?

I answer, God forbid, that any man in such a case, just man requires no
unjust thing: But when the whole is given to God, no Bishop for love, either to
his wife or children, or for any other gain, should let and lease that for 5
pound, which is worth 50 pound, or the like, as I have showed to you before.

But I know what our sacrilegious persons, Tithes of impropriations, and the
lands, houses, and possessions of the Church, into their possessions, will
further object, and say for themselves, and against me; That our Laws do allow
them to do what they do, and our Bishops, that knew God's will, as well, or
better than my self, have formerly let out the lands and houses belonging to
the Church in fee-ferme, and for a very small rent, unto their Tenants and
Fee-fermers, and they do still let out long leases of them unto their children
and friends; and therefore they are not to be blamed: but if there be any fault
herein, it is in our selves, and in our Predecessors.

To which Objection I shall answer, but as I did before; tyrannical, fierce,
and wilful Kings and Princes, and wicked Governors, See what I say in the
Grand Rebellion. c. 7.
when they have once got power and authority into their hands: as was King
Henry the Eighth, and the late Rebel and Usurper Crumwell, will make what laws,
and force the people in their Parliament to give their consent, to what Acts
and ^^tutes soever they please: And do you think, that such Laws can excu^^
^ou, for the breach of the Law of God? And for our Bishops that do, of have
done such things, to the prejudice of the Church, and the great dishonor of
our God, I confess, majus peccatum habent, our sin is more than yours; for we
are but God's Stewards, entrusted with the implements of his House, and the
revenues of his Church, to be used and employed, not wastefully upon our
selves, in pride; or upon our children, to make them Knights, or Lords and
Ladies: but for the best advantage and furtherance of God's Service, and the
honor of Jesus Christ, as he has commanded us, to dispose of them; and you
know, we must render an account of our Stewardship, and how soon I know not;
and if we waste our Masters goods, or take all, or more than is due unto our
sel^^^ ^hen we should dispose of it to other uses, for the Service of our
Mas^^r, I know not how we shall answer it.

But I know that our greater sin, in imbezelling and alienating our Masters
goods, and the Revenues of his Church, will not quit and excuse you, for your
lesser sin, in being copartners with us in this Sacrilege; for, as the
receiver of any stolen goods, is liable to the Law, as well as the stealer of
his neighbors goods; so is the lessee, as well as the lessor, the detainer as
well as the maker away of these unlawful Fee-ferms and long Leases of the
Church-Revenues, liable to the just judgment of God.

And therefore, in this respect, that the Donations and Free-will-offerings of
religious and holy men were given, not to men, but to God, and for the Honor
and Service of God, and the good of his Church, the worthiest Bishops, and best
Prelates, and Servants of Christ, would rather suffer the greatest indignities,
and the heaviest wrath of the most powerful Commanders, than they would yield
to satisfy their desires, that sought to take away or alienate the goods of
God, that were dedicated to him for the service of his Church; For, when at the
instigation and evil advice of the Arrians, whom the Empress Faustina did very
much favor, the Emperor Valentinian, sent certain Officers unto S. Ambrose, to
require him to yield up, and surrender his Church of Millane, and all the
possessions thereof, into their hands; the holy Bishop, in a letter that he
sent to his Sister Marcellina, tells her, what he did, saying, When we were
commanded to deliver up the Church, and all the vessels and possessions thereof
into the Officers hands, I made this answer unto them: If you had demanded mine
estate and goods, lands, houses, or any other thing that I had, Gold, Silver,
or the like, I would very readily yield them to you: But it is not in my power,
to yield up any thing, that is the Churches, and is but only committed to my
trust and custody; and therefore herein, because the things of the Church are
the goods of God, Ambros. l. 1. Epistol. and Epist. 33.
I have a special respect to the saving of the Emperors soul; because it
neither becomes me the Bishop, to give up the vessels and the goods of the
Church, nor him the Emperor, to ask them; And therefore I besought his
Majesty, to take my words in good part, and if he loved himself, to desist from
offering such an injury unto Christ.

And the same Father, in concione de Basilicis non tradendis haereticis, says
Solvimus quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, We give to Caesar, the things that are
Caesar's, and to God, the things that are God's: For if Caesar demands his
Subsidy or Tribute, we do not refuse to pay it; but if he would have the
Church, and Church-goods, they must not be delivered up to Caesar; Quia Templum
Dei est, Idem de Basilicis non t^adendis haereticis Tomo. 5.
non jus Caesaris; Because the Temple, and what belongs unto the Temple, is
Gods right, and not the right of Caesar. And this we say for the honor of
Caesar, because nothing can be more honorable for the Emperor, than that he
should be called the son of God. And the same may I say of every King, Prince,
or Potentate.

And here I must crave leave to insert a Story, How that in the time of Pope
Xistus, a cunning persecuting Tyrant came to the Treasurer of the Church, The
Story of a crafty Tyrant, and a faithful Pastor; related by Doctor Gardener.
and said unto him, You Christians do compl^^^ that you are cruelly dealt
withal; and perhaps you have some just c^^^e to complain; and therefore I am
far from any bloody purpose, being as unwilling to proceed in any capital
Sentence against you, as your selves are willing to live: but I understand that
your Bishops are very rich, and have store of vessels of Go^d and Silver, and
many men do give their lands and livings unto your Churches, whereby you must
needs become exceeding rich; and yet your God is no Mammonist, but has left
many wholesome Precepts against covetousness, and has advised you, to give
unto Caesar, what is due to Caesar; and you know, that his Wars, and the
affairs of the Commonwealth are very chargeable unto him, and we know, that
your profession is not to hoord up wealth, and to make account of transitory
things: And therefore if you be pleased to forgo those lands, and riches, and
vessels of Gold and Silver, which you have and care not for, I will warrant
you, both safety of life, and freedom to use your Religion, according to your
Conscience.

To whom the godly man answered, Prudent. Peristoph.
That he desired three days liberty to return his resolution: and by the third
day, he had gathered together a multitude of poor, lame, blind, impotent men
and women, whose names he delivered up in a Schedule, into the Tyrant's hands,
and said, These are the goods of the Church, for whom I am but the Steward of
those goods that you desire, and my Master commanded me, to keep for them, and
for his Service. A blessed man, that herein showed, he feared God more than man.

And I would all our Bishops, that have alienated and past away the lands,
houses, and p^ssessions of the Church in long Leases and Fee-ferms unto their
children and friends, for a trifling rent only, reserved unto their successors,
had had some part of this good man's spirit; for then, the Church of Christ had
not been left so naked as it is.

But you may remember the Canon, that I quoted to you before, which says, If
any Bishop do grant the Tithes, Cause. 16. qu. 7. c. 3. Oreg. 7. Si quis a modo
Episcopus.
or other possessions of the Church to any lay man, let him be numbered among
the greatest Heretics, and let his name be like Demas, a lover of this world,
more than a lover of God. And I hope, that by this, which I have already
showed, it is apparent unto you, and to all men, that will not be blind, having
their eyes open, and grope with the Sodomites for the wall at noonday, The
Donations of good and holy men, whether houses, lands, or goods, which they
have freely dedicated, and given to God, to perpetuate the Service, and to
promote the Religion of Jesus Christ, ought not by any means to be, either by
the Bishop alienated, or by his children, or any other person received, and
taken away from the Church contrary to the will and intention of the Donor. And
I say here, in the name of God, That no Bishop can pass it away, nor any lay
person can receive it and detain it from the Church without sin, and committing
a most horrible Sacrilege in the sight of God: And if men did but remember
what the Apostle says, That, a Testament, Heb. 9.17.
or a man's last Will, is of force and inviolable after men are dead, and that
the very Gentiles and Heathens thought it a piaculum, and a heinous offense, to
infringe and alter a man's last Will and Testament. I wonder, why these men's
Wills, that gave their own goods (and it was lawful for them to do, what they
would with their own) to God, and to maintain Gods Service, should not be of
force, and stand unalterable, but that men will, so fearlesly break them, and
so presumptuously take away the things that they bequeathed unto God;
especially if men considered, the form and style of their Donation, which I
find thus expressed in sundry Copies. These things being lawfully our own, we
offer and give to God, for the maintenance of his Service; from whom, Capit.
Car. l. 6. cap. 285.
if any man presume to take them away, (which we hope no man will attempt to
do) but if any man shall do, Let his account be without favor, and his
judgment without mercy in the last Day, when he comes to receive his doom,
which is due for his Sacrilege, which he has committed against that our Lord
and God, unto whom we have given and dedicated the same.

For this form and manner of their Dedication, should, in my judgment, make
their hairs to stand on end, and their hearts to tremble, for fear of this
judgment, when they go about to take away the lands, houses, and possessions
of the Church (which were offered for the service of God) and which I would not
do, for all the World, and which I think none durst do, but such as have their
hearts heardened above Pharaohs heart.

But here, I must tell you; How that after I came to London, to put this
Treatise into the P^ess, I lighted upon a Pamphlet not only foolish, but most
wicked, defending the most horrible sin of Sacrilege to be no sin at all: and
the selling and taking away of the Church Lands to be no offense at all; which
Pamphlet had I met it at Kilkenny, I would have done, as our Savior did at
Jerusalem, made a scourge to Whip the publisher of it C. Burg^s out of the
Church of Christ, and after the detecting of his lies and errors, condemn his
blaphemous scriblings into the fire; for, having read his Pamphlet all over, I
find that all his malice is against the Bishops, and the flood of poison, that
he spitteth out of his mouth, is to none other end, then like Noah's deluge, to
drown their lands, and none else: For in page 23. he prosecuteth the point at
large, that Parochial Glebes, that is, the lands given to the Presbyterians,
that were the limbs of the false Prophet, and settled in all the fattest livings
of England, far better then the poor Bishop-pricks, must neither be sold nor
alienated from them, and their Churches, by any means; so that had the land of
the Bishops been given to these prating Presbyterians, it had been piacular to
take it from them: And though he writes much and quotes Authors, to make men
think that he is a Scholar, yet, this is the substance of his whole book,
divided into these two parts.

The whole sum and substance of Dr. Burges his book.
1. Cathedral, or Episcopal, Lands are not of Divine right, a page 19. ad page
44. But Presbyterian or Parochial lands are of Divine right, page 23. that
therefore,

2. It is no Sacrilege, nor sin to purchase Cathedral and Episcopal lands, a
page 44. ad 58. But the Parochial lands, and Presbyterian Glebes, being of
Divine right, it must needs be Sacrilege, And a very heinous sin to sell or
alien their lands from them, page 23.

Now consider these things, thus plainly and briefly set forth, and tell me if
any man, that has his eyes open, will believe this blind fellow, that like a
mad man lays about him, to spit out all his malice against the Bishops. When
as the Scripture speaks, Malitia ejus excoecavit eum: His envy and malice
against the Bishops have made him stark blind. But as S. Jerome thought
Helvidius not worthy to be answered, so I would answer all the extravagant
passages of this Parochial Presbyter Burg^s, were it not for fear, to make him
proud, to think himself worthy to be answered by a Bishop; when as, in very
deed, I think not his book worthy to be looked on, when as out of his own words
and quotations, without any other help, I could easily answer and confute his
whole book.

And so I have sufficiently showed the haynousness of this sin.

And therefore, let me advise all Sacrilegious persons, to take heed how they
dally with God, and take up from such desperate and irreligious fellows a
security to the enchantment of their souls, in this so heinous and so horrible
an impiety, and to fill their houses and to enrich their children with those
goods, that were Sanctified for Gods service, and are execrable unto them, and
do make them ^ikewise execrable, and all the whole Host of Israel, the whole
Church of God, to be troubled, as the execrable goods of A^han did.

And let not us, that are Gods Ministers, and are commanded to give you warning
of your sins, sub poena maledictionis, as the Prophet shows, after so many
Sermons and Summons, (...). 3.18.
Tam Verbis quam Scriptis, both in words and writings, find your hearts still
obdurate, and as hard as the nether Millstone, lest we be forced, in the
bitterness of our souls, to cry out with the Prophet, In vacuum laboravimus, we
have spent our strength in vain, and be so compelled, with grieved spirits to
send you to Gods judgment seat, carbone not abiles atro, marked by a black
coal, with this inscription upon your foreheads, Noluerunt incantari, They
would not be charmed, but made a mock of all that we said.

But I would have these greedy snatchers of those lands and houses, that
instead of making their children happy, will bring an inevitable curse upon
themselves and their Posterity, to weigh well what Fulgentius, a Holy Bishop,
says upon these words of John the Baptist, Matthew. 3. To which purpose S.
August. says in like manner, Si in ignem mittitur qui non dedit rem
propropriam; Vbi mittendus est qui invasit alienam? Vere seipsum vili pendit,
qui pro re aliena animam suam perdit. Aug. ad Maced. Ep. 54.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the
fire; Si sterilitas in ignem mittitur, rapacitas quid meretur? and, si semper
ardebit, qui sua non dedit, quid recipiet qui aliena tulit? If sterility be
thrown in the fire, what shall become of rapacity; and if he shall endure
everlasting burning, that would not give his own goods, what punishment shall
he receive that takes away another man's goods, and especially the goods of
God? And to weigh likewise what Rabanus Maurus, another Holy man, commenteth
upon the words of Christ, I was hungry and you gave me not to eat, and,
amplying our doings, says, Esurivi, and pauxillum panis quod restabat,
abstulisti: Nudus fui, and vilem chlamidem and vestem quam ^abui, abripuisti:
Et unicam vineam habui and tu illam diripuisti: I was naked, and that simple
garment that I had, you have taken from me; and I had but one Ewe, and one only
Vineyard, and like Ahab you have deprived me of it; And what reward shall they
have for these things? I fear, their doom will be too heavy, if, with Zacheus,
they make not Restitution, of that, which with Ahab, they have most unjustly
taken possession of; for, as S. Augustine truly says, Si res aliena, propter
quam peccatum est, reddi potest and non redditur, poenitentia simulatur, sed
non agitur; nam si veraciter agitur, non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituaturi
oblatum; id est, cum restitui potest: If that which we have taken away from
another, whereby we have sinned, may be restored, and is not; the repentance is
not done, but dissembled: because that if it be truly done, the sin is
remitted; and the sin is never remitted, Aug. quo suprae Ep. 54.
unless that which is taken away, be restored, that is, as I said, when
Restitution may be made.

But, though it be an Axiom infallible, not liable to controulment, and a truth
as clear as the Sun, that Impropriations of Tithes, and the alienation of
Lands, Houses, and other things that were given to God, and for the service of
God, ought not to be done, nor cannot be enjoyed, as their own proper goods, by
any lay person, be he Lord, Knight, or what you will, contrary to the mind and
will of the donors, without committing that horrible sin of Sacrilege; yet you
must not so understand me, How the tithes, lands, and houses of the Church may
be let and set to lay persons.
as if I conceived, that Ministers might not set their Tithes, or let their
Lands, and their Livings to any lay-person: or that it must be generally
understood, that no commerce or bargain can be made, of the goods and
endowments of the Church; because that, as God is willing we should use those
goods always for our benefit; so he will be as graciously pleased, we shall
forgo them and exchange them, when we find it for our benefit, and the benefit
of his Church and Service, which in all our bargains and commerce, we ought
chiefly to regard: because, we are but Gods Stewards, for the service of his
Church; and so, whatsoever our Religion and our Ancestors have honored God
withal, we must employ, not so much for our own best advantage, as for that,
which makes most for Gods honor.

And therefore, we that are instructed with the inheritance of the Church and
portion of Jesus Christ, must not make such bargains for our Master, as Glaucus
made for himself, when he changed his golden Armor for brazen furniture;
neither must we deal with the Church of Christ, as Rehoboam did with the Temple
of Solomon, 1 Reg. 14.26, 27.
when he took away all the shields of gold, and made in their steed shields of
brass: but what bargain or covenant soever we make, without sin, for the
greater glory unto God, and gr^^^ter good unto the Church, we hold it good,
with whomsoever the same is made.

CHAP. XIX.
That it is the duty of all Christian Kings and Princes, to do their best
endeavors, to have all the Impropriations restored to their former Institution;
to hinder the taking away, and the alienation of the Lands, Houses, and other
the Religious Donations of our Ancestors from the Church of Christ; and to
suppress and root out all the Unjust and Covetous subtle customs and frauds,
that are so generally used, and are so derogatory to the service of God; from
amongst the people, and especially from this Kingdom of Ireland, where most
corruption is used, and most need of Instruction unto the people.

THus you have heard, how that Cathedrals and other Parochial Churches should
be built and beautified for the Honor of God, Godly Bishops and Preachers
should be placed in them for the Service of God; and then the allowance, that
God has appointed, should be given and yielded unto them, for their
maintenance; And now, because the Lands, Houses, Tithes, and Hereditaments of
the Church, which the Lord God has granted, and the godly Emperors, pious
Kings, and zealous Professors have given and dedicate for Gods service, are in
these dismal days, snatched away by the hands of Ha^ksters, and haters of
Religion, and alienated by the Soldiers, that divide Christ his garments
amongst them, from the true servants and Ministers of Christ, who should be
very thankful unto these Soldiers, as they often say, that we have any thing
left unto us. For, as the Orator tells the grave Senators of Rome of an
audacious fellow called Fimbria, that stabbed Quintus Scaevola, an honest man,
Cicero in Orat. pro Roscio Amerino.
at the funerals of Caius Marius; and then boasted of the great favor that he
showed to him, Quod non totum telum in ejus corpore absconderat; That he had
not thrust his dagger wholly to the Hilt, into his body, but only gave him a
slight stab, that was sufficient to kill him; So these brood of Fimbria, having
seized upon a great part of the Houses, Lands, and Patrimony of the Church, and
still detayning them, Per fas and nefas, in their own hands; do labor to get
more, and think the favor that they have done us deserves no small thanks,
that they brought or left to us what we have, and have not deprived us of all
together.

Therefore, Covetousness, Injustice, and the love of this World, being so
deeply grounded and settled in the hearts of our Demas's, and this Epidemical
disease of taking and detaining the Churches right, being, as one says, just
like the King's Evil, which no Physician but the King himself, will serve to
heal it; Our address must be unto his Majesty, to supplicate, that he would be
graciously pleased to interpose his Royal Command, to stop the current of these
intruders into Gods right, and to cause the Restitution of the Church-goods to
be made unto the Church.

And among the rest of the injuries done by these Military I speak of the
Soldiers; because either the Soldiers of that Parliament, or of Crumwel, or
his Majesty, have almost all the Kingdom of Ireland; and do fill the House of
Lords, and the House of Commons, and are the chief men in every place; So that
nothing can be done either in Parliament City, or Country, but what they will
have done; because they are the Major Party, and so can Out-vote all the rest;
and therefore Ireland, being now Regnum Militum; This my discourse cannot be,
Gratum opus agricolis, but Ingratum militibus, which is all one, to me, if you
consider what I say, in the latter end of this book: and that I fear not what
they say of me, Quia nec melior sum si laudeverint, nec deterior si
vituperaverint.
men to the Church of God; there is one great Abuse, which is generally used
and practiced here in Ireland, by the rich proprietors and possessors of Lands
and Town-ships, to the abundant detriment and loss of the Ministers, and to the
hazard and danger, if not the destruction, of many, I know not how many, souls;
and that is, when the Gentleman proprietor, that holds all or most of the
Parish in his own hands, if he be offended with his Minister and cannot have
the Tithes, as he pleases himself, he can make the Rectory or Vicaridge, that
might be well worth fifty or sixty pounds per annum, to be scarce worth ten
pound a year, or nothing; for he will leave all his ground unplowed, and turn
it to pasture, and so bring a dearth, through the scarcity of Corn in the
Commonwealth, and then he will buy young Bullocks, and fills his Lands with dry
Cattle, whereof their Religious Lawyers, (of whom Dr. Gardener Dr. Gardener in
his Scourge of Sacrilege.
says; that he never heard yet, at any hand, of any good, that they have
Prophesied unto the Church) tells them, their custom will preserve them, from
the payment of any Tithes; and so they bring a spiritual dearth, and a famine
of Gods Word, unto the rest of the poor parishioners, when for want of
sufficient maintenance, they shall want a sufficient Minister, that is able to
give them any Instruction; because, as the Poet says, -- Nulla illis captetur
gloria, Ovid. trist. lib. 5.
quaeque
Ingenii stimulos subdere fama solet.


And the benefit, that these worldlings reap, by this lawless, impious, and
wicked Custom, to pay no Tithes for their dry Bullocks, nor any thing to God
for the fruits of their ground, is one main reason why the Minister's part of
six or seven Parishes, does scarce amount to twenty pounds per annum, as I have
formerly showed in my Remonstrance to his Majesty: and I conceive it likewise,
to be a special Reason, why the poor simple Irish Papists have so many Popish
Priests amongst them, for want of Protestant Priests; for, that want of
sufficient maintenance, does cause them to leave their Parishes and charge
unlooked unto, and their flock untaught; and then the superstitious mendicant
Friar comes to instruct, and lead the silly ignorant Irish, as he pleases.

And truly, to say what I think, though I am far enough from Popery, and from
all Popish errors, and superstitions, as, I hope, all the Sermons that I have
Preached, and the Books that I have Printed, can bear witness unto the World;
yet, as Alexander Severus told an unruly Victualler, that would not suffer the
Christians to erect a Church, in a place which he thought more convenient and
fit for him to sell Ale in it, That it was better, God should be served in any
place, and in any way, then that he should have his way, and God not served in
any place, nor any way, as I showed to you before; so I conceive it better to
be Superstitious then Profane, better to be a Papist then an Atheist, and
better to have a Popish Priest, to give some light to them, that sit in
darkness, and some knowledge of Christ, to them that otherwise would know
nothing, then not to have any Priest at all.

And therefore, if you would abandon Popery, and suppress all popish Priests
out of Ireland, which is my heart's desire; then I desire withal, that this,
and all other lewd and wicked customs be taken away; the lands, houses, and
possessions of the Church be restored; and all impropriations reduced to their
first institution, that so a sufficient Ministry may be maintained here in
Ireland, as they are in England; and that the poor ignorant Irish may have
honest and able Protestant Ministers, And to that end the natives, according to
the institution of the College, should be placed in the College at Dublin;
the which thing hitherto, they say, has been too much neglected.
and, as many as may be, of their own Nation, to live amongst them, and to
instruct them: and then God will bless this Nation, and the true Protestant
Religion will prosper and flourish, and both we and they shall live happily
together; which otherwise will very hardly, if ever, come to pass: Because that
now, we have not our knowledge by inspiration, we cannot in an instant,
understand and speak all Tongues, and we cannot work miracles; but we must buy
many Books to learn Languages, and to get knowledge, which the Apostles had
without any Book; and we must spend our time, in reading, writing, studying,
and praying to God to assist us, and to enable us, to instruct our people: and
all this cannot be done without maintenance and means to do it. And therefore,
where there is no sufficient maintenance, there can be no sufficient Ministry,
no instructing of the people, no true serving of God, as it ought to be.

And what a heap of unspeakable mischiefs and miseries do these evil customs,
impropriations, and taking away the land, houses, and possessions of the
Church, bring amongst us?

And therefore, seeing the Soldiers, Captains, and others of the Military
rank, that have gotten the lands of the Irish Rebels (which for their service,
they have justly deserved) have likewise unjustly seized upon Gods part, and
the lands, houses, and possessions of the Church, and are as fast wedded to
these evils, as to their wives; so that we can more easily overcome Golias, or
pull the club out of Hercules hands, than our lands out of these men's fingers:
It is high time, and I hope no good man will be offended with us for it, to
implore, and most humbly to beg and beseech, the help and assistance of our
Most gracious King, to redress these intolerable abuses, and to drive away this
three-headed Cerberus, or rather this many-headed Hidra, the manifold
Sacrilege, and the great oppression of the Church of Christ that is used in
these days, and especially in this Kingdom of Ireland at this time. For I call
Heaven and Earth to witness, that ever since the monstrous, undutiful, and
unnatural murder, of that Most glorious Martyr, your Majesty's most dear
Father, my Most gracious Master, Charles the First, until the happy Arrival of
your gracious Majesty, I lived more quietly and contentedly, when all my
Ecclesiastical Preferments were taken from me, and not 20 pound per annum left
me in all the world to maintain me, than now I do; when by your gracious
goodness, all the Church Rights and Inheritances, are commanded unresistably
to be yielded unto us: for your Majesty may be well assured, that they which,
neither for love of Gods favor, nor fear of his vengeance, will observe Gods
Commandments, will never regard to obey your commandments. And therefore many
of our Military men, Colonels, Captains, and others that fought for the
Long-Parliament and Crumwell, do, with some of your Commanders, that herein
imitate them, divide and tear the Revenues, and Garment of the Church, the
Spouse of Christ, worse than the Soldiers of Pilate did with the Coat of
Christ. And therefore now in mine old age, well-nigh 80. years, I am forced to
bestow all my labor, and take pains, and many journeys, which an old man can
hardly do, and spend all my means in Law, (which were better bestowed upon the
poor) to wring the Church-means out of their hands, or suffer the same, through
my remisness, to be swallowed down into the belly of Hell; and leave my self to
be liable to that great account, which I must render for my neglect of doing
mine uttermost endeavor to recover it, at the last Day; the which wonderful
straight that I am put to, does wonderfully discontent and trouble me
continually: which makes me oftentimes to think, that I were better to resign
my Bishopric, if I knew it were no offense to God, to some younger man, that
could better combat with these Golias's, than for me to agonize, as I do, to
recover my right, who may well cry out with the Poet, -- Impar congressus
Achilli.

But the nearness of the time, that I must render mine account of my
Stewardship unto God, has strengthened me, to write this Treatise against
Sacrilege, and especially, the Sacrilege of this Climate, and more
particularly of this Diocese of Ossory, where the Irish behind me, the English
before me, the Citizens of the Corporation of Kilkeny, and Crumwells Captains
on the one hand, and your Majesty's faithful Soldiers and Subjects in Anno
1649. on the other hand, do all seem to me, to become faithless unto Christ,
and to fight against God, to take away the Inheritance of his Church from us,
that are his weak servants. And it has imboldned me likewise, most humbly to
supplicate your Majesty, to take notice of these wrongs done unto us, which you
do not know; and to assist me, to gain that right unto the Church, which I
without your Majesty's assistance, cannot do; and to pardon me for my boldness,
and whatsoever else I have done amiss.

CHAP. XX.
The Author's supplication to Jesus Christ, that he would arise and maintain
his own cause, which we his weak servants cannot do, against so many rich,
powerful, and many-friended adversaries of his Church.

ANd now, sweet Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, having made mine humble address
according to my bounden duty, to thine Anointed, thy Livetenant, and my Sacred
Sovereign, to assist thy servants, to maintain thy right, Thy right, I say, as
thou art a Priest, and a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec; and I
know, that his Majesty, being the son of so pious, and so gracious a Father, as
is now so glorious with thee in Heaven, will stretch forth his Royal hand, as
thou did unto S. Peter, to preserve us from sinking: I must now, with fear
and reverence, and in all humility, crave leave, to return my speech unto thy
Self; and as thou have commanded us, to hear thy voice, so thou have promised,
to hear our prayers: And therefore I pray thee let not my Lord be angry, but
suffer thy servant to speak unto thee: And we confess, that we are not worthy
to sit with the dogs of thy flock; yet thou have called us, to a most high and
honorable place, to be thine Ambassadors to thy chosen people, and unto Kings
and Princes, to be thy Stewards, and the Dispensers of thy manifold graces. And
according to our places, thou have commanded us to behave and carry our selves,
as may be most agreeable for thine Honor; to preach thy word, to relieve the
poor, to keep hospitality, to build thine House, and to do other the like works
of piety and charity.

Matthew. 21 33. Matthew. 25 14. Luke 19 13.
And we know, that thou art not like Pharaoh, a cruel Master, that takes away
the straw, and yet will require the whole tale of bricks; for thou did
deliver thy Vineyard unto the Husbandmen, before thou did expect the fruits
of it; and thou gave thy Talents unto thy servants, before thou did look
for any gain from them.

But now, O Lord God, our straw is kept from us, our vineyard is taken away, It
was all taken from us, and now still much is detained from us.
and we have scarce any one talent left unto us; for, O God, the Heathen have
come into thine Inheritance, and as of old they made Jerusalem, so, now of
late, they have made the famous Church of S. Keny, and many other Churches in
Ireland, an heap of stones; the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to
be meat unto the fowls of the air, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts
of the field. And as the Prophet David said, The Tabernacles of the Edomites,
and Ismaelites, the Moabites and the Hagareus, Gebal and Ammon, and Amalec, the
Philistines, with them that dwell at Tire; Assure also is joined with them, and
have helped the children of Lot to devour Jacob, and to lay waste his dwelling
place: So, the Independents, the Arminians, the Brownists, the Anabaptists,
Luther and Calvin, and Cartwright, the Hugonots, with them that are called
Quakers, and the Jesuits also, have joined with them, and have, to the
uttermost of their power, helped our Grand Opposers the Presbyterians, if not
to devour the seed of Jacob, to destroy the Church, and thy Service, (which
they now deny to desire to do it) yet I am sure, to be confederate against
thee, and to lay waste thy dwelling place, to imagine craftily against thy
people, the true Royalists; and to take counsel against the secret ones, the
Bishops, and Governors of the Church: 1 Reg. 19.10.
And as Elias said of the children of Israel, They have forsaken thy Covenant,
they have thrown down thine Altars, and they have killed thy Prophets; So I may
say of the children of Belial, they have forsaken the true Protestant Religion,
they threw down thy Churches, they killed many of thy servants; and they said,
Come, and let us root out the Bishops, that they be no more a people, and that
the name of Episcopacy may be no more in remembrance; and to that end, at the
Prophet says, They brake down all our carved and curious works, with axes and
hammers; they have set fire upon thy holy places, and have defiled the dwelling
place of thy Name, Psalm. 74.7, 8.
even to the ground: Yea, and they said in their hearts, Let us make havoc of
them altogether; And by taking away all our lands, houses, Psalm. 80.5
and possessions, they fed us with the bread of tears, and gave us
plenteousness of tears to drink: and so they made us a very strife unto our
neighbors, and our enemies laughed us to scorn, when they saw us made as the
filth of the world, 1 Cor. 4.13.
and as the offscouring of all things.

And though thou have brought unto us, a most gracious King, to our unspeakable
joy and comfort; yet to this very day, they and their associates, and that,
which troubles us most of all, they that come in thy Name, and under pretense
of thy Service, and for service done unto thee, and thy Church, do, by the
example of those thine enemies, and the haters of thy Church, either through
ignorance or covetousness, labor by all means, and with great friends, to
blind the eyes of our good King, that he should not understand the truth of the
Churches Right; that so they might the easier and the sooner, carry away the
lands, houses, and possessions of the Church from thee, and from thy servants,
whereby, they shall be made invalid and unable, to discharge the duties, and
the works, that thou requirest at their hands, if thou do not help them to
their instruments and means wherewith they may do their work.

And therefore, because we are weak and friendless, and far unable to deal, and
to prevail against so many powerful, armed men, we lift up our eyes and hands
to thee, O Lord God, and pray thee, to arise and maintain thine own Cause, and
let not man have the upper-hand; for they have rebelled against thee, and have
robbed thee, as the Prophet testifies, and be not angry with us for ever; but
be gracious unto thy servants, and lay not that to our charge, which we cannot
help, when we have done our very best to preserve thy Right, and to uphold thy
Service; but let the sin lie upon the heads of them, that commit it. Hear us, O
Lord our God, and grant our request, for Jesus Christ's sake, thy dear Son, and
our only Savior; to whom with thee, and the Holy Spirit, our blessed
Comforter, be all Glory and Dominion, and Thanksgiving, for ever and ever. Amen.

Jehovae Liberatori.
TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
I Have been long ashamed to see the Egyptian locusts, the emissaries of
Apollyon, and the sons of perdition, under the name of Christ, so much to abuse
His sacred truth, as to send forth so impudently, and most ignorantly, such
lying Pamphlets; so stuffed with Treason, to animate Rebellion, and to poison
the dutiful affections, and the obliged loyalty of Your Majesty's seduced
Subjects; and seeing we ought not to be sleeping, when the Traitors are
betraying our Master, I have been not a little grieved to see so many able men,
the faithful servants of Christ, and most loyal to Your Majesty, either
overawed with fear, or distempered with their calamities, or, I know not for
what else, to be so long silent from publishing the necessity of obedience, and
the abomination of Rebellion, in this time of need; when the tongue and pen of
the Divine, should as well strengthen the weak hands of faithful subjects, as
the Sword and Musket of the Soldier, should weaken the strength of faithless
Rebels: Therefore, not presuming of mine ability to equalize my brethren, but
as conscious of my fidelity both to God and to Your Majesty, as in my younger
years I Non sine meo magno malo.
fearlesly published The resolution of Pilate, so in my latter age, though as
much perplexed and persecuted as any man, driven out of all my fortunes in
Ireland, hunted out of my house and poor family in England; and (after I had
been causelessly imprisoned, and most barbarously handled) then threatened beyond
measure; yet I resolvedly set forth this Tract of The Grand Rebellion: and
though it be plain, without curiosity, -- Qualem decet exulis esse: Yet I do it
in all truth and sincerity, without any sinister aspect: for, my witness is in
Heaven, I had rather have all the estate I have, plundered and pillaged; my wife
and children left desolate, and destitute of all relief; and my self deprived
of liberty and life by the Rebels, for speaking truth; in defense of whom my
conscience knows to be in the right; than to have all the praise and
preferment that either People, Parliament, or Pope, can heap upon me, for
sewing pillowes under their elbows; and with idle distinctions, false
interpretations, and wicked applications of holy Writ, hypocritically to
flatter, and most seditiously to instigate the discontented and seduced
spirits, and others of most desperate fortunes, to rebel against the Lord's
anointed. I presume to present the same into Your sacred hands. God Almighty,
which delivers your Majesty from the contradiction of sinners, and subdueth
your people that are under You, bless, protect, and prosper You in all Your
ways, Your Royal Queen, and all Your Royal Progeny. Thus prays

Your Majesty's most loyally-devoted Subject, and most faithfully-obliged
servant, Gryffith Ossory.

(...) THE GRAND REBELLION.
PSALM. 106.16. Aemulati sunt Mosen in Castris, Aaron sanctum Domini.


CHAP. I.
Shows, who these Rebels were; how much they were obliged to their
Governors; and yet how ungratefully they rebelled against them.

I Am here in this Treatise to show unto you a Monster, more hideous and
monstrous than any of those that are described either by the Greek or Latin
Poets; and more noisome and destructive to humane kind, then any of those that
the hottest Regions of Africa have ever bred, though this be now most
frequently produced in these colder Climates: The name of it is, Rebellion, an
ugly beast of many-heads, of loathsome aspect, of great antiquity, and as great
vivacity; for the whole world could not subdue it to this very day. And this
Rebellion (the like whereof was never seen from the Creation of the World to
this very time, and I hope shall never be seen hereafter to the day of
Judgment) is fully set down in the 16. of Numbers; The greatness of this sin
of Rebellion, is seen two ways. 1. From the Text. 2. From their punishment.
1. Of the Text 4. Parts of the Text.
and it is briefly repeated in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 106.16. How
great a sin it is, and how odious unto God will appear, if we examine 1. The
particulars of the Text in the 16. verse, and but view 2. The greatness of
their punishment in the next verse.


1. The Text contains four special parts: 1. Qui fuere, who the Rebels were
that did this: 2. Contra quos, against whom they rebelled: 3. Quid fecerunt,
what they did: 4. Vbi fecerunt, where they did it.
And in each of these I will endeavor brevity: for, as the Poet says, Horat.
Cito dicta, Percipiunt dociles animi, retinentque fideles; Few words do best
hold memory, and a short taste does breed the more eager appetite; therefore,
as all the precepts of Christ were 3. Properties of Christ's precepts,
1. Brevia, 2. Levia, 3. Vtilia,
so my desire shall be to do herein.

1. Part, who the Rebels were.
First then, Aemulati sunt, they angered; and who were they? the Prophet
answers, Verse 7. Patres nostri in Aegypto, Our Fathers regarded not thy
wonders in Egypt. And therefore they were

Described by four notions.
1. Their own Contrymen, the Israelites.

2. Of their own Tribe, as was Corah and his companions; and of the Nobility of
Israel, as were Dathan and Abiram, and their adherents.

3. Of their own Religion, such as had received the Oracles of God, and did
profess to serve the same true and ever living God, as the others did.

4. Such as had obtained multa and m^gna, many great favors and benefits; yea,
Beneficia nimis copiosa: and I may say, very precious benefits from them. For
when God sent M^ses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen; these delivered
them from bondage, and brought them forth with silver and gold, and there was
not one feeble person among their Tribes, says the Prophet: And yet these were
the men that rebelled.

1. Of the same Country.
1. They were their own Countrymen, of their own Tribe, the seed of Abraham,
and partakers of the same fortunes; And therefore they should love, and not
hate; they should further, and not hinder; rejoice, and not envy at one
another happiness: for though wicked men of desperate fortunes, care for none
but for themselves, Sibi nati sibi vivunt, sibi moriuntur, sibi damnantur; yet
not only the Heathen Philosophy of Natures Scholars, but also the Divine
verity of Gods elected servants, does teach us, that partem patria, partem
parents vendicant; the love of our Country, and to our Countrymen, should be
such, as rather to spend our selves to relieve them, then by lewd practices to
destroy them; when by our dissolute debauchment, we have destroyed our selves.

2. Of the same Tribe.
2. These Rebels were of their own Tribe, of the Tribe of Levi, and so knit
together indissolubili vinculo, with the indissoluble bond of blood and
fraternity; and therefore they should have remembered the saying of Abraham
their Father, unto his Nephew Lot; Let there be no dissension betwixt thee and
me, for we be brethren: a good Uncle, that would never drive his Nephew out of
his house and home.

And we read, that affinity among the Heathens could not only keep away the
force, and suppress the malice of deadly foes, but also retain pignora juncti
sanguinis, as Julia did Caesar and Pompey; and as the Poet says, Lucan
Pharsal. l. 1.
Vt generos soceris mediae junxere Sabinae. And therefore why should not
consanguinity, and the bond of flesh and blood suppress the envy of friends,
and retain the love of brethren?

But these prove true the old saying, that Fratrum irae inter se inimicissimae,
the wrath of brethren is most deadly: as it appeared, not only in Cain against
Abel, Romulus against Remus, and all his brethren against Joseph; but
especially in Caracalla, that slew his brother Geta in his mothers arms: and
therefore Solomon says, A brother offended is harder to win then a strong
City, Prove. 28.19.
and their contentions are like the bars of a Palace, not easily broken. Nam
ut aqua calefacta, cum ad frigiditatem reducitur frigidissima est For as water
that has been hot, being cold again, is colder then ever it was before; and as
the Adamant, if it be once broken, is shivered into a thousand pieces; so love,
being turned into hatred, and the bond of friendship being once dissolved,
there accreweth nothing but a swift increase of deadly hatred: So it happened
now in the Camp of Israel, that the saying of Saint Bernard is found true,
Omnes amici, Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 33.
and omnes inimici, All of a house, and yet none at peace; all of a kindred,
and yet in mortal hatred.

And as Corah and his companions were so nearly allied unto Moses, of the Tribe
of Lev^; so Dathan and Abiram were men famous in the Congregation, noble Peers,
and very popular men, heads of their families, of the Tribe of Reuben. A subtle
practice of that pestiferous Serpent, to join Simeon and Levi, Clergy and
Laity, in this wicked faction of Rebellion; the one under color of dissembled
sanctity, the other with their power and usurped authority, to seduce the more,
to make the greater breach of obedience. And so it has been always, that we
scarce read of any Rebellion, but some base Priests, the Chaplains of the
Devil, have begot it; and then the Nobles of the people, arripientes ansam,
taking hold of this their desired opportunity, do foster that which they would
have willingly fathered; as, besides this Rebellion of Corah, that of Jack
Cade, in the reign of Henry the sixth; and that of Perkin Warbeck, in the time
of Henry the seventh; and many more that you may find at home, in the lives of
our own Kings, may make this point plain enough. But they should have thought
on what our Savior tells us, that Every Kingdom divided against it self, is
brought to desolation; and every City or House divided against it self, (...),
shall not stand. What a mischief then was it for these men to make such a
division among their own Tribe, and in their own Camp? Nondum tibi defuit
hostis: had they not the Egyptians, and the Canaanites, and the Amalekites, and
enough besides to fight against, but they must raise a civil discord in their own
house? Could not their thoughts be as devout as the Heathen Poet's, which
says, -- Omnibus hosts
Reddite nos populis, civil avertite bellum. Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 1.



And therefore this makes the sin of homebred Rebels the more intolerable,
because they bring such an Ilias malorum, so many sorts of unusual calamities,
and grievous iniquities upon their own brethren.

3. These Rebels were of their own Religion, 3. Of the same Religion.
professing the same faith that the others did: Et religio dicitur a religando,
(says Lactantius;) and therefore this bond should have tied them together
firmer then the former. For if equal manners do most of all bind affections; Et
similitudo morum parit amicitiam, as the Orator teaches: then, hoc magnum est,
hoc mirum, that men should not love those of the same Religion. And if the
profession of the same trades and actions is so forcible, not only to maintain
peace, but also to increase love, and amity, JACOB REX, in Ep. to all Christian
Monarchs.
as we see in all Societies and Corporations of any mechanic craft or handle
work, they do inviolably observe that Maxim of the Civil Law, to give an
interest unto those, qui fovent consimilem causam: so that as birds of the same
feather, they will cluster all in one, and be zealous for the preservation of
them that are of the same craft or society: why then should not the profession
of the same Religion, if not increase affection, yet at least detain men from
dissension?

For, though diversities of Religion, non been convenient, can seldom contain
themselves for any while in the same Kingdom, without Civil distractions,
especially if each party be of a near equal power, which should move all
Governors to do herein, as Hannibal did with his army, that was a mixture of
all Nations, to keep the most s spected under, and rank them so, that they
durst not kick against his Carthaginians: or as Henry the fourth did with the
Britains, to make such Laws, that they were never able to rebel: so should
the discreet Magistrate, not root out a people, that they be no more a Nation,
but so subordinate the furth^st from truth to the best professors, that they
shall never be able any ways to endanger the true Religion; yet where the same
Religion is universally prof^ss^d, excepting small differences in adiaphoral
things, quae non diversificant species, as the Scho^^s speak; it is more then
unnatural for any one to make a Schism, and much more transcendently heinous to
rebel against his Governors. But indeed no sin is so unnatural, no offense so
heinous, but that swelling pride, and discontented natures, will soon
perpetrate; no bonds nor bounds can keep them in; and therefore Corah must
rebel. And ever since in all Societies, even among the Levites, and among the
Priests, the d sordered spirits have rebelled against their Governors, and
fecerunt unitatem contra unitatem; and erecting Altars against Altars, (as the
Fathers speak) they have made confederacies and conspiracies against the truth,
and thereby they have at all times drawn after them many multitudes of ignorant
souls unto perdition: This is no new thing, but a true saying; and therefore
our Savior bids us to Take heed of false Prophets, and of rebellious
spirits; that, as Saint John says, went from us, but were not of us, but are
indeed the poison, and Incediaries, both of Church and Commonwealth.

4. Much obliged for many favors unto their Governors.
4. These Rebels had received many favors and great benefits from their
Governors: for they were delivered e lutulentis manuum operibus, as Saint
Augustine speaks; and, as the Prophet says, They had eased their shoulders
from their burdens, and their hands from making of pots: they had broken the
Rod of their oppressors, and, as Moses tells them, they had separated them from
the rest of the multitude of Israel, Numb. 16.9.
and set them near to God himself, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the
Lord: and therefore the light of nature tells us, that they were most
ungrateful, and as inhumane as the brood of Serpents, that would sting him to
death, which, to preserve his life, would bring him home in his bosom.

And it seems this was the transcendencie of Judas his sin, and that which
grieved our Savior most of all, that he, whom he had called to be one of his
twelve Apostles, whom he had made his Steward and Treasurer of all his wealth,
and for whom he had done more then for thousands of others, should betray him
into the hands of sinners; for, if it had been another (says the Psalmist)
that had done me this dishonor, I could well have born it, but seeing it was
thou my familiar friend, which did eat and drink at my table, it must needs
trouble me: for though in others it might be pardonable, yet in thee it is
intolerable; and therefore of all others he says of Judas, Vae illi homini,
woe be unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it had been better for
him he had never been born, as if his sin were greater then the sin of Annas,
Ca^aphas, or Plate.

But the old saying is most true, Improbus a nullo flectitur obsequio, no
service can satisfy a froward soul, no favor, no benefit, no preferment can
appease the rebellious thoughts of discontented spirits. And therefore
notwithstanding M^ses had done all this for Corah, yet Corah must rebel
against Moses: So many times, though Kings have given great honors unto their
subjects, made them their Peers, their Chamberlains, their Treasurers, and
their servants of nearest place, and greatest trust; And though Aaron, the
High Priest, or Bishop, does impose his hands on others, and admit them into
Sacred Orders above their brethren, to be near the Lord, and bestow all the
preferment they can upon them: yet, with Corah, these unquiet and ungrateful
spirits must rebel against their Governors: For, I think, I may well demand,
Which of all them, that now rebel against their King, have not had either
Grand fathers, Fathers, or themselves promoted to all, or most of their
fortunes and honors, from that Crown which now they would trample under their
feet? Who more against their King, then those, that received most from their
King? Just like Judas, or, here, like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. I could
instance the particulars, but I pass.

So you see, who were the Rebels, most ungrateful, most unworthy men.

CHAP. II.
Shows against whom these men rebelled; that God is the giver of our
Governors; the several offices of Kings and Priests; how they should assist
each other; and how the people labors to destroy them both.

SEcondly, we are to consider, against whom they rebelled; 2. Part, against
whom they rebelled. 2. Points discussed.
and the Text says, Moses and Aaron: and therefore We must discuss 1. Qui
fuere, who they were in regard of their places. 2. Quales fuere, what they were
in regard of their qualities.


1. In regard of their places, we find that these men were 1. The chief
Governors of Gods people. 2. Governors both in temporal, and in spiritual
things. 3. Agreeing, and consenting together in all their Government.


1. They were the prime Governors of the people: Moses the King or Prince, to
rule the people; and Aaron the High Priest to instruct and offer Sacrifice, to
make atonement unto God for the sins of the people; and these have their
authority from God: for though it sometimes happens that Potens, the Ruler,
is not of God, as the Prophet says, Hos. 8.4.
They have reigned, and not by me; and likewise modus assumendi, the manner of
getting authority is not always of God, but sometimes by usurpation, cruelty,
subtlety, or some other sinful means: yet Potestas, the power it self,
whosoever has it, is ever from God: for the Philosopher says, Magistra us
originem, Aristot. P^lit. lib. 1. c 1. Ambros. Ser. 7.
esse a natura ipsa. And Saint Ambrose says, Datus a Deo Magistratus, non modo
malorum coercendorum causa, sed etiam bonorum fovendorum in vera animi pie aete
and honestate, gratia. And others say, the Sun is not more necessary in Heaven,
then the Magistrate is on Earth; for alas, how is it possible for any Society
to live on earth, cum vivitur ex rapto, when men live by rapine, and shall say,
Let our strength be to us the law of justice; therefore God is the giver of our
Governors, and he professes, Per me regnant Reges: And Dan^el told
Nebuchadnezzar, Vide etiam c. 2. v. 37.
That the most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and he gives it to
whomsoever he will: Dan 4.25.

2. These two men were Governors, both in all temporal and in all spiritual
things; as Moses in the things that pertained to the Commonwealth, and Aaron
in things pertaining unto God.

And these two sorts of Government are in some sort subordinate each to other,
and yet each one entire in it self, so that the one may not usurp the office of
the other; for

1. The spiritual Priest is to instruct the Magistrates, 2 Governors both in
temporal, and spiritual things.
and to reprove them too, if they do amiss, as they are members of their
charge, and the sheep of their sheepfold: And so we have the examples of
David, reproved by Nathan, Achab by Elias, Herod by John Baptist; and, in the
Primitive Church, Eusebius. l, 6. c. 34. Sozomen. lib. 7.
of Philip the Emperor, repenting at the persuasion of Fabian; and Theodosius
senior, by the writings of S. Ambrose.

2. The temporal Magistrate is to command, and, if they offend, to correct and
condemn the Priests, as they are members of their Commonwealth; Romans 13.
Bernard ad Archiepis. Senonensem.
for Saint Paul says, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: and if
every soul, then the soul of the Priest, as well as the souls of the People; or
otherwise, Quis eum excepit ab universitate? as Saint Bernard says; and so,
Theodoret, Theophylact, and Oecumenius, are of the same mind: And the examples
of Abiathar, deposed by Solomon; and a greater than Solomon, Christ himself,
not refusing the censure of Pilate, though for no fault; Saint Paul appealing
unto Caesar; Caecilian judged by the Delegates of Constantine; Flavianus by
Theodosius, and all the Martyrs and godly Bishops never pleading exemption from
their persecutors, do make this point beyond all question.

3. Governors well agreeing in their government.
3. These two Governors were not only consanguinei, two brethren, for so were
Cain and Abel, to whom totus non sufficit orbis; but they were also
consentanei, like the soul and body of man, of the same sympathy and affection
for the performance of every action: For the Church and Commonwealth, are like
Hippocrates twins, so linked together, as the Ivy intwisteth it self about the
Oak, that the one cannot happily subsist without the other; but, as the
Secretary of nature well observes, That the Marygold opens with the Sun, and
shuts with the shade; even so, when the Sunbeams of peace and prosperity shine
upon the Commonwealth, then by the reflection of those beams, the Church
dilates and spreads it self the better; as you may see in Acts 9.31. and on the
other side, when any Kingdom groaneth under civil dissension, the Church of
Christ must needs suffer persecution. And therefore to this end, that the
Prince and Priest might, as the two feet of a man, help each other to support
the weight of the whole body, and to bear the burden of so great a charge; God
at the first severing of these offices, (which before were united in one
person, as the Poet says of Anius, -- Rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos.
and as the Apostle says of Melchisedech, that he was both a King, and the
Priest of the most high God) did choose two natural brethren to be the
Governors of his people; and that, quod non caret mysterio, Aaron was the
eldest, and yet Moses was the chiefest; to signify, as I take it, that they
should rather help and further each other, then any ways rule and domineer one
over the other; because that although Aaron was the eldest brother, and chief
Priest, yet Moses was the chief Magistrate, and his brother's god, as God
himself does style him; and therefore this should terrorem incutere, and teach
him how to behave himself toward his brother; and though Moses was the chief
Magistrate, yet Aaron was the chief Priest, and his eldest brother, which had
not lost (like Reuben) the prerogative of his birthright: and this should
reverentiam inducere, work in Moses a respect unto his brother's age and place.

And truly there is great reason why these two should do their best, to support
and protect each other; for the government of the people, is, as we may now
see, a very difficult, and miraculous thing, no less then the appeasing of the
Surges of the raging Sea, as the Prophet shows, when he says, That God
rules the rage of the Sea, and the noise of his waves, and the madness of his
people: And the Rod of government is a miraculous Rod, as well that of Aaron,
as that of Moses; for as Moses Rod turned into a Serpent, and the Serpent into
a Rod again; so the Rod of Aaron, of a dry stick, did blossom and bear ripe
Almonds: to show how strange and wonderful a thing it is, either for Prince or
Priest, to rule an unruly multitude, too much for any one of them to do; and
therefore God does always join both of them together, as the Psalmist shows,
Thou leddest thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

And besides, if these two do not assist and protect each other, they shall be
soon suppressed, one after another, of their own people; for if the Prince,
which is to be our Nursing-Father, be once subdued, then presently the Priest
shall be destroyed; and when he has lost his power, our power shall never be
able to do any good: and if the Priest which prays, and preaches, to direct
the King, be trampled under foot, As soon as men have overthrown their Priests,
they will presently labor to destroy their king.
it has been found most certain, that after they have thrown away the Miter,
they have not long retained the Scepter: And therefore King James of ever
blessed memory, of a sharp conception, and sound judgment, was wont to say, No
Bishop, no King; unless you mean such a King as Christ was, when the Jews
crowned him with Thorns, and bowing their knees, said, Hail King of the Jews;
that is, Rex sine Regno, a King without power; like a man of straw, that is
only made to fright away the birds: For the people are always prone to pull
out their necks from the yoke of their obedience, and would soon rebel, if the
Priests did not continually preach, that Every soul should be subject to the
higher powers; as we see now by experience, how apt they are to rebel, when
factious Preachers give them the least encouragement. And therefore as this
rebellion of Corah, so every other, though they begin with one, yet they aim at
both, and strive to overthrow as well the one, as the other: for so my Text
says, They angered Moses in their Tents, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. And
therefore these two should be as Hippocrates twins, or indeed like man and
wife, indissolubly coupled, and coherent together, without distraction; and
cursed be they that strive to make the division: for whom God has thus united
together, no man should put asunder.

And here you may observe the method of their Rebellion, The method of their
Rebellion.
the Text says, Moses and Aaron, yet Moses shows, they began with Aaron: for
when their Rebellion was first discovered, Moses does not say, What have I done
against you? but What is Aaron that you should murmr against him? to show
unto us, that although Moses was the first they aimed at in their intention,
yet he was the last they purposed to overthrow in the execution: Quia
progrediendum a facilioribus, as the Devil began with the woman, the weaker
vessel, that he might the easier overthrow the stronger; so the enemies of God
and his Church do always seek, first to overthrow the Priest, and then
presently they will set upon the Prince.

And therefore as Moses here, Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 2.
so all Magistrates every where should remember, that Jam tua res agitur,
through our sides they may smart, and our wounds may prove dangerous unto them:
because you shall never read they began to shake us, but they fully intended to
root out them: for if the fear of God, and the honor of the King must go
together, as Saint Peter shows; it must needs follow, that they will but
dishonor and disobey their King, that have cast away the fear of God; and it
is most certain, that when they drive God out of their hearts, as the
Gergezites drove Christ out of their Coasts: Little fear of God in them, that
expel their Priests out of their societies.
when they expel Aaron the chief Priest or Bishop out of their Assemblies,
there is but little fear of God before their eyes: for if Seneca, that was but
Nature's Scholar, could tell us, that when we go about any wicked Act, a grave
Cato, or severe Aristides standing by us, would make us blush, and stop the
doing thereof, then certainly the Christian that has any grace, will be
ashamed of his evil intent, and be afraid to offend God, when he sees a man
of God so near him; who does oftentimes ponere obicem,, make a stop to stay the
proceedings of the wicked, that would not seldom be far worse, and do more
unjustice, if it were not for the company and persuasions of the Priest and
Preacher.

The wisdom of the former age.
And therefore the former ages, that feared God more then we, and were wiser to
use this means, that they might fear him, desired, that in their greatest
Assemblies of greatest affairs, as Sessions, Councels, Parliaments, and the
like; the Bishops and Preachers might be as the chief members of their
consultations, as well to witness the uprightness of their actions, as to
direct them in cases of conscience, what is most agreeable to the divine
constitution.

The expulsion of Bishops, the cause of many subs quent mischiefs.
And wheresoever you see the expulsion of these men, and the rejection of these
helps and furtherances unto godliness, you shall find no good success, nor
better fruit of their greatest Counsels, than Sedition, Oppression, Confusion,
and Rebellion: For it is not the least part of the Bishops office, and the duty
of all Preachers, not only in the Pulpit, where what they say is of many men
soon forgotten, but also in all other meetings and assemblies; and in the very
instances, when occasion shall be offered; to do as Christ and his Apostles
did, persuade peace, righteousness, and obedience unto the people; and the
want of their association has been the opening of many gaps, to let in much
injustice and impiety in many places, because their present persuasion may do
as much, if not more good with men, when they are in action, then their
preaching can do when they come to contemplation.

And therefore if any assembly has (like Corah) rebelled against Aaron, and
cast their Bishops and Preachers out of doors, I would advise them to follow
the Counsel of Saint Ambrose in the like case, Quod inconsulto fecerunt,
consultius revocetur, what they have inconsiderately done, to throw them out,
let them more advisedly revoke and call them in again; and they whose breeding
has been in knowledge, and their calling is to do justice, and to teach truth,
will help, and not hinder them to understand the truth, and to proceed in
righteousness.

And so you see, who these men were, in regard of their places.

CHAP. III.
Shows the assured testimonies of a good and lawful Governor, their
qualifications, our duties to them; and wherein our obedience to them
consists.

2. How these Governors were qualified for their places. 2. Points discussed.
1. How they obtained their places. Many u urp their places
SEcondly, we are to consider, Quales fuere, how these men were qualified for
their places; touching which, these two points are to be handled: 1. Modus
assumendi, the mannner of obtaining it. 2. Facultas exequendi, the ability and
fidelity of discharging it.


1. I told you before, that many do obtain their places by sinful means: as
many of the Popes and Roman Emperors, by poisoning and murdering their
Predecessors, have unlawfully stepped the Thrones of Majesty; and so did Henry
the fourth by the unjust deposition of Richard the second: and Richard the
third, by the cruel and secret murdering of his poor innocent Nephews,
attain unto the Crown of England. And in such manner of assuming government,
there is just cause of resisting, and a fair color of rebelling against them;
if you call it a Rebellion, when men discharge their duties in defense of
justice, to oppose usurpation: But neither Moses nor Aaron came so to the
places of their government. For

1. 1. Moses had a twofold testimony to justify his calling.
Moses had a double testimony to approve his calling to be from God.

The first was Internum, to assure himself: And the second was Externum, to
confirm the same unto the people. For

1. When Moses said unto God, Who am I that I should go unto Pharaoh; 1.
Inward.
The Lord answered, I will be with thee, [ad protegendum and dirigendum] says
the gloss: and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee; After
that you have brought the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God upon this
Mountain; and that may assure thee that I have sent thee, and will bring thy
people unto Canaan, as I have brought them into this wilderness.

2. That the people might be assured he was lawfully called, 2. Outward, which
was a threefold sign. 1. Of his Rod.
God gave unto him a threefold sign.

1. Of his Rod: that, being cast to the ground, was turned to a Serpent; but
taken by the tail, it turned to a Rod again: to show, that when the rod of
Government is thrown out of the Magistrates hand, People without government,
like Serpents.
the people are like the brood of Serpents, a malicious, and a viperous
generation; but being taken into the hand of government, they prove a royal,
and a glorious Nation.

2. The hand thrust into his bosom, and taken out, was leprous; 2. Of the Hand
but thrust again and taken out, was made whole: to signify, that a good
Magistrate out of the bosom of the Law, must pull out the hand of justice, both
to wound and to heal, to kill and to make alive, as the Poet says; Parcere
subjectis, and debellare superbos. To defend the innocent, and to punish the
wrong doer.

3. The water taken out of the river, and cast upon t^^ dry ground, 3. Of the
Water.
should be turned into blood, to intimate unto them, that the ^^^^d which was
spilt by Pharaoh, when their children were murdered, and drowned in the
Rivers, should be required, and revenged upon the Egyptians, when, by the
government of Moses, the carcasses of those outrageous oppressors, should be
cast out of the Red Sea, and laid upon the dry ground. Thus Moses showed that
he was lawfully called.

2. For Aaron, 2. Aarons calling justified. Heb. 5.
the Apostle makes him the pattern of all lawful entrance into this Calling,
when he says, that No man takes this honor upon him, but he that is called
as Aaron was: and Moses manifested the lawfulness of his calling unto all
Israel, when according to the number of their twelve Tribes, he caused 12. Rods
to be put in the Tabernacle of witness; and of all them the Rod of Aaron only,
which was for the Tribe of Levi, was budded and brought forth buds, and bloomed
blossoms, and yielded Almonds. Numb. 17.8.
And so it was apparent to all Israel, that these men came lawfully to their
government.

2. For their ability and fidelity to discharge their places, 2. Their
qualifications for their places.
the malice of their adversaries could not charge them with any omission; they
do not say they have governed amiss, but they would fain govern with them.
And, to make this more apparent;

1. The Spirit of God testifies of Moses, 1. Of the abilities of Moses.
that He was faithful in all Gods house; and in that respect called the man of
God, the servant of God, whose whole care was for his Master: and for the
sweetness of his disposition, he is said to be a very meek man, above all the
men that were upon the earth: for his love to his people, Tertullian makes him
the figure of Christ, Tertul. de fug^ in persecut.
Cum adhuc Christo n^n revelato, in se figurato, ait, Si perdis hunc populum
and me pariter cum eo disperde; for his zeal of Gods honor he was most
fervent, and therefore severe in punishing the worshippers of the golden Calfe:
and for his just^ e and uprightness, he wronged no man; for his intellectuals
he was exceeding wise, and learned in all the learning of the Egyptians.

2. Of the abilities of Aaron.
2. For Aaron, how sit he was to be a Priest, will appear, if you consider those
two virtues that are the most requisite for the Priesthood, as Moses shows
when he prays. Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim be upon the man of thy mercy,
that is, omitting all other interpretations, 1. His ability to teach.
1. Ability to teach. Malach. ^ Tim. 3.2.
2. Sanctity of life.
For,

1. The Priests lips must preserve knowledge; he must be apt to teach, and si
Sacerdos est, sciat legem Dei; si ignorant legem, ipse se arguit non esse
sacerdotem Domini: Hieron. in Haggai 2. and Aug. de doctr. Christ. l 4. c. 16.
But God himself says, that he knew Aaron was an eloquent man, and could speak
well, and he promised unto Moses, that He would be with his mouth, to teach him
what he should say: and therefore I know not who can say any thing against him
herein, when God says, he can do it so well, and ingageth himself that he will
help him.

3. His uprightness of life.
2. For the integrity of his life, I need not go further then my Text, when as
the Prophet calls him The Saint of the Lord; that is, not only Sanctificatum
ad Sacerdotium; but also a holy, just, and godly man, in respect of the
innnocency of his life.

And so you have seen the persons described, against whom these Rebels have
rebelled: They were the prime Governors of Gods people, and such Governors as
the like, for all kind of goodness and excellencies, could not be found on
earth.

Therefore these Rebels ought to have obeyed them, though for nothing else, but
because they were their Governors; for the Apostle tells us plainly, that
Necesse est subjici, we must needs be subject; not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake: wherein you see a double necessity of obeying.

A double necessity of obedience. Our obedience consists in two things. 1. In
doing nothing against our Governors. 1. In Thought. Eccles 10 20. 2. In Word.
Exodus 22.28. 3. In Deed. Romans 13.2.
1. Extern^^, Propter iram, for fear of wrath:

2. Internal, Propter conscientiam, for conscience sake: therefore we must
needs obey. And our obedience consists chiefly in these two things: 1. To do
nothing against them. 2. To do all that we can for them.
For,

1. We are forbidden to think an ill thought of them with our hearts: Speak not
evil of the King, (says Solomon) no not in thy thought; for a bird of the air
shall carry the voice, and that which has wings, shall tell the matter:

2. We are charged not to revile them with our tongues; for, Thou shall not
revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of the people.

3. We are restrained from resisting them with our hands; for, Whosoever
resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist,
receive unto themselves damnation.

And therefore the Lord says unto all, Nolite tangere Christos meos; where he
does not say, Non occides, or ne perdas, the worst that can be, but ne tangas,
Many kinds of touches.
the least that may be; touch not, tactu noxio, with any hurtful touch.

And many times we are touched secretly, we know not bow, nor when, nor by
whom, but cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly, and all the people
shall say Amen: and therefore much more cursed be he, that smites his Prince,
his Priest, his Governor.

And sometimes we are touched with violent hands, when with hostile force, and
open arms, our power and authority are withstood: but

Most frequently we are touched with virulent tongues, as they say in Jeremy;
Jerem. 18.18.
Venite, percutiamus eum lingua; and this touch, though it breaks no bones, yet
does it wound and kill the very heart.

But the Lord says in general, Touch not at all; therefore no kind is limited,
no way permitted to touch them.

2. As we are forbidden to do any thing against them, 2. In doing all that we
can do for our Governors. 1. To honor them.
so we are commanded to do all we can for them: for,

Saint Peter says, Fear God, and honor the King; therefore he cannot be said
to fear God, that does not honor his King: And Solomon says, Fear God, my
son, and the King; therefore he cannot be the son of Wisdom, the son of
Solomon, that does not fear the King; that is, fear to wrong him, fear to
offend him, fear to anger him. Romans 1^. Vide J sh. 1.16. Wherein we ought to
obey, and disobey.
And when the Magistrates command us any thing, Saint Paul bids us to obey
them; but if they command any thing against God, then indeed their authority
comes too short. Quia melius est obedire Deo, quam hominibus. Yet in these
things wherein we may not obey, we must not resist; but as Julian's Soldiers
would not sacrifice at his command; Sed timendo potestatem, contemnebant
potestatem, in fearing the power of God, regarded not the power of man; yet
when he led them against his enemies, Subditi erant propter Dominum aeternum,
etiam domino temporali; Aug. in Psalm. 124.
so should we truly distinguish of the things they do command, and take heed we
be not blind Judges herein, and too partial to satisfy our own passionate
affections.

And besides, we are to impart our goods to supply their necessities, 2. To
impart our goods to them.
and for the supportance of their dignities; for our Savior bids us, Give unto
Caesar, what belongs unto Caesar: and Saint Paul expresses the same to be
Tribute; that is, Imposts, Subsidies, Gifts, or the like, call it by what name
you will; we are commanded by God, to the uttermost of our ability, to supply
their occasion and necessities, even as the children are bound to relieve their
parents in their extremities.

And if we see our Moses, our King, or chief Governor, 3. To hazard our lives
for them.
any ways impugned, or like to be oppressed, either by foreign Egyptians, or
domestic Israelites, though they should be Datqan and Abiram, the most prime
and popular men in all the Congregation, that could draw thousands after them,
yet are we bound, to the hazard of our lives, to preserve the Life, Crown, and
Dignity of our Prince; as the subjects of King David hazarded themselves to
save him harmless: And if we will not do this, 2 Samuel 18.3.
then, as Mordecai in the like case said to Hester, Hester 4.14.
If thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall there
enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, but thou and
thy fathers house shall be destroyed. So I say, with King David, the Lord will
help his Anointed, and deliver him from the strivings of his people: and if we
still be silent and do nothing; yet, the Stars in their order shall fight
against Sisera. Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti: and as the Angel of
the Lord said of the Merozites, The punishment of them that will not assist
their Governors.
Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came
not to help Barack against the Canaanites: So let them fear a bitter curse, and
a curse from God, that will not help their Prince against his enemies,
especially such enemies as have least reason to be enemies unto him.

So you see what obedience we owe unto our Governors, and therefore their
rebellion was the more intolerable, that thus spurned against their Magistrates.

CHAP. IV.
Shows the objection of the Rebels to justify their Rebellion: the first
part of it answered, that neither our compulsion to Idolatry, nor any other
injury or tyranny should move us to Rebel.

BUt we must not condemn them before their cause be heard; and therefore Corab
shall have his Counsel, to object what he can for himself: And I find but one
Objection of any moment, though the same consists of many branches. As

The objection of the Rebels.
What if Moses, the King, or chief Governor, being so much affected and
addicted unto Aaron the chief Priest or Bishop, and to others his prime
Council, should be led by evil advice to set up Idolatry, and to play the
Tyrant; to take away the goods, destroy the lives, and bring most of his people
to most miserable conditions? may neither private men, nor the subordinate
Magistrates, nor the prime Nobility of the people, nor any other Court or
Assembly of men, restrain his fury, or remove this mischief from Gods
inheritance, from the Church and Commonwealth? This is that Gordian knot which
is so hard to be untied.

Steven was, with stony arguments, I would soon answer, Two Parts of their
objection.
that 1. In neither of these cases: 2. Neither of these men may do it: and I
could make this good by very good authority; for, Si Magistratus est bonus,
nutritor est tuus; if our Governor be good, he is our Nursing-Father, and we
should receive our nourishment with thanks; and no thanks to us for our
obedience to such a one. And if our Governor be evil, he is so for our
transgression, and we should receive our punishment with patience; and
therefore no resistance: but either obey the good willingly, or endure the
evil patiently.

But to proceed to break this Gordian knot in pieces, and to answer each part
of this Objection:

1. Part of their objection answered. Not to rebel for any cause 1. Not for
our compulsion to Idolatry.
1. I say, that many wicked Kings, and cruel Emperors have set up Idolatry, and
blasphemy against God, and yet I do not find that any of Gods servants did ever
rebel against them; for you know Jeroboam the son of Nebat that made Israel to
sin, did set up golden Calves to be worshipped. Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon
made an Image of gold, and commanded all his people to fall down to worship it.
And what shall I say of those Idolatrous Kings, Achab, Manasses, Julian, and
abundance more, that most impiously compelled their subjects unto Idolatry? and
yet you shall not find that either the faithful Jews under Jeroboam, or the
Prophet Daniel in Babylon, or Elias the man of God in the time of Achab, or any
of all the good Christians that were under Julian, either did themselves, or
persuaded others of the servants of God, at any time, to rebel against those
Idolatrous Kings: for they considered how far the Law of God that prohibiteth
Idolatry, and instigateth us against the allurers and perswaders of us to
Idolatry and blasphemy, Deuteronomy. 13, 6. How far the Law of God extends to resist
Idolaters.
extends; and that is, If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or
thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own
soul, shall entice thee to Idolatry, and to serve strange Gods, thine eye shall
not spare him, neither shall thou have any pity upon him; but for the son to
rise up against the father, the wife against her husband, the servant against
his Lord, the subject against his King, here is not a word; and therefore by
this Law they are not obliged, but rather forbidden to do it; for though the
son is not expressly prohibited to accuse his father, nor the wife her
husband, nor the servant his Lord, nor the subject his King: yet, because Gods
Law is absolute and perfect, to which we must neither add nor detract, nor
construe it as we please; the Divines conceive those things forbidden which are
not expressed; especially in penal precepts, which are to be restrained, and
not extended any further then they are set down, as Tostatus does most truly
conclude: Tostatus in Deuteronomy, 13. q. 3.
And what the son may not do against his father, nor the wife against her
husband, nor the servant against his Lord; that certainly no man may do against
his King, which is the father of his Country, the husband of the Commonwealth,
and the supreme Lord over all his subjects.

And therefore Christ himself that came to fulfill the Law, and knew best how
far it reached, living under the Empire of Tiberius, the Principality of
Herod, and the Government of Pilate, that were all wicked and idolatrous, did
notwithstanding submit himself in all things (which the Law of God forbad him
not) unto them; and though for strength, policy, and power, he might easily
have resisted them, The obedience of all his Apostles and prime Christians to
Idolatrous Governors.
yet did he not only perform all the offices of subjection unto these wicked
Magistrates, and idolatrous Governors, but also commanded all his followers to
do the like; and so we see they did: for the Christians which were at
Jerusalem, when Saint James was martyred, were more in number, and greater in
power, then were the persecutors of that Apostle; and yet for the reverence
they bare to the Law of God, and the example of their Master Christ, interimi
se a paucioribus, quam interimere patiebantur; they rather suffered themselves
to be killed, then they would kill their Persecutors, says St. Clement. And so
the other Apostles, under Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Clement. recognit. lib. 1.
f. 9.
and Domitian, that were bloody Tyrants, cruel Persecutors, and most wicked
Idolaters: and those holy Fathers of the Church, Liberius, Hosius, Athanasius,
Nazianzen, Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierom, Chrysostom, and the rest, for a
thousand years together followed the example of Patience, without resistance;
yea, Quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit numerus; though their power was
great, and their number greater then their adversaries, yet none of them
strugled when he was apprehended, says St. Cyprian. Cyprian ad Demetrium.
Tertul. in Apolog. He that would see more plenty of proof, let him read the
Treatise A persuasion to Loyalty. Where the Author brings the Fathers of all
ages, to confirm this point.
And the reason is rendered by Tertullian, because among the Christians, Occidi
licet, occidere non licet, It was lawful for them to suffer themselves to be
killed, but not to kill; for our Savior had pronounced them blessed, that
would suffer for righteousness sake: and what more righteous, then to suffer
death for not being an Idolater, to die rather then to deny their God?
Therefore they are not to be blessed, which refuse to suffer, because that in
not suffering, but in rising up, and rebelling against their Persecutors, they
are (as the Apostle says) convinced of sin, and in sinning, they acquire unto
themselves damnation, Romans 13.

Besides, if it were lawful to maintain this Doctrine, then the Papists that
believe our Religion to be false, and that we persuading men unto it, do seduce
them from the true service of God, may lawfully rebel against their Prince,
and justify all their traiterous plots: and every heretical Sect that
believes we are Idolaters, (as they do all which oppose the cross in Baptism)
may, without offense, fall into Rebellion against all those Magistrates that
maintain that Idol, as they term it. And this false pretext might be a
dissembled cloak for all Rebels, to say, They do it in defense of their
Religion, because they are afraid to be compelled unto Idolatry: And therefore
the truth is, if any Tyrant, like Julian, should endeavor to compel me unto
the Idols Temple, or to worship my true God with false service I will rather
die then do it; but I may not resist when I am compelled by any means: for so I
find, that Shadrac, Meshao, and Abeduego, Elias, the Prophets, and the
Apostles, and all the Christians of the Primitive Church, did use to do in the
like case.

And I had rather imitate the obedience of those good Saints to those wicked
Kings, that would have compelled them to Idolatry; then the insolency of those
proud Rebels, that under these false pretenses will rebel against their lawful
Princes.

2. Not for any injury that is done unto us.
2. If we may not rebel when we are compelled to Idolatry, much less may we do
it for any other injury: for, what injury can be greater then to be forced to
Idolatry, when as to be robbed of my faith and religion, is more intolerable
then to be spoiled of all my goods and possessions? No injury greater then
compulsion to Idolatry.
And therefore, when Christ suffered as great an injury as could be offered
unto his person, when the soldiers came with Swords and Staves to take him, as
if he had been a thief and a murderer; and Saint Peter then, like a hotheaded
Puritan, was very desirous to revenge this indignity, our Savior reprehended
his rashness, because he knew what the other as yet knew not: that he ought
not to resist when the Magistrate does send to apprehend; and so the Christians
of the Primitive Church were extremely injured by their Persecutors: And the
Catholic faith it self suffered no small oppression under Constantius the
Arian Emperor; and yet that purer age, wherein the better Christians lived,
did not so much as once think of any revenge or resistance, When, and who did
first resist, and what moved them. Baron. ad annum Christi. 350.
says Baronius: But about the year of Christ 350. then first (says he) alas
the Christian Soldiers being swelled with pride, and taken up with a cruel
desire of bearing rule, have conspired against the Christian Emperors; when as
before, ne gregarius quidem miles inveniri quidem posset, qui adversus
Imperatores, licet Ethnicos, and Christianorum quoque persecutores, a partibus
aliquando steterit insurgentium tyrannorum; not a Christian could be found that
stood up against the Heathen Emperors, that were the persecutors of the
Christians.

But to make it yet more plain, that no grievance should move good Christians
to make resistance, no injury should cause them to rebel against their
Magistrates, our savior says, and authoritative, with authority enough, I say
unto you, Matthew. 5.39.
that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek,
turn to him the other also: and if by our Savior's rule we may not resist any
one, what think you that we may resist our King, our Priest, or any other
Magistrate that corrects or reproves us? 1 Pet. 2.19.
And Saint Peter says, This is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully; for what glory is it, if when ye suffer
for your faults, ye take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for
it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God; where you see still, the
rule of piety is none other but suffering, though it be never so unjustly.

How pathetically the Fathers persuade us to suffer, not to resist.
And therefore the Fathers are most plentiful in the explanation and
confirmation of this point; for Tertullian, that was no babe in the School of
Divinity, nor any coward in the Army of Christ, speaking of those faithful
Christians, that suffered no small measure of miseries in his time, says, that
one short night, with a few little torches, might have wrought their
deliverance, and revenged all their wrongs, if it had been lawful for them to
blot out, or expel evil with evil; but God forbid (says he) ut aut igne
humano vindicetur divina secta, Tertul. in Apologe^.
aut doleat pati in quo probatur; that either the divine sect, that is, the
Christian Religion, should be revenged with humane fire; or that it should
grieve us to suffer, wherein we are commended for suffering.

Nazianzen, that for his soundness of judgment, and profoundnesse of
knowledge, Nazian. Orat. 1.
was (...), termed Theologus, the Divine, says, that the fury of Julian that
great Apostata, was repressed only with the tears of the Christians, which
many of them did most plentifully power forth to God, when they had no other
remedy against their Persecutor, Mark that they say, It is unlawful to resist.
because they knew it unlawful for them to use any other means then sufferance;
or else they might (having so much strength as they had) have repelled their
wrongs with violence.

Saint Ambrose says as much; and Prosper in like manner says, Ambros. ep. 33.
The present evils should be suffered, until the promised happiness does
come; the Infidels should be permitted among the faithful, and the plucking of
the tares should be deferred: and let the wicked rage against the godly, as
much as they will; yet the case of the righteous is far better, because that
Quanto acrius impetuntur, tanto gloriosius coronantur; Prosper. in sent. 99.
by how much the more sharply they are tormented, by so much the more
gloriously they shall be crowned.

And Saint Bernard says, If all the world should conspire against me, and
conjure me, that I should plot any thing against the royal Majesty, yet I would
fear God, and would not dare to offend the King, Bernard. Ep. 170.
that is appointed of him over me; because I am not ignorant of the place where
I read, Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God.

And yet he speaks this of King Lodovicus, that offered a monstrous wrong to
all the Clergy, when he robbed them, and took away all their goods without
cause; and which is worse, would hear of no persuasions to make restitution, or
to give them any satisfaction: Gaguin. lib, 6.
as Gaguinus testifies.

Thus the Fathers (whereof I could heap many more) do testify of this truth;
and the Schoolmen tread in the same steps, The Schoolmen of the same
judgment.
and differ not a nails breadth from them herein; For,

Alexander Hales says, wicked and evil men ought to suffer for the fault of
their irrationability, and good men ought to suffer, Propter debitum divinae
ordinationis, for the duty that they owe to the divine ordinance, and the
benefit of their own purgation: Whereupon Saint Ambrose says, Ambrosius in
Romans 13.
If the Prince be good, he does not punish the well-doer, but loves him,
because he does well; but if the Prince be evil, and punishes the well-doer,
he hurts him not, but purges him; Alex. Hales, p. 3. q. 48. memb. 2. art. 1.
de offic. subd. erga Princ.
and therefore he is not a terror to him that does well: but the wicked ought
to fear, because Princes are appointed, that they should punish evil.

Aquinas says, The faith of Christ is the beginning, and the cause of
righteousness, and therefore by the faith of Christ, the order of Justice is
not taken away, but rather settled and strengthened; because (as our Savior
says) It became him to fulfill all righteousness. But the order of justice
does require, that all inferiors should obey their superiors; otherwise the
estate of humane affairs could no ways be preserved: Tham. secunda secundae, q.
104. art. 6.
and therefore by the faith of Christ, the godly and the faithful Christians
are neither exempted, nor excused; but that they are tied, and bound by the Law
of Christ, to obey their secular Princes. Where you see the Christian faith
does not submit the superior to the inferior, contrary to the rule of
justice; neither does it any ways for any cause permit the power of the sword
to any subject to be used against his Prince, because this inordinate power
would turn to the ruin of mankind, and the destruction of all humane affairs;
which can no otherwise be preserved, but through the preservation of the order
of justice.

Indeed many times there may happen some just causes, Wherein we may disobey,
and how.
for which we are not bound to obey the commands of our Magistrates, as when
they command any thing contrary to the commandments of God; and yet then there
can be no cause why we should withstand him that executes the unjust sentence
of our condemnation, or requires the punishment that an unjust malicious
Magistrate, under the color of his power and authority, has most unjustly
laid upon us; because he has (as our Savior says unto Pilate) this ordinary
power from God, which if he does abuse, he is to be refrained, not by the
preparation of arms, and the insurrection of his subjects to make impressions
upon their Sovereign, but by those lawful means which are appointed for them;
that is Petitions unto him, and prayers and tears unto God for him, because
nothing else remains to him that is guilty, or condemned as guilty for any
fault, but to commit his cause to the knowledge of the omnipotent God, and to
expect the judgment of him which is the King of Kings, and the Judge of all
Judges; and will undoubtedly chastize and correct the iniquity of any unjust
sentence, with the severity of eternal justice, Barcl l. 3. c. 10.
as Barclay says.

These testimonies are clear enough: and yet to all these I will add this one
memorable example, Berchetus in explicat. controvers. Galli cana, cap. 7.
which you may read in Berchetus, and Joh. Servinus, which tells us, that in
France, after the great Massacre ut Paris, when the reformed Religion did seem
as it were forsaken, and almost extinguished, a certain King, powerful in
strength, rich in wealth, and terrible for his Ships and navall Force, which
was at enmity, and hatred with the King of France, dispatched a solemn Embassy
and Message unto Henry King of Navarre, and other Protestant Lords, and
commanded his Ambassadors to do their best to set the Protestants against the
Papists, and to arm Henry the Prince of Navarre, which then lived at Bearn,
under the Dominion of the most Christian King, against his Sovereign, the
French King; which thing the Ambassadors endeavored to do with all their art
and skill, An example of a faithful, and excellent subject.
but all in vain; for Henry being a good subject, as it were another David, to
become a most excellent King, would not prevent the day of his Lord; yet the
Ambassadors offered him many ample, fair, and magnificent conditions, among
the rest abundance of money, the sum of three hundred thousand, Aureorum
Scutatorum, French Crowns, which were ready to be told for the preparation of
the war; and for the continuation of the same, there should be paid every
month so much as was necessary: but Henry being a faithful Christian, a good
Prince, a Widower; and though he was displaced from the public government of
the Commonwealth; and for his sake, for the dislike the King bare toward him,
the King had banished many Protestants from his Country, and had killed many
faithful Pastors; yet would not he for all this lift up his hand against the
Lords anointed; but refused their gold, J^h. Servinus pro libertat. Ecclesiae,
and statu Regni, tom. 3. Monarchia. Romans p 202.
rejected their conditions, and dismissed the Ambassadors, as witnesses of his
faith to God, his fidelity and allegiance to his King, and peaceable mind
toward his Country.

Where you see this prudent and good Prince, had rather patiently suffer these
intolerable injuries that were offered, both to himself, to the inferior
Magistrates, and to many other good Christians for his sake, then any ways
undutifully resist the Ordinance of God. And surely this Example is most
acceptable unto God, most wholesome for any Commonwealth, and most honorable
for any subordinate Prince; for I am certain this is the faith of Christ, and
the religion of the true Protestants, Not to offer, but suffer all kind of
injuries, and to render good for evil; and rather with patience, love, and
obedience, to study to gain the favor of their Persecutors, then any ways with
force and arms, to withstand those that God has placed in authority: which
must needs be not only offensive unto God, whose Ordinance they do resist; but
also destructive to the Commonwealth, which can never receive any benefit by
any insurrection against the Prince.

3. Not for any tyranny that shall be offered unto us.
3. Though the King should prove to be Nerone Neronior, worse then Phalaris,
and, degenerating from all humanity, should prove a Tyrant to all his people;
yet his subjects may not rebel against him upon this pretense; for if any
cause should be admitted for which subjects might rebel, that cause would be
always alleged by the Rebels, whenever they did rebel; and whom I and
many others should deem a good Prince and most pious, the Rebels would proclaim
him tyrannical, and idolatrous.

And therefore in such a case, The difference betwixt king and people, to be
determined only by God.
when some men think their King most gracious, and others think him vicious,
some believe him to be good, others believe him to be evil; shall we think it
fit that the disaffected party shall presently with arms decide the
controversy, and not rather have the accused, the accuser, and the witnesses,
before a competent Judge to determine the truth of this question? Surely this
seems more reasonable, and more agreeable unto the rules of justice, when as
The Law condemns no man (much less the King) before his cause be heard.

And seeing such a competent Judge, as can justly determine this controversy
betwixt the King and his People, or rather betwixt one part of his people and
the other, cannot be found under Heaven; therefore to avoid civil wars, and
the effusion of humane and Christian blood, and the prevention of abundance of
other mischiefs; both the Scripture teaches, That we ought not by any means to
resist our kings. Proved,
and the Church believes, and Reason it self shows, and the public safety
requires, that we should transmit this question to be decided only by him,
which is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and will, when he sees good,
bind evil Kings in fetters, and their Nobles with links of iron.

CHAP. V.
Shows, by Scripture, the Doctrine of the Church, humane Reason, and the
Welfare of the weal public, that we ought by no means to rebel. A threefold
power of every Tyrant. Three kinds of tyrannies. The doubtful and dangerous
events of War. Why many men rebel. Jehu's example not to be followed.

1. THe Scripture says, I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, 1 By
the Scriptures.
and that in regard of the oath of God; that is, the oath whereby thou have
sworn before God, and by God, to obey him; Be not hasty to go out of his sight,
that is not, out of his presence, but out of his rule and government, and stand
not in an evil thing; that is, in opposition, or rebellion against thy King,
which must needs be evil, and the worst of all evils to thy King, for He does
whatsoever pleases him; that is, Ecclesiast 8.2, 3, 4.
he has power and authority to do what he pleases. Where the Word of a King
is, there is power; and who may say unto him, What do thou? or, Why do thou
so? And Solomon says, A Greyhound, an Hee-Goat, and a King, Prove. 30.31.
against whom there is no rising up; there ought not to be indeed. I will not
set down what Samuel says, but desire you to read the place, 1 Samuel chapter 8.
verse 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. where you shall see what the King will
do, and what remedy the Prophet prescribes against him, Not to rebel and
take up arms, but to cry unto the Lord that he would help them. And Saint Paul
says, Whosoever resists the power, Romans 13.1.
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. And S. Peter says, that they which despise government, 2
Pet. 2.10.12.
and are not afraid to speak evil of dignities, are presumptuous, and do walk
after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, and as natural brute beasts, that
are made to be taken and destroyed, they speak evil of the things they
understand not, and therefore they shall utterly perish in their own
corruption. And Saint Jude in like manner calls those that despise Dominion,
and speak evil of Dignities, (the very phrase of Saint Peter) filthy dreamers,
Jude 8.10, 11.
that defile the flesh, and therefore shall perish in the gainsaying of Corah.
This is the doctrine of God, therefore Saint Paul exhorts us not to rebel,
nor to speak evil of our Kings, be they what they will; but first of all, 1 Timothy
2.2.
or before all things, to make prayers, and supplications for our Kings, and
for all that are in authority. And I wonder what spirit, except it were the
spirit of hell it self, durst ever presume to answer, and evade such plain and
pregnant places of Scripture, to countenance disobedience, and to justify
their rebellion: And therefore,

2. By the Doctrine of the Church.
2. The Church of Christ believes this Doctrine to be the truth of God; for no
man (says Saint Cyril) without punishment, resists the Laws of Kings, but
Kings themselves, in whom the fault of prevarication has no place; because it
is wisely said, It is impiety (therefore against the will of God) to say unto
the King, Cyrill. in J^han l. 14. c 56
Inique agis, Thou do amiss; for, as God is the supreme Lord of all, which
judges all, and is judged of none; so the Kings and Princes of the earth,
which do correct and judge others, are to be corrected and judged of none, but
only of God, to whose power and authority they are only subject; and
therefore King David, understanding his own station well enough, when he was
both an adulterer, and a murderer, and prays to God for mercy, says, Against
thee only have I sinned; because I acknowledge none other my superior on
earth, besides thee alone; and I have no Judge besides thee, which can call me
to examination, or inflict any punishment on me for my transgression: And so
the Poet says, Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.


Cyril; If it be impiety to say unto the King, Thou do amiss^; how shall we
excuse Samuel, that told King Saul, he did foolishly; and Nathan that reproved
King David; and Elias, that said to King Achab, it was he and his fathers
house, that made Israel to sin; and John Baptist that told Herod, It was not
lawful for him to have his brothers wife.

What the Priest or Prophet may do, private men may not do.
I answer, 1. That by the mouth of these men, God himself reproved them; because
these men were no private persons, but extraordinarily inspired with the spirit
of of God, to perform the extraordinary messages of God.

2. I say, as I said before, that as Moses may correct and punish Aaron if he
does amiss, so Aaron the Priest in regard of his calling, may reprove and
admonish Moses the chief Magistrate, when he does offend; but so, that he do it
wisely, and with that love and reverence which he owes unto Moses, as to his
God; not publicly to disgrace and vilify his Prince unto his people, but
modestly and privately to amend his fault, and reconcile him to God: and this
is the work of his office which he ought to do as he is a Priest, and not of
his person, which ought not to do it, as he is his subject.

3. By humane reason.
3. Reason it self confirms this truth, because the King is the head of the
body politic; and the members can neither judge the head, because they are
subject unto it; nor cut it off, because then they kill themselves, and cease
to be the members of that head: and therefore the subjects with no reason can
either judge or depose their King.

4. From the welfare of every Commonwealth. The event of every war is
doubtful.
4. The public safety and welfare of any Commonwealth requires, that the
subjects should never rebel against their King. 1. Because the event of a
rebellious war is both dubious, and dangerous; for who can divine in whose
ruin it shall end? or which party can assure themselves of victory? It is
true, that the justest cause has best reason to be most confident; yet it
succeeds not always: when God for secret causes best known unto himself,
suffers many times, especially for a time, (as in the case of the Tribe of
Benjamin) the Rebels to prevail against the true subjects. And as the event is
doubtful, so it must needs be mournful, what side soever proves victor; for
who can express the sorrows and sadness of those faithful subjects, that
shall see the light of their sun any ways eclipsed? the lamp of Israel, and
the breath of their nostrils to be darkened, or extinguished? and also to see
the learned Clergy, and the grave Fathers of the Church discountenanced and
destroyed? On the other side, it will not be much less mournful to see so many
of our illustrious Nobles, ancient Gentry, and others of the ablest Commonalty,
brought to ruin; and to pay for their folly, not only their dearest lives, but
also the desolation of their houses, and decay of their posterities.

Quis talia sando Temperet a lachrymis? When the Kings victory shall be but
like that of David, after the death of Absolon, and the Nobles victory but as
the two victories of the Benjamites over their own brethren the Israelites;
Bella geri placuit, nullos habitura triumphos. Lucan. l. 1.
and the best triumph that can succeed on either side, shall be but as the
espousal of a virgin on the day of her parents funeral; or as the laying of the
foundation of the second Temple, when the shout of joy could not be discerned
from the noise of weeping.

And therefore a learned Preacher of Gods Word says most truly, Mr. Warmstry
in Ramo Olivae, p. 23.
that it is a hard matter to find out a mischief of so destructive a nature,
that w^ would exchange it for this civil war; for Tyranny, Slavery, Penury,
or any thing almost, may be better born with peace and unity, then a civil
war with the greatest liberty and plenty; seeing the comfort of such
associates would quickly be swallowed up, like Pharaohs fat kine, by such a
monster feeding with them.

Had we a Tyrant like Rehoboam, that would whip us with Scorpions, (which the
Devil dares not be so impudent, as to allege we have) yet, better it were to
be under one Tyrant, then many, which we are sure to have in civil broyls, when
every wicked man becomes a Tyrant, when he sees the reins of government cut
in pieces. Were we under the yoke of an Egyptian slavery, to make bricks
without straw, yet better it were for us to be in bondage, then that fury and
violence should be set free, and malice suffered to have her will, because
there is more safety in being shut up from a Tiger, then to be let loose before
him, to be chased by him: or were we wasted and oppressed in our estates; yet
the wisest of men tells us, that Better is a little with the fear of the Lord,
Prove. 15.15, 17.
then great treasure and trouble therewith.

And therefore seeing civil war is (...), an affliction full of all
calamity, and one of the greatest punishments that God uses to send upon a
Nation: it is apparent that the welfare of any State calls upon every subject
to be obedient unto his King; yea, though he were never so vile an Idolater, or
so cruel a Tyrant: for though a King could be proved, and should be condemned
to be cruel and tyrannous, unjust and impious toward God and men, yet hereby
that King will not yield what he does hold from God, but though the confederate
conspirators should have a thousand times more men and strength then he; yet he
will call his servants and friends, his kinsmen, allies, and other circumjacent
Kings and Princes unto his aid, and he would hire mercenary Soldiers, to
revenge the injury offered unto him, and to suppress the Rebels both with fire
and sword: and if he should happen to have the worse, and to lose both his
Crown and Kingdom, and his life and all, yet all this would be but a miserable
comfort, and a lamentable victory a to ruined Commonwealth, whose winnings can
no ways countervail her losses; The miseries that follow the disturbance or
deposing of any king, are unspeakable.
for we never read of any King that either was disturbed, expelled, or killed,
but there succeeded infinite losses to that Kingdom; and therefore Writers say,
that the death of Caesar was no benefit unto the Romans, because it brought
upon them far greater calamities then ever they felt before; as you may find
in Appian, those infinite miseries that succeeded in several fields and
battles, which could never end until the overthrow of Anthony by Augustus
Caesar. And when Nero perished, it fell out with no good success; but the next
year that followed after his death, felt more oppression, and spilt more blood
then was spilt in all those * nine years wherein he had so tyrannically
reigned: His first Quin quennium was good.
So when the Athenians had expelled one Tyrant, they brought in thirty. And
when the Romans had abandoned their Kings, they did not put away the tyranny,
but changed the Tyrants; for wicked Kings, they chose more wicked Consuls,
which is nothing else, but (as the Proverb goes) Antigonum eff^dere, to go out
of Gods blessing into the warm Sun, or rather to change a bad Master for a
worse: A fable worth the observing
And this is contrary to the judgment of that ulcerated wretch in the fable,
who, when the traveller saw him full of flies, swarming in his sores, and,
pitying his miseries, would have swept them off, prayed him to let them alone,
for that these being now well filled, would suck the less, but if these were
gone, more hungry flies would come, which would most miserably suck his blood.

And so Histories tell us of many other Kings, that by Heathens, and rebellious
subjects, were for their injustice, cruelty, and tyranny, either expelled, or
murdered; but very seldom or never with any public benefit, when the chiefest
plotters of any rebellion do most chiefly aim at their own private revenge, Who
do many times rebel, and why.
or profit. Yea, many times those very Parasitical Lords, that have most
persuaded the King, to do things which he knew not to be illegal, and made
benefit of those Monopolies, and exactions to their own advantage, to fill
their own purses; and then upon either discontent with the King, or to content
the people, and to escape their own due deserved punishment, will be the
chiefest upbraiders of their King, the greatest sticklers of rebellion, and the
head leaders of all the disloyal Faction. What fools then are the people, upon
the false pretense of public good, to take up arms to destroy themselves;
when this name of public good is nothing else but a vain shadow to hide their
private ends?

Or were it granted, that it might happen for the public good, yet it is not
good to do it, because it can never stand with a good conscience, because it is
contrary to the Commandment of God; A threefold power in every Tyrant.
for in every Tyrant, there is a threefold power and authority that does
concur. 1. Paternal. 2. Conjugal. 3. Herile: and you know the law of God does
not permit the children to renounce their father, nor, which is less, to laugh
at their fathers nakedness; nor does it suffer the wife to forsake her
husband, nor the servant to chastise his Lord and Master; and therefore much
less may the Subjects deprive their King from his Dominion, and take from him
what God has given him; or any ways chastize him for his ill government,
whereof he is accomptable to God, and not to them: or if they might depose him,
or reduce him by their correction, when he does degenerate into a Tyrant; yet
seeing there are many kinds of Tyrannies, I demand if the same reason shall
serve to proceed against all kinds of Tyranny, Punishment should be
proportionable to the fault.
to the like condemnation of all tyrannous Kings? and this every Sophister will
deny; for where the punishment is not proportionable to the fault, the sentence
is most unjust, and the suppressors of the Tyrant do show the signs of a worse
tyranny; and if there must be an adaequation of the punishment to the sin, I
would know how they would distinguish to impose the just measure that is due to
each kind of tyranny. Three kinds. 1. Kind.


But to leave the Rebels in this Labyrinth, till they be better able to evade;
I say that there are three special kinds of tyrannies:

1. Is against all humane right for his own private commodity, to the public
Achab, when he took away Naboths vineyard; 1 Samuel 8.
and of those Kings which Samuel does describe.

2. Violateth the divine Law, to the contumely of the Creator, as was
Nebuchadnezzar, when he would have forced the three children to adore his
golden Image; and of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin,
because he compelled them to go to Dan and Bethel to adore his Calves; and
hindered them to go to Jerusalem for to worship the true God.

3. Treads and trampleth under foot both the divine and humane piety and
justice, as was the tyranny of Man^sses, Julian, and others, that regarded
neither the worship of God, nor the good of men.

And I do confidently affirm, that each one of these tyrannies apart, or all of
them coupled in one Tyrant; as well that which offers violence unto God, as
that which brings calamity and cruelty unto man, ought to be suffered, and
not abolished, until he does abrogate the same, which alone loses the belts
of Kings, and girdeth about their loins, as Job speaks. For you know the
forenamed Tyrants, and many more as bad or worse then they, as Solomon
himself, that by his Oppression, Polygamy, and Idolatry, had most grievously
sinned both against God and man, and yet all of them went on without either the
diminution of their glory, These should be our patterns, unless we have some
new revelations.
or the loss of their dominions: and Achab did most tyrannically kill Naboth,
and took away his Inheritance without law, (as David did before kill Vrias, a
most innocent man, and took away his wife, contrary to all law, which was death
by their law to any other man;) and he exiled the Prophets, and was the death
of many of them, and he trampled down the true Religion under his feet, and by
public authority established the Idolatrous worship of Baal in every place;
and yet neither the inferior Magistrates, nor the greatest Peers, nor the
consent of all the people, durst presume, contrary to the Ordinance of God, to
depose or suppress any of these tyrannous men.

If you allege Jehu, I confess indeed he did it, 2 Reg. 2.
Joram, his own Lord and Master.

But how did he this? By a power extraordinarily given him from Heaven, as you
may see in the 6. and 7. verses of that Chapter, when the same was not
permitted him by any laws, as Jezabel her self could tell him; Had Zimri peace
which slew his Master? to whom he might have answered, He breaks no Law, that
obeys the commands of the Lawmakers; no more then the Israelites could be
accused of theft, when they did rob the Egyptians, or Abraham of murder, if he
had killed Isaac; but without this special command, he could not have done this
extraordinary work without sin; and therefore that which he could not do then,
without the warrant of the heavenly Oracle, cannot be done now by any other,
Jehu's example not to be imitated.
without the contempt of the Deity, the reproach of Majesty, and abundance of
damage to the Commonwealth. And so not only I, but also Peter Martyr
commenteth upon the place; where he says, God stirred up, and armed one only
Jehu against his Lord; which fact, as it is peculiar and singular, so it is not
to be drawn for any example: for certainly, if it might be lawful for the
people upon any pretense, to expel their Kings and Governors, though never so
wicked and unjust, from their Kingdoms and government, no Kings or Princes
could be safe in any place; Petrus Martyr loc. com. class. 4. loc. 20.
for though they should reign never so justly and holily, yet they should never
satisfy the people, but they would still accuse them of injustice and impiety,
that they might depose them.

And Bodinus in his Policy, differs not at all from this Divinity; for he
says, If the Prince be an absolute Sovereign, as are the Kings of France,
Spain, England, Scotland, Aethiopia, Turkey, Persia, Muscovie, and the like
true Monarchs, whose authority cannot be doubted, and their chief rule and
government cannot be imparted with their subjects; in this case, it is not
lawful for any one apart, nor for all together, to conspire and attempt any
thing, either of fact, or under the color of right, against the life, or the
honor of his Prince or Monarch; yea, though his Prince should commit all kind
of impiety and cruelty, which the tongue of any man could express. For, as
concerning the order of right, the subject has no kind of jurisdiction against
his Prince, from whom depends, and proceeds all the power and authority of
commanding, (as they that rise against their King, do notwithstanding send out
their Warrants and Commands in the Kings name) and who not only can recall all
the faculty of judging and governing from his inferior Magistrates, Johan.
Bodinus de repub. l 2. l. 5
whenever he please; but also being present, all the power and jurisdiction
of all his under-Magistrates, Corporations, Colleges, Orders, and Societies do
cease, and are even then reduced into him, from whom before they were derived.

But we find it many times, that not the fault of the Prince, nor the good of
the Commonwealth, The true causes that move many men to disturb the State and
to rebel.
but either the hiding of their own shame, or the hope of some private gain
induces many men to kindle and blow up the flames of civil discord; for as
Paterculus says, Ita se res habet ut publica ruina quisque malit, quam sua
proteri: It so falls out, that men of desperate conditions, that, with
Catiline, have outrun their fortunes, and quite spent their estates, had
rather perish in a common calamity, which may hide the blemish of their
sinking, then to be exposed to the shame of a private misery: and we know, that
many men are of such base behavior, that they care not what loss or calamity
befalls others, so they may enrich themselves; Paterculus in Histor. Roman.
so it was in the eivil wars of Rome, Bella non causis inita, sed prout
merces eorum fuit; they undertook the same not upon the goodness of the cause,
but upon the hope of prey: and so it is in most wars, that avarice and desire
of gain makes way for all kind of cruelty and oppression, and then it is as it
was among the Romans, a fault enough to be wealthy; and they shall be
plundered, that is, in plain English, robbed of their goods and possessions,
without any show of legal proceedings.

But they that build their own houses out of the ruin of the State, and make
themselves rich by the impoverishing of their neighbors, are like to have but
small profit, and less comfort in such rapine; because there is a hidden curse
that lurketh in it, and their account shall be great, which they must render
for it.

Therefore I conclude this point: that for no cause, and upon no pretext; it is
lawful for any subject to rebel against his Sovereign governor; for Moses had
a cause of justice, and a seeming equity to defend and revenge his brother upon
the Egyptian: And Saint Peter had the zeal of true religion, and, as a man
might think, as great a reason as could be, to defend his Master that was most
innocent, from most vile and base indignities, and to free him from the hands
of his most cruel persecutors; and yet (as Saint Augustine says) Vterque
justitiae regulam excessit; August. contra Faustum Man. l. 27. c. 70.
and ille Fraterno, iste Dominico amore peccavit; both of them exceeded the
rule of justice: and Moses out of his love to his brother, and S. Peter out of
his respect to his Master, have transgressed the commandment of God.

And therefore I hope all men will yield, that what Moses could not do for his
brother, nor Saint Peter for his Master, and the religion of his Master Christ,
that is, to strike any one without lawful authority, ought not to be done by
any other man, for what cause or religion soever it be; especially to make
insurrection against his King contrary to all divine authority, for the true
Religion has been always humble, patient, and the preserver of peace and
quietness; Pro temporali salute non pugnavit, sed potius ut obtineret aeternam
non repugnavit, Aug. de Civit. l. 22. c. 6.
and (as Saint Augustine says) the City of God, though it wandered never so
much on earth, and had many troops of mighty people; yet, for their temporal
safety, they would not fight against their impious persecutors, but rather
suffered without resistance, that they might attain unto eternal health.

And so I end this first part of the objection, with that Decree of the
Council of Eliberis; If any man shall break the Idols to pieces, and shall be
there killed for the doing of it, because it is not written in the Gospel, and
the like fact is not found to be done at any time by the Apostles; Council.
Eliber. Can. 60.
it pleased the Council that he shall not be received into the number of
Martyrs, because (contrary to the practice of our days, when every base
mechanic runs to the Church to break down, not Heathen Idols, but the Pictures
of the blessed Saints out of the windows) they conceived it unlawful for any
man to pull down Idolatry, except he had a lawful authority.

CHAP. VI.
Shows, that neither private men, nor the subordinate Magistrates, nor the
greatest Peers of the Kingdom may take arms, 2. Part of the objection answered.
No kind of men ought to rebel. 1. Not private men. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 20.
Sect. 31. Beza Confess. c. 5. p. 171. J. Brutus q. 3. page 203. Dan. de Polit.
Christ l. 6. c. 3. Bucan loc. com. 49. Sect. 76. The examples of obedience to
kings.
and make War against their King. Buchanan's mistake discovered, and the
Anti-Cavalier confuted.

2. AS it is not lawful for any cause, so no more is it lawful for any one, or
for any degree, calling, or kind of men, to rebel against their lawful
Governors: For,

1. Touching private men, we find that Calvin, Beza, Jun. Brutus, Danaeus,
Bucanus, and most others yield, that mere private men ought not to rebel at
any hand; and no wonder, for the Scriptures forbid it flatly: as Exodus 22.28,
Revile not the Gods, curse not the Ruler. 1 Chronicles. 16.22. Touch not mine
anointed. Prove. 30.31. Rise not up against the King, that is, to resist him.
Eccles. 8.3. Let no man say to the King, Why do thou so? Eccles. 10.17.
Curse not the King in thy thought. And the examples of obedience in this kind,
are innumerable, and most remarkable; for David, when he had Saul, a wicked
King, guilty of all impiety and cruelty, in his own hand, yet would he not lay
his hand upon the Lords anointed, but was troubled in conscience, when he did
but cut the lap of his garment: Elias could call for fire from Heaven to burn
the two Captains and their men, a hundred in number, only for desiring him to
come down unto the King; as you may see, 2 Reg. 1.10, 12. and yet he would not
resist Achab his King that sought his life, and was an enemy to all religion;
but he rather fled, than desired any revenge, or persuaded any man to rebel
against him. Esaias was sawed in pieces by Manasses, Jeremy was cast into the
dungeon, Daniel exposed to the Lions, the Three Children thrown into the fiery
Furnace, Amos thrust thorough the temples, Zacharias slain in the porch of the
Temple, James killed with the sword, Peter fastened to the Cross with his head
downward, Bartholomew beaten to death with clubs, Matthew beheaded, Paul slain
with the sword, and all the glorious company of the Martyrs, which have
ennobled the Church with their innocent life, and enlarged the same by their
precious death, never resisted any of their Persecutors, never persuaded any
man to rebel against them, Why the holy Saints obeyed the unjust Tyrant.
never cursed the Tyrants, never implored the aid of the inferior Magistrates,
or superior Nobility, either by force to escape their hands, or by violence to
resist their power; for they thought it more honor unto God, and far better
to themselves? that the just should unjustly suffer for righteousness sake,
than under the color of justice undutifully to resist, and unjustly to rebel
against these unjust Persecutors.

A strange Position.
And yet some men are not ashamed to aver, that mere private men, and
inferior subjects, if their King as a Tyrant should invade them like a robber
or ravisher, may defend themselves, and oppose the Tyrant, as well, and as
violently, as they may resist a private thief, or a highway robber.

But how untruly they do avouch this thing, will plainly appear, if you
consider how disjunctive these things are, and how unjustly they are alleged
for this purpose; Confuted.
for a Surgeon launceth a man, and draws his blood, and so does the thief,
or a robber; but he deserves a reward, this a rope: The Tyrant has a just
power, though he uses the same unjustly; so has not the thief or the robber.
So, the Prince sometimes does in some sort the same thing, and it may be after
the like manner as a thief or a robber does, as often as with a strong hand he
takes the goods of his subjects, and forces the rebellious unto obedience.
But will you say, that both of them do it by the same right? I hope not: for
God gave the power and the sword unto the Prince, and he, as the Judge of our
actions, uses the same ad vindictam, for the punishment of our offense; but
the thief or the robber usurpeth the sword, and abuses the same ad rapinam, to
our destruction, and therefore whosoever says, that a subject has the same
reason to rise against his Prince that punishes him, as a traveller has
against a robber that steals from him, may well be ashamed of such doctrine,
that carries so little show of any truth.

Tyrant punishes for no fault, without any just cause, nay, altogether
unjustly, and against all truth; as Saul persecuted David, and put to death the
harmless Priests: and David did the like to Vrias, Achab to Naboth, Joash to
Zachary, Manasses to Esaias, Pilate to Christ, Nero to Peter, and perhaps
Theodosius to the Thessalonians; may they not resist in such a case, when they
are thus punished, and persecuted without cause?

Saul, David, Achab, Joash, and Manasses, there lived many faithful Priests and
Prophets, that were both upright for life, and excellent for knowledge; How the
Saints at all times suffered, and never resisted their kings.
and in the days of Christ, Zacheus, Nicodemus, and Gamaliel, were inferior
Magistrates, and were also pious men, and skilful in the understanding, as well
of Politic as of Divine affairs; and we are sure, that no age brought forth
either more learned Bishops, or holyer Saints, than the Apostles and Disciples
of Christ, that lived under Nero, and those excellent Fathers that were in the
time of Theodosius; and yet never any of these, not one of them all, showed us
this resisting way, to escape the force of tyranny; but it has been always
the doctrine of Christ and his Church, that Kings and Princes, offending the
Laws, and transcending the bounds of their duties, have only God for their
revenger, and ought not to be resisted by any man, or any kind of men, though
they should never so much abuse that power which they have received from God.

Christ and his Apostles persuade all men obediently to suffer.
And therefore Christ himself and all his Saints, not only suffered their
greatest rage, but also exhibited all honor, and showed all reverence unto
their most cruel Persecutors; and they persuaded all others, both by their
precepts and examples, to do the like, and that not only for fear of wrath,
but also for conscience sake; because the King is Gods Steward, which Christ
has set over his whole family: and if the Steward, like the evil servant in
the Gospel, shall begin to despise his Master, neglect his duty, smite his
fellows, and dissolutely go on to eat and drink, and be drunken; yet not all
the whole family, not the Priests, not the Nobles, not the Commons, nor yet all
together have any power or right to displace that Steward, which their Lord
has appointed over them; but they with patience must expect and wait for the
coming of their Master, which only has authority to call him to his account,
and to displace him, and dispose of him at his pleasure.

Besides, we know that among men every one is either superior, inferior, 3.
Degrees of men.
or equal. And, 1. The Superior is no way subject to his inferior. 2. The
inferior is every way subject to his Superior. But 3. An equal has no power
or authority against his equal.
As for example, Exodus 18.21.
In the Commonwealth of Israel there were Rulers of thousands, and Rulers of
hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of tens; Tostatus in Number. 25 9.
and those of tens were over the people, those of fifties were over the tens,
those of hundreds over the fifties, those of thousands over the hundreds, the
70. Elders over them, and Moses (as the King) over all; and he was subject
neither to any of them apart, nor to all of them together, but only unto God
himself; Ambros. in Ps. 50.
and therefore (as Saint Ambrose says) he was obliged by no laws, because
Kings are free from the bonds of offenses, and cannot be called to their
punishment by any Statute, Tuti imperii potestate, being safe from men by the
power of their Dominion.

But then you will object: If the Tyrant may thus do what he will, resistance,
then he may destroy the whole Society of men, and especially the Church of
Christ, when the worse part, that is, the Tyrant and his Flatterers, shall take
and root away the better, that is, the true servants of God.

I answer, that the society of men and the communion of Saints, Church of
Christ and the Common wealth, are continued and preserved, not by any humane
policy, but by the divine providence, which uses the power and policy of men
to do it; and yet, contrary to their power, and beyond all their policies, God
preserves his Church.
suffers not the same to be destroyed by the subtlety or cruelty of any
Tyrant, whom he can bridle when he will; and either put a hook in his nostrils,
or cut him off at his pleasure; and though this our God, when he will, and as
long as he will, suffers wicked Kings and Tyrants to reign and rage over his
people, and disposes the Ministry of those evil Governors for the
punishment of ungodliness, or the trial of our faith; yet he is no less
merciful and good unto us, when, either for the proof our fidelity, or the
scourging of our sins by cruel Tyrants, for the healing of our dying and
perishing souls, he punishes us; than when he heapeth his blessings upon us,
by most meek and clement Princes, for the comfort and consolation of this
present life. Neither may we think, that by this sufferance of God, the worse
part can take away the better, or that the Devil by this means shall be able
to overthrow the Church of Christ, against which, the gates of hell shall never
be able to prevail; because he does not cast his vessel into the furnace of
tribulation, ut frangatur, sed ut coquatur. And as the Goldsmith does not cast
his gold into the fire to consume it, but to purge it; so God never did, nor
ever will, in the greatest persecutions, Why God punishes his servants.
deliver up his inheritance as a prey unto the Tyrants teeth, nor submit his
people unto the hands of their adversaries, that they might be oppressed to
destruction; but only that they might be pressed and reduced to amendment, or
delivered from their miseries to salvation.

And therefore, The best means to escape our punishments.
when the Saints of God lie under the hands of a cruel Tyrant, Christ has
prescribed them far better means, both for his glory and their own comfort,
to escape his tyranny, than by resisting his power. And these means I find to
be amendment of life, tears for our sins, prayers to God, flight from them,
and patience to suffer when we cannot escape: For so Theodoret says, Theodor
Orat. 8. de Providentia.
As often as Tyrants sit at the stern of the Common wealth, or cruel masters do
rule over us, the wrath of God is to be pacified, and the mitigation of these
miseries is to be sought for by earnest prayers, and serious amendment of our
lives. And Christ, when he was sought to be murdered by Herod, fled into Egypt;
and he advises us, When we are persecuted in one City, to fly into another;
and when by flight we cannot escape, then, as the Martyrs and godly Confessors
did, so must we do; either mollify the Tyrants by our humble prayers, or offer
up our souls to God by true patience: For so Saint Ambrose says, Ambrosius in
Orat. contra Auxent. tom. 5. and Ep 32. similia habet. Basilius ut est apud
^^nicerum in Theatro Historico, page 154.
I have not learned to resist, but I can grieve, and weep, and sigh; and
against the weapons of the Soldiers and the Goths, my tears and my prayers
are my weapons; otherwise, neither ought I, neither can I resist. And Saint
Basil says, I will not betray my faith for fear of the loss of my goods, or
of banishment, or of death it self; for I have no wealth besides a torn
garment, and a few books. I remain on earth as one that is always going away,
and my feeble body shall overcome all sense of pain and torments, una accepta
plaga, when I shall receive but one stroke. And Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in
Epist. ad Cyriacum.
when he was driven from Constantinople, said unto himself, If the Empress
will banish me, let her banish me; for the earth is the Lords, and the fullness
of it: If she cut me in pieces, let her cut me; Esayas suffered the same
punishment: If she will have me thrown into the Sea, I will remember Jonas: If
she will throw me into the fiery furnace, the three Children suffered the like
doom: If she will cast me to wild beasts, let her do it; I shall call to mind
how Daniel was cast into the Lions den: If she will stone me to death, let her
stone me; I have Steven the Proto-martyr my companion: If she will take away my
head, let her take it; I have John Baptist for my fellow: If she will take away
my goods and substance, let her take it; for, I came naked out of my mothers
womb, Bernard. Epist. 22 1.
and naked I shall return again. And Saint Bernard says, whatsoever it
pleases you to do, concerning your Kingdom, your Crown, and your Soul, we
that are the children of the Church, cannot any ways dissemble the injuries
and contempt of our mother; and therefore truly we will stand, and fight unto
death (if need be) for our mother, but with those weapons wherewith we may
lawfully do it; not with swords, spears, and shields, but with our prayers and
tears to God. And it would be too tedious for me to set down all that I might
collect of this kind, most excellent sayings of those worthy men, which never
hoped for any glory in the Kingdom of Heaven, but by suffering patiently in
the Kingdom of the Earth; and, when they could, did faithfully discharge the
duties of their places; and when they could not, did willingly undergo the
bitterness of death; and were always faithful, both to their good God, and
their evil Kings; to God rather by suffering Martyrdom, then offend his
Majesty; and to their Kings, not in committing that evil which they commanded,
but in suffering that punishment which they inflicted upon them.

2. Not the Nobility, or Peers. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 20. Sect. 31. Beza in
confess. c. 5. p. 171. Author. vindic. q. 3 page ^03. Alchus. de polit. c. 14
page 142. and 161. Danaeus de polit. Christiana, l. 6. c. 3. p. 413.
2. As no private men, of what rank or condition soever they be, so neither
Magistratus populares, the peoples Magistrates, as some term them; nor Junius
Brutus, his Optimates regni, the prime Noblemen of the Kigdom; nor Althusius
his Ephori, the Kings assistants in the government of the people; nor his great
Council of Estate, nor any other kind, calling, or degree of men, may any ways
resist, or at any time rebel for any cause or color whatsoever, against their
lawful Kings, and supreme Governors.

1. Because they are not, as Althusius does most falsely suggest, Magistratus
summo Superiores, but they are inferiors to the supreme and chief Magistrate;
otherwise, how can he be Summus, if he be not Supremus? or how can Saint Peter
call the King supereminent, 1 Pet 2.13. if the inferior Magistrates be
superior unto him? and it is contra ordinem contrary to the rules of justice,
as I told you before out of Aquinas, (...).
that the inferiors should rise up against their superiors, which has the
rule and command over them, The Inferior should never rise against his
Superior. Optat. de schis. Donat. l. 3. p. 85
as the husband has over the wife, the father over the son, the Lord over
his servants, and the King over his subjects; and therefore Jezabel might truly
say, Had Zimri peace which slew his Master? And I may as truly say of these
men, as Optatus says of the Donatists, when as none is above the King or the
Emperor, but only God which made him Emperor; while the inferior
Magistrates do extol themselves above him, they have now exceeded the bounds
of men, that they might esteem themselves as God; Non verendo eum, qui post
Deum ab hominibus timebatur, in not fearing him, which men ought to fear next
to God.

But the words of Saint Peter are plain enough. 1 Pet. 2.15.
Submit your selves unto every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it
be unto the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by
him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.
Wherein you may see not only the subordination which God has placed betwixt
the King and his Subjects, but also that different station which is betwixt the
Supreme, and the inferior powers: for the words [sent of him] do most clearly
conclude, that the inferior Magistrates have no power to command, but by the
virtue, power, and force which they receive from the supreme; and that the
inferior Magistrates, opposed to the supreme power, are but as private men:
and therefore, that as they are rulers of the people, so, being but instruments
unto the King, they are subjects unto him, to be moved and ruled by him which
is inferior to none but God; and their authority, which they have received
from him, Inferior Magistrates in respect of the king, are but private men.
can have no power upon him, or to manage the sword, without him, and
especially against him, upon any pretense whatsoever: how then can any, or all
these Magistrates make a just war against their King, when as none of them can
make any just war without him.

2. Because, as Bodinus says most truly, the best and greatest, not only
inferior Magistrates, but also of all these Peers, Nobles, Counselors, or
what you please to call them, have neither honor, power, nor authority, but
what they have given them from him, which is the King or supreme Magistrate; as
you see, God made Moses the chief Governor, and Moses made whom he pleased his
Peers, and his inferior Magistrates: and as they have all their power derived
from him that is the chief, so he that is the King, or chief, can draw it away
from them that are his inferiors, when he pleases; and as he made them, so he
can unmake them when he will, and none can unmake him, but he that made him,
that is, God himself; and therefore David, that was ex Optimatibus regni, the
greatest Peer in Israel, being powerful in war, famous in peace, the Kings
Son-in-law, and divinely destinated unto the Kingdom, yet would he not lay his
hand upon his King, when he was delivered into his hands. And this Buchanan
cannot deny, but confesses, that the Kings of the Jews were not to be
punished, or resisted by their subjects, because that from the beginning, they
were not created by the people, but given to them by God; Buchanan's absurdity.
and therefore (says he) jure optimo, qui fuit honoris author, idem fuit
poenarum exactor, it is great reason, that he which gives the honor, should
impose the punishment.

But for the Kings of Scotland, Buchan. de jure Regni, apud Scotos.
they were (says Buchanan) not given them of God, but created by the people,
which gave them all the right that they can challenge; Ideoque jus idem habere
in reges Multitudinem, quod illi in singulos e multitudine habent; which is
most false: for Moses tells us, that immediately after the deluge, God, the
Creator of all the world, ordained the revenging sword of bloodshed, and the
slavish servitude of paternal derision, wherein all the parts of civil
jurisdiction and regal power, are Synecdochically set down: and Job says, that
there is one God, which looseneth the bond of Kings, Job 12.18.
and girdeth about their reins: which must be understood of the Gentile-Kings,
because that in his time the Commong-wealth of Israel was not in being; and God
himself universally says, By me Kings do reign, that is, all Kings; not only
of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles: and Christ does positively affirm, that
the power of Pilate was given him from Heaven, and Saint Paul says, There is
no power, but what is appointed of God. And Tertullian says, Inde and
Imperator, unde and homo; jude illi potestas, unde and spiritus; he that made
him a man, made him Emperor; and he that gave him his spirit, gave him his
power. And Irenaeus says, God ordained earthly Kingdoms for the benefit of
the Gentiles, Et cujus jussu homines nascuntur, That God is the ordainer of all
kings. Ang. de Civit. Dei, l. 4. c 33.
illius jussu reges constituuntur; And by whose command men are born, by his
command Kings are made. And S. Augustine more plainly, and more fully says,
God alone is the giver of all earthly Kingdoms, which he gives both to the
good, and to the bad; neither does he the same rashly, and as it were by
chance, because he is God, but as he sees good; Pro rerum ordine, ac tempore,
in respect of the order of things and times, which are hid from us, but best
known unto himself: and whosoever looks back to the original of all
governments, he shall find that God was the immediate author of the Regal
power, God the immediate author of Monarchy.
and but the allower, and confirmer of the Aristocratical, and all other forms
of government; which the people erected, and the Lord permitted, lest the
execution of judgment, should become a transgression of justice; for as Homer
says, Hom. Odyss. a.
(...). And Aristotle tells us, Aristot. Polit. l. 1. c. 8.
that the Regal power belonged to the father of the family, who, in the infancy
of the world was so grandevous and long-lived, that he begat such a numerous
posterity, as might well people a whole Nation; as Cain for his own Colony
built a City, and was as well the King as the father of all the Inhabitants;
and therefore Justin says very well, that Principio rerum, Justin. l. 1.
Gentium, nationumque imperium penes reges erat, The rule of Nations was in the
hands of Kings from the beginning; and the Kingly right pertaining to the
father of the family, the people had no more possibility in right to choose
their Kings, then to choose their Fathers; and to make it appear unto all
Nations, that not only the Kings of Israel, but all other Heathen Kings are
acknowledged by God himself to be of divine institution, Jerem. 43.10, Esaias
45.1.
he calls Nebuchadnezzar his servant, and Cyrus his anointed.

And therefore though I do not wonder that ignorant fellows should be so
impudent, Jo. Goodwin in his Pamphlet of Anti-Cavalierism, p. 5.
as to affirm The King, or kingly government to be the Ordinance or Creation,
or creature, of man; and to say that the Apostle supposes the same, because he
says, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether
it be unto the King, etc. whereas he might well understand that the same act is
oftentimes ascribed as well to the mediate as to the immediate agent, as Samuel's
anointing of Saul and David Kings, denies not but that God was the immediate
giver of their Kingdoms, and the Author of that regal power; 1 Samuel 10.
for God anointed Saul Captain over his inheritance, and by the mouth of
Nathan he tells David, that he anointed him King over Israel: 2 Samuel 12.
and Solomon acknowledges, that the Lord had set him on the Seat of his Father
David: 1 Reg. 2.
and Abijah in the person of God says unto Jeroboam, 1 Reg. 11.
I will give the Kingdom unto thee; 1 Samuel 11.15.
and yet it is said, that all the people went to Gilgal, and made Saul King
before the Lord; and the men of Juda anointed David King of Juda; 2 Samuel 5.
and Zadock the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet anointed Solomon King; that is,
God anointed them as Master of the substance, and gave unto them regal power,
in whom is all power, primario and per se; and the Prophets anointed them as
Masters of the Ceremony, and declared, that God had given them that power. And
therefore the power and authority of Kings is originally, Constituere regem est
facere ut regiam potestatem exerceret. Pinedas de reb. Solom. c. 2.
and primarily (as Saint Paul says) the Ordinance of God; and secondarily, or
demonstratively, it is as Saint Peter calls it, the ordinance of man: when
the people, whose power is only derivatively, makes them Kings, not by giving
unto them the right of their Kingdoms, but by receiving them into the
possession of their right, and admitting them to exercise their royal authority
over them, which is given them of God, and therefore ought not to be withstood
by any man.

And this Anti-Cavalier might further see, that Saint Peter means not, that
the King is the creature of man, or his Office of man's Creation; but that the
Laws and Commands of Kings, though they be but the Commands and Ordinances of
man, yet are we to obey the same for the Lords sake, because the Lord
commands, that Every soul should be subject to the higher powers: Or if this
will not satisfy him, because the Greeks word is not so plain for this, as the
English, yet let him look into Pareus, that was no friend to Monarchy, and he
shall find that he does by seven special reasons prove, Pareus in Romans c. 13.
p. 13. 27.
that the authority of Kings is primarily the Ordinance of God; and he quoteth
these places of Scripture to confirm it, Proverbs 8.15. 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Psalm
81.6. Joh. 10.34. Genes. 9.6. 1 Samuel 15. 1 Kings 12. 2 Kings 9. Dan. 2.21. Job
34.30. Eccles. 10.8. And to this very objection he answers, that the Apostle
calls the Magistrate (...), an humane Ordination, or Creation; not causally,
because it is invented by man, and brought up only by the will of men; but
subjectively, because it is born and executed by men; and objectively, because
it is used about the government of humane society: and (...) in respect of the
end, because it is ordained of God for the good and conservation of humane
kind; and he says further, that (...) appellatio, the Greek word (...), ad
Deum primum autorem nos revocat, shows plainly, that God is the first author
of it: for though the Magistrate, in some sense as I showed, may be said to be
created, that is, ordained by men, yet God alone is the first Creator of them;
as Aaron, though he was ordained the High Priest by Moses, yet the Apostle
tells us, None takes this office upon him, but he that is called of God, as
Aaron was.

Yet I do admire, that Buchanan, or any other man of learning, to satisfy the
people, or his own peevish opinion, will so absurdly deny so divine, and so
well known a verity, and say, that any Kings have their Kingdoms, and not from
God: so flatly contrary to all Scripture.

CHAP. VII.
Shows the Reasons and Examples that are alleged to justify Rebellion, and
a full answer to each of them: God the immediate Author of Monarchy: Inferior
Magistrates have no power, but what is derived from the superior: And the ill
success of all rebellious Resisting of our Kings.

The allegation to justify Rebellion.
BUt to prove their absurdities, they still allege, that the inferior
Magistrates, as the Peers and Counselors of Kings, and the chief h^ads of all
the people, which are flos and medulla regni, are therefore added unto the
superior Magistrate, 1. By Reason.
both to be his helpers in the government, and also to refrain his
licentiousness, and to hinder his impieties, if he degenerate to be an
Idolater or a Tyrant.

2. By Examples.
And to confirm this Tenet, they produce many examples both out of the sacred
and profane Histories; as the Judges that rose up against their
neighbour-Tyrants; Ezechias against the King of Assyria; the people
withstanding Saul, that he should not slay Jonathan; Ahikam defending the
Prophet Jeremy against King Jehoiakim; the revol^ing of the ten Tribes in the
time of Rehoboam; Jerem. 26.24.
the Priests and Princes of Juda taking away Athalia; the Macchabees arming
themselves against Antiochus, and others of the Macedonian Tyrants; Thrasibulus
driving the thirty Tyrants out of Athens; the Romans expelling their flagitious
Kings, Consuls, and other Tyrants, that behaved themselves most wickedly, out
of Rome; and so, many Peers and Potentates of other Kingdoms, that in the like
cases did the like. To all which I answer,

Sol. 1. Their Reasons answered.
1. That it is most false that any Peer, or inferior Potentate, Magistrate, or
other, is appointed by God to be the Associate of the King, or supreme
Governor for the government of the people: for, as God, and not the people,
appointed Moses, Joshua, Gideon, and the other supreme Judges of Israel; so
Moses, and not God immediately, as he did the others, appointed the Rulers of
tens, To what end kings do choose their inferior Magistrates,
fifties, hundreds, and thousands, which always acknowledged themselves his
subjects, and not his associates in the government of the people. And so other
Kings and Princes have always chosen whom they pleased to be their Peers,
Counselors, and inferior Magistrates, as well to bear some part of their
burden (as Jethro says unto Moses) and to lessen their care, as also to
afford them their best assistance and counsel in the discussion and
determination of great and difficult affairs; but not for them to prescribe
and set down Laws, Orders, and Ordinances, that should either moderate their
royal liberty, or bridle and revenge what they conceive to be Idolatry or
Tyranny. I am sure, no King that did intend to be a Tyrant, would choose
Counselors, or make Magistrates to that end; but they make choice of them (as
I said) to further them, and not to hinder them to effect those things which
they conceive to be most fit and just; for the Magistrates that are over the
people, are under the King, and do all, All the inferior Magistrates must do
all in the name of the Superior.
as you see, in the name of the King, from whom they derive all the power that
they have; whereby it follows, that neither the people can resist the
Magistrates whom the King appoints, nor those Magistrates resist their King,
without apparent sacrilege against God; because the greater can never be
judged, nor condemned by the lesser: but, as the Apostle says of Abraham and
Melchisedech, Heb. 7.7.
that without contradiction, the less is blessed of the better; so I say, that
without all controversy, the inferior must be always judged of the
superior; and therefore if these Peers, Nobles, or inferior Magistrates, have
any ways any power or authority over their Kings, we must conclude against
Saint Peter, that these are above the King, and so they, and not the King, are
the supereminent power.

But we find no such power nor commandment, that they have from God to refrain
Kings, in all the holy Scriptures; Et si mandatum non est, praesumptio est; and
ad poenam proficiet, non ad praemium: and if there be no commandment for it,
it is presumption to do it, which deserves punishment, and not praise; because
it is to the reproach of the Creator, that contemning the Lord, we should
worship the Servant; and neglecting the Emperor, we should adore or magnify
his Peers; as S. Augustine says.

And therefore both the learned and religious Fathers, And the Homily of the
Church of England, against wilful Rebellion.
and the best of our later Writers, are flat against this Doctrine, that any
sort of men have any power over Kings, but he that is the King of Kings, as you
may see, what would be too teadious for me to set down, in Johan. Bodinus Apol.
pro Regibus, c. 27. and de repub. l. 2. c. 5. Barclaius contra Monarchom. l. 3.
c. 6. Berchetus in explicat. controvers. Gallicar. c. 2. Saravia de Imperator.
autorit. l. 2. c. 36. Sigon. de repub. Hebraeor. l. 7. c. 3. Bilson. de perpet.
Eccles. gubernat. c. 7. Pet. Gregor. Tholos. de republ. l. 5. c. 3. number. 14,
15, 16. and many more.

2. For the examples that are produced, 2. Their examples answered.
to countenance Rebels against their Kings, I answer, that they are unlike, or
of some peculiar fact, or unjust, and therefore no warrant for any other to do
the like; when as we are to live by the laws and precepts of God, and not by
the examples of men; which many times, contrary to equity, do induce us to
transgress the divine verity. But to run over the particulars of their
examples as brief as I can.

1. I say, that to conclude an ordinary rule from the doings of the Judges, 1.
Example answered.
which were extraordinarily commanded by God to be done, is no more lawful for
us to do, then it is for us to rob our neighbors, August. in Jud. c. 20.
because the Israelites robbed the Egyptians, as Saint Augustine shows.

And therefore Aquinas (if Aquinas be the Author of that book, Thom. de
Regimine Princip. l 1. c. 6.
De Regimine Princip) says excellently well; Quibusdam visum est, it seems to
some men, that it pertains to the honor of valiant and heroical men, to take
away a Tyrant, and to expose themselves to the peril and danger of death, for
the liberty and freedom of the Multitude: whereof they have an example in the
Old Testament, where Ehud killed Eglon: Judge. 3.21.
But this agrees not with the Apostolical Doctrine, for Saint Peter teaches
us to be subject, not only to the good, but also to the froward, because this
is thank-worthy with God, if for conscience sake we patiently suffer wrongs:
therefore when many of the Roman Emperors did most tyrannically persecute the
faith of Christ, and a great and mighty multitude both of the Nobility, Gentry,
and Commons, were converted unto Christianity, they are praised, not for
resisting, but for suffering death. Besides, A great deal of difference betwixt
a lawful King, and an Usurper.
Eglon was not the lawful King of Israel, but an alien, an usurper, and a
scourge to them for their sin, and therefore no pattern for others to rebel
against their lawful King.

2. For the example of Ezechias, rebelling against the King of Assyria; 2.
Example answered.
it is most impertinently alleged, for Ezechias was the lawful King of Juda,
and the King of Assyria had no right at all in his Dominions; An impertinent
example.
but being greedily desirous to enlarge his territories, he incroached upon the
others right, and for his injustice, was overcome by the sword in a just
battle: and therefore to conclude from hence, that because the King of Juda
refused to obey the King of Assyria, therefore the inferior Magistrates, or
Peers of any Kingdom, may resist and remove their lawful Prince for his
tyranny or impiety, surely this deserves rather fustibus retundi, quam
rationibus refelli; to be beaten with rods, then confuted with reasons: as
Saint Bernard speaks of the like Argument.

And whereas they reply, that it skilleth not whether the Tyrant be foreign,
as Eglon, and the King of Assyria were; or domestique, as Saul, Achab, and
Manasses were; The ubsurdity of their replication.
because the domestique is worse then the foreign, and therefore the rather to
be suppressed, I will show you the validity of this argument by the like: The
seditious Preachers are the generation of vipers; nay, far worse then vipers,
because they hurt but the body only, and these are pernicious both to body and
soul; therefore as a man may lawfully kill a viper, so he may more lawfully
kill any seditious Preacher.

Quia Dare absurdum, non est solvere argumentum.
But to omit their absurdity, let us look into the comparison betwixt domestique
and extranean Tyrants; and we shall find, that domestique Tyrants are lawfully
placed over us by God, who commands us to obey them, and forbids us to
resist them in every place; for the Scripture makes no distinction betwixt a
good Prince and a Tyrant, in respect of the honor, reverence, and obedience,
that we owe unto our superiors; as you see the Lord does not say, Touch not a
good King, and, Obey righteous Princes; but as God says, Honor thy father and
thy mother, be they good or bad: so he says, Touch not the King, resist not
your Governors, speak not evil of the Rulers, be they good, or be they bad;
and therefore Saint Paul, when he was strict y charged for reviling the wicked
High Priest, answered wisely, I wist not, brethren, that he was Gods
High Priest; for if I had known him to be the true High Priest, I would not
have spoken what I did, because I know the Law of God obliges me to be
obedient to him that God has placed over me, Bad kings to be obeyed, as well
as the good.
be he good or bad; for it is Gods institution, and not the Governors
condition that tyeth me to mine obedience: So you see the mind of the Apostle,
he knew the Priesthood was abolished, and that he was not the lawful
High Priest, therefore he says, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: But if
he had known, and believed him to be the true and lawful High Priest, which God
had placed over him, he would never have said so, had the Priest been never so
wicked; because the Law says, Thou shall not revile thy Ruler. But for private
robbers, or foreign Tyrants, God has not placed them over us, nor commanded
us to obey them; neither have they any right by any Law, but the Law of
strength, to exact any thing from us; and therefore we are obliged by no law to
yield obedience unto them, neither are we hindered by any necessity, either of
rule or subjection, but that we may lawfully repel all the injuries that they
offer unto us.

Saul to put his son Jonathan to death; I say, that they freed him from his
fathers vow, non armis, sed precibus, not with their weapons, Saul was
contented to be persuaded to spare his son.
but by their prayers, when they appealed unto himself and his own conscience
before the living God; and persuaded him, that setting aside his rash vow, he
would have regard unto justice, and consider whether it was right, that he
should suffer the least damage; who, following God, had wrought so great a
deliverance unto the peohle, as Tremelius and Junius in their Annotations do
observe. Gregor. in 1 Reg. 4.
And Saint Gregory says, The people freed Jonathan that he should not die,
when the King, overcome by the instance of the people, spared his life: which
no doubt, he was not very earnest to take away from so good a son.

Ahikam, that was a prime Magistrate under King Jehoiakim, I say that he
defended the Prophet, not from the Tyranny of the King but from the fury of the
people; for so the Text says, The hand of Ahikam, Jerem. 26.24.
that is, (says Tremelius) the authority and the help of Ahikam, was with
Jeremy, that They, that is, his enemies, should not give him into the hands of
the people which sought his life, to put him to death, because Ahikam had been
a long while Counselor unto the King, and was therefore very powerful in
credit and authority with him: The act of Ahikam no color for Rebellion.
And you know there is a great deal of difference betwixt the refraining of a
tumultuous people by the authority of the King, and a tumultuous insurrection
against the King; That was the part of a good man, and a faithful Magistrate,
as Ah^kam did; this of an enemy and a false Traitor, as the opposer of Kings
use to do.

5. For the defection and revolting of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam lawful
King, unto a fugitive, and a man of a servile condition; and for the Edomites,
Lybnites, and others, that revolted against King Joram; 2 Chronicles. 21. 2 Reg.
14.19.
and that Conspiracy which was made in Jerusalem against Amazia; I answer
briefly, That the Scriptures do herein (as they do in many other places) set
down, rei gestae veritatem, non facti aequitem, the truth of things how they
were done, not the equity of the things that they were rightly done: and
therefore, Actions commanded to be done, are not to be imitated by us, unl sse
we be su^e of the like commandment.
Non ideo quia factum legimus, faciendum credamus, ne violemus praeceptum dum
sectamur exemplum; We must not believe it ought to be done, because we read
that it was done, lest we violate the Commandment of God, by following the
example of men, as Saint Augustine speaks: for though Joseph swear by the
life of Pharaoh, the Midwives lied unto the King, and the Israelites robbed the
Egyptians, and sinned not therein; yet we have no warrant without sin to
follow their examples. Besides, God himself had foretold the defection of the
ten Tribes for the sin of Solomon, and he being Lord proprietary of all, his
donation transferreth a full right to him, God is the right owner of all things
and therefore may justly dispose any Kingdom.
on whom he bestows it; and this made Shemaiah the man of God, to warn
Rehoboam not to fight against his brethren: for, as, when God commanded Abraham
to kill his son, it was a laudable obedience, and no murder to have done it;
and when he commanded the Israelites to rob the Egyptians, it was no breach of
the eighth Commandment: so this revolt of these Tribes, if done in obedience
unto God, could be no offense against the Law of God: but because they regarded
not so much the fulfilling of Gods will, as their not being eased of their
grievances, and the fear of the weight of Rehoboam's finger, which moved them
to this Rebellion, I can no ways justify their action: and though God by this
Rent did most justly revenge the sin of Solomon, and paid for the folly of
Rehoboam; yet this does no ways excuse them for this rebellion, because they
revolted not with any right aspect: and therefore it is worth our observation,
that the consequences which attended this defection, was a present falling away
from the true God into Idolatry, and not long after to be led into an endless
Captivity. Which is a fearful example, to see how suddenly men do fall away
from God, and from their true religion, after they have rebelled against their
lawful King; and how, to avoid imaginary grievance, they do often fall into a
real bondage, and so leap out of the Drying Pan into the fire. And for the
Edomites they were not Israelites that led their lives by the law of God;
neither can any man excuse the conspirators against Amazia, from the
transgression of the Law of God.

6. For Vzziah, that was taken with a grievous sickness, so that he present at
the public affairs of the Kingdom; I say, that according to the law, by
reason of the contagion of his disease, he was rightly removed from the Court
and concourse of people, and his son in the mean time placed in his fathers
stead, to administer and dispose the Commonwealth: but he in all that while,
like a good son, did neither affect the name, nor assume the title of a King.

7. For the deposing of Athalia, I see nothing contrary to equity; because
right Prince, but an unjust Usurper of the Crown: and therefore Jehoida the
chief Priest, having gathered together the principal Peers of the Kingdom, and
the Centurions, and the rest of the people, showed them the Kings son, whom
for six years space he had preserved alive from the rage and fury of Athalia,
which had slain all the rest of the Kings seed; and when they saw him, they did
all acknowledge him for the Kings son; they crowned him King, and he being
crowned, they joyfully cried, God save the King: and then by the authority of
the new crowned King, that was the right heir unto the Kingdom, they put to
death the cruel Queen, that had so tyrannically slain the Kings children, and
so unjustly usurped the Crown all that while. And therefore to allege this
example, so justly done, to justify an insurrection contrary to justice, does
carry but a little show of reason. And I say the like of the Macchabees, and
Antiochus, that neither he, nor any other Macedonian Tyrant had any right over
them, but they were unjust Usurpers, that held the Jews under them in ore
gladii, with the edge of their swords, and were not their lawful Kings, whom
they ought to obey; and therefore no reason, but that they might justly free
themselves with their swords, that were kept in bondage by no other right, then
the strength of the sword.

Thrasibulus, Juniu^ Brutus, and other Romans, or whosoever, that for their
faults have deposed their Kings; I answer, with Saint Augustine, Examples not
to be imitated.
that Exempla paucorum non sunt trahenda in legem universorum; we have no
warrant to imitate these examples: for though these things were done, yet we
say, they were done by Heathens that knew not God, and unjustly done contrary
to the law of God; and therefore with no blessing from God, with no good
success unto themselves, and with less happiness unto others; but it
happened to them, as to all others that do the like, to expel a mischief, and
to admit a greater; as, besides what I have showed you before, this one most
memorable example out of our own Histories, does make it plain.

The ill success^ of resisting our superiors:
In the time of Richard the second, the Nobility and Gentry murmured much
against his government; in brief, they deposed him, and set the Crown upon the
head of the Duke of Lancaster, whom they created King Henry the fourth. The
good Bishop of Carlisle made a bold and excellent Speech, to prove, that they
could not by any law of God or man, depose and dispossess their lawful King:
or, if they deposed him, that they had no right to make the Duke of Lancaster
to succeed him; but he good man for his pains was served as Saint Paul and
others were many times for speaking the truth, committed to prison, and there
was an end of him, but not an end of the story: for the many battles and
bloodshed, the miseries and mischiefs that this one unjust and unfaithful act
produced, had never any period, never an end, till that well nigh a hundred
thousand English men were slain in civil wars; whereof two were Kings, one
Prince, ten Dukes, two Marquesses, 21. Trussel in his supplement to Daniel's
History.
Earls, 27. Lords, two Viscounts, one Lord Prior, one Judge, 139. Knights,
421. Esquires; and Gentlemen of great and ancient Families, a far greater
number; a just revenge for an unjust extrusion of their lawful King, whose
greatest misery came from his great mildness.

And therefore these things being well weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary, All the pressures that we have suffered since the first year of our
king, are not comparable to the miseries that one years civil war has
brought upon us.
in the scales of true wisdom, it had been better for them, as it will be for
us, and all others, patiently to suffer the cross that shall be laid upon us,
until that by our prayers we can prevail with God, that for our sins has
sent it, in mercy to remove it, then for our selves to pluck our necks out of
the collar; and, in a froward disobedience, to pull the house (as Sampson did)
upon our own heads: and like impatient fishes, to leap out of the Drying Pan
into the fire, from hard usage that we impatiently conceived, to most base
cruel bondage, that we have deservedly merited; or at the best, to bring many
men to many miseries, before we can attain unto any happiness: and so as the
Poet says in this very case among the Romans, when for their liberty and
privileges, as they termed it, in Pompey's time, Excessit medicina modum, The
remedy that they procured, has proved far worse then the disease they
suffered; And I doubt not but ere long, the Rebels in this Kingdom will
feelingly confess this to be too true, when they shall more deeply taste of
the like miseries, as they have brought, as well upon many of their own
friends, as others.

If you allege the time of Richard the third, how soon he was removed, and how
happily it come to pass that Henry the seventh succeeded; I answer briefly,
that Richard the third was not only a cruel bloody Tyrant, but he was also an
unjust Usurper of the Crown, and not the right King of England: and that there
is a great deal of difference betwixt rebelling against our lawful Kings which
God has justly placed over us, and expelling an usurping Tyrant, which has
unjustly intruded himself into the royal Throne: This God often has blessed,
as in the case of Eglon, Athalia, Henry the seventh, and many more, which you
may obviously find both in the Greek and Roman stories; and the other, he
always cursed, and will plague it, whenever it is attempted.

After I had answered these Objections, I lighted upon one more, Goodwin in his
Anti-Cavalierisme. p. 8,
which is taken out of 2 Kings 6.32. where the Objector says, When Ahab sent a
Cavalier, a man of blood, to take away the Prophet Elisha's head, as he sat in
his house among the Elders, did Elisha open his door for him, and sit still
till he took off his head in obedience to the King? No, he bestirred himself
for the safeguard of his life, and called upon others to stand by him to assist
him. And a little after he says, Surely he that went thus far for the safety
of his life, when he was but in danger to be assaulted, would have gone further
if occasion had been; and in case the Kings Butcher had got in to him, before
the door had been shut, if he had been able, and had had no other means to have
saved his own head, but by taking away the others; there is little question to
be made, but he would rather have taken, then given a head in this case.

I answer, that who this Goodwin is, I know not; The Ministers of Christ should
not be the incendiaries of war.
I could wish he were none o^ the Tribe of Levi: 1. Because I find him such an
incendiary of war, and an enemy unto peace; whereas the messengers of Christ
have this Elogie given them, Q^am speciosi pedes Evangelizantium pacem? And the
Scripture says, Blessed are the Peacemakers; and we continually pray, Give
peace in our days, O Lord: and therefore I can hardly believe these
incendiaries of war to be the sons of the God of peace. 2. Because his
objection is full of falsehoods, and false grounds: as

1. He says, that Ahab sent to take Elisha's head, The first mistake in the
front of his Speech. 2 Kings 6.32. If any thing more.
when as Ahab was dead long before: it was his ghost therefore, and not he. But
it was his son, and what then? what did the Prophet? he shut the door, and
desired the Elders to handle the messenger roughly, or hold him fast at the
door: Thus says the Text, and the Prophet in my judgment does herein but
little more then what God and nature allows every man to do, not to lay down
his life, if he can lawfully preserve it; but, as the Prophet did, to shut the
door; or, as our Savior says, When we are persecuted in one City, to fly
into another, to save our lives as long as we can, and in all this I find no
violent resistance. But 2. the Objector tells us, Surely, if the messenger had
got in, Elisha had taken off his head, rather then given his own. I demand,
What inspiration he has from God to be sure of this; for I am sure John
Baptist would not do so, nor Saint Paul, nor any other of Gods Saints, that I
have read of; but these men are sure of every thing, even of Gods secret
Counsel, and that is more then the thoughts of men's hearts; or, if this be
sure, which I am not sure of, I answer, that Elisha was a great Prophet, that
had the spirit of Eliah doubled upon him; and those actions which he did, or
might have done, through the inspiration of Gods spirit; this man may not do,
except he be sure of the like inspiration: for God, who is justice it self, can
command by w^rd, as he did to Abraham to kill his son; or by inspiration, as he
did to Elias to call fire from Heaven, and it is a sin to disobey it: whereas
without this, it were an horrible sin to do it. And we must distinguish betwixt
rare and extraordinary cases, that were managed by special commission from God;
and those patterns that are confirmed by known and general Rules, which pass
through the whole course of Scripture: and take heed, that we make not obscure
Commentaries of humane wisdom, upon the clear Text of holy Writ; Quia maledicta
glossa quae corrumpit textum.
Cursed be the gloss that corrupts the Text.


But indeed the place is plain, that Elisha made no other resistance, but what
every man may lawfully do, to keep the messenger out of doors so long as he
could; and yet this man would infer hence, that we may lawfully, with a
strong hand, and open war, resist the authority of our lawful Kings; a
Doctrine, I am sure, that was never taught in the School of Christ.

He makes some other Objections, which I have already answered in this
Treatise; and then he spends almost two leaves in six several answers, that, he
makes to an objection against the examining the equity or iniquity of the
Kings commands: but to no purpose: because we never deny, but that in some
cases, though not in all, (for there must be Arcana Imperii, and there must be
Privy Counselors; and every Peasant must not examine all the Edicts of his
Prince:) The commands of Kings may not only be examined, but also disobeyed;
as the three Children did the commands of Nebuchadnezzar, and the Apostles the
commands of the Highpriests: but though we may examine their commands, and
disobey them too, when they are contrary to the commands of God; yet I would
fain know, where we have leave to resist them, and to take arms against them? I
would he understood, There is a great deal of difference betwixt examining
their commands, and resisting their authority: the one, in some cases we may;
the other, by no means we may do.

CHAP. VIII.
Shows, that our Parliament has no power to make war against our King: Two
main Objections answered: The original of Parliaments: The power of the King to
call a Parliament, to deny what he will, and to dissolve it when he will. Why
our King suffers.

BUt, when all that has been spoken cannot satisfy their indignation against
true obedience, and allay the heat of their rebellious spirits, they come to
their ultimum refugium, best strength, and strongest fort; that although all
others should want sufficient right to cross the commands, and resist the
violence of an unjust and tyrannical Prince; yet the Parliament, that is the
representative body of all his Kingdom, and are entrusted with the goods,
estates, and lives of all his people, may lawfully resist, and when necessity
requires, take arms, and subdue their most lawful King; and this they labor
to confirm by many arguments.

I answer, that for the Parliament of England it is beyond my sphere, and I
being a transmarine member of this Parliament of Ireland, And whatsoever I
^p^ak of Parliaments in all this Discourse, I mean of Parliaments disj^yned
from their King, and understand only the prevalent faction that ingrosseth and
captivateth the Votes of many of the plain honest minded party, which has been
often seen both in general Councels, and the greatest Parl aments.
I will only direct my speech to that whereof I am a Peer; and I hope I may the
more boldly speak my mind to them, whereof I am a member; and I dare maintain
it, that it shall be a benefit, and no prejudice, both to King and Kingdom,
that the Spiritual Lords have their Votes in this our Parliament.

For, besides the equity of our sitting in Parliament, and our indubitable
right to vote therein; (and his Majesty, (as I conceive, under favor be it
spoken) is obliged by the very first act in Magna Charta, to preserve that
right unto us) when as in the Summons of Edw. 1. it is inserted in the Writ,
that, Claus. 7. m. 3. dors.
Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus approbari, or tractari debet, whatsoever affair
is of public concernment, ought to receive public approbation; and
therefore with what equity can so considerable a party of this Kingdom, as are
the Clergy, (who certainly cannot deserve to forfeit the privilege of the
meanest subjects, and of Common men, because they are more immediately the
servants of the living God) be denied the benefit of that, which in all men's
judgments is so reasonable a law, and they only be excluded from that
interest, which is common unto all, I cannot see: yet I say, that besides this
our right, while we sit in Parliament, this fruit shall always follow, that
our knowledge and conscience shall never suffer us to vote such things against
the truth, as to allow that power or privilege to our Parliament, as to make
Orders and Ordinances without the consent, and contrary to the will of our
King, much less to leavie moneys, and raise arms against our King:
Privileges of Parliament, what they are.
for I conceive the Privileges of Parliament to be Privatae leges Parliamenti,
a proceeding according to certain rules, and private customs and laws of
Parliament, which no member of the Houses ought to transcend; whereas the other
is Privatio legum, a proceeding without Law, contrary to all rules, as if our
Parliament had an omnipotent power, and were more infallible than the Pope, to
make all their Votes just, and their sayings truth.

I, but to make this assertion good, that the Parliament in some cases may
justly take arms, and make war upon their justest King, if they conceive him
to be unjust: it is alleged, that although the King be Singulis major, greater
then any one, yet he is Vniversis minor, less then all; therefore all may
oppose him, if he refuse to consent unto them.

I answer, that the weakness of this argument, Page 11. and 38, 39, 40.
is singularly well showed in the Answer to the Observations upon some of his
Majesty's late Answers and Expresses; and I will briefly contract the Answer,
to say, the King is better than any one, does not prove him to be better then
two; and if his Supremacy be no more, then many others may challenge as much:
for the Prince is Singulis major, a Lord above all Knights, and a Knight above
all Esquires; he is singulis major, though universis minor; And if the King be
universis minor, then the people have placed a King, not over, but under them:
And Saint Peter does much mistake, in calling the King Supreme, 2 Pet. 2.13.
and they do ill to petition, when they might command: and I am confident, that
no records (except of such Parliaments as have most unjustly deposed their
Kings) can show us one example, that the Parliament should have a power, As
Edw. Carnarvan, and Richard the second.
which must of necessity overruled the King, or make their Votes Law, without,
and against the will of the King; for if their Votes be Law without his
consent, what need they seek and solicit his consent?

But the clause in the Law made 2. Hen 5. cited by his Majesty, that it is of
the Kings regality to grant or deny such of their Petitions as pleases
himself, That the King is universis major, greater then all: proved.
and the power which the Law gives the King to dissolve the Parliament; and
especially the words in the Preface of cap. 12. Vices to Hen. 8. where the
Kings Supremacy, not over single persons, but over all the body politic is
clearly delivered, does sufficiently show the simplicity of this Sophistry, God
having given, and the people having yielded their power to th it King: they can
never challenge any power, but what they have derived from their king. 2.
Reason. Sol.
and prove that the King being invested with all the pow^^ of the people, which
is due to him as their King, he is the only fountain of all power and justice;
so that now they can justly claim no power, but what is derived from him; and
therefore it is the more intolerable, that any man should usurp the power of
the King, to destroy the King.

2. They will say, that Salus populi est suprema a lex, The good of the people
is the chiefest thing that is aimed at in all government; and the Parliament is
the representative body of all the people; therefore if any thing be intended
contrary to the good of the people, they may and ought lawfully to resist the
same.

I answer, and confess, that there is no wise King, but will carefully provide
for the safety of his people, because his honor is included therein, and his
ruin is involved in their destruction; but it is certain, that this principle
has been used as one of our Irish mantles, to hide the rebellion of many
Traitors, and so abused to the confusion of many Nations; for there is not
scarce any thing more facile, 2 Samuel 15.4.
then to persuade a people that they are not well governed; as you may see in
the example of Absolon, who by abusing this very Axiom, has stolen away the
hearts of many of his fathers subj cts: How easy it is to persuade the people
to rebel.
for, as Lipsius says, Proprium est aegri, nihil diu pati, It is incident to
sick men, and so to distempered minds, to endure nothing long, but foolishly to
think every change to be a remedy; therefore the people that are soon persuaded
to believe the lightest burden to be too heavy, are easily led away by every
seducing Absolon, who promise them deliverance from all their evils, so they
may have their assistance to effect their ends; and then the people, swelled up
with hopes, cry up those men as the reformers of the State; and so the craft
and subtilty of the one, prevailing over the weakness and simplicity of the
other, every Peer and Officer that they like not, must with Teramines be
condemned, and themselves must have all preferments, or the King and Kingdom
must be liable to be ruined.

whole Parliament cannot be thought to be thus envious against the Officers of
State; or thus careless of the common good, as, for any sinister end, to
destroy the happiness of the whole.

unerring spirit, but as General Councels, so whole Parliaments have been
repealed and declared null by succeeding Parliaments, How a Faction many times
prevails to sway whole Councels and Parliaments.
as 21. Rich. 2. c. 12. all the Statutes made 11 Rich. 2. are disanulled: and
this in the 21 Rich. 2. is totally repealed in 1 Hen. 4. c. 3. And 39 Hen. 6.
we find a total repeal of a Parliament held at Coventry the year before, and
the like: and the reason is, because many times by the hypocritical craft of
some Faction, working upon the weakness of some, and the discontent of others,
the worse part procuring most unto their party, prevails against the better.

The original of Parliaments: why they were at first ordained.
Besides all this, I conceive the Original of Parliaments was, as it is
expressed in the Kings Writ, to consult with the King, De quibusdam arduis, and
urgentibus negotiis regni; they being collected from all the parts of the
Kingdom, can best inform His Majesty, what grievances are sprung, and what
reparations may be made, and what other things may be concluded for the good of
His Subjects in every part: and His Majesty to inform them of his occasions and
necessities which by their free and voluntary Subsidies, they are to supply
both for his honor, and their own defense. In all this they have no power to
command their King, See Jo. Bodin. de repub. l. 1. c. 8. page 95. in English,
and the place is worth the noting.
no power to make Laws without their King, no right to meet without his Writ,
no liberty to stay any longer then he gives leave; how then can you meet, as
you do now, in my Episcopal See at Kilkenny, and continue your Parliament
there, to make war against your lawful King? What color of reason have you
to do the same? you cannot pretend to be above your King; you have with lies
and falsehoods most wickedly seduced the whole Kingdom, and involved the same in
a most unnatural civil war: you are the actives, the King is passive; you
make the offensive, He the defensive war; for you began, and when He, like a
Gracious King, still cried for peace, you still made ready for battle.

And I doubt not but your selves know all this to be true, for you know, that
all Parliament men must have their elections warranted by the Kings especial
Writ. You will say, that so you were; well, The letter sent from a Gentleman to
his friend.
and you were chosen but by subjects, and entrusted by them to represent the
affections, and to act the duties of subjects; and subjects cannot impose a
rule upon their Sovereign, nor make any ordinance against their King; and
therefore, if the representative body of subjects transcend the limits of their
trust; and do in the name of the subjects, that which all subjects cannot do;
and assume that power which the subjects neither have, nor can confer upon
them: I see no reason that any subject in the world should any ways approve of
their actions. For, how can your privilege of being Parliament men, That men
entrusted, should not go beyond their trust.
privilege you from being Murderers, Thieves, or Traitors, if you do those
things that the Law adjudgeth to be murders, thefts, and treasons? Your
elections cannot quit you, and your places cannot excuse you; because he that
is entrusted, cannot do more then all they that do entrust him; and therefore
all subjects should desert them, that exceed the conditions, and falsify the
trust which their fellow subjects have reposed in them.

Besides, The King must needs be a part of every Parliament.
you know the King must needs be reputed part of every Parliament, when as the
selected company of Knights and Burgesses, together with the Spiritual and
Temporal Peers, are the representative body, and the King is the real head of
the whole Kingdom; and therefore if the body separates it self from the head,
it can be but an useless trunk, that can produce no act, which pertains to
the good of the body: because the spirits that gave life and motion to the
whole body, are all derived from the head, as the Philosopher teaches.

And further, you do all know, that as the King has a power to call, The power
of dissolving the Parliament, greater then the power of denying any thing.
so he has a power to dissolve all Parliaments; and having a power of
dissolving it when he will, he must needs have a power of denying what he
please; because the other is far greater then this. And therefore, all these
premises well considered, it is apparent that your sitting in Kilkenny without
your King, (or his Lieutenant, which is to the same purpose;) and your Votes
without his assent, are all invalid to exact obedience from any subject; and
for my part I deem them fools that will obey them, and rebels that will take
arms against their King at your commands; and if you persist in this your
rebellious obstinacy, I wish your judgments may light only upon your own
heads: and that those, which like the followers of Absolon, are simply led by
you, may have the mist taken from their eyes, that they may be able to discern
the duty they owe unto their King, that they be not involved, and so perish in
your sin.

For, though you be never so many, and think that all the Kingdom, Towns, and
Cities be for you; Psalm. 21.11.
yet take heed lest you imagine such a mischievous device, which you are not
able to perform; for the involving of well-meaning men into your bad
businesses, 1 Reg. 22.29.
as Jehosaphat was mis^led to war against Ramoth Gilead, does not only bring a
punishment upon them that are seduced, but a far greater plague upon you that
do seduce them: and God, who has at all times so exceeding graciously defended
His Majesty, and contrary to your hopes and expectation, from almost nothing in
the beginning of this rebellion, has increased his power, to I hope an
invincible Army, will be a rock of defense unto his anointed; because it is
well known to all the world, For what causes the King suffers.
that whatsoever this good King has suffered at the hands of his subjects, it
is for the preservation of the true Protestant Religion, of the established
Laws of his Kingdoms, and of those Reverend Bishops, Grave Doctors, and all
the rest of the Learned and Religious Clergy, that have ever maintained, and
will, to the spilling of the last drop of their blood, defend this truth
against all Papists, and other Anabaptistical Brownists and Sectaries
whatsoever.

What a shame it is to use the power we have received against him that gave it
us.
And therefore if you that are his Parliament, should, like unthankeful vapors,
that cloud the Sun which raised them; or like the Moon in her interposition,
that obscures the glorious lamp which enlightens her, in the least manner
employ that strength, which you have received from his Majesty, when he called
you together, against His Majesty; it will be an ugly spot, and a foul blemish,
both for your selves, and all your p^sterities: And if not suddenly prevented,
you may raise such spirits, that your selves cannot lay down; and sow such
seeds of discord and disconte^t between the King and his people, as may derive
through the whole Race of all succeeding Kings, such a disaffection to
Parliaments, as may prove a plague and poison to the whole Kingdom. For, if the
King out of his favor and grace call you together, and entrust you with a
power either of continuing, concluding, or enacting such things, as may be for
the good of the Common wealth; and you abuse that power against him that gave
it you: I must needs confess that I am of his mind, That it is lawful to
recall a power given, when it is abused.
who says, That the King were freed before God and man from all blame, though
he should use all possible lawful means to withdraw that power into his own
hands; which being but lent them, has been so misapplyed against him: for if
my servant desires to hold my sword, and when I entrust him with it, he seeks
to thrust the same into my breast, Will not every man judge it lawful for me to
gain my sword, if it be possible, out of his hand, and with that sword to cut
off his head, that would have thrust it into my heart? or, as one says, If I
convey my estate in trust to any friend, to the use of me and mine, and the
person entrusted falsify the faith reposed in him, by conveying the profits of
my estate to other ends, to the prejudice of me and mine, no man will think it
unlawful for me to annihilate (if I can possibly do it) such a deed of trust.

And therefore, Noble Peers and Gentlemen of this ancient Kingdom of Ireland,
that your Parliament may prove successeful to the benefit of the Commonwealth;
let me, that have some interest and charge over all the Inhabitants and
Sojourners of Kilkenny, persuade you to think your selves no Parliament without
your King; and that your Votes and Ordinances, carrying with them the power,
though not the name of Acts of Parliament, to oblige both King and Subjects to
obey them, are the most absolute subversion of our Fundamental Laws, the
destructive invasion of our rightful Liberties; And that by an usurped power of
an arbitrary rule, to dispose of our estates, or any part thereof as you
please, to make us Delinquents when you will, and to punish us as Malignants at
your pleasure, and through your discontent to dispossess your rightful King,
though it were to set the Crown upon the head of your greatest One al; is such
a privilege, that never any Parliament has yet claimed. Or if you still go on
for the enlargement of your own usurped power, under the title of the
privilege of Parliament, to Vote diminution of the Kings just Prerogative,
that your Progenitors never denied to any of his Ancestors, to exclude us
Bishops out of your Assemblies, without whom your determinations can never be
so well concluded in the fear of God, and to invade the Liberties of your
fellow subjects, under the pretenses of religion, and the public good: I will
say no more, but turn my self to God, and put it in my Liturgy; From
Parasites, Puritanes, Popes, and such Parliaments, Good Lord deliver us.

CHAP. IX.
Shows the unanimous consent and testimonies of many famous learned men, and
Martyrs, both ancient and modern, that have confirmed and justified the truth
of the former Doctrine.

ANd so you see, that as for no cause, so for no kind or degree of men, be they
what you will; Peers, Magistrates, Heads of Families, Darlings of the people,
or any other Patriots, whom the Commons shall elect, it is lawful to rebel
against, or any ways to resist our chief Princes, and sovereign Governors.
This point is as clear as the Sun; and yet to make it still more clear unto
them, that will not believe that truth which they like not; but, as Tertullian
says, Credunt Scripturis, ut credant adversus Scripturas, Testimonies of
famous men.
do allege Scriptures to justify their own wilful opinions, against all
Scripture; I will here add a few testimonies of most famous men, to confirm
the same.

Henry de Bracton, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, under Hen. 3. L.
Elismer in orat. habita in Camera Fiscali, anno 1609. page 108.
says, as he is quoted by the Lord Elismer, That under the King, there are
free men and servants, and every man is under him, and he is under none but
only God: If any thing be demanded of the King, (seeing no Writ can issue
forth against the King) there is a place for Petition, that he would correct
and amend his fact; and, if he shall refuse to do it, he shall have punishment
enough, when the Lord shall come to be his revenger; for otherwise, touching
the Charters and deeds of Kings, neither private persons, nor Justitiaries,
ought to dispute. This was the Law of that time: what new Laws our young
Lawyers have found since, I know not: I am not so good a Lawyer.

The Civil Lawyers do far surpass the Common Law herein; for, Corsetus Sic.
tract. de potestat. reg. part. 5. number 66.
Corsetus Siculus says, Rex in suo regno potest omnia, imo de plenitudine
potestatis. And Marginista says, Qui disputat de potestate Principis, utrum
been fecerit, est infamis. Hostiensis says, Princeps solutus est legibus, [id
est, quoad vim coactivam, non quoad vim directivam: Thom. 1. 2 ae. q. 96. ar.
5. ad 3.] quia nulli subest, nec ab aliis judicatur. And, to omit all the rest,
Marginista in Angelum Perusinum. c. l. 9. tit. 29. De crimine sacrilegii, l. 2
Hostiens. Sum. l 1. rubr. 32. de effic. legati. Barclaius contra Monarchomach.
l. 3^ c. 14.
Gulielmus Barclaius out of Bartolus, Baldus, Castrensis Romanus, Alexander,
Felinus, Albericus, and others, does infer. Principem ex certa scientia,
supra jus, extra jus, and contra jus omnia posse; Principem solum, legem
constituere universalem. Princeps soli Deo rationem debet. Princeps solutus est
legibus, and temerarium est velle, Majestatem Regiam ullis terminis limitare:
which things if I should English, seditious heads would think my head not
suffi^ient to pay for this; but I only repeat their words, and not justify
their sayings: and therefore to proceed to more familiar things.

Pasquerius writes that Lewis the eleventh did urge his Senators and
Counselors to set forth a certain Edict, which they refused to do, Pasquer. de
Antiquit. Gallican. l. 1. Sicut olim Lacedaemonii, victoribus responderunt: Si
duriora morte Imperetis, potius moriemur.
because it seemed to them very unjust; and the King being very angry,
threatened death unto them all: whereupon Vacarius, President of the Council,
and all the Senate in their purple robes came unto the King; and the King,
astonished therewith, demanded whence they came, and what they would have:
Vacarius answered for all, We come to undergo that death which you have
threatened unto us; for you must know (O King) that we will rather suffer death,
then do any thing against our c^nscience toward God, or our duty toward you:
Whererein we see the Nobility of this King, like Noble Christians, do more
willingly offer to lay down their lives at the command of their Liege Lord,
then unchristian like rebel, and take Arms against their delinquent Sovereign.
And so Colmannus, a godly Bishop, did hinder the Scottish Nobility to rise
against Fercardus, that was their most wicked King.

Tertul. ad Scapul.
Tertullian, writing unto Scapula, the President of Carthage, says, We are
defamed, when the Christian is found to be the enemy of no man, no not of the
Emperor; whom because he knows him to be appointed by God, he must needs
love and reverence, and wish him safe with all the Roman Empire; for we honor
and worship the Emperor as a man second from God, Tertul in Apooget.
and solo Deo minorem, and inferior only to God: And in his Apologetico, he
says, Deus est solus in cujus solius potestate sunt reges, a quo sunt secundi,
post quem primi, super omnes homines, ante omnes deos; it is God alone, in
whose power Kings are kept, which are second from him, first after him, above
all men, and before all gods; that is, all other Magistrates, that are called
gods.

Athanasius, de summo regum imperio. q. 55.
Athanasius says, that, As God is the King and Emperor in all the world, that
does exercise his power and authority over all things that are in Heaven, and
in Earth; So the Prince and King is appointed by God over all earthly things;
Et ille libera sua voluntate facit quod vult, sicut ipse Deus; and the King by
his own free will does whatsoever he pleases, even as God himself: And the
Civilians could say but little more.

Simulach um a similitudine dictum. Isidor.
Saint Augustine says, Videtis simulachrorum templa, you see the temples of our
Images, partly fallen for want of reparation, partly destroyed, partly shut up,
partly changed to some other uses; ipsaque Simulachra, and those Images either
broken to pieces, or burned and destroyed; and those Powers and Potentates of
this world, which sometimes persecuted the Christians, Aug. ad frat. Madaur.
ep. 42. See the duty of Subjects o^ a persuasion to Loyalty, which is a full
collection of the Fathers to this purpose.
pro istis simulachris, for those Images; to be overcome and tamed, non a
repugnantibus, sed a morientibus Christianis, not of resisting, but of dying
Christians; and the rest of the Fathers are most plentiful in this Theme: and
therefore to the later Writers,

Cardinal Alan says, (but herein most untruly) that the Protestants are
desperate men, and most factious; for, as long as they have their Princes, and
Laws, indulgent to their own wills, they know well enough how to use the
prosperous blasts of fortune; but if the Princes should withstand their
desires, or the Laws should be contrary to their minds, then presently, Card.
Alan in resp. ad Instit, B itannicam. c. 4.
they break asunder the bonds of their fidelity, they despise Majesty, and with
fire and sword, slaughters, and destructions, they rage in every place, and do
run headlong into the contempt of all divine and humane things: which
accusation, if it were true, then I confess the Protestants were to be blamed
more then all the people in the world. But, howsoever some factious, seditious,
anabaptistical, and rebellious spirits amongst us, not deserving the name of
Protestants, may be justly taxed for this intolerable vice: yet, to let you see
how falsely he does accuse us, that are true Protestants, and how fully we do
agree with the Scriptures, and the Fathers of the purest age of the Church, in
the Doctrine of our obedience to our Kings and Princes; I will only give you a
taste of what we teach; And to begin with the first reformer.

Luther says, no man which stirs up the multitude to any tumult, can be
excused from his fault, though he should have never so just a cause; but he
must go to the Magistrate, and attempt nothing privately: because all sedition
and insurrection is against the Commandment of God, Sleidan. commentar. l 5.
which forbids, and detesteth the same.

Philip Melancthon says, though it be the Law of Nature to expel force with
force, yet it is no ways lawful for us to withstand the wrong done us by the
Magistrate with any force; yea, though we seem to promise our obedience upon
this condition, Melancthon apud Luther. tom. 1. p. 463.
if the Magistrate should command lawful things; yet it is not therefore lawful
for us to withstand his unjust force with force: for though their Empires
should be gotten and possessed by wicked men, yet the work of their government is
from God, and it is the good creature of God; and therefore, whatsoever the
Magistrate does, no force ought to be taken up against the Magistrate.

Brentius says; that the rule and government of a Prince, The rule of a Prince
may be evil two ways.
may be evil two ways.

1. When he commands any thing against the faith of Christ; as, to deny our
God, to worship Idols, and the like: and herein we must It is better to obey
God, then men; but in this case the subject must in no way rage, or rise,
against his Magistrate, but he should rather patiently suffer any evil, then
any way strike again; and rather endure any inconveniences and discommodities,
then any ways obey those ungodly commands.

2. The Prince his government may be evil, when he does, or commands public
justice; of which kind are the exaction of our goods, or the vexation of our
bodies; and in these kinds of injuries, Brentius in respon. ad artic.
rusticorum.
the subject ought rather then in the former, to be obedient to his Magistrate;
for if he steps forth to arms, God has pronounced of such men, He that smites
with the sword, shall perish with the sword.

Cranmer Arch Bishop of Canterbury, together with the rest of the Bishops, and
most famous Divines of this Kingdom, says, If Princes shall do any thing
contrary to their duties, God has not appointed any superior Judge over them
in this world, but they are to render their account to God, which has reserved
their judgment to himself alone; and therefore it is not lawful for any
subjects, Cranmer in lib. de Ch^istiani hominis institutis.
how wicked soever their Princes shall be, to take arms, or raise sedition
against them, but they are to power forth their prayers to God, in whose hand
Kings hearts are, that he would inlighten them with his spirit; whereby they
might rightly, to the glory of God, use that sword which he has delivered unto
them.

Gulielmus Tindal, a godly Martyr of Christ, when Cardinal Lanio's son did
lead the Lambs of Christ by troops unto the slaughter, does then describe the
duty of subjects according to the strait rule of the Gospel; saying, David
spared Saul, and if he had killed him, he had sinned against God; for in every
Kingdom, the King, which has no superior, judges of all things; and
therefore he that indeavoureth, or intends any mischief or calamity against
the Prince that is a Tyrant, or a Persecutor; or whosoever with a froward hand
does but touch the Lords anointed, he is a rebel against God, and resists
the ordinance of God: as often as a private man sins, he is held obnoxious
to his King, that can punish him for his offense; but when the King offends,
he ought to be reserved to the divine examination and vengeance of God: Tindal.
l. de Christiani hominis obedient.
and as it is not lawful upon any pretense to resist the King, so it is not
lawful to rise up against the Kings Officer, or Magistrate, that is sent by the
King for the execution of those things which are commanded by the King: for, as
our Savior says He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me; And as he
says unto Saul, when he persecuted the servants of Christ, Saul, Acts 9.4.
Saul, why persecutest thou me? when as he was then in Heaven, far above the
reach of Saul; yet, because there is such a mystical union betwixt Christ and
his Church, the head and members, as is betwixt man and wife; no man can be
said to injure the one, but he must wrong the other: so, whosoever resists
the Kings Lieutenant, Deputy, or any other Magistrate, or Officer that he
sends, with Commission to execute his commands, resists the King himself;
and all the indignities that are offered to the Kings Ambassador, or servant,
that he thus sends, are deemed as indignities offered to the King himself; as
we see, the base usage of David's servants by King Hanun, 2 Samuel, 10.
David revenged as an abuse offered unto himself; because the Kings person
cannot be in all places, where justice and judgment, and many other offices
and actions are necessarily to be done throughout the latitude of his
Dominions; but his power and his authority, Whatsoever is done to any
Messenger, is deemed as done to him that sent him.
deputed to those his servants and officers that he sends, are as the lively
representatives of the King, in every part of his Kingdom; and whatsoever
favor, payment, neglect, or abuse, is showed unto any of them; the same, in
all Nations is accounted, and therefore punished or rewarded, as a service done
unto the King himself; as our Savior, when but the Tole gatherer came for the
Tribute-mony, says, Give unto Caesar, what belongs unto Caesar.

And therefore it is but an idle, simple, most foolish, and frivolous
distinction of men, to deceive children and fools; to say, They love and honor
their King, and they fight not against their King, but against such and such,
whom notwithstanding they know to be the Kings chiefest officers, and to be
sent with the Kings Power, Commission, and Authority, to do those things that
they do. This is such a foppery, that I know not what to say, to undeceive
those that are so desirous to be deceived, when the Devil, Saint Paul says,
God s^ndeth them strong delusions. 2 Thessalonians 2.11. But what God sends justly as
the punisher of their sin, the Devil sends maliciously, as the guider of them
to Hell. Ba nesius in Tract de humanis Constitut.
which knows how near their destruction hangs over their heads, sends them
strong delusions, that they should so easily, and so sillily believe su h
palpable lies, as to make them think, they love him dearly, whom they murder
most barbarously.

Barnesius, a very godly and learned man, treating of the same Argument, says
in a manner the same thing; That the servants of Christ, rather then either
commit any evil, or resist any Magistrate, ought patiently to suffer the loss
of their goods, and the tearing of their members; nay, the Christian, after the
example of his Master Christ, ought to suffer the bitterest death for truth and
righteousness sake; and therefore (says he) whosoever shall rebel under
pretense of Religion, aeternae damnationis reus erit; he shall be found guilty
of eternal damnation.

Master Dod upon the Commandments.
Master Dod says, that, where the Prince commands a lawful act, the subjects
must obey; and if he injoynes unlawful commands, we must not rebel, but we
must be content to bear any punishment that shall be laid upon us, even unto
death it self; and we should suffer our punishment without grudging, even in
heart: and this he presses by the example of the Three Children, and of Daniel
that was a mighty man, and of very great power in Babylon, yet never went about
to gather any power against his King, though it were in his own defense.

Master Byfield upon 1 Pet. 2.13.
Master Byfield expounding the words of Saint Peter, (...), as to the Supreme,
says, This should confirm every good subject to acknowledge and maintain the
Kings Supremacy, and willingly to bind himself thereto by oath; for the Oath of
Supremacy is the bond of this subjection; and this oath men must take without
equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation: yea, it should bind in
them the same resolution that was in Saint Bernard, who says, If all the world
should conspire against me, to make me complot any thing against the Kings
Majesty, yet I would fear God, and not dare to offend the King, ordained of God.

Serenissimus Rex Jacobus, de vera lege liberae Monarchiae.
I might fill a Volume, if I would collect the testimonies of our best Writers;
I will add but one, of a most excellent King, our late King James of ever
blessed memory; for he says, The improbity, or fault of the Governor, ought
not to subject the King to them, over whom he is appointed Judge by God; for if
it be not lawful for a private man to prosecute the injury that is offered unto
him against his private adversary, when God has committed the sword of
vengeance only to the Magistrate, how much less lawful is it, think you,
either for all the people, or for some of them to usurp the sword, whereof they
have no right, against the public Magistrate, to whom alone it is committed
by God?

This has been the Doctrine of all the Learned, The obedient example of the
Martyrs in the time of Queen Mary.
of all the Saints of God, of all the Martyrs of Jesus Christ; and therefore
not only they that suffered in the first Persecutions under Heathen Tyrants,
but also they that of late lived under Queen Mary, and were compelled to
undergo most exquisite torments, without number, and beyond measure; yet none
of them, either in his former life, or when he was brought to his execution;
did either despise her cruel Majesty, or yet curse this Tyrant-Queen, that
made such havoc of the Church of Christ, and causelessly spilt so much innocent
blood; but being true Saints, they feared God, and honored her: and in all
obedience to her authority, they yielded their estates and goods to be spoiled,
their liberties to be infringed, and their bodies to be imprisoned, abused, and
burned, as oblations unto God, rather then, contrary to the command of their
Master Christ, they would give so much allowance unto their consciences, as,
for the preservation of their lives, to make any show of resistance against
their most bloody Persecutors, whom they knew to have their authority from that
bloody, yet their lawful, Queen.

And therefore I hope it is apparent unto all men that have their eyes open,
and will not, with Balaam, most wilfully deceive themselves; Numb. 24.15. Genesis
19.11.
or with the Sodomites, grope for the wall at noonday; that, by the Law of
God, by the example of all Saints, by the rule of honesty, and by all other
equitable considerations, it is not lawful for any man, or any degree or sort
of men, Magistrates, Peers, Parliaments, Popes, The conclusion of the whole.
or whatsoever you please to call them, to give so much liberty unto their
misguided consciences, and so far to follow the desires of their unruly
affections, as for any cause, or under any pretense to withstand Gods
Vicegerent, and with violence to make war against their lawful King; or
indeed, in the least degree, and lowest manner, to offer any indignity either
in thought, word, or deed; either to Moses our King, or to Aaron our High
Priest, that has the care and charge of our souls; or to any other of those
subordinate callings, that are lawfully sent by them to discharge those offices
wherewith they are entrusted: This is the truth of God, and so acknowledged by
all good men. And what Preachers teach the contrary, I dare boldly affirm it,
in the name of God, that they are the incendiaries of Hell, and deserve rather
with Corah, to be consumed with fire from Heaven, then to be believed by any
man on Earth.

CHAP. X.
Shows the impudency of the Anti-Cavalier: How the Rebels deny they war
against the King: An unanswerable Argument to press obedience: A further
discussion, whether for our Liberty, Religion, or Laws, we may resist our
Kings; and a pathetical disswasion from Rebellion.

I Could insert here abundant more, both of the Ancient and Modern Writers,
that do with invincible Arguments confirm this truth. But the Anti Cavalier
would persuade the world, Anti-Cavalier, p. 17, 18, etc.
that all those learned Fathers, and those constant Martyrs, that spent their
purest blood to preserve the purity of religion unto us, did either belie their
own strength, Yet Tertul. Cypr. (whom I quoted before) and R ssi^ hist. Eccles.
l. 2. c. 1. and S. August in Psalm 124. and others avouch, the Christians were
far stronger then their enemies, and the greatest part of Julians army were
Christians.
or befool themselves with the undue desire of over-valued Martyrdom; but now
they are instructed by a better spirit, they have clearer illuminations to
inform them to resist (if they have strength) the best, and most lawful
authority that shall either oppose, or not consent unto them: thus they throw
dirt in the Fathers face, and dishonor that glorious company, and noble army
of Martyrs, which our Church confesses, praises God; and therefore no wonder
that they will war against Gods anointed here on Earth, when they dare thus
dishonor and abuse his Saints that reign in Heaven: but I hope the world will
believe, that those holy Saints were as honest men, and those worthy Martyrs,
that so willingly sacrificed their lives in defense of truth, could as well
testify the truth and be as well informed of the truth, as these seditious
spirits, that spend all their breath to raise arms against their Prince, and to
spill so much blood of the most faithful subjects.

But though the authority of the best Authors is of no authority with them,
that will believe none but themselves; yet I would wish all other men to read
that Homily of the Church of England, where it is said, that God did never long
prosper rebellious subjects against their Prince, were they never so great in
authority, or so many in number: yea, were they never so noble, so many, so
stout, so witty and politic, but always they came by the overthrow, and to a
shameful end. Yea, though they pretend the redress of the Commonwealth,
(which rebellion of all other mischiefs, does most destroy; The Homily against
rebellion, p. 390. and 301.
) or reformation of religion, (whereas rebellion is most against all true
religion) yet the speedy overthrow of all Rebels shows, that God allows
neither the dignity of any person, nor the multitude of any people, nor the
weight of any cause, as sufficient; for the which, the subjects may move
rebellion against their Princes: and I would to God that every subject would
read over all the six parts of that Homily against wilful rebellion, for there
are many excellent passages in it; which, being diligently read, and seriously
weighed, would work upon every honest heart, never to rebel against their
lawful Prince.

And therefore the Laws of all Lands being so plain to pronounce them
Traitors, that take arms against their Kings, (as you may see in the Statutes
of England, 25 Edw. 3. c. 2. And as you know, it was one of the greatest
Articles for which the Earl of Strafford was beheaded, that he had actually
leavied war against the King:) The Nobles and Gentry, Lords and Commons of
both Houses of Parliament, in all Kingdoms, being convicted in their
consciences with the truth of this Doctrine, do in all their Votes and
Declarations conclude and protest, (and I must believe them) that all the
leavies, moneys, and other provision of horse and men, that they raise and arm,
are for the safety of the Kings person, and for the maintenance of his Crown
and Dignity.

Nay, more then this, the very Rebels in this our Kingdom of Ireland, knowing
how odious it is before God and man, for subjects to rebel and take arms
against their lawful King, do protest, if you will believe them, that they are
the Kings soldiers, and do fight and suffer for their King, and in defense of
his Prerogatives.

But you know the old saying, Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen,
The Devil deceives us soonest, when he comes like an Angel of light; and you
shall ever know the true subjects best by their actions, far better then by
their Votes, Declarations, or Protestations; for, Quid audiam verba, cum videam
contraria facta? When men do come in sheeps clothing, and inwardly are
ravening wolves; when they come with honey in their mouths, and gall in their
hearts; and, like Joab, with peace in their tongue, and a sword in their hand;
a petition to entreat, and a weapon to compel; I am told by my Savior, that I
shall know them by their works, not their words.

And therefore, as our Savior says, Not he that says, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which
is in Heaven: So I say, not he that cries peace, peace, is the son of peace,
but he that does obey his Prince, and does most willingly whatsoever he
commands; or suffers most patiently for refusing to do what he commands
amiss: This is the true subject.

Well, to draw toward the end of this point, That is, when the Commonalty
guide the Nobility, and the Subjects rule their King.
of our obedience to our Sovereign Governor, I desire you to remember a double
story. The one of Plutarch, which tells us how the tail of the Serpent
rebelled against the head, because that did guide the whole body, and drew the
tail after it whithersoever it would, therefore the head yielded that the
tail should rule; and then, it being small, and wanting eyes, drew the whole
body, head and all, through such narrow crevises, clefts, and thickets, that it
soon brought the Serpent to confusion. The other is of Titus Livius, Titus
Livius, Decad. 1. l. 2^
who tells us, that, when the people of Rome made a factious combination to
rebel against their Governors, Menenius Agrippa went unto them, and said,
that on a time all the members conspired against the stomach, and alleged,
that she devoured with ease and pleasure, what they had purchased with great
labor and pain; therefore the feet would walk no more, the hands would work no
more, the tongue would plead no more for it; and so within a while, the long
fast of the stomach made weak knees, feeble hands, dim eyes, a faltering
tongue, and a heavy heart; and then presently, seeing their former folly, they
were glad to be reconciled to the Stomach again: and this reconciled the people
unto their Governors.

I need not make any other application, but to wish, and to advise us all with
the people of Rome, to submit our selves unto our Heads, that are our
Governors, lest, if we be guided by the tail, we shall bring our selves, with
the Serpent, unto destruction:

And to remember that excellent speech of S. Basil: The people through
ambition, are fallen into grievous Anarchie, whence it happens, that all the
exhortations of their rulers do no good: no man has any list to obey, but
every man would reign; being swelled up with pride, that springs out of his
ignorance: And a little after, he says, Basilius de Spiritu Sancto. c. ult.
scii. 30. An argument of obedience drawn from the fifth Commandment.
that some sit no less implacable, and bitter examiners of things amiss, then
unjust and malevolent Judges of things well done, so that we are more brutish
then the very beasts; because they are quiet among themselves, but we wage
cruel and bloody wars against each other.

And let us never forget that the Lord says, Honor thy father and thy mother;
and I must tell you, that by father in this precept, you must not only
understand your natural father, but also the King, who is your political
father, and the father of all his subjects, and the Priest your spiritual
father, 1 Chronicles. 2.24.
and those likewise that in loco patris, do breed, and bring you up: and though
natural affection produces more love and honor unto those fathers that begat
us; yet, reason and religion oblige us more unto the King, that is the common
father of all, and to the Priest, that begat us unto Christ, then unto him that
begat us into the world; for that without our new birth, which is ordinarily
done by the office of the Priest, we were no Christians; What we are, and
should be, without King or Priest.
and as good unborn, as unchristened, that is unregenerated: and without the
King, that is Custos utriusque tabulae, the preserver both of the public
justice, and of the pure religion, our fathers can neither bring us up in
peace, nor teach us in the faith of Christ: and therefore if my father should
plot any treason against the King, or prove a Rebel against him, I am bound in
all duty and conscience, to prefer the public before the private, and if I
cannot otherwise avert the same, to reveal the plot to preserve the King,
though it were to the loss of my father's life; and therefore certainly they
that curse, that is, speak evil of their King are cursed; and they that rebel
against him, shall never have their days long in the land, but shall, through
their own rebellion, be soon cut off from the land of the living.

Whether for the liberty of Subjects, we can be warranted to rebel. In the
discourse of the differences betwixt King and Parliament.
For mine own part, I have often admired, why the subjects of King CHARLES
should raise any civil war, and especially turn their spleen against him. If
any say, it is for their liberties: I answer, that I am confident His Majesty
never thought to bring any (the meanest of his subjects) into bondage; nor by
an arbitrary government, to reduce them into the like condition, as the
Peasants of France, or the Boores of Germany, or the Pickroes of Spain are, as
some do most falsely suggest: but that they should continue, as they have been
in the days of his Father, of blessed memory, and of all other his most noble
Progenitors, the freest subjects under Heaven. And I hope they desire not to be
such Libertines, as those in the Primitive Church, The Libertines of the
Primitive Church, what they thought.
who (because Christian liberty freed us from all Jewish Ceremonies, and all
typical Rites, which were such a burden, that neither we nor our fathers could
undergo, and also from the curse and malediction of the moral law) would, under
this pretense of Christian liberty, be freed from the obligation of all laws,
and give themselves the freedom to do what they pleased; for this would prove
to be, not the liberty, but the bondage, and the base slavery of a people, that
are not governed by laws, but suffered to do what they please; because, that
neither God, nor good laws confine us, but for our own good: and he that
forbids us to obey impious commands, bids us to obey all righteous laws; and
rather to suffer, then to resist the most unrighteous Governors. But I fear,
that under the name of the liberty of the subjects, What is often aimed at
under the name of the^ liberty of the ^ubjects.
the licentiousness of the flesh is aimed at; because you may see by what is
already come to pass, our civil dissension has procured to many men such a
liberty, that few men are sure either of their life or estate: and God bless
me from such a liberty, and send me rather to be the slave of Christ, then such
a libertine of the world.

Whether for the preservation of our Religion, we can be warranted to rebel,
And if religion be the cause that moves you here hereunto, I confess this
should be dearer to us then our lives; but this title is like a velvet mask,
that is often used to cover a deformed face, and decipimur specie recti: for as
that worthy and learned Knight, Sir John Cheek, that was Tutor to King Edward
the sixth, says, If you were offered Persecution for Religion, you ought to
fly, and yet you intend to fight; if you would stand in the truth, ye ought to
suffer like Martyrs, and you would slay like Tyrants: Thus for Religion you
keep no Religion, and neither will follow the Counsel of Christ, nor the
constancy of Martyrs. And a little after, he demands why the people should not
like that Religion which Gods Word established, the Primitive Church has
authorized, the greatest learned men of this Realm, and the whole consent of
the Parliament have confirmed, and the Kings Majesty has set forth, is it not
truly set out? Sir John Cheek in, The true subject to the rebel p. 4 and 6.
Dare you Commons take upon you more learning then the chosen Bishops and
Clerks of this Realm have? This was the judgment of that judicious man. And I
must tell you that Religion never taught Rebellion; neither was it the will of
Christ, that Faith should be compelled by fighting, but persuaded by preaching;
for the Lord sharply reproves them that built up Sion with blood, Micah 3.18.
and Jerusalem with iniquity: and the practice of Christ and his Apostles was
to reform the Church by prayers and preaching, and not with fire and sword; and
they press obedience unto our Governors; yea, though they were impious,
infidels, and idolatrous, True religion never rebelleth.
with arguments fetched from Gods ordinance, from man's conscience, from wrath
and vengeance, and from the terrible sentence of damnation. And this truth is
so solid, that it has the clear testimony of holy Writ, the perpetual practice
of all the Primitive Saints and Martyrs; and, I dare boldly say it, the
unanimous consent of all the orthodox Bishops, and Catholic Writers, both in
England and Ireland, and in all the world, That Christian Religion teaches us
never with any violence to resist, or with arms to withstand the authority of
our lawful Kings.

If you say, The Laws of our Land, Whether the Laws of our Land do warrant us
to rebel.
and the Constitutions of this our Kingdom, give us leave to stand upon our
liberty, and to withstand all tyranny that shall be offered unto us,
especially when our estates, lives, and religion, are in danger to be destroyed.

To this I say with Laelius, that Nulla lex valeat contra jus divinum, Lael^^s
de privileg Eccles. 112.
Man's laws can exact no further obedience then may stand with the observance
of the divine precepts; and therefore we must not so prefer them, or rely
upon them so much, as to prejudice the other: and for our fear of the loss of
estate, life, or religion, I wish it may not be settled upon groundless
suspicions; for I know, and all the world may believe, that our King is a most
clement and religious Prince, that never did give cause unto any of his
subjects to foster such fears and jealousies within his breast; and you know
what the Psalmist says of many men, They were afraid, where no fear was. And
Job tells you, whom terrors shall make afraid on every side, Job 18.11, 12.
and shall drive him to his feet; (that is, to run away, as you see the
Rebels do from the Kings Army in every place) and in whose Tabernacle shall
dwell the King of fear: for, though the ungodly flees, when no man pursues
him; yet, they that trust in God are confident as Lions, without fear; they
know that the heart of the King is not in his own hand, but in the hand of the
Lord, Prove 21.1. Bonav. ad secundam did. 35. art 2. qu. 1.
as the rivers of waters, and he turns it whithersoever it pleases him;
either to save them, or destroy them, even as it pleases God; He orders the
King how to rule the people.

And therefore, in the name of God, and for Christ Jesus sake, let me persuade
you to put away all causeless fears, and groundless jealousies, and trust
your King; if not, trust your God; and let your will, which is so unhappy in it
self, become right and equal, by receiving direction from the will of God; and
remember what Vlpian the great Civilian says, that Rebellion and disobedience
unto your King, is proximum sacrilegio crimen, and that it is, in Samuel's
judgment, as the sin of witchcraft, whereby men forsake God, and cleave unto
the Devil: and above all, The remembrance of his Oath should be a terror to
the conscience of every Rebel.
remember the oath that many of you have taken, to be true and faithful unto
your King, and to reveal whatsoever evils or plots that you shall know or hear
to be contrived against his Person, Crown, or Dignity, and defend him from
them, Pro posse tuo, to the uttermost of your power, So help you God. Which
Oath, how they that are any ways assistant in a war against their King, can
dispense with, I cannot with all my wit and learning understand: and therefore
return, O Shulamite, (...), lay down thine arms, submit thy self unto thy
Sovereign, and know, that as the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings, 1 Kings
20.31.
so is the King of England; thou shall find grace in the time of need: but
delay not this duty, ^est, as Demades says the Athenians never sat upon
treaties of peace, but in mourning weeds, when by the loss of their nearest
friends, they had paid too dear for their quarrels, so thou be driven to do the
like: for (except the sins of the people require no less satisfaction, then
the ruin of the Kingdom I am confident, The Authors confidence of the kings
victory.
and am ready to hazard life and fortunes in this confidence, that the
goodness of our King, the justness of his cause, and the prayers of all
honest and faithful Ministers for him and our Church, will in the end give him
the victory over all those his rebellious enemies; that with lies, slanders,
and false imputations, have seduced the Kings subjects, to strengthen
themselves against their Sovereign: and all the world shall see, that as
Christ, so, in sensu modificato, this Vicegerent of Christ, shall rule in the
midst of these his enemies, and shall reign until he puts them all under his
feet.

A rebellion, that the like was never seen.
And because we never read of any rebellion (not this of Corah here, which of
above six hundred thousand men had not many more then 250. Rebels: nor that of
Absolon against David, who had all the Priests and Levites, and the best
Counselors, and a mighty Army with him, such as was able to overthrow Absolon
and twenty thousand men in the plain field: nor Israel against Rehoboam,
because they did but revolt from him, and not with any hostile Arms invade him:
nor the Senate of Rome against Caesar, though he was the first that entrenched
upon their liberty, and intended to exchange their Aristo-democracie into a
Monarchy: nor any other that I can remember, except that Council which
condemned Christ to death) that was grown to that height, to be so absolute,
and so perfect a Rebellion in all respects, as that a whole Parliament in a
manner, and the major part of the Plebeians of a whole Kingdom, should make a
Covenant with Hell it self, yea, and which is most considerable, that (as I
understand the beginning of this rebellion in this Kingdom of Ireland was) the
Commonalty therein should so fascinate the Nobility, as to allure them so long
to confirm their Votes, till at last they must be compelled in all things to
adhere unto their conclusions; that they whose power was formerly most absolute
without them, must now be subordinate unto them, that the strength of the
people may defend the weakness of the Nobility from that desert, which they
merited by their simplicity, to be seduced to join with them to rebel against
their King. Therefore, if any faction in any Parliament should thus combine
against the Lord, and against his anointed, there is no question, but their
reducement to obedience, will make that Majesty, which shall effect it, more
glorious to posterity, than were any of all his Predecessors.

And therefore I say again, Return, O Shulamite, return, and remember I pray
thee, remember, lest my words shall accuse thy conscience in the day of
judgment, that we are often commanded in many places of the Scriptures, to
obey our Kings; but in no place bidden, nor permitted to rise up and assist any
Parliament against our King. If thou say, Thou do not do it against thy
King, but against such and such that do abuse the King; I told you before, that
whosoever resists him that has the Kings authority, resists the King: and
therefore the whole world of intelligible men laugheth at this gullery, and he
that dwells in the heavens, shall laugh it to scorn; when with such
equivocation men shall think to justify their rebellion; and I hope the people
will not still remain so simple, as to think that all the Canon and the Musket
shot which the enemies of a King should make at him, must be understood to be
for the safety of his person.

And as neither private men, nor any Senate, nor Magistrate, nor Peers, That
the Pope has no power to license any man to make war against the King.
nor Parliament, can lawfully resist, and take Arms against their King; so
neither Synod, nor Council, nor Pope, have any power to depose, excommunicate
or abdicate; or to give immunities to Clergy, or absolution to subjects,
thereby to free them from their duty and due allegiance, and to give them any
color of allowance to rebel, and make war against their lawful King. And
this point, I should the more largely prosecute, because the natives of this
Kingdom are more addicted to the Pope and his Decrees, then any others of all
the Kings Dominion. Pareus in Romans 13. Johan. Bid, in the Right and
Prerogatives of Kings. And the Treatise entitled, God and the King.
But the bulk of this Treatise is already too much swelled, and I hope I may
have hereafter a fitter opportunity to enlarge this Chapter: and therefore till
then, I will only refer my Reader unto Pareus, John Bid, and abundance
more, that have most plentifully written of this Argument.

And so much for the persons against whom they rebelled, Moses their King, and
Aaron their High Priest, or chief Bishop; both these the prime Governors of
Gods people, whom they ought by all laws to have obeyed, and for no cause to
have rebelled against them.

CHAP. XI.
Shows what these Rebels did: How by ten several steps and degrees ( 1.
Pride. 2. Discontent. 3. Envy. 4. Murmuring. 5. Hypocrisy. 5. Lying. 7.
Slandering. 8. Railing. 9. Disobedience. 10. Resistance.) they ascended to the
height of their Rebellion; and how these are the steps and the ways to all
Rebellions, and the reason which moves men to rebel.

3. WE are to consider, Quid fecerunt, what these Rebels did. 3. Part. What
these Rebels did.
Cajetan says, Zelati sunt. Tirinus says, Irritaverunt. The vulgar Latin
says, Aemulati sunt. Our vulgar English says, They angered Moses: and our last
English says, They envied Moses. And indeed the large extent of the original
word, and the diversity of the Translation of it, shows the greatness of
their iniquity; and the multiformity or multiplicity of their sin: And
therefore that you may truly understand it, you must look into the History
Numb. 16.
, and there you shall see the whole matter; the conception, birth, strength,
and progress of their sin: for,

1. This sin was begotten by the seed of Pride; they conceived an opinion of
their own excellency. Excellency, that bewitcheth men to rebel, thinking that
they are inferior to none, equal to the best, if not superior unto all; and
therefore they disdained to be governed, and aspired to the government of Gods
people: And then Pride, as the father, Pride the beginning of rebellion.
begat Coffeehouse as his eldest son; they liked not their own station,
but would fain be promoted to higher dignity; and because Moses and Aaron were
settled in the government before them, and they knew not how either to be
adjoined with them, or advanced above them; therefore discontent begat Envy,
and they began to pine away at their felicity; and so our last English reads
it, They envied Moses.

2. This sin being thus conceived in the womb of the heart, Private meetings
do often produce mischief.
at last it comes forth to birth at the mouth; for out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks: and they begin to murmr and mutter among
themselves, and, as Rebels use to have, they have many private meetings and
conventicles among themselves, where they say, We are all good, we are all
holy, 2 Samuel 15.3, 4.
and They are no better then we; and, as Absolon depraved his fathers
government, and promised justice and judgment, and golden mountains unto the
people, if he were King: so do they traduce the present government with all
scandalous imputations, and profess such a reformation, as would make all
people happy, if they were but in Moses place, or made over him, or with him,
the Guardians, and Protectors of Commonwealth.

And so now you see this ugly monster, the son of Pride and Coffeehouse, is
born into the world, and spreads it self from the inward thought, to open
words. Then Moses hears the voice of this infant, which was not like the voice
of Jacob, but of the Serpent, which spitteth fire and poison out of his mouth.

And therefore lest this fire should consume them, and these mutterers prove
their murderers; Moses now begins to look unto himself, and to answer for his
brother: he calls these rebels, and he tells them, that neither he nor his
brother had ambitiously usurped, but were lawfully called into those places;
and to make this apparent to all Israel, he bad these rebels come out of their
Castles to some other place, where he might safely treat and confer with
them; and that was to the Tabernacle of the Lord: that is, to the place where
wisdom and truth resided, and was from thence published and spread to all the
people, and there the Lord should show them whom he had chosen.

The wisdom of Moses.
And here I do observe the care and wisdom of the Prophet, that at the first
appearance of their design, would presently begin to protect his brother,
before their rebellion had increased to any strength; for had he then delivered
Aaron into their hands, his hands had been so weakened, that he had never been
able afterward to defend himself; to teach all Kings to beware, that they
yield not their Bishops and Priests unto the desires of the people, which is
the forerunner of rebellion against themselves: for as King Philip told the
Athenians, that he had no dislike to them, The witty tale of Demosthenes to
save the Orat^urs: and to assure all Kings that if Aarons tongue, and the
Prophets pen, persuade not the conscience to yield obedience, Moses's power,
and Joshua's sword may subdue the people to subjection but never retain them
long without rebellion. Evil men grow worse, and worse. Verse. 12. Verse. 13.
but would admit them into his protection, so they would deliver to him their
Orators, which were the fomenters of all mischief, and the people were mad to
do it; till Demosthenes told them, how the Wolf made the same Proposition unto
the Sheep, to become their friends and protectors, so they would deliver their
Dogs, which were the cause of all discontent betwixt them; and the She being
already weary of their Dogs, delivered them all unto the Wolves, and then
immediately the Wolves spar^d neither Sheep nor Lambs; but tore them in pieces
without resistance: even so, when any King yields his Bishops unto the
peoples Votes, he may fear, ere long, to feel the smart of this great mistake.

Therefore Moses wisely delivers not his brother, but stoutly defends him,
who he knew had no ways offended them; and offered, if they came to a
convenient place, to make this plain to all the people,

But as evil weeds grow apace, and lewd sons will not be kept under, so the
more Moses sought to suppress this sin, the faster it grew, and spread it
self to many branches; from secret muttering, to open railing; from inward
discontent, to outward disobedience. They tell them plainly to their faces,
they will not come, e Castris, from their strong holds, they accuse them
falsely, that Moses their Prince aimed at nothing but their destruction; and to
that end, had brought them out of a good land to be killed in the wilderness,
and contemning them most scornfully in the face of all the people, whatsoever
Moses bids them do, they resolve to do the contrary.

So now Moses well might say with the Poet, Moses is in a strait. Fluctibus hic
tumidus, nubi b bus ille minax.
Quocunque aspicio, nihil est nisi pontus, and ether. And therefore it was
high time this evil Weed should be rooted out, or else the good corn shall be
choked; these Rebels must be destroyed, or they will destroy the Governors of
Gods people; and Moses now must wax angry, Nam debet amor laesus irasci,
otherwise his meekness had been stupidnesse, and his mercy had proved little
better then cruelty; when as to spare the Wolf, is to spoil the Sheep: and,
because these great Rebels had with Absolon, by their false accusations of
their Governors, and their subtle insinuations into the affections of the
people, stole away the hearts of many men; therefore Moses must call for aid
from Heaven, and say; Exsurgat Deus, And let him that has sent me, now defend
me: So God must be the decider of this dissension, as you may see he was in the
next verse.

And by this you find, Quid fecerunt, what these Rebels did; and how their sin
was not Simplex peccatum, but Morbus cumulatus, a very Chaos, and an heap of
confused iniquity: for here is, 1. Pride. 2. Discontent. 3. Envy. 4. Murmuring.
5. Hypocrisy. 6. Lying. 7. Slandering. The ten fold sin of rebels.
8. Railing. 9. Disobedience. 10. Rebellion.
A Monster indeed, that is a ten-headed, or ten-horned beast.

1. Pride, which bred the distraction in the Primitive Church, 1. Pride.
and will be the destruction of any Church, of any Commonwealth, was the first
seed of their rebelllion; for the humble man will easily be governed, but the
proud heart, like a sturdy Oak; will rather break then bend.

2. Discontent was the second step, and that is a most vexatious vice; 2.
Discontent
for though contentation is a rare blessing, because it arises either from a
fruition of all comforts, as it is in the glorious, in Heaven; The poison of
discontent.
or a not desiring of that which they have not, as it is in the Saints on
earth; yet discontent is that which annointeth all our joys with Aloes: for
though life be naturally sweet, yet a little discontent makes its weary of our
lives, as the Israelites, that loved their lives as well as any, yet for want
of a little water, say, O that we had dyed in Egypt. And Haman tells his wife,
Hester. 5.13.
that all the honor which the King and Queen showed unto him, availed him
nothing, so long as Mordecai refused to bow unto him.

And discontent may as well invade the highest, as the lowest; for as none is
so bare, but he has some benefits; so none is so full, The comm^n condition of
man to be ever wanting something.
but he wants something: as the Israelites had Manna, but they wanted water;
and when they had water, they wanted flesh; and this want made them
discontented; so these Rebels had the dignity to be Levites, and to be Peers;
of high places, and heads of all their families, which was more then they
deserved; but they wanted the honor to be Priests, and to be Kings, the chief
Governors of Gods people, which they desired; and therefore were discontented,
because their conceit was unsatiable, and their desires unsatisfied.

3. As Pride makes men discontented to be inferior unto any, 3 Envy.
so Discontent makes them always to envy their superiors: and therefore Envy
is the third head of this monster, and the third step unto rebellion; How
monstrous a sin is Envy.
a most hateful vice before God and man, That I should pine away with grief,
because God is gracious unto another; and I must be angry with God, because he
will not be guided by me in the disposing of his fav^urs: and therefore Saint
Augustine calls this a devilish vice, which caused Cain to kill Abel; Gen,
4.8. Acts 7.9.
the Patriarchs to sell Joseph; the Medes to molest Daniel; and the Nobility of
Jury to persecute good King David, Cyprian. in Sermon. de Livors.
and to crucify the son of David, Christ himself; Et ideo periere, quia
malucrunt Christo invidere quam credere.

And yet herein I must commend Envy, that, as the Poet says, -- Sit licet
injustus Livor, Though it be unjust to others, yet is it very just, to destroy
them first that would destroy others; as the envy of these rebels did,
Sampson-like, pull down the house upon their own heads; and will, most likely,
bring destruction unto those that follow them in rebellion.

4. Murmuring.
4. Murmuring, is a secret discontented muttering one to another of things that
we dislike, or persons that we distaste; and the very word in all languages
seems as harsh unto our ears, as the sin is hateful unto our souls: for in
Greek it is called (...); in Latin, Murmurare; in English, to Murmr; in
British, Grwgnach; a sad word, and a sour sin: Exodus c. 15. c. 16. c. 17.
therefore the wise man says, Beware of murmuring, which is nothing worth; and
yet this sin was frequent among the Israelites, (three times in three
Chapters) that they could never leave it, till, as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.
they were destroyed of the destroyer.

5. Hypocrisy.
5. Hypocrisy is, when a man seems to be what he is not; for, as Saint Hierom
says, Q^i foris Cato, intus Nero, hypocrita est; he that talks of peace, and
prepares for war; that protests loyalty, and yet hates his King; that in
his words will advance the Church, but in his actions will overthrow the
Churchmen; that commends all piety, but commits all iniquity; that will not
swear for a Kingdom, but deceipe for a penny; that pretends the safety of the
Kings person, but purloyneth away all his power; that will bend his knee, and
say, Hayle King, but will spit in his face, and crown him with thorns, he is an
hypocrite: So these rebels say, they are all holy, they love all their
brethren, they hate usurpation, and cannot endure the tyranny of these
Governors; but indeed, though they cried, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, all
for the King, and all for the Church; all for Moses, and all for Aaron; yet
notwithstanding this voice of Jacob, they had the hands of Esau, and they would
have brought Moses and Aaron to confusion, as they brought themselves to
destruction.

This is the property of an Hypocrite, and therefore Job speaking of an
hypocrite, says, (and it is excedingly well worth the observing) Though his
excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet he
shall perish for ever like his own dung; they which have seen him, (that is,
they which came out to see his pomp and his greatness, and have admired at the
greatness of his glory) shall say, Where is he? or, How chance he does not
ride on with his honor? Job 20.6, 7, 8, 9.
Job answers, The eye which saw him, shall see him no more; that is, in the
like Majesty, neither shall his place any more behold him: for, He shall flee
away as a dream, and shall not be found; yea, he shall be chased away as a
vision in the night. And our Savior knowing as well the cruelty, as the
subtlety of hypocrites, bids us to beware of hypocrites: Matthew. 7.15.
as the Poet says, -- ut atri limina Ditis. Shun hypocrites as the gates of
Hell, Hypocrisy, how odious it is.
and believe their actions rather then their protestations: for, as in the Old
Testament Sodom and Gomorrah are the patterns of all beastliness, so in the
New Testament the greatest sinners are threatened to have their portion with the
hypocrites.

6. Lying.
6. Lying must follow Hypocrisy at the heels: for, were it not for the heaps of
lies that hypocrites spread abroad, the world could not possibly be so easily
seduced by their hypocrisy; and I read it in a Sermon of a learned Divine,
That now adays some phanatique Sectaries of desperate opinions, and despicable
fortunes, (whom the Church and State find to be a malignant party), having
little else to do, make it their trade to lie both by whole sale, and retayle;
they invent lies, and vent lies; they tell lies, and write lies, and print
lies; yea, I may add, and more palpable lies, and more abominable, then either
Bourn or Butter ever published of the affairs of Germany; and this they do as
confidently, and impudently, as if they were informed by that lying spirit,
which entered as a Voluntier into Ahab's Prophets; and by lying, and raising
false rumors, they beget jealousies and fears in the people, and by blowing
the coals which themselves kindled, and enlarging the difference betwixt King
and Parliament, they set all in a combustion, and bring all into confusion: and
that which grieves me most, he says, that they are Preachers, which in the
exuberancie of their mis-grounded and mis-guided zeal, do both preach and pray
against public peace, as inconsistent with the Independencie, or rather
Anarchie, that they aim at.

7. Slandering may be coupled unto their Lying, 7. Slandering.
because we can slander none with that which is truth; therefore these Rebels
say, All the Congregation is holy, and that is a lie; when there can be no
holiness in the Rebels: and, The Lord is among them, which is another lie; for
he will forsake all those that forsake him: then they say, Moses and Aaron take
too much upon them, which is an apparent slander; and they add, that they
lifted up themselves above the Congregation of the Lord, which is another
slander, as false as the Father of lies could lay upon them; for I showed unto
you before, how truly they were called, and how justly they behaved themselves
in their places; but as Absolon knew well enough, that to traduce his Father's
Government, was the readiest way to insinuate, and to wind himself into a
good opinion among the people, and to make the King odious unto his subjects;
so these, and all other Rebels, will be sure to lay load enough of lies and
slanders upon their Governors; and so the namelesse Author of the Sovereign
Antidote, Goodwin, Goodwin in his Anti-Caval. Bu^roughs in his Sermon upon, The
glorious name of the Lord of Hosts.
Buroughs, and abundance more, such scandalous, impudent, lying libels, have
not blushed (which a man would think the brazen face of Satan could not choose
but do) so maliciously, and reproachfully, to lay to his Majesty's charge, the
things which (as the Prophet says) he never knew; and which all they that know
the King, do know to be apparent lies, and most abominable slanders against the
Lord's Vicegerent: but, Quid domini facient, audent cum talia fures? You know
the meaning of the Poet, and you may know the reason why these grand Liars,
these impudent slanderers, do so impudently belly so good a King, so pious, and
so gracious a Majesty; for, Lay on enough, Et aliquid adhaerebit, and throw
dust enough in their faces; and let the Governors be never so good, the King
as mild, and as unreproveable as Moses, and the Bishops like Aaron, the Saints
of the Lord; yet some thing will stick in the opinion of the simple, that are
not able to discern the subtilty of those distractors.

And as they diminish and undermine the credit and reputation of the best
Governors, by no other engine then a lying tongue, and a false pen; so with
the same instruments they do magnify their own repute, and further their
unjust proceedings, by deceiving the most simple with such equivocal lies, as
any sensible man might well wonder, A strange equivocation.
that they should be so insensibly swallowed down; as, when they say, They
fight for him whom they shoot at; and they are for the King, when with all
their might and main they strive to take away his power, to pull the sword out
of his hand, and to throw his Crown down to the dust; which is so strange a
kind of equivocation, as might well move men, with Pilate, to ask What is
truth? which we can never understand, if any of these things can be true: which
(as one says most truly) is one of the absurdest gulleries that ever was put
upon any Nation; much like that Anabaptist which I knew, that beat his wife
almost to death, The tale of an Anabaptist.
and said, He beat not her, but that evil spirit that was in her.

Therefore the Lord hates this abominable sin, because it is unpossible the
people should be so soon drawn into rebellion, if they did not credit these
defamations: But the wise man tells us, that Stultus credit omni verbo;
therefore no wise man will believe those false and wicked slanders, that such
malicious Rebels do spread abroad against their King, Prince, or Priest, or any
other Governor of Gods people.

8. Railing.
8. After they had thus slandered these good men, they fell to open railing
against them, as you may see, Number. 16.13, 14. For now they had eaten shame, and
drunk after it; and therefore they cared not what they said; and so now we find
how the Rebels deal with our King, and with our Bishops too; with our Moses,
and with our Aaron; for here in Ireland they rebel against their Sovereign,
because he is no Papist, and will not countenance the Papists as they desire:
And in England, they rail at him, and rebel against him, because they say, He
is a Papist, and does connive at Popery, and has a design to bring in Popery
into the Kingdom, which is as flat a lie as the father of lies has ever
invented. So the Bishops here are driven out of all, (as my self am expelled,
aedibus and sedibus, and left destitute of all relief) because we are no
Papists, but do both preach and write against their errors, as much as any,
and more learnedly then many others. And in England we are persecuted, and
driven to flee from place to place, or to take our place in a hard prison, (as
my self have been often forced to flee, and to wander in the cold and dark long
nights) because we are Papists, and Popishly given: Good God! what shall we do,
whither shall we go, or what shall we say? for, Nusquam tuta fides, -- nec
hospes ab hospite tutus. We cannot confide in the confiders, to whom we are
become malignant enemies for speaking truth; neither dare we trust in the
followers of the public faith, nor in the professors of the Catholic faith;
whereof, men maliciously rejecting their godly Bishops, rebelliously fighting
against their lawful King, and mortally wounding their own souls, have made a
shipwreck. But, If they called the Master of the house Beelzebub, if they said
he was a glutton, and a drunkard, what wonder if they say these things of us?
and if Christ the King of Kings was crucified between two Thieves, what marvel
if this servant of Christ, our King, be thus pressed, opposed, and abused
betwixt two rebellious factions? And when we see our Savior, and our King thus
handled, it is less strange to find the Bishops and the Priests persecuted and
crucified betwixt two heretical and tyrannical parties. Well, Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee,
take heed lest the King of peace shall say unto thee, Verily, thou shall see me
no more, till thou say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

9 Disobedience.
9. When they were grown thus impudent, from bad to worse, both over shoes and
over boots, then Disobedience must needs follow; and therefore now putting on
their brazen foreheads, they tell Moses plainly, We will not come to thee; we
will do nothing that thou willest, but will cross thee in all that thou
intendest: this is our most peremptory resolution.

And so we see, that, Nemo repent fit pessimus, but the wicked grow worse and
worse: first you must lend, then you must give, if not, we will take; or if you
deny your goods, we will have your bodies: so at first, what soever we do, it
is for the King; and, because this is so palpable a mockery, that as every man
knows, they that fight against the Earl of Essex, and his Army, do war
against the Parliament; so they that fight against the Kings Army, do as
certainly war against the King; then we grow so impudent, as to justify any
rebellion against our King; as in England, Goodwin, and that seditious
Pamphleter, in opening The glorious name of the Lord of Host, do but a little
less: For which application of Gods glorious name, and abusing the holy
Scriptures, to such abominable transgression of Gods holy Precepts, to
instigate the subjects to war against their Sovereign, and to involve a whole
Kingdom into a detestable distraction: I do much admire that they are not
apprehended, and transferred to the Kings Bench Bar, to be there arraigned,
and condemned to be punished according to their deserts.

10. When these Rebels had proceeded thus far, 10. Rebellion. See the place.
J^shua 1.16, 17, 18.
then contrary to the loyal obedience which they owed unto their Prince, and
which the people promise unto Joshua, they ascended to the height of that
odious rebellion, which may not unfitly be called Monstrum, horrendum, inform,
ingens, cui lumen ademptum, and is (as Thucydides says). All kind of evil; Et
qui facit, peccatum non facit, sed ipse totus est peccatum: and therefore
Samuel says, that Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, when men do
confederate to give their souls unto the Devil; for now these Rebels are ready
to take arms against Moses, and they had reduced all civil order to a confused
paritie, deposed and destroyed their Governors, if the Governor of all the
world, by whom Kings do reign, and who has promised to defend them, had not
prevented the same from Heaven.

And the reason why they did all this, The reason of their rebellion
and proceeded thus far against Moses and Aaron, is intimated in the words of
my Text, Aemulati sunt, because they would emulate or imitate Moses, that is,
to play the Moses, or play the King, and play the part of the chief Priest
themselves; for this is certain, that none will envy, murmr at, slander, and
disobey his King so far, as to make an open rebellion against him, but they
that in some sort would rule and be Kings themselves; especially when they
shall seek, so far to debilitate their Prince, as that he shall be no ways
able to make resistance; for they think, If Treason prosper, it is no Treason;
what is the reason? if it prosper, who dares call it Treason? and none would
disobey their Bishops or chief Priests, but they that would, and cannot be
Bishops themselves; because pride and ambition are the two sides of that
bellows, which blows up disobedience and rebellion.

But they that are bad servants, will prove worse Masters; they that will not
learn how to obey can never tell how to rule; and if Moses were, as these
Rebels suggested, a Tyrant; yet the Philosopher tells us, we had better endure
one Tyrant, then, as they were, 250. Tyrants. And the Homily of the Church
tells us, that contrary to their hopes, God never suffers the greatest treasons
or rebellions for any long time to prosper.

Therefore, when under loyal pretenses, we see nothing but studied mischiefs,
and most crafty endeavors to innovate our government, or to imbroyle the
Kingdom in a civil war, that so they may fish in a troubled water; let us
never be so stupid, as to secure them in these actions, to produce our
discredit for our simplicity, and destruction for our disloyalty; but rather
let us leave them as Delinquents, to the justice of our Laws, and the mercy of
the King; and this will be the readiest way to effect peace and happiness to
our Nation.

CHAP. XII.
Shows where the Rebels do hatch their Rebellion: The heavy, and just
deserved punishments of Rebels: The application, and conclusion of the whole.

4. Part. Where they did la^ this.
4. WE are to consider, Vbi fecerunt, where they did all this; in castris, non
in templis; that is, in their own houses, not in the house of God: for in Gods
house we teach obedience to our Kings, and beat down rebellion in every
Kingdom; this is the Doctrine of the Church. But in our houses, in our cabins
and corners, in private Coventicles, they teach rebellion, Our houses are our
Castles
which is the doctrine of those Schools. And these Schools are called Castra,
Tents, or Castles; because indeed every man's house is his Castle, or his Fort,
where he thinks himself sure enough; so did these Rebels, and they would not
come out of them: neither Moses the King could compel them, nor Aaron the
Priest could persuade them, to come out of their Castles, and forsake their
strong holds, which their guilty consciences would not permit them to do: and
so all other rebels will never be persuaded to forsake their places of
strength, until God pulls them, as he did these Rebels, out of their holes:
for, were it not for these Castra, the Cities and Castles that they possess,
they could not so (like subtle Foxes) run out and in, to nullify the property,
and to captivate the liberty of the Kings faithful subjects, as they do; for,
though they do all this under those fair pretenses, for the defense of the true
religion, the maintenance of our liberties, and the property of our estates:
yet for our Religion, it is now amongst us, as it was in the days of Saint
Basil, Basilius de Spiritu Sancto, cap. ult.
(...), Every one is a Divine; and then (...), etc. All the bounds of our
forefathers are transgressed, foundation of doctrine, and fortification of
discipline is rooted up; and the innovators which never had any other
imposition of hands, but what they laid upon themselves, have matter enough to
set forward their sedition: And for the other pretenses, I dare procaim it to
all the world, that mine own experience believes, the liberty of the subjects,
and the property of our goods, and the true Protestant Religion, could not
possibly be more abused, then it has been by them that came, in the name, and
for the service of the Parliament: and therefore I would to God, that all the
oppressions, injustice, and imprisonments, that have been made since the
beginning of this Parliament, were collected and recorded in a Book of
remembrance, that all the world might see and read the justice and equity of
our Parliament, and the iniquity, oppression, and rapine of them, that to
enrich themselves, How the Parliament Rebe^s have enriched themselves in
Ireland.
deprive us of our estates and liberties, and that under the Parliaments name.
For I hear, that as many have been impoverished, so many both the Lords and
Commons in this Kingdom of Ireland, that, before the conjunction of these
malevolent martial Planets, were very low at an ebb, and their names very deep
in many Citizens books, have now wiped off all scores, paid all their debts,
and clad themselves in Silks and Scarlet, but with the extorted moneys, and the
plundered goods of the loyal subjects: I hope it is not so in England.

Yet, as Platina tells us, that when the Guelphes and the Gibilines, Platina's
story of the Guelphs and Gibelines.
in the City of Papia, were at civil discord; and the Gibilines promised to one
Facinus Caius, all the goods of the Guelphes, if he assisted them to get the
victory, which he did; and after he had subdued the Guelphes, he seized upon
the goods of both; and when the Gibilines complained that he brake his
Covenant, to pillage their goods, Caius answered, that, Themselves were
Gibilines, but their goods were Guelphs, and so belonged unto him: So both in
England and Ireland, I see the Parliament- Forces, and the Rebels, (I hope
contrary to the will of the Parliament) make little difference betwixt Papist
and Protestant, the well-affected and disaffected; for, they cannot judge of
their affections, but they can discern their estates, and that is the thing
which they thirst after; Haud ignota cano.

But you will say, These are miseries unavoidable, accidents common to all
war, when neither side can excuse all their followers.

I answer, Woe be to them therefore that were the first suggesters and
procurers of this war, and cursed be they that are still the incendiaries,
and blow the coals, for the continuance of these miserable distractions. I am
sure, his Majesty was neither the cause, nor does he desire the prolonging
thereof for the least moment; but, as his royal Father was a most peaceable
Prince, so has he showed himself in all his life, to follow him passibus
aequis, and to be a Prince of peace: though, as the God of peace is likewise a
man of war, and the Lord of Hosts; so this peaceable Prince, when his
patience is too much provoked, can (as you see) change his pen for a sword, and
turn the mildness of a Lamb into the stoutnesse of a Lion; and you know what
Solomon says, that The wrath of a King is the messenger of death, especially
when he is so justly moved to wrath, And so much for the particulars of this
Text.

2. Having fully seen the ugliness of this sin, 2. The punishment of these
rebels.
you may a little view the greatness of the punishment: for,

Although I must confess, we should be slow to anger, slow to wrath, yet when
the Magistrate is disobeyed, the Minister despised, and God himself disclaimed,
it makes our hearts to bleed, and our spirits angry within us: yea, though the
King were as gentle, and as meek as Moses, the meekest man on earth; and the
Bishops as holy as Aaron, Tirinus in ^. Psalm.
the Saint of the Lord: yet such disobedience and rebellion, would anger
Saints; for so Tirinus faith, Irritaverunt, They angered Moses in their Tents,
and Aaron the Saint of the Lord: Nay more then this, they angered God himself,
so far that fire was kindled in his wrath, and it burned to the bottom of
hell. And as these rebels were Lords and Levites, Clergy and Laity; so God did
proportion their punishments according to their sins: for the Levites, that
were to kindle fire upon Gods Altar, and should have been more heavenly, and
those two hundred and fifty men which usurped the Office of the Priests; He
sent fire from heaven to devour them; and the Nobility that were Lay-Lords, the
Prophet tells you, The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the
Congregation of Abiram. A most fearful example of a just judgment: for to have
seen them dead upon the earth, as the Egyptians upon the shore, had been very
lamentable; but to see the earth opening, and the graves devouring them quick,
was most lamentable, and so strange, that we never read of such revenge taken
of Israel; never any better deserved: and which is more, Saint Basil says,
Basilius hom. 9.
quod descenderunt in infernum damnatorum, they fell into the very pit of the
damned; which doleful judgment, though they well deserved it, yet I will leave
that undetermined.

And if these rebels, proceeding not so far, whatsoever they intended, as to
offer violence, and to make an open war against Moses, were so heavily
plagued for the Embrio of their rebellion, what tongue shall be able to
express the detestation of that sin, and the deserts of those Rebels, that by
their subtilty and cruelty, would bring a greater persecution upon the Church,
then any that we read since the time of Christ, and by a desperate disobedience
to a most Gracious King, would utterly overthrow a most flourishing State? A
rebellion and persecution; the one against the King, the other against the
Church, that in all respects can scarce be paralleled from the beginning of the
world, to this very day.

And therefore except they do speedily repent with that measure of repentance,
as shall be in some sort proportionable to the measure of their transgression,
I fear God in justice will deal with them as he did with the Jews, deliver them
into the hand of their Enemies, that will have no compassion upon young man or
maiden, 2 Chronicles. 36 17.
old man, or him that stoopeth for age; or rather as he did with Pharaoh King
of Egypt, deliver them up to a reprobate sense, and harden their hearts, that
they cannot repent, but in their folly and obstinacy still to fight against
Heaven, until the God of heaven shall overthrow them with a most fearful
destruction; the which I pray God, they may foresee in time, and repent, that
they may prevent it, that God may be still merciful unto us, as he uses to be
to those that love his Name.

And so much for the words of this Text.

The application of all.
Now to Apply all in brief: if God shall say to any Nation, I will send them a
King in my wrath, and give them Laws not good: let them take heed they say
not, We will take him away by our strength: for we have read, that He has
authority to give us a King in his displeasure, but you shall never read, that
we have authority to disobey him at our pleasure, and to say, Nolumus hunc
regnare super nos: or, if any do, let them know, that he which set him up, and
settled him over them, is able to protec^ him against them; and they that
struggle against him, do but strive against God; and therefore they have no
better remedy, then to pray to God, which has the hearts of all Kings in his
hand; that he would, as the Psalmist says, Give the King his judgments, and
his righteousness unto the King's Son, that he would either guide his heart
aright, and direct his feet to the way of peace: or as he has sent him in his
fury, so he would take him away in his mercy. But for our selves of these
Islands we have a King, and I speak it here in the sight of God, and as I shall
answer for what I say at the dreadful judgment, not to flatter him that hears
me not, but to inform those of you that know him not so well as I, that had the
happiness to live with my ever honored Lord, the Noble Earl of Pembroke and
Montgomery, 16, or 17. years in the Kings house, and of them 6, or 7. years in
the Kings service, He is a most just, pious, and gracious King; and I believe,
the best Protestant King that ever England or Ireland saw, neither Popishly
affected, nor Schismatically led to disaffect, but most constantly resolved to
be a true Defender of that true Protestant Faith, which is established by Law
in the Church of England, and he is such a King, of so unblameable a life, so
spotless in all his actions, so clement, and so meek toward all men, and so
merciful toward his very enemies, that the mouth of Envy cannot truly tax
him, nor malice it self disprove him in any thing. Yet we know, that as Moses
the meekest among men, and David the best of Kings, were sore afflicted,
slandered, and persecuted, not a little, by many of their own obliged subjects;
yea, and the best Kings have had the greatest troubles; so this good King, has
had for his trial a great part of the like usage, I know not by whom, neither
do I intend here to accuse others, but to instruct you, and by what I showed
out of this Text, to teach you above all, to take heed of disobedience and
Rebellion toward your King: and to let you understand, that what privileges
in the New Testament are acknowledged to be due to Heathen Princes, and what
prerogatives the spirit of God has in the Old Testament warranted unto the
Jewish Kings, and what the universal Law of Nature, has established upon all
the supreme Governors, do all of them appertain by unquestionable right unto
his most sacred Majesty; and yet His Majesty, out of His incomparable
goodness, insisteth not to challenge all these, but vouchsafes to accept of
those Rights and Prerogatives, which are undoubtedly afforded him by the Laws
of His own Lands: and these come far short, scarce the moity of the other;
because we know, if our Historians have not deceived me, how many of them were
obtained, by little better then by force and violence, compelling Kings to
consent unto them; whereas Laws should be of a freer nature.

And therefore of all the Nations round about us, besides, that God has
entrusted Him with us all, we have most reason to entrust him, and to give
credit unto his Majesty's many Protestations (too high to be forgotten by him,
or misdoubted by us) for his resolution, to maintain the Liberty of his
Subjects, the just Privileges of Parliaments, and the true established
Religion in the Kingdom of England: and likewise to rule over us according to
our Laws, in this Realm of Ireland. And we have least reason to rebel and take
arms against him; and therefore let us not be persuaded by any means by any man
to do it, because God will preserve his anointed, and will, as you see, plague
the Rebels; but let us pray for our King, and praise God night and day, that he
which might have given us a bramble, not only to tear our flesh, but also to
set us all on fire, has given us such a Cedar, such a gracious, and a pious
King; and, if either foreign foes, or domestique Rebels, do press him so,
that he has need of us, let us add our help, and hazard our lives to defend
and protect him that protecteth us; and suffers all for the protection of
Gods service, as it was established in the purest time of Reformation, and for
the preservation of our Laws from any corrupt interpretation, or arbitrary
invasion upon them, by those factious men, that under fair, yet false
pretenses, have, with wondrous subtilty, and with most subtle hypocrisy,
seduced so many simple men, to partake with them, not only to overthrow the
true Religion, to imbase the Church of Christ, that hitherto has continued
glorious in this Nation, and by trampling the most learned under feet, to
reduce Popery into this Kingdom, and to bring in Atheism or Barbarism into our
Pulpits, when they make their Coach-men, and Tradesmen, like Jeroboam's
Priests, the basest of the people, to become their Trencher-Chaplains, and the
teachers of those poor sheep, for whom the Son of God has shed his precious
blood, but also to change the well-setled government, and to subvert the whole
fabric of this famous Commonwealth, either by their tyranny, or bringing all
into an Anarchie; for if we have any regard of any of these things, either true
Religion, or ancient Government; a gracious King, and a learned Clergy; a
glorious Church, and a flourishing Kingdom; we ought not to spare our goods, or
be niggards in our contributions to help his Majesty: yea, as Debora says, To
help the Lord against the mighty; Or, if we be cold and careless herein,
penurious and tenacious of our worldly pelf, preferring our gold before our
God; or fearing graceless Rebels more then we love our gracious King: It may
fall out, as Saint Augustine says, Quod non capit Christus, rapit fiscus; or
as it did with the Carthaginians, who because they would not assist Hanniball
with some reasonable proportion of their estates, they lost all unto the
Romans, and with the Constantinopolitans, that for denying a little to
Paleologus, lost all unto the Turks; so we may be robbed and pillaged of all,
because we would not part with some; and I had rather the King should have all
I have, then that the Rebels should have any part thereof. Therefore I hope I
shall persuade all good men to honor God with their riches, and to assist His
Majesty to the uttermost of their powers, even to the hazard, and to the loss
both of liberty and life. And doing this, our God which is the King of Kings,
will bless us, and defend us from all evil, and make us Kings and Priests, to
live with him for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom, with
the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praise, and glory, and dominion, from
henceforth for evermore. Amen. Amen.

Hester 4.16, If I perish, I perish. Yet,

Esdras 4.41. The truth is great, and will prevail.


Jehovae Liberatori.
TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
THough the wisest man in all the Kingdom of Persia says, Great is the truth
and stronger then all things; Yet, the father of lies has now played his part
so well, that, as the Prophet says, Truth is fallen in the Street, and Equity
cannot enter in; And your Majesty, whom the God of Truth has anointed his sole
Vicegerent, to be the Supreme Protector of them both, in all your Dominions,
has accordingly lifted up your Standard against their Enemies; and I may truly
say of you, as Menevensis says of that most Noble King Alfred.

Si modo victor erat, ad crastina bella pavebat.
Si modo victus erat, ad crastina bella parabat.
Neither do I believe, that Lucan's Verse can be applied to any man better than
to your Majesty: -- Non te videre superbum
Prospera fatorum, nec fractum adversa videbunt.


As the height of your glory and prosperity never swelled your Pious heart, so
your greatest crosses and adversities never dejected your Royal spirit; But as
the Prophet says of the Captain of the host of the Lord, so I say to you that
are his Lieftenant, Ride on with your honor, or, ride prosperously, Because of
the word of truth, of meekness, and righteousness, the people shall be subdued
unto you; and because the King puts his trust in the Lord, and in the mercy
of the most Highest, he shall not miscarry; especially, while he fights, as
he does, the battle of the Lord, in defense of the Church of Christ, who has
promised to be his shield and buckler; which is the daily faithful prayer of

Your Majesty's most loyally devoted Subject, and most faithfully obliged
servant Gryffith Ossory.

THE DISCOVERY OF MYSTERIES. OR, The Plots and practices of a prevailing
Faction in this present Parliament, to overthrow both Church and State.
CHAP. I.
Shows the Introduction; the greatness of this Rebellion; the Original
thereof; the secret plots of our Brownistical faction; and the two chifest
things that they aimed at to effect their Plot.

I Have long wandered in a region of Rebellion, among seduced Subjects, and
discontented Peers; and now at last, after I had passed the raging Seas; and
very hardly escaped the storms and dangers of the surging waves, I am arrived
in my native soil: where I find my self encompassed with far greater storms
and more violent winds then ever I thought could be on any Land; for though
that Grand Rebellion, which you may find lately described, was both magna and
mira, very great and very grievous, such as I supposed could not be exceeded by
any humane malice; yet now (me thinks) I hear the Spirit saying unto me as he
did unto Ez^kiel, Son of man stand up, and I will show thee greater
abominations; and a Rebellion far greater and more odious then either Popish,
Irish, or any other Sect or Nation of the World has hitherto produced; and
therefore I may now say with the Poet, Barbara Pyraemidum sileat miracula
Memphis.
Let proud Babylon cease to boast
Of her Pyramid's stately spires;
This Rebellion is more strange,
Surmounting all infernal fires:
No age the like has ever bred,
Nor shall when these Rebels be dead.


The seed and original of this Rebellion.
The seed of it was unseasonably sown in the Northern storm; and the Original of
those Boreal blasts (either why or by whom those spirits were raised) is not so
well known to me; therefore how justly the King did undertake the quarrel, I
will not at this time determine; or with what equity the Scots made their
approach into England, it is not my purpose to discuss: yet I must needs say,
that our English Sectaries, and Amsterdam Recusants, which hated our Church and
loved not our King, justum, quia justum, only because he is so good, too good
for them, did from hence arripere ansam, take hold of this opportunity, by
procuring those to proceed that were coming on, and discouraging the others of
the Kings side, that were Cowardly enough (to say no worse) of themselves, to
betray both King and Kingdom into the hands of the Invaders. So the good King
was now with King David brought into a strait, either to take counsel and
follow the advice of those secret Sectaries, So now I fear more the secret
enemies both of Church and State, that may lu^k in Court, then those that lie
in the Earl of Essex his Camp.
and the masked enemies both of the Church and State, that as yet insensible
unto him, were such, in the bosom of his Court, and most slily aimed at a
further mischief then his Majesty could have imagined, as now it appears by
the consequences of this Parliament; or, else to hazard the dangers that his
then open foes were like to bring upon his people: And I assure my self, eyes
of flesh, that cannot pierce into the mysteries of the hearts and our secret
thoughts, could see no further, nor make any better election then His Majesty
did; that is, to call a Parliament, which the hearts of all the Kingdom called
and cried for; and which, in former times, by the wise institution and right
prosecution thereof, was found to be the Pancreston, or, as the Weapon salve,
an antidote to cure all the diseases, and to heal all the bleeding wounds of
this Kingdom, (though of late we have sensibly felt the unhappy ending of some
of them, which perhaps may be some accidental cause of some part of this
unhappiness:) here was His Majesty's fair mind, and an act of special grace;
for which all His Subjects ought most thankfully to show themselves Loyal unto
Him, when He preferred their safety before the prosecuting of his own
resolutions.

But, Decipimur specie recti, we are many times deceived by the shadow of the
truth, and betrayed under the vizard of virtue; for, as God produces light out
of darkness, and good out of evil; so wicked men, like the spiders, do suck
poison from those flowers, whence the Bees do extract honey; and these
subtle-headed Foxes (whereof many of them had unduly got themselves elected
into the House of Commons, and there factiously combined themselves together to
do their great exploit, to overthrow the Government both of Church and Sat,
and minded to make the Parliament House like Vulcans Forge, where they intended
to contrive their Iron-net, that should be able to hold fast all sorts of
people, from him that sits upon the Throne, to him that wallowed in dust and
ashes) turned the hopes of our redresses to our extreme miseries, when, in
stead of rectifying our abuses, they intended principally to work our ruin in
our just apprehension, though perhaps our happiness in their own mistaken
conception.

And, as the Apostle says, Known unto God are all his works from the
beginning, and he has eternally decreed, how, and by what means, to bring them
all unto perfection; so the Devil, being God's Ape, and the wicked treading in
his steps, do first mold their designs, and intentions in the Idea of their own
brains, and conclude the works they would have done in their own conceits, and
then they frame to themselves the means and ways, whereby they are resolved to
produce and perfect all those misshapen embryoes that they conceived; and so
these factious men, this brood of vipers, that would gnaw through the bowels of
their mother, from the first convention of this Parliament had resolved upon
their plot, and contrived among themselves, what great good work they would by
such and such means bring to pass.

And that was (as I hope this subsequent discourse will make it plain to all,
The design (...) plot of the faction of Se^aries.
that will not be wilfully blind) the subversion of the ancient government both
of this Church and Kingdom; and to introduce a new Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and to frame a new Commonwealth, much like, if not worse than that of our
neighbors in the Low Countries.

Gratum opus agricolis; a brave exploit, and a great work indeed, beyond the
adventure of Junius Brutus, that expelled the Kings, but left the Priests
alone; that purged the corruption of the Royal Government, but meddled not with
the Religion of their Bishops and Prophets: and beyond the undertaking of
Martin Luther, that pulled down the pride of the Pope, and all that Romish
Hierarchy; but ventured not to trample upon the S^epter of Kings, and the
Imperial Government, which he held Sacred, and inviolably to be obeyed; For,
these men perceiving how God had so wisely ordered these Governments among his
people, to assist each other, that the one can neither stand nor fall without
the other, (as it is fully and truly showed in the Grand Rebellion;) therefore
as Caligula wished that the people of Rome had but one neck, that so he might
dispatch them all, uno ictu, with one stroke; So these men would overthrow both
Government, and destroy both King and Priest, both Church and State, at one
time, with one clap, with one thunderbolt: And so they should be famous
indeed, though it were but like the fame of Herostratus, that burnt the Temple
of Diana, or of Raviliac, that killed the King of France; of Nero, that
destroyed his mother; or Oedipus that murdered his own father; for a man may be
as notoriously famous for transcendent villainies, and nefarious impieties, as
another is for his rare virtues, and super-eminent deeds of piety; As in
History Thersites is as well known for his base Cowardice, as Achilles for his
heroic Valor: And in the Scripture, Judas for his Treachery is as notoriously
known, as Saint Peter for his Fidelity. Therefore these men go on with this
great Design; and to effect the same, I find that they aimed at these two
special things.

1. To take away all the lets and impediments that might hinder them. They
aimed at two things.
2. To secure unto themselves all the helps and furtherances that might
advantage them. For,
1. As a Vineyard that is well hedged, 1. To remove the impediments of their
design.
or a City strongly fenced with walls and bulwarks, cannot easily be laid wast
and spoiled, before these defenses be destroyed; so the wild Boars cannot
devour the grapes of God's Church, and swallow down the Revenues of her
Governors; and the Rebels cannot pull the Sword out of their Sovereigns hand,
and lay his Crown down in the dust; so long as the means of their preservations
are entire and not removed: Therefore these men endeavor to eradicate all the
impediments of their Design. And they saw four great Blocks, that were as four
mighty Mountains, which their great Faith (their public faith being not yet
conceived) must remove, before they could plant their new Church, and subvert
the old Government of this Kingdom: and those were; 1. The Earl of Straffords
Head. Four impediments of their Design.
2. The free judgment of the Judges. 3. The power of dissolving the Parliament.
4. The Bishops votes in the House of the Lords.


For, as the heavenly Angels could do nothing against Sodom, while righteous
Lot was in it; so these earthly angels, the messengers of Abaddon, can never
effect their ends, to overthrow the Church and State, to make them as Sodom,
full of all impurity and villainy, until these four main stops be taken away:
And therefore;

CHAP. II.
Shows the eager prosecution of our Sectaries, to take off the Earl of
Straffords head. How he answered for himself. The Bishops right of voting in
his cause. His excellent virtues, and his death.

1. Impediment.
1. THey get Master Pym, the grand father of all the purer sort, and a fit
instrument for this Design, in the name of the House of Commons, The Earl his
Charge.
and thereby of all the Commonal^y of England, to charge Thomas, Earl of
Strafford, of High Treason; A high charge indeed, and yet no less a crime
could serve the turn, to turn him out of their way; because nothing else could
subdue that spirit, by which he was so well able to discover the plots, and to
frustrate the practices of all the faction of Sectaries; for as the Jews were
no ways sufficient to answer Saint Stephen's arguments, but only with stones;
so these men saw themselves unable to confute his reasons, and to subdue his
power, but only by putting him to death, and cutting off his head, for that
fault which Pym alleged he had committed.

But then, I demand, How this great charge of High Treason shall be made good
against him?

How sought to be proved.
It is answered, That England, Scotland, and Ireland, and every corner of these
three Kingdoms must be searched, and all discontented persons that had at any
time any Sentence, though never so justly pronounced against them, by him that
was so great a Judge, yet conceited to be otherwise by themselves; must now be
encouraged and countenanced by the faction, and most likely by this grand
Accuser, to say all that they know, and perhaps more than was true, against
him; for what will not envy and malice say? or what beast will not trample upon
the Lion, when they see him grovelling and gasping for life in an unevitable
pit, and, it may be, compassed with so many mastiff dogs (I mean his enemies,
and discontented witnesses) as were able to tear more than one Lion all to
pieces? So by this means they are enabled to frame near thirty Articles against
him, ut, cum non prosint singula, multa juvent, that the number might amaz^ the
people, and think him a strange creature, that was so full of heinous offenses,
and so compassed with transgressions.

But, Si satis accusasse, quis innocens? If accusations were sufficient to
create offenders, not a righteous man could escape on earth: therefore, the Law
condemns no man before he be heard, The Earl his Answer.
what he can answer for himself: And the Earl of Strafford coming to his
Answer, made all things so clear, in the Judgment of the common-hearers, and
answered to every Article so well, that, his enemies being Judges, they much
applauded his abilities, and admired at his Dexterity, whereby he had so finely
untied those Gordian knots, that were so foully contrived against him, and, as
his friends conceived, had fairly escaped all those iron-nets, which his
adversaries had so cunningly laid, and my popular countryman, with the rest of
the more learned Lawyers, had so vehemently prosecuted to ensnare him in the
links and traps of guiltiness; and, in brief, the Lords, who as yet were
unpoisoned by the leavened subtilty of this bitter Faction, could find not any
one of all those Articles to be Treason, by any Law that was yet established in
this Land, sic te servavit Apollo; So God delivered him, as he thought, and his
friends hoped, out of all these troubles.

Yet, as a rivulet stopped, will at last prove the more violent, The nature of
malice.
viresque acquirit ibidem, and recollect a greater strength in the same place;
so rage and malice, hindered of their revengeful desires, will turn to be the
more implacable; Quia malitia little excaecavit eos, Because the malice of men
bewitcheth them, and has no end, till it makes an end of its hated foe;
therefore those men, that hated and maligned the Earl (like the Jews, that
because their tongues could make no reply to the just defense of the holy
Martyr, gnashed upon him with their teeth, and stopping their ears, Acts 7.51.
ran upon him with one accord, all at once) because they had no Law, nor
learning, to make those Articles Treason, they say with the Poet, Hac non
successit, alia aggrediemur via; Seeing we failed herein, we will attempt
another way: And to that end, they frame a Bill of Attainder against him; and
this, if it pass by the major part of both Houses, and have the Royal assent,
will bring him to his just deserved death; And herein, I will not say, they
showed themselves worse than the Jews, because that, when their malice was at
the highest pitch against Christ, they said, We have a Law, and by our Law he
ought to die; and these haters of the Earl, seeing they had no Law, will have a
Law, to be made, that shall bring him unto his death; because the House might
have reasons, which my sense cannot conceive.

Yet some of his friends have said, that, after a former prosecution according
to Law, to make a new Law, where there was none before, to take away a man's
life, is almost as bad as the Romancy-Law, that I read of, The rubs of the Bill
how taken away.
to hang him first, and then judge him afterward, to which I assent not: and
not many less than 60. worthy Members of the House of Commons would never
yield to pass that Bill; and it had a greater rub among the Lords, where, it
is thought not upon any slight conjectures, it had never passed, but that this
rub must be taken away by a new device; for that the Faction judging some of
them might be more timorous than malicious, and remembering, that primus in orb
deos fecit timor, Fear is a powerful passion, that produces many strange
effects, the Apprentices and Porters, Watermen and Car-men, and all the rascal
rout of the ragged Regiment were gathered together by some Chedorlaomer, and
came, as they did against Christ, with swords and staves, without order, with
great impudency, to awe them, and to cry for Justice against him; and this was
done, and done again, and again, until the business, that they came for, was
done: A course, not prevented, that may undo all Justice, and bring us all to
be undone.

And yet all this will not do this deed, until the King passes His assent; for
as yet the new Law of Orders and Ordinances without the King, The Kings great
pains to search out the truth.
was not hatched; And the good King, having so graciously, so indefatigably
taken such care and such pains, in his own Person every day, to hear and see
all that could be laid unto his charge, and how he had answered each
particular, was so just, and of such tender and religious conscience, that he
was not satisfied (as men conceived) with the weight of those reasons that were
produced, to pass the same. Therefore here I find another Stratagem used, such
as Hannibal could not invent, to effect this hard task: What? To persuade
mildness to become severe, or to cause a just, and most clement Prince, so full
of mercy, so prove to pardon where there is a fault, and so loath to punish, but
where he must (by the Law of Justice) the greatest fault, to yield to put him
to death, that was in many things so excellent in his life. The task was, to
procure his assent to pass this Bill; and how shall this be done? As the Man
of God could not be persuaded by any man, but by a Man of God, a Prophet by a
Prophet; so now the Bishops that were good men, men of conscience, and set
apart by God to resolve and satisfy weak and tender consciences, are thought
fit to be sent unto this good King, to persuade him, (as men supposed) that, to
prevent a greater mischief, he might justly pass this Bill; and either 6. or
4. of the prime Prelates, are requested by the Lords, to go unto the King, to
assay how far they can prevail with him herein: And so they went; and how they
dealt with His Majesty, I do not fully understand, but am informed by some that
went, that they assured Him, he ought to satisfy himself in point of Law by
his Judges, and of State by his Council: And how they did any otherwise, in any
other thing rectify his Conscience, in point of Divinity, which belonged unto
themselves, I cannot tell.

But, though I think no man can justly lay the least tittle of blame upon the
just King, no, not the Earl himself, as himself professed, for yielding to
such, and so earnest persuasions of I know not how many reverend Bishops, wise
Counselors, grave Judges, and the flower of all his people, to pass that
Bill whatsoever it was:

The Bishops right to vote in any cause:
Yet, to say what I conceive, with their favor, of my Brethren the Bishops, in
the prosecution of this cause; I am persuaded, that they had no reason to
withdraw themselves from the House, and to desert their own Right, when the
Bill, or the Judgment, was to pass against the Earl, upon this slight
pretense, alleged against them, by the haters of the Earl, and no lovers of
the Bishops, That a Clergyman ought not to have any Vote, or to be present, at
the handling of the cause of blood or death; for they might know full well,
when my Lords grace of York did most clearly manifest this truth: that the
first inhibition of the Clergy, to be present and assistant in causa sanguinis,
or judicio mortis, in the Canon of Innocent the third (as I remember, for I am
driven to fly without my Books) was most unjust, only to tie the Bishops to his
blind obedience, to the apparent prejudice of all Christian Princes, by denying
this their service unto them; and it is no ways obligatory to bind us, that
are, by the Laws of our Land, not only freed, but also enjoined to abandon all
the unjust Canons, that are repugnant to our Laws, and derogatory to our Kings,
and to renounce all the usurped authority of the Pope: For, I would fain know,
what Scripture, or what reason Pope Innocent can allege, to exclude them from
doing that good service, both to God and their King, which in all reason they
can, or should be better able to do, than most others. And I am sure, that
neither in the old, nor in the new Testament, nor yet in the Primitive Church,
until these subtle Popes began thus to incroach upon the Rights of Princes, to
take away the Prerogatives of Kings, and to domineer over the consciences of
men, this exclusion of them from the highest act of Justice was never found;
For, The Prophets and Apostles, judged in the case of life and death.
did not Moses, Joshua, Samuel, Eliah, Elizaeus, Jehoida, and others of the
Priests and Prophets of the old Testament, and S. Peter also the Prince of the
Apostles in the new Testament, judge in the case of blood, and pronounced the
sentence of death against Malefactors? As when Ananias and Sapphira were
suddenly brought unto their end, by the judgment of the Apostle; and if they
be able and fit to judge of any thing, then why not of this?

If you say, because they are the Advocates of mercy, pardon, the Preachers of
repentance, and men that are made to save life, and not to put any one to
death, or to bring any man unto his end:

I answer, fittest men to be the Judges both of life and death: For who can
better and more justly judge me to death, than he that does most love my life?
it is certain he will not condemn me without just cause; even as God, that is
(...), the Father of mercies, and even mercy it self, is the fittest and most
righteous Judge that can be found both of death and damnation; Clergy, how fit
to be Judges.
because his mercy and goodness toward his creatures will not permit his
severity against sin, though never so detestable to his purity, to do the least
injustice to their persons; so our love of mercy and pity, will not suffer us
to do any thing that shall transcend the Rules of justice and equity; And as
our inclination to mercy prohibites us to condemn the innocent, so our love to
justice, and our charge to preserve it, will not permit us to justify the
wicked; for, the Scripture teaches us, That he which justifies the wicked,
and he that condemns the innocent, that calls the evil good, and the good
evil; that spares Agag, and kills Naboth; are both alike abominable unto the
Lord.

And therefore notwithstanding this unjust Canon, I never find in any of our
Histories, that the Bishops did ever withdraw themselves, and quit their Votes
in this case, either before or after, save only from the 10th year of Richard
the 2d, unto the 21th year of the reign of the same unfortunate King: which
they did, not because they could not justly be present; but because they had
just reasons to be absent, as you may find it in the Annals of his time:
Therefore I know nor how to palliate their facility of yielding way to those
N^n-Canonical Lords, Non-Canonicall Lords.
to produce those non-obliging Canons, which they abhorred in all that made not
for the furtherance of their design, to exclude them from doing this, which was
one of their chiefest duties; for who knows not the Lord Say, and Lord Brook,
and others of the Lords, to hate all Canons, even the old Canons of the
Apostles, as inconsistent with their new Rules of Independent Government: and
yet herein, to exclude the Bishops Votes, in the judgment of this man, and the
passing of this Bill, which being admitted, might perhaps have turned the
scales, they will take hold of the unjustest Law, and allege one of the worst
of Canons, a Canon against reason, and most repugnant to the best of God's
Properties, which though they be all equal in themselves, fumme and
perfectissime, yet are they not so perceived by us; but his mercy is over all
his works.

But you will say, Was this man so just, that he was unjustly condemned to
death? Did all men so untruly complain against him? And was he good,
notwithstanding all the evil that was proved against him?

I answer, That I dare not, and I do not say, that he was unjustly adjudged to
death, or that the Bill it self was unjust; But this I assure my self, that he
was a very wise and understanding man, and endued with may rare Heroic
virtues, and most excellent graces; as, among the rest, The Earle's Virtues.
with those two incomparable indowments, that cannot easily be found among many
of the Nobles of this World.

1. Faithfulness to his Prince, to whom (as I conceive) he showed himself a
true servant, and most Trusty in his greatest employments, save in what was
(and I know not that) justly proved against him; and, I believe, he would never
have taken Arms, as some others of the Lords do now, against his Sovereign.

2. Love unto the Church and Churchmen; to whom, though others think it their
glory to oppress them, and a virtue to contemn them; yet he was a true Friend,
a most Noble Benefactor, and most just, unto his death, as his very last speech
unto his dearest Son, does sufficiently testify unto all posterity; which
speech was to this effect, (and I would to God it were indelibly imprinted in
the memory of all our Nobility) That, as he regarded his father's blessing, or
expected a blessing from God upon what his father left him, so he would be
careful never to take away, or in any wise to diminish any part or parcel of
the goods or Patrimony of the Church; which if he did, would prove a Canker, to
waste and consume all that he had.

Yet, it may be, he was (which in truth I cannot imagine) as the Philosopher
says of Marcus Antonius, a man of that composition, that his vices did
equalize, if not exceed his virtues, and his offenses cloud all his graces, and
obscure all his glory; And as the saving of one man's life, cannot save him from
suffering, that does unjustly put another man to death; so the rarest Virtues
cannot justify the man that commits so many horrible offenses, How a
Malefactor may be unjustly condemned.
as his accusers conceived this man did; to which it may be well replied, That
a notorious Malefactor (though I apply not this to him) may be unjustly
condemned: and so he may be justly condemned, and unjustly executed; as when he
is not condemned for the fault committed, or condemned not according to the Law
which condemns that Fact; For though a Murderer deserves death, yet any one
may not presently be the death of that Murderer, nor the Judge condemn him for
robbery: And though I should commit many offenses worthy of death, yet if the
Law does not condemn me, I ought not to die for any of them. For, as the
Apostle says, Where there is no Law, there is no sin, because sin is the
transgression of the Law: Therefore the Earl of Strafford might be an evil
man, and do many things that in the sight of God and good men, were worthy of
death; Yet, if our Law made not those crimes Capital, or if the Law made them
Capital, and not Treason, we ought not for Treason to adjudge him unto death:
So in sum the result is this, That he might justly deserve death, and yet be
very unjustly condemned to death. And it seemed to some of his friends, that so
he was; especially because they had no plain unquestionable Law, but were fain,
in some kind, to make a Law, to take off his head; and when his head was off,
this new manner of proceeding should end, and be no Law for any other that came
after: And a De^laration must be made, That the course prosecuted for his
punishment, shall not afterward, be drawn into an Example; it must be produced
for no Pattern, but for him alone and none other; lest perhaps, Complaint to
the House of Commons. p. 6.
if the same course should be still practiced, the contrivers of this Plot,
might have the like payment to fall ere long upon their own heads. Therefore,
some say, this may well draw a suspicion upon the justice of the Sentence,
though I will not censure any man for any injustice therein.

The Earle's words at his death.
But, as the Earl said at his death, which he undertook like a good Christian,
full of Charity, and no less Piety, it was an ill Omen to this Nation, that
they should write the Frontispiece of this Parliament, with letters of Blood;
which, if unjustly done, or unduly prosecuted, I fear may, with Abels blood,
cry for vengeance in the ears of God, against the Contrivers of this mischief,
to produce our miseries: And the God of Heaven does only know, how much of the
blood of this Kingdom must be squeezed out, to expiate all the mis-proceedings,
and the fearful projects of our people. God Almighty turn his anger from us,
and let not the righteous perish with the wicked, not the sins of some few be
laid upon us all.

This was the first impediment that was to be removed, before they could
proceed any further in this Tragedy, and thus it was most artificially acted.
And I say, He was a great, and a very great, impediment of their design, which
made me the larger in the prosecution thereof; because he was a person of that
great ability, and so great fidelity both to the Church and State; and the
taking off of his head, made a very wide gap for our enemies to enter into the
Vineyard of Christ, and a large breach into the City of God, to deface the
Church, and to destroy this Kingdom.

CHAP. III.
Shows, how they stopped the free judgment of the Judges; procured the
perpetuity of the Parliament; the consequences thereof, and the subtle device
of Semiramis.

2. THe next Let that might hinder their design, was, the great learning, The
second impediment of their design.
long experience, and free judgment of the grave Judges, to declare what is
Truth, and what is Law in every point; for these men being skilful in the Laws
and Statutes of our Land, knew how contrary to the same, and how repugnant to
the fundamental Constitutions of our Government, the erecting of a new Church,
and the framing of a new Commonwealth would be; and their judgment, being to
be inquired in any emergent Doubt, might prove very prejudicial unto their
plots, and a hinderance of their Desin, except it were diverted by some course.

Therefore to stop this stream, to put a gagg in their mouths, How they
stopped the free judgment of the Judges.
to imprison all truths that might make against them, and to make these Judges
yield to whatsoever they do, or at least not to contradict any thing they say,
they get many of them to be accused of High Treason; and they do but accuse
them, and not proceed to any trial against them, which was a pretty plot of
their policy; because that hereby they kept them, and the rest of their
fellow-Judges (that had any finger in the mis-sentencing of the Ship money, and
were therefore in the same predicament, and to be under the same Censure) under
the last, and to be still silent, for very fear of their proceeding against
them: for they saw by many presidents, that those men which favored their
design, or contradicted not their ways, were winked at by this Faction, though
they were the greatest Delinquents; and therefore redimere se captos, to free
themselves out of the hands of these men, they might conceive it their safest
course to gainsay none of their conclusions; which was a Plot of no small
value to further their design, by this removal of this second impediment.

3. The third impediment of their design.
The third Let that stood in their way to make stop of their impious design,
was the Royal power to dissolve the present Parliament, as formerly to dissolve
any other, which they knew to be an inseparable flower of the Crown; Timor
undique nostris, this brought them in fear on every side, lest, if they were
too soon discovered, they might suddenly be prevented, and their plot might
prove abortive, Like the untimely fruit of a woman, that perishes before it
sees the Sun, or as the apples of Sodom, vanishing when they are touched,
into Nothing; or, at the best, but to stinking blasts: Therefore to escape this
rock, they sail about, and, like cunning Watermen, they look toward you when
they ^ow from you; their eyes and mouths are one way, when their hearts and
minds are another way; for they tell the King, that the discontinuance of
Parliaments has produced abundance of distempers in this State, and a world of
grievances both in the Church and Commonwealth: besides they say, what the
King and every man else saw to be true, That the Scots were entered into our
Land, The fair pretenses for the continuance of the Parliament.
and settled in the bosom of this Kingdom; and though perhaps if some things had
been better looked into, we might at first most easily have kept them out; yet
now, durius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hostis, it was too late to shut the
door, and it is not so easy to expel and drive them out, except we made them a
bride of gold to pass over the river, and so to go homewards again.

And this cannot be done without a great deal of money; which moneys though the
Parliament should grant them, (as we are most willing to do, to free your
Majesty from these guests, and to prevent the dangers of an intestine war); yet
they cannot suddenly be levied and collected, as the times and occasions now
required; therefore it must be borrowed to supply our present necessities; and
lenders we shall find none, except we can show them a way how they shall be
repaid again; and the expeperience we have lately had in these latter years, of
so many Parliaments so unhappily and suddenly dissolved, puts us out of all
hope to find any way to secure their debts, except your Majesty will pass an
Act, (for as yet they durst not say they needed not His assent to what they
did) that this Parliament shall not be dissolved, until it be agreed upon by
the consent of both houses.

How the King was seduced by their pretenses.
This and the like were their fair pretenses, like the Sirens voices, very
sweet, and very good; and the good King that ever spoke as he thought, could
not think that His great Council, whom He trusted with all the Affairs of His
Kingdom, meant any otherwise then they said, or looked any further then they
showed Him; He never dreamed that they intended to have an everlasting
Parliament, and so perfidiously to overreach both the King and the Kingdom.

But though our gracious King (being not so much versed with the dissembling
subtilty and serpentine windings of wicked hypocrites, that are to be removed
from the King, and expelled out of his House) supposed all them to mean
sincerely, and to deal fairly as they seemed to do; yet I do admire that the
wisdom of the Kings Counsel, (but that they, which, as the Apostle says, are
not ignorant of the devices of Satan, are not permitted by these men to be of
His Council) could not espy what mischief might lurk under this fair shade, or
what might be the Consequences of such a Parliament, that is inconsistent with
a Monarchy, and therefore must in a convenient time be ended, or else will make
an end of all Monarchical Government; Why then might not a year or two, or
three, (or more, so the years were limited) suffice to determine all
businesses, but that the life of this Parliament should be endless, and the
continuance thereof undetermined? This is beyond the age of the Counsel of
Trent, What the faction could be contented with. Complaint p. 19.
that they say lasted above forty years; for I presume, if some of the
contrivers of this Design might have their desires, the youngest of us should
hardly see the Dissolution of this Parliament, Til the earthly Houses of our
Tabernacles be dissolved; for it is likely they could be well contented, as one
says, to make an Ordinance that both Houses should be a Corporation, to take
our Lands and Goods to themselves and their successors, and when any of that
Corporation dies, toties quoties, the surviver and none else should choose a
successor to perpetuity; so they should be Masters of our Estates and
disposers of all we have (as they are now) for ever.

And therefore, this was a Plot beyond the Powder Plot, and beyond the device
of Semiramis, The plot of Semiramis.
that with a lovely face, desired her husband, she might rule but three days,
to see how well she could manage the State, and obtaining her request, in the
first thereof, she removed all the Kings Officers, in the second she placed her
own minions in all the places of Power and Authority, (as now the saction would
do, such as they confide in, in all places of strength) and in the third day
she cut off the Kings head, and assumed the Government of all the Kings
Dominions into her own hands; for not three days, nor three years will serve
their turn, for fear they shall not have ability in so short a space, to finish
all their strange intended projects; and therefore, that they might not be
hindered, their request is unlimited, that the Parliament should not be
dissolved, till both Houses gave consent, which they were contented should be
ad Graecas Calendas.

Yet God that knew best, what punishments were due to be inflicted for their
former Actions, and for all the subtle Devices of their hard hearts, gave way
for this also, that this third Impediment of their projects might be removed;
that so at last, their sins, like the sins of the Amorites by little and little
growing unto the full, might undergo the fullness of Gods vengeance, which as
yet, I fear, was not fully come to pass; for till the Parliament was made
perpetual, the things that they have done since, were absolutely unimaginable;
How the faction has strengthened it self.
because that while it was a dissolvable body, they durst not so palpably
invade the known rights, either of King or Subjects; whereas now, their Body
being made indissoluble, they need not have the same apprehension of either,
having strengthened themselves by a Bill against the one, and by an Army
against the other; and therefore all the dissolutions of Parliaments from the
beginning of them to this time, have not done half that mischief, as the
continuance of this one has done hitherto: and God only knows what is to
succeed hereafter.

But seeing themselves have publicly acknowledged in their Declarations, that
they were too blame, if they undertook any thing now, which they would not
undertake, if it were in His Majesty's power to dissolve them the next day, and
they have since used this means, which was given them to disburthen the
Commonwealth, of that debt, which was thought insupportable, What many wise
men do say.
to plunge it irrevocably into a far greater debt, to the ruin of the whole
Kingdom, to change the whole frame of our Government, and subjecting us to so
unlimited an arbitrary power, that no man knows at the sitting of the House,
what he shall be worth at the rising, or whether he shall have his liberty the
next day, or imprisonment. Many wise men do say, they see no Reason that this
trust being forfeited, and the faith reposed in them betrayed; the King may not
immediately reassume that power of dissolving them, into his own hands again,
and both our unjustly abused King, and our much injured people, declare this
Act to be void, when as contrary to their own Faith and the trust of the King,
they abuse it to overthrow the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; though I could
heartily wish, that because it still carries the Countenance of a Law, the
faction would be so Wise to yield it to be presently dissolved by a Law.

CHAP. IV.
Shows the abilities of the Bishops; the threefold practice of the Faction to
exclude them out of the House of Peers; and all the Clergy out of all Civil
Judicature.

The fourth impediment of their design.
4. THere was one stop more that might hinder, or at least hardly suffer their
plots to succeed according to their hearts desire; and that is, the Bishops
Votes in the Upper House, nay they cannot endure to call it so, but, in the
House of the Lords; for they rightly considered therein these two special
things.

1. Their Number, 2. Their Abilities.
Which are two main things to stop and hinder many evils: For,

1. They had Twenty six Voices, which was a very considerable number, and might
stop a great gap, and stay the stream, or at least moderate the violence of any
unjust prosecution.

2. They were men of great Learning, men of Profound knowledge both in Divine
and Humane Affairs, and men well educated, a cunabulis, that spent all their
time in Books, and were Conversant with the dead, that feared not to speak the
truth, and have wearied themselves in reading Histories, The abilities of the
Bishops.
comparing Laws, and considering the Affairs of all Commonwealths; and so were
able, if their modesty did not silence them, to discourse de quolibet ente, to
untie every knot, and to explain every riddle; and being the immediate servants
of the living God, set apart as the Apostle speaks, to offer Sacrifice and to
administer the Sacraments of God, to prepare a people for the Kingdom of
Heaven, it ought not, and it cannot be otherwise imagined, by any child of the
Church, that is a true believer, but that they are men of Conscience, to speak
the truth and to do justice in any cause, and betwixt any parties more then
most others, Pardon me good Lords for so plainly speaking truth.
especially those young Lords and Gentlemen, whose years do want experience,
and the course of their lives, some in Hawking and Hunting, and others in
Dicing and Bowling, and visiting Black-Friars Playhouse, or perhaps in worser
exercises, does sufficiently show how weak their judgment must needs be in
great Affairs, and how imperfect their conscience is as yet in holy things, I
hope not to be preferred before these grave and Reverend men.

And therefore, lest these grave men should prove great hindrances of their
unjust proceedings, before any of their worst intentions be well perceived;
there must be an exclusion of them from Parliament, and from those Lords, whose
consciences and knowledge they may then the better captivate, and bring them
the sooner to side with them, for to effect their great Design. And it is a
world of wonders to see, with what subtilty and industry, with what Policy and
Villainy, this one work must be effected. It would fill a volume to collect the
particulars of their Devices; I will reduce them to these three heads.

A threefold practice against the Bishops.
1. They used all means to render them odious in the eyes of all people.

2. They brought the basest and the reffuse of all men, watermen, porters, and
the worst of all the apprentices, with threats and menaces, to thunder forth
the death and destruction of these men.

3. Upon a pretended treason they caused twelve of them, besides the
Archbishop that was in the Tower before, to be clapped up at once into prison;
where they kept them in that strong house, until they got it Enacted that they
should be excluded from the Vpper-House, and both they and their Clergy should
be debarred from the Administration of any secular act of Justice in the
Commonwealth.

1. 1. To make them odious two ways.
They endeavored to make them odious unto the people two ways.

1. In making that Order (or giving that notice unto the people) that any man
might exhibit his complaint against Scandalous Ministers, and he should be
heard; which invitation of all discontented sheep to throw dirt in their
Pastor's faces, was too palpably malicious; for our Savior told us, We should
be sent as sheep into the midst of Woolvs, but here is a sending for the Wolves
to destroy the Shepherds; and it came to pass hereby, that no less then 900
complaints and petitions were brought in a very short space, (as I was informed
by some of their own House, that feelingly misliked these undue proceedings)
against many Learned and most faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, that were
therefore hated, because they were not wicked; and persecuted because they were
conformable to the Laws of the King and the Church. The Ministers why
persecuted.
And the rest of our calling that were factious and Seditious, were both
countenanced and applauded in all their Seditious courses, and the more they
railed against our Church Government, the more they were favored by these
enemies of the Church Governors. As to instance in both particulars (as you
may find in the Author of the Sober Sadness, p. 33.) Master Squire, Master
Stone, and Master Swadlin, whom they have imprisoned, and scarce allowed them
straw to lie on. Master Reading, Master Griffith, Master Ingoldsby, Master
Wilcocks, and many others, having done nothing worthy of death or of bonds, are
inserted into the black bill of Scandalous and superstitious Ministers, only
for Preaching Obedience to Soveraign-Authority, and other points consonant to
the Holy Scriptures; and those that are scandalous indeed, as Doctor Burgess
the ringleader of all Sedition, Doctor Downing that is reputed as variable as
was Doctor Pern, Master Calamy that is little better, Master Harding a most
vicious man, Master Bridge a Socinian, and Master Marshall, not free from the
suspicion or some unjust persuasions of the weaker Sex, and many more such
factious men are not only dispensed with, for all faults, but also rewarded and
advanced for their infidelity to God, and disloyalty to His Vicegerent: This
the Author of the Sober Sadness affirms of them.

2. By framing Petitions themselves (as it is conceived) in the name of saw or
never knew what was in them, against Episcopacy and Episcopal men; and then
exhibiting the said petitions unto themselves, and the rest of their seduced
brethren, to instigate others of their own faction, that affected not
Episcopacy, and those offenders that by their Ecclesiastical censure were
justly punished, and yet thereby unjustly provoked to hate them, Petitions
against Episcopacy, how unjustly procured.
to frame the like petitions against this Apostolical function, and to make the
World believe how odious these Reverend men were in the judgment of so many
millions of men, which were indeed most ignorant and simple, and which God
knows, and themselves afterward confessed, knew not what they did, nor to what
end their hands were purloyned from them, under fair pretenses, that were
alleged for the Reformation of some abuses, but were subscribed to most
scandalous Petitions, which the poor men utterly renounced, when they
understood how unchristianly they were seduced: So strange were their plots to
make the Bishops odious.

And yet you must not think, that these courses are more strange than true; for
our Savior tells his Apostles, that were men beyond exceptions, full of
inspirations, and abundantly endued with the gifts of sanctification, They
should be hated of all men for his names sake; and, if you look into the
sufferings of Saint Paul, and the most horrible imputations that were so
scandalously raised against the Holy Fathers, you need not admire so much to
see these men suffering such things at the hands of sinners, to be made the
scorn of men, and as the off scouring of the people, as they were not long
since, when the Bishops and the most learned Preachers might pass with more
honor, and less contempt, at Constantinople among the Turks, or in Jerusalem
among the Jews, than in the City of London among this brood of Anabaptists.

2. How the scum of the people threaten them.
2. After they had thus brought them upon the Stage, and used them thus
strangely without cause, they get Ven and Manwaring, and others of the same
Sect, to gather together the scum of all the Prophanest rout, the vilest of all
men, and the outcast of the people, such, as Job says, are not worthy to eat
with the dogs of the flock: and as they came before for the Earl of Straffords
head, so now again, they must come in great numbers, without order, without
honesty, against all Law, and beyond all Religion, with swords and staves, and
other unfashionable though not inconsiderable weapons, to cry, No Papists, no
Bishops, and if they had added, No God, no Devil, no Heaven, no Hell, then
surely these men had obtained (if the Parliament could have granted their
requests) the sum of their desires; and they would have thought themselves
better than either King or Bishop: but as yet they go no farther, than, No
Papist, no Bishop; and by this they put the good Bishops in great fear, and
well they might be possessed of that fear, qui cadit in fortem and constantem
virum: for mine eyes did see them, and mine ears did hear it said, What Bishop
soever they met, they would be his death, and I thanked God they knew not me to
be a Bishop. Their furious assault upon Saint Peter's Church in Westminster.
Then they set upon Saint Peter's Church of Westminster, burst part of the door
to pieces, and had they not been most manfully withstood by the Archbishop of
York his Gentlemen, and the Prebends Servants, together with the Officers of
the Church, they had entered, and likely ransacked, spoiled, and defaced all the
Monuments of the Ancient Kings, broken down the Organs, and committed such
Sacrilege and profanation of that Holy place, as their fellow Rebels have
done since in Canterbury, Winchester, Worcester, and other places, whereof I
shall speak hereafter; the like was never seen among the Turks and Pagans; and
after these things, what rage, cruelty, and barbarity they would have showed to
the Dean and Prebends, we might well fear, but not easily judge; I am sure, the
Dean was forced to hire Armed Soldiers to preserve the Church for many days
after; for, seeing these riotous Tumults could not as yet obtain their ends,
they came, nay, they were brought again and again, and they justled and offered
some violence unto the Archbishop's Grace, as he went with the Earl of Dover
into the Parliament House: which made him and the rest of his brethren justly
to fear what might be the issue of these sad beginnings, which they conceived
must needs be very lamentable, if timely remedy were not applied, to prevent
these untimely frights and unchristian tumults.

Therefore when no Complaints either to the House of Lords or Commons could
produce any safe effects, but rather a frivolous excuse than a serious redress,
that they came to petition against the Government, and not to seek the
destruction of the Governors, the Bishops were enforced (and, in my judgment,
flesh and blood could take no better course in such a case, in such distress,
and I believe it will be found wisdom hereafter) to make their Petition for
their security, and Protestation against all Acts as null, (they might have
added, to them and whom they represented) that should be enacted in their
unwilling absence, while they were so violently hindered from the House; and,
it may be, some word might pass in this Protestation, that might be bettered,
or explained by another word; yet, on such a sudden, in such a fright, when
they scarce had time to take Counsel of their pillows, or to advise with their
second thoughts (quae semper sunt saniores), To watch for iniquity, Esaias 29.20,
21.
to turn aside the just for a thing of naught, to take advantage of a word, or
to catch men for one syllable, to charge them with High Treason to bring them
unto death, so many Reverend Bishops to such a shameful end, was more heavy
than ever I find the Jews were to the old Prophets, or the Pagan Tyrants unto
the Primitive Fathers; nor do I believe you can Parallel the same charge in any
History: yet

3. For this one necessitated Act of the Bishops, 3. How they were committed to
Prison.
the House of Commons do suddenly upon the first sight thereof, charge twelv
of them with High Treason; they were not so long in Condemning it, as the
Bishops in Composing it; and accordingly the Lords commit them unto Prison. And
if this was Treason, I demand, why could they not prove it so to be? Or if it
was not, why should such an House, Flos and Medulla regni, the greatest and the
Highest Court of Justice, from which (the King consenting with them) there
lies none appeal, but only to the Court of Heaven, accuse them of High
Treason? I would not have that Court to charge a man with any thing that were
not most true, for certainly, whosoever unjustly compasses my death is justly
guilty of death himself, when as the Poet says, -- Lex non justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
It may be they would have us to believe this Treason was not proved, nor the
charge so fully followed as they intended, out of some mercy to save their
lives; but I could sooner believe, they rejoiced to see them fear, and were
glad of their mistake, that they might charge them, and by such a charge cast
them into prison, that so they might the more easily work their Design, to cast
them out of the Parliament, which now they have soon effected, and procured an
Act for their exclusion.

And you must know, that to cast out from doing good, or serving God, is a work
of the Devil, and not of God; so the wicked Husbandmen did cast out the right
Heir of the Vineyard, out of his own inheritance; The consequences of this Act.
so the Jews did cast out the blind man, and all that professed Christ out of
their Synagogue. But you may better judge of this good Act, by these
consequences which are like to be the fruits thereof.

1. Hereby they are all made incapable to do any good, 1. Made incapable of
doing any good.
either for Gods honor, or their neighbors benefit, by executing justice, or
pronouncing judgment, in any cause in any temporal Court: and justice which
long agon has fled to Heaven, and wanders as a stranger here on earth, must be
countenanced and entertained only by the sons of men, by secular Lords and
Gentlemen: and the Spiritual Lords the Servants of God, and messengers of
Heaven must have nothing to do with her; not because they are not as well able
as any other to do justice, but, because the others cannot endure to let them
see it, for fear they should hinder their injustice, and therefore justice and
judgment are like to speed well on earth, when their chiefest friends are
banished from them, and it may be worldlings, oppressors, or most ignorant
youths, rather than any just understanders of their natures, must be their
Judges.

2. 2. Made unable to defend themselves.
Hereby they are made unable to defend themselves or their calling from any
wrong; their respect was little enough before, and their indignities were great
enough; and yet now we are exposed to far greater miseries, and to unresistable
injuries, when a Bishop has not so much Authority as a Constable, to withstand
his greatest affronts.

But hoc I^hacus est, this is that which the Devil and his great Atreides's,
his prime Champions to enlarge his Kingdom would fain have, our Souls to remain
among Lions, and all the means or defense to be taken from us, our enemies to
be our Judges, and our selves to be murdered with our own weapons. In the time
of Popery there were many Laws de immunitate Clericorum, whereby we were so
protected, that the greatest Prince could not oppress us, as you may find in
the Reign of King John, and almost in all our Histories: and when we renounced
the Pope, God made Kings our nursing Fathers, and Queens our nursing Mothers,
and we, putting our selves under their protection, have been hitherto most
graciously protected: but now by this Act we are left naked of all defense, and
set under the very sword of our Adversaries, and, as the Psalmist says, They
that hated us are made Lords over us, to call us, to assess us, to undo us.

3. Debarred of that right that none else are.
3. Hereby they are made more slavish than the meanest Subject, and deprived of
that benefit and privilege which the poorest Shoemaker, Tailer, or any other
Tradesman or yeoman, has most justly left unto him: for, to be excluded,
debarred, and altogether made incapable of any benefit is such an insupportable
burden, that it is set upon no man's shoulders but upon the Clergy alone, as if
they alone were either unworthy to receive, or unable to do, any good.

4. Made more contemptible than all others.
4. Hereby they are made the unparalleled spectacle of all neglect and scorn to
all foreign people; for I can hardly believe the like Precedent can be showed
in any Age, or any other Nation of the World, no not among the very Infidels or
Indians; for, in former times, the Bishops and Clergymen were thought the
fittest instruments to be employed in the best places of greatest truth, and
highest importance in the Commonwealth: and Kings made them their
Ambassadors, as the Emperor Valentinian did Saint Ambrose. And our own
Chronicles relate how former times respected the Clergy, and how our Kings made
them both their Counselors, and their Treasurers, Chancellours, Keepers of
the Great Seal, and the like Officers of the chiefest concernment, as Ethelbert
in the year of Christ 605. Vt refert in tractatu suo de Episcopatu p. 61 62. M.
Theyer. Sir Henry Spelman. p. 118. Idem p. 403. Idem. p. 219.
says, I Ethelbert; King of Kent, with the consent of the Reverend Arch Bishop
Augustine, and of my Princes, do give and grant, etc. And the said Ethelbert
with the Queen and his Son Eadbald, and the most Reverend Prelate Augustine,
and with the rest of the Nobility of the Land solemnly kept his Christmas at
Canterbury, and there assembled a Common Council, tam cleri quam populi, as
well of the Clergy as of the People; And King Adelstan says, I Adelstan the
King do signify unto all the Officers in my Kingdom, that by the advice of
Wolfelm my Archbishop, and of all my Bishops, etc. In the great Council of
King Ina, An. 712. The Edicts were Enacted by the Common Council and consent,
omnium Episcoporum, and Principum, Procorum, C^mitum, and omnium sapientum
seniorum, and populorum totius regni, and per praeceptum regis Inae: And in the
second Charter of King Edward the Confessor, How former times respected the
Clergy.
granted to the Church of Saint Peter in Westminster; it is said to be, Cum
concilio and decreto Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum, aliorumque suorum
Optimatum, With the Counsel and Decree of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and
other Potentates. And so not only the Saxon Kings, but the Norman also, ever
since the Conquest, had the Bishops in the like or greater esteem, that they
never held Parliament or Council without them. And surely these Princes were no
Babes that made this choice of them, neither was the Commonwealth neglected,
nor justice prejudiced by these Governors. And whosoever shall read Mores
gentium, or the pilgrimage of Master Purchase, Livy, Plutarch, Appian, and the
rest of the Greek and Latin Histories, I dare assure him, he shall find greater
honor given, and far less contempt cast upon the Priests and Flamins, the
Prophets of the Sybils, than we find of this Faction left to the Servants of
the Living God; who are now d^it withal worse, than Pharaoh dealt with the
Israelites, that took away their straw, and yet required their full tale of
Bricks; For these men would rob us of all our means, and take away all our
Lands, and all our Rights, and yet require not only the full tale of Sermons
and Services, as was used by our Predecessors, but to double our files, to
multiply our pains, How the Clergy are now used.
and to treble the Sermons and Services, that they used to have of our
forefathers, more than ever was done in any Age since the first Plantation of
the Gospel; And when we have done, with John Baptist, the utmost of our
endeavors, like a shining and a burning lamp, that does waste and consume it
self to nothing, while it gives light to others; they only deal with us, as
Carriers use to do with their pack-horses, hang bells at their ears to make a
melodious noise, but with little provender lay heavy loads upon their backs;
and when they can bear no more burdens, take away their Bells, withdraw their
praises, call them Jades, exclaim against their laziness, and then, at last,
turn them out to feed upon the Commons, and to die in a ditch; And thus we have
now made the Ministers of Christ to be the Emblems of all misery, and in
pretending to make them more glorious in the sight of God, we have made them
most base in the eyes of all men.

And therefore the consequence of this Act, is like to prove most lamentable,
when the people, considering how that hereby, we are left naked of all comfort,
and subject to all kind of scorn and distress, and how that this being
effected, is but the Praeludium of a far greater mischief; they will rather
with no great cost, make their children of some good Trade, and their children
will choose so to be, than with such great cost, and more care, and yet little
hope, to bring them up to worse condition than the meanest of all Trades, or
the lowest degree of all rusticks; When as they can challenge, and it shall not
be denied them, to have the privileges of the Law, The Clergy alone are
deprived of Magna Charta.
and a property in their goods, which without their own consent, yielded in
their persons or their representours, cannot be taken from them: And the Clergy
only, of all the people in this Kingdom, shall be deprived of the right and
benefit of our great Charter, which so many famous Kings and pious Princes have
confirmed unto us; and when we have labored all the days of our lives, with
great pains, and more diligence, to instruct our people, and to attain to some
competency of means to maintain our selves, and our families, we shall be in
the power of these men, at their pleasure, under the pretense of Religion,
contrary to all justice, to be deprived of any part of our freehold, when we
shall have not one man of our own Calling to speak a word in our behalf, on no
Seat of Justice throughout the whole Kingdom,

O terque quaterque beati, Queis ante or a patrum contigit oppetere! O most
miserable, and lamentable condition of Gods Ministers! I must needs speak it,
though I should die for it; and if some did not speak it, I think the stones
would cry against it, and proclaim it, Better for the Clergy, were their hope
only in this world, never to have been born, or at least never to have seen a
Book, then to fall into the hands, and to be put under the censure of these men
that do thus love Christ, by hating his Ministers; This Act more prejudicial
to the future times than now.
who as I said before, by this one Act are made liable to undergo all kind of
evils, which shall not only fall upon the present Clergy, (for were it so, our
patience should teach us to be silent) but also to the increase of all
prejudices to the Gospel, more than my foresight can express, in all
succeeding Ages.

And therefore I may well say with Jeremy, Jer. 5.9, 29.
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? And we need not wonder,
that such plagues, calamities, and distresses, have so much increased in this
Kingdom ever since the passing of this Act, and yet the anger of the Lord is
not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still; and I fear, his wrath
will not be appeased, till we have blotted this, and wiped away all other our
great sins and transgressions, with the truest tears of unfeigned repentance.

These are like to be the consequences of this Act: And yet our good King, who
we know loved our Nation, and built us a Synagogue, and was (as I assure my
self) most unwilling to pass it, was notwithstanding overperswaded
(considering where thirteen of the Bishops were, even in prison, and in what
condition all the rest of them stood, in question whether all they should
stand, or be cut down root and branch) to yield His assent unto the Act;
though, if the case in truth were rightly weighed, not much less prejudicial
to his Majesty, than injurious to us, to be thus deprived of our right, and
exposed to all miseries, by excluding us from all Civil Judicature. And I would
to God the King and all the Kingdom did continually consider, how his Majesty
was used ever since the confirmation of this Act; How the King has been used
ever since this Act passed.
for they no sooner had excluded the Bishops and Clergy out of their right, but
presently they proceeded, and prosecuted the Design ever since, to thrust out
the King from all those just Rights and Prerogatives, which God and Nature, and
the Laws of our Land, have put into his hands, for the Government of this
Kingdom: neither was it likely to succeed any otherwise, as I have fully
showed; and I would all Kings would read it, in the Grand Rebellion.

That the Act should be annulled.
But I see no reason why it may not, and why it should not, be retracted and
annulled, when the Houses shall be purged of that Anabaptistical, and
Rebellious Faction, that contrived and procured the same to Pass; for these
three special Reasons:

first refused, and after a full hearing among the Lords, it was by most Votes,
by more than a dozen voices, rejected: And yet, to show unto the World, that
the Faction's malice against the Bishops had no end, and their rage was still
implacable; at the same Session, and which is very considerable, immediately
as soon as ever they understood it was rejected, the House of Commons revived
it, and so pressed it unto the Lords, that (if I may have leave to speak the
truth) contrary to all right, For I conceive this to be an approved Maxim, That
no Right, not proved forfited by some offense, can be taken away without wrong:
it must be again received; and while the Bishops were in prison, it was, with
what honor I know not, strangely confirmed.

2. Because this Bill had the Royal assent, after that a most riotous tumult,
and many thousands of men, with all sorts of Warlike weapons, both on land and
water, most disloyally had driven His Majesty to fly from London, that most
Rebellious City, not without fear, for his own safety, even for the safety of
his life, as himself professes. And when they had so cunningly contrived their
Plot, as to get some of the Kings servants and friends, that were about him, In
his Majesty's answer to the Petition of the Lords and Commons. 16. of July. p.
8.
and employed in the Queens affairs, to persuade Her Majesty to use all her
power with the King, for the passing of this Bill, or else Her journey should
be stayed, as formerly they had altered Her resolution for the Spaw; and at
Rochester she should understand the sense of the House to stop Her passage unto
Holland, whereas the passing of this Bill, might make way for Her passage over:
And many other such frights and fears, they put both upon the King and Queen,
to enforce Him, full sore against his will, as we believe, to pass this harsh
Bill, for the exclusion of the spiritual Lords out of the House of Peers, and
of all the Clergy, from all Secular Judicature.

But Master Pym will tell us, as he did, that it was the opinion of both
Houses, There was no occasion given by any tumults, that might justly cause His
Majesty's departure.

To whom I answer, with the words of Alderman Garraway, Ald. Gar. speech at
Guild Hall.
If the Houses had declared, that it had been lawful to beat the King out of
Town, I must have sat still with wonder (though I should never believe it):
but when they declare matters of Fact, which is equally within our own
knowledge, and wherein we cannot be deceived, as in the things we have seen
with our eyes; if they dissent from truth, they must give me leave to differ
from them. As if they should declare, They have paid all the money that they
owe unto the City, or that there For now I understand it is pulled down.
was no Cross standing in Cheapside, we shall hardly believe them.

And therefore, seeing we all remember, when the Alarm was given, that there
was an attempt from Whitehall upon the City, how hardly it was appeased, and
how no Babies thought the Design of those subtle heads that gave that false.
Alarm was no less, than to have caused Whitehall to be pulled down; and they
that loved the King, and saw the Army both by land and water, which accompanied
the persons accused, to Westminster the next day after His Majesty's departure,
(as if they had passed in a Roman Triumph) conceived the danger to be so great,
that I call Heaven to witness, they blessed God that so graciously put it in
the Kings heart, rather to pass away overnight, though very late, than hazard
the danger that might have ensued the day following.

The meaning therefore of both Houses may be, That there was nothing done,
which they confessed to be a tumult; And no marvel; Because they received
encouragement, as we believed, from their defense; and no reproof, that we
found was made, for this indignity offered unto the King. But if I be
constrained, and in danger, it is not enough for me, that I am voted free and
safe; For if that, which looks, as like a tumult, as that did; or, as the
representation of my face in the truest Glass, is like my face; does come
against me and incompasse me about, though I may be, perhaps, in more safety;
yet I shall think my self in great fear, and in no more security, than His
Majesty was at Edgehill.

3. Because, as the viewer of the Observat, has very well expressed it, p. 7.
No Act of Parliament can prevail to deprive the King of His Right and
Authority; as an Attainder by Parliament could not bar the Title to the Crown
from descending on King Hen. 7. Nor was an Act of Parliament disabling King
Hen. 6. to reassume the Government of his people, of any force; but, without
any repeal in it self, frustrate and void. 7. Rep. 14. Calvin's case; an Act of
Parliament cannot take away the protection or the Subjects service, which is
due by the Law of Nature. 11. rep. Sur de la Wares case. William de la Ware,
although disabled by Act of Parliament, was nevertheless called by Queen
Elizabeth to sit as a Peer in Parliament; for that it seems the Queen could not
be barred of the service and counsel of any of Her Subjects. 2. H. 7. 6. a
Statute, that the King by no non obstante shall dispense with it, is void;
because it would take a necessary part of Government out of the Kings hand. And
therefore I see not how this Act can deprive the King of the service and
counsel of all his Bishops and Clergy, but that it is void of it self, and
needs no repeal; or if otherwise, yet seeing that besides all this, 13. of
the Bishops were shut in prison when this Act passed, and their protestation
was made long before this time, and it was so unduly framed, so illegally
prosecuted, and with such compulsive threats and terrors procured to be
passed; I hope the wisdom of the next Parliament, together with their love and
respect to the Church and Churchmen, will nullify the same.

CHAP. VI.
Shows the Plots of the Faction, to gain unto themselves the friendship and
assistance of the Scots; And to what end they framed their new Protestation;
How they provoked the Irish to rebel, and what other things they gained
thereby.

ANd thus the Sectaries of this Kingdom, and the Faction in this Parliament,
have by their craft and subtilty prevailed to have all the chiefest impediments
of their Design to be removed: So now the hedge is broken down, and all the
Boars of the Forest may now come into the vineyard, to destroy the vine, and
to undermine the City of God: But, into their counsels let not my soul come.

2. When they had taken away these stops and hindrances of their projects, 2.
The furtherances of their Design were five.
they were to recollect and make up the furtherances, that might help to
advance their Cause, for the founding of their new Church, and the establishing
of their famous Democratical Government, and popular Commonwealth. And these I
find to be principally five.

1. The gaining of their Brethren of Scotland, to become their fast and
faithful friends.

2. The framing of a Protestation to frighten the Papists, and to ensnare the
simple, to be led as they listed to prosecute their Design.

3. The condemning of our late Canons, as abominable in their judgment, and
inconsistent with their Religion.

4. The appointing of a new Synod, the like whereof was never heard in the
Church, since Adam, to compose such Articles as they liked, and to frame such
Discipline as should be most agreeable to their own dispositions.

5. The settling of a Militia, a word that the vulgar knew not what it was, for
to secure the Kingdom, as they pretended, from those dangers that they feared,
that is, from those Jacks of Lent, and men of Clouts, which themselves set up
as deadly enemies unto the Church and State; but indeed insensibly to get all
the strength of the Realm into their own hands, and their Confederates; that so
they might, like the Ephori, bridle the King, and bring him as they pleased, to
abolish, and establish, what Laws and Government they should propose; whereby,
perhaps, he might continue King in Name, but they in Deed.

These were the things they aimed at, and they effected the first three, before
they could be discryed, and their Plots discovered; but in the other two, they
were prevented, when God said unto them, as he does unto the Sea, Hitherto
shall thou go, and no further, here shall thou stay thy proud waves: And
therefore, I am confident (and I wish all good Christians were so) that their
purposes shall never succeed, nor themselves prosper therein, while the World
lasts; because God has so mercifully revealed so much, so graciously
assisted our King, and so miraculously, not only delivered him from them, but
also strengthened him against them, contrary to all appearing likelihood, to
this very day; which is a sufficient argument to secure our faith, that we
shall by the help of our God, escape all the rest of their destructive Designs.

But to display their Banners, to discover their Projects, and to let the World
see what they are, and how closely and yet cunningly, they went about to effect
their work; I will in a plain manner set down what I know, and what I have
collected from other Writings, and from men that are fide dig^i, (for one man's
eyes cannot see all things, nor infallibly perceive the Mysteries of all
particulars) for to confirm the faithful Subjects in their due obedience, both
to God, and their King, and to undeceive the poor seduced people, that they
perish not in the contradiction of Corah.

1. It is believed, not without cause, 1 The indeering of themselves unto the
Scots. Our Sectaries the inviters of the Scots to England.
with far greater probabilities than a bare suspicion, that our own
Anabaptistical Sectaries, and this Faction, were the first inviters of those
angry spirits (that conceived some cause to be discontented, and were glad of
secret entertainers) to enter into the bosom of this Kingdom. Whatsoever those
our Brethren of Scotland did, I will bury it according to their Act, in
oblivion; neither approving, nor yet blameing them for any thing. But for any
Subject of England, to enterchange Messages, and to keep private intelligence,
with any that seem to be in Arms against their King, and the invaders of his
Dominions, to animate them to come, and advance forward; to refuse their
Sovereigns Service, and the Oath of their fidelity, which was tendered unto
them; and to hinder the Kings Soldiers to do their duties, either by denying
to go with him, or refusing to fight for him when they went, (which if some men
were brought to their Legal trial, I believe, would be more than sufficiently
proved against them) can be no less than heinous Crimes, perhaps, within the
compass of high Treason.

Or were these things but our jealousies and fears, which do wear the garments
of Truth; yet their proceedings in Parliament do add more fuel unto the fire
of our suspicion; as, for our men, whom we have chosen to plead for us, and to
treat with them, to respect them more than us, to enrich them, by impoverishing
us, How they behaved themselves toward the Scots.
giving them no less than 300000. l. who had entered into our Land and brought
upon us such fears, of I know not how many mischiefs that might succeed; and
not only so, but also, (to show what love they bare to them, and how little
regard they had of us, their Native Brethren, that put such trust and
confidence in their fidelity, as to commit all our fortunes and liberties into
their hands) paying weekly such a Pension for their provision, (besides the
maintenance of our own Army, which were forced to carry them their moneys, when
themselves were unpaid) as in a short time was able to exhaust all the wealth
of this Kingdom; and yet for all his Majesty's continual calling upon them to
dispatch their discharge, and to finish the Treaty, for the good of both
Kingdoms, keeping them here so exceeding long, and making so very much of them,
(which in truth we envyed not, but admired what it meant, when we saw with what
continual feastings they were entertained in London, and their lodgings
frequented as the Kings Court) till all the people began to murmur, and to wax
weary of so great a charge, and such a burden, as they knew must at last light
upon their shoulders; which must needs be matters worthy of our best
examinations.

But as yet the common people that sees no further than the present tense, Why
they detained them here so long.
and the outside of things, did little know, what many wise men did then
foresee, that these men aimed further than they seemed to do, and delayed the
business purposely till they had attained many of their desires, and had fully
endeared themselves into the affections of the Scots, that (if need required,
that they could not effect all the residue of their design as they intended,
which now could not so suddenly be brought unto perfection,) they might recall
them here again to assist them, to do that by force, which by their craft and
subtilty they should fail to do; as now by their sending for them, going unto
them, and alleging the Act of Pacification for their assistance, to withstand
their King and to overthrow our Church, it is apparent to all the World, how
perfidiously they dealt with God and man, and how treacherous their thoughts
were from the beginning, both to the King and Kingdom. Yet, As we found our
Brethren of Scotland (howsoever these men behaved themselves in their secret
intentions) to have carried themselves none otherwise than as wise, rational,
and religious men, in all the Treaty; So I assure my self, they will hereafter
still continue, both faithful unto God, and loyal unto their King; and, as they
perceived not their intentions at the first, so they will not now join with
them in any Association of Rebellion to withstand their own Liege Lord, and to
change the established Laws and Religion of our Kingdom; but will rather live
in peace and happiness in their own Land, than by forsaking their enjoyed
quietness, to involve themselves in the unhappiness of a desperate War in
another Country.

2. The compelling of all people to take their new framed Protestation.
2. After they had thus endeared themselves unto their Brethren of Scotland,
they framed a Protestation, to maintain and defend, as far as lawfully they
might, with their lives, powers, and estates, the True Reformed Protestant
Religion, his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate, the power, and
privilege of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, and
every person that should make the Protestation, in whatsoever he should do in
the lawful pursuance of the same; and to their power, and as far as lawfully
they might, to oppose, and, by all good means, endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by force, practice, counsels, plots,
conspiracies, or otherwise Which word is like the etc. in the Canonical Oath.
do any thing to the contrary of any thing in the said Protestation contained;
and neither for fear, hope, nor other respect, to relinquish this Promise, Vow,
and Protestation.

In which Protestation, though no man can espy the least shadow of ill, prima
facie, at the first reading thereof; yet if you look further, and search
narrowly into the intentions of the composers, the frame of the Protestation,
and the practice of these Protestors, ever since the framing of it, you shall
find that Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne: these men are no
Changelings, but as like themselves as ever they were; For,

1. To terrify the Papists, and to raise a Rebellion in Ireland.
1. As it was intended, so it succeeded; it terrified the Papists, and made them
so desperate, as almost to despair of their very Being, as concerning the place
where, or the manner how, they should live; Which thing, together with many
other harsh and hard proceedings against many of them, and the small
countenance which they showed unto a very moderate Petition that the Papists
exhibited unto them, has driven abundance of them into Ireland, (whom I saw my
self) and there consulting with the Irish (which were then also threatened by
the Agents of this Faction there, that ere long they should be severely
handled, and brought to the Church whether they would or no, or pay such a
Mulct as should make them poor) what course they should take in such a
desperate condition, wherein they were all like to be ruined, or to be rooted
out of all the Kings Dominions, they concluded what they would do; To defend
themselves by a plain Rebellion. So this course against them has been the
leading-card (as some of them confessed) of that great Rebellion; which being
kindled (as some Sectaries in England expected) they thought they would so much
the more weaken the King, by how much the more combustion should be raised in
each one of his Dominions: And therefore notwithstanding all the Kings gracious
Messages, and wishes unto the House of Commons (which I wish all men would
remember, how affectionately he desired it) to hasten to relieve that bleeding
Kingdom, yet still they protracted and neglected their redress; and at last,
passed such Votes, made such Orders, and procured such Acts, as rather
respected themselves, and their posterity, to get all the land and goods of the
Rebels to themselves, that were the Adventurers, than the relieving of us that
were distressed, and would (as I told some of the House of Commons) rather
increase the Rebellion, than any ways quench that destroying flame. And this
was (as it succeeded, and, as you see hereby, most likely intended) a most
detestable Plot, for the kindling of that Rebellion, and continuing of that
bloody War in Ireland, without which, they knew this Rebellion in England could
never have gained so much strength as it has.

2. By their large expression of what Religion they protested to defend: 2. To
gain all Sectaries to their side.
not the Protestant Religion, as it is established by Law, and expressed in the
39. Articles of the Church of England; but as it is repugnant to Popery, and
taught perhaps by Burton, Burges, Goodwin, Burrows, or the like Amsterdamian
Schismatics, they opened the gap so wide, and made Heaven-gate so broad, that
all Brownists, Anabaptists, Socinians, Familists, Adamites, and all other
New-England-brood, and Outlandish Sectaries whatsoever, that opposed Popery,
might return home, and join with them, as they have done since, to overthrow
our established Church and State. And this Plot, to increase their own
strength, was as craftily done, and is as Detestable as the other, which, to
weaken the King in England, caused a Rebellion in Ireland.

3. By their illegal compelling, 3. To descry their own strength.
and forcible inducing of all the people in the Kingdom to take the same, or to
be adjudged ill-affected and popish; and after the Lords had rejected the
imposing of it, they by their Declaration, which showed, That what person
soever would not take it, was unfit to bear Office, either in Church, or
Commonwealth, prevailed in this Plot so, that they descryed the number of
their own Party, they understood their own strength, and they perceived thereby
many things, which they knew not before; for now they had with David, numbered
Israel, and, so far as the wit and policy of the Devil had instructed them,
they had searched into the secrets of all hearts.

4. Having compelled the people to take it, 4. To ensnare all the simpler sort
to adhere unto them.
they have hereby ensnared all the simpler sort and tender consciences to stick
unto them, when they tell them, and press it upon their souls, That they have
made a Protestation to maintain the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty
of the Subject, and therefore they are bound to adhere to the Parliament to the
uttermost of their power; and so by this equivocall Protestati n, they have
seduced thousands into their Rebellion, and led them blindfold unto destruction.

But to let you see, not the sincerity of their hearts, The mystery of their
iniquity.
but the mystery of their iniquity, by this their Protestation; you shall never
find them urge it unto others, or remembering it themselves, For the defense of
the Kings Person, Crown, or Dignity, or for the liberty of any Subject, but
only such Subjects as will be Rebels with them: For, how can they be said to
defend any of these, when they do their very best to destroy His Person, and
deprive him of all his Royal Dignities? and to plunder and imprison all true
Subjects for being true Subjects unto their King? Whereby you see, how these
Rebels are likewise perjured, and have weaved this Protestation like a Spiders
web, That the rebels are all perjured.
through which themselves might pass when they pleased, and like Vulcans Net,
to catch the simpler sort, to adhere most eagerly to their Designs; and so it
is but a circle of all subtilties, and not unwittily questioned; An protestatio
Parliamentaria deterior sit juramento cum, etc. For if there be any thing
enjoined to be done by that Protestation, which was unlawful to be done before
the Protestation was taken, it is no more to be justified by that Act, than any
other unlawful thing is by a rash and wicked vow; and it ought not to be urged
to do mischief; and if there be nothing to be enjoined thereby, but what was
every man's duty before, there was but small need to draw any argument from any
Protestation: but if they intended to draw men from the duty of allegiance to
which they were legally sworn, and all men understood, to do somewhat which the
ignorant did not understand, then such a voluntary Protestation might do the
deed; for they have protested to maintain the Privileges of Parliament. And
yet the wisest of us now may justly protest, we cannot tell what those
Privileges are, or how far they should extend in the judgment of the House of
Commons; for they are multiplied like the Rats of Egypt: And as Pharaohs lean
Kine, did eat up all his fat Cows; Privileges of Parl. multiplied, and are
like Pharaohs kine.
so these meager Privileges have eaten up all our goodly Laws. And therefore,
the unlimited universality of these Privileges in the Protestation, extending
it self as far as the and caetera in the Canonical Oath, was but a mischievous
plot in the Contrivers, to catch the simple to adhere unto them; And it is a
madness in any man that has legally sworn to defend the King's Person, Crown,
and Dignity, which he knows, and has irregularly protested to maintain the
Privileges of Parliament, which he knows not, immediately to draw his sword
against his known Sovereign, or to Rebel against his well-known lawful
Authority, in the behalf of some thing, he knows not what, but is told by
these men, It is a Privilege of Parliament. O ye unwise among the people, When
will you understand; Who has bewitched you, that you should not believe the
truth?

CHAP. VII.
Shows how the Faction was enraged against our last Canons. What manner of
men they chose in their new Synod. And of six special Acts of great prejudice
unto the Church of Christ, which under false pretenses, they have already done.

3. The condemning of our last Canons.
3. FOr the Canons, that were last made, I must confess, my self, and many
others of my Brethren, were very averse unto our sitting, to make any at that
time; yet many Reasons were showed us, that we might sit (and we had the Judges
of the Common-Laws opinion under their hands showed us, for the legality of our
sitting) and conclude such Canons as might be for the glory of God, and the
good of his Church; but of those that are made, though I assure my self, the
worst of them, is not so ill as they allege, nor near so bad as most (I might
say the best) of their illegal Orders; yet, there were many of us that never
gave our votes to pass them; and though not for any offense that we saw in
them, yet, for the scandal that might be taken at them, we heartily wished
they had never been so zealously propounded at that time.

But the Sectaries of London, and the prevalent Faction in Parliament did, with
open mouth, spend much time to the no small prejudice of the whole Kingdom, and
made many long Speeches to exclaim against them, as against a Bundle of
superstitions, that obscured the purity of our Religion, an introduction unto
Popery, and an intolerable, unheard of the like, invasion upon the liberty of
the Subjects, that revived again the Papal Tyranny, which, contrary to our
Fundamental Laws, have incroached to make Canons and Constitutions to bind our
Consciences; whereupon they canvas them, and condemn them out of their house,
and the House of God, out of the Church and Commonwealth: and not only so, but
also the Contrivers of them, and Consenters to them, they terrify, and
threaten to adjudge them, sometimes with a praemunire, to have forfeited all
their goods and possessions, and sometimes to be fined, (as we were at last)
with such a heavy Mulct, as, in all other men's judgment, did far exceed the
pretended offense, especially of us that never consented to them.

And yet we find, not only in Lindwood, and others of our Canonists, but also
in the book of Martyrs, and the rest of our English Histories, that the
Archbishops, within their Provinces, have at several times made Canons and
Constitutions, for the Regulating of all the people committed to their charge,
without any suspicion of the least violation of our laws; but the Faction say,
Sic volumus, and the Houses of Parliament understand what is Law better then I
do, and therefore accordingly (before the makers of them were called to make
their answers, by what Authority they made them, or by what Law they could
justify them) they reject the Canons and censure their makers. Yet
notwithstanding their distaste of them, it is conceived by some, that the Clergy
having His Majesty's writ to be convocated, and leave to compose such Canons,
as they thought fit to be observed, for the Honor of God, the discharge of
their duty, and the good of the Church, and having the Royal assent and
approbation to all that they concluded; (which is all that I find the Statute
provided in this case requires) though they should be defective, or perhaps
offensive, in some circumstances; yet if they be not legally abrogated, after a
full hearing of all parties, and the Kings consent to reject them, as it was to
approve them they are still as binding, and in as full force as ever they were;
though, for mine own part, I will not undertake the task, to make that good,
when as both the Houses have condemned them; but I say:

4. This Scandal taken against these Canons, 4. The appointing of a new framed
Synod.
made way for the faction to call for a new Synod, or Assembly of Divines, for
the rectifying of things amiss, as well in Discipline as in Doctrine; And in
this new intended Synod, the Divines are nominated, not according to the rules
and Canons of the Church, and the Customs of all Nations, Laymen choosers of
the Clergy, as if a shepherd did choose precious stones.
since the first Synod or Council of the Apostles, by Divines, that can best
judge of their own abilities, as when the spirit of the Prophets is subject to
the Prophets: but, fearing the Clergy would have sent men that were too
Orthodoxal for their faith, they deprived them of their rights, and, forgetting
their Protestation to defend the right of the Subject, the choice is made by
themselves, that are Lay men, and Young men, and many of them perhaps Profane
men, or at least not so religious, nor so judicious as they ought to be, for a
business of this nature, of so great concernment, as the direction of our souls
to their eternal bliss.

And now they being nominated, we know most of them what they are; men, not
only justly suspected to be ill disposed to the peace of our Church, and too
much addicted to innovation, to alter the Government, What manner of men they
have chosen.
to reject and cast away the Book of Common Prayer, to oppose Episcopacy, and
to displcae the grave and godly Governors of Gods Church; but also apparently
fashioned to the humors of these their own Disciples (who are to be the only
judges of their determinations) that (although some few Canonical men, and most
Reverend, Learned, and Religious Bishops, and others, for fashion sake, to
blind the World, are named amongst them; yet, when, as in a Parliament, so in a
Synod, the most desperate faction, if they prove prevalent to be the major
part, will carry any thing in despite of the better part, they shall stand but
as Ciphers, able to do nothing) they might abolish our old established
Government, erect their own new invented Discipline, and propagate their well
affected Doctrine in all Churches; for you may judge of them by their compeers,
Goodwin, Burrows, Arrow-Smith, and the rest of their ignorant, factious, and
schismatical Ministers, that together with those intruding Mechanics, (who
without any calling either from God or man, do step from the Botchers board, or
their Horses stable, into the Preachers Pulpit) are the bellows which blow up
this fire, that threateneth the destruction of our Land, like Shebah's trumpet,
to summon the people unto Rebellion, and like the red Dragon in the Revelation,
which gave them all his poison, and made them eloquent, to disgorge their
malice, and to cast forth floods of slanders after those that keep Loyalty to
their Sovereign, and to belch forth their unsavory reproaches against those
that discover their affected ignorance, and Seditious wickedness, in defense of
truth; and are the Instruments of this faction, to seduce the poor people to
the desolation of the whole Kingdom, if not timely prevented by their
repentance, and assistance to enable him whom God has made our Protector to
defend us against all such transcendent wickedness. And these are the main ends
for which they summoned such a new Synod of their furious and Fanatic
teachers, upon whose temper and fidelity, I believe, no wise man that knows
them would lay the least weight of his souls felicity. Whar Synod they should
have chosen.
Whereas if they desired a Reformation of things amiss, and not rather an
alteration of our Religion and the abolition of our now settled Government, they
would have called for such a Synod as was in Queen Elizabeth's time, when the 39
Articles of our Religion were composed, and such as they needed not to be
ashamed to own in future times, nor the best refuse to associate the rest, for
the illegality of their election; for if there be any scandalous Governors,
(as we deny not but there may be a Cham in the Ark, a Judas amongst the
Apostles, and perhaps an unjustifiable Prelate among the Bishops, as there was
a proud Lucifer among the Angels) or if they think it necessary to correct,
qualify, explain, or alter some expressions or ceremonies in our Liturgy, and
Book of Common Prayer, we are so far from giving the least offense to weak
Consciences, that we heartily wish a lawful Synod, which may have a full legal
power, as well to remove the offenses, as to punish the offenders, and to
establish such Laws and Canons, as well against Separatists and Schismatics,
Anabaptists and Brownists, as against Recusants and Papists, and such as may be
for the Glory of God, and the peace of our Church; which was our sole intention
in the last Synod.

But seeing their Plot was rather to establish a new Church than to redress the
defects of the old, and to countenance and advance those boute-fues that
schismatically rent our Church in pieces, and most wickedly defile the pure
Doctrine of the same, by degrading and displacing the grave Governors thereof,
I will (to give you a taste of what fruit you are like to reap from them) very
briefly set down the sum of these two points.

Two points handled. 1. What they have already done in the Affairs of our
Church. 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. 1. Opened a gap ta all licenciousness.
1. What they have already done. 2. What Discipline and Doctrine are like to
ensue, if they should be enabled or permitted to erect their new Church; for,
(as you may find it in the Remonstrance of the Commons of England to the House
of Commons.)
1. Under color of Regulating the Ecclesiastical Courts, (Courts that have
been founded by the Apostles, and had always their Authority and Reverence
among Christians, even before the Secular power (when the Emperors became
Christians) had confirmed them) they have taken away (in respect of the
coercive part thereof, which is the life of the Law, and without which the
other part is fruitless) all the Spiritual jurisdiction of Gods Church; they
have taken away Aarons rod, and would have only Manna left in Gods Ark; so that
now the crimes inquirable and censurable by those Courts, though never so
heinous, as Adultery, Incest, and the like, cannot be punished; Heresies, and
Schisms, which now of late have abounded in all places, can no ways be
Reformed, and the neglect of Gods service can as hardly be repaired, when as
the Ministers cannot be enforced to attend their Cures, the Church Officers
cannot be compelled to perform their duty, and the Parishioners cannot be
brought by our Law to pay their Tithes and other necessary Duties; which things
are all so considerable that all Christians ought to fear how lamentable will
be the end of these sad beginnings; for, my self have seen the House of God
most unchristianly profaned, the Churchyard and the dead bodies of the Saints
so rooted and miserably abused by Hogs and Swine, that it would grieve mere
men, that scarce ever heard of God, to see such a barbarous usage of any holy
place; and when the Ministers have given a seven-nights warning to prepare for
the blessed Eucharist, and the Communicants came to partake of those holy
mysteries, they were fain to return home without it, for want of Bread and Wine
to administer it; and yet now, the Church- Governors have not any power to
redress any of these abominable abuses.

2. Under show of Reforming the Church Discipline, 2. Voted down all the
Governors of Gods Church.
and bettering the Government thereof, they have voted down those very
Governors, the Bishops and their Assistants, the Deans and Chapters, whose
function was constituted by the Apostles, and has from that time continued to
this very day; As the most Learned Archbishop of Armagh, Bishop Hall, Master
Mason, Master Tailor, and that worthy Gentleman Master Theyer, and others have
sufficiently showed to all the World.

3. Under the pretense of expunging Popery, which Bishop Jewel, 3. Vilified our
Service Book.
Bishop Parry, Bishop Babington, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Morton, Bishop Davenant,
Bishop Hall, and abundance more of the Reverend Bishops have confuted, expelled
and kept out of our Church, more than any, yea than all their schismatical
Disciples, whose Learning was no ways able to answer the weakest Arguments of
our Adversaries, the Service Book that is established by Act of Parliament, and
was by those holy Martyrs, that lost their lives, and spilt their blood in
defense of the Protestant Religion, and defiance of Erroneous Popery, so
Divinely and devoutly composed, as all the Reformation can bear witness, and I
am well assured, the whole flock of these Convocants shall never be able,
without this, to make any near so pious; must be totally cried down, and has
been in many places, burned, used to the uncleanest use, and teared all to
pieces; And to let you see their abomination herein, I must crave patience to
transcribe, that it may the more generally pass, the Speech of Alderman
Garraway, Alderman Garraway p. 7.
where he says, page 7. Did not my Lord Mayor (that is, Pennington) first
enter upon his Office with a Speech against the Book of Common Prayer? Has the
Common Prayer ever been read before him? Has not Captain Ven said, that his
Wife could make prayers worth three of any in that Book? O Masters! There have
been times, that he which should speak against the Book of Common Prayer in
this City, should not have been put to the patience of a Legal-Trial; we were
wont to look upon it as the greatest treasure, and the Jewel of our Religion;
and he that should have told us, he wished well to our Religion, and yet would
have taken away the Book of Common Prayer would never have gotten credit. I
have been in all the parts of Christendom, and have conversed with Christians
in Turkey; why, in all the Reformed Churches there is not any thing of more
Reverence than the English Liturgy; not our Royal Exchange, nor the Navy of
Queen Elizabeth, is so famous as this; in Geneva it self, I have heard it
extolled to the skies. I have been three months together by Sea, and not a day
without hearing it read twice; How the Mariners esteem the Liturgy.
the honest Mariners then despised all the World but the King and the
Common Prayer Book; he that should be suspected to wish ill to either of them,
should have made but an ill voyage; and let me tell you, they are shrewd
Youths, those Seamen; if they once discern that the person of the King is in
danger, or the Protestant professed Religion, they will show themselves mad
bodies before you are aware of it; I would not be a Brownist or an Anabaptist
in their way, for -- And yet, these men have so basely abused, and are so
violent to abolish this excellent Book and Divine Liturgy, that Many will not
believe it though it should be told unto them: I would they did but read that
Act of Parliament which is prefixed unto the same, to see if they regarded
either the Law of God or Man, the Religion of the Clergy that composed it, or
the Wisdom of the Parliament that confirmed it.

4. Abused the images and pictures of the Saints and other holy things.
4. Under color to show their hatred to Idolatry, they have broken down the
glass- Windows of many Churches; shot off the heads of the Images of the
Blessed Virgin, and of our dear Savior, represented in her lap, upon the porch
of Saint Mary's in Oxford; thrown away the Pictures of Christ, and of other his
Holy Apostles, and Gods blessed Saints, into the Rivers; taken the Ministers
Surplices to make Frocks to preserve their clothes when they dressed their
Horses; and in Worcester they have done what I am ashamed to speak, and would
loathe any modest ear to hear; made the Pulpit, and (not far from the Town)
the Font their house of office, as I was informed by one of the gravest
Doctors and Prebends of that Church; thrown down the Organs, which cost above
fifteen hundred pounds, and taken the Pipes, and Copes of the Prebends, and
gone round about the Streets, with the Copes on their backs, and the Pipes in
their hands, dancing the Morrice-dance; So in Winscomb in Gloucestershire, they
brake down the Organs, and made that Church their Slaughterhouse, when they
killed certain Sheep that they had stolen, and dressed the same upon the
Communion Table; and in Lincoln-Minster the Soldiers brought their Horses into
the Quire, laid their hay upon the Holy Table, and made the House of God a
Stable for their Horses, that did now eat their hay where the Christians did
use to Communicate the Body and Blood of Christ; so that these men give their
Savior no better entertainment now in his glory, Luke 2.7:
than the Jews did when he came in his Humility, but he shall be still kept
low, and a Stable shall be good enough for his Mansion; yet, as in Canterbury
they did but little less, so in Winchester they added this to their former
prophanations, to take the ashes of those Saxon Kings, that were kept in
certain Urns, and threw them about the ground, as if death it self could not
appease their rage.

Saeva sed in manes manibus arma dabant. It would fill a whole volume to relate
all the Villainies that they did of this kind, the consideration of which
profane usage of Holy places, made a worthy Gentleman Pathetically to set down
these fervent speeches; I would to God we had not cause to complain of the
Horrid and barbarous attempts of diverse among us (Christians I can scarce call
them) against some the mother-Churches, Canterbury, Worcester, Winchester,
Chichester, and many others.
who as if they had studied to affront the Almighty to his face, and purposely
with Manasses to anger him, have not spared to profane those goodly
Structures, and irreligiously and Antichristianlike to deface the Instruments
there prepared and employed in the service of the great God: at the very
thought whereof, I tremble and stand amazed, Master Theyer in his Treatise of
Episcopacy. 56, 57.
and can hardly believe the Christian World in any age (no not under the Goths
and Vandals) can parallel it with an example of like abominable and Atheistical
Villainies, yet to this day uncensured: and I am heartily sorry that it should
be told in Gath or Ascalon, in any foreign Nation, that our English People
should have any such Sect amongst them, so void of all humanity, so destitute
of all thoughts of a Deity, and so full of all incredible impieties. And
therefore I must use the words of the Prophet Jeremy, (...) 9, 29.
Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? Or, shall not my soul, be
avenged on such a Nation as this? Or, is it any wonder, that there are such
Wars, such bloody Wars, such barbarous rapines, and that these miseries do
still continue amongst us, when we not only proceed to commit, Romans 1.32. Heb.
10.31.
but also to defend and justify these and the like abominable wickednesses; and
have pleasure in them that do them? for, It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.

5. Under the color of advancing the true Protestant Religion, 5 Branded the
true Protestants, and advanced Anabaptists.
they have branded the best Protestants, (even those that have most learnedly,
both preached, and written against the Church of Rome, and all her erroneous
tenets, and were not long since registered in the class of Puritans, and for
that cause kept under water) for Papists, and superstitiously Popish, and so
Malignants, and opposers of the true, to be established, Religion; and they
have encouraged and promoted to the Livings and Lively-hoods of the most
Orthodox and Canonical men, Anabaptists and Brownists, and other Sectaries of
most desperate opinions, that (as Saint Bernard says of the like, Multiplicati
sunt super numerum;) As the Caterpillars overspread all the Land of Egypt, so
these are multiplied in every corner, without number; and these tares have
almost choked all the Wheat in Gods field, and do preach most desperate
Doctrines, destructive both to themselves, their Proselytes, and all the truest
Protestants throughout all this Kingdom; when as Sedition and Rebellion,
besides their other damnable Doctrines condemned by the Church, must ever be at
one end of their Sermons, and published in their Pamphlets; As for instance,
you may find in the bloody books, and fiery writings, of the darling
Secretaries of the red Dragon, that warreth against the Saints, Stephen
Marshal, Master Bridges, Jo. Goodwin, Buroughs, and the rest of the Locusts,
Quae glomerantur in unum Innumerae pestes Erebi, Claud.
that are sent out of the bottomless pit to seduce the people of God, and to
lead them headlong unto perdition.

But, let me advise the Servants of Christ, to remember their Savior's words.
To beware of false Prophets; they shall deceive many, and many, Matthew. 7.15.
love to be deceived by them; those whom God has given up, that they should
believe a lie; Qui infatuati seducuntur, and seducti judicabuntur; 2 Thessalonians.
2.10. The Author's advice.
but you that desire to escape their snares may know them by their fruits;
which are, Rebellion against their King, and Railing against their Governors,
Perjury against God, by the breaches of those Oaths, which in the face of the
Church they have taken, both to the King, and to their Superiors; Three notes
by which we may know the false Apostles.
and a wilful perverting of the sacred Scriptures, to the perdition of their
Proselytes; besides many other bitter fruits, that, worse than any Aconite are
able to poison any Christian soul, that do but taste of their Philtra's: or, if
you will believe these Apples of Sodom, to be as sweet as they seem fair, then
remember by what marks the Prophets and Apostles tell us that we may know them;
1. Such as run before they be sent, 1. Note. Jer. 23.21.
as Weavers, Tailors, and the like, that never had any calling or Authority to
enter upon this sacred Function. 2. They went from us, 2. Note. 1 John 2.15.
but are not of us; such as were called, but then forsook their first love, and
apostated from the Church, and, like ungracious children, did throw dirt in
their mothers face, or, like the brood of Vipers, do labor to gnaw out her
bowels; and here let the world judge, whether we went from them, or they from
us; whether we or they apostated from that Oath and profession which all and
every one of us did make, when we entered into holy Orders.

3. These false Prophets, says the Apostle, do lead simple, 3. Note. 2 Timothy
3.6. Genesis 3.1.6.
or silly women, captives; just as their Master first seduced Eve, and she
Adam, so do these; and because they have less worth than can attain to the
height of their ambition, you may see most of them by women raised to great
fortunes, that their pride disdaineth to be obedient; or if they fail of such
wives, yet are they swelled with envy, which is as rebellious in these, as
pride is in the other.

6 Ordered to take away all the revenues of the most worthy Clergy.
6. Under the pretense of making our Clergy more spiritual and Apostolic,
they have voted away most of our temporal estates, the Lands and Lordships of
the Bishops, Deans, and Prebends, and the Pluralities of those persons that
possessed double Benefices, and made their Order that no man should pay any
rent, or any dues, unto any of the forenamed persons. And by this taking away
the freehold of the Clergy now in present, (which they hold with as good
right, and by the same Law, as the best Lord in England holds his
Inheritance) and by this discouragement of Learning for the time to come, they
thought to make our Clergy Angelical; but have proved themselves, I will not
say, diabolical, but most injurious unto the Church of Christ, by committing an
Act of as great injustice, and as prejudicial to the Commonwealth, as can be
found among the Pagans. For what can be more unjust, or more inhumane, than to
take away my Livelihood, which is my very life, in mine old age, without any
offense of mine, for which I had labored all the days of my life? And what
consequence can this produce, than (that which succeeded in the like case,
Sublatis studiorum praemiis, ipsa studia pereunt, C. Tacit. 1 Reg. 12 31.
Matthew. 15.14.
in Jeroboam's time, when he robbed the Priests and Levites of their
Inheritance) ignorance and barbarity, and the basest of the people to be the
Preachers of Gods Word, whereby the blind do lead the blind, until both do
fall into the ditch; as I can testify, some of our greatest Nobility intended
to make their sons Priests and Bishops, while the glory of Israel, and the
beauty of our Church remained un-obscured, and now, contempt and poverty being
enacted and ordered to be their portion, those resolutions are vanished; and
the Universities can bear me witness, the lowest Gentry are not so well
contented to undertake this highest calling. These, and many other things
ejusdem farinae, of the same mold, they have already done, to overwhelm the
ship of Christ under the waves of this turbulent Faction. And these
prophanations of Gods divine Service, and the violations of the Sepulchers of
the dead (whose ashes and bones, like canes sepulchrales, they have disturbed
in their graves) and those unheard of sacriledges on Gods Priests and portion
are so equally practiced, that it is almost hard to judge which are greater,
either their impiety toward God, their inhumanity toward the dead, or their
injustice toward the living.

CHAP. VIII.
Shows what Discipline or Church Government our factious Schismatics do like
best. And twelve principal points of Doctrine, which they hold as twelve
Articles of their faith: and we are to believe the same, or suffer; if this
faction should prevail.

2. What discipline and doctrine the new Synod is like to set up.
2. FOr the discipline and the doctrine that they would establish, they have not
yet, and I believe they can never fully agree what they shall be; their desire
is first to overthrow the old, and then they will take care, and consult how to
devise a new; but I could wish they would let the old alone till they could
agree to produce a better.

Yet, because their blind zeal is so violent, to have their own unjust desires,
to destroy the vineyard of Christ root and branch, I, that have served seven
years, a Lecturer, among them, in the heart of London, and was conversant with
the purest of these holy brethren, and thereby understood most of their
Anabaptistical, and ridiculous tenets, and what discipline they best liked,
will here draw you a model of their Vtopian, or New- England Church, which they
would transport hither, to obscure the glory of old England.

1. For their discipline and government: 1. Their discipline.
Some would have the Scottish Synods, and that form of Government, which old
furious Knox has first brought among them, and is fully described by that
Reverend Archbishop Bancroft; Others like better of the Geneva Assemblies,
Banc^oft in lib. English Scottizing.
instituted by M. Calvin, and continued by Theodore Beza, two worthy members of
that Church, or the discipline of the Hugonots in the new French Reformation,
which differs but a little from the other; But most of them like better of
the manner of Amsterdam, where every Church is independent, and every Pastor
is a Pope in his own Parish; and to that purpose, you may remember how
vehemently they have lately most foolishly written As Smith, Best, Davenport,
Can, Robinson, and Mris. Childley, and many other anonyms. Sober Sadness, p.
22.
for this Independent Government; and how the Lord Say, and the Lord Brooks,
two leading Captains of that faction, have often protested they would dispense
with all sorts of Religions, so they might freely exercise their own; and that
such a toleration ought to be granted, to all others; because their
Independencie cannot otherwise consist; for he that is accountable to none,
will use what Religion he pleases, without control; and therefore they
support their own Army by men of all Nations and Religions, not their grand
Adversaries the Papists excepted, but of fifty or sixty Soldiers that billeted
in Adthrop, there were no less than three or four Papists amongst them.

But how unsuitable these Governments would prove to stand with our English
Nobility, and Gentry, (besides the novelty of them, How unsuitable their
government would be to our Gentry.
and how far dissonant they are to the Apostolic discipline) I will appeal
to their own judgment, when every undiscreet Parson, and poor Vicar, shall be
able, upon every discontent to excommunicate the best man in his Parish, and as
we have seen some of them debarring whom they pleased from the holy Table,
because their great anger, or little judgment, conceived them to be unworthy.
When as the Church deemed it fitter that none of her children should undergo
the least indignity for any personal distaste, but upon due examination of
witnesses, a full hearing, and a just censure in open Court; which course if it
be neglected, should be rather punished in the offenders, than the discipline
dissolved, the Governors removed, and a new fantastical fancy erected.

2. For the Doctrines of these men, 2. The Doctrines of the faction that are
like to be settled by the new Synod.
they are like the poetical fiction of those Sisters, facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen; I did once intend, while I lived amongst them to collect a
whole Volume of them; but Satan then prevented me, and plotted my destruction
for mine intention: yet now, I will set down these few, out of those many,
which I then observed.

1. Though Moses says, The secret things belong to the Lord our God, 1. They
search into Gods secrets. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but the things revealed, belong to us and our children for ever: yet these men
are all Gnostiques, they know very much, even of the secrets and counsels of
God, and they are sure who shall be saved, and who shall be damned; and, as men
of the Cabinet-counsel of God, broach their illusions for divine revelations,
and persuade the people, that what they say, or do, is all from God; and
therefore that this War which they prosecute, was preordained of God for the
destruction of the wicked, to whom they formerly preached their damnation, and
thereby have caused many silly souls most desperately to end the miseries of
their wretched life, by putting themselves to an untimely death.

2. They only, They judge th mselves only the elect.
as the elect of God (which shall be the sole heirs of heaven) are the Lords
Proprietaries of all this worldly wealth, and the reprobates being enemies unto
God, have no right unto any of Gods creatures; and therefore they think they
may lawfully take away the goods of those reprobates, whom now they call
Malignants, and they have as good warrant for it, as ever the Israelites had to
spoil the Egyptians; for they tell us, that Saint Paul, which knew right from
wrong, tells them plainly, that whether they be things present, 1 Cor 3.22, 23
or things to come, even all are yours, and ye Christ's, That there is a double
right to the things of this woe ld. Psalm. 104.28. Matthew. 5.45.
and Christ God's; but they understand not that men have a double right unto
these worldly goods. 1. As Christians, and so God as a merciful Father, has
provided all things for them. 2. As the Creatures of God; and so God, as a
faithful Creator, opens his hand, and fills all things living with
plenteousnesse; and makes his Sun to shine upon the just, and upon the unjust;
and so the wicked have as good an interest in their estates as the godly; and
besides, God has not given them the power to distinguish, who are the elect,
or who are reprobates.

And therefore if we have any regard of our goods, that God has given us, we
have great reason to look about us: for these are the greatest Cheaters in
Christendom, and as they have made us Malignants, so they will make us
reprobates when they please, that they may enjoy those things that we have.

3. They think themselves free from all sin Numb. 23.21. Tit. 1.15.
3. Because Balaam says, God beheld no iniquity in Jacob; and the Apostle
says, To the pure, all things are pure; they teach their Proselytes, that in
them, which are the holy Brethren, there is no sin; and their adultery,
drunkenesse, cozenage, and the like odious crimes, are no crimes, because God
loving them so tenderly, as a fond mother sees no fault in her untoward child,
so he takes no notice of any offense that they commit; but for the ungodly, To
the unbelieving, nothing is pure. Titus 1.15.
their Prayers are sins, their Alms are odious, and whatsoever commendable
duty they do perform, God accounts their best actions to be heinous
transgressions, and to add the more weight of punishment to their damnation;
which Doctrine how abominable it is to God, and how destructive to all men, to
make these holy Brethren, and their sanctified Sisters senseless in all sins,
Matthew. 9.12.
incapable of repentance, when the whole has no need of the Physician; and to
discourage all other ignorant men from doing good duties, when the performance
of them shall multiply their stripes; is so apparent to all men, that I need
not stand to confute it: for, if Coniah, (though he were the Signet upon my
right hand, Jer. 22.24. Ezekiel. 33.15.
or, as the apple of mine eye) does offend, I will cut him off; and, if the
wicked forsake his wickedness, and do that which is just, love mercy, and
speak truth, he shall be accepted, and the Lord will not call light darkness,
nor good evil, in any one.

4. They allow the women to offend while their husbands sleep. Joh. 11.11. 1
Cor. 7.39.
4. Because our Savior says, Our friend Lazarus sleeps; when as indeed he
was dead; and the Heathens say, Sleep is (...), the brother of Death: they take
this color to hide their adulteries, that while the husband sleeps, the wife
is as free from him as if he were dead, a foolery so ridiculous, that the
naming of it, is a sufficient confutation of it, and yet you shall hardly
withdraw our London-Anabaptists from it.

5. They justify many kinds of lies, and equivocations. Gen 12 13. Acts 23.5.
5. Because Abraham said that Sarah was his Sister, and Saint Paul said, I wist
not brethren, that he was the High Priest; they hold it as an Article of their
Creed, that for officious lies and equivocations, being for the furtherance of
their cause, the good work which they pretend, they may, and ought to use them,
to swallow them down like water, they make no bones of them; and therefore it
is dangerous to treat, and weakness to give credit, without sufficient
pledges, to the faith of these men; whose profession may as lawfully deceive
us, as their Religion teaches them to destroy us: and I believe the experience
which his Majesty's Officers had of them in the performance of their promises
and conditions of departure from Winchester, Reading, and other Towns
surrendered unto them, may sufficiently confirm this equivocall point of their
Public faith.

6. 6. They would root out all those that they term wicked. Deuteronomy 7.2. 1 Samuel
15.23.
Because the Lord straightly charged the Israelites to root out the wicked
Canaanites, and the rest of those cursed Nations; and translated the Kingdom of
Israel from Saul unto David, because he spared Agag; and our Savior bids us,
succidere ficum, to cut down that unprofitable tree which bare no fruit: they
are so filled with such unmerciful cruelty toward all those they term wicked,
and judge Malignants, that they had better fall into the hands of heathen
Tyrants, than of these their holy brethren, who embruing their hands in the
blood of so many faithful Christians, do sing with the Psalmist, Psalm. 58 9.
The righteous rejoice when they see this vengeance, they shall wash their feet
in the blood of the ungodly: for, as Solomon says, The tender mercies of the
wicked are mere cruelty. Prove. 12.10.
And I believe the first inventers of that Design to root out all the Papists
in Ireland, and to get that Act to purchase all the Lands of the Rebels, had
tasted too much of this bitter root of such destructive Doctrine; whereby you
see how the Religion of these men robbes us of our Estates, keeps no faith with
us, and takes away our lives.

7. Though among the works of God, every flower cannot be a Lilly, 7. They
would have a party among all men, both in Church and Commonwealth. Gal. 5 6.
Col. 3.11.
every beast cannot be a Lion, every bird cannot be an Eagle, and every Planet
cannot be a Phoebus; yet in the School of these men, this is the doctrine of
their to be new erected Church, that with God there is no respect of persons,
and neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision; but whether
they be bond or free, masters or servants, Jew, or Gentile, Barbarian,
Scythian, a country-Clown, or a Court Gallant, rich or poor, it is all one with
God because these Titles of Honor, Kings, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, are
no entities of Gods making, but the creatures of man's invention, to puff him
up with pride, and not to bring him unto God; and therefore though for the
bringing of their great good work to pass, they are yet contented to make the
Earl of Essex their General, and Warwick their Admiral, and so Pym and Hampden
great Officers of State; yet, when the work is done, their Plot perfected, and
their Government established, then you shall find, that, As now, they will
eradicate Episcopacie, and make all our Clergy equal, as if all had equally
but one talent, and no no man worthier than another; so then there should be
neither King, Lord, Knight, nor Gentleman, but a parity of degrees among all
these holy brethren. And to give us a taste of what they mean; as the Lords
concurrence with them enabled them to devour the Kings power; so they have
since, with great justice, prevailed with the House of Commons to swallow up
the Lords power, and have most fairly invaded their privilege, when they
questioned particular Members As my Lord Duke, and my Lord Digbie. 8. They
would have no man to pray for temporal things. Matthew. 33 34. Matthew. 6.11. 9.
Not to say the Lords Prayer. 10. Not to say, God Speed you. 2 John 10.11, 12,
Not to pray for the Malignants. 1 John 5.16.
for words spoken in that House, and then the whole House, when they brought up
and countenanced a mutinous and seditious Petition, which demanded the Names of
those Lords, that consented not with the House of Commons in those things,
which that House had twice denied.

8. Because our Savior says, Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things, that is, meat, drink, and
clothes, and all other earthly things, (...), shall be cast unto you; and
again, Be not careful for to morrow; they teach their Proselytes, that they
ought not to pray, by any means, for any of these things; whereas Christ
bids us to say, Give us this day our daily Bread.

9. They cannot endure to say the Lords Prayer, for that is a Popish
superstition, but their Prayers must be all tautologies, and a circular
repetition of their own indigested inventions.

10. You must not say, God speed you, to any neighbor, or any traveller, lest
he intends some evil work, and then you shall be partaker of his sin.

11. They will not allow any of their Disciples to pray for any of the
Reprobates; and therefore they do exceedingly blame us, and tear our Liturgy,
because we say, That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

12. Because Christ says, Call no man father on earth, for one is your Father
which is in Heaven, the child must not call him that begat him, and nurseth
him, his father; nor kneel unto him to ask him blessing, nor perform many other
such duties which the Lord requires, and the Church instructs her children
to do to this very day: and this foolish Doctrine of calling no man Father, no
man master, or Lord, and the like, in their sense, (because they understand not
the divine meaning of our Savior's words) has been the cause of such
undutifulnesse, and untowardnesse, such contempts of superiors, and such
rebellions to Authority, as is beyond expression; when as by their disloyalty,
being thus bred up in them from their cradle, they first despise their father,
then their Teachers, then their King, and then God himself.

CHAP. IX.
Shows three other special points of Doctrine, which the Brownists and
Anabaptists of this Kingdom do teach.

13. BEcause they can find no Text in Scripture (when as the Alcoran is not so
impudently hellish, as to justify the action) for to warrant men, to absolve
our consciences from any Oaths that we have voluntarily taken, for the
performance of any business; I cannot say that they do professedly teach, but
I do hear they do usually practice this most damnable sin; as, that Master
Marshall, and Master Case, did absolve the Soldiers taken at Brainceford from
their Oath, which they took, never to bear Arms against his Majesty; which is a
sin destructive both to body and soul, when their Perjury added to their
Treason, makes them twofold more the children of hell, than they were before;
and if they be taken again, they can expect nothing but their just deserved
death; and therefore I do admire that any man can challenge the name of a
Divine, which does either preach or practice a point so devilish.

14. They think sacrilege to be no sin. Acts 20.34. 1 These. 2.9. 1 Cor. 1.12.
14. Because Saint Paul says, These hands have ministered to my necessities, and
to them that were with me: and again, Laboring night and day, because we would
not be chargeable to any of you, we preached unto you the Gospel of God: and
because the rest of the Apostles and Disciples were Fishermen, Tradesmen, or
professors of some Science, either liberal or mechanic, as Saint Luke was a
Physician, Joseph a Carpenter, and the like, who did live by their manual
crafts, and were chargeable to none of their people, but sought them, and not
theirs, to win their souls to God, and not their moneys unto themselves;
therefore they think it no robbery to take away all the revenues of the Church,
nor sacrilege to rob the Clergy of all the means they have; because they
should either labor for their livings, as the Apostles did, or live upon the
peoples Alms, as many poor Ministers do, to the utter undoing of many souls,
in many distressed, and most miserable Churches.

But because this revenue of the Church, and the Lands of the Bishops is that
golden Wedge, and the brave Babylonish garment, which the Anabaptistical Achans
of our time do most of all thirst after, in this their pretended holy
Reformation, I must here sistere gradum, stay awhile and let you know:

1. Sacrilege, what it is.
1. That the taking away of any Lands or goods given and consecrated to holy
uses, and to convert the same to any other purpose than which they were
dedicated, is termed sacrilege; that is, the stealing of holy goods from the
right owners, to our selves and others to whom we leave them.

2. That this sacrilege is a sin; for it is a snare to the man, 4. That it is
a sin.
who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make inquiry; that is,
whether such a service be needful, or such a taking away be a sin.

3. That this sin is a very great sin; for Saint Paul says, 3. A great sin.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou sacrilege? And Idolatry is the
giving of our goods and service to false gods; Sacrilege the taking away of
goods dedicated to the service of any God, especially of the true God. And this
seems by the Apostles words to be a greater sin than the other; because the
devil labors more to take away the service of the true God, than to
establish his own service; for he knows that as light taken away, darkness
must needs follow, so the true Religion being destroyed, Hosea 2.8. Ezech. 16.
1 Reg. 18.19. Genesis 22.
Idolatry must needs succeed; and he knows that Idolatry has been bountiful
enough to the service of Idols, that he needs not so much to fear the taking
away of their goods, as to care that the goods dedicated to Gods service, be
taken away.

4. That this sin is a very dangerous sin, both to 1. The Persons that commit
it. 2. 4 A most dangerous sin. Joshua 7. Act. 5.4. 1. To the sacrilegers.
To the Commonwealth that suffers it; for,


1. Not only Achan, Ananias, and Sapphira, and other private men perished for
this sin, but the proudest Kings, and greatest Peers that became
sacrilegious, were plagued and destroyed by God; as Belshazzar, the great
Monarch of Assyria; William Rufus; and abundance more that you may find in our
Histories: for the curse of God, like Damocles sword, by a slender thread hangs
over their heads, and makes them like those that perished at Endor, and became
as the dung of the earth. And I beseech you mark it, Make them like a wheel,
and as the stubble before the wind, persecute them with thy tempest, let them
be confounded, and be put to shame, and perish, which say, Let us take to our
selves the houses of God in possession; and if this be the guerdon of them that
say it, I wonder what shall be the plague of them that do it; and I wonder more
that the very thought of this Curse does not make their hearts to tremble, if
their consciences were not seared, to be senseless of all fear.

2. The sin of sacrilege, extends it self not only to the persons
committing it, but also to the whole Nation that suffers it, 2. To whole
Nations.
as the sin of Achan was not only a snare to catch him to be destroyed, but it
troubled all Israel, so that they were still discomfited, and never prospered,
till the sacrileger was punished, and the Lord appeased.

If you say, The sin is taken away, when the Parliament takes these things
away.

I answer, that we must not idolize the Parliament, as if it were a kind of
omnipotent Creature, and like the Pope, such an infallible Lord God upon earth,
as that their Votes and Sanctions were the supremest rule of justice; that
cannot be unjust, because they are enacted by the whole State: because as no
conclusions are therefore truths, because determined by a whole Council; so no
Laws are therefore just, because done by a whole Parliament, but when they do
agree with the common rules of truth and justice, which God has given unto
men, and showed the same in his holy Word, which he has left to be the right
rule of our actions.

And therefore if the greatest Assemblies, Parliament, or Council, make not
the will of God the rule to guide their proceedings thereby, their Sanctions
are so far from taking away the nature of the sin, that they do increase the
evil, and make it the more out of measure sinful, and to become a national
sin, that before was but personal; and the more exceedingly sinful, when the
same is confirmed by a Law, so that none dares speak against it, and the
sinners are become senseless in their sins: and therefore the Prophet
demands, how any man, that fears God, dares meddle with such a people, that
will thus justify their sins, saying, Shall the throne of iniquity, that is,
any unjust course, have fellowship with thee, which framest mischief by a Law?
And the Lord does extremely threaten them, that walk after unrighteous
ordinances, as that they should sow much, Mich. 6.15, 16.
but not reap; tread the Olives, but not anoint themselves therewith; and
sweet wine, but not drink it; because the Statutes of Omri are kept, and all
the works of the house of Achab, and they walked in their counsels: Hos. 5.10,
11.
and the Prophet Hosea does more fully set down the wrath of God both against
the makers, and the observers of all unrighteous Laws.

Lands and Lordships of the Bishops were not the patrimony of the Church, but
were only, in superstitious times, given by our Kings and others unto the
Churchmen; and therefore now, the King being in want, they may be restored to
the Crown again.

free bequests of godly Kings, and of other pious men dead long ago, with most
fearful imprecations made against all those that should seek to alter their
Wills and Testaments: Gal. 3.15.
and the Apostle says, If it be but a man's Testament, no man alters it; that
is, no honest man ought to alter it, though perhaps his Will might have been
made wiser, and his goods bestowed to better use; for our Saviors Maxim, when
he gave a Penny to him that labored but one hour, and but a Penny to him that
had endured the heat of the day, is unanswerable, Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will, with mine own? And therefore,

1. As others daily leave their estates of great Amount to whom they please,
many times to strangers, and perhaps to idiots, or debauched persons, of wicked
lives, and noxious manners; and yet no man grudgeth, or endeavors to take
away those just Legacies, which their good Benefactours had bestowed upon these
unjust men; so there is no reason, that any man's eyes should be evil for the
goodness of their Ancestors unto the Clergy, but that their Wills should
stand to those uses after their death, as intemerate, as if they were now alive
to dispose of their beneficence.

2. They are most injurious to the King, (who is wise as an Angel of God, and
therefore holds this sacrilege odious to his Princely heart) that would seek
to enrich his Crown with that, which will shake it on his head, and endanger
all his Posterity to such fearful judgments as his Progenitors have
denounced, and God has executed upon many Kings and Princes for the like
sins; for, as Moses prays against the sacrilegious enemies of Levi, Deuteronomy.
33.11.
Smite through the loins of them that rise aginst him, and of them that hate
him, that they rise not again? so, we find that many ancient families, having
by the Statute of Dissolution taken some of the Lands and Tithes of the Church
into their possessions, have found the same like the Gold of Tholous, Pierius
in Hier glyph.
or the Eagles feathers; pernitiosa potentia, that will consume all the
feathers where they shall be mingled.

Who so is wise will consider these things, and will not, to satisfy these
Anabaptistical dregs of the people, Aelian. lib. 5. cap 15. Var. Hist.
and the enemies of all Christian Religion, sacrilegiously take away, with
Aelian's boy, the golden plate from Diana's Crown, the Lands and Revenues of
the Church; but, having not so learned Christ, they will do that which
becomes Saints, and suffer the dead to enjoy their own will in that wherein
they put them to to no charge, and if they do intend to promote Gods service,
they will not rob Saint Peter, to pay Saint Paul, but will rather say with holy
David, God forbid that I should offer sacrifice to God of that which cost me
nothing.

15. As any wooden Preachers, like Jeroboam's Priests de foece plebis, scarce
worthy to be compared with the Grooms of their stable, or such humi serpents,
poor abjects, as Job speaks of, Job 30.8.
The sons of villains and bondmen, more vile than the earth they crawle
upon, are fit enough to be their teachers, and beggarly pensioners; so any
place, a thatched Barn, a littered Stable, or an ample Cow-house, What prayers
and Sermons please these men.
is thought by these to be very fair and fit to be the House of Him that was
born in a Stable, and laid in a Manger; and any service, prayers without sense,
such as our Savior blames, and preaching without learning, without truth, such
as their Enthusiasts conceive in illa hora, and quicquid in buccam venerit,
without any further study or meditation, is justified to be most acceptable to
God; witness the Author of One argument more against the Cavaliers, where
that great Scholar in his own opinion, rails against our grave Bishops, and
most impudently reproacheth a very reverend man of known worth, and great
learning, by the scandalous Epithete of The ceremonious Master of Balliol
College, Doctor Laurence, whom for a most learned and pious Sermon preached
before the King, upon these words of Exodus, Put off thy shoes from thy feet,
for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground: he does, just like the
eldest son of his dear father the devil (as Tertullian calls Hermogenes,
primogenitum diaboli) most falsely, and shamelesly, charge him with the wearing
of consecrated slippers, which was never done, but is one of those scurrilous
invented imputations of this malicious Accuser of his brethren, now thrown at
him, whose shoes, either for learning or piety, I am sure, this rambling
Arguist, and railing Rabsheka is not worthy to bear; and for the service of God
in our Churches, though the holy Prophet, which was a man according to Gods own
heart, Music ever used in the Church. Psalm. 147.1. 149.3. Ps. 150.3, 4, 5.
praised God in the beauty of holiness, upon all the best instruments of
music, and commanded us, as well in the grammatical sense, as in the mystical
sense, to sing praises unto our God with Tabret and Harp, to praise him in the
sound of the Trumpet, in the Cymbals and dances, upon the well-tuned Cymbals,
and upon the loud Cymbals; yet this zealous Organe-mastix, gives us none other
Title, than Cathedral Roarers, and Squeakers: and good reason it is he should
be very angry with roaring and squeaking in Churches; Page 14.
for that having been possessed of a very competent Living with cure of souls
these four or five years together (if I am not mistaken in the Author) he
never yet either read, or preached, in that, or any other Church; so necessary
is Non-residence, and so useful are dumb dogs, when they are willing to
snarle and bark against Government and Religion: but it is strange to me, that
such a divine harmony, Music how useful. Theodoric. Epist. l. 2. Plutarch de
Musica.
which has made others sober, should make this spawn of the red Dragon mad;
for we know some Lawgivers commanded children to be taught (...), after the
grave composed tones of the Dorick way, ad corda fera demulcenda, to soften the
fierceness of their dispositions, and ad montis fervorem temperandum, to cool
and allay the heat and distempers of their minds, as Achilles was appeased in
Homer, and Theodosius was drawn to commiseration, luctuoso carmine, by a sad
Poem sung to him at supper, Niceph. lib. 12: cap. 43.
when he intended the utter destruction of Antioch; and the Scripture
testifies the like effect of David's harp in King Saul; yet all this sweet and
hallowed air, which ravisheth devout souls, has only filled this envious
malignant with nasty winds, and stinking expressions. So contrary to the words
of God himself, Exodus 3.5. and against the judgment of all Divines; and the
practice of all Saints; a primordiis Ecclesiae, from the first birth of Gods
Church, Page 15.18.
he most ignorantly denies any place to be holier than another, which makes me
afraid, that Heaven with this man and his faction is deemed no holier than
Hell, or the Lords day no holier than Monday, no more than they hold the Church
holier than their B^rns, or the holiest Priest, though he were Aaron himself,
the Saint of the Lord, holier than the prophanest worldling; for I find no
differnce that they make either of persons, times, or places, but such a
commixtion of all things as if they intended to reduce and bring the whole
world into that confused Chaos, which God first created, before he disposed the
parts thereof into their several stations.

But I am loath to spend any more time about this ignorant Argument, that is, as
all the rest of their Writings are, as full of railing and unsavory speeches,
as any mortal pen can diffuse; therefore I leave him to do with his heart and
mouth as that Morussian Cabares (whereof he speaks) did with those Churches,
which the Goths and Vandals had defiled.

Thus you have some, and I might add here abundance more, of their absurd and
impious Doctrines, which their ignorant simplicity produced, and their furious
zeal published, out of mis-interpreted Scriptures; not that all these points
are taught by every one of their Teachers, but that all these and many more are
taught and maintained by some one or other of them, as I could easily express
it, if it were not too tedious for my Reader; but the bulk of my Book swells
too big, and their fancies are but Dreams fit for laughter; and I brought these
only as Vinegar to be tasted, and then to be spit out again.

CHAP. X.
Shows the great Bug-bears that affrighted this Faction; the four special
means they used to secure themselves; the manifold lies they raised against the
King; and the two special Questions that are discussed about Papists.

5. The settling of the Militia.
5. FOr the settling of the Militia, and putting the whole Kingdom in a posture
of Defense, as they termed it: 1. They dreamed of a desperate Disease. 2. They
devised an Emperical way to cure it.
and,

1. The disease.
1. The Disease was a monstrous fear of Popery, and the re-establishment of
abolished superstitions in our Church, to invade their consciences; and of the
Papists, with fire and sword, to waste their estates, and to take away their
lives and liberties, and through that groundless fear, they looked on the
innocent Ceremonies that were established in the Church, as dangerous
Innovations, and introductions to Idolatry.

And in the State, they feared the practiced ways and endeavors, to produce
an arbitrary government, by our advancing of a boundless Prerogative, even to
the dispoyling of the Subject of his property, and robbing him of the benefit
of the laws: these were their fears.

And the grounds of these fears were lying fictions, and most scandalous
detractions and defamations; for their invented Letters that should come from
Holland, and from Denmark, and some other places beyond the Seas, (where we
were better believe them, then go try whether they were true) which informed
them sometimes of a Fleet of Danes, sometimes of another Nation, that should
come to assist the King for the setting up of Popery, and the securing of
himself in a tyrannical and arbitrary government over them: What terrible
things frighted them.
and every day almost produced a discovery of new treacheries against the
Parliament, what terrible things frighted them; as the stable of Horses under
ground, (for indeed they were invisible Horses, such as Elisha's servant saw,
terrifying their guilty consciences) and that of the Tailors in Moor-fields,
and the like horrid machinations, that were to come against them, I know not
from whom, and God knows from whence; which things, how false they were, time,
which is the mother of truth, has long agone made manifest and ridiculous, to
any man that is not bewitched with these lying fancies: therefore, lest these
dreams of their distempered brains, should be too soon descryed, and so prove
defective to produce their intended project, they allege, The Queen is a
Papist (and I would to God they were so truly religious, and void of hypocrisy
in their profession, as she, most gracious Queen, is in her religion) then they
say, The Bishops are all Papists, Deans and Prebends are of the same stamp, and
all the Kings Chapleins, that were preferred by the Archbishop, were either
close Papists, or professed Arminians, which are but Cosen-germans unto the
other; Arminianism being but a Bridge to pass over unto Popery.

And with these and the like false slanders against the King, Queen, and
Clergy, they so bewitched most of their well meaning brethren of the same
house, and amazed all the simpler sort of people of this Kingdom with these
fears, and filled them with such jealousies, with those Pamphlets, that they
caused to be printed, and dispersed every where, that they were at their wits
end, for fear of this lamentable alteration of their religion, and deprivation
of their liberties.

2. The disease being thus spread, like a Gangrene, 2. The Cure.
over all the parts of the body of this Kingdom, they like skilful Physicians
devise the cure; and that is, the preparation of a Militia, and this Militia
they would have put into such hands as they pleased, such as they might confide
in; and I wish the whole Kingdom knew who those men were, and who they are,
that they do confide in; for I know,

1. Some of them are poor men of most desperate fortunes, if Bank-rupters may
be termed such;

2. Others to be most factious and schismatical men, addicted to Anabaptism,
and Brownism, and other worser Sects; as amongst the London Commanders, Ven,
Manwaring, Fowke, N^rington, Bradly, Best, and the rest, whereof there are
twice as many schismatical, and, as it is conceived, beggarly Sectaries, as are
right honest men among them; and if we looked among their Lords, and all the
rest of their nomination throughout the Kingdom, I doubt we shall find some of
them to be just of the same condition.

And because the King (to whose care and trust God had committed all the people
of this Kingdom (and not to them, that are called by the King, and chosen only
by men, and that only for this time,) and of whom he will require an account
of the laws and religion, whereof he made him keeper and defender, and not of
them) thought most rightly, that this Militia should be committed rather to
such men, as he might confide in (as it was in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
and His Father of ever blessed memory) rather than to any that they should
name, which was to dis-robe himself of all his regal power, of the chiefest
garland of his royal Prerogatives, (without which he could hold his Crown by no
better a tenure, then durante beneplacito) and to put the sword out of his own
hand, into the hands of them that could not love him, because they could not
trust him, as they alleged; (and what reason had he to trust them that were
causelessly so distrustful of him?) they startled at this denial.

And because the King of heaven had by this time opened the Kings eyes, God
opens the Kings eyes.
to let him see what hitherto he could hardly imagine, that these men (to whom
he had granted for the good of his kingdom, so many Acts of grace and favor,
as never any King of England did before, and had very graciously offered to
commit to the hands of their own choosing, so large a share of the Militia, as
might have rendered the whole kingdom most secure, if security in a just and
legal way, had been all that they sought for) had their intentions far
otherwise then they pretended, and that not only the government of the Church
was intended to be altered, and the Governors thereof destroyed, but himself
also was hereby dis-robed of those rights, which God and the Laws of the Land
had put into his hands, and the Kingdom brought either into a base Tyranny, or
confused Anarchy, when all things shall be done according to the arbitrary
power of these factious and schismatical men, therefore he utterly refused to
grant their desires, and most wisely withstood their design.

How they strengthened themselves to make their orders fi m without the King.
Whereupon, these men put their heads together, to consult how they might
strengthen themselves, and make their ordinances firm and binding without the
King; and to that purpose, having by their former doings, gotten too great an
interest, as well in the faith, as in the affections of the people; in
confidence of their own strength, they came roundly to the business, and what
they knew was not their right, as their former Petitions can sufficiently
witness, they resolve to effect the same by force, but as insensibly as they
can devise; as, 1. To seize upon the Kings Navy to secure the Seas. 2. To lay
hold upon all the Kings Magazine, Forts, Towns, and Castles. 3. To withold
his moneys and revenues, and all other means from the King. 4. To withdraw the
affections, and to poison the loyalty of all his Majesty's Subjects from him.


And hereby they thought (and it must have been so indeed, except the Lord had
been on his side) they had made their hill so strong, that it could not be
moved, and the King so weak and destitute of all means, that he could no ways
subsist, or relieve himself, as a member of their own House did tell me, for

1. Earl of Warwick made Vice Admiral.
1. They get the Earl of Warwick to be appointed Vice Admiral of the Sea, and to
commit all the Kings Navy into his hand, and to take away that charge from Sir
John Pennington, whom most men believed to be far the better Seaman, but more
faithful to his King, and the other purer to the Parliament.

2. Sir John Hotham put into Hull for the Magazine.
2. They send Sir John Hotham a most insolent man, that most uncivilly contemned
the King to his face, to seize upon the Kings Magazine that he bought with his
own money, (when they might as well take away my horse that I paid for) and to
keep the King out of Hull, which was his own proper Town, and therefore might
as well have kept him out of White Hall, and was an Act so full of injustice,
as that I scarce know a greater.

3. They detained the Kings moneys. Esaias 1.23.
3. Because moneys are great means to effect any worldly affair, and the sinews
of every war, when as men and arms, and all other necessaries may be had for
money, some of them and their followers show themselves to be just as the Peers
of Israel, companions of thieves, mere robbers, which forcibly take away a man's
money from him; they take all the Kings treasure, they intercept, detain, and
convert all the Kings revenues and customs, to strengthen themselves against
the King.

4. They labor to render the King odious by lies.
4. Because their former Remonstrances framed by this faction, of the ill
government of this kingdom, though in some things true, (which the King
ingenuously acknowledges, and most graciously promises to redress them) yet
in all things full of gall and bitterness against the King, could not so fully
poison the love and loyalty of the Kings Subjects, as they desired, especially
the love of those that knew his Majesty, who the better they knew him, did the
more affectionately love him, and the more faithfully serve him; they thought
to do it another, and a surer way, with apparent lies, palpable slanders, and
abominable accusations, invented, printed, and scattered over all the parts of
this kingdom, by their Trencher Chaplains, and parasitical Preachers, and other
Pamphleters, some busy Lawyers, and Pettifoggers, to bring the King into an
odium, disliked and deserted of all his loving Subjects. And what created power
under heaven was able to dissolve that wickedness, which subtilty and malice,
had thus treacherously combined to bring to pass?

Hereupon (after many threatening votes, 1. Lie, that he intended to war against
the Parliament.
and actual hostility exercised against his Royal person) the King is forced
to raise a guard for the defense of himself, and those his good Subjects that
attended him; then presently that small guard, that consisted but of the chief
gentry of the Country, was declared to be an Army raised for the subversion of
the Parliament, and the destruction of our native liberties; an invincible Army
is voted to be raised, the Earl of Essex is chosen to be their General, with
whom they promise both to live and die, the Earl of Bedford General of the
Horse, moneys are provided, and all things are prepared to fetch the King and
all delinquents, or to be the death of all withstanders; and that nothing might
hinder this design, though the King in many gracious Messages attested by the
subscription of many noble Lords that were upon the place, assured them, he
never intended any war against his Parliament, yet they proceed with all
eagerness, and declare all those that shall assist the King, either with
Horse, money, or men, to be malignants and enemies unto the King and Kingdom,
and such delinquents as shall be sure to receive condign punishment by the
Parliament, Hoc mirum est, hoc magnum.

And among the rest of their impudent slanders, this was their Masterpiece,
which they ever harped upon, that he countenanced Papists, and intended to
bring Popery into this Kingdgm, and to that end had an Army of Papists to
assist him.

But to satisfy any sensible man in this point, I would crave the resolution
of these two Questions:

1. Whether every Papist that is subject to his Majesty, Two questions to be
resolved.
is not bound to assist and defend his King in all his dangers?

2. Whether the King should not protect his Subjects that are Papists in all
their dangers, so far as by the Law he ought to do it; and accept of their
service, when he himself is environed with dangers?

For first, 1. All Papists bound to assist their King.
I believe there is no Law that inhibiteth a Papist to serve his King against a
Rebellion, or to ride Post, to tell the King of a Design to murder Him, or any
other intended Treason against Him; or, being present, to take away a weapon
from that man that attempted to kill the King; because his not coming to
Church, does not exempt him from his Allegiance, or discharge him of his duty
and service unto the King; and therefore if a Fleet from France or Spain, or
any other foreign part should invade us, or any Rebellion at home should rise
against his Sovereign, and seek to destroy those Laws and Liberties, whereof
himself and his Posterity has as good an interest to, as any other Subject; I
say, he is bound by all Laws to assist his King, and to do his best endeavor,
both with his purse and in his person, not only to oppose that external
Invasion, but also to subdue, as well that homebred Rebellion, as the foreign
Invasion.

2. If a Papist should be injured, his estate seized upon, 2. The King bound to
protect dutiful Papists.
his house plundered, and his person, if taken, imprisoned, not because he
transgressed any other Law, but that he dispenceth not with the Law of his
conscience, to be no Papist; and being thus injured, should come unto his King,
and say, I am your Subject, and have lived dutifully; I did nothing which the
Law gives me not leave, I have truly paid all duties, and humbly submitted my
self to all penalties; and yet, I know not why, I am thus used, and abused by
my neighbors; I am driven from my house by force of Arms; and I have no place
to breathe, but under your Majesty's wings, and the shelter of your power;
therefore I beseech you, as you are my King, and are obliged to do your best
for the safety of your true Subjects, let me have your protection, and you
shall have my service unto death? I would fain know what the King should do in
such a case; deny his protection, or refuse his service? The one is injustice,
the other not the best wisdom; especially if he needed service: for as the Law
of nature and of nations requires all Subjects, to obey their Kings, and
faithfully to serve them, of what Religion soever their Kings shall be; so Lege
relationis, every King is bound to protect every faithful Subject, that
observes his Laws, or submits to their penalties, without corrupting of his
fellow Subjects, of what Religion soever he is: because they are his Subjects,
not as they are faithful Christians, but as obedient men; and he is to rule,
not over the faith of their souls, but the actions of their bodies; and it is
an Axiom in Divinity, that Fides non est cogenda; and if Kings cannot persuade
their subjects to embrace the true Faith, they ought not to cut them off, so
long as they are true Subjects: And therefore with what reason can any man
blame the King, either for protecting them in their distresses, or accepting
their service in his own extremities; I cannot understand. And yet, for the
goodly company of Papists which his Majesty entertaineth in all his Armies,
they cannot all make up so much as one good Regiment, as an Officer in his
Majesty's Army confidently affirms; but it will serve their turn to tax the
King, to lay imputations upon him, even the very things that belong unto
themselves (as the whole sum of those things that are expressed in Englands
Petition to their King, mutaetis mutandis, might truly be presented to the two
Houses, that have now almost destroyed us all) and to make them mighty faults
in him, which are no faults at all in themselves; because there is no fear of
their favoring Popery, though, as they have very many, so they should have
never so many more in their Army.

3. Lie, that he caused the Rebellion in Ireland.
3. Another Slander they not only whispered, but also dispersed the same far
and near among the people, to make the King still the more odious unto his
Subjects, that he was the cause of the Rebellion in Ireland, and that the
Rebels there had his Commission under the Broad Seal to plunder the
Protestants, and to expel them thence; that so, the Gospel being rooted out of
Ireland, Popery might the easier be transported and planted here in England;
whereas themselves in very deed were the sole causers of this Rebellion, as I
have showed unto you before; and the color of this slander was, The cause of
this slander.
that the Rebellion being raised, the Ring leaders of those Rebels, the sooner
to gain the simple to adhere unto them, persuaded them to believe that they had
the Kings command to do the same; and to that purpose showed them the Broad
Seal, which they had taken from Ministers, and Clerks of the Peace, and others,
whom formerly they had plundered, and taken their Seals from them, which they
cunningly affixed to certain Commissions of their own framing; as M. Sherman
assured me, he saw the Broad Seal that was taken from one M. Heart, that was
Clerk of the Peace in the County of Tumond; and was found in the pocket of one
of the chief Leaders of the Rebels, when he was killed by the Kings Soldiers;
yet, this false and lewd practice of these Rebels in Ireland, was a most welcome
news to this Faction in England, to lay this imputation upon the King, that he
was the cause of this Rebellion, which themselves had kindled, and were glad to
find such a color to impute it unto him, that it might not be suspected to be
raised by them.

Many other such falsehoods, Lies, and impudent slanders, has the father of
lies caused these his Children most impudently to father upon the King; but as
the Philosopher says, Non quia affirmatur, aut negatur, res erit, How things
are indeed.
aut non erit, Things are not so and so, because they are said to be so;
neither can they be no such things, only because they are denied to be such;
as Gold is not Copper, because ignorant men affirm it to be so; nor a drunken
man sober, or a vicious man virtuous, because they deny him to be good, and
blazon him abroad for one of the sons of Belial; but as Gold is Gold, and
Brass is Brass, so godly men are good, wicked men are evil, and Rebels are
none other then Rebels, let men call them what they will; and so our King is
not such a man as they say, because they affirm it; but he is indeed a most
just, virtuous, and most pious Prince, let them say what they will, Their
tongues are their own, and we cannot rule them: and so all his followers are
better Protestants indeed, and less Papists in all points of faith, than the
best of them, that term us so by false names. God forgive them these slanderous
accusations.

CHAP. XI.
Shows the unjust proceedings of these factious Sectaries against the King;
eight special wrongs and injuries that they have offered him. Which are the
three States. And that our Kings are not Kings by election or Covenants with
the People.

ANd yet, for all these strange courses, contrary to all humane thoughts, Psalm.
118.23, Esaias 46.10.
which is mavelous in our eyes; the Lord of Heaven whose counsel shall
stand, and whose will shall be done, has them all in derision, dissipates all
these devices, and turns all the counsel of Achitophel against his own head,
when he opened the eyes of many millions of the Kings true Subjects, to behold
and detest these unfaithful dealings, and dis-loyall proceedings against so
gracious a King; and therefore petitioned, and subscribed, that his Majesty
standing upon his Guard, and defending himself from such indignities as might
follow, they would hazard their lives and fortunes to assist him, to repel
those more than barbarous injuries, that were offered unto Him.

Therefore now, Memoriae proditum est, I find it written, that without fear of
God, without regard of Majesty, without justice, without honesty; they are
resolved, rather than to repent of their former wickedness, to involve the
whole Kingdom in an unnatural civil War; and to maintain the same against the
will, and contrary to the desires both of the King and Kingdom; and it is
almost incredible, what wicked courses, and how unjust, and insufferable Orders
and Ordinances you shall find recorded, that they have made: 1. Against the
King. 2. Against the Subjects. 3. Against the Law.
Which are all said to be exceedingly abused by them; for,

1. Against the King, it is registered to Posterity, that they have proceeded,
besides many other things, in all these particulars:

1. They possess all the Kings Houses, Towns, and Castles, 1. Their
proceedings against the King. 1. Wrong. Matthew. 8 20.
but what he gets by the strength of his sword, and detain them from him; so
that we may say with our Savior, The Foxes have holes, and the fowls of the
air have nests, but the King of England has not an house allowed him by the
Houses of Parliament, wherein to put his head; and they take not only his
Houses, but also his rents, and revenues, and (as I understood when I was in
Oxford) his very clothes, and provision for his Table, that seeing they could
not take away his life by the sword, they might murder him with cold or famine,
when he should not have the subsistence (if they could hinder him) to maintain
life and soul together, which is the shame of all shame, and able to make any
other men odious to all the world, The complaint to the House of Commons. Page
19.
thus maliciously and barbarously to deal with their own most gracious King;
neither does their malice here end, but they withold the Rents of the Queen,
and seize upon the Revenues of our Prince, which, I assure them, my
Contrymen takes in great scorn, and I believe will right it with their
lives, or this Parliament-Faction shall redeem their errors with no small
repentance, when as we find no Prince of Wales was ever suffered by his
Subjects to have such indignities offered him by the greatest Peers of England.

And here I cannot omit what Alderman Garraway says of the reproach of Master
Pym, touching the maintaining of the Kings other Children, which he professes
made his heart to rise, and hoped it did so to many more: Alderman Garraway his
Speech.
Is our good King fallen so low, that his Children must be kept for him? It is
worth our inquiry, Who brought him to that condition? We hear him complain,
that all his own Revenue is seized, and taken from him; Is not his Exchequer,
Court of Wards, and Mint here? his Customs too are worth somewhat, and are his
Children kept upon Alms? How shall We and our Children prosper, if this be not
remedied? And I pray God these things rise not up in judgment against them and
this Nation; but hereby they intended to verify that disloyal Speech which One
of them uttered in a Tavern, and God will avert it from his Servant, Sober
Sadness, page 22. 2. Wrong.
That they would make the King as poor as Job, unless he did comply with them.

2. If any man which they like not attends the Kings Person, though he be his
sworn servant, or assist him in his just defense, which he is bound to do by
the Law of God and man; yet he is presently voted and condemned for a
Malignant, Popish, disaffected, evil Counselor, and an enemy to the State;
and that is enough (if he be catched) to have him spoiled and imprisoned at
their pleasure; nay, my self was told by some of that Faction, that because I
went to see the King, I should be plundered and imprisoned, if I were taken.

3, Wrong.
3. Though they do solemnly profess that his Majesty's personal safety, and his
royal honor and greatness are much dearer unto them then their own lives and
fortunes, The Petition to his Majesty the 16. of July 1642.
which they do most heartily dedicate, and shall most willingly employ for the
support and maintenance thereof; yet for all this hearty Protestation, they had
at that very time (as the King most accurately observes in his Answer)
directed the Earl of Warwick to assist Sir John Hotham against him, Non turpe
est ab eo vinci quem vincere est nefas; neque ei inhoneste aliquem submitti,
quem Deus super omnes extulit. Dictum Armenii Pompeii.
appointed their Generals, and, as Alderman Garraway testifies, raised ten
thousand armed men out of London, and the Neighbour-Countries before the King
had seven hundred: and afterward, though the King sent from Nottingham a
gracious Message and solicitation for Peace, yet they supposing this proceeded
from a diffidence of his own strength, or being too confident of their own
force, slighted the Kings Grace, and most barbarously proceeded in the most
hostile manner, waged war, and gave battle against the Kings Army, where
they knew he was in his own Person, and as one of their Preachers taught the
Sunday before the Battle, that they might with a good conscience, as well kill
the King (horresco dicere) as any other man; so (according to Captain Blagues
directions, as Judas taught the Highpriests servants) we know what Troops and
Regiments were most aimed at, whereas they do most ridiculously say they have,
for the defense of his person, sent many a Cannon-bullet about his ears, which
he did with that Kingly courage, and Heroic magnanimity; yea, and that
Christian resolution, and dependence on Gods assistance pass through, that it
shall be recorded to his everlasting honor, and their indelible shame and
reproach, so long as the world endures.

4. 4 Wrong.
They have most Disloyally and Traitorously spoken both privately and publicly
such things against his Majesty, as would make the very Heathens tear them in
pieces, that should say the like of their Tyrannous Kings, and such as I could
not believe they proceeded from the mouth of a Christian against so Christian a
King, but that I find most of them were publicly uttered, made known unto his
Majesty, and related by himself, and those that were Ear-witnesses thereof,
Sober sadness p. 3. The Viewer p. 4. His Majesty's Declaration. Trussel in the
supplement to Daniels History.
as (Horresco referens) that he was not worthy to be our King: not fit to live:
that he was The Traitor: that the Prince would govern better: and that they
dealt fairly with him they did not depose him, as their forefathers had
deposed Richard the second, whom all the World knows to be most Traitorously
Murdered: and the whole progress of that Act, whereby he was deposed, is
nothing else but the Scandal of that Parliament, and an horrid treason upon the
fairest relation of any Chronicle: and the good Bishop of Carlisle, was not then
afraid, in open house to tell the Lords so to their faces; and I would our
Parliament men would read his Speech.

5. They command their own Orders, Ordinances, 5. Wrong.
and Declarations to be Printed Cum privilegio, and to be published in Public
throughout the whole Kingdom, and they are not a little punished that neglect
it; and whatsoever Message, Answer, Declaration or Proclamation comes from the
King, to inform his Subjects of the Truth of things, and to undeceive his much
seduced people, they straightly forbid those to be Printed, and imprison (if
they can catch them) all that publish them, as they did many worthy Ministers
in the City of London, and in many other places of this Kingdom.

6. They have publicly voted in their House, 6. Wrong.
and accordingly endeavored by Messages to persuade our brethren of Scotland,
to join in their assistance with these grand Rebels, to rebel against their
Sovereign; but I persuade my self, (as I said before) that the Nobility and
Gentry of Scotland, are more Religious in themselves, more Loyal to their liege
Lord, and indeed wiser in all their actions, then, while they may live quietly
at home in a happy peace, to undertake upon the persuasions of Rebellious
Subjects, such an unhappy war abroad.

7. It is remonstrated and related publicly, that, 7. Wrong.
as if they had shaken off all subjection, and were become already a State
Independent, they have Treated by their agents with foreign States, and do
still proceed in that course; which, if true, is such an usurpation upon
Sovereignty, as was never before attempted in this Kingdom; and such a
Presumption, as few men know the secret mischiefs that may lurk therein.

8. They suffer and license their Pamphleters; Pryn, Goodwin, Burges, 8. Wrong.
Marshal, Sedgwick, and other emissaries of wickedness, to publish such
Treasons and Blasphemies, and abominable Aphorisms; As, that the negative vote
of the King is no more then the dissent of one man; the Affirmative vote of the
King makes not a Law, ergo, the Negative cannot destroy it; and the like absurd
and senseless things that are in those Aphorisms, and in Prins book of the
Sovereign power of Parliament, whereby they would deny the Kings power to
hinder any Act, that both the Houses shall conclude; and so, taking away those
just prerogatives from him, that are as Hereditary to him as his Kingdom,
compel him to assent to their conclusions: for which things our Histories tell
us, that other Parliaments have banished (and upon their returns they were
hanged) both the Spencers, the Father and the Son, for the like presumption,
Why the two Spencers died.
as among other Articles, Per asperte vid. Elismere post-nati p. 99.
for denying this Prerogative unto their King, and affirming, that if he
neglected his duty, and would not do what he ought, for the good of the
Kingdom, he might be compelled by force to perform it: which very thing,
divesteth the King of all Sovereignty, overthrows Monarchy, and makes our
government a mere Aristocracy, contrary to the constitution of our first Kings,
and the judgment of all ages; for we know full well, Page 48.
from the Practice of all former Parliaments, that seeing the three States are
subordinate unto the King, in making Laws (wherein the chiefest power
consists) they may propound and consent, but it is still in the Kings power
to refuse or ratify: and I never read that any Parliament man, till now, did
ever say the contrary: but that if there be no concurrence of the King (in whom
formally the power of making of any Law resideth, ut in subjecto,) to make the
Law, the two Houses (whose consent is but a requisite condition to complete the
Kings power) are but a liveless convention, like two Ciphers without a figure,
that of themselves are of no value or power, but, joined unto their figures,
have the full strength of their places; which is confirmed by the Viewer of the
Observations, out of 11. Page 19, 20, 21.
Hen. 7.23. per Davers, Polydore, 185. Cowel inter. verbo Praerog. Sir Thomas
Smyth de republ. Angl. l. 2. c. 3. Bodin. l. 1. c. 8. For if the Kings consent
were not necessary for the perfecting of every Act, The Letter to a Gentleman
in Gloucestershire, p. 3.
then certainly (as another says) all those Bills that heretofore have passed
both Houses, and for want of the Royal assent, have slept, and been buried all
this while, would now rise up as so many Laws and Statutes, and would make as
great confusion, as these new orders and ordinances have done.

And as the Lawyers tell us, that the necessity of the assent of all three
States in Parliament, is such, as without any one of them, the rest do but lose
their labor; Lamberts Archeion, 271. Vid. the Viewer p. 21.
so, Le Roy est assentus ceo faict un Act de Parliament, and as another says,
Nihil ratum habetur, nisi quod Rex comprobarit, Nothing is perfected but what
the King confirms.

But here in the naming of the three States, I must tell you, that I find in
most of our Writers, about this newborn question of the Kings power, a very
great omission, that they are not particularly set down, that the whole Kingdom
might know which is every one of them; and, upon this omission, I conceive as
great mistake in them, that say the three States are, Which be the three States
of England.
1. The King. 2. The House of Peers. 3. The House of Commons.
For, I am informed by no mean Lawyer, that you may find it upon the Rowls of
Henry the fifth, Speed, l. 9. c. 19. p. 712.

Anno. 1 Ric. 3.


as I remember, and I am sure you may find it in the first year of Richard the
third, where the three States are particularly named, and the King is none of
them; For it is said, That at the request, and by the assent of the three
Estates of this Realm, that is to say, the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal,
and Commons of the Land, Assembled, it is declared that our said Sovereign Lord
the King, is the very undoubted King of this Realm: Wherein you may plainly
see, the King that is acknowledged their Sovereign by all three, can be none of
the three, but is the head of all three, as the Dean is none of the Chapter,
but is Caput capituli; and as in France, and Spain, so in England, I conceive
the three Estates to be,

1. The Lords Spiritual, that are, if not representing, yet in loco, in the
behalf of all the Clergy of England, that, till these Anabaptistical tares have
almost choked all the Wheat in Gods field, were thought so considerable a
party, as might deserve as well a representation in Parliament, as old Sarum,
or the like Borough, of scarce twenty Houses.

2. The Lords Temporal in the right of their Honor and their Posterity.

And to make the World believe, how justly and sufficiently legal they could do
this, they made another Ordinance for the inhabitants of the Counties of
Northampton, Rutland, Derby, etc. to pay the twentieth part and to be assessed
by the Assessors that they name, in imitation of the Statute lately made for
the four hundred thousand pound: and it is more than probable, that this
proceeding is but the praeludium of the like exaction to be extended, when
their need requires, to all the other parts of the Kingdom; which is a most
miserable course, and injustice not to be paralleld, to cast themselves, into a
necessity of getting money, to maintain an impious War against their King, and
then out of that necessity to compel their Fellow Subjects, and those peaceable
men, (that do abominate this War) to maintain the same (yea, and to fight in
the same, to kill men against their consciences) in despite of their teeth; or
if they refuse to do it, to send, or at least to permit, a party of Horse,
Dragooneers, and other strength to go to fetch their Money, Plate, or other
goods, as if they were the goods of the deadly enemies of the Commonwealth;
and this for none other reason, but for that the owners thereof are good
Subjects to the King, and not well-affected to their unjust, and ungodly
proceedings.

But let me persuade all men, that do fear God, still to suffer any thing,
which they cannot avoid, from the violence of these wicked men, rather than to
contribute any thing unto them, to further such abominable courses, as they
prosecute against the Law of God and man; Because the Lord commands us, to
fear none of those things that we shall suffer, Rev. 2.10.
but to stand in our integrity unto death, and we shall be crowned with the
crown of life.

3. 3. How they discharged the Apprentices and compelled them to fight.
They have discharged the Apprentices and servants from their Masters services,
and have either compelled, or persuaded them, to serve in their Army against
the King, and that without the consent, and against the will of their Masters
and Dames, yea, sometimes against the commands of their own Parents, which I
speak from their own months.

4. They have imprisoned very many hundreds of most able, 4. How they
imprisoned our men without cause.
and most honest men; even so many, that the Prisons are not able to contain
them, but they are fain to consecrate the greatest houses in London, to become
Prisons; as the Bishop of London's house, Ely-house, Winchester-house,
Lambeth-house, Crosby-house, the Savoy, and the like. And this they do for none
other cause, but either for performing the duties of their places, and
discharging their obedience to his Majesty; as the last Lord Mayor Gurney,
which deserved rather to be commended, than committed, if we believe many that
were present at his Trial: or petitioning unto them; as Sir George Bynion, and
Captain Richard Lovelace, and Sir William Boteler of Kent, because they did not
therein flatter, Complaint. p. 8
and approve their present wicked courses; or intending to petition unto the
King for relief of these lamentable distresses, as those Gentlemen of
Hertford-shire and Westminsters; or for being, as they conceived, disaffected
unto their disloyal Orders. A strange thing! and injustice beyond president,
not the like to found among the Pagans, That (where no Law can condemn a man
for his affections, when no action is committed against Law) men shall be
robbed of their estates, and adjudged for Malignants (which is also a crime
most general, and without the compass of any Statute) and then for this
new-created sin, to be condemned and imprisoned, and therein to remain without
Trial of his offense, perhaps as long as the Archbishop of Canterbury. And this
wonder, is the rather to be wondered at, because it is the sense of both
Houses, M. Pym in his Speech at the Guild hall.
(if we may believe Master Pym) That it is against the Rules of Justice, that
any man should be imprisoned upon a general Charge, when no particulars are
proved against him: For never Charge can be more general than to be
ill-affected, or a Malignant, or a man not to be confided in, whereof you find
ten thousand in the City of London, and many hundred thousands in the Kingdom:
and therefore, when we find so many persons of Honor and Reputation
imprisoned, only upon this surmise, without any other particular Charge so much
as once suggested against them, (as was the Lord of Middlesex, the Lord of
Portland, and abundance more) and detained in prison, because they were
ill-affected, in that they have not contributed to the maintenance of this War,
we see how insensibly they have accused themselves to have laid this
insupportable punishment, beyond the desert of the transgressors, and against
the Rules of all Justice, and how they have forgotten their Protestation, and
exceedingly infringed the liberty of the Subjects, whereof they promised to be
such faithful Procurators.

CHAP. XIII.
Shows the proceedings of this Faction against the Laws of the Land, the
Privileges of Parliament; transgressed eleven special ways.

3. Their proceedings against the Laws.
3. FOr the Laws of our Land, which are either private, as those chiefly which
belong unto the Parliament, and are called the Privileges of Parliament; or
Public, which are the Inheritance of every Subject: you shall find how they
have invaded, and violated, each one of these: For,

1. Against the Privileges of Parliament.
1. Touching the Privileges of Parliament: We confess, that former Kings have
graciously yielded many just Privileges unto them, for the freedom of their
persons, and the liberty of their speeches, so they be free from Blasphemy or
Treason, or the like unpardonable offense; but such a freedom as they
challenge, though for my self, I confess my skill in Law to be unable, to
distinguish the legitimate from the usurped; yet in these subsequent
particulars, I find wise men utterly denying it them: As,

1. Denying us to dispute of them. L. Elismer in post-nati.
1. When they forbid us to dispute of their Privileges, and say, That
themselves alone are the sole Judges of them; when as in former Ages they have
been adjudged by the Laws of the Kingdom, when Thorpe the Speaker of the House
of Commons, has been committed, and detained Prisoner, upon an Execution, and
the House confirmed that Act.

2. Committing and putting out their Members.
2. When the Members of the House (of whose elections, and transgressions
against the House, or any of their Fellow Members, or the like, the House is
the proper Judge) which ought to have as free liberty as any of the rest, upon
any emergent occasion, are committed; as Master Palmer, and others were;
Complaint. p. 11.
or put out of the House, as Sir Edward Deering, the Lord Faulkland, Sir John
Culpepper, Sir John Strangwayes, and others, have been voted hand over head,
for speaking more reason, than the more violent party could answer, or in very
deed, for speaking their minds freely, against the sense of the House, or
rather against some of the prevalent Faction of the House, which we say is no
Privilege, but the pravity of the House, to deny this just Privilege unto
those Members, that were thus committed or expelled: For, hereby it does
manifestly appear, that, contrary to the practice of all former Parliaments,
and contrary to the Honor of any Parliament, things were herein debated and
carried, not by strength of argument, but by the most voices; and the greater
number were so far from understanding the validity of the alleged Reasons,
that, after the Votes passed, they scarce conceived the state of the Question,
but thought it enough to be Clerks to Master Pym, and to say Amen to Master
Hampden by an implicit faith.

3. When they deny the Members of their House, or any other employed by them in
this horrid Rebellion, should be questioned for Felony, Treason, 3. Denying
their Members to be legally tried for any capital Crime. Vide Dyer, p. 59. 60.
Crompton. 8. b. 9, 10, 11. Elism. post-nati 20, 21. The viewer. p. 43.
Murder, or the like capital Crimes, but only in Parliament, or at least, by
the leave of that House whereof they are Members, or which does employ them;
for by this means any Member of their House may be a Traitor, or a Murderer, or
a Robber, whenever he please, and may easily escape, before the party
wronged, or complainant can obtain this leave of the House of Commons: and
therefore this is as unreasonable, and as senseless a Privilege as ever was
challenged, and was never heard of till this Parliament: For, why should any
man refuse his Trial, or the House deny their Members to the justice of the
Law, when as the denial of them to be tried by the Law, implies a doubt in us
of the innocence of those, whom we will not submit to justice; and their Trial
would make them live gloriously hereafter, if they were found innocent, and
move the King to deliver those men, that had so wickedly conspired their
destruction, to the like censure of the Law. But for them to cry out, The King
is misinformed, and we dare not trust our selves upon a Trial, may be a way to
preserve their safety, but with the loss of their reputation, and perhaps the
destruction of many thousands of people.

If they say, They are contented to be tried, but by their own House, which, in
the time of Parliament, is the highest Court of justice; It may be answered,
said a plain Rustic, with the old Proverb, Ask my fellow, if I be a Thief. For
mine own part, I reverence the justice of a Parliament in all other judgments
betwixt party and party, yea, betwixt the King and any other Subject; yet, when
the party accused shall be judged by his own Society, his Brethren, and his own
Faction, I believe any indifferent Judge would see this to be too great
partiality against the King, that he shall not have those, whom he accuses to
be tried by the Laws already established, and the ordinary course of Justice;
and if the Judges offend in their Sentence, the Parliament has full power,
undenied them by his Majesty, to question, and to punish those Judges, as they
did for that too palpable in justice (as they conceived) in the case of the
Ship money; but they will be judged by themselves, and all that dissent from
them, must be at their mercy or destruction. And yet it is said to be evident,
That no Privilege can have its ground or commencement, unless it be by
Statute, Grant, or Prescription. And by the Stat. 26. Hen. 8. cap. 13. it is
enacted, That no offender in any kind of high Treason, shall have the
privilege of any manner of Sanctuary: So all the Grants of such a privilege,
if any such should be made, are merely void, 1 Hen. 7. Staffords case, and not
one Instance could hitherto be produced, whereby such a Privilege was either
allowed, or claimed, but the contrary most clearly proved by his Majesty out of
Wentworths case.

And therefore, seeing your own Law Books tell us, That the Privilege of
Parliament does not extend to Treason, the breach of the Peace, and (as some
think) against the Kings debt: it is apparent, how grossly they do abuse the
People by this claim of the Privilege of Parliament.

4. 4. Conniving with their Faction for any fault.
When they connive with their own compeers for any breach of privilege; as
with Master Whitakers, for searching Master Hampdens pockets, and taking away
his papers, immediately after the abrupt breaking up of the last unhappy
Parliament, and those that discovered the names of them that differed in
opinion from the rest of the Faction, in the business of the Earl of Straffords
and specially with that rabble of Brownists and Anabaptists, which with
unheard of impudency, durst ask that question publicly at the Bar, Who they
were that opposed the well-affected party in that House? as if they meant to be
eeven with them, whosoever they were. And likewise that unruly multitude of
zealous Sectaries, that were sent, as I find it, by Captain Ven, and Isaac
Pennington, to cry Justice, Justice, Justice, and, No Bishops, no Bishops; and
this to terrify some of the Lords from the House, and to awe the rest that
should remain in the House, as they had formerly done in the case of the Earl
of Strafford; and when others that they like not, are for the least breach of
pretended Privilege, either imprisoned, or expelled; for I assure my self,
there cannot be higher breaches of Privileges than these be, nor greater
stains to obscure the Honor, and vilify the repute, of this Parliament.

5. The engaging one another in civil causes.
5. When there is such siding, and engaging one another in civil causes, (that
they may be conglutinated together for their great Design) to do things, not
according unto Justice, but for their own ends, contrary to all right; and
their favor is scarce worth the charge of attendance, to them that speed best
by their Ordinances; but the complaint is, that m n have the greatest injuries
done them, in this, that themselves call the highest Court of Justice, which
others say, has now justified all other inferior Courts, and made all
unrighteous Judges most just.

6. The surreptitious carrying of businesses.
6. When (as we have been informed) a matter of the greatest importance has
been debated and put unto the question, and upon the question determined, and
the Bill once and again rejected, yet at another time, even the third time,
when the Faction had prepared the House for their own purpose, and knew they
could carry it by most voices, the same question has been resumed, and
determined quite contrary to the former determination, when the House was more
orderly convened; as it is said they did, to pass the Ordinance for the
Militia, which many men dare avouch to their faces to be no Privilege of
Parliament, but a great abuse of their Fellow Members, and a greater injury
unto all their Fellow Subjects.

7. Their partial questioning of some men, and no questioning of some others.
7. When the elections of some of their Members have been questioned, and others
have been accused, for no less than capital Crimes, (as Master Griffith was)
yet if these men incline, and conspire with this Faction, to confirm those
Positions, which they proposed to themselves, to overthrow the Church and
State, and to uphold their usurped Government, and tyrannical Ordinances, they
will pretend twenty excuses: as, The great Affairs of the State, The
multiplicity of their businesses, The necessity of procuring moneys, The
shortness of their time, (though they sat almost three years already) that
they have no leisure to determine these questions (which in truth they do
purposely put off, lest they should leese such a friend unto their party;) but
when any other, which dissenteth from their humors, does but any thing
contrary to the straitest Rules of the House, they do presently
(notwithstanding all their greatest affairs) call that matter into question,
The L; Digby in his Apolog.
and it must be examined and followed with that eagerness (as in my Lord
Digby's case) that he must be forthwith condemned and excluded; for we say,
This cannot be any just Privilege, but an unjust proceeding of this Parliament.

8. The delegating of their power to particular men.
8. When they delegate their power to some men to do some things of themselves
without the rest; as it seems they did unto Master Pym, when an Order passed
under his sole test, for taking away the Rails from the Communion Table; for
this is a course we never heard of in former time.

9. The multiplying of their Privileges.
9. When their Privileges are so infinitely grown and enlarged, more than ever
they were in former Parliaments, and so swelled, that they have now swallowed
up almost all the Privileges of other men; so that they alone must do what
they please, and where they will, in all Cities, and in all Courts, because
they have the Privilege of Parliament.

10. When, according to the great liberty of language, 10. Their speaking and
sitting in other Courts.
which we deny them not within their own wall, they take the Privilege to
speak what they list in other places, and to govern other Courts as they
please, where (as they did in Dublin, and do commonly in London) they sit as
Assistants with them, that are privileged by their Charters to be freed from
such Controllers.

11. When, above all that has been, or can be spoken, 11. Their close
Committee.
they have made a close Committee of Safety, (as they call it) which in the
apprehension of all wise and honest men, is not only a course most absurd and
illegal, but also most destructive to all true Privileges, and contrary to
the equitable practice of all public meetings, that any one should be excluded
from that which concerns him as well as any of the rest; And this Committee
only, which consists of a very few of the most pragmatical Members of their
House, must have all intelligences and privy counsels received, and reserved
among themselves; and what they conclude upon, must be reported to the House,
which must take all that they deliver upon trust, and with an implicit Roman
faith, believe all that they say, and assent to all that they do; only because
these (forsooth) are men to be confided in, upon their bare word, The
greatness of this abuse.
(when their House has no power to administer an Oath unto any man) in the
greatest affairs, happiness or destruction of the whole Kingdom; for this is,
in a manner, to make these men Kings, more than the Roman Consuls, and so as
great a breach of Privilege, and abuse of Parliament, as derogatory to his
Majesty, that called them to consult together, and as injurious to all the
people, as can be named, or imagined.

CHAP. XIV.
Shows how they have transgressed the public Laws of the Land three ways:
and of four miserable Consequences of their wicked doings.

2. FOr those public, written, and better known Laws of this Land, 2. Against
the public laws of the Land.
they have no less violated and transgressed the same than the other; and
that, as well in their execution and exposition, as in their composition; For,

1. When they had caused the Archbishop of Canterbury to be committed to the
Tower, Judge Berkeley to the Sheriff of London, 1. In the execution of the old
Laws.
Sir George Ratcliffe to the Gate House, for no less crimes than high Treason,
and many other men to some other prisons for some other faults; yet all the
World sees, how long most of them have been kept in prison; some a year, some
two, some almost three, and God only knows, when these men intend to bring
them to their legal trial; which delay of justice, is not only an intolerable
abuse to the present Subjects of this Kingdom, to be so long deprived of their
liberty upon a bare surmise, but also a far greater injury to all posterity,
when this President shall be produced to be imitated by the succeeding
Parliaments, and to justify the delays of all inferior Judges.

2. Whereas we believe what Judge Bracton says, and Judge Britton likewise,
which lived in the time of Edward the first, 2. In expounding the Laws.
Si disputatio oriatur, justiciarii non possunt eam interpretari; sed in dubiis
and obscuris, Domini regis erit expectanda interpretatio and voluntas; Citatur
a Domino Elism. in post-nati p. 108.
cum ejus sit interpretari, cujus est condere; If any Dispute does arise, the
Judges cannot interpret the same, but in all obscure and doubtful questions, the
interpretation, and the will of the King, is to be expected; when as he that
makes the Law, is to be the expounder and interpreter of the Law; Yet they have
challenged, and assumed to themselves, such a power, that their bare Vote,
without any Act of Parliament, may expound or alter a known Law; which if it
were so, they might make the Law, as Pighius says of the Scripture, hke a nose
of wax, that may be fashioned and bended as they pleased; but we do constantly
maintain, That the House of Commons has no power, to adjudge of any point or
matter, but to inform the Lords what they conceive; and the House of Peers has
the power of Judicature, which they are bound to do, according to the Rules of
the known established Laws; and to that end, they have the Judges to inform
them of those cases, and to explain those Laws, wherein themselves are not so
well experienced, (though now they sit in the House for ciphers, even as some
Clergy did many times in the Convocation;) and if any former Statute be so
intricate and obscure, that the Judges cannot well agree upon the right
interpretation thereof, then (as in explaining Poynings Act, and the like,
either in England or Ireland) the makers of the Act, that is the King, and the
major part of both Houses, must explain the same.

3. In composeing and setting forth new laws.
3. Whereas we never knew that the House had any power to make Orders and
Ordinances to bind any, (besides their own Members) to observe them as Laws;
yet they compel us to obey their Orders, in a stricter manner than usually we
are enjoined by Law; and this course, to make such binding Ordinances as they
do, to carry the force, though not the name of an Act of Parliament, or a Law,
is a mighty abuse of our Laws and Liberties; for Sir Edward Cook tells us
plainly, That (as the constitution of our Government now stands) neither the
House of Commons and King, L. Cook in the Preface of the Stat. of Westminster
the second. Lamberts Archeion. 271.
can make any binding Law, when the Peers dissent; nor the Lords and King, when
the Commonalty dissenteth; nor yet both Houses without the Kings consent; but
all three, King, Peers, and Commons, must agree, before any coactive Law can be
composed: Nay more, it is sufficiently proved, that Dare jus populo, or the
legislative power, being one principal end of Regal Authority, was in Kings
by the Law of Nature, (while they governed the people by natural equity) long
before municipall Laws, or Parliaments had any being. For, as the Poet says,
Remo cum fratre, Quirinus -- Jura dabat populo.
Hoc Priami gestamen erat, cum jura vocatis
More daret populis --
Because this was the custom of the Kings of Scythia, Assyria, Egypt, etc.
(long before Moses and Pharonaeus, when Municipall Laws first began) to give
Laws unto their people, according to the Rules of Natural equity, which, by
the Law of Nature, they were all bound to observe.

And though some Kings did graciously yield, and by their voluntary oaths, for
themselves and their successors, bind themselves may times, to stricter limits,
than were absolutely requisite; as William Rufus, King Stephen, Henry the
fourth, Richard the third, and the like, granted many Privileges, perhaps to
gain the favor of their Subjects, against those which likely had a better
Title to the Crown than themselves: or, it may be, to satisfy their people, as
the guerdon or compensation for the sufferance of some fore-passed grievances,
as Henry the first, Edward the second, Richard the second, and the like: yet,
these limitations, being agreeable to equity, and consistent with Royalty, and
not forcibly extracted, ought in all truth and reason to be observed by them.
And hence it is that the Kings of this Realm, according to the oaths and
promises which they made at their Coronation, can never give, nor repeal any
Law, but with the assent of the Peers and People.

But though they have thus yielded, to make no Laws, nor to repeal any Laws
without them; yet this voluntary concession of so much grace unto the people,
does no ways translate the legislative power from the King unto his
assistants, but that it is formaliter and subjective still in the King, and not
in them; else, would the government of this Kingdom be an Aristocracy, or
Democracy, and not a Monarchy; because the Supreme power of making and
repealing Laws, and Governing or judging decisively according to those Laws,
are two of those three things, that give being to each one of these three sorts
of Government.

Therefore, the King of England, Cassan. in cata^, gloria mundi. 2 2 Ed. 3. 3.
pl. 25. Vid. The view of a Printed book, entitled, Observations, etc. Where
this point is proved at large, p. 18, 19, 21, 22.
being an absolute Monarch in his own Kingdom, as Cassaneus says, and no man
can deny it; the Legislative power must needs reside solely in the King, ut in
subjecto proprio; and the consent of the Lords and Commons is no sharing of
that power, but only a condition yielded to be observed by the King, in the use
of that power: and so, both the Oath of Supremacy, and the form of all our
ancient Statutes, wherein the King speaks as the Lawmakers, do most evidently
prove the same unto us, Le Roy voit.

Neither durst any Subjects in former times either assume such a power unto
themselves, or deny the same unto their King: for you may find how the House of
Commons, denying to pass the Bill for the Pardon of the Clergy, which Henry the
8th. granted them, when they were all charged to be in a Praemunire, unless
themselves also might be included within the pardon, received this answer from
the King, that He was their Sovereign Lord, and would not be compelled to show
his mercy, (nor indeed could they compel him to any thing else:) but seeing
they went about to restrain him of his Liberty, he would grant a pardon unto
his Clergy by his great Seal without them; though afterward of his own accord
he signed their pardon also, which brought great commendation to his judgment,
Sir Rich. Baker in vita Hen. 8.
to deny it at first, when it was demanded as a right, and to grant it
afterward, when it was received as of grace. And yet the denial of their assent
unto the King, is more equitable to them, and less derogatory to him, then to
make orders without him; And this manner of compulsion, to show grace unto
themselves is more tolerable, than to force him, to disgrace and displace his
most faithful servants; only because others cannot confide in them, when no
criminal charge is laid against them.

And therefore for the Lords and Commons to make Orders and Ordinances without
the King, and in opposition to the King, is a mere usurpation of the Regal
power, a nullifying of the Kings power, and a making of the Royal assent, which
heretofore gave life to every Law, to be an empty piece of formality, which is
indeed, an intolerable arrogance in the contrivers of these Orders and the
makers of these Ordinances, a monstrous abuse of the Subjects, and a plain
making of our good King to be somewhat like him in the Comedy, A King and no
King.

And, whereas no Subject, yea, under favor be it spoken, nor the King himself,
after he has taken his Oath at his Coronation, is free from the observation of
the established Laws; yet they make themselves so far above the reach of Law,
that they freed him, which the Lord chief Justice Bramston had committed to
Newgate for felony in stealing the Countess of Rivers goods; they hindered all
men, as we found in their journal, from proceeding against Sir Thomas Dawes;
they enjoined the Judges by their Orders, to forbear to proceed in their
ordinary courses, in the Courts of Justice, contrary to the Oaths of those
Judges; and some Parliament Men came to the Bench to forbid the Judges to grant
Habeas Corpus's: which is as great an iniquity, and as apparent an injustice,
as ever was done by any Parliament.

The most abominable wickedness of these factious Rebels.
And that which is a Note above Ela, above all that could be spoken; whereas the
Law of God and man, the bonds and obligations of Civility and Christianity, tie
us all to be dutiful and obedient unto our King, in all things, either Actively
or Passively; and no ways for no cause violently to resist him, under the
greatest penalties that can be devised here, and damnation hereafter; yet these
men, contrary to all Laws, do enjoin us and compel us, as much against our
Consciences, as if they should compel us, with the Pagan Tyrants, to offer
sacrifice unto Idols, to war against our most gracious Sovereign, whom we from
our hearts do both love and honor; and they proscribe us as malignants, and as
enemies to the Commonwealth, Ps. 50.22. Augu. contra. Faust. l. 22. c. 75. 76.
if we contribute not Money, Horse, and Arms, to maintain this ungodly War, and
so become deadly enemies unto our own souls. O consider this ye that forget
God, lest, for tearing us, He tear you in pieces while there is none to help
you: for, considering what the Apostle says, Romans 13.1, 2. and what Saint
Augustine says, Ordo naturalis, mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poscit, ut
suscipiendi belli Autoritas atque consilium penes principem sit; and lest men
should think, they ought by force of Arms to resist their King for Religion,
he answers that objection by the example of the Apostles, Isti non resistendo
interfecti sunt, ut potiorem esse docerent victoriam, pro fide veritatis
occidi. We conceive this to be so execrable an Act, and so odious to God and
man, that we are made thus miserable, and abused beyond measure, to have our
Religion, which is most glorious, our Laws, The miserable consequences of their
wicked doings.
that in their own nature are most excellent, and our Liberties, that make us
as free as any Subjects in the World, under false pretenses, and the shadows of
Religion, Laws, and Liberties, to be eradicated, and fundamentally destroyed;
whereby,



Roman Civil-Wars, in the time of Metellus, the Son did kill his own Father; so
now, by the subtilty of this faction, we are cast into such a War as is,

1. A most unnatural War, the Son against the Father, and the Father against
the Son: The Earl of Warwick fights for the Parliament, and my Lord Rich his
Son with the King: The Earl of Dover is with the King, and my Lord Rochford his
Son with the Parliament: So one brother against another, as the Earl of
Northumberland with the Parliament, and his brother with the King; The Earl of
Bedford with the Parliament and his brother with the King; Master Perpoint with
the Parliament, and the Earl of Newark with the King; Devoreux Farmer with the
Parliament, and his b^other Richard Farmer, together with his brother in law my
Lord Cokain with the King, and the like: and of Cosens without number, the one
part with the King, and the other with the Parliament: And if they do this in
subtilty to preserve their Estates, I say it is a wicked policy to undo the
Kingdom, which all wise men should consider.

2. A most irreligious War, when one Christian, of the same professed Religion,
shall bathe his Sword, and wash his Hands in the blood of his fellow Christian,
and his fellow Protestant, that shall be coheir with him of the same Kingdom.

3. A most unnatural, irreligious, and barbarous War, when the Subject shall
take Arms, to destroy or unthrone their own Liege, a Religious and most
gracious King.

3. The Service of God in most Churches is neglected, when almost all ablest,
gravest, and most Orthodox Divines and Preachers are persecuted, plundered,
imprisoned, and driven to fly (as in the time of the Arian or Donatist, which
was worse than the Heathen, perfection) from City to City, and to wander in
Deserts from place to place, to save themselves from the hands of these Rebels
against the King, and Persecuters of Gods Church: which is a most grievous and
a most cruel persecution, far more general than that of the Anabaptists in
Germany, or of Queen Mary here in England. The Lord of Heaven make us constant,
and give us patience to endure it.

4. The whole Kingdom is, and shall be yet more, by the continuance
impoverished, and plunged into all kind of miseries; when the travailer cannot
pass without fear, nec hospes ab hospite tutus, the Carrier cannot transport
his commodity, but it shall be intercepted, the Husbandman cannot till his
ground, but his Horses, as my self saw it, shall be taken from the Plough, and
his Corn shall be destroyed when it is ready for the Sickle, which must be the
forerunner of a Famine, that is ever the Usher to introduce the Plague and
Pestilence, and all other kind of grievous diseases; and these things put
together, do set wide our Gates, and open our Ports, to bring foreign foes
into our Coasts, to possess that good Land, whereof we are unworthy; because
with the Israelites we loathed Manna, we were weary of our peace and happiness;
we would buy Arms and be Volunteers, and every Town being too wanton, would
needs train and put themselves into a posture of defense, as they termed it, to
be secured from their own shadows: and though the King told them often, there
was no cause of their Jealousies, and therefore forbade these disloyalties; yet
just like the Jews, they were willing to be deceived by this miserable faction,
that contrived that Act whereby they have perfidiously overreached both our
good King, and the rest of our wel-meaning brethren, either to perfect their
Design, or else, to make themselves perpetual Dictators, and to betray the
felicity of all our people, under the name of Parliament; which though (as I
said before) I honor and love, as much as any of the truest Patriots of either
House, both in the institution and the right prosecution thereof; that is, as
it was constituted, to be the great Council of the Kingdom graciously called by
his Majesties-writ, confidently to present the grievances of the people, and
humbly to offer their advice and counsels for their Reformation; yet I do abhor
those men, that would abuse the word Parliament, only as a Stalking-Horse to
destroy all Acts of Parliament; and I hate to see men calling the Fanatic
actions of a few desperate seditious persons, the proceedings of Parliament,
and others (making an Idol of it, as if their power were omnipotent or
unlimitted, and more than any Regal Power, their judgment infallible, their
Orders irreprehensible, and themselves unaccountable for their proceedings) to
be so besotted with the name of it, that this bare shadow without the substance
(for it is no Parliament without the King; and the Major part of both Houses is
either banished, or imprisoned, or compelled to reside with his Majesty) should
so bewitch us (as Master Smyth blushed not to say, Nothing could free us from
our dangers but the Divinity of a Parliament) out of our own happiness to
become more miserable, Ingeniosus ad blasphemiam.
then heretofore this Kingdom has ever been by any Civil War: for, if you will
consider the Treasons and Rebellions, the Injustice, Cruelty, and Inhumanity,
the Subtilty, Hypocrisy, Lying, Swearing, Blasphemy, Profaneness, and
Sacrilege in the highest pitch, and many other the like fearful sins, that
have been committed since the beginning of this Parliament, by the sole means
of this Faction, and observe the ill Acts that have been used by them to
compass things lawful, and the wicked Acts that have been daily practiced to
procure things unlawful (when by blood and rapine and the curses of many
Fatherless and Widows, they have gotten the Treasure of the Kingdom, and the
Wealth of the Kings loyal Subjects into their hands, and wasted it so, that
their wants are still as notorious as their crimes) we may admire the miracles
of Gods mercy, and the bottomless depth of his goodness, that the stones in the
streets have not risen against them, or the fire from Heaven had not consumed
these Rebels, that thus far and thus insolently had tempted Gods patience, and
provoked him to anger with such horrible abominations.

Jerusalem justified Samaria, so this Faction has justified all the Romanists,
and showed themselves worse Christians, less Subjects, and viler Traitors than
all the Papists are; for these factious Rebels justify their Rebellion, and, to
the indelible shame of their Profession, they maintain that it is not only
lawful, but that it is their duty to bear Arms, and to wage War against their
King, when the King does abuse his Power: whereas the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome Christopherson tract. contr. rebel. Rhemist. in Nov. Test. p. ^01.
Goldastus de Monarchia S. Imp. Romans tom. 3. Dr. Kellison in his Survey. Aquin.
de Regim. Princip. c. 6. Council. Constan. Sess. 15. Stephan. Cantuar anno 8. H.
3. Tolet. in summa l 5. c 6. Gr. Valentia, p. 2. q 64. Bellar. Apol. c. 13
Lessi^^ l. 2 c. 9. Serrarius, Azorius, etc.
utterly denies the same, and concludes them no Children of the Church that do
it: and Doctor Kellison gives this reason for it, because Faith is not
necessarily required to Jurisdiction or Government; neither is Authority lost
by the loss of Faith; therefore it is not lawful for any Subjects to Rebel
against their King, though their King should prove a Tyrant, or should Apostate
from the Faith of Christ; so that now the Papists boast, they are better
Subjects than these Rebellious Protestants: and thefore I fear that this
Faction (Defendens Christum, verso mucrone cecidit.) by their unjust Design to
propagate the Gospel, have most grievously wounded the Faith of Christ, and
given a more deadly blow to the Protestant Religion than ever it had since the
Reformation; when it is impossible that the true Religion should produce
Rebellion.

And therefore seeing we are freeborn Subjects, and persons interessed in the
good and safety of this Kingdom, as well as any of them, we must crave liberty
to express our grievances, and to crave redresses; and seeing my self am called
to be a Preacher of Gods Word, and a Bishop over many of the souls of my
Brethren, for which I must render an account to my God, both for my silence
when I should speak, and speaking any thing that should not be spoken, I
resolved to fear my God, and neither out of flattery to the King and his party,
nor out of hatred or malice to those factious men, but as I am persuaded in my
Conscience, fully satisfied and guided by Gods Truth, to set forth this
Discovery of these Mysteries, what danger soever I shall undergo; and if I
shall become their Enemy for speaking Truth, I shall fare no worse than Saint
Paul did; and it shall be with them, if they do not repent, as it was with the
Israelites, When their destruction comes, Ezech. 7.25, 27.
they shall seek peace and shall not have it, but calamity shall come upon
calamity.

CHAP. XV.
Shows a particular recapitulation of the Reasons, whereby their Design to
alter the Government of the Church and State is evinced; And a pathetical
disswasion from Rebellion.

ANd thus I have set down not any thing to render these men more odious than
they are, or to abuse my Reader with falsehood, If I have been misinformed of
any thing that shall appear false, I shall not blush to retract it by an
ingenuous confession.
or uncertainties, but to report what I knew, and what I collected out of the
present writings of best credit, and attested by men of known truth and
integrity, whereby it is most apparent to any discerning eye, That the Faction
of Anabaptists, and Brownists, and some other of the subtilest heads in the
House of Commons, had from the first Convention of this Parliament, secretly
projected this Design, and, insensible to the rest of their well-meaning
Brethren, prosecuted the same, to alter and change the ancient Government both
of the Church and Kingdom, Sober Sadness. p. 44, 45, 46.
which the Author of Sober-Sadness proves by these subsequent Reasons: as (for
the first)

1. By suspending all Ecelesiasticall Laws and Censures; Their Design to change
the Church Government, proved 4. ways.
which indulgence of all Vices, has drawn all Offenders to comply with them.

2. By setting the people on work, to petition against the present Government,
and the Service of the Church.

3. By the Bill concluded for the abolishing of our Government.

4. By the chief persons countenanced and employed by them in that business,
who are Anabaptists and Brownists, and all sorts of Sectaries; he evinceth
their Design to change our Church Government, and to convert the Patrimony of
the Church, which our religious Ancestors dedicated for the advancement of
God's Worship; not to establish Learning and a preaching Ministry, as they
pretended, but to dis-ingage their Publick-faith, which otherwise would never
prove a saving faith.

And I wish, there might be none about His Majesty, that, pretending great
loyalty unto him, do comply with them herein, and either to raise, or to secure
their own Fortunes, would persuade Saint Paul, to part with Saint Peter's keys
so he may still hold the sword in his hand; or, to speak more plainly, to
purchase the peace of the Commonwealth, with the ruin of God's Church: But
for this, let me be bold,

1. To crave leave to tell His Majesty, It was not His sword that has brought
him from a flying Prince out of Westminster, and as yet unsecured at
Nottingham, to be a victorious King at Edge hill, and immediately to be the
terror of all the Rebels in London; But it was God, whose Church and Church-
Service he defended, that protected him hitherto, and gave him the Victory in
Battle; And let him be assured, that He, which is Yea and Amen, will be his
Shield and Buckler still, to defend him from the strivings of his people, and
to subdue them that rise against him, while he defends them, whose eyes, next
under God, are only fixed on him, to be, as God has promised, their nursing
Father.

2. To assure those that would suffer the Church to fall, or perhaps sell the
same out of a by-respect unto themselves, That taking their rise from the fall
of the Church, or laying the foundation of their houses in the ruin of the
Clergy, they do but build upon the sands, whence they shall fall, and their
fall shall be great, when the success thereof shall be as the success of the
City of Jericho, that was built by Hiel, who laid the foundation of it in
Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates thereof in Segub his youngest son,
and had her destiny described by Joshua; and all the Poss ssions that they
shall get, shall prove Acheldama's, fields of blood; and we hope God will raise
deliverance to his Church from some better men, when as they and their Fathers
House shall all perish, and shall stink in the nostrils of all good men for
their perfidiousness in Gods cause.

But if any man should demand why we suspect any Traitors, or false
Counselors, to be in Kings Courts: I answer, because Saint Paul says,
Oportet esse hareses; and, I believe, the purest Court has no more Privilege
to be free from Traitors, then the Church from Heretics. And you know there
was one of eight in Noah's Ark, and another of twelve in Christ his Court; and
he that was so near him, as to dip his hand with him in the dish, was the first
that flew in his face, and yet with a Hayl Master, and with a Kiss: two fair
testimonies of true love.

Therefore, let no King in Christendom think it strange that his Court should
have Flatterers, Traitors, or evil Counselors; let not us be blamed for
saying this, and let not Pym so foolishly charge our King for evil
Counselors; for certainly, did he know them, I make no question but he would
discard them: or could I, or any other, inform his Majesty who they are, and
that it were an easy matter, dic^er, Hic est; we would not be afraid to pull
off their veils, and to say, as Christ did to Judas, Thou art the man; but
their Maeandrian windings, their Sirens voices, and their Judas kisses, are as
a fair mantle, to conceal and cover Joabs Treason, even perhaps to betray some
of the wisest in the Parliament, as well as some of them have betrayed the
King. In such a case, all I can say, is this; Memento diffidere, was Epicarmus
his Motto. The honest plain dealing man that does things for Religion, not for
ends, is the unlikest man to betray his Master; and few Counselors are not so
apt to breed so many Traitors as a multitude. It was the indiscretion of
Rehoboam that lost him ten parts of twelve, to prefer young Counselors before
the ancient Seldom discretion in youth attends great and sudden fortunes. In
vita Hen: 3.
and if we may believe that either paupertas, or necessitas cogit ad turpia, or
the fable of the ulcerated Travailer, They that are to make their fortunes are
apter to sell Church and State, and to betray King and Kingdom, rather then
those that have sufficiently replenished their coffers, and enlarged their
possessions. But I assure my self the mouth of malice cannot deny, but that our
King has been as wary and as wise in the choice of his Servants, Officers, and
Counselors, so far as eyes of flesh can see, Their design to change the
Government of th State, showed.
in all respects, as any Prince in Christendom; and more by man cannot be done.

And for the second, that is, their Design to change the Government of the
State, and to work the subversion of the Monarchy: he evinceth it,

Declaration upon the Earl of Straffords suffering, that this Example might not
be drawn to a President for the future; because they thought that themselves,
intending to do the like, and to become guilty of the same Crimes, might by
virtue of this Declaration be secured from the punishment, if things should
succeed otherwise then they hoped.

Courts of Justice, which may perhaps Relieve the Subjects from some pressures,
but encourage many more in licentiousness, and prove the Prodroms to the ruin
of our Monarchy.

Propositions, whereby the King was, in very deed, demanded to lay down his
Crown, The Letter p. 11.
and to compound with them for the same; because (as another says) therein,
there was presented to him a perfect Platform of a total change of Government,
by which the Counselors, indeed, were to have been Kings, and the King in
name to have become scarce a Counselor, and nothing of the present State to
have remained, but the very Names and Titles of our Governors.

expression (so little understood by many men, and yet so much talked of in
many of their papers) of a power of re-assuming the trust, which is falsely
pretended to be derived unto his Majesty, by the mere human pactions and
agreement of the Politic body of the people, which I showed unto you to be a
most false and a mere invented suggestion.

pretending to, and according to this Doctrine their Usurping of the power of
the Militia both by Sea and Land.

Actual exercising of this power, in disposing of Offices, Generals, Colonels,
Captains, and the like Places of Command in War, and appointing their Speaker,
Master of the Rowls, and other Officers of Peace.

expression of one of them to Sir Edward Deering, while he was yet of their
Cabinet-Council, that if they could bring down the Lords to the House of
Commons, and make the King as one of the Lords, then the whole work were done;
that is, to make the Government of this Kingdom popular.

unanswerable Argument of this Design, the licencing of Master Pryn's Book of
The Sovereign Authority of Parliaments, and suffering the same to pass
unquestioned to this very day; because that book devesteth the King of all his
Sovereignty, and makes our Government Aristocratical.

And this subversion of our Monarchical Government was the last Design, if not
the grand Design of this Faction: not that all the Members, which have voted
all or most of those things that tended to this change, or be still remaining
in either House, did intend any ill either to Church or State, (for I know
many, especially my ever honored Lord, the Earl, of Pembrook and Montgomery,
who, I dare avouch it in Truth and honesty, did ever, and as I believe does
still bear a most upright heart, and as sincere intentions, (howsoever perhaps
by a misunderstanding his Lordship and the rest of those well meaning men may
be mis-guided, as were those honest men that followed Absolon) both to Gods
Service, the Kings Honor, and the happiness both of Church and Commonwealth,
as any man in the Kingdom) but that a Faction, it may be very few at first have
insensibly seduced the rest to effect their own Design; and thia Faction is all
that I mean by the name of Parliament, throughut this whole Treatise; because
their subtilty has prevailed over the plain Integrity of the other well-minded
men, to make up the major part of the House, both of the Lords and Commons;
which thing has often happened both in General Councils, and great
Parliaments, as in the Council of Constans and Trent, and many others, and that
Parliament which was branded with the name of Parliamentum insanum, and the
other somewhat like this, in quo jugulum ecclesiae atrocius petebatur, and the
like; Tempore Hen. 3.
for otherwise, I do both honor, and reverence this Parliament rightly
understood, and every Member of the same, as much as any discreet Member can
desire.

And therefore having thus discovered and displayed the Plots and practices of
these infernal instruments; to insinuate their assistance unto the Scots, and
their allurements of them to invade our Kings Dominions; to ensnare the Irish,
and to provoke the Papists, to such a Rebellion as has been the utter ruin
and destruction of many millions of men; to obscure the Glory of this noble
Kingdom, to alter the Discipline, and corrupt the Doctrine of the most glorious
and the purest Church. that professes the name of Christ, and to bring us all,
and all our Posterity to extreme miseries, to suffer yet more than we have
endured, or that can be hitherto imagined; And considering those bloody
Treasons that have been publicly uttered, and openly practiced against the
Sacred Person of our Sovereign; I may justly say, that, as the sins of the
Israelites, and their impetuous calling for a King, moved the Lord to send them
a King in his anger, so our sins and our impatient crying for a Parliament,
made our God to send us a Parliament in his Wrath, that will never turn for our
Blessing, till we return to God from our sins; for when I consider on the one
side, the Piety and goodness of our King, the justness of his cause, and the
most ready and cordial valor, as well in the Common Soldiers as the
Commanders of a full and sufficient Army; and on the other side, the multitude
of disloyal and seduced Subjects, the vigilance and subtilty of their
Commanders, with their unlimited ways to get Moneys; and on both sides, the
desire of too many, not for the honor of the King, nor the Peace of the
Kingdom to end the War, but to continue the same for their own advantage, until
the wealth of Lawyers, Clergy, and Gentry, be transplanted to the possession of
other Masters, I am afraid it will prove an heavy Judgment. And therefore,
lest our obstinacy in our sins should procure the continuance of Gods anger,
which being removed will soon remove all our miseries; let me persuade all
conscientious men, especially the Gentry, and all other understanding men,
(howsoever the Citizens that deceive the Kingdom of their Wealth, delight to be
deceived in their Faith) that would not be cheated of their Religion by these
factious Mountebanks, and that would not provoke God to say, I have no pleasure
in them, to turn from their Rebellious courses, to listen no longer to those
furious fire brands, that out of their new Divinity, contrary to the Doctrine
of all the ancient Fathers, and all the Orthodox and grave Preachers of this
Kingdom, do incite the People unto this unnatural bloody War, and to slander
the footsteps of Gods Anointed; because they know him not, and to remember the
Oaths of their Allegiance and Supremacy, together with their late
Protestation, whereby they stand obliged to their uttermost power to maintain
his Majesty's Royal Person, Crown, and Dignity, against all treacherous
practices, that may any ways dishonor or impair them; and then I presume
their consciences will disavow the proceedings of these Projectours, protest
against all their Ordinances, that are made against or without the Kings
consent, advise all the Knights and Burgesses to Vote no more against their
Sovereign, and to make no further use of the trust they reposed in them, to
Murder us and our fellow Subjects, under the pretense of shedding the blood of
the ungodly; or, if they still go on to abuse that trust, (to make us yet more
miserable) to withdraw themselves and their trust and power of the
representation from them, and to join their uttermost assistance unto his
Majesty to Protect him, that he may be enabled to protect us, and to overwhelm
these Rebels into the same pit which they have made for us.

And this may be, by dissolving the knot of factious members wherein we see our
miseries involved, and to make elections of new members into their places, who,
with the rest of the Lords and Commons, which were faithful both to the Church,
King, and Kingdom, shall call them to a strict account, for betraying our
Trust, interrupting our Peace, opposing his Majesty, and violating all our
ancient liberties.

Or if a better way may be found, let us follow the same to God's glory, and to
produce the peace and happiness of this Kingdom, lest, if we persist
obstinately in this wilful Rebellion, to withstand God's Ordinance, to oppose
his Anointed, and to shed so much innocent blood, we shall, thus fighting
against Heaven, so far provoke the wrath of the God of Heaven, as that the
Glory of Israel shall be darkened, the Honor of this Nation shall be trodden
under-foot, and be made the scorn of all other Nations round about us; and the
light of our Candlestick shall be extinguished, and we shall all become most
miserable; because we would not hearken to the voice of the Lord our God. Which
I hope we will do; and do most earnestly pray, that we may do it, to the Glory
of God, the Honor of our King, and the Happiness of this whole Kingdom,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be Praise and Dominion, both now and for
ever. Amen.

Jehovae Liberatori.
AN APPENDIX.
THe man of God speaking of transcendent wickedness, says, Their Vine is of
the Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: Deuteronomy. 32.32.
their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter; their wine is the
poison of Dragons, and the cruel vemon of Aspes. And I believe, never any
wickedness deserved better to be clad with this elegant expression, than that
threefold iniquity.

1. The unparalled Vote. 2. The intolerable Ordinance. 3. The damnable
Covenant, which the rebellious Faction in Parliament have most impiously
contrived, to make up the full measure of their impiety, since the writing of
my Discoveries; For,
1. Omitting that horrible practice of those rebellious blood thirsty
Soldiers, that did their best to murder their own most gracious Queen; this
Faction seeing how God prevented that plot, voted this most loving and most
loyal Wife, to be impeached of High Treason, for being faithful to do her
uttermost endeavor (which will be her everlasting praise) to assist her most
dear, and Royal Husband, (their own Liege Lord, and Sovereign King) in his
greatest extremities, against a virulent mighty Faction of most malicious
Traitors; The strangest Treason that ever the World heard of.

2. They made an Ordinance for the composing and convocating of such a Synod
(whereof I said somewhat before) of Laymen, ignorant men, factious men,
traiterous men, and such concretion of heterogeneall parts, like
Nebuchadnezzars Image, Gold, Brass, and Clay, all mixed together, and all so
ordered, limited, and bridled, (as it is expressed in the 5. and 6. page of
their Ordinance) by the power of both Houses, where there are such abundance of
Schismatic and seditious Members, that I should scarce put the worst
sensitive soul to profess that erratical faith, or any brute beast, to be
guided by that Ecclesiastical Discipline, that such factious Traitors (as some
of them are like to be proved) should compose, or cause to be composed.

3. They composed a form of a sacred Vow, or Covenant (as they term it) or, as
it is indeed, the Covenant of Hell, a Covenant against God, to overthrow the
Gospel of Christ, under the name of Christ; which Covenant, is the oil that
swimmeth uppermost upon the waters, that is, the oil of Scorpions, or (as Moses
says) The poison of Dragons, so lately wringed and diffused far and near, to
defile and destroy millions of souls; when, forgetting their faith to God, and
the oaths of their allegiance (so often, and so solemnly taken by many, or
most of them) to be faithful unto their King, they shall be compelled (which is
one degree worse than the vow of them that bound themselves with a curse,
neither to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul;) so hypocritically, so
perjuredly, so rebelliously, so horribly, and so bloodily, to make such a
fearful Vow, and such an abominable Covenant, so wickedly contrived, that
without great and serious repentance, spitteth forth nothing but fire and
brimstone, and can produce nothing else but Hell and Damnation, to all that
take it; especially, to them that will compel men to be thus transcendently
wicked, as if they would send them with Corah quick to Hell. All which
triplicity of evil, I shall leave to some abler, and more eloquent Pen, to be
set forth more fully in the right colors, that, being sufficiently displayed,
they may be thoroughly detested of all good men. Amen.

O Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep thy Laws. THE
CONTENTS Of the several Chapters in the Plots of the Parliament.
Chap. I. Shows the Introduction; the greatness of this Rebellion; the
original thereof; the secret plots of the Brownisticall Faction; and the two
chiefest things they aimed at to effect their plot. Page 251. Chap. II. Shows
the eager prosecution of our Sectaries to take off the Earl of Strafford's
head; How he answered for himself; The Bishops right of voting in his cause;
His excellent virtues, and his death. p. 254. Chap. III. Shows how they
stopped the free judgment of the Judges; procured the perpetuity of the
Parliament; the consequences thereof. And the subtle device of Semiramis. p.
259. Chap. IV. Shows the abilities of the Bishops; the threefold practice of
the Faction to exclude them out of the House of Peers; and all the Clergy out
of all Civil Judicature. p. 262. Chap. V. Shows the evil consequences of this
Act; How former times respected the Clergy; How the King has been used ever
since this Act passed; and how for three special Reasons it ought to be
annulled. p. 265. Chap. VI. Shows the plots of the Faction, to gain unto
themselves the friendship and assistance of the Scots: To what end they framed
their new Protestation: How they provoked the Irish to rebel: And what other
things they gained thereby. p. 270. Chap. VII. Shows how the Faction was
enraged against our last Canons. What manner of men they chose in their new
Synod. And of six special Acts of great prejudice unto the Church of Christ,
which under false pretenses they have already done, p. 274. Chap. VIII. Shows
what Discipline, or Church Government our factious Schismatics like best.
Twelve Principal points of their Doctrines, which they hold as 12. Articles of
their faith, and we must all believe the same, or suffer, if this Faction
should prevail. p. 270. Chap. IX. Shows three other special points of
Doctrine, which the Brownists and Anabaptists of this Kingdom do teach. p. 274,
Chap. X. Shows the great Bug-bears that affrighted this Faction. The four
special means they used to secure themselves. The manifold lies they raised
against the King. And the two special Questions that are discussed about
Papists. p. 278. Chap. XI. Shows the unjust proceedings of these factious
Sectaries against the King. Eight special wrongs and injuries that they have
offered him. Which are the three States? And that our Kings are not Kings by
Election or Covenants with the people. p. 283. Chap. XII. Shows the unjust
proceedings of this Faction against their fellow Subjects, set down in four
particular things. p. 289. Chap. XIII. Shows the proceedings of this Faction
against the Laws of the Land. The Privileges of Parliament transgressed eleven
special ways. p. 292. Chap. XIV. Shows how they have transgressed the
public Laws of the Land three ways: and of four miserable Consequences of
their wicked doings. p. 295. Chap. XV. Shows a particular recapitulation of
the Reasons, whereby their Design to alter the Government both of Church and
State, is evinced: And a pathetical disswasion from Rebellion. p. 301.
(...) TO THE KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY.
Most gracious Sovereign,
WITH no small pains (and the more for want of my books, and of any settled
place, being multum terris jactatus and alto, frighted out of mine house, and
tossed betwixt two distracted Kingdoms) I have collected out of the sacred
Scripture, explained by the ancient Fathers, and the best Writers of God's
Church, these few Rights out of many, that God, and Nature, and Nations, and
the Laws of this Land have fully and undeniably granted unto our Sovereign
Kings. My witness is in Heaven, that as my conscience directed me, without any
squint aspect, so I have with all sincerity, and freely traced and expressed
the truth, as I shall answer to the contrary at the dreadful judgment; (...);
therefore with all fervency I humbly supplicate the divine Majesty, still to
assist Your Highness, that, as in Your lowest ebb, You have put on
Righteousness as a breast plate, and with an heroic Resolution withstood the
proudest waves of the raging Seas, and the violent Attempts of so many
imaginary Kings; so now, in Your acquired strength, You may still ride on with
Your honor; and for the glory of God, the preservation of Christ his Church,
and the happiness of this Kingdom, not for the greatest storm that can be
threatened, suffer these Rights to be snatched away, nor Your Crown to be thrown
to the dust, nor the Sword, that God has given You, to be wrested out of Your
hand by these uncircumcised Philistines, these ungracious Rebels, and the
Vessels of God's wrath, (...), unless they do most speedily repent; for if the
unrighteous will be unrighteous still, and our wickedness provoke God to bring
our Land to Desolation, Your Majesty, standing in the truth, and for the right,
for the honor of God, and the Church of his Son, is absolved from all blame,
and all the blood that shall be spilt, and the oppressions, insolences, and
abominations that are perpetrated, shall be required at the hands, and
revenged upon the heads of these detested Rebels. You are, and ought in the
truth of cases of conscience, to be informed by Your Divines; and I am
confident that herein they will all subscribe, that God will undoubtedly assist
You, and arise in his good time, to maintain his own cause; and by this war,
that is so undutifully, so unjustly made against Your Majesty, so Giant-like
fought against Heaven, to overthrow the true Church, You shall be glorious like
King David, that was a man of War, whose dear son raised a dangerous rebellion
against him, and in whose reign so much blood was spilt; and yet,
notwithstanding these distempers in his Dominion, he was a man according to
God's own heart, especially, because that from a to o As, in the beginning, by
reducing the Ark from the Philistines, throughout the midst, by settling the
service of the Tabernacle, and in the ending by his resolution to build, and
leaving such a treasure for the erecting of the Temple.
, the beginning of his reign, to the end of his life, his chiefest endeavor
was to promote the service, and protect the servants of the Tabernacle, the
Ministers of God's Church. God Almighty so continue Your Majesty, bless You and
protect You in all Your ways, Your virtuous, pious Queen, and all Your royal
Progeny. Which is the daily prayer of

The most faithful to Your Majesty, GRYFFITH OSSORY.

THE RIGHTS OF KINGS, Both in CHURCH and STATE: And, The Wickednesses of this
Pretended PARLIAMENT Manifested and Proved.
CHAP. I.
Shows, who are the fittest to set down the Rights which God granted unto
Kings; what causes men to rebel; the parts considerable in S. Peter's words,
1 Pet. ii. 17. in fine. How Kings honored the Clergy; the fair, but most
false pretenses of the refractary Faction, what they chiefly aim at, and their
malice to Episcopacie and Royalty.

IT was not unwisely said by Ocham that great Scholeman to a great Emperor
(which M. Luther said also to the Duke of Saxony,) Tu protege me gladio,
Guliel. Ocham. Ludov. 4.
and ego defendam te calamo; do you defend me with your Sword, and I will
maintain your Right with my Pen; for God has committed the Sword into the hand
of the King, and His hand which bears not the Sword in vain, Romans 13. v. 4
knows how to use the Sword better than the Preacher, and the King may better
make good His Rights by the Sword then by the Pen, which having once blotted
His papers with mistakes, and concessions more then due, though they should be
never so small (if granted further than the truth would permit, as I fear some
have done in some particulars) yet they cannot so easily be scraped away by the
sharpest sword; and God ordered the divine tongue and learned Scribe to be the
pens of a ready Writer, and thereby to display the duties, and to justify the
Rights of Kings; and if they fail in either part, The Divine best to set down
the Rights of kings.
the King needs neither to perform what undue Offices they impose upon him,
nor to let pass those just honors they omit to yield unto him; but he may
justly claim his due Rights, and either retain them, or regain them by his
Sword, which the Scribe either wilfully omitted, or ignorantly neglected to
ascribe unto him, or else maliciously endeavored, (as the most impudent, and
rebellious Sectaries of our time have most virulently done) to abstract them
from him.

And seeing the Crown is set upon the head of every Christian King, and the
Scepter of Government is put into his hand, by a threefold Law 1. Of Nature,
that is common to all. 2. Of the Nation, that he rules over. 3. Of God, that
is over all.
As,

Every Christian king established by a threefold Law. Psalm. 119.
1. Nature teaching every King to govern his People according to the common
rules of honesty and justice.

2. The politic constitution of every several State, and particular Kingdom,
showing how they would have their government to be administered.

3. The Law of God, which is an undefiled Law, and does infallibly set down
what duties are to be performed, and what Rights are to be yielded to every
King: To what end the stories of the kings of Israel and Judah were written.
Romans 15.4.
for whatsoever things are written of the Kings of Israel, and Judah in the
holy Scriptures, are not only written for those Kings, and the Government of
that one Nation, but as the Apostle says, They are written for our learning,
that all Kings and Princes might know thereby how to govern, and all Subjects
might in like manner, by this impartial, and most perfect rule, understand how
to behave themselves in all obedience and loyalty toward their Kings and
Governors; for he that made man, knew, he had been better unmade, than left
without a Government; therefore, as he ordained those Laws, whereby we should
live, and set down those truths that we should believe; so he settled, The
ordination of our government as beneficial as our creation.
and ordained that Government, whereby all men in all Nations should be guided
and governed, as knowing full well, that we neither would, or could do any of
these things right, unless he himself did set down the same for us; therefore,
though the frowardness of our Nature will neither yield to live according to
that Law, nor believe according to that rule, nor be governed according to that
divine Ordinance, which God has prescribed for us in his Word; yet it is most
certain, that he left us not without a perfect rule, and direction for each one
of these our faith, our life, and our government without which government, we
could neither enjoy the benefits of our life, nor scarce reap the fruits of our
faith: and because it were as good to leave us without Rules, Unwritten things
most uncertain.
and without Laws, as to live by unwritten Laws, which in the vastness of this
world would be soon altered, corrupted, and obliterated; therefore God has
written down all these things in the holy Scriptures, which though they were
delivered to the People of the Jews, for the government both of their Church
and Kingdom: yet were they left with them to be communicated for the use and
benefit of all other Nations; (God being not the God of the Jews only, Romans 3
29.
but of the Gentiles also:) because the Scripture, in all moral and perpetual
precepts (that are not merely judicialia Judaica, or secundae classis, which
the Royal Government was not, because this was ordained from the beginning of
the world to be observed among all Nations, and to be continued to the end of
the world; nor the types and shadows that were to vanish when the true
substance approached) was left as a perfect pattern, and platform for all Kings
and People, Pastors and Flocks, Churches and Kingdoms throughout the whole
world, to be directed how to live, to govern, and to be governed thereby. Such
was the love and care of God for the Government of them that love and care as
little to be governed by his government.

And therefore the dim and dusky light of bleare-ey'd Nature, Every Government
the better, by how much nearer it is to the Government of the Scripture kings.
and the dark distracted inventions of the subtillest politics must stoop, and
yield place in all things, wherein they swerve from that strict rule of
justice, and the right order of government, which is expressed necessarily to
be observed in the holy Scripture, either of the Kings part toward his People,
or of the Peoples duty toward their King.

And though each one of these faculties, or the understanding of each one of
these three Laws requires more than the whole man, our life being too short to
make us perfect in any one; yet seeing that of all three, the Law of God is
abyssus magna, like the bottomless sea, and the supreme Lady, to whom all other
Laws and Sciences are but as Penelopes, handmaids to attend her service; the
Divine may far better, and much sooner understand what is natural right, and
what ought to be a just national Law, and thereby what is the Right of Kings,
The Divine is better able to understand Law, then the Lawyer to understand
Divinity. Psalm. 1.2.
and what the duty of Subjects, than any, either Philosopher or Lawyer, can
find the same by any other art; especially to understand the same so fully by
the Law of God, as the Divine that exercises himself therein day and night,
may do it; unless you think (as our Enthusiasts dream) that every illiterate
Tradesman, or at least a Lawyers Latin, (I speak of the generality, when I
know many of them of much worth in all learning) may easily wade, with the
reading of our English Bibles, into the depth of all Divinty: and that the
greatest Doctor that spent all his days in studies, can hardly understand the
mysteries of these Camelion-like Laws, which may change sense, as often as the
Case shall be changed; either by the subtlety of the Pleader, or the ignorance,
or corruption of the Judges. But we know their deepest Laws, discreetest
Statutes, and subtillest Cases cannot exceed the reach of sound reason; and
therefore no Reason can be showed, but that a rational man meanly understanding
Languages, may sooner understand them, and with less danger mistake them, than
that Law, which (as the Psalmist says) is exceeding broad, and exceeds all
humane sense, Psalm 119.96. 1 Cor. 2.14.
and the most exquisite natural understanding, when (as the Apostle says) The
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned: and being not discerned, or misunderstood, they make all such
mistakers liable to no small punishment, if God should be extreme to mark what
is done amiss: and this not understanding of God's Law, is the error of other
Laws, and the cause of much mischief; for if men understood not the Law of God,
What causes many men to rebel. The Scriptures say more for the right of
kings, then any book in the world. Downing in his discourse of the
Ecclesiastical State, p. 91.
or would believe us that do understand it, I assure my self, many of the
Rebels (such as rebel not out of pride, disobedience, or discontent) are so
conscientious, that they would not so rebel as they do, being seduced through
their ignorance, by the subtletie of the most crafty children of disobedience.

And therefore letting the usual impatience of the furious firebrarnds of
sedition, and the malicious incendiaries of Rebellion, together with those
treaecherous Judasses, that insensibly, lurk in the King's Court, and are more
dangerous both to the Church and State, than those open Rebels that are in the
Parliament House, to lay on me what reproach they please; as some of them being
galled, and now gone, have already done, Ego in bona conscientia teneo,
quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae. August.
I shall believe it in a good conscience, that whosoever shall wittingly
detract from my repute, and unjustly load me with undue disgrace, shall
unwillingly add to my reward; neither shall I ever think, Plus ponderis esse in
alieno convicio, Ambrose.
quam in testimonio meo, that there is more account to be had in the foul
slander of another man's malice, then in the spotless testimony of mine own
conscience: but considering (as Saint Hierome says) that, Apud Christianos non
qui patitur sed qui facit contumeliam, miser est; among Christians, not he that
suffers, but he that offers injuries and reproaches, is wretched; Osor. in
Epist. Reginae Eliz. page 7.
though (as Osorius faith) Multae insidiae principibus a suis domesticis
intenduntur, multae frauds in aula Regia quaestus and compendii gratia
suscipiuntur, multa, partim adulatione and perfidia, partim offensionis
periculosa formidine dissimulantur, ita ut raro inveniantur qui Regibus libere
loqui audeant; many snares are laid for Princes by their own domestique
servants; many deceitful tricks, and cunning plots, are undertaken in the
King's Court for gain and honors sake, and many things partly for fear of
offending, How kings are deluded by their own Courtiers, and the truth
concealed from them. The Authors Resolution with God's Assistance.
and partly through a persidious and false flattery, are dissembled, and the
truth of things is imprisoned from the sight of the King; so that he that sees
with these Courtiers eyes, and hears with their ears, can hardly know the
certain state of his own affairs, especially when their flattering Parasites
shall bear so heavy a hand over the faithful servants, that few of them shall
dare freely to declare the Truth; yet I am resolved to set down the plain face
of Truth, without either flattering of my Royal Master, or fear either of the
Court flatterers hatred, or the Parliamentary Factions cruelty. And though my
eldest Brethren, that are abler than my self, should reprove me, 1 Samuel 17.28.
and say unto me, as Eliab said unto David; yet I will take my staff in my
hand, mine own integrity to uphold me, and my fidelity to my King, and to the
King of kings to protect me, and I will gather a few stones out of the Brook of
living waters, out of the Book of holy Scriptures, and I hope with one of them
to smite the Philistine, The Adversaries of regal Right.
the three-headed Gerion, the Anabaptist, Brownist, and Puritan Rebel, in the
forehead, that he fall to the earth, his head shall be cut off with his own
sword, and the whole army of the uncircumcised Philistines, that is, all the
rest of the wilfully seduced Rebels, that refuse to be un-deceived, and to
accept of his Majesty's grace and pardon, shall fly away, and be destroyed.
And,

The first stone that comes into my hand (which I believe will hit the Bird in
the eye, and be abundantly sufficient to do the deed) is a stone taken out of
the Rock, that appears highest in the Brook, that is Saint Peter, which our
Savior in the judgment of some Fathers, which I quoted in my true Church,
calls a Rock, and in the judgment of most of the Fathers, and the sober
Protestants, (...), 1 Pet. 2.17.
is the Prince of Apostles: for he says, Honor the King; and this one short
sentence truly understood, (though I confess many other may seem more full) is
absolutely sufficient to overthrow all the Anti-Royalists, and to silence all
the Basileu-Mastices, all the opposers of their own Kings, throughout all the
world, especially, if we consider, 1. Who says this, S. Peter. 2. What is
said, Honor the King. 3. To whom he says thus, to every Soul.


1. The Author of these words.
First, The words are the words of Saint Peter, the first in order, the chiefest
for authority, and the greatest for resolution of all the Apostles of Christ,;
and he spoke them as he was inspired by the holy Ghost; therefore we may
believe them, 2 Pet. 1.21.
and we should obey them, or we should fear the judgments of God; for if they
escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape,
Hebr 12.27.
if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven.

2. The Substance of the Precept.
Secondly, The Substance of this precept contains as many parts as there be
words, 1. Who is to be honored, the King. 2. What is that Honor, that is due
unto him.


Which two Points, rightly understood, and duly observed, as they are
enjoined, would make a peaceable Commonwealth, and a most flourishing Kingdom,
without any civil Broiles, or intestine Rebellion, which is the greatest
Plague, and heaviest Curse, that God has ever laid upon any Nation. Lucan l. 1.
Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos. I have therefore resolved (to
prevent this evil, and to diswade us from this miserable mischief) to say
something of these two Points, as may best heal the bleeding Wounds of these
unhappy, and distracted times.

First, It is the most Gracious Promise of our good God to all them, that will
faithfully serve him, I will honor them, that honor me: 1 Samuel 2.30.
and Saint Augustine says, that Sicut verax est in punitione malorum, ita and
in retributione honorum. as he is most certain in his threatenings for the
punishment of the wicked, so he is most faithful in his Promises for rewarding
of the Godly; and that not only for the future, but also in these present
times, 1 Timothy 4.8.
because Godliness has the Promise both of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.

Therefore pious Princes, that are God's Vicegerents here on earth, How kings
have honored those that honored God. 1. With Dignities.
and his Deputies to discharge his Promise, have accordingly honored them,
that have by their upright life, and indefatigable pains honored God in his
Church, with double honor.

1. With titular Dignities, honorable Places, and considerable Eminencies in
the Commonwealth, as conceiving it not unworthy, to make the greater lights of
the Church to be not of least esteem in the Civil State; but judging it most
convenient, that they, whom God had entrusted with the Souls of men, should
with all confidence be entrusted with their personal Actions, and with the
Employments of the greatest trust.

2. With competent means, 2. With Maintenance.
in some sort answerable to support their Dignities, without which means, as
the Poet says, Virtus nisi cum re, vilior. alga, so honorable Titles, without
any subsistence, is more contemptible then plain Beggary; therefore, out of
their piety to God, and bounty to the Church, they have conferred many fair
Lordships, and other large Endowments upon the best deserving Members of
Christ's Ministers.

But, as the good Husbandman had no sooner sown his pure Wheat, Matthew. 13.24.
(...),
but immediately Inimicus homo, the evil and envious man, superseminavit
zizania, sowed his poisonous Tares amongst them; so God had no sooner thus
honored his Servants, but presently the Devil, which is (...). 2 Cor. 4.4.
the God of this World, began to throw dirt in their faces, and to deprive them
of both these honors: for,

1. He stirred up ignorant men, of small learning but of great spirits, of no
fidelity but of much hypocrisy, that, as Pope Leo wrote unto Theodosius, Leo
Papa Epist. 23. What the factious Preachers pretended.
Privatas causas pietatis agunt obtentu, and under a fair pretext did play the
part of Aesop's Fox, who being ashamed that his tail was cut off, began to
inveigh against the unseemly burdensome tails of all the other Foxes, and to
persuade them to cut theirs off, that so by the common calamity he might be the
better excused for his obscenity; for so they cried down all Learning, as
profane, they railed at the Scholemen, they scorned the Fathers, and esteemed
nothing, but that nothing which they had themselves: and although they
professed to the Vulgar, that they aimed at no end but the purity of the
Gospel, they desired nothing but the amendment of life, and reformation of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and hated nothing but the pride and covetousness of
the Bishops, and the other dignified Prelates, which stopped their mouths, and
imprisoned the liberty of their Conscience; yet the truth is, that because
their worth was not answerable to their ambition, to enable them to climb up
to some height of honor, their envy was so great, that they would fain pull
down all those, that had ascended, and exceeded them.

And therefore, with open mouths, that would not be silenced, they exclaimed
against Episcopacy; and as the Apostle says, spoke evil of Dignities,
employing all their strength, like wicked birds, to defile their own nests, to
disrobe us of all honor, and to leave us naked; yea, and as much as in them
lay, What the Factious aim at.
to make us odious and to stink (as the Israelites said to Moses) in the eyes
of the people. Then

2. As Plutarch tells us, that a certain Sicilian Gnatho, Plutarch. in lib.
(...).
and Philoxenus the son of Erixis, that were slaves unto their gutts, and make
a God of their bellies, to cause all the other guests, to leath their meat,
that they alone might devour all the dainties, did use Narium mucum in catinis
emungere; so do these men spit all their poison against the Revenues of the
Bishops, and that little maintenance that is left unto the Ministers, and are
as greedy to devour the same themselves, as the dogs, that gape after every bit
they see us put into our mouths; for, so I heard a whelp of that litter, making
a bitter invective in the House of Commons against Bishops, Deans, and
Chapters, and the greatness of their Revenue; Doctor Burges
and concluding, that all they should be degraded, their means should be
sequestered, and distributed all without any diminution of what they now
possessed, but with the restitution of all Impropriations unto himself, and
the rest of his factious fellow Preachers; which speech, as it pleased but few
in the latter clause, so no doubt it had fauters enough in the former part;
when we see this little remnant of our forefathers bounty, this testimony of
our Princes piety, is the only mote that sticks in their eye, the undigested
morsel in their stomachs, and the only bait that they gape after; for, did
our King yield this garment of Christ to be parted among their Soldiers, and
this revenue of the Church to be disposed of by the Parliament, I doubt not but
all quarrels about the Church would soon end, and all other strife about
Religion would be soon composed.

What many men would willingly undergo to procure peace.
But, would this end all our civil Wars, would the unbishoping of our Prelates
bring rest unto our Prince, and the taking away of their estates settle the
State of the Commonwealth, and bring peace and tranquillity unto this Kingdom?
If so, we could be well contented for our own parts, to be sacrificed for the
safety of the people; for though we dare not say with Saint Paul, that we could
wish our selves (...), or separated from Christ for our Countrymen; yet I can
say with a sincere heart, (...). Romans 9.6.
that I believe many of us could be well contented our fortunes should be
confiscated, and our lives ended, so that could procure the peace of the
Church, which is infinitely troubled, redeem His Majesty's honor, which is so
deeply wounded, and preserve this our native Country from that destruction, The
abolishing of Episcopacy would not satisfy the Factious.
which this unparalled Rebellion does so infallibly threaten: but the truth
is, that the abolishing of Episcopacy, root and branch, the reducing of the
best to the lowest rank, and the bringing of the Clergy to the basest condition
of servility, to be such as should not be worthy to eat with the dogs of their
flock, as Job speaks, will not do the deed; because, as the Satyrist says,
nemo repent fit turpissimus, but as virtues, so vices have their increase by
use and progression, Juven. Sat. 2.
and primum quodque flagitium gradus est ad proximum, and every heinous offense
is as iron chain, to draw on another. For, as Seneca says, nunquam usque adeo
temperatae cupiditates sunt, Seneca de Clem lib. 1.
ut in eo quod contigit desinant, sed gradus a magnis ad majora fit, and spes
improbissimas complectuntur insperata assecuti: our desires are never so far
temperated, that they end in that which is obtained, but the gaining of one
thing is a step to seek another: And therefore, cum publicum jus omne positum
sit in sacris, as Plato says, how can it be, that they which have profaned
all sacred things, Plato de legibus lib. 12.
and have degraded their Ministers, should not also proceed to depose their
Magistrates? if you be diffident to believe the same; let the Annals of France,
Germany, England and Scotland be revised, and you shall find that Charles the
fifth was then troubled with War, when the Bishops were turmoyled, and tumbled
out of their Seas: and Scoti uno eodemque momento numinis and principis jugum
excusserunt, nec justum magistratum agnoverunt ullum, ex quo primum tempore
sacris and sacerdotibus bellum indixerunt: and the Scots at one and the
self-same moment did shake off the yoke of their obedience both unto their God,
and to their King; neither did they acknowledge any for their just Magistrate
after they had once warred against Religion and religious men, Blacvod. Apolog.
pro regibus page ^3.
which were their Priests and Bishops, says Blacvodaeus and in Fran e (says
he) the same men were enemies unto the King that were adversaries unto the
Priests; quia politicam dominationem nunquam ferent, qui principatum Ecclesiae
sustulerunt, nec mirum si Regibus obloquantur, qui sacerdotes flamma and ferro
persequuntur; because (as I have showed at large in my Grand Rebellion) they
will never endure the Political Magistrate to have any rule, The haters of the
Bishops ever enemies unto kings.
when they have shaken off the Ecclesiastical government; neither is it any
wonder that they should slander, rage against, and reject their King, when they
persecute their Bishops with fire and sword.

And I think* the sad aspect of this distracted Kingdom at this time, makes
this point so clear, that I need not add any more proof to beget faith in any
sober man; for does not all the World see, that as soon as the seditious and
traiterous faction in this unhappy Parliament, had cast most of the Bishops,
How soon the Faction fell upon the King, after they had cast off their Bishops.
the gravest and the greatest of all, with Joseph into the dungeon, (a thing
that no story can show the like president in any age) and had voted them all,
contrary to all right, out of their indubitable right to sit in the House of
Peers, (an act indeed so full of incivility, as has no small affinity with
that of the Gergesites, who for love of their swine, drove not out, (...).
Matthew. 8.34.
but desired Christ to depart out of their coasts:) they presently began to
pluck the sword out of the Kings hand, and ende^voured to make their Sovereign
in many things more servile, then any of his own Subjects, so that he should be
gloriosissime servilis, as Saint Augustine says, that Homer was suavissime
vanus, and to effect this, you see, how they have torn in pieces all his
Rights, they have trampled his Prerogatives under foot, they have as much as
they could, laid his honor in the dust; and they have with violent war, and
virulent malice, sought to vanquish and subdue their own most gracious
Sovereign, which cannot choose but make any Christian heart to bleed, to see
such unchristian, and such horrid unheard of things attempted to be done by
any, that would take upon him the name of a Christian.

Therefore to manifest my duty to God, and my fidelity to my King, I have
undertaken this hard, and to the Rebels unpleasant labor, The Rebels for the
punishment of our sins may prosper for a time, but at last they shall be most
surely destroyed. Prove. 8.15. Psalm. 68.30. Joshua 9 16. Psalm. 91.16.
to set down the Rights of Kings: wherein I shall not be afraid of the Rebels
power, neither would I have any man to fear them; for however, Victores,
victique cadunt, here may be a vicissitude of good success many times on both
sides, to prolong the war for our sins, and they may prosper in some places;
yet that is but nubecula quaedam, a transient cloud, or summer storm, that will
soon pass away; for we may assure our selves they shall not prevail, because
God has said it, By me Kings do reign, and He will give strength unto his
King, and exalt the horn of his Anointed; He will scatter the people that
delight in war, and make the hearts of the cursed Canaanites to melt, and their
joints to tremble; but, He will satisfy the King with long life, and show him
his salvation.

CHAP. II.
Shows what Kings are to be honored; the institution of Kings to be
immediately from God; the first Kings; the three chiefest rights to Kingdoms;
the best of the three rights; how Kings came to be electted; and how, contrary
to the opinion of Master Seldom, Aristocracie and Democracie issued out of
Monarchy.

TO proceed then, you see the person that by Saint Peter's precept is to be
honored, to be the King, and what King was that? but (as you may see in the
beginning of this epistle) the King of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bythinia; and what manner of Kings were they, I pray you? I presume you will
confess they were no Christians, but it may be as bad as Nero, who was then
their Emperor, and most cruelly tyrannizing over the Saints of God, What Kings
are to be honored.
gave a very bad example to all other his substitute Kings and Princes to do
the like; and yet these holy Christians are commanded to honor them. And
therefore, 1. Heathen, Pagan, wicked and tyrannical Kings are to be truly
honored by God's precept. 2. Religious, just, and Christian Kings are to have
a double honor, because there is a double charge imposed upon them: as


The double charge of all Christian Kings. 1. To preserve peace.
1. To execute justice and judgment among their people; to preserve equity and
peace, both from intestine broils, and foreign Foes; which careful government
brings plenty and prosperity in all external affairs unto the whole Kingdom:
and this they do as Kings, which is the common duty of all the Kings of the
earth.

2. To protect the Church.
2. To maintain true Religion, to promote the faith of Christ, and to be the
guardians and foster-fathers unto the Church and Churchmen, which tie their
people unto God to make them spiritually and everlastingly happy; and this duty
is laid upon them, as they are Christian Kings: and therefore in regard of this
accession of charge, they ought to have an accession of honor, more then all
other Kings whatsoever.

1. Then I say, that the Heathen, Pagan, wicked and tyrannical Kings, such as
were Nero, Dioclesian, and Julian, among the Christians, or Ahab and Manasses
among the Jews, or Antiochus, Dionysius, and the rest of the Sicilian Tyrants
among the Gentiles, are to be honored, served, and obeyed of all their
Subjects, and that in three especial respects.

1. All Kings to be honored in three respects.
1. Of their institution, which is the immediate ordinance of God. 2. Of God's
precept, which enjoineth us to honor them. 3. Of all good men's practice:
whether they be 1. Jews. 2. Gentiles. 3. Christians.

1. The institution of Kings, is immediately from God. Justin lib. 1. Herodot.
lib. 1. Clio.
1. Justin tells us, that Principio rerum gentium, nationumque imperium penes
reges erat, from the beginning of things, that is, the beginning of the world,
the rule and government of the people of all Nations was in the hands of Kings;
Quos ad honoris fastigium non ambitio popularis, sed spectata inter bonos
moderatio provehebat. And Herodotus sets down, how Deioces the first King of
the Medes had his beginning. And Homer also names the Kings that were in, and
before the wars of Troy. But the choice of Deioces, and some others about that
time and after, Cicero in Officiis.
whereof Cicero speaks, may give some color unto our rebellious Sectaries,
to make the royal Dignity (...), a humane ordinance; therefore I must go before
Herodotus, and look further then blind Homer could see: and from the first King
that ever was, I will truly lay down the first institution and succession of
Kings, and how times have wrought by corruption, the alteration of their right,
and diminution of their power, which both God and nature had first granted unto
them.

God the first King. (...). 1 Timothy 1.17. Apoc. 19.16.
And I hope no Basileu-mastix, no hater of Kings, nor opposer of the royal
government can deny, but, that God himself was the first King that ever the
world saw, that was the King of ages before all worlds, and the King of Kings
ever since there were any created Kings. The next King that I read of was Adam,
whom Cedrenus styles the Catholic Monarch; (...): a mighty King of a large
Territory, of great Dominion, and of unquestionable right unto his Kingdom,
which was the whole World, the Earth, the Seas, and all that were therein. For,
the great King of all Kings said unto him, Genesis 1.28. Adam the first King of
all men.
Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing, that moves upon the earth. Which is a very large Commission,
when dominare, is more then regere; and therefore his royalty is so plain, that
none but wilful ignorants will deny it to be divinum institutum, a divine
institution, and affirm it, as they do, to be humanum inventum, a humane
ordination, when you know there were no men to choose him, and you see God
himself does appoint him, and after the flood the Empire of Noah was divided
betwixt his three sons; Japheth reigned in Europe, Johan. Beda. de jure Regum.
p. 4.
Sem in Asia, and Cham in Africa.

Yet I must confess, the first Kingdom that is spoken of by that name, is the
Kingdom of Nimrod, who notwithstanding is not himself termed King, Genesis 10.9.
but in the Scripture phrase a mighty hunter, because he was not only a great
King, but also a mighty Tyrant, or oppressor of his people in all his Kingdom;
or as I rather conceive it, because he was the first usurper that incroached
upon his neighbors rights to enlarge his own dominions: and the first king
that I find by that name in the Scripture was Amraephel, king of Shinar, with
whom we find eight other Kings named in the same chapter. Genesis 14.1.


But we are not to contest about words, or to strive about the wind, when the
Scripture does first give this name unto them: the plain truth is that, which
we are to enquire after; and so it is manifest, there were Kings ever since
Adam and so named ever since Noah's flood; for Melchizedech, which in the
judgment of Master Seldom, Broughton, and others, was Sem the eldest son of
Noah, (though mine own mind is set down otherwise) was King of Salem; and
Justin tells us, that long before Ninus, which was the son of Nimrod, there
were many other Kings, as Vexores King of Egypt, and Tanais King of Scythia,
(...) Euripides de Cyclop. Genesis 14.14.
and the like; and as reason shows us, that every one, qui regit alios Rex
est, so every master of a family that rules his own household is a petty King,
as we commonly say to this very day, every man is a King in his own house; and
as their families were the greater, so were they the greater Kings; so Abraham
hand three hundred and eighteen servants, that were able men for the War in his
own house: and therefore the inhabitants of the Land tell him, Princeps Dei es
inter nos, thou art a Prince of God, that is, a great ruler amongst us: and yet
the greatest of these rulers were rather reguli then reges, Kings of some
Cities, or small Territories, and of no large dominion, as those thirty and one
Kings which Joshua vanquished, does make it plain. Josh. 12.14. Seldom in his
Titles of honor, cap. 1.


But Master Seldom confesses that civil societies, beginning in particular
families, the heads thereof ruled as kings: and as the World increased, or
these kings incroached upon their neighbors, so their Kingdoms were enlarged.

Kings therefore they were, and they were kings from the beginning. But how
they came to be kings, or what right they had to regal power, from whence their
authority is derived 1. Whether God ordained it: or, 2. Themselves assumed it:
3. The people conferred it upon them:
herein lies all the question. To which I must briefly answer, The chiefest
rights to kingdoms either of three ways.
that the right of all kings which have any right unto their kingdoms, is
principally either, 1. By birth: or, 2. By the sword: or 3. By choice.
whereof The last is and may be just and good. The second is so without
question: but, The first is most just, and so best of all. For,


1. The best right, whereby the Patriarchs and all the rest of the posterity of
Adam enjoyed their royalty, was that which God has appointed; that is, 1. The
best right, without contradiction, is by inheritance. Genesis 4.7. Genesis 25.31.
the right of primogeniture, whereby the elder was by the law of nature, to
reign and rule over the younger; as God says unto Cain, though he was never so
wicked an hypocrite, unto thee shall be the desire of thy brother, and thou
shall rule over him, though he was never so godly and sincere a server of God:
which made Jacob so earnestly desirous to purchase the birthright, or the
right of primogeniture from his brother. And

2. When the rightful kings became with Nimrod to be unjust Tyrants, 2. The
right by conquest is a just and a good right.
then God that is not tied to his Vicegerent any longer then he pleases, but
has right and power Paramount to translate the rule, and transfer the dominion
of his People to whom he will; Psalm. 89.44. So the Israelites enjoyed the
kingdom of Canaan, and David the territories of them that he subdued, etc.
Esdras. 1.2. Esaias. 45.1, 2. Dan. 2. etc 4.
has oftentimes thrown down the mighty from their seat, and given away their
crowns and kingdoms unto others, that were more humble and meek, or some
other way fitter to effect his divine purpose, as he did the kingdom of Saul
unto David, and Belshazzar's unto Cyrus; and this he does most commonly by the
power of the sword, when the Conqueror shall make his strength to become the
Law of justice, and his ability to hold it, to become his right of enjoying it;
for so he gave the Kingdoms of the earth to Cyrus, Alexander, Augustus, and the
like Kings and Emperors, that had no other right to their Dominions, but what
they purchased with the edg of their swords; which notwithstanding must needs
be a very good right, as the same comes from God, which is the God of war, and
gives the victory unto Kings; Psalm. 144.10.
when as the Poet says, -- Victrix causa Deo placuit. And he deposes his
Vicegerents, and translateth the government of their Kingdoms, as he sees
cause, and to whom he pleases.

3. The right of elective kings, and how they came to be elected.
3. When either the Kings neglected their duty, and omitted the care of their
People so far as that the People knew not that they had any Kings, or who had
any right to be their Kings, or upon the incursion of invading Foes, the
Nations being exceedingly multiplied, and having no Prince to protect them, did
change the orderly course of right, belonging unto the firstborn (which their
rude and salvage course of life had obliterated from their minds) unto the
election and choice of whom they thought the better, and the abler men to expel
their enemies, and to maintain justice among themselves; so the Medes being
oppressed with the insolences and rapines of enemies and the greater man,
said, it cannot be that in this corruption and lewdness of manners we shall
long enjoy our Country: and therefore (...). Herodot. lib. 1.
Let us appoint over us a King, that our Land may be governed by good Laws.
(...). And we turning our selves to our own affairs, need not be oppressed by
the rage and violence of the lawless: and finding by their former experience of
him, that Deioces was the justest man amongst them, they chose him for his
equity to be their King; which is the first elective King that I do read of;
and Cicero says, Cicero in Offic. page 322.
Mihi quidem non apud Medos solum, sed etiam apud majores nostros, justitiae
fruendae causa videntur olim been morati reges constituti: even as Justin said
before. And when the People do thus make choice of their King, it is most true
which Roffensis, Roffensis de potestate Papae, fol. 283.
and our most learned Divines do say, that Licet communicatio potestatis
quandoque sit per consensum hominum, potestas tamen ipsa immediate est a Deo,
cujus est potestas; though the power be sometimes conferred by the consent of
men* yet it is immediately given from God, whose power it is. Spalat. tem. 2.
529.
Et communitas nihil sui confert regibus (says Spalat.) nisi ad summum
personam determinet; and potius personam applicat divinae potestati, quam
divinam potestatem personae: and ita Winton. Resp. ad Matthew. Tort. fol. 384.
says, Christi Domini, non Christi populi sunt.

But as their justice and goodness moved the People to exalt them to this
height of Dignity; Why kings were rejected by the people.
so either their own tyranny, when change of place did change their manners, or
their Peoples inconstancy, that are never long pleased with their governors,
caused them to be deposed again, and many times to be murdered by those hands,
that exalted them

How the Aristocracy and Democracy issued out of Monarchy.
Then the People perceiving the manifold evils that flow from the want of
government, do erect other governments unto themselves, and rather then they
will endure the miserable effects of an Anarchy, they resign their hurtful
liberty, and their total power sometimes into the hands of few of the best of
the flock, which we call Aristocracy or optimacy, and sometimes into the hands
of many, which we call Democracy, or a popular state. In all which Elections of
Magistrates, Each form of government lawful.
and resignations of the Peoples power voluntarily to the hands of their
governors, call them what you will, Senate, Consuls, Duke, Prince or King,
thoug I dare not any way reject any of them as a form utterly disallowed and
condemned of God; yet comparing them together, I dare boldly say, the farther
men go from God's first institution, Democracy the worst kind of Government.
the more corruption we shall find in them; and therefore it must needs follow
that Democracy is the next degree to Anarchy, and Aristocracy far worse then
Monarchy; for though it may seem very unreasonable, that one man should have
all the power; -- toto liber in orb
Solus Caesar erit --
And many plausible reasons may be alleged for the rule of the Nobles, Inter
parts plebemque certamina exercere modo turbulenti tribuni, modo consules
praevalidi; and in urbe ac foro tentamenta civilium bellorum; mox e plebe
infima C. Marius, and nobilium saevissimus L. Sylla victam armis libertatem in
dominationem verterunt, Tac. l. 2. hist. P. 16. usque 28. Prove. 28.2.
Ecclesiast. 10.16.
or of the People; yet the experience, that the Roman State had in those
miserable Civil Wars, that so frequently, and so extremely afflicted them,
after they had put down their Kings, (as when Caius Marius, the meanest of the
Commonalty, and Lucius Sylla the cruellest of all the Nobility, destroyed their
liberty, and rooted out all property, by their Civil faction, and the
assistance of an illegal Militia, and a multitude of unruly volunteers) and the
fatal miscarriages of many businesses, and the bad successes of their Armies,
when both the Consuls went forth Generals, together with the want of unity,
secrecy, and expedition, (which cannot be so well preserved amongst many) do
sufficiently show, how defective these Governments are* and how far beneath the
excellency of Monarchy, as it is most fully proved in the unlawfullness of
Subjects taking up arms against their Sovereign; and more especially by the
wisest of men, that tells us plainly, that for the transgressions of a Land,
many are the Princes thereof, but by a man of understanding and knowledge the
State thereof shall be prolonged: and in another place he cries Woe to that
land whose king is but a child, either in knowledge, or in years; for that
during his infancy, and the want of ability, the government will be managed by
many others, which can produce nothing else but woes to that Commonwealth; and
therefore Saint Augustine says, that if they who do bear Rule in Democracy, do
corrupt justice, a good powerful man may lawfully change that Democraticall
government into an Aristocraticall, Aug. de l. arbit. l. 1. c. 6.
or Monarchical; but you shall never find it in any Christian Author, that
any man, be he never so good, never so powerful, may lawfully, upon any
occasion, or pretense, change the Monarchy into an Aristocracy, or Democracy;
because it is lawful for us to reduce things from the worst and remotest state
to the better, and the nearer to the original form: but, not from the better
to a worser, and remoter from its original institution, which is then soundest,
when it is nearest to its first ordination.

CHAP. III.
Shows, the Monarchical Government to be the best form; the first
Government that ever was; agreeable to Nature, wherein God founded it;
consonant to God's own Government; the most universally received throughout the
world; the immediate and proper Ordinance of God, when the other Governments
began; how allowed by God; the quality of elective Kingdoms, not primarily the
institution of God; and the nature of the People.

THerefore it is apparent, that of all sorts of Government, The Monarchical
government best.
the Monarchy is absolutely the best, (and of all Monarchs, the best right is
that which is hereditary) because it is, 1. The first in Nature. 2. The prime
and principal Ordinance of God.
For,

1. Reason. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, lib. 1.
1. Though Master Seldom says, that naturally all men in oeconomick rule, being
equally free, and equally possessed of superiority in those ancient propagations
of mankind, even out of Nature it self, and that inbred sociableness which
every man has, as his character of civility, a popular state first raised it
self, which by own judgment afterward was converted into a Monarchy; and in
the fourth page of his Book, rejects the opinion of great Philosophers, that
affirm with Saint Austin, the first of the three Governments to be a Monarchy,
and affirms possitively, that the Monarchy has its original out of a
Democracy, as Aristocracy likewise had, yet I say, that this contradicts his
first Thesis, where he asserteth, that the husband, father, and master of the
house ruled as a King: and therefore the Monarchy must needs be before either
Aristocracy, or Democracy: and where citing Pausanias, that In Booeticorum
initio, says, (...). Monarchy ancienter then any other Government.
All Greece was anciently under Kings, and no Democracies; he is driven to
confess, page 5. that a family, being in Nature before a public Society, or
Commonwealth was an exemplary Monarchy, and in that regard Monarchy is to be
acknowledged ancienter then any other state; and so, not one^y the Orthodoxal
people, but the Pagans also had this notion thereof by the instinct of Nature;
Monarchical government most agreeable to Nature.
for the Cappadocians being vanquished by the Romans, did instantly request
them to give them a King, protesting, that they were not otherwise able to
maintain themselves; and so most other Nations esteemed that true, which
Herodian says, that as Jupiter has command over all the gods, so, in
imitation of him, it is his pleasure, that the Empire of men should be
Monarchical.

And indeed, it is concluded by the common consent of the best Philosophers,
that the Laws of Nature lead us to a Monarchy, Monarchy founded in Nature.
as when among all Creatures both animate, and inanimate, we do always find
one that has the pre-eminence above all the rest of his kind, as among the
Beasts, the Lion, among the Fowls the Eagle, among Grains, the Wheat, among
Drink^ the Wine, among Spices the Baulme, among the Planets the Sun; and all
the best Divines conclude, the Monarchical government to be the most lively
image, and representation of the divine regiment and government of God,
Consonant to the Divine government.
who, as sole Monarch rules and guides all things; and therefore we find all
the Nations of greatest renown lived under the Royal Government, as the
Scythians, Aethiopians, Indians, Assyrians, Medes, Egyptians, Bactrians,
Armenians, Macedonians, Jews, and Romans first and last; and at this day the
most famous people live under this form, as the English, French, Spaniards,
Polonians, Danes, Muscovites, The Government of the most famous Nations
Monarchical -- Summo dulcius unum stare loco, sociisque comes discordia
regnis, Statius Thebaid. 1.
Tartars, Turks, Abissines, Moors, Agiamesques, Zagathinians, Cathaians, yea,
and the Salvage people lately discovered in the West Indies, as being guided
thereto by the rules of Nature* do all of them in a manner live under the
Government of Kings; and I believe the Apostle does specially mean the Regal
Government, though he speaks plurally of powers, as understanding the same of
many Kings, because he speaks but of one (...), one sword, which being
wrested out of the hand of the King, and put amongst many, would make them all,
like mad men, fall out and fight, which of them should bear it, when one Sword
can never be well guided by many hands; and therefore I think it is a madness
indeed for any people to be weary of that government which God first ordained,
which is most agreeable unto Nature, most consonant to God's government, most
acceptable to God himself, and most profitable unto men, and to affect a late
new invented government, full of all dangers and inconveniences.

A family is a small kingdom, and a kingdom a great family.
Therefore it is apparent that Monarchy is the first Ordinance of all
governments; a family being nothing else but a small Kingdom, wherein the
paterfamilias had Regal power, and potestatem vitae and necis, even over his
own children, as I have elsewhere showed in the example of Abraham, and of
other Heathens, that justly executed their own sons; and a Kingdom being
nothing else but a great family, where the King has paternal power, and more
then fathers now have, because of the great abuse that diverse fathers
committed, while they had their plenary authority: therefore it was thought fit
to abridge them of that pristine power, and to place it all in the hands of the
more public father.

And to make this yet more plain unto the World, I would fain know of these
Democratical men, 1. When 2. How
their Democracy, and Aristocracy had their being, and came first in use.

I have showed the age of Monarchy to be from Adam.

-- primaque ab origin mundi,
Ad mea perpetuum deduxi tempora Regem.
And I cannot remember that any Democracy or Aristocracy was in all the
Assyrian Monarchy, which notwithstanding lasted above a thousand years; When
Aristocracies and Democracies began.
for the Aristocracies of Greece, alas, they are but of yesterday, of no age,
long after Homers time, which yet lived but about the time of Jephte Judge of
Israel, and besides, I will not believe, -- Quicquid Graecia mendax
Audet in historiis. --
And for the Democracy of Rome, Titus Livius shows when it was first hatched,
after the expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus^; if therefore you will believe
Tertullian, that Id verius quod prius, you must needs give the precedence of
all governments unto Monarchy.

But that which is more considerable is to understand, how these birds flitted
out of the nest of Monarchy? Our Savior says, Every plant which my Father
planted not, shall be rooted up* that he planted Monarchy, I have made it
plain; Matthew. 15.13.
but when this Vine began to grow wild and instead of grapes to bring forth
bitter clusters, that is, oppression instead of justice; What caused the change
of Monarchy.
the people grew weary of God's Ordinance, and loath to be contained within the
bounds of obedience, when they found strength and opportunity, they withstood
their lawful but degenerated Kings, and then they deposed them from their
estates and deprived them of their lives; so that as the Poet says, Ad generum
Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci Juvenal Satyr. 10.

Descendunt reges, and sicca morte tyranni.
And thinking to find a better way, then that which they found so thorny, and
a better government then that which formerly they found so bad, they elected
those men, whom they thought would make them happy, The unconstancy of the
people in the choice of their Governors.
sometimes more, and sometimes fewer, as their disposition was, to be their
Governors: so after the expulsion of Tarquinius the Romans chose two Consuls,
and these giving not a plenary content unto the People, they added the Tribunes
to bridle the disorders of the Consuls, and when all this would not satisfy
their unsatiable expectation, they must have their Decemviros, and in great
dangers their Dictator, then comes the Triumvirat, of Antony, Lepidus, and
Augustus, The Government never settled till it came, as all things in nature,
(...), to Monarchy.
who at last takes upon him the name of an Emperor, but the full power of a
King, and governs all as the sole Monarch: thus they ran in a maze, and turned
round like a wheel: and I should but weary my Reader to trace the Greek
Histories, to set down the state of Athens under the thirty Tyrants, or of the
Lacedaemonians, under those Ephori, that bore a fair show to restrain their
Kings, Lacedaemoniorum aristocratia ex duobus Regibus, quinque Ephoris, octo
and viginti senatoribus composita. 1 Samuel 2.14.15. Chap. 8.11.
but were indeed a scourge and plague unto the people; so that in truth the
remedy proved far worse then the disease, excessit medicina modum, and the
change of Government never brought any other good, but an exchange of miseries,
the greater for the lesser, unto the people, as for that one rape of Lucrece by
Tarquinius, to undergo a thousand greater insolences under the new erected
Government of the Consuls and Tribunes; and the Israelites for preventing the
snatching of the flesh out of their pots, by the sons of Eli, and growing weary
of the sons of Samuel, to have a Saul, that shall tear their own flesh in
pieces, and take their sons and their daughters for his vassals.

2. Reason that Monarchy is the best form of Government.
2. As the hereditary Monarch is the first kind of Government, so it is the
principal and best government; because it is the immediate Ordinance of God,
that he set down for the Government of his People; for this was ordained by God
himself, and so continued among his people, even in an hereditary way, unless
the same God designed another person by those Prophets, that he inspired for
that purpose; as it was in the case of David, Solomon, and Jehu; and it is
certain, that the wisests of men cannot devise a better Form of Government then
God ordained: therefore the choice of one, or more, made by the People to be
their King or Governor, cannot be (if not without sin) yet I am sure, without
folly; but seeing, as our Savior says, a Sparrow cannot light upon the ground
without the providence of our heavenly Father: so I must confess; Matthew. 10.29.
-- haec non sine numine divum Eveniunt. This election of Kings and change of
the first Ordinance happend not without God's providence, either for the
Tyranny of the evil Kings, or the punishment of the rebellious people: and
therefore as Moses for the hardness of those men's hearts that hated their
Wives, to prevent a greater mischief, either continual fighting, or secret
murdering one another, suffered them to give their Wives a bill of divorcement,
Deuteronomy. 24.1. Matthew. 19.8.
(but as our Savior says) Non erat sic ab initio, it was not any primary
Ordinance of God, but a permissive toleration of the lesser evil; so when the
people out of their froward disposition to God's first Institution of the Regal
right, How God allowed the Aristocratical and Democratical Government, and why,
and presuming to like better of their own choice, do alter this hereditary
Right and divine Ordinance into the election of one or more Governors, either
annual, as among the ancient Romans, or vital, as it is in the present state of
the Venetians; God, out of his infinite lenity to our humane frailty, rather
then his people should be without Government, and so many heinous sins should
go unpunished, does permit, and it may be allow and approve the same, though
sometimes not without great anger and indignation for our contempt and distaste
of his heavenly institution; Deuteronomy. 33, 5,
as when the Israelites, weary of the Judges that succeeded Moses, who was a
king in Jesurun, and that God raised still to rule as Kings amongst them, to
make War against their enemies, and to judge them according to the Law in the
time of peace, which are the two chiefest Offices of all kings, 1 Samuel 8, 5.
desired to have a king, to judge them like all the Nations; not a king simply
(for so they had indeed though not in name) but a king like all the Nations,
that is, a king of a more absolute power then the Judges had, as Samuel
shows, and they seem contented therewith: God sent them a King in his wrath,
because they had rejected him, that he should not reign over them; that is,
verse. 7.
they had refused to submit themselves to his Ordinance, and to obey the Kings
that he appointed over them, but they must needs be their own Carvers and have
a King of their own election, or such a king invested with a more absolute
power) as they desired, though notwithstanding they did most hypocritically
seem to desire none but whom God appointed over them; and therefore perceiving
their own error, and seeing their own offense by the anger that God showed,
they confessed their fault and did always thereafter accept of their kings by
succession, The lamentable success of the first elective kings.
but only when their Prophets by the sacred Ointment had ordained another by
God's special designation.

But I cannot find it in all the Scripture, or in any other Writings
authentical, where God appointed or commanded any people to be the ^h^esers of
their kings, but rather to accept of him, and submit themselves to him, whom
the Lord had placed over them. For I would very fain know, as Roffensis
speaks, Roffen. de potest. Papae, 282
An potestas Adami in filios ac nepotes, adeoque omnes ubique homines, ex
consensu filior um ac nepotum dependet, an a solo Deo ac nature prostuit^ And
if this Authority of the Father be from God without the consent of his
Children, then certainly the authority of Kings is both natural and divine
immediately from God and not from any consent or allowance of men; and Pineda
says* Pineda de rebus Solo l. 2. c. 2
Nusquam invenio Regem aliquem Judaeorum populi suffragiis creatum quin si
primus ille erat, qui designaretur a Deo, vel a Propheta e^t Dei jussus vel
sort, vel alia ratione quam Deus indicasset. Neither do I remember any one
that was chosen king by the Children of Israel, but only Abimel^^h the bastard
son of Gedeon, and (as some say) Jeroboam that made Israel to sin; and the
Scripture tells you how unjustly they entered, how wickedly they reigned,
Strange that the People should bestow the greatest favor or dignity on earth.
Esaias 42.8.
and how lamentably the first, that was without question the Creature of the
people, ended both his life and his reign; to teach us how unsuccesful it is to
have other makers of kings then he that is the King of kings, and says, He
will not give his glory unto another, nor hold them guiltless that intrude into
his Throne, to bestow Sovereignty and create kings at their pleasures, when as
he professes, it belongs unto him not to the People, to say, Ye are Gods,
and to place his own Viceroy to govern his own People.

And therefore though I do not wonder to find Aristotel of that opinion, Vt
reges populi suffragio constarent, That Kings should be elected by the People,
Ar^st pol l. 3.
and that it was the manner of the Barbarians to accept of their kings by
succession, Quales sors tulerit, non virtutis opinione probatos, The nature of
the people. Blaovod p. 61. and as T. Live. says, Aut servit humiliter, aut
dominatur superbe.
such as nature gave them, and not those which were approved by the people for
their virtues, because he was ignorant of the divine Oracles; yet me thinks it
is very strange that men continually versed in God's Word, and knowing the
nature of the people, which as one says, Semper ager est, semper insanus,
semper furore and intemperiis agitur, and specially reading the story of times,
should be transported with such dreams and fopperies, that the people should
have any hand in the election of their kings: for if you briefly run over most
of the kings of this World, you shall scare find one of a thousand to be made
by the suffrage of the people: Of all the kings of the world, very few made by
the suffrage of the People.
for Nimrod got his kingdom by his strength, Ninus enlarged the same by his
sword, and left the same unto his heirs; from the Assyrians the Monarchy was
translated to the Medes and Persians, and I pray you how? by the consent of the
people, or by the edg of the sword? From the Persians it was conferred to
Alexander, but the same way; and it continued among his successors by the same
right: and Romulus, Ad sua qui domitos deduxit stagra Quirites. Did not obtain
his power by the suffrage of his people; and if you look over the States of
Greece, we shall find one Timondas which obtained the Scepter of the
Corinthians, and Pittacus the Government of the Mytilenians by the suffrage of
the people; but for the Athenians, Laecedemonians Sicyoni, Thebanes, Epirots,
and Macedons, among whom the Regal Dignity flourished a far longer time then
the popular rule, Idem. page 63.
Non optione populi sed nascendi condition regnatum est, their kings reigned
not by the election of the people, but by the condition of their birth: and
what shall we say of the Parthians, Indians, Africans, Tartars, Arabians,
Aethiopians, Numidians, Muscovites, Celtans, Spaniards, French, English and of
many other kingdoms that were obtained, either by gift, Quintus Curtius.
as Abdolonimus received his kingdom of Alexander, Juba the kingdom of Numidia
from Augustus, and the French king got the kingdoms of the Naples and Sicily;
or by will, as the Romans had the kingdoms of Egypt, Bithinia, Pergamus, and
Asia, or by Arms, Claud. de 4. cons, Honorii.
as many of the aforesaid kingdoms were first gotten, and were always
transmitted afterward to posterity by the hereditary right of blood. And the
Poet could say, -- terrae dominos pelagique futuros
Immenso decuit rerum de principe nasci.
It behoved the Kings of the earth to be born of Kings.

Besides we must all confess, that the King is the Father of people, the
Husband of the Commonwealth, and the Master of all his subjects: and can you
show me, that God ever appointed that the Children should make choice of their
fathers? Children and servants not allowed to choose what fathers and masters
they please.
then surely all would be the sons of Princes; but though fathers may adopt
their sons, as the King may make a Turk or any other stranger a free Denizon,
yet Children may not choose whom they please for their Fathers, but they are
bound to honor those fathers that God has appointed, or suffered to beget
them; though the same should be never so poor, never so wicked; so the wives,
though while they are free, they may have the power to refuse whom they
dislike, yet they have no such prerogative to choose what husbands they please;
or if they had, I am sure no woman would be less then a Lady: and the like may
be said of all servants.

Therefore the election of Kings by the People seems to me no prime Ordinance
of God, but as our sectaries say, (...), A humane Ordination indeed, and the
corruption of our Nature, a mere (...), and an imitation of what the Poet
says, Optat Ephippia bos niger, optat arare caballus. Just as if the women
would fain have that Law of liberty to choose what husbands they please, and
the servants to make choice of what Masters they like best: so the People,
never contented with whom God sends, never satisfied with his Ordinance,
would fain pull their necks out of God's yoke, and become their own chosers,
both of their Kings and of their Priests, and indeed of all things else, when
as nothing does please them but what they do, and none can content them, The
People are in all things greedy to have their own wllls.
but whom themselves will choose; and their choice cannot long satisfy their
minds, but as the Jews received Christ into Jerusalem with the joyful
acclamation of Hosanna, and yet the next day had the malicious cry of
Crucifige, so the least distaste makes them greedy of a new change; such is the
nature of the People.

But though I said before, the election of our chief Governors may for many
respects be approved of God among some States, yet I hope by this that I have
set down, it is most apparent unto all men, contrary to the tenet of our
Anabaptisticall Sectaries, that the hereditary succession of Kings to govern
God's People, is their indubitable right, and the immediate, prime, principal
Ordinance of God: therefore it concerns every man, as much as his soul is
worth, to examine seriously, whether to fight against their own King, be not to
resist the Ordinance of God, for which, God threatens no less punishment then
damnation, from which Machiavel cannot preserve us, nor any policy of State
procure a dispensation.

CHAP. IV.
Shows, what we should not do, and what we should do for the King; the Rebels
transgressing in all those; how the Israelites honored their persecuting King
in Egypt, how they behaved themselves under Artaxerxes, Ahashuerus, and under
all their own Kings of Israel; and how our Kings are of the like institution
with the Kings of Israel; proved in the chiefest respects at large; and
therefore to have the like honor and obedience.

2. AS every lawful King is to be truly honored in regard of God's Ordinance,
so likewise in respect of God's precept, 2. All kings are to be honored in
respect of God's precept, considered two ways.

1. What we should not do.


which commands us to honor the King; and this duty is so often inculcated,
and so fully laid upon us in the holy Scripture, that I scarce know any duty
toward man so much pressed, and so plainly expressed, as this is;

1. Negatively, what we should not do, to deprive him of his Honor.

2. Affirmatively, what we should do, to manifest, and magnify this Honor
toward him: for,

1. Our very thoughts, words, and works are imprisoned, and chained up in the
linkes of God's strictest prohibition; that they should no ways peeep forth,
to produce the least dishonor unto our King: for,

1. The Spirit of God, by the mouth of the wisest of men commands us to think
no ill of the King, let the King be what he will, 1. To think no ill of the
King; Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, Eccles. 10.30.
the precept is without restriction; you must think no ill, that is, you must
not intend, or purpose in your thoughts to do the least ill office or
disparagement to the King that rules over you, be the same King virtuous or
vicious, mild, or cruel, good or bad: this is the sense of the Holy Ghost.
For, as the child with Cham shall become accursed, if he does but dishonor,
and despise his wicked father (or his father in his wickedness) whom in all
duty he ought to reverence, so the Subject shall be liable to Gods vengeance,
if his heart shall intend the least ill to his most tyrannical King.

2. The same Spirit says, Thou shall not revile the Gods; that is, 2. To say
no ill of the King. Exodus 22.28. Act 23.5. (...).

3. To do no hurt to the King. Psalm. 10^.15. 1 Samuel 24 4, 5.


the Judges of the Land; nor curse, that is, in Saint Paul's phrase, speak evil
of the Ruler of the people: and what can be more evil, then to belly his
Religion, to traduce his Government, and to make so faithful a Christian King,
as faithless as a Cretan, which is commonly broached by the Rebels, and
Preached by their seditious Teachers.

3. The great Jehovah gives this peremptory charge to all Subjects, saying,
Touch not mine Anointed; which is the least indignity that may be: and
therefore David's heart smote him when he did but cut off the lap of Saul's
garment. What then can be said for them that draw their swords, and shoot their
Cannons, to take away the life of Gods Anointed, which is the greatest
mischief they can do? I believe no distinction can blind the judgment of
Almighty God, but his revengefull hand will find them out, 2. What we should
do to honor the King. Eccles. 8.2.

1. To observe the kings commands.


that so mali^iously transgress his precepts, and think by their subtilty to
escape his punishments.

2. The Scriptures do positively, and plainly command us to show all honor
unto our King. For,

1. Solomon says, I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment; or, as the
phrase imports, to observe the mouth of the King; that is, not only his
written law, but also his verbal commands, and that in regard of the oath of
God; that is, in respect of thy Religion, or the solemn vow which thou made
at thine initiation, and incorporation into Gods Church, to obey all the
precepts of God, Et si religio tollitur, nulla no bis cum coelo ratio est.
Lactant, Just. l. 3. c. 10.
whereof this is one, to honor and obey the King; or else that oath of
allegiance and fidelity, which thou have sworn unto thy King in the presence,
and with the approbation of thy God, which certainly will plague all perjurers,
and take revenge on them that take his name in vain; which is the infallible,
and therefore most miserable condition of all the perjured Rebels of this
Kingdom. For if moral honesty teaches us to keep our promises, yea, though it
were to our own hindrance, then much more should Christianity teach us to
observe our deliberate and solemn oaths, whose violation can bear none other
fruit, then the heavy censure of God's fearful indignation.

But when the prevalent faction took a solemn Oath and Protestation to defend
all the Privileges of Parliament, and the Rights of the Subjects, and then
presently forgetting their oath, and forsaking their faith, by throwing the
Bishops out of the House of Peers (which all men knew to be a singular
Privilege, How the prevalent Faction of the Parliament forswore themselves. 2.
To obey the kings commandments. Josh. 1.18
and the House of Lords acknowledged to be the indubitable right of the
Bishops) and their doctrine being to dispense with all oaths for the
furtherance of the cause, it is no wonder they falsify all oaths that they
have made unto the King.

2. The people said unto Joshua, Whosoever rebelleth against thy commandment,
and will not hearken to the words of thy mouth, in all that thou command, he
shall be put to death: surely this was an absolute government, and though
martial, yet most excellent to keep the people within the bounds of their
obedience; for they knew that where rebellion is permitted, there can be no
good performance of any duty; and it may be a good lesson for all the higher
powers, not to be too clement (which is the encouragement of Rebels) to most
obstinate, traiterous, and rebellious Subjects, who daring not to stir under
rigid Tyrants, do kick with their heels against the most pious Princes: and
therefore my soul wishes (not out of any desire of blood, but from my love to
peace) that this rule were well observed, Whosoever rebelleth against thy
commandment, he shall be put to death. Quia in talibus non obedientes,
mortaliter peccant, nisi foret illud quod praecipitur contra praeceptum Dei,
vel in salutis dispendi^m: Angel. summa verb. obedientia. 3 To give the king no
just cause of anger. Prove. 2.2. The Rebels have given him cause enough to be
provoked. 4. To speak reverently to the king, and of the king. Eccles. 8.4.


3. The wisest of all Kings, but the King of Kings, says, The fear of a King
is as the roaring of a Lion, who so provokes him to anger, sins against his
own soul. And I believe that the taking up of Arms by the Subjects against
their own King, that never wronged them, and the seeking to take away his life,
and the life of his most faithful servants, is cause enough to provoke any King
to anger, if he be not (...), too Stoically given to abandon all passions: and
that anger should be like the roaring of a Lion to them that would pull out the
Lions eyes, and take away the Lions life.

4. The King of Heaven says of these earthly Kings, That where the word of a
King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what do thou? And Elihu
demands, Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, or to Princes, you are
ungodly? Truly if Elihu were now here, he might hear many unfitter things said
to our King by his own people, and which is more strange, by some Preachers;
for some of them have said, but most maliciously, and more falsely, that he is
a Papist, he is the Traitor, unworthy to reign, unfit to live; good God! do
these men think, God says truth, Where the word of a King is, there is power,
that is, to blast the conspiracies, and to confound the spirits of all Rebels,
who shall one day find it; because the wrath of God at last will be awaked
against their treachery, Jerem. 27.8.
and to revenge their perjury by inabling the King to accomplish the same upon
all that resist him, as he promised to do in the like case,

5. To pray for the king. Ezra 6.10. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
5. The Israelites being in captivity under the King of Babylon, were commanded
to pray for the life of that Heathen King, and for the life of his sons. And
Saint Paul exhorts Timothy to make supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks for Kings, and for all that are in authority: and how do our
men pray for our King? in many Pulpits not at all, and in some places for his
overthrow, for the shortning of his life, and the finishing of his days
(nullum sit in omine pondus:) and they give thanks indeed, not for his good,
but for their own supposed good success against him; thus they praevaricate and
pervert the words of the Apostle to their own destruction, Psalm. 109 6.
when as the Prophet says, Their prayers shall be turned into sin.

6. Christ commands us to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
that is, 6. To render all his dues unto him.
(as I shall more fully show hereafter) your inward duties of honor, love,
reverence, and the like: and your outward debts, tolls, tribute, custom, etc.
and the Rebels render none unto him, but take all from him, and return His Arms
to his destruction.

I might produce many other places and precepts of Holy Scripture to enforce
this duty to honor the king, but what will suffice him, cui Roma parum est;
Luke 16.31.
if they believe not Moses, neither will they believe, if one should arise from
the dead; and if these things cannot move them, then certainly all the world
cannot remove them from their Wickedness. Yet

3. Quia exempla movent, plus quam praecepta docent; 3. All kings should be
honored by the example of all Nations. 1 The Israelites. 1 In Egypt. Exodus
12.37. Exodus 1.9.
you shall find this doctrine practiced by the perpetual demeanor of all
Nations. For

1. If you look upon the Children of Israel in the Land of Egypt, it cannot be
denied but Pharaoh was a wicked king, and exercised great cruelty, and
exceeding tyranny against Gods people; yet Moses did not excite the Israelites
to take arms against him, though they were more in number, being six hundred
thousand men, and abler for strength to make their party good then Pharaoh was,
as the king himself confesses; but they contained themselves within the bounds
of their Obedience, and waited Gods leisure for their deliverance; because they
knew their patient suffering would more manifest their own piety, and aggravate
king Pharoah's obstinacy, and especially magnify Gods glory, then their
undutiful rebelling could any ways illustrate the least of these.

2. David's demeanor toward Saul is most memorable; 2. Under Saul. The loyal
Subjects belief, p. 55.
for though (as one says) king Saul discovered in part the described manner of
such a king, as Samuel had foreshewed; yet David and all his followers
performed and observed the prescribed conditions, that are approved by God in
true Subjects: never resisting, never rebelling against his king, though his
king most unjustly persecuted him. Samuel also, when he had pronounced Saul's
rejection, 1 Samuel 15.
yet did he never incite the people to Rebellion, but wept and prayed for him,
and discharged all other duties, which formerly he had showed to be due unto
him; and Elias, that had as good repute with the people, 3. Under Ahab.
and could as easily have stirred up sedition, as any of the seditious
Preachers of this time; yet did he never persuade the Subjects to withstand the
illegal commands of a most wicked king, 1 Reg. 21.25.
that as the Scripture testifies, had sold himself to work wickedness, and
became the more exceedingly sinful by the provocation of Jezabel his most
wicked wife, and harlot; but he honored his Sovereignty, and feared his
Majesty, when he fled away from his cruelty.

And because these are but particular presidents, Two examples of the whole
Nation under Heathen kings 1. Under Artaxerxes. Ezra 1.1.
I will name you two observeable examples of the whole Nation.

1. When Cyrus made a Decree, and his Decree (according to the Laws of the
Medes and Persians) should be unalterable; that the Temple of Jerusalem should
be re-edified, and the adversaries of the Jews obtained a letter from
Artaxerxes to prohibit them, the people of God submitting themselves to the
personal command of the king, contrary to that unalterable Law of Cyrus,
pleaded neither the goodness of the work, nor the justness of the cause, but
yielded to the kings will, and ceased from their work, until they obtained a
new License in the second year of king Darius: and if it be objected that they
built the Temple in despite of those that hindered them, with their sword in
one hand, and a trowel in the other: it is rightly answered, that having the
kings leave to build it, they might justly resist their enemies, that did
therein, not only show their malice unto them, but also resisted the will of
the King.

2. When Ahashuerus, to satisfy the unjust desire of his proud favorite, 2.
Under Ahashuerus. Hester. 3.10*
had wickedly decreed, and most tyrannically destined all the Nation of the
Jews to a sudden death; yet this dutiful people did not undutifully rebel, and
plead the King was seduced by evil counsel, and misguided by proud Haman,
therefore nature teaching them, vim vi pellere, to stand upon their own
defense, they would not submit their necks to his unjust Decree; but, being
versed in God's Laws, and unacquainted with these new devices, they return to
God, and betake themselves to their prayers, Hester. 8.11.
until God had put it into the Kings heart to grant them leave to defend
themselves, and to sheath their swords in the bowels of their adversaries;
which is a most memorable example of most dutiful unresisting Subjects: an
example of such piety, as would make our Land happy, if our zealous generation
were but acquainted with the like Religion.

The author of the Treatise of Monarchy, p. 32.
But here I know what our Anabaptists, Brownist, and Puritan will say, that I
build Castles in the air, and lay down my frame without foundation; because all
Kings are not such as the Kings of Israel and Judah we^e, as the Kings that God
gave unto the Jews, and prescribed special Laws both for the Kings to govern,
and the people to obey them; but all other Nations have their own different and
several Laws and Constitutions, according to which Laws their Kings are tied to
rule, and the Subjects bound to obey, and no otherwise.

Henric. Stepha^. in libello de hac re, contendit in omnes respub debere leges
Hebraeorum, tanquam ab ipso Deo profectas, and per consequens omnium optimas
reduci.
I answer, that indeed it is granted there are several Constitutions of
Royalties in several Nations, and there may be Regna Laconica, conditional and
provisional Kingdoms, wherein perhaps upon a real breach of some expressed
conditions, some Magistrates like the Ephori, may pronounce a forfeiture, as
well in the successive, as in the elective Kingdoms; because (as one says)
succession is not a new title to more right, but a legal continuance of what
was first gotten: which I can no ways yield unto, if you mean it of any
Sovereign King, (because the name of a King does not always denotate the
Sovereign power, as the Kings of Lacedaemon though so called, yet had no regal
authority; and the Dictator for the time being, and the Emperors afterward
had an absolute power, though not the name of Kings) for I say, that such a
government is not properly a regal government, ordained by God, but either an
Aristocratical or Democratical government instituted by the people, though
approved by God for the welfare of the Commonwealth; 1 Samuel 8 4, 20.
but as the Israelites desired a King to judge them like all the Nations, that
is, such a King as Aristotle describes, such as the Nations had entrusted with
an absolute and full regal power, as Sigonius shows; so the Kings of the
Nations, if they be not like the Spartan Kings, were and are like the Kings of
Israel, both in respect of their ordination from God, by whom all Kings, as well
of other Nations as of Israel do reign, and of their full power and inviolable
authority over the people; which have no more dispensation to resist their
Kings, then the Jews had to resist theirs. And therefore Valentinian, though an
elected Emperor; yet, when he was requested by his Electours to admit of an
associate, Sozom. histor. l 6. c. 6. Niceph hist. l. 11. c 1.
answered, it was in your power to choose me to be an Emperor, but now, after
you have chosen me, what you require is in my power, not in you: Vobis tanquam
subditis competit parere, mihi vero quae facienda sunt, cogitare, it becomes
you to obey, as Subjects, and I am to consider what is fittest to be done.

And when the wife takes an husband, there is a compact, agreement, and a
solemn vow past in the presence of God, that he shall love, cherish, and
maintain her; The wife may not forsake her husband, though he break his vow,
and neglect his duty.
yet if he breaks this vow, and neglects both to love and to cherish her, she
cannot renounce him, she must not forsake him, she may not follow after
another; and there is a greater marriage betwixt the King and his people:
therefore though as a wife they might have power to choose him, and in their
choice to tie him to some conditions, yet though he breaks them, they have no
more power to abdicate their King, then the wife has to renounce her husband,
nor so much, because she may complain and call her husband before a competent
Judge, and produce witnesses against him; whereas there can be no Judge betwixt
the King and his people, but only God: and no witnesses can be found on earth,
because it is against all Laws, and against all Reason, that they which rise
against their king, should be both the witnesses against him, and the Judges to
condemn him: or were it so, that all other Kings have not the like constitution
which the Scripture sets down for the Kings of Israel; yet I say, that
excepting some circumstantial Ceremonies, in all real points, the Laws of our
Land are (so far as men could make them) in all things agreeable to the
Scriptures in the constituting of our Kings, according to the livelyest pattern
of the Kings of Israel; as it is well observed by the Author of the Appeal to
thy conscience, An Appeal to thy conscience page 30. Our Kings of the like
Institution to the kings of Israel.
in these four special respects.

1. In his Right to the Crown. 2. In his Power and Authority. 3. In his Charge
and Duty. 4. In the rendering of his Account.
For

1. As the Kings of Israel were hereditary by succession, and not elective,
extraordinary and divine designation, as in David, Kings of England are kings
by birth, Proved.
Solomon, Jehu: so do the Kings of England obtain their Kingdoms by birth, or
hereditary succession, as it appears,

1. By the Oath of Allegiance, used in every Leete, that you shall be true
Charles, and to his Heirs.

2. Because we owe our legeance to the King in his natural capacity, that is,
Charles the Son and Heir apparent of King James; when as homage cannot be done
to any King in his politic capacity, Coke, l. 7. Calvin's case.
the body of the King being invisible in that sense.

3. Because in that case it is expressly affirmed, that the King holds the
Kingdom England by birthright, inherent by descent from the bloud-royal:
therefore to show how inseparable this right is from the next in blood. Hen.
the 4. though he was of the bloud-royal, being first cozen unto the King, and
had the Crown resigned unto him by Rich. the 2. and confirmed unto him by Act
of Parliament; yet upon his deathbed, confessed he had no right thereunto,
Speed, l. 9. c. 16.
as Speed writes.

4. Because it was determined by all the Judges, at the Arraignment of Watson
Clerk, 1. Jacobi.
that immediately by descent his Majesty was completely and absolutely King,
without the Ceremony of Coronation, which was but a Royal Ornament and outward
Solemnization of the descent. And it is illustrated by Hen. 6. that was not
crowned till the ninth year of his Reign; Speed, l. 9. c. 16.
and yet diverse were attainted of High Treason before that time, which could
not have been done, had he not been King. And we know, that upon the death of
any of our Kings, The right heir to the Kingdom is King before he is crowned.
Why the peoples consent is asked.
his Successor is immediately proclaimed King; to show that he has his Kingdom
by descent, and not by the people at his Coronation; whose consent is then
asked, not because they have any power to deny their consent, or refuse him for
their King; but, that the King having their assent, may with greater security
and confidence rely upon their loyalty.

2, As the Kings of Israel had full power and authority to make war and peace,
to call the greatest Assemblies, as Moses, Joshua, David, Jehosaphat, and the
rest of the Kings did; to place and displace the greatest Officers of State, as
Solomon placed Abiathar in Sadoc's room, and Jehosaphat appointed Amariah and
Zebaediah rulers of the greatest Affairs, 2 Chronicles. 19.11 The absolute
authority of the kings of England. Coke 7, rep. fol. 25. 6. Polyd. Virgil. lib
11. Speed. Stow, etc.
and had all the Militia of the Kingdom in their hands: so the Kings of England
have the like; for,

1. He only can lawfully proclaim war, as I showed before; and he only can
conclude peace.

2. There is no Assembly that can lawfully meet but by his Authority; and as
the Parliament was first devised and instituted by the king, as all our
Historians write in the life of Henry the first, so they cannot meet but by the
king's Writ.

3. All Laws, Customs, and Franchises are granted and confirmed unto the people
by the King. Rot. Claus. 1. R. 2. n. 44.

4. All the Officers of the Realm, whether Spiritual or Temporal, Smith de
repub. Angl. l. 2. c. 4. etc. 5.
are chosen and established by him; as the highest immediately by himself, and
the inferior by an authority derived from him.

The absurdi^ies of them that deny the Militia to the King.
5. He has the sole power of ordering and disposing all the Castles, Forts, and
strong Holds, and all the Ports, Havens, and all other parts of the Militia of
this kingdom; or otherwise it would follow, that the king had power to
proclaim war, but not to be able to maintain it; and that he is bound to
defend his subjects, but is denied the means to protect them; which is such an
absurdity, as cannot be answered by all the House of Commons.

6. The kings of Israel were unto their people their honor, their Sovereigns,
their life, and the very breath of their nostrils, as themselves acknowledge;
and so the kings of England are the life, the head, and the authority of all
things that be done in the Realm of England; supremam potestatem and merum
imperium apud nos habentes, Smith de Repub. l. 2. Cambden Britan. p. 132.
nec in Imperii clientela sunt, nec investituram ab alio accipientes, nec
praeter Deum superiorem agnoscentes; and their Subjects are bound by Oath to
maintain the kings Sovereignty, in all causes, and over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil; and that not only as they are singularly considered,
but overall collectively represented in the body politic; for by sundry,
diverse, old authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and
expressed, that this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted
in the world, In the Preface to a Stat. 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12
governed by one supreme head and king, having the dignity and royal estate of
the Imperial Crown of the same; unto whom a body politic, compact of all sorts
and degrees of people, divided in terms and by names of spiritualty and
temporalty, have been bounden and owen to bear next to God a natural and humble
obedience.

Israel was to be custos utriusque tabulae, to keep the Law of God, and to have
a special care of his Religion; and then to do justice and judgment, according
to the Law of nature, and to observe all the judicial Laws of that kingdom: so
are the kings of England obliged to discharge the same duties.

The duty of the kings of England.
1. To have the chiefest care to defend the faith of Christ, and to preserve the
honor of Gods Church, as I showed before.

2. To maintain common right, according to the rules and dictates of Nature.
And.

3. To see the particular Laws and Statutes of his own kingdom well observed
amongst his people.

To all which the king is bound, not only virtute officii, in respect of his
office, but also vinculo juramenti, in respect of his Oath, which enjoyneth him
to guide his actions, not according to the desires of an unbridled will, but
according to the ties of these estab^ished Laws; neither do our Divines give
any further liberty to any king, but if he fails in these he does offend in
his duty.

Israel were accountable for their actions unto none, but only unto God, Psalm.
51.4.
and therefore king David after he had committed both murder and adultery,
says unto God; Tibi soli peccavi, as if he had said, none can call me to any
account for what I have done but thou alone; and we never read that either the
people did call, or the Prophets persuaded them to call any of their most
idolatrous, The kings of England accountable for their actions only to God
tyrannical, or wicked kings to any account for their idolatry, tyranny, or
wickedness; even so the kings of England are accountable to none but to God.

immediately from God, who first gave it to the Conqueror through his sword,
and since to the succeeding kings, by the ordinary means of hereditary
succession. Smith de repub l. 1. c. 9.


Oath which he takes at his Coronation binds him only before God, who alone
can both judge him, and punish him if he forgets it.

condition, promise, or limitation, either in that Oath or in any other
Covenant or compact that the king makes with the people, either at his
Coronation, or at any other time, that he should be accomptable, or that they
should question and censure him for any thing that he should do.

Testimony of many famous Lawyers justify the same truth; for Bracton says, if
the king refuse to do what is just, satis erit ei ad poenam, quod Dominum
expectet ultorem, The Lord will be his avenger, which will be punishment enough
for him; but of the kings grants and actions, nec privatae personae, nec
justiciarii debent disputare: And Walsingham makes mention of a Letter written
from the Parliament to the Bishop of Rome, wherein they say, Bracton fol. 34.
2. b. apud Lincol. anno 1301.
that certum and directum Dominium a prima institutione regni Angliae ad Regem
pertinuit, the certain and direct Dominion of this Kingdom from the very first
institution thereof, has belonged unto the King, who by reason of the
arbitrary or free preeminence of the royal dignity and custom observed in all
ages, ought not to answer before any Judge, either Ecclesiastical or Secular.
Ex libera praeeminentia.
Ergo neither before the Pope, nor Parliament, nor Presbytery.

Parliament at any time sought to censure their king, and either to depose him,
or to punish him for any of all his actions; save only those that were called
in the troublesome and irregular times of our unfortunate Princes, No
legitimate and just Parliment did ever question the kings of England for their
actions.
and were swayed by those that were the heads of the most powerful Faction, to
conclude most horrid and unjustifiable Acts, to the very shame of their
Judicial authorities as those factious Parliaments in the times of Hen. 3. king
John, Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. and others, whose acts in the judgment of all good
authors, are not to be drawn into examples, when as they deposed their king for
those pretended faults, whereof not the worst of them but is fairly answered,
and all thirty three of them proved to be no way sufficient to depose him,
Heningus c. 4. p. 93.
by that excellent Civilian Heningus Arnisaeus.

And therefore seeing the Institution of our kings is not only by Gods Law,
but also by our own Laws, Customs, and practice thus agreeable to the Scripture
kings, they ought to be as sacred and as inviolable to us, as the kings of
Israel were to the Jews; and as reverently honored and obeyed by us, as both
the Apostles, Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, advise us to honor and obey the
king.

CHAP. V.
Shows, how the Heathens honored their Kings; how Christ exhibited all due
honor unto Heathen and wicked Kings; how he carried himself before Pilate; and
how all the good Primitive Christians behaved themselves toward their Heathen
persecuting Emperors.

2. WE find that not only the Jews, that were the people of God, a royal
Priesthood, that had the Oracles of God, and therefore no wonder that they were
so conformable in their obedience to the will of God, 2. The Heathens. Persae
quidem olim aliquid coeleste atque divinum in regibus inesse statuebant. Osor.
de Instit. regis, l 4. p. 106. Justin. l. 4. Herodot. l. 8. What great respect
men in former times did bear unto their kings.
but the Gentiles also that knew not God knew this by the light of nature, that
they were bound to yield all honor unto their kings. For Quintus Curtius tells
us, that the Persians had such a divine estimation and love unto their king,
that Alexander could not persuade them either for fear or reward, to tell him
where their king was gone, or to reveal any of his intentions, or to do any
other thing that might any ways prejudice the life, or the affairs of their
king. And Justin tell us, that the Sicilians did bear so great a respect unto
the last Will and Testament of Anaxilaus their deceased king, that they disdain
not to obey a slave, whom he had appointed Regent, during the minority of his
son. And Herodotus says, that when Xerxes fled from Greece in a vessel that
was so full of men of war, that it was impossible for him to be saved, without
casting some part of them into the Sea; he said, O ye men of Persia, let some
among you testify that he has care of his King, whose safety is in your
disposition; then the Nobility which accompanied him having adored him, did
cast themselves into the Sea, till the vessel was unburthened, and the King
preserved. And I fear these Pagans will rise in judgment to condemn our
Nobility, that seek the destruction of their King. And the Macedonians had such
a reverent opinion of their King, that being foiled in war, before they
returned again to the battle, they fetched their cradle wherein their young
King lay, and set him in the midst of the Camp, as supposing that their former
misfortune proceeded, Justin. l. 7.
because they neglected to take with them the good augure of their King's
presence. And Boemus Aubanus speaking of the Egyptian Kings, says, that they
have so much good will and love from all men, ut non solum sacerdotibus, sed
etiam singulis Aegyptiis, major regis quam ^xorum filiorumque, Aubanus de Afr
ca. l. 1. p. 39. Reges divinos Jove genitos, a Jove nutritos, Homerus and
Hesiodus appellarunt.
aut aliorum principum salutis inesset cura; that not only the Priests, but
also the Egyptians have a greater care of the safety of their King, then of
their wives or children, or any other Princes of the Land. And the same Author
describing the manner, how the Tartars create their King, says, the Princes,
Dukes, Barons, and all the people meet, then they place him that is to be their
King on a Throne of gold, and prostrating themselves upon the ground, they cry
with an unanimous and loud voice, Rogamus, volumus and praecipimus, ut
domineris nobis, We entreat you and beseech you to reign over us; and he
answers, If you would have this of me, it is necessary that you should be
obedient to do whatsoever I shall command you; when I call you, to come;
whethersoever I shall send you, to go; whomsoever I shall command you to kill,
to do it immediately without fear; and to commit the whole Kingdom into my
hands: then they do all answer, We are willing to do all this. And then he
says again, Therefore from henceforth, oris mei sermo, gladius meus erit, the
word of my mouth shall be the sword of my power: then all the people do applaud
him. And a little after he says, in ejus manibus seu potestate omnia sunt,
Auba^us l. 8. p. 141.
all things are in his hands and power: no man dare say, this is mine, or that
is his: no one man may dwell in any part of the Land, but in that which is
assigned unto him by the King. Nemini licet imperatoris verba mutare, nemini
latae ab illo sententiae qualicunque mede contraire; and no man dares alter the
Kings words, nor gainsay his sentence whatsoever it is. And we read that the
Turk is as absolute in his Dominions, and as readily obeyed in his commands as
the Tartar; and yet these Subjects learn this duty of honor and obedience unto
their Kings only by the light of nature; and if grace and the Gospel has made
us free from this slavish subjection, should we not be thankful unto our God,
and be contented with that liberty which he has given us; but because we have
so much, we will have more: And as the Poet says, Like Subjects armed, the
more their Princes gave, They this advantage too^, the more to crave Lucan.
lib. 1.
and seeing God has delivered us from the rage of tyrannous Kings, we will
free our selves from all government, and disobey the commands of the most
clement Princes. We may remember the fable of the Frogs, where they prayed unto
Jupiter to have a King, and what was the success thereof, -- omnia dat qui
justa negat: an he that undutifully denies his due obedience, may unwillingly
be forced to undue subjection; as the Israelites, not contented with just
Samuel, shall be put under an unjust Saul. So God may justly deal with us for
our injustice toward our King, to deny that honor unto him which God
commanded to be given, and the very Heathens have not detained from their
Kings. But

3. Christians.
3. Lest with Saint Paul we should be blamed (though unjustly) for bringing the
uncircumcised Greeks into the Temple, for alleging the disorderly practice of
blind Heathens to be a pattern for these zealous Ch istians: (which thing,
notwithstanding our Savior did, when he preferred Sodom and Gomorrha before
Capernaum; Matthew. 11.21.
yea, Tyrus and Sidon before Corazin and Bethsaida:) we cannot want the example
of good Christians, and a multitude of most holy Martyrs, to shame the practice
of these profane hypocrites. For

1. Christ him self exhibited all due honor unto wicked kings.
1. Christ himself, the author and the finisher of our faith, never left any
plainer mark of his religion, then to propagate the same by patience; as on the
other side, there cannot be a more suspicious sign of a false Religion, then to
enlarge it and protect it by violence: and therefore when the Inhabitants of a
certain Samaritane village refused to admit Christ and his Disciples into their
Town, and so renounced him and his Religion; James and John, Luke 9.54.
two principal members of his Court, remembering what Elias did in the like
case, 1 Reg. 18. 2 Reg. 1.
asked if they should not command fire to consume them, as Elias did? that is,
if they should not use their best endeavors, and be confident of Gods
assistance, to destroy those profane rejecters of Christ, and refusers of his
religion? Our Savior, though ever meek, yet now moved at this their
unchristian thought, rebuked them with that sharpness, as he did Saint Peter,
when he committed the like ^^rour, and said, You know not what manner of spirit
you are of: as if he had said, Matthew. 16.23.
you understand not the difference betwixt the profession of Elias, and my
religion; for he was such a Zelot, that jure zelotarum, and the extraordinary
instinct of Gods spirit that was in him, might at that time (when the Jews were
governed by a (...), as Josephus says, and God presiding as it were their King
amongst them, and interposing rules by his Oracles, and other particular
directions, that should oblige and warrant them, as well as their standing Law)
do this or the like act, though not authorized by any ordinary Law; and those
actions thus performed, are as just and as legal as any other that proceed from
the authority of the supreme Magistrate; but that dispensation of the Prophets
is now ended, and the profession of my Disciples must be far otherwise; for I
do not authorize my servants to pretend to the spirit of Elias, or to do as
Phineas and others, extraordinary men among the Jews, have done, but they must
learn of me to be meek and lowly in heart, and rather to suffer wrong of
others, then to offer the least injury unto their meanest neighbor, Matthew.
11.29.
much less to resist their supreme Magistrate.

And when Christ was apprehended, not by any legal power of the supreme
Magistrate, but by the rude servants of the High Priests; and Saint Peter, How
Christ carried himself before Pilate and the Highpriests.
as zealous for his Master as our Zealots are for their Religion, drew his
sword and smote off Malchus ear, a most justifiable and commendable act, a man
would think, to defend Christ, and in him all Christianity; our Savior bids
him put up his sword, and he adds a reason most considerable to all Christians;
for all they that take the sword shall perish by the sword: that is, all they
that without lawful authority take the sword, to defend me and my religion with
the sword, they deserve to suffer by the sword; and it is very well observed by
the Author, of resisting the lawful Magistrate upon color of religion, that
the two parallel places quoted in the margent of our Bibles, are very pertinent
to this purpose; Page 6.
for that Law concerning the effusion of blood, Genesis 9.6*
being not any prohibition to the legal cutting off of Malefactors, is
notwithstanding urged against S. Peter, to show that his shedding of blood in
defense of religion was altogether illegal, and prohibited by that Law: and the
other place (where immediately after these words, He that kills with the
sword must be killed with the sword; Revel. 13.10.
the Holy Ghost adjoyneth, here is the patience and the faith of the Saints:)
does most clearly show, that all forcible resistance is inconsistent with the
religion of the Saints; because their faith must be ever accompanied with their
patience; and it is contrary to their profession to save themselves by any
violent opposition of them that have the lawful authority.

But that example which is unparalled, is the suffering of Christ under
Pontius Pilate; for the whole course of their proceeding; against Christ was
illegal, when as no Law can be found to justify the delivering up of an
innocent person to the will of his accusers, as Pilate did our Savior Christ;
and our Savior had ability and strength enough to have defended himself; John
19.16.
for he might have commanded more then twelve Legions of Angels to assist him;
yet our Savior acknowledging the legal power of Pilate to proceed against him,
John 19.12.
that it was given him from above, makes no resistance either to maintain his
doctrine or to preserve his life, but in all things submits himself to their
illegal proceedings, and gives unto the Magistrates all the honor that was due
unto their places: and you know the rule, Omnis Christi actio, debet esse
nostra instrictio, we ought to follow his example.

And therefore not only Christ, but also all good Christians have imitated him
in this point; for the Apostles prayed for their persecuting Tyrants, exhorted
all their followers to honor even the Pagan Kings, and most sh^rply reproved
all that spoke evil of Authority, much more would they say against them, that
commit evil, and proceed in all wickedness against Authority. And Tertullian
speaking of the behavior of the Primitive Christians toward the Heathen
Emperors, How the Primitive Christians hehaved themselves toward their
Heathen persecutors.
and their cruel persecutors, says* that because they knew them to be
appointed by God, they did love and reverence them, and wish them safe with all
the Roman Empire; yea, they honored the Emperor, and worshipped him as a man
second from God, and solo Deo minorem, and inferior only unto God; and in his
Apologetico he says, Deus est so^us in cu^us solius potestate sunt reges, a
quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, super omnes homines, ante omnes Deos; God
alone is he by whose power Kings are preserved, which are second from him,
first after him, above all men, and before all gods; that is, all other
Magistrates that the Scripture calls Gods. So Justin Martyr, Minut us Felix,
Nazianzen, (which also wrote against the vices of Julian) S. Augustine, and
others of the prime Fathers of the Church have set down, how the Primitive
Christians, and godly Martyrs, that suffered all k nde of most barbarous
cruelty at the hands of their Heathen Magistrates, did notwithstanding pray for
them, and honor them, and neither derogated from their authority, Beda p. 15.
nor any ways resisted their insolency. And Johannes Beda, Advocate in the
Court of Parliament of Paris, says, that the Protestants of France in the
midst of torments have blessed their King, by whom they were so severely
entreated; and in the midst of fires and massacres, have published their
confession in these words: Artic. 39 and 40 confess. eccles. Gal. refor.
For the cause he (that is, God) put the sword into the Magistrates hand, that
he may repress the sins committed, not only against the second Table of Gods
Commandments, but also against the first: We must therefore for his sake not
only endure that Superiors rule over us, but also honor and esteem of them
with all reverence, holding them for his Lieutenants and Officers, to whom he
has given in commission to execute a lawful and a holy function: We therefore
hold that we must obey their Laws and Statutes, pay Tributes, Imposts, and
other duties, and bear the yoke of subjection with a good and free will,
although they were Infidels.

Ob. But against this patience of the Saints, and the wisdom of these good
Christians, it is objected by Goodwin, and oters of his Sect, that, ei her they
wanted strength to resist, or wanted knowledge of their strength, or of their
privilege and power, which God granted them to defend themselves and their
religion, or were overmuch transported with an ambitious desire of Martyrdom,
or by some other misguiding spirit were utterly misled to an unnecessary
patience; and therefore we having strength enough, as we conceive, to subdue
the King and all his strength, and being wiser in our generation then all the
generation of those fathers, as being guided by a more unerring spirit, we have
no reason to pray for patience, but rather to render vengeance, both to the
King, and to all his adherents.

Sol. This unchristian censure, and this false imputation laid upon these holy
Fathers, by these stubborn Rebels, and proud Enthusiasts, are so mildly, and so
learnedly answered by the Author, of resisting the lawful Magistrate upon
color of Religion, Where they are fully answered
that more need not be said to stop the mouths of all ignorant gainsayers.

Therefore seeing that by the institution of Kings, by the precept of God, and
by the practice of all wise men, and good Christians, Heathen Kings, and wicked
Tyrants are to be loved, honored, and obeyed, it is a most hateful thing to
God and man, to see men professing themselves Christians (but are indeed like
those in the Revel. (which say, they are Jews, Revel. 2 9.
and are not) in stead of honoring, transcendently to hate, and most violently
to persecute their own most Christian, and most gracious King; a sin so
infinitely sinful, that I do not wonder to see the greatness of Gods anger to
power all the plagues that we suffer, upon this Nation; but I do rather admire,
and adore his wonted clemency and patience, that he has not all this while
either sent forth his fire and lightning from heaven, as he did upon Sodom and
Gomorrah, to consume them, Genesis 19.24. Number 16.31
or cause the earth to swallow them, as it did Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for
this their rebellion against their King; or that he has not showred down far
greater plagues, and more miserable calamities then hitherto we have suffered;
because we have suffered these Antichristian Rebels to proceed so far, and have
with the Merozites neglected all this while to add our strength to assist the
Lords Anointed, to reduce his seduced Subjects to their obedience, Judges 5.23.
and to impose condign punishments upon the seducers, and the ringleaders of
this unnatural, and most horrible Rebellion.

CHAP. VI.
Shows, the two chiefest duties of all Christian Kings; to whom the charge
and preservation of Religion is committed; three several opinions; the strange
speeches of the Disciplinarians against Kings are showed; and Viretus his
scandalous reasons are answered; the double service of all Christian Kings; and
how the Heathen Kings and Emperors had the charge of Religion.

2. AS all Kings are to be honored in the foresaid respects, 2. Christian
Kings are to have double honor, in reshect of their double duty. 1. Duty. 2.
Duty.

so all Christian Kings are to have a double honor, in respect of the double
charge and duty that is laid upon them: As,

1. To preserve true religion, and to defend the faith of Christ, against all
Atheists, Heretics, Schismatics, and all other adversaries of the Gospel,
within their Territories and Dominions.

2. To preserve their Subjects from all foreign adversaries, and to prevent
civil dissentions, to govern them according to the rules of justice and
equity, which all other Kings are bound to do; but neither did, nor can do it
so fully, and so faithfully as the Christian Kings; because no Law, either
Solons, Lycurgus, Pompilius, or any other Greek or Latin; nor any Politic,
Plato, Aristotle, Machievle, or whom you will, old or new, can so perfectly set
down, and so fairly declare, quid justum, and quid honestum, as the Law of
Christ has done; and therefore, seeing omnis honos praesupponit onus, the
honor is but the reward of labor, and that this labor, or duty of Kings to
maintain true Religion, well performed, and faithfully discharged, brings most
glory unto God, and the greatest honor to all Kings; when it is more to be,
with Constantine, a nursing father to Gods Church, then it is to be with
Alexander the sole Monarch of the known world; I will first treat of their
charge and care, and the power that God has given them to defend the faith,
and to preserve true Religion. And

1. Religion (says a learned Divine) without authority, is no Religion; for,
1. Care of Kings to preserve true Religion. Aug. de utilitate credendi cap. 9.
as Saint Augustine says, no true Religion can can be received by any means,
without some weighty force of authority: therefore if that Religion, whereby
thou hopest to be saved, has no authority to ground it self upon: or if that
authority, whereby thy Religion is settled, be mis-placed in him that has no
authority at all, what hope of salvation remaining in that Religion can thou
conceive? but it is concluded on all sides, that the right authority of
preserving true religion must reside in him, and proceed from him, by whose
supreme power and government it is to be enacted and forced upon us: and
therefore now the question is, To whom the charge of preserving religion is
committed. 3 Opinions.
and it is very much questioned, to whom the supreme government of our Religion
ought rightly to be attributed, whereof I find three several resolutions.

1. Papistical, which leans too much on the right hand. 2. Anabaptistical,
which bends twice as much on the left hand. 3. Orthodoxal of the Protestants,
that ascribe the same to him, on whom God himself has conferred it.
Rome makes the Pope solely to have the supreme government of our Christian
Religion, Vnde saepe objiciunt dictum Hosii ad Constantium: Tibi Deus imperium
commisit, nobis quae sunt ecclesiastica, concredidit. Sed hic intelligitur de
executione officii, non de gubernatione ecclesiae. Sicut ibi manifestum est,
cum dicitur, neque fas est nobis in terris imperium tenere, neque tibi
thymiamatum and sacrorum potestatem h^bere. (i. e.) in praedicatione Evangelii,
and administratione Sacramentorum and similibus.
is most apparent out of all their writeings; and you may see what a large book
our Countryman Stapleton w^ote against Master Horn Bishop of Winchester to
justify the same. And Sanders to disprove the right of Kings, says, Fatemur
personas Episcoporum, qui in toto orb fuerunt, Romano Imperatori subjectas
fuisse, quoniam Rex praeest hominibus Christianis, verum non quia sunt
Christiani; sed quia sunt homines, episcopis etiam ex ea part rex praeesset.
So Master Harding says, that the office of a King in it self is all one every
where, not onley among the Christian Princes, but also among the Heathen; so
that a Christian King has no more to do in deciding Church matters, or meddling
with any point of Religion then a Heathen. And so Fekenham, and all the brood
of Jesuits, do with all violence and virulency labor to disprove the Prince's
authority and supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes, and the points of our
Religion, and to transfer the same wholly unto the Pope and his Cardinals.
Neither do I wonder so much, that the Pope having so universally gained, and so
long continued this power, and retained this government from the right owners,
should employ all his Hierarchy to maintain that usurped authority, which he
held with so much advantage to his Episcopal See, (though with no small
prejudice to the Church of Christ, when, the Emperors being busied with other
affairs, and leaving this care of religion and government of the Church to the
Pope, the Pope to the Bishops, the Bishops to their Suffragans, and the
Suffragans to the Monks, whose authority being little, their knowledge less,
and their honesty least of all, all things were ruled with greater corruption
and less truth then they ought to be) so long as possibly he should be able to
possess it,

But at last, when the light of the Gospel shined, and Christian Princes had
the leisure to look, and the heart to take hold upon their right, the learned
men (opposing themselves against the Pope's usurped jurisdiction) have soundly
proved the Sovereign authority of Christian Kings in the government of the
Church; that, not only in other Kingdoms, but also here in England, this power
was annexed by diverse Laws unto the interest of the Crown, and the lawful right
of the King: and I am persuaded (says that Reverend ArchBishop Bancroft) had
it not been that new adversaries did arise, Survey of Discip. c. 22. p. 251.
and opposed themselves in this matter, the Papists before this time had been
utterly subdued; for the Devil seeing himself so like to lose the field,
stirred up in the bosom of Reformation a flock of violent and seditious men,
How the Devil raised instruments to hinder the reformation.
that pretending a great deal of hate to Popery, have notwithstanding joined
themselves, like Sampson's Foxes, with the worst of Papists, in the worst and
most pernicious Doctrines that ever Papist taught; to rob Kings of their sacred
and divine right, and to deprive the Church of Christ of the truth of all those
points, that do most specially concern her government and governors: and
though in the fury of their wild zeal they do no less maliciously then falsely
cast upon the soundest Protestants, the aspersion of Popery and Malignancy; yet
I hope to make it plain unto my reader, that themselves are the Papists indeed,
or worse then Papists both to the Church and State: For,

Cardinals, and all the Schools of the Jesuits, do most st^fly defend this
usurped authority of the Pope, which, as I said, Of the Anabaptists, and
Puritans.
may be with the less admiration, because of the Princes concession, and their
own long possesion of it; so on the other side there are sprung up of late a
certain generation of Vipers, the brood of Anabaptists and Brownists, that do
most violently strive not to detain what they have unjustly obtained, but a
degree far worse, to pull the sword out of their Prince his hand, and to place
authority on them which have neither right to own it, nor discretion to use it;
and that is, Where the Puritans place the authority to maintain religion. 1 In
the Presbytery.
either 1. A Consistory of Presbyters: 2. A Parliament of Lay men.
For

1. These new Adversaries of this Truth, that would most impudently take away
from Christian Princes the supreme and immediate authority, under Christ, in
all Ecclesiastical Callings and Causes, will needs place the same in
themselves, and a Consistorian company of their own Faction; a whole Volume
would not contain their absurdities, falsities, and blasphemies that they have
uttered about this point. I will only give you a taste of what some of the
chief of them have belched forth against the Divine Truth of God's Word and the
sacred Majesty of Kings. Master Calvin a man otherwise of much worth, Calvin in
Amos cap. 7.
and worthy to be honored, yet in this point transported with his own passion,
calls those, Blasphemers, that did call King Henry the eight the supreme Head
of this Church of England: and Stapleton says, that he handled the King
himself with such villainy and with so spiteful words, Stapl. cont. Horn. l. 1.
p. 22.
as he never handled the Pope more spitefully; and all for this Title of
Supremacy in Church causes: and in his fifty fourth Epistle to Myconius, he
termed them profane spirits and mad men, that persuaded the Magistrates of
Geneva, not to deprive themselves of that authority which God has given them:
Viretus is more virulent; How Viretus would prove the temporal Pope (as he
calls the King) worse then the spiritual Pope.
for he resembles them not to mad men, (as Calvin did) but to white Devils,
because they stand in defense of the Kings authority; and he says, they are
false Christians, though they cover themselves with the cloak of the Gospel,
affirming that the putting of all authority and power into the Civil
Magistrates hands, and making them masters of the Church, is nothing else but
the changing of the Popedom, from the Spiritual Pope into a Temporal Pope, who
(as it is to be feared) will prove worss and more tyrannous then the Spiritual
Pope, which he labors to confirm by these three reasons:

Spiritual Pope had not the Sword in his own hand, to punish men with death,
but was fain to crave the aid of the Secular power, which the Temporal Pope
needs not do

spiritual Popes had some regard in their dealings of Councils, Synods, and
ancient Canons; but the new Secular Popes will do what they list without
respect of any Ecclesiastical Order, be it right or wrong*

Romish Popes were most commonly very learned, but it happens oftentimes,
that the Regal Popes have neither learning nor knowledge in divine matters; and
yet these shall be they that shall command Ministers and and Preachers what
they list; and to make this assertion good, he affirms that he saw in some
places some Christian Princes, under the title of Reformation, to have in ten
or twenty years, usurped more tyranny over the Churches in their Dominions,
then ever the Pope and his adherents did in six hundred years.

All which reasons are but mere fopperies, blown up by the black Devil, to
blast the beauty of this truth; for we speak not of the abuse of any Prince,
Viretus his scandalous reasons answered.
to justify the same against any one, but of his right, that cannot be the
cause of any wrong; and it cannot be denied but an illiterate Prince may prove
a singular advancer of all learning, as Bishop Wickham was no great Scholar,
yet was he a most excellent instrument to produce abundance of famous Clerks in
this Church; and the King rules his Church by those Laws, which through his
royal authority are made with the advice of his greatest Divines, as hereafter
I shall show unto you: yet these spurious and specious pretexts may serve, like
clouds, to hide the light from the eyes of the simple. T. C. l. 2. p. 411.
So Cartwright also, that was our English firebrand, and his Disciples teach as
Harding had done before, that Kings and Princes do hold their Kingdoms and
Dominions under Christ, as he is the Son of God only, before all Worlds,
coequal with the Father, and not as he is Mediator and Governor of the Church:
and therefore the Christian Kings have no more to do with the Church
government, then the Heathen Princes: so Travers says, that the Heathen
Princes being converted to the faith, receive no more nor any further increase
of their power, whereby they may deal in Church causes, then they had before;
so the whole pack of the Disciplinarians are all of the same mind, and do hold
that all Kings, as well Heathen as Christian receiving but one Commission and
equal Authority immediately from God, have no more to do with Church causes,
the one sort then the other. And I am ashamed to set down the railing and the
scurrilous speeches of Anthony Gilby against Hen. 8. and of Knox, Gilby in his
admonition p. 69 Knox in his exhortation to the Nobility of Scotland, fol. 77.
Whittingham, and others, against the truth of the King's lawful right and
authority in all Ecclesiastical causes. For, were it so, as Cartwright,
Travers, and the rest of that crew do avouch, that Kings by being Christians
receive no more authority over Christ his Church, then they had before Which is
most false.
; yet this will appear most evident to all understanding men, that all Kings,
as well the Heathens as the Christians, are in the first place to see that
their people do religiously observe the worship of that God which they adore:
and therefore much more should Christian Princes have a care to preserve the
religion of Jesus Christ.

The Gentilee Kings preservers of religion.
For it cannot be denied, but that all Kings ought to preserve their Kingdoms;
and all Kingdoms are preserved by the same means, by which they were first
established; and they are established by obedience and good manners: neither
shall you find any thing that can beget obedience and good manners, but Laws
and Religion; and Religion does naturally beget obedience unto the Laws;
therefore most of those Kings that gave Laws were originally Priests; and as
Synesius says, Synes. ep. 126. Vide Arnis. part. 2. page 14. Ad magnas
reipubl. utilitates retinetur religio in civitatibus. Cicero de divin. l. 2.
(...), a Priest and a Prince was all one with them: when the Kings, to
preserve their Laws inviolable, and to keep their people in obedience that they
might be happy, became Priests, and exercised the duties of Religion, offering
sacrifices unto their Gods, and discha ging the other offices of the Priestly
Function (as our factious Priests could willingly take upon them the offices of
the King;) or if some of them were not Priests (as all were not Lawmakers) yet
all of them preserved Religion as the only preservation of their Laws, and
the happiness of their Kingdoms, which thye saw, could not continue without
Religion. But

2. The wisdom of our grave Prelates, and the learning of our religious
Clergy having stopped the course of this violent stream, 2. In the Parliament.
and hindered the translation of this right of Kings, unto their newborn
Presbytery and late erected Synods: There sprang up another generation out of
the dregs of the former, that because they would be sure to be bad enough, out
of their envy unto Kings, and malice unto the Church (that the one does not
advance their unworthyness, and the other does not bear with undutifullness)
will needs transfer this right of ruling God's Church unto a Parliament of
Laymen; the King shall be denuded of what God has given him: and the people
shall be endued with what God and all good men have ever denied them. I deny
not but the Parliament men, as they are most noble and worthy Gentlemen, so
many of them may be very learned, and not a few of them most religious; and I
honor the Parliament rightly discharging their duties, as much as their
modesty can desire, or their merit deserve; neither do I gainsay, but as they
are pious men, and the greatest Council of our King, so they may propose
things, and request such and such Laws to be enacted, such abuses to be
redressed, and such a reformation to be effected, as they think befitting for
Gods Church; but for Aaron's feed and the Tribe of Levi, Hugo de Sancto Vict. l
b 2. de sacr. fid par. 2. cap 3. Laicis Christianis fidelibus terrena possidere
conceditur, clericis vero tantum spiritualia committuntur; quae a^tem illa
spiritualia sunt, subjicit, c. 5. dicens; omnis ecclesiastica administratio in
tribus consistit, in sacramentis, in ordinibus, in praeceptis. Ergo, Laici
nihil juris habent in legibus and praeceptis condendis ecclesiast^cis.
to be directed and commanded out of the Parliament chair, how to perform the
service of the Tabernacle, and for Lay men to determine the Articles of faith,
to make Canons for Churchmen, to condemn heresies and define verities, and to
have the chief power for the government of Gods Church, as our Faction now
challenges, and their Preachers ascribe unto them, is such a violation of the
right of Kings, such a derogation to the Clergy, and so prejudicial to the
Church of Christ, as I never found the like usurpation of this right, to the
eradication of the true Religion, in any age; for seeing that, as the Proverb
goes, Quod medicorum est, promittunt medici, and practant fabrilia fabri; what
Papist or Atheist will be ever converted to profess that religion, which shall
be truly, what now they allege falsely unto us, a Parliamentary religion, or a
religion made by Laymen, with the advice of a few that they choose e faece
Cleri? I must seriously profess what I have often bewailed, to see Nadab and
Abihu offering strange fires upon God's Altar, to see the sacred offices of the
Priests so presumptuously usurped by the Laity, and to see the children of the
Church, nay, the servants of the Church to prescribe Laws unto their Masters;
and I did ever fear it to be an argument, not only of a corrupted, but also of
a decaying State when Moses chair should be set in the Parliament House, and
the Doctors of the Church should never sit thereon: therefore I wish that the
Ark may be brought back from the Philistines, and restored to the Priests, to
be placed in Shilo where it should be; and that the care of the Ark, which king
David undertook, may not be taken out of his hands by his people; but that he
may have the honor of that service, which God has imposed upon him. For

dearer to understanding, righteous, and religious Kings, then the increase and
maintenance of true religion, Of the Orthodox. Quia religio est ex potioribus
reipublicae partibus: ut ait Aristot Polit. l. 7. c. 8. and ipsa sola custodit
hominum inter se societates: ut ait Lactant. de ira Dei, cap. 12. Peritura
Troja perdidit primum Deos. Therefore the Tyrians chayned their gods, lest if
they fled they should be destroyed.
and the enlargement of the Church of Christ throughout all their Dominions, so
they have at all times employed their studies to this end; because it is an
infallible maxim, even among the Politicians, that the prosperity of any
Kingdom flourishes for no longer time, then the care of Religion and the
prosperity of the Church is maintained by them among their people: as we see
Troy was soon lost, when they lost their Palladium, so it is the truest sign of
a declining and a decaying State, to see the Clergy despised, and religion
disgraced: and therefore the provision for the safety of the Church, the
public enjoying of the word of God, the form of Service, the manner of
Government, and the honor and maintenance of the Clergy, are all, the duties
of a most Christian King, which the King of Heaven has imposed upon him for
the happiness and prosperity of his Kingdom; and whosoever derive the authority
of this charge, either in a blind obedience to the Sea of Rome, as the
Jesuits do, or out of their too much zeal and affection, to a new Consistory
as the late Presbyterians did, or to a Lay Parliament, as our upstart
Anabaptists aad Brownists do, are most unjust usurpers of the Kings Right,
which is not only ascribed unto him and warranted by the Word of God, but is
also confirmed to the Princes of this Land by several Acts of Parliament, to
have the supremacy in all causes and over all persons, as well in the
Ecclesiastical as in the Civil government; which being so, they are exempted
thereby from all inforcement of any domestical or foreign power, and freed
from the penalties of all those Laws, both Ecclesiastical and civil, whereunto
all their Subjects, Clergy and Laity, Q. Curtius de rebus Alexand. Joh. Beda,
p. 22, 23.
and all inferior persons, and the superior Nobility within their Kingdoms,
are obliged by our Laws and Statutes; (as hereafter I shall more fully declare.)

Therefore it behooves all Kings (and especially our King at this time)
seriously to consider, what prejudice they shall create unto themselves and
their just authority, if they should yield themselves inferior to their
Subjects, ( aggregative, or repraesentative, or how you will) or liable to the
penal Laws, (for so they may be soon dethroned by the unstable affection and
weak judgment of discontented people) or subject to the jurisdiction of Lay
Elders, and the excommunication of a tyrannous Consistory, who denouncing him,
Matthew. 18.17.
tanquam Ethnicum, may soon add, Deuteronomy. 17.15.
a stranger shall not reign over thee, and so depose him from all government.
For seeing all attempts are most violent, that have their beginning and
strength from zeal unto Religion, be the same true or false, and from the false
most of all, and those are ever the most dangerous whose ringleaders are most
base (as the servile War under Spartacus was most pernicious unto the Romans)
there can be nothing of greater use, How necessary it is for Kings to retain
their just rights in their hands.
or more profitable either for the safety of the King, the peace of the Church,
and the quiet state of the Kingdom, then for the Prince, the King, to retain
the Militia, and to keep that power and authority which the Laws of God and of
our Land have granted to, and intailed upon him, in his own hands unclipped and
unshaken: for when the multitude shall be unbridled, and the rights of the
Kings are brandished in their hands, we shall assuredly taste, and I fear in
too great a measure (as experience now shows) of those miserable evils, which
uncontrouled ignorance, furious zeal, false hypocricy, and the merciless
cruelty of the giddy-headed people, and discontented Peers shall bring upon us
and our Prince.

But to make it manifest unto the World, what power and authority God has
granted unto Kings, for the government of the Church, and the preservation of
his true Religion; we find them the worst men, at all times and in all places,
that mislike their Government, and reject their authority; and we see those
Churches most happy, The Kings that maintain true religion make their Kingdoms
happy.
and those Kingdoms most flourishing, which God has blessed with religious
Kings, as the State of the Church of Judaea makes it plain, when David,
Ezechias, Josias, and the other virtuous Kings restored the Religion, and
purified that Service, which the idolatry of others their predecessors had
corrupted, and we know that as Moses, Exodus 14 31 Number. 12.7, 8 Deuteronomy. 34.5.
Josh. 1.1, 2.
so kings are called the servants of God in a more special manner then all
others are: that is, not only because they serve the Lord in the Government of
the Common wealth, but especially because he vouchsafes to use their service
for the advancement of his Church, and the honor of his Son Christ here on
earth: or to distribute their duties more particularly, we know the Lord
exspecteth, and so requires a double service from every Christian king.

1. The one common with all others, to serve him as they are his creatures and
Christians; The double service of all Christian kings.
and therefore to serve him as all other Christians are bound to do. 2. The
other proper and peculiar to them alone, to serve him as they are Kings and
Princes.
1. As they are Christians.
In the first respect, they are no more privileged to offend then other men;
but they are tied to the same obedience of Gods Laws, and are obliged to
perform as many virtuous actions, and to abstain from all vices, as well as
any other of their Subjects: and if they fail in either point, they shall be
called to the same account, and shall be judged with the same severity as the
meanest of their people: and therefore, Be wise O ye Kings, be learned ye that
are Judges of the earth; Psalm. 2.10.
Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence; for with God
there is no respect of persons, but if they do offend he will bind Kings in
fetters, Romans 2.11. Psalm. 149.8.
and their Nobles with linkes of iron: and we dare not flatter you, to give you
the least liberty to neglect the strict service of the great God.

2. As they are Christian king: and that is twofold
In the second respect, the service of all Christian kings and princes has (as
I told you before) these two parts: 1. To protect the true religion, and to
govern the Church of Christ. 2. To preserve peace, and to govern the
Commonwealth.
For

1. To protect the Church. Aug. cont. lit. petil. l. 2. Optat. Milivit. lib. 3.
1. It is true indeed, that the Donatists of old, the grand fathers of our new
Sectaries, were wont to say, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What have we to do
with the Emperor, or what has the Emperor to do with the Church? but to this
Optatus answers, that, Ille solito furore acceusus in haec verba prorupit.
Donatus out of his accustomed madness burst forth into these mad terms; Prima
omnium in republ. functionum est, (...). Arist l. 7. c. 8. Arist. Polit. l. 3.
c. 10.
for it is a duty that lies upon all Princes, (because all, both Christians
and Pagans ought to be religious, as I showed to you before) not only to be
devout, but also to be the means to make all their Subjects (so far as they
can) to become devoted to Gods service, as the practice of those Heathens, that
had no other guide of their actions then the light of nature, does make it
plain; for Aristotle says, that, Qu^^ ad Deorum cultum pertinent, commissa
sunt regibus, and magistratibus, those things that pertain unto the worship of
the Gods are committed to the care of Kings; and civil Magistrates: and
whatsoever their religion was, (as indeed it was but mere superstition) yet
because Superstition and Religion, hoc habent commune, do this in common: Vt
faciant animos humiles formidine divum. Therefore to make men better, the more
humble and more dutiful, the transgression thereof was deemed worthy to receive
punishment among the Pagans; and that punishment was appointed by them, that
had the principal authority to govern the Commonwealth; as the Athenian
Magistrates condemned Socrates, (though he was a man wiser then themselves, yet
as they conceived very faulty) for his irreligion and derision of their adored
gods: The chief Magistrates of the Heathens had the charge of Religion.
And Tiberius would set up Christ among the Roman gods (though the act added
no honor unto Christ) without the authority and against the will of the
Senate; to show that the care of religion belonged unto the Emperor, or chief
Magistrate; and therefore as the Lord commanded the kings of Israel to write a
copy of his Law in a book, and to take heed to all the words of that Law for
to do them; that is, not only as a private person, (for so every man was not
to write it)* Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19.
but as King, to reduce others to the obedience thereof; so the examples of the
best kings both of Israel and Juda, and of the best Christian Emperors do make
this plain unto us: for Joshua caused all Israel to put away the strange gods
that were among them, Josh. 24.23. The care of the good kings of the Jews to
preserve the true religion.
and to incline their hearts unto the Lord God of Israel; Manasses, after his
return from Babylon, took away the strange Gods, and the Idols out of the
house of the Lord, and cast them all out of the City, and repaired the Altar of
the Lord, and commanded Juda to serve the Lord God of Israel. And what shall I
say of David, whose whole study was to further the service of God; and of
Jehosaphat, Asa, Josias, Ezechias, and others, that were rare patterns for
other kings for the well government of Gods Church? and in the time of the
Gospel, Quod non tollit praecepta legis, sed perficit, which takes not away the
rules of nature, nor the precepts of the Law, but rather establishes the one,
and perfecteth the other; because Christ came into the world, non ut tolleret
jura saeculi, sed ut de^eret peccata mundi, not to take away the rights of the
Nations, but to satisfy for the sins of the World, the best Christian
Emperors discharged the same duty, reformed the Church, abolished Idolatry,
punished Heresy, and maintained Piety: The care of the good Emperors to
preserve the true religion. Esaias 49.23.
especially, Constantine and Theodosius, that were most pious Princes, and of
much virtues, and became, as the Prophet foretold us, nursing fathers unto Gods
Church; for though they are most religious and best in their religion, that are
religious for conscience sake, yet there is a fear from the hand of the
Magistrate, that is able to restrain those men from many outward evils, whom
neither conscience nor religion could make honest: therefore God committed the
principal care of his Church to the Prince, and principal Magistrate.

And this is confirmed, and thoroughly maintained by sundry notable men, who
defended this truth. The Papists unawares confess this truth. Osorius de relig.
p. 21.
as Brentius against Asoto, Bishop Horn against Fekenham, Jewel against
Harding; and many other learned men, that have written against such other
Papists and Puritans, Anabaptists and Brownists, that have taken upon them to
impugn it; yea, many of the Papists themselves at unawares, do confess as
much; for Osorius says, Omne regis officium in religionis sanctissimae
rationem conferendum; and munus ejus est bear rempubl. religione and pietate:
all the office of a King is to be conferred, or employed for the regard of the
most holy Religion, and his whole duty is to bless, or make happy the
Commonwealth with Religion and piety: Quod enim est aliud reipublicae principi
munus assignatum, quam ut rempubl. florentem atque beatam faciat? quod quidem
nullo modo sine egregia pietatis and religionis sanctitate perficitur. For,
though we confess with Ignatius, that no man is equal to the Bishop in causes
Ecclesiastical, no not the King himself; that is, in such things as belong to
his office, Whit. resp. Camp. p. 302.
as Whitaker says; because he only ought to see to holy things, that is, the
instruction of the people, the administration of the Sacraments, the use of the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the like, The Kings authority over Bishops.
1 Chronicles. 28.13. 2 Chronicles. 29. 1 Reg. 2.26.
matters of great weight, and exceeding the Kings authority; yet Kings are
above Bishops in wealth, honor, power, government, and majesty: and though
they may not do any of the Episcopal duties, yet they may, and ought lawfully
to admonish them of their duties, and restrain them from evil, and command
them diligently to execute their office; and if they neglect the same, they
ought to reprove and punish them, as we read the good Kings of the Jewish
Church, and the godly Emperors As Martian apud Binium, l. 2. p. 178.
Justinian. novel. 10. tit. 6. Theodos. jun. Evagr. l. 1. c. 12.

Basil. in Council Constant 8. act. 1. Binius tom. 8. p. 880. Reason
confirms, that Kings should take care of religion.


of the Christian Church have ever done; and the Bishops themselves in sundry
Councils, have acknowledged the same power and Authority to be due, and of
right belonging unto them: as at Mentz, Anno 814. and Anno 847. apud Binium,
tom. 3. p. 462. and 631. At Emerita in Portugal, Anno 705. Bin. tom. 2. p.
1183. and therefore it is an ill consequent, to say, Princes have no Authority
to preach, Ergo they have no authority to punish those that will not preach, or
that do preach false Doctrine.

This truth is likewise apparent, not only by the the testimony of Scripture
and Fathers, but also by the evidence of plain reason; because the prosperity
of that Land which any King does govern, without a principal care of Religion,
decays and degenerateth into Wars, Dearths, Plagues and Pestilence, and
abundance of other miseries, that are the lamentable effects and consequences
of the neglect of Religion, and contempt of the Ministers of Gods Church; which
I believe is no small cause of these great troubles which we now suffer;
because our God, Psalm. 35.27.
that takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, cannot endure that
either his service should be neglected, or his servants abused.

CHAP VII.
Shows, the three things necessary for all Kings that would preserve true
Religion; how the King may attain to the knowledge of things that pertain to
Religion; by his Bishops and Chaplains, and the calling of Synods; the
unlawfulness of the new Synod; the Kings power and authority to govern the
Church; and how both the old and new Disciplinarians and Sectaries rob the King
of this power.

THerefore seeing this should be the greatest care, that brings the greatest
honor to a Christian Prince, to promote the true Religion; it is requisite
that we should consider those things that are most necessary to a Christian
King, for the Religious performance of this duty: And they are Three things
necessary for a king to prefer the Church and the Religion.
1. A will to perform it. 2. An understanding to go about it. 3. A power to
effect it.
And these three must be inseparable in the Prince that maintains true
Religion. For,

1. Our knowledge and our power without a willing mind, does want motion.

2. Our will and power without knowledge shall never be able to move right. And,

3. Our will and knowledge without ability can never prevail to produce any
effect. Therefore Kings and Princes ought to labor to be furnished with these
three special graces.

The first is a good will to preserve the purity of Gods service, 1. A willing
mind to do it.
not only in his House, but also througout all his Kingdom: and this, as all
other graces are, must be acquired by our faithful prayers, and that in a more
special manner for Kings and Princes then for any other; and it is wrought in
them by outward instruction, and the often predication of God's Word, and the
inward inspiration of Gods Spirit.

The second is knowledge, which is not much less necessa^y then the former; 2.
Understanding to know what is to be reformed and what to be retained.
because not to run right, is no better then not to run at all, and men were as
good to do nothing, as to do amiss; and therefore true knowledge is most
requisite for that King that will maintain true religion: and this should be
not only in general, and by others, but as much as possible he can, in
particulars, and of himself; that himself might be assured what were fit to
be reformed, and what warranted to be maintained in Gods service; for so Moses
commands the chief Princes to be exercised in Gods Law day and night:
because this would be a special means to beatifie, or make happy, both the
Church and Commonwealth: As the neglect thereof brought ignorance unto the
Church, The kings neglect of religion and the Church, is the destruction of the
Commonwealth.
and ruin to the Roman Empire; for, as in Augustus time learning flourished,
and in Constantines time piety was much embraced; because these Emperors were
such themselves: so when the Kings, whose examples most men are apt to follow,
either busied with secular affairs, or neglecting to understand the truth of
things, and the state of the Church, do leave this care unto others; then
others imitating their neglect, do rule all things with great corruption, and
as little truth; whereby errors and blindness will overspread the Church; and
pride, covetousness, and ambition will replenish the Commonwealth; and these
vices, like the tares that grow up in Gods field to suffocate the pure Wheat,
will at last choke up all virtue and piety both in Church and State,

Therefore to prevent this mischief, the King, on whom God has laid the care
of these things, ought himself (what he can) to learn and find out the true
state of things: and because it is far unbefitting the honor and inconsistent
with the charge of great Princes, (whose other affairs will not permit them) to
be always poring at their books, as if they were such critiques, How kings may
attain unto the knowledge of religion, and understand the state of the Church,
and how to govern the same. 1. To call able Clergymen about them.
as intended to exceed all others in the the^rick learning, like Archimedes,
that was in his study drawing forth his Mathematical figures, when the City
was sacked, and his enemies pulling down the house about his ears; therefore it
is wisdom in them to imitate the discreet examples of other wise Kings, and
religious Emperors, in following the means that God has left, and using the
power and authority that he has given them, to attain unto more knowledge, and
to be better instructed in any religious matter, then themselves could possibly
attain unto by their own greatest study: and that is,

1. As Alexander had his Aristotle ready to inform him in any Philosophical
doubt, and Augustus his prime Orators, Poets, and Historians to instruct him in
all affairs; so God has granted this power unto his Kings, to call those
Bishops, and command such Chaplains to reside about them, as shall be able to
inform them in any truth of Divinity, and so direct them in the best form of
Government of Gods Church; and these Chaplains should be well approved, both
for their learning and their honesty; for to be learned without honesty, as
many are, is to be witty to do evil, which is most pernicious, and does often
times make a private gain by a public loss, How they should be qualified.
or an advantage to themselves by the detriment of the Church: and to be honest
without knowledge, or to have knowledge without experience, especially in such
places of eminency, and for the affairs of importance, may be as dangerous;
when their want of skill may counsel to do matters of much hurt: but when both
are met together in one person, that man is a fit Subject to do good service
both to God and the King: and the King may be assured, there cannot be a better
furtherance to assist him for the well ordering of God's Church, then the grave
advice and directions of such instruments, as it appears by that memorable
example of King Ioas, (left to be remembered by all Kings) who, whilst the wise
and religious Priest Jehoiada assisted and directed him, had all things
successful and happy to his whole Kingdom; 2 Reg. 12.2.
but after Jehoiada's death, the King destitute of such a Chaplain to attend,
and such a Priest to counsel him, all things came speedily to great ruin.

Therefore I dare boldly avouch it, they are enemies unto Kings, and the
underminers of God's Church, and such instruments as I am not able to express
their wickedness, that would exclude such Jehoiada's from the Kings counsel;
for was not Saul a wicked King, and Ahab little better? yet Saul would have
Samuel to direct him, though he followed not his direction; and Ahab would ask
counsel of Micaiah, though he rejected the same to his own destruction: and
King David, 1 Reg. 22.16.
though never so wise and so great a Prophet, and Josias, and Ezechias, and all
the rest of the good Kings, had always the Priests and the men of God to be
their Counselors, and followed their directions, especially in Church causes,
Mar. 6.20.
as the oracles of God: so wicked Herod disdained not to hear John the Baptist,
and to be reformed by him in many things; and happy had he been, had he done it
in all things. And if you read Eusebius (which is called Pamphilus, for the
great love he bare to that his noble Patron) and Socrates, and the rest of the
Ecclesiastical Historians, or the Histories of our own I and, you shall find
that the best Kings and greatest Emperors had the best Divines, and the most
reverend Bishops to be their chiefest Counselors, and to be employed by them
in their weightiest affairs. How then has the Devil now prevailed to exclude
them from all Counsels, and as much as in him lies, from the sight of Princes,
when he makes it a suspicion of much evil, if they do but talk togethe? How
has he bewitched the Nobility to yield to be deprived of their Chaplains? Is
it not to keep them (that have not time to study, and to find out truth
themselves) still in the ignorance of things; and to none other end, then to
overthrow the true religion, and to bring Kings and Princes to confusion?

2 To call Synods to discuss and conclude the harder things.
2. When the King sees cause, God has given him power and authority to call
Synods and Councils, and to assemble the best men, the most moderate and most
learned, to determine of those things together, which a fewer number could not
so well, or at least not so authoritatively conclude upon: for so Constantine
the Great called the great Council of Nice to suppress the Heresy of Arius.
Theodosius called the Council of Ephesus in the case of Nestorius: Valentinian
and Martian called the Council of Calcedon against Eutyches: Justinian called
the Council of Constantinople against Severus, that renewed the Heresy of
Eutyches: Constantine the Fifth called the sixth Synod against the
Monothelites; and so did many others in the like cases: God having fully
granted this right and authority unto them, for their better information in any
point of religion, and the government of the Church.

And therefore they that deny this power unto Kings, or assume this authority
unto themselves, whether Popes or Parliament, out of the Kings hand, they may
as well take his eyes out of his head; because this is one of the best helps
that God has left unto Kings, The unparalled presumption of the Faction to
call a Synod without the king
to assist and direct them in the chiefest part of their royal government: how
presumptuous then, and injurious unto our King, and prejudicial to the Church
of Christ, was the faction of this Parliament, without the Kings leave, and
contrary to his command, to undertake the nomination of such a pack of
Schismatical Divines for such a Synod, as might finally determine such points
of faith and discipline, as themselves best liked of, let all the Christian
world, that as yet never saw the like president, be the Judge; and tell us what
shall be the religion of that Church, where the Devil shall have the power to
prompt worldlings to nominate his prime Chaplains, Socinians, Brownists,
Anabaptists, and the refuse of all the refractory Clergy, The quality of the
Synodical men.
(that seem learned in nothing but in the contradiction of learning, and
justifying Rebellion against their King and the Church) to compose the Articles
of our faith, and to frame a new government of our Church? I am even ashamed
that so glorious a Kingdom should ever breed so base a Faction, that durst ever
presume to be so audacious; and I am sorry that I should be so unhappy to live
to see such an unparalled boldness in any Clergy, that the like cannot be
found in any Ecclesiastical History, from the first birth of Christ's Church to
this very day, unless our Sectaries can produce it from some of the Vtopian
Kingdoms, that are so far South ward In terra incognita, beyond the Torrid
Zone, that we (whose zeal is not so fiery, but are of the colder spirits) could
not yet perfectly learn the true method of their Anarchical government: or if
our Lawyers can show us the like president that ever Parliament called a Synod
contrary to the King's Proclamation, I shall rest beholding to them, produce it
if they can, Credat Judaeus appella; non ego.

The third thing requisite to a King for the preservation of true religion, 3.
An authority and power to guide the Church, and to uphold the true religion.
and the government of God's Church, is power and authority to defend it; for
though the Prince should be never so religious, never so desirous to defend the
faith, and never so well able in his understanding, and so well furnished with
knowledge to set down what Service and Ceremonies should be used; yet if he
has not power and ability, which do arise from his right and just authority to
do it, and to put the same in execution, all the rest are but fruitless
embryoes, like those potentials, that are never reduced into actions; Ps. 129.6.
or like the grass upon the house top, that withers before it be plucked up.

But to let you see, that Kings and Princes should have this power and
authority in all Ecclesiastical causes, and over all Ecclesiastical persons, we
find that all Ages and all Laws have warranted them to do the same; for
Solomon displaced Abiathar and placed Sadoc in his room; 1. Reg. 2.27. and 35.
Jerem. 26. How all kings and Emperors exercised this power over the Church.
Jeremy's case was heard by the King of Israel. Theodosius, and Valentinian
made a Decree, that all those should be deposed, which were infected with the
impiety of Nestorius; and Justinian deposed Sylverius and Vigilius: and many
other Kings and Emperors did the like; and not only the Law of God, whereof
the King is the prime keeper, and the keeper of both Tables, but also the
Statutes of our Land do give unto our King the nomination of Bishops, and some
other elective dignities in the Church, the custody of the Bishops Temporalties
during the vacation, the Patronage Paramount, or right to present by the last
lapse; and many other furtherances and preservatives of religion are, in
terminis terminantibus, deputed by our Laws unto the King; and for his care
and charge thereof, they have settled upon him our first Fruits, Tenths,
Subsidies, and all other contributions of the Ecclesiastical persons, which the
Pope received while he usurped the government of this Church; these things
being due to him that had the supreme power for the government.

And therefore seeing the examples of all good Kings in the Old Testament, and
of the Christian Kings and Emperors in the New Testament, and all Laws both
of God and man, (excepting those Laws of the Pontificials, that are made
against the Law of God,) and all Divines, Cassian. de Incarn. l. 1. c. 6.
excepting the Jesuits and their sworn Brethren the Presbyterians, do most
justly ascribe this right and power unto Kings; I may truly say with Cassianus,
that there is no place of audience left for them, by whom obedience is not
yielded to that which all have agreed upon; nor any excuse for those Subjects
that assist not their Sovereign to enable him to discharge this great charge
that is laid upon him.

What then shall we say to them that pull this power, and tear this prerogative
out of the King's hand, and place it in the hands of mad men, as the Prophet
epithets the madness of the people? Psalm. 65.7. How the Disciplinarians rob the
king of this right. Knox to the Commonalty, fol. 49. 50, 55.
For that furious Knox belched forth this unsavory Doctrine, That the
Commonalty may lawfully require of their King to have true Preachers; and if he
be negligent, they themselves may justly provide them, maintain them, defend
them, against all that oppose them, and detain the profits of the Church
Livings from the other sort of Ministers; a point fully practiced by the
English Scotizers of these days: and as if this Doctrine were not seditious
enough, and abundantly sufficient to move Rebellion, Goodman publishes that
horrible tenet unto the world, that it is lawful to kill wicked Kings: which
most dangerous and more damnable Doctrine, Dean Whittingham affirms to be the
tenet of the best and most learned of them that were our Disciplinarians.

But when as true Religion does command us to obey our Kings, whatsoever their
Religion is, What true religion teaches us.
aut agendo aut patiendo, either in suffering with patience, whatsoever they do
impose, or in doing with obedience whatsoever they do command. Religion can be
no warrant for those actions, which must remain as the everlasting blemishes of
that Religion, which either commanded or approved of their doing, I am sure all
wise men will detest these Doctrines of Devils: and seeing it is an infallible
rule, that good deserves then to be accounted evil, when it cease to be well
done, it is apparent that it is no more lawful for private and inferior
persons to usurp the princes power, and violently to remove Idolatry, or to
cause any Reformation; then it is for the Church of Rome by invasion or treason
to establish the Doctrine of that See in this or any other foreign kingdom,
because both are performed by the like usurped authority.

The old Disciplinarians.
Yet these were the opinions and practices of former times, when Buchanan, Knox,
Cartwright, Goodman, Gilby, Penry, Fenner, Martin, Travers, Throgmorton,
Philips, Nichols, and the rest of those introducers of Out landish and Genevian
Discipline, first broached these uncouth and unsufferable tenets in our Land,
in the Realm of England and Scotland; and truly if their opinions had not
dispersed themselves, like poison, throughout all the veins of this Kingdom,
and infected many of our Nobility, and as many of the greatest Cities of this
Kingdom, (as it appears by this late unparalled rebellion) these and the
rest of the traiterous authors of those unsavory books, which they published,
and those damnable tenets which they most ignorantly held, and maliciously
taught unto the people, should have slept in silence; their hallowed and
sanctified Treason should have remained untouched, and their memorial should
have perished with them.

But seeing, as Saint Chrysostom says of the Heretics of his time, that
although in age they were younger, yet in malice they were equal to the ancient
Heretics; Our rebellious Sectaries far worse then all the former
Disciplinarians.
and as the brood of Serpents, though they are of less stature, yet in their
poison no less dangerous then their dammes; so no more have our new Sectaries,
our upstart Anabaptists, any less wickedness then their first begetters; nay,
we find it true, that as the Poet says, Aetas parentum pejor avis
Tulit nos nequiores. --
These young cubbs prove worse then the old foxes; for if you compare the
Wheles with the wolves, our latter Schismatics with their former Masters, I
doubt not but you shall find less learning, and more villainy, less honesty,
and more subtilty, hypocrisy and treachery in Doctor Burges, Master Marshal,
Case, Goodwin, Burrowes, Calamy, Perne, Hill, Cheynel, and the rest of our
giddy-headed Incendiaries, then can be found in all the seditious Pamphlets of
the former Disciplinarians, or of them that were hanged (as Penry) for their
treasons: for these men do not only (as Sidonius says of the like) aperte
invidere, S idon lib. epist.
abjecte fingere, and serviliter superbire, openly envy the state of the
Bishops, basely forge lies against them, and servilely swel with the pride of
their own conceited sanctity and apparent ignorance; but they have also most
impudently (even in their pulpits) slandered the footsteps of Gods Anointed,
and so brought the abomination of their transgression to stand in the holy
place; they have with Achan troubled Israel, and tormented the whole Land; yea,
these three Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland; and for inciting,
provoking, and encouraging simple, ignorant, poor, For which their intolerable
villainies If I be not deceived in my judgment, they of all others, and above
all the Rebels in the kingdom, deserve the greatest and severest punishment,
God of Heaven give them the grace to repent.
discontented and seditions Sectaries, to be Rebels and Traitors against their
own most gracious King; they have not only with Jerusalem justified Samaria,
Sodom and Gomorrah, but they have justified all the Samaritanes, all the
Sodomites, all the Schismatics, Heretics, Rebels, and Traitors, Papists, and
Atheists, and all that went before them, Judas himself in many circumstances
not excepted; and that which makes their doings the more evil, and the more
exceedingly wicked, is, that they make Religion to be the warrant for their
evil doings: the pack-horse to carry, and the clokt to cover all their
treacheries: and thereby they drew the greater multitudes of poor Zelots to be
their followers.

And therefore seeing it is not only the honor, but also the duty, as of all
other Kings, so likewise of our King, to be as the Princes of our Land are
justly styled, the Defenders of the Faith; and that not only in regard of
enemies abroad, but also in respect of those far worse enemies, which desire
alteration at home, it behooves the King to look to these homebred enemies of
the Church; and seeing the king, though never so willing for his piety and
religion, never so able for his knowledge and understanding, What Gods faithful
servants, and the kings loyal Subjects must do in these times. 1. To justify
the kings right
yet without strength and power to effect what he desires, cannot defend the
faith, and maintain the true Religion, from the violence of Sectaries and
Traitors within his kingdom; it hehoves us all to do these two things.

2. To justify the kings (...), his authority and right to the supreme
Governor and defender of the Chuch, and of Gods true religion and service,
both in respect of Doctrine and Discipline; and that none else, Pope or
Parliament, has any power at all herein, but what they have derivately from
him: which I hope we have sufficiently proved.

2. To submit our selves unto our king, and to add our strength, force, 2. To
assist Him against the Rebels.
and power to enable his power to discharge this duty against all the
Innovators of our Religion, and the enemies of our peace, for the honor of
God, and the happiness of this Church and Commonwealth: for that power which
is called the Kings power, and is granted and given to him of God, is not only
that Heroic virtue of fortitude, which God planteth in the hearts of most
noble Princes, (as he has most grasiously done it in abundant measure in our
most gracious king) but it is the collected and united power and strength of
all his Subjects, which the Lord has commanded us to join and submit it for
the assistance of the kings power, against all those that shall oppose it, and
if we refuse or neglect the same, then questionless whatsoever mischief,
idolatry, barbarity, or superstition shall take root in the Church, and
whatsoever oppression and wickedness shall impair the Commonwealth, Heaven
will free His Majesty, and the wrath of God, in no small measure, must
undoubtedly light upon us and our posterity; even as Debora says of them, that
refused to assist Barac against his enemies, Curse ye Meroz, curse bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof, Jud. 5.23.
because they came not forth to help the Lord against the mighty.

CHAP. VIII.
Shows it is the right of Kings to make Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons,
proved by many authorities and examples; that the good Kings and Emperors made
such Laws by the advice of their Bishops and Clergy, and not of their Lay
Counselors; how our late Canons came to be annulled; that it is the Kings
right to admit his Bishops and Prelates to be of his Council, and to delegate
secular authority, or civil jurisdiction unto them; proved by the examples of
the Heathens, Jews, and Christians.

OUt of all this that has been spoken, it is more then manifest, that the king
ought to have the supreme power over Gods Church, and the Government thereof,
and the greatest care to preserve true Religion throughout all his Dominions:
this is his duty, and this is his honor, that God has committed not a people,
but his people, and the members of his Son under his charge. For the
performance of which charge, it is requisite for us to know that God has
granted unto him, among other rights, these two special prerogatives.

Two special rights and prerogatives of the King for the government of the
Church. 1. To make Laws and Canons.
1. That he may and ought to make Laws, Orders, Canons, and Decrees, for the
well governing of Gods Church. 2. That he may, when he sees cause, lawfully
and justly grant tolerations and dispensations of his own Laws and Decrees, as
he pleases.
1. Not only Solomon and Jehosaphat gave commandment, and prescribed unto the
chief Priests and Levites, what form and order they should observe in their
Ecclesiastical causes, and method of serving God; but also Constantine,
Theodosius, Justinian, and all the Christian Emperors that were careful of
Gods service, did the like; and therefore, when the Donatists alleged, that
secular Princes had nothing to do to meddle in matters of Religion, and in
causes Ecclesiastical, Aug. l. 2. c. 26.
Saint Augustine in his second Epistle against Gaudentius, says, I have
already proved that it appertains to the Kings charge, that the Ninivites
should pacify Gods wrath; and therefore the Kings that are of Christ's Church,
do judge most truly, that it belongs to their charge, to see that men Rebel
not, Idom ep. 48. and ep. 50. ad Bonifac.
without punishment against the same; because God does inspire it is to the
minds of Kings that they should procure the Commandments of the Lord to be
performed in all their Kingdoms; for they are commanded to serve the Lord in
fear; and how do they serve the Lord, as Kings, but in making Laws for Christ?
So they are called the kings Ecclesiastical Laws.
as man he serves him by living faithfully, but as King he serves him in
making Laws that shall command just things, and forbid the contrary, which they
could not do, if they were not kings: And by the example of the king of Ninive,
Darius, Nebuchadnezzar, and others, which were but figures and prophesies that
foreshewed the power, duty and service that Christian kings should owe and
perform in like sort to the furtherance of Christ's Religion in the time of the
New Testament, when al kings shall fall down and Worship Christ, Psalm. 72.11.
Arg. cont. lit. Peul. l. 2. c 92
and all Nations shall do him service, he proves, that the Christian kings and
Princes should make Laws and Decrees for the furtherance of Gods service, even
as Nebuchadnezzar had done in his time. And upon the words of the Apostle, Idem
in l. de 12. abus. grad. grad. 2.
that the king bears not the sword in vain, he proves against Petilian, that
the power and authority of the Princes, which the Apostle treats of in that
place, is given unto them, to make sharp penal Laws to further true
religion, and to suppress all Heresies and Schisms.

And so accordingly we find the good Emperors and Kings have ever done; The
good Emperors have made Laws for the government of the Church. Eusebius. in vita
Constant. l. 2. and 3.
for Constantine caused the idolatrous religions to be suppressed, and the true
knowledge of Christ to be preached and planted amongst his people, and made
many wholesome Laws, and godly Constitutions, to restrain the sacrificing unto
Idols, and all other devilish and superstitious south-sayings, and to cause
the true service of God to be rightly administered in every place, says
Eusebius. And in another place he says, that the same Constantine gave
injunctions to the chief Ministers of the Churches, that they should make
special supplication to God for him; and he enjoined all his Subjects that
they should keep holy certain days dedicated to Christ, and the Sabbath, or
Saturday (which was then wont to be kept holy, and as yet not abrogated by any
Law among the Christians;) he gave a Law to the Ruler of every Nation, that
they should celebrate the Sunday, or the Lords day in like sort; Idem de vita
Constant. l. 1. and 3. and 4. c. 18.
and so for the days that were dedicated to the memory of the Martyrs, and
other festival times; and all such things were done according to the ordinance
of the Emperor.

Nicephorus writing of the excellent virtues of Andronicus, son to Immanuel
Palaeologus, and comparing him to Constantine the Great, says, Niceph. in
prafation. Eccles. hist.
thou have restored the Catholic Church, being troubled with new opinions, to
the old State, thou have banished all unlawful and impure doctrine, thou have
established the truth, and have made Laws and Constitutions for the same.

Sozomen speaking of Constantines sons, says, Sozomenus l, 3. c. 17.
the Princes also concurred to the increase of these things, (...), showing
their good affections to the Churches, no less then their father did, and
honoring the Clergy their servants with singular promotions and immunities,
both confirming their fathers Laws, and making also new Laws of their own,
against such as went about to sacrifice, and to worship Idols, or by any other
means fell to the Greekish, or Heathenish superstitions.

Theodoret tells us, that Valentinian at the Synod in Illirico, did not only
confirm the true faith by his Royal assent, but made also many godly and
sharp Laws, as well for the maintenance of the truth of Christ his doctrine,
as also touching many other causes Ecclesiastical, and, as ratifying those
things that were done by the Bishops, (...), Theodor. l. c. 5, 6, and 7.
he sent abroad to them that doubted thereof.

Honorius, at the request of Boniface the first, made a Law, whereby it might
appear what was to be done, Distinct. 79. siduo.
when two Popes were chosen at once by the indiscretion of the Electors.

Martianus also made a Statute, to cut off, and put away all manner of
contention about the true faith and Religion, in the Council of Calcedon.

The Emperor Justinus made a Law, that the Churches of Heretics should be
consecrated to the Catholic Religion, says Martinus Poenitentiarius. And who
knows not of the many Laws, and Decrees, that Justinian made in
Ecclesiastical causes for the furtherance of the true Religion? for in the
beginning of the Constitutions collected in the Code of Justinian, the first 13
titles are all filled with Laws for to rule the Church; where it forbids the
Bishops to reiterate baptism, to paint, L. 1. tit. 5. L. 1. tit. 7. Novel.
123. c. 10. Novel. 58. Novel. 137. c. 6.
or grave on earth the Image of our Savior. And in the Novels the Emperor
ordains Laws, of the creation and consecration of Bishops; that Synods
should be annually held; that the holy mysteries should not be celebrated in
private houses; that the Bishops should speak alond when they celebrate the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist; and that the holy Bible should be
translated into the vulgar tongue, and the like.

And not only these and the rest of the godly Emperors that succeeded them,
but also Ariamirus, Wambanus, Richaredus, and diverse other Kings of Spain did
in like manner: And Charlemaigne, who approved not the decisions of the
Greekish Synod, wrote a book against the same Entitled, A Treatise of
Charlemaigne against the Greekish Synod touching Images.
, whereby the King maintained himself in possession, to make Laws for the
Church (says Johannes Beda) of which Laws there are many in a book, called
The capitulary Decrees of Charles the Great, who as Popin his predecessor had
done in the City of Bourges, so did he also assemble many Councils in diverse
places of his Kingdoms, as at Mayns, at Tours, at Reins at Chaalons, at Arles,
and the sixth, most famous of all, at Francfort, where himself was present in
person, and condemned the error of Felician; and so other Kings of France, and
the Kings of our own Kingdom of England, both before and after the Conquest,
(as Master Fox plentifully records) did make many Laws and Constitutions for
the government of God's Church.

The saying of Dioclesian.
But as Dioclesian, that was neither the best nor the happiest governor, said
most truly of the civil government, that there was nothing haraer th n to rule
well That is, to rule the Commonwealth.
, so it is much harder to govern the Church of Christ; therefore as there
cannot be an argument of greater wisdom in a Prince, nor any thing of greater
safety and felicity to the Commonwealth, then for him to make choice of a wise
Council to assist him in his most weighty affairs, Tacitus Annal. lib. 12.
says Cornelius Tacitus: So all religious Kings must do the like in the
government of the Church, and the making of their Laws for that government;
for God out of his great mercy to them, and no less desire to have his people
religiously governed, left such men to be their supporters, their helpers and
advisers in the performance of these duties: and I pray you, whom did Kings
choose for this business, but whom God had ordained for that purpose? for you
may observe that although those Christian Kings and Emperors made their Laws,
as having the supremacy and the chie^est c^re of God's religion committed by
God into their hands; yet they did never make them, that ever I could read,
with the advice, counsel, or direction of any of their Peers, or Lay Subjects;
but, as David had Nathan and God, The good Kings and Emperors made their Laws
for the government of the Church, only by the adv ce of their Clergy. A good
Law of Instinian. Constit. 123.
N^bu^hadnezzar had Daniel, and the rest of the Jewish Kings and Heathens had
their Prophets only and Priests to direct them in all matters of religion; so
those Christian Kings and Princes took their Bishops and their Clergy only to
be their counselors and directors in all Church causes, as it appears out of
all the forecited Authors, and all the Histories that do write thereof: and
Justinian published this Law, that when any Ecclesiastical cause or matter was
moved, his Lay officers should not intermeddle with it, but should suffer the
Bishops to end the same according to the Canons: the words are, Si
Ecclesiasticum negotium sit, nullam communionem habento civiles magistratus cum
ea disceptatione, sed religios^ssimi Episcopi secundum sacros canones, negotio
finem imp nunto. For the good Emperor knew full well, that the Lay Senate
neither understood what to determine in the points of faith, and the government
of Christ's Church, nor was ever willing to do any great good, or any special
favor unto the Shepherds of Christ's flock, and the teachers of the true
religion; because the Son of God had foretold it, that the world should hate
us, that secular men and Lay Senators should commonly oppose, John. 15.19.
cross, and show all the spite they can unto the Clergy, Matthew. 10.16.
of whom our Savior says, Behold I send you forth, (...), as sheep in the
midst of wolves. Whence this, (...), great distance between their dispositions
being observed, it grew into a Proverb, that Laici semper infesti sunt
Clericis. And Doctor Meriton In a Sermon before King James, How the Laity love
the Clergy. A very memorable act. Anno. ^9. Eliz. cap. 4.
observed this as one of the good favors the Clergy of England found from our
Parliaments since the reformation, (when many men first began to be translated
from the seat of the scornful to sit in Moses chair, and to prescribe Laws
for Christ his Spouse) to make an Act, that all wandering beggars after their
correction by the Constable, should be brought to the Minister of the Parish,
to have their names registered in a Book, (and the Constable used to give to the
Minister 2d for his pains for every one so registered) but if he refused or
neglected to do it, the Statute says he should be punished five shillings for
every one that should be so omitted; where, besides the honorable office, I
will not say to make the Minister of Christ a Bedle of the Beggars, but a
Register of the vagrants; you see the punishment of one neglect amounts to
the reward of thirty labors: therefore all the Christian Emperors and the
wisest Kings, considering this great charge that God had laid upon them, to
make wholesome Laws and Constitutions for the government of his Church, and
seeing the inclinations of the Laity, would never permit any of these Lay-
Elders, and the Citizens of the world, to usurp this authority, to be the
composers, contrivers, or assistants in concluding of any Ecclesiastical Law,
until the fences of God's vineyard were pulled down, That the Laity should have
no interest in making Laws for the Church.
and the wild Boar out of the forest, the audacious presumption of the unruly
Commonalty ventured either to govern the Church, or to subdue their Prince;
since which incroachment upon the rights of Kings, it has never succeeded well
with the Church of Christ; and I dare boldly say it, and fidenter quia
fideliter, and the more boldly because most truly: the more authority they
shall gain herein, the less glory shall Christ have from the service of his
Church; and therefore Be wise o ye Kings. And consider how any new Canons are
to be made by our Statute, 25 Hen. 8.

Ob. But then it may be demanded, if this be so, Laity has no right in making
Laws and Decrees for the government of God's Church, but that it belongs
wholly unto the King to do it, with the advice of his Bishops and the rest of
his Clergy: then how came the Parliament to annul those Canons that were so
made by the King and Clergy, because they had no vote nor consent in confirming
of them?

Sol. Truly I cannot answer to this Objection, Poet says, Dum furor incursu,
currenti cede furori,
D^fficiles aditus impetus omnis habet.


They we^e furiously bent against them; and you know, furor arma ministrat: and
dum regnant arma, si lent leges, all Laws must sleep while Arms prevail:
besides, you may find those Canons, as if they had been prophetically made,
foresaw the increasing strength of Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Puritanisme, most
likely to subvert true Protestantisme, and therefore were as equally directed
against these Sectaries of the left hand, as against the Papists on the right
hand; and I think the whole Kingdom now finds and feels the strength of that
virulent Faction; and therefore what wonder, that they should seek to break all
those Canons to pieces, and batter them down with their mighty Ordinances, for
seeking to subdue their invincible errors; or else, because (as they say) the
Ecclesiastical State is not an independent society, but a member of the whole,
the Parliament was not so to be excluded, as that their advice and approbation
should not be required, to make them obligatory to the rest of the Subjects of
the whole Kingdom, which claim this privilege, to be tied to the observation
of no humane Laws, that themselves by their representatives have not consented
unto.

2. As the King is entrusted by God to make Laws for the government of the
Church of Christ, so it is a rule without question, 2. To grant dispensations
of his own Laws.
that ejus est dispensare and absolvere, cujus est condere, he has the like
power to dispense with whom he pleases, and to absolve him that transgresses,
as he has to oblige them: therefore our Church being for reformation the most
famous throughout all the parts of the Christian world, and our King, having so
just an authority to do the same, it is a most impudent scandal, full of all
malice and ignorance, not to be endured by any well-affected Christian, that
the new brood of the old Anabaptists do lay upon our Church and State, that
they did very unreasonably, and unconscionably by their Laws, grant
Dispensations both for Pluralities and Non-residency, The scandals of the
malicious ignorants against the worthier clergy.
only to further the corrupt desires of some few, to the infinite wrong of the
whole Clergy, besides the hazard of many thousands of souls, the intolerable
dishonor of Gods truth, and the exceeding disadvantage of Christ his Church:
for, seeing God has principally committed, and primarily commended the care of
his Church and service unto Kings, who are therefore to make Laws and Orders
for the well governing of the same, i^ shall make it most evident, that they
may, as they have ever done, most lawfully and more beneficially, both for Gods
Church, and also for the Commonwealth, do these three things.

Three special points handled.
1. To grant that grace and favor unto their Bishops and other Ecclesiastical
persons, as to admit them of their counsel, and to undertake secular authority
and civil jurisdiction.

2. To allow dispensations of Pluralities, and Non-residency, which they may
most justly and most wisely do, without any transgression of the Law of God.

3. To give tolerations (where they see cause) of many things prohibited by
their Law, to dispense with the transgressions, and to remit the fault of the
transgressors. For

1 Point.
1. Though the world relapsed from the true light, and declined from the sincere
Religion to most detestable superstition; yet there remained in the people
certain impressions of the divine truth, The great respect of the Clergy in
former ages Saravia l. 2. c. 2. p. 103. 1. Among the Gentiles. Osor p. 231. De
tota Syria and Pa^estina refert Dion. l. 37. quod rex summi Pontificis nomen
habeat. Str^bo lib. 12 Apud Tertul. advers Valent. Hermetem legimus appellari
and Max. sacerdotem, and maximum regem. Cicero l. 2. de legibus. Diotogenes
apud Stob. d cit. (...), Aethiopes reges suos del gebant ex numer^ sac^rdotum.
Di odor. l 3. c. 1. Titus Vespas Pontification maximum ideo sele prosessusest
accipere, ut puras servaret manus. Sution i't Tito. cap. 9. In Aricia regnum
erat concretum cu^ sacerdotio Danae, ut iunuit Ovid De art amandi, lib. 1.
Ecce suburbanae templum nemorade Dianae, Paraiaque per gladios regna nocente
manu, and Strabo lib. 5.
that there was a GOD, and that this God, was religiously to be worshipped; and
those men that taught the worship of that God, how fowly soever they did
mistake it, were had in singular account and supereminent authority among all
Nations: and as Saravia says, they were compeers with Kings in their
Government, so that nothing was done without their counsel and consent; and as
Theseus was the first, that Cives Atticos e pagis in ^rbem compulit, and put
the difference betwixt Nobles, Husbandmen, and Artificers; so the Priests were
always selected out of the noblest families, and were ever in all their public
counsels, as the Divines sat among the Athenians, and the South-sayers sat
with the King among the Lacedaemonians in all their weightiest consultations:
and Strabo tells us, that the Priests of Bellona, which were in Pontus and
Cappadocia (for that Goddess was honored in both places) were regarded with
the greatest honor next to the King himself: and the Romans that were both
wealthy, warlike, and wise, did almost nothing without the advice and counsel
of their Priests. I will omit what Valerius Maximus sets down of their care
of Religion, and their great respect unto their Priests, and religious persons;
and I will refer you only to what Tully writes of this point, where he says,
that the greatest and worthiest thing in their Commonwealth, was the
privilege and pre-eminence of the Divines, which was joined with the greatest
authority; for they dismissed the companies and the Councels of the chiefest
Empires and the greatest Potentates, when they were proposed; they restrained
them when they were concluded; they ceased from the affairs which they had in
hand, if but one Divine did say the contrary; they appointed that the Consuls
should depose themselves from their Magistracy; and it was in their entire
power, either to give leave or not to give leave, to deal with the people, or
not to deal; to repeal Laws not lawfully made, and to suffer nothing to be done
by the Magistrate in peace or war without their leave or authority: this was
their Law; (though I believe it was not always observed by their proud Consuls,
and unruly Magistrates.) Cicero de not. deorum, l. 2.

In like manner Caesar writes of the Gauls and Britons, that they had two
sorts of men in singular honor; the one was their Druides or Divines, the
other was their Soldiers or men of war; and he says, that their Druides
determined of all controversies (in a manner) both private and public; and if
there were any crime committed, any murder attempted, if any controversy about
inheritance, or the bounds of lands did arise, they also did set down their
Decree, and appointed the penalty: and whosoever rejected their order, or
refused their judgment they excommunicated him from all society, and he was
then deemed of all men as an ungodly and a most graceless person. Thus did
they, that had but the twilight of corrupted Nature to direct them, judge those
that were most conversant with the mind and will of the gods, to be the
fittest Counselors and Judges of the actions of men: and I fear these children
of nature will rise in judgment, to condemn many of them that profess
themselves to be the sons of grace, for coming so short of them in this point.

2. The Jews also which received the oracles of God, 2. Among the Jews.
were enjoined by God to yield unto their Priests the dispensation both of
divine and humane Laws; and the Lord enacted it by an irrevocable Law, that
the judgment of the High Priest should be observed, as sacred, Deuteronomy. 17.
and inviolable in all controversies; and if any man refused to submit himself
un^o it, his death must make recompense for his contumacy. And Josephus says,
Si judices nesciunt de rebus ad se delatis pronunciare, integram causam in
urbem sanctam mittent, and convenientes Pontifex and Propheta and Senatus, quod
visum sit, Joseph. contra Appi. lib. 2.
pronuntient: and in his second book against Appian he says, Sacerdotes
inspectores omnium, judices controversiarum, punitores damnatorum constituti
sunt a Moyse: The Priests were appointed by Moses to be the lookers into all
things, the Judges of controversies, and the punishers of the condemned. And
they were of that high esteem amongst the Jews, that the royal blood
disdained not to match in marriages with the Priests, as Jehojada married the
daughter of King Jehoram, 2 Chronicles. 22.11.
and in the vacancie of Kings they had all the affairs of the Kingdom in
their administration, and when they became tributaries unto the Romans after
Aristobulus, the royal government was often annexed to the Priesthood: and S.
Paul argues from hence, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9.
that if the administration of death was glorious, how shall not the
administration of the spirit be rather glorious? for, if the ministration of
condemnation be glory, much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed
in glory; or otherwise it were very strange, that the Ministers of the Gospel
should be deemed more base and contemptible, because their calling is far more
glorious and excellent, yea, so excellent, that to all good Christians the
Prophet demands, quam speciosi pedes eorum? Esaias. 52.7. Priests employed in
secular affairs. 1 Among the Jews. Psalm. 99.6, Priests and Prophets among the
Jews exercised secular jurisdiction.


And for the discharging of secular employments, we have not only the example
of the Priests and Prophets of the Old Testament, but we have also the
testimony, and the practice of many godly Bishops, and Fathers of the Church of
Christ, under the New Testament, to justify this truth. For,

1. Not only Moses and Aaron that were both the Priests of the most high God,
and the chief Judges in all secular causes, but also Joseph had his
jurisdiction over the Egyptians, Daniel had his Lieutenancie over the
Babylonians, and Nehemias was a great Courtier among the Persians: and yet
these secular employments were no hinderance to them in the divine worship and
service of God. So Ely and Samuel both, were both Judges and Priests together:
and the most religious Princes, David, Solomon, Jehosaephat, and others, used
the Priests and Levites at their command in the civil government of their
Dominions; for, when David caused all the Levites to be numbered from 30 years
old and upward, and that they were found to be 38 thousand; he appointed 24
thousand of them to he overseers of the works of the house of the Lord, and he
ordained the other six thousand to be Judges and Rulers in all Israel; 1 Chronicles.
23.4.
and so did Jehosaphat likewise; 2 Chronicles. 19.11. The place explained
for though the last verse of the said chapter seems to put a difference
betwixt the Civil matters and the Ecclesiastical affairs; yet it is rightly
answered by Saravia, that this error rises from a misconceived opinion of
their government, as if it were the same with the government of some of our
reformed Churches, which was nothing less; for if you compare this place with
the 26. chap. Sigonius legit, super opera quae ad regis officia pertinent. l.
6. p. 315. 1 Samuel c. 8.
of the 1. Chron verse. the 29, 30, and 32. you may easily find, that the Kings
service, or the affairs of the King, does not signify the civil matters, or
the politic affairs of the Kingdom, over which Amarias here, and Hashabia and
his brethren there (1 Chronicles. 26.30.) were appointed the chief Rulers; but it
signifies those things which pertained to the King's right, betwixt him and
his subjects, (as those things that were described by Samuel, and were
retained, and perhaps augmented, either by the consent of the people, or the
incroachment of the succeeding Kings, as the special rights of the Kings) over
which Zebadias the son of Ismael was appointed by Jehosaphat to be the Ruler;
and the business of the Lord is fully set down, verse. 10. to be not only the
Church affairs, but all the affairs of the Kingdom, between blood and blood,
Versu 10.
between Law and Commandment, Statutes and Judgments, over which the Priests
and Levites were appointed the ordinary Judges, and the Interpreters of the
Law, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical; for the Lord says plainly, Ezech 44 23.
Vide locum. Sigon ait: and circa judicium sanguinis ipsi insistent. 2. In the
Primitive Church Salmer tract 18. in parabol. hominis divitis lo. 16. number. 1.
that every question and controversy shall be determined according to the
censure of the Priests; which certainly he would never have so prescribed, nor
these holy men have thus executed them, if these two Functions had been so
averse, and contrary the one to the other, that they could never be exercised
together by the same man.

2. In the Primitive times under the Gospel, Salmeron says, that in the time
of S. Augustine, as himself teaches, Episcopi litibus Christianorum vacare
solebant, the Bishops had so much leisure, that they were wont to judge of the
quarrels of Christians: yet they did not so spend their time in judging their
contentions, that they neglected their Preaching and Episcopal function: and
now that they do judge in civil causes, consuetudine Ecclesiae introductum est,
ut peccata caverentur. Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 9.
And Bellarmine says, Non pugnat cum verbo Dei, ut unus homo sit Princeps
Ecclesiasticus and politicus simul, it is not against the Word of God, that the
same man should be an Ecclesiastical and a Secular Prince together, when as the
same man may both govern his Episcopacy and his Principality. And therefore we
read of diverse men; Theod. l. 2. c. 30.
that were both the Princes and the Bishops of the same Cities: as the
Archbishop of Collen, Mentz, Triers, and other German Princes, Henr. of
Huntingson, Hist. Angl.
that are both Ecclesiastical Pastors, and great secular Princes. And Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury was for a long while Viceroy of this Kingdom: And so
Leo. 9. Julius 2. Philip Archbishop of York, Adelboldus. Innoc^nt 2.
Collenutius and Blondus, and many others, famous and most worthy Bishops, both
of this Island and of other Kingdoms, have undertaken and exercised both the
Functions. And Saint Paul recommendeth secular businesses and judgments unto
the Pastors of the Church, Aug. tom. 3. de a^erib. Menach. c. 29.
as S. Augustine testifies at large; where he says, I call the Lord Jesus a
witness to my soul, that for so much as concerns my commodity. I had rather
work every day with my hands, and to reserve the other hours free to read,
pray, and exercise my self in Scriptures, then to sustain the tumultuous
perplexities of other men's causes, in determining secular Controve^sies by
judgment, or taking them up by arbitrament: to which troubles the Apostle has
appointed us, not of his own will, but of his that spoke in him. And as this
excellent Father, that wrote so many worthy volumes, did notwithstanding employ
no small part of his time in these troublesome affairs, so S. Ambrose twice
undertook an honorable Embassy so Valentinian the Emperor unto the Tyrant
Maximus. Socrat. Eccl hist. lib 7.
And Marutha Bishop of Mesopotamia was sent by the Roman Emperor, an
Ambassador to the King of Persia, in which employment he has abundantly
benefitted both the Church and the Emperor: and we read of diverse famous men
that undertook diverse Functions, and yet neither confounded their offices, nor
neglected their duties; for Spiridion was an husbandman, and a Bishop of the
Church: a Pastor of sheep, and a feeder of souls; and yet none of the ancient
Fathers, that we read of, either envyed his Farm, or blamed his neglect in his
Bishopric; but they admired his simplicity, and commended his sanctity: they
were not of the spirit of our hypocritical Saints. And Theodoret writes,
Theodor. lib. 4. c. 13.
that one James Bishop of Nisib, was both a Bishop and a Captain of the same
City, which by the help of his God he manfully preserved against Sapor King of
Persia. And Ensebius Bishop of Samosis, managing himself with all warlike
habiliments, ranged along throughout all Syria, Phaenicia, and Palaestina; and
as he passed, erected Churches, and ordained Priests and Deacons, and pe^formed
such other Ecclesiastical pensions, as pertained to his office in all places;
and I fear me the iniquity of our time will now call upon all Bishops, that are
able, to do the like: to preach unto our people, and to fight against God's
enemies, (that have long labored to overthow his Church) as we read of some
Bishops of this Kingdom, that have been driven to do the like: and if these men
might do these things without blame, as they did, why may not the same man be
both a Bishop and the Kings Counselor? both a Preacher in the pulpit, and a
Justice of the peace on the Bench? and yet the callings not confounded, though
the same man be called to both offices; for you know the office of a Lawyer is
different from the office of a Physician, and the office of a Physician as
different from the duty of a Divine; and yet as Saint Luke was an excellent
Physician, and a heavenly Evangelist; and S. Paul as good a Lawyer, as he was a
Preacher, (for he was bred at the feet of Gamaliel) as was Master Calvin too,
as good a Civilian as he was a Divine (for that was his first profession,) so
the same man may, as in many places they do, and that without blame, both play
the part of a Physician to cure the body, and of a Divine to instruct the soul;
and therefore why not of a Lawyer? when as the Preachers duty, next to the
teaching of the faith in Christ, is to persuade men to live according to the
rules of Justice; and Justice we cannot understand without the knowledge of the
Laws, both of God and men; and if he be obliged to know the Law, why should he
be thought an unfit man to judge according to the Law? But.

CHAP. IX.
Shows a full answer to four special Objections that are made against the
Civil jurisd ctions of Ecclesiastical persons; their abilities to discharge
these offices, and desire to benefit the Commonwealth; why some Councils
inhibited these offices unto Bishops; that the King may give titles of honor
unto his Clergy; of this title, LORD, not unfitly given to the Bishops, proved;
the objections against it answered, six special reasons why the King should
confer honors and favors upon his Bishops and Clergy.

1. IF you say the office of a Preacher requires the whole man, and where the
whole man is not sufficient to one duty, for (...)? 2 Cor. 2.16.
then certainly one man is never able to supply two charges.

I answer, that this indefinite censure is uncertainly true, certainly false,
as I have proved unto you before, by many examples of most holy men, that
discharged two offices with great applause, and no very great difficulty to
themseves; for though Saint Matthew could not return to his trade of Publican,
because that a continued attendance on a secular business, would have taken him
from his Apostolate, and prove an impediment to his Evangelick ministration;
yet Saint Peter might return to his nets, as he did, without blame; because
that a temporary employment, and no constant secession, can be no hinderance to
our Clericall office; No man is always able to do the same thing.
when there is no man that can so wholly addict himself to any kind of art,
trade, or facul^y, but that he must sometimes interchangeably afford himself
leisure, either for his recreation, Vt quemvis animo possit sufferre laborem;
or the recollection of strength and abilities to discharge his office by the
undertaking of some other exercise, which is to many men their chiefest
recreation; as you see, the husband-mans change of labor does still enable him
to continue in labor; and the Courtier cannot always wait in the same
posture, nor the Scribe always write, nor the Divine always study; Change of
labor is a kind of recreation.
but there must be an exchange of his actions for the better performance of his
chiefest employment: and that time, which either some Gentlemen, Citizens, or
Courtiers spend in playing, hawking, or hunting, only for their recreation,
the better to enable them to discharge their offices, why may not the Divine
employ it in the performance of any other duty, different, but not destructive,
or contradictory to his more special function? especially considering that the
discharging of those good duties, to give counsel, to do justice, to relieve
the distressed, and the like, are more acceptable recreations unto them (as it
was meat and drink to Christ to do his fathers will) then the other forenamed
exercises are or can be to any others; John. 4.34,
and considering also, that where the Bishop or Pastor has great affairs, and
much charge, he may have great helps, and much aid to assist him. You will
allow us an hour for our recreation, why, will you not allow us that hour to do
justice?

Ob. 2.
2. If you say, they are spiritual men, and therefore cannot have so great a
care of the temporal State, and Commonwealth.

Sol. 1. The ability of the Clergy to manage civil affairs Ignat. Epist. ad
Ephesians. (...).
I answer, that as now the Commonwealth is the Church, and the Church is the
Common wealth, and have as good interest therein, and better we hope then many
of the Commonwealth have in the Church; and they should be as able to unde
stand what is beneficial to the Commonwealth as any other; for Ignatius
says, that Kings ought to be served by wise men, and by those that are of
great understanding, (...), and not to be attended upon by weak and simple men;
and if Kings must be served by such men, then certainly the service of God is
not to be performed by Weavers and Tailors, and others like Jeroboams Priests;
but it will require men of great abilities, learning, and understanding in all
businesses whatsoever, such as are indeed well able to discourse De quolibet
ente: And they have very unprefitably consumed themselves with their time in
their head-pain vigils, and heartbreaking studies, in traversing over all the
Commonwealths of the world, if they have learned nothing, The Clergy of better
abilities to benefit the Commonwealth, then many others that now sway it.
whereby they may benefit their own Commonwealth, or do understand less what
belongs unto the good of their Country especially in matters of equity and
right, then illiterate Burgesses, and mere Chapmen: for, if you read but the
books of the Prophets, you shall find how plentiful they are in the precepts
of peace, in the policies of war, and in the best counsels for all things which
concern the good of the Commonwealth: and do not the Divines read the
Histories of all, or most other Commonwealths? how else shall they be enabled
to propose unto their people the example of Gods justice upon the wicked, and
his bounty and favor unto the observers of his Laws, throughout all ages, and
in all places of this world? and will you deprive the King of the assistance of
such instruments for the government of his people, The employment of the
Bishops in civil affairs, is the good of the Common wealth.
that are stronger then any one man can rule, and would quickly despise Heaven,
and destroy the earth, if their consciences were not awed with Religion? or
would you damme up the channels of those benefits that should flow from them to
the Commonwealth? for it is not the addition of any honor to the calling of a
Bishop, but the King's interest, and the peoples good that is aimed at, when we
assert the capacity of the Clergy to discharge the offices of the most public
affairs; Petrus Blesensis, ep. 84.
because, as Petrus Blesensis says, it is the office of the Bishops to
instruct the King to righteousness, to be a rule of Sanctity, and sobriety unto
the Court, to mix the influencies of Religion with the designs of State, and
to restrain the malignity of the ill-disposed people; and all histories do
relate unto us, that when pious Bishops were employed in the King's Counsels,
the rigor of the Laws was abated, equity introduced, the cry of the poor
respected, their necessities relieved, the liberties of the Church preserved,
pride depressed, religion increased, the devotion of the Laity multiplied, the
peace of the Kingdom flourished, and the tribunals were made more just and
merciful, then now they be.

And therefore the sacred histories do record of purpose, how the people of God
never adventured upon any action of weight and moment, before they had well
consulted with the Priests and Prophets, as you see in the example of Ahab, No
Nation attempted any great matter without the advice of their Priests.
that was none of the best Kings, yet would not omit this good duty: and such
was the custom of all other Countries, wheresoever there was any religion or
reverence of God; Quae enim est respub. ubi ecclesiastici primum non habeant
locum in comitiis and publicis de salute reipub. deliberationibus? for which is
that Commonwealth, where the Ecclesiastical persons had not the first place in
all meetings and public consultations about the welfare of the Commonwealth?
as in Germany the three spiritual Electours are the first; in France the three
Ecclesiastical persons were the first of all the Peers; in England (till this
unhappy time) the two Archbishops, and in Poland as many, were wont to have the
chiefest place, and not unworthily: quia aequum est, Apud Eusebius. Pamphilam, l.
11. Strabo l. 4. Caesar de bello Gallico lib. 6.
antestent in concilio qui antestant prudentia, nec videtur novisse res
humanas, nisi qui divinas cognitas habet; as the Indian said unto Socrates: and
therefore the Chaldaans, the Egyptians, the Graecians, the Romans, the
French, and the Britons, thought it always ominous to attempt any notable
thing in the Commonwealth, without the sad and sage advice of their Priests
and Prophets; for they knew the neglect of God was never left without due
revenge; and though their false gods were no gods, yet the true God was found
to have been a sharp revenger of the contempt of the false gods; because that
to them they were proposed for the true gods, and they believed them so to be,
as Lactantius shows: and therefore all antiquity that bare any reverence to
any Deity, showed all reverence and respect unto the teachers of his religion;
but now men desire to throw learning over the Bar, because it should not
discover the ignorance of the Bench; or rather piety is excluded, because it
should not reprove their iniquity: And the Clergy must not sit on the seat of
judgment, that the Laity may do injustice without control; or perhaps revenge
themselves upon their Ministers on the Bench, for reproving their vices in the
Church: so the Devil gains, whatsoever piety loses by their depression.

2. As the Clergymen are as able, 2. The desire of the Clergy to do good to
the State.
so they are as willing and as careful to provide for the good of the State, as
any other; for themselves are members of the Commonwealth, and they are
appointed by God to be watchmen and overseers, to foretell what mischiefs or
felicities are like to ensue, and to admonish as well the Prince as the people,
of such things as are to be avoided and to be performed; which they cannot do,
if they be strangers from the conscience, and excluded from the conference of
such things that are to be done in the Common wealth.

Therefore, seeing the good of the Commonwealth is their own good, The Church
of Christ and a Christian commonwealth sail together.
and the good of the Church is the good of the Commonwealth, when a Christian
Commonwealth and the Church of Christ are embarked in the same Vessel, and do
sail together with the same success, aiming both at the same Port; and God
has commanded his Ministers to be no less solicitous for the one, then the
other: it is incredible to think that a godly Minister should have less care
of the Commonwealth, then the best of our common Burgo-Masters; and it is
impossible to conceive any true reason, why the Bishops and Pastors above all
others, should be excommunicated out of their assemblies, and excluded from
their Parliaments, and other civil Courts; when it does most chiefly concern
them, to see unto the welfare of their flock, not only in such things as
concern the safety of their souls, A miserable thing, that the Ministers of the
Gospel should be made more slaves, then the basest calling in the World.
but also in all other things that may pertain, either to the security of their
bodies, or the quietness of their estates; because this is a thing utterly
against the equal right of all Subjects, that the Ministers of the Gospel,
being Subjects unto the king, and Citizens of the Commonwealth should have
nothing to do in the Government thereof, but must be governed, not as
strangers, that may have admission, but as slaves with an impossibility to be
received into the civil administration af any matter: and their exclusion is as
prejudicial to the king and kingdom, as it is injurious unto the Clergy; when
they must be deprived of the grave advice and faithful service of so learned
and religious assistants for the government of the people, as the reverend
Bishops and devout Doctors have ever been.

Ob. 3. Act. 15. S. Cyprian punished Geminius Faustinus for undertaking the
Executor ship of Geminius Victor. ep. 66. Sol.
3. If you say the sixth Canon of the Apostles, the seventh Canon of the Council
of Calcedon, and Saint Cyprian in his Epistle to the Priests of Furnam, do
forbid these things in Ecclesiastical persons; and so many Fathers have
accordingly refused these civil employments and jurisdictions.

I answer briefly, that while the Emperors were Heathens, and neither the
Kings nor their Kingdoms Christian, but their counsels were often held for
wicked ends, private gain, or privy deceit, for bloody murders, or horrid
treason^ the Clergy were inhibited, and the godly Bishops were ashamed to sit
in such ungodly assemblies, that would neither be converted to Christ, nor
reformed from their sins; and so now, when the Puritan faction prevailed in our
Parliament, Good to be excluded from the counsel of the wicked.
and our Sectaries disdained in their counsels, to take the counsel of
Religion, and resolved to banish GOD from their assemblies, to make the Church
and Churchmen a public scorn unto the wicked, and the Commonwealth a private
gain to every broken Citizen, and every needy Varlet; I say, happy are those
Bishops that are excluded, and well it is for those Ministers that are furthest
off from such godless and irreligious, not Parliament, but Parricides; even as
the Psalmist testifies, Blessed is the man that has not sat in the seat of
the scornful; Psalm. 1.1.
and therefore if they had not been excluded, I am sure, that as the case now
stands, they would have seceded themselves.

But when the civil Magistrates became Christians, and the Christians consulted
with God in all their actions, then it was no indecorum for the servants of
Christ to be seen in the Congregation of Saints, and to sit as Judges among
gods, where the judgment shall pass for the glory of God; neither is it any
prejudice to our holy calling, The giving of Caesar's due does not hinder us to
give to god his due
to give unto Caesar those things that are Caesar's, and that we owe unto him,
as our service and our counsel, and whatsoever else lies in us to do for the
good of the Commonwealth, as we are his Subjects and the Tenants of the
Commonwealth: nor do the rendering of these things to Caesar any ways hinder
us to give unto God the things that are God's, and that we owe to God, as our
prayers and our care over God's flock, as we are Christians and Bishops over
the Church of Christ; but the same man, if he will be faithful, may justly
perfo^m both duties, without giving over or neglecting either And when our men
shall return to God, and take him along with them into their counsels, and
desire the assistance of his servants (as I hope they will have grace to do) I
assure my self the Reverend Bishops will not refuse to do them service.

Emperors were good Christians, when the Council of Calcedon put out their
Canons.

Emperors were, but all Kings were not: besides, that Canon cleares it self;
for it shows that Clergymen did at that time undertake secular employments,
Propter lucra turpia, ministerium Dei parvi pendentes, for gain, neglecting
their duty; and therefore the Council forbade all Clergymen, negotiis
secularibus se immiscere; because the Apostle says, (...); 2 Timothy 2.4.
no man that warreth, intangleth or insnareth himself with the affairs of this
life: and so neither the Apostle nor the Council does absolutely forbid all
secular affairs, as inconsistent with this function; but as the Council of
Arles says, Council. Arelai. Ca^. 14. The words of the Canon explained,
Clericus turpis lucri gratia aliquod genus negotiationis non exerceat, so they
forbid all Clerks to meddle with any business for the love of gain, and filthy
lucre, that might ensnare him to neglect his duty: or as the Canon of the
Apostle says, (...), a Bishop should not assume unto himself, or seek after
worldly cares, but if either necessity or authority impose them on him, I see
not how he can refuse them, because there is no absolute prohibition of such
employments in any place, but as it might be a hinderance to discharge his
office: or otherwise Saint Paul's Tent-making was as much against the calling
of an Apostle, as the sitting in a secular tribunal is against the office of a
Bishop; because there is no reason we should deny that benefit to a public
necessitated community, which we will yield to a private personal necessity.

And so indeed these very men that cry out against our Bishops, The
Presbyterians will be the directors of all affairs.
and other grave Prelates of the Church, for the least meddling in these civil
affairs, do not only suffer their own Preachers to strain at a gnat, but also
to swallow a Camel; when M. Henderson, Marshal, Case, and the rest of their new
inspired Prophets shall sit as Presidents in all their Counsels, and Committees
of their chiefest affairs and consultations, either about War or Peace, or of
any other civil cognizance; how these things can be answered, to deny that to
us, which they themselves do practice, I cannot understand, when as the light
of Nature tells us.

Quod tibi vis fieri, mihi fac, quod non, mihi noli:
Sic potes in terris vivere jure poli. Vnde Baldus jubet, ut quis in alios non
aliter judicet, quam in se judicari vellet.

And therefore when as there is no politic Philosophy, no imperial
constitution, nor any humane invention, that does or can so strictly bind the
consciences of men unto subjection and true obedience, as the Doctrine of the
Gospel; and no man can persuade the people so much unto it, as the Preachers of
Gods word, (as it appears by this Rebellion, persuaded by the false
Preachers) because the Principles of Philosophy, and the Laws of many nations
do permit many things to be done against tyrants, which the Religion of Christ
and the true Bishops of Gods Church do flatly inhibit; How requisite it is for
Kings to delegate civil affairs unto their Clergy.
it is very requisite and necessary for all Christian Kings, both for the glory
of God, their own safety, and the happiness of the Commonwealth, to defend
this their own right, and the right of the Clergy, to call them into their
Parliaments and Counsels, and to demise certain civil causes and affairs to the
gravest Bishops, and the wisest of the Ministers, and not suffer those
Rebellious Anabaptists and Brownists, that have so disloyally labored to pull
off the Crown from their Kings head, to bury all the glory of the Church in the
dust, to bring the true Religion into a scorn, and to deprive the King of the
right, which is so necessary for his safety, and so useful for the Government
of his people, that is, the service of his Clergy in all civil Courts and
Councils.

And as it is the Kings right to call whom he pleases into his Parliaments and
Councils, That it is the Kings right to give titles of honor to whom he
pleases.
and to delegate whom he will to discharge the office of a civil or
Ecclesiastical magistrate, or both, wheresoever he appoints, within his Realms
and Dominions: so it is primarily in his power and authority and his regal
right, to give titles of honor and dignity to those officers and magistrates
whom he chooses: for, though the Barbarians acknowledge no other distinction
of Persons, but of Master and Servants, which was the first punishment for the
first contempt of our Superiors; Genesis 9.25.
therefore their Kings do reign and domineer over their Subjects, as Masters do
over their servants; and the Fathers of Families have the same authority over
their Wives and Children, Saravia c. 28. p. 194.
as over the slaves and vassals; and the Muscovites at the day do rule after
this manner neither is the great Empire of the Turk much unlike this
Government, and generally all the Eastern Kingdoms were ever of this kind,
and kept this rule over all the Nations whom they Conquered; and many of them
do still retain it to these very times. Yet our Western Kings whom charity
has taught better, and made them milder, and especially the Kings of this
Island, which, in the sweetness of Government exceeded all other Kings, The
mild government of our Kings.
(as holding it their chiefest glory to have a free people subject unto them,
and thinking it more Honorable to command over a free, then a servile nation,)
have conferred upon their subject many titles of great honor, which the
Learned Gentleman M. Seldom has most Learnedly treated of: and therefore I
might well be silent in this point, (and not to write Iliads after Homer) if
this title of Lord, given by His Majesty unto our Bishops, Of the Title of Lord.
(for none but he has any right to give it) did not require that I should say
something thereof: touching which, you must observe, that this name dominus is
of diverse significations, and is derived a domo, as Zanchius observes, where
every man is a Lord of that house and possession which he holds; and it has
relation also to a servant; so that this name is ordinarily given among the
Latinists to any man that is able to keep servants: and so it must needs
appear, how great is the malice, I cannot say, the ignorance, (when every
schoolboy knows it) of those Sectaries that deny this title to be consistent
with the calling of a Bishop, which indeed cannot be denied to any man of any
ordinary esteem.

But they will say, that it signifies also rule and authority; and so, as it
is a title of rule and Dominion, it is the invention of Antichrist, the
donation of the Devil, Luke 22.25. (...). Matthew. 16.30.
and forbidden by our Savior, where he says, (...): that is, in effect, be
not you called gracious Lords, or benefactors (which is the proper
signification of (...):) therefore these titles of honor are not fit for the
Preachers of the Gospel, to puff them up with pride, and to make them swell
above their brethren.

That there is a double rule or dominion.
It is answered, that if our Saviors words be rightly understood, and his
meaning not maliciously perverted, neither the authority of the Bishops, nor
the title of their honor is forbidden; for as (...) is a title of dominion, so
it is fit to be ascribed to them, unto whom the Lord and author of all rule and
dominion, has committed any rule or Government over his People; and our
Savior forbids not the same; because you may find that there is a double
rule and dominion; the one just and approved, the other tyrannical and
disallowed; 1 Pet. 5.3. (...).
and the tyrannical rule, or as S. Peter says, (...), the domineering
authority over Gods inheritance, both Christ and his Apostles do forbid; but
the just rule and dominion they deny not; because they must do it, (...), as
the son of man does it; so the manner of their rule, (...); as the Kings of the
Nations rule with tyranny, he prohibiteth; but, as the servants of Christ ought
to rule with charity, not with austerity; with humility, and not with
insolency, he denies not; and so he denies not the name of Lord, as it is a
title of honor and reverence, given unto them by the King, and ascribed by
their people; but he forbids an ambitious aspiring to it, and a proud
carriage, and deportment in it; yet it may be so with you, (...), as it is with
the son of man, whom no man can exceed in humility; and yet in his greatest
humility, he says, ye call me, (...), Master and Lord: (...), and ye say well,
for so I am: John. 13.13. And therefore he forbad not this title no otherwise
then he forbad them to be Fathers, Doctors, and Masters; and I hope you will
confess he does not inhibit the Children to call them Fathers that begat them,
nor forbid us to call them Doctors, unto whom the Lord himself has given the
name, (...), of Doctors in his Church, Ephesians. 4.11. otherwise we must know why
S. Paul does call himself the Doctor of the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 2.7. and why does
the Law command us to honor our Father and our Mother, if we may call no man
Father.

But Christ coming not to diminish the power of Princes, nor to make it
unlawful for Christian Kings to honor his servants, which the heathen Princes
did to the servants of God, as Nebuchadnezzar preferred Daniel among the
Babylonians, and Darius advanced Mordecai among the Persians, nor to deny that
honor unto his servants, which their own honest demerits, and the bounty of
their gracious Princes do confer upon them; it is apparent, What Christ
forbids to his Ministers.
that it is not the condition of these names, but the ambition of these titles
and the abuse of their authority, is forbidden by our Savior Christ; For, as
Elias and Elizaeus in the old Testament suffered themselves with no breach of
humility to be called Lords, as where Abdias, 3 Reg. 18.1.
a great officer of King Ahab says, art not thou my Lord Elias? and the
Shunamite called Elizaus Lord, 4 Reg. 4.16. So in the new Testament Paul and
Barnabas that rent their clothes when the people ascribed unto them, more then
humane honor; yet refused not the name of Lords, Act. 16.30. (...).
when it was given them by the keeper of the prison, that said, Lords, what
shall I do to be saved? which title certainly they would never have endured, if
this honor might not be yielded, and this title received by the Ministers of
the Gospel: and Saint Peter tells us, that Christian women, if they imitate
Sarah (that obeyed Abraham (...).
) whom he propounded to them as a pattern, may, and should call their husbands,
though mean Mechanics, Lords: or else he proposes this example to no purpose;
and therefore me thinks they should be ashamed, to think this honor may be
afforded to poor Tradesmen, and to deny it to those eminent pillars, and chief
governors of God's Church. And as the Scripture gives, not only others the
like eminent, and more significant titles of honor unto the governors of the
Church, (as when it says, they are (...), Presidents; (...), Rulers; (...),
Princes; as where the Psalmist says, instead of thy Fathers, thou shall have
children, whom thou may make Princes in all lands, which the best
interpreters do expound of the Apostles and Bishops, that are called the
Princes of God's Church, Origin ho. 19. in Matthew. Hier. in Psalm. 45.16.
but also gives and allows this very title of Lord un^o them, as I showed
before; so the fathers of the Primitive Church did usually ascribe the same one
to another, as Saint Hierom writing to Saint Augustine says, Domine vere
sancte, and the Letters sent to Julius Bishop of Rome had their superscription,
(...), To our most blessed Lord. Sozom. lib. 3. c. 23. Nazian. in ep. ad gr.
Nyssen Theodor l. 1. c. 4. and 5. l. c. 9.
And Nazianzen says, Let no man speak any untruth of me, nor (...), of the
Lords the Bishops: and in all antiquity as Theodoret shows, this title of
Lord is most frequently ascribed unto the Bishops: Saint Chrysostom in Psalm.
13. as he is cited by Baronius, Anno 58. n. 2. says, that Heretics have
learned of the Devil to deny the due titles of honor unto their Bishops:
neither is it strange, that he which would have no Bishops, should deny all
honor unto the Bishops; but they can be contented to transfer this honor,
though to cover their hypocrisy in another title, that shall be as Emperor
instead of King, from the Episcopacy to the Presbytery: so that indeed it is
not the honor which they hate, but the Persons of the Bishops that are
honored.

Therefore, though for mine own particular, I do so much under value the vanity
of all titles, that we e it not the duty of the people to give it, more then
the desire of the Bishops to have it, I should have spared all this Discourse:
yet seeing it is the right of Kings to bestow honors, and it is an argument of
their love to Christ, to honor them that honor God, to magnify the order of
their Religion, and to account the chief Ministers of the Gospel among the
chief States of the Land, I could not pass it over in silence, but show you how
it belongs to him to give this honor to whom he will: and because this dignity
cannot be given to all that are in the same order, it is wisely provided by the
King, that the whole order or Ministry should be honored in those few, The
whole order honored in few.
whose learning and wisdom he has had most use and experience of, or is
otherwise well informed thereof; and it is no small wonder unto me, that any
learned man should be so blinded with this error, as any ways to oppose this
truth, or that any Christian should be like the sons of Jacob, so transported
with envy, when they see any of their brethren made more honorable then
themselves, for they ought to think themselves honored in the honor of their
brethren; when the lord Bishops are down, the Lords Temporal shall not continue
long, for as Geneva put away their Bishop, their Prince: so the Cantons and
Switzers put away all Lords. A just judgment of God, that they which will have
no spiritual Lords, should not be any temporal Lords, but should be as little
regarded by their creatures, as they regard the servants of their Creator. Six
special reasons, why the King should confer his savours and honors upon the
Bishops. 1 Reason.
but that, pride, is such a beast, that thinks himself the most worthy, and
envy is such a monster, that cannot endure any happiness to any other.

And that which makes me wonder most of all, is to see those Lords, whose
honors scarce saw the age of a man, and some pretending great loyalty to His
Majesty, and wishing happiness to His posterity, so far yiedling to the
mis-guided Faction, to darken the glory of Gods Church, and 10 undervalue
Christ's Ministers, as to obliterate that dignity, and raze out those titles
which are inherent to the Ministry from the foundation of the Church, and are
ascribed unto the Bishops by the same Majesly that honored them; and for some
by-respect and private ends to persuade the King, to desert the Church, to
leave the Prelates in the suds, their honor to be laid and buried in the
dust, and their revenues to be devoured by the enemies of all Godliness.

But do these men think that blessings come from God; or that this is the way
for God to bless the King, or themselves, or this Kingdom, to vilify those
that honor God, and of whom Christ directly says, He that receives you
receives me, and he that despises you despises me? for alas, who were more
favored, protected, and blessed by God, then Constantine, Theodosius, and the
rest of those good Emperors and Kings, that gave most immunities, and
conferred most dignities upon the Bishops, and Prelates of Gods Church? because
that hereby they testified their love to Christ himself; and did not God
withdraw his favor and protection from those kings and Potentates that
neglected to protect his servants? therefore they cannot wish well unto the
king, that wish him to give way to denude the Church, and to desert the defense
of the Bishops. For, besides many other reasons, we find six special arguments
proving, that our king, rather then any king in Europe, should uphold his
Clergy, and confer his favors and honors upon them, I say, not more then upon
his nobility, for that would procure hatred unto the king, envy unto them, and
ruin unto all, but as well as upon any other state in this kingdom. As

1. Not only the relation betwixt them and their Prince, as they are his
faithful Subjects, and he their Sovereign King, but as he is the Lords
Anointed, and the Defender of that faith which they teach and publish unto his
people, for this anointing of him by God for this end, superinduceth a
brotherhood betwixt the king and the Bishops, and makes him quasi unus ex
nobis, and the chief guide and guardian of the Clergy; because that thereby he
is mixta persona, more then a mere Layman, Rex inunctus non est merus Laicus,
Guimerus, tit. 12. sect 9.33. Edw. 3. tit. Aid le Roy 2. Reason. ^
and has an Ecclesiastical supreme Government, as well as the civil, and ut
oleo sancto uncti sunt, spiritualis jurisdictionis capaces sunt, and as it was
said in the time of Edward the third, and therefore as in relation to the
temporalty, the king is supremus justiciarius totius Angliae; so in respect to
the spiritualty, he is as Constantine styled himself in the Council of Nice,
(...) as the chief Christian Bishop among his Bishops.

2. Our Bishops and Clergy are truer and faithfuller Subjects to their Prince
then any other Clergy in Christendom; because the Clergy of France and Spain,
and other Popish States and Dominions, are not simply Subjects unto their king,
but deny civil obedience unto their Prince, where canonical obedience commands
the contrary; and you see how the Presbytery not only deny their just
allegiance, but incite the people to unjust Rebellion; but the Bishops and
their Clergy renounce all obedience to any other Potentate, and anathematize as
utterly unlawful, all resistance against our lawful Sovereign; and in this
hearty adherence to His Majesty, as they are wholly his, so they do exspect
favor from none, but only from His Highness; and yet Philip the second of
Spain, notwithstanding he had but half the obedience of his Clergy, advised
his son Philip the third to stick fast unto his Bishops, even as he had done
before him; therefore our king that has his Bishops so totally faithful unto
him, has more reason to succor them, that they be not no^ the object of
contempt unto the vulgar.

really to their power, the most beneficial state to the Crown, both in
ordinary and extraordinary revenues, of all others; for though their means is
much impaired, and their charges increased in many things, yet if you consider
their first fruits the first year, their Tenths every year, Subsidies most
years, and all other due and necessary payments to the king, I may boldly say,
that computatis computandis, no state in England of double their revenue scarce
renders half their payments; and now in the kings necessity for the defense of
Church and Crown, Or else they are much to blame, and far unworthy to be
Bishops.
I hope my Brethren the Bishops, and all the rest of the loyal Clergy, will
rather empty themselves of all they have, and put it to His Majesty's hands,
then suffer him to want what lies in them, during all the time of these
occasions.

labors in Gods service, continually praying for blessings upon the head of
His Majesty, and his posterity; and next under god relying only upon His
favor and protection.

charge upon all Christian kings, to be our nursing fathers, and to defend the
faith that we preach, Esaias 49.33.
which cannot be done when the Bishops and Prelates are not protected; and God
has promised to bless them, so long as they discharge this duty, and has
threatened to forsake them when they forsake his Church, and leave the same as a
prey to the adversaries of the Gospel.

pious and a gracious King, at his Coronation promised and engaged himself to
do all this that is desired of him. And as for these and other reasons His
Majesty should, so we do acknowledge with all thankefulness that he has and
does His best endeavor to discharge this whole duty, Quia non plus valet ad
dejiciendumterrena mala^ quam ad erigendum divina tutela: Cypr.
and do believe with all confidence, that maugre all open opposition; and all
secret insinuation against us, He will in like manner continue his grace and
favor unto the Church and Church governors unto the end: And if any,
whosoever they be, how great or how powerful soever, either in kingdom or in
Court shall seek to alienate the Kings heart, or diminish His affection and
furtherance to protect and promote the publishers of the Gospel, (which we are
confident all their malice cannot do, because the God of Heaven, that has
built his Church upon a rock, and will not turn away his face from his
Anointed, will so bless our King, that it shall never be with him as it was
with Zedechia, when it was not in his power to save Gods Prophet, but said unto
his Princes, Jerem. 28.5.
Behold he is in your hand, for the King is not he that can do any thing
against you;) yet as Mordecai said to Hester, God will send enlargement and
deliverance unto his Church, Hester 4.14.
and they and their fathers houses that are against it, shall be destroyed;
because as Saint Peter says, we have forsaken all to become his servants, that
otherwise might have served Kings with the like honor that they do, and we
have lest the world to build up his Church, we put our trust under the shadow
of his wings, and being in trouble we do cry unto the Lord, and therefore he
will hear our cry and will help us, and we shall never be confounded. Amen.

CHAP. X.
Shows, that it is the Kings right to grant Dispensatious for Pluralities and
Non-residency; what Dispensation is; reasons for it, to tolerate diverse Sects,
or sorts of Religions; the four special sorts of false professors; S.
Augustines reasons for the toleration of the Jews; toleration of Papists, and
of Puritans; and which of them deserve best to be tolerated among the
Protestants; and how any Sect is to be tolerated.

2. That the King may lawfully grant his dispensation for Pluralities and
Non-residency.
2. WHereas the Anabaptists and Brownists of our time, with what conscience I
know not, cry out, that our Kings by their Laws do unreasonably, and
unconscionably grant dispensations both for Pluralities and Non-residency,
only to further the corrupt desire of some few aspiring Prelates, to the
infinite wrong of the whole Clergy, the intolerable dishonor of our Religion,
the exceeding prejudice of Gods Church, and the lamentable hazard of many
thousand souls.

I say, that the Pluralities and Non-residency granted by the King, and
warranted by the Laws of this Land, In Anno 112.
may find sufficient reasons to justify them, for, In Anno 636.
if you consider the first limitation of Benefices, that either Euaristus
Bishop of Rome, or Dionysius (as others think) did first assign the precincts
of Parishes, The first distribution of Parishes.
and appointed a certain compass to every Presbyter: and in this Kingdom
Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury was the first that did the like, appointed
the Pastoral charge and the portion of means accrewing from that compass, to
this or that particular person; whereas before, for many years, they had no
particular charge assigned, nor any Benefice allotted them, but had their
Canonical pensions and dividents, given them by the Bishop out of the common
stock of the Church, according as the Bishop saw their several deserts, for at
first the greater Cities only had their standing Pastors, and then the
Country Villages imitating the Cities, to allow maintenance according to the
abilities of the inhabitants, had men of lesser learning appointed for those
places.

Pluralities and Non-residency no transgression of Gods Law.
Therefore this limitation of particular Parishes being merely positive, and an
humane constitution, it cannot be the transgression of a divine ordinance to
have more Parishes then one, or to be absent from that one which is allotted to
him, when he is dispensed with by the Lawmakers to do the same; for, as it is
not lawful without a dispensation to do either, because we are to obey every
ordinance of the higher power for the Lords sake; so for the higher power to
dispense with both, Gods Law admits an interpretation, not a dispensation of
it.
is most agreeable to reason, and Gods truth; for all our Laws are either
divine, or humane: and in the divine Law, though we allow of interpretation,
quia non sermoni res, sed rei sermo debet esse subjectus, because the words
must be applied to the matter, else we may fall into the heresy of those, that
as Alfonsus de Castro says, held it unlawful upon any occasion to swear:
because our Savior says, swear not at all: yet no man. King nor Pope, has
power to grant any dispensation for the least breach of the least precept of
Gods Law: he cannot dispense with the doing of that which God forbids to be
done, nor with the omitting of that which God commands; but in all humane
Laws, Man's Law may be dispensed with.
so far as they are merely positive and humane, it is in the power of their
makers to dispense with them; and so quicquid fit dispensatione superioris, non
fit contra praeceptum superioris, and he sins neither against the Law, nor
against his own conscience, because he is delivered from the obligation of that
Law by the same authority, whereby he stood bound unto it.

And as he that is dispensed with, is free from all sin; so the King, which is
the dispenser, is as free from all fault, as having full right and power to
grant His dispensations. For, seeing that all humane Laws are the conclusions
of the Law of nature, or the evidences of humane reason, showing what things
are most beneficial to any society, either the Church or Commonwealth; and
that experience teaches us, our reason grows often from an imperfection to
be more perfect, when time produces more light unto us, we cannot in reason
deny an abrogation and dispensation to all humane Laws, which therefore ought
not to be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, that might not be changed;
Aug. de libero arbit. l. 1.
and so Saint Augustine says, Lex humana quamvis justa sit, commutari tamen
pro tempore just potest, any humane Law, though it be never so just, yet for
the time, as occasion requires, may be justly changed: and dispensatio est
juris communis relaxatio, facta cum caus^ cognitione ab eo, Dispensation, what
it is.
qui jus habet dispensandi; and as the Civilians say, a dispensation is the
relaxation of common right, granted upon the knowledge of the cause, by him
that has the power of dispensing; or as the etymology of the word bears,
dispensare est diversa pensare, The reward of learning and virtue, how to be
rendered.
to dispense is to render different rewards: and the reward of learning, or of
any other virtue, either in the civil, or the ecclesiastical person, being to
be rendered (as one says) not by an Arithmeticall, but a Geometrical
proportion; and the division of Parishes being (as I said before) a positive,
humane Law, it cannot be denied but the giver of honor, and the bestower of
rewards, which is the King, has the sole power and right to dispose how much
shall be given to this or that particular person.

If you say the Law of the King, Parliament, has already determined what
portion is fit for every one, and what service is required from him.

I answer, that the voice of equity and justice tells us, general Law does
never derogate from a special privilege, or that a privilege is not opposite
to the principles of common right, and where the Law it self gives this
privilege (as our Law does it yet) envy it self can never deny this right
unto the King, to grant his dispensation whenever he sees occasion; and
where the Law is tacit, and faith nothing of any privilege, yet seeing in all
Laws, The end of every Law is chiefly to be respected.
as in all other actions, the end is the mark that is aimed at, and this end
is no other then the public good of any society, for which the Law is made;
if the King, which is the sole Lawmakers, so, as I showed in my Discovery of
Mysteries, sees this public good better procured by granting dispensations
to some particular men, does he not perform thereby what the Law intends,
and no ways break the Law of common right? as if a man's absence from his
proper Cure should be more beneficial to the whole Church, Reasons of
dispensations.
then his residence upon his Charge could possibly be, (as when his absence may
be either for the recovery of his health, or to discharge the Kings Embassage,
or to do his best to confute Heretics, or to pacify Schisms, or to consult
about the Church affairs, or some other urgent cause that the Law never dreamt
of when it was in making) shall not the King (whom the Laws have entrusted
with the examination of these things, and to whom the principal care of
Religion, and the charge of all the People is committed by God himself, and
the power of executing his own Laws) have power to grant his dispensations for
the same?

Certainly, they that would persuade the world that all Laws must have such
force, that all dispensations are transgressions of them, (as if general rules
should have no exceptions) would manacle the Kings hands, and bind his power
in the chains of their crooked wills, that he should not be able to do that
good, which God, and Right, and Law it self do give him leave; and their envy
toward other men's grace, How God does diversely bestow his gifts. Matthew. 25.15.
Genesis 43.34.
is a great deal more, then either the grace of humility, or the love of truth
in them; for does not God give five talents to some of his servants, when he
gives but one to some others? and did not Joseph make Benjamins mess five
times so much as any of his brethren's? and have not some Lords, six, or eight
or ten thousand pounds a year, and some very good men in the Commonwealth, and
perhaps higher in God's favor, not ten pounds a year? and shall not the King
double the reward of them that deserve it in the Church of God? or shall he be
so curbed and manacled, that he shall neither alter nor dispense with his own
Law, though it be for the greater glory unto God, and the greater benefit both
to the Church and Commonwealth?

Besides, who can deny, but that some men's merits, virtue, pains, and
learning, are more worthy of two Benefices, then many others are of one? and
when in his younger time he is possessed of a small Benefice, he may perchance
afterward, when his years deserve better, far easier obtain another little one
to keep with it, then get (what I dare assure you, he would desire much rather
For who would not rather choose one Living of an 100 l. a year then two of 50 l.
a piece.
) one Living of equal value to them both: and shall the unlearned zeal of an
envious mind so far prejudice a worthy man, that the King's lawful right shall
be censured, and his power questioned and clipped, or traduced by this ignorant
Zelot? I will bless my self from them, and maintain it before all the world,
that the King's dispensations for Pluralities, Non-residency, and the like
Privileges, not repugnant to common right, are not against Law; nor the giving
or taking of them upon just causes against conscience: but what the violence of
this viperous brood proclaims an intolerable offense, we dare warrant both
with good reason and true Divinity to be no sin, no fault at all, but an
undoubted portion of the King's right, for the greater benefit both of the
Church and State, and the greater glory unto God himself.

The Author's Petition to His Majesty.
And therefore (most gracious King) we humbly desire your Majesty, suffer not
these children of Apollyon to pull this flower out of your Royal Crown, to
abridge you of your just right of granting dispensations for Pluralities and
Non-residency (which the Laws of your Land do yet allow you) and which they
labor to annul, to darken the glory of God's Church, and to bring your Clergy,
by depriving them of their means and honor, into contempt, lest that, when by
one and one, they have robbed you of all your rights, they will fairly salute
you, as the Jews did Christ, Hail King of the Jews, when God knows they hated
him, and stripped him of all power, (I speak not of his Divinity) either to
govern them, or to save himself.

3. The toleration of diverse Sects and sorts of religions.
3. As the King has right and power to grant his dispensations both of grace
and of justice, of grace when it is merely of the King' Princely favor, as in
legitimations and the like, and of justice when the King finds a just cause
to grant it; so likewise it is in the King's power and right to remit any
offense, (that is, the mulct or penalty) and to absolve the offender from any,
or all the transgressions of his own Laws; from the transgression of God's
Law, neither King, nor Pope, nor Priest, nor any other can formally remit the
fault, and absolve transgressors, but as God is the Lawgiver, so God alone
must be the forgiver of the offense; Mar. 2.7.
so the Jews say, who can forgive sins but God only? Yet, as God which gives
the Law can lawfully remit the sin, and forgive the breach of the Law, As David
pardoned Absolon, and Solomon Abiathar.
so the King, which makes these positive Laws cannot be denied this power, to
pardon when he sees cause, or is so pleased, the offenders of his Laws; as
you see they do many times grant their pardons for the most heinous faults and
capital crimes, as treasons, murders, felonies, and the like: and if they may
grant their pardons for the breach of the Law, and remit the mulct imposed for
the transgression thereof, it is strange if they should not have right to
dispense with whom they please, when they see cause, from the bond of the Law:
and therefore, we are to discuss how far the King, (in these Laws of the
Church) may give exemptions and tolerations unto them, whose consciences cannot
submit themselves to the observation of the established Laws; Christ bids
that the ^ares should grow. Matthew. 13.30. And the Apostle says, (...). there
must be heresies: therefore there must be a toleration of diverse Sects. 1 Cor.
11.19. Four special sorts of false Professors. 1. Jews Whitak. against
Campian, translated by Master Stoke, p. 311. With what cautions the Jews are
to be suffered.
for seeing all men are not of the same faith, nor do profess the same
Religion; and it is the nature of all men to dislike that which themselves will
not profess, and if opportunity serve to root out that which they dislike; it
is requisite it should be showed, how far a prudent and a pious Prince may
grant a toleration (the Law in terminis not forbidding it) unto any of these
Sects that may be commorant within his Kingdoms.

Touching which, I say that besides dissembling hypocrites, and profane
worldlings, that have no faith, nor any other Religion, but the shadow of that
Religion, whatsoever it is, which is professed wheresoever they are, there may be
in any Kingdom Jews, Turks, Papists, Puritans, and the like; or to call them
otherwise, Idolaters, Heretics, Schismatickes, etc. And

1. For the Jews, though they have many things in their Religion, which will
ever alienate them from the Papists, yet they have free leave to use their
ancient Ceremonies in Rome, says Doctor Whitaker; and it is well known, that
many pious Princes have permitted them to dwell, and to exercise their own
Religion in this kingdom; the old Jury in London is so called, because it was
allotted for their abode; and the Laws of many Christian Emperors have in
like sort permitted them to do the like in their Dominions, but with those
cautions and limitations that Moses prescribed unto the Jews, to be observed
with the Heathens and Idolaters that dwelt amongst them; that is, neither to
make marriages with them, nor to communicate with them in their Religion. And
Saint Augustine is reported to be so favorable toward them, that he
alleges several reasons for their toleration. As

1. That above and before others they had the promise of salvation; Deuteronomy. 7.3.
Exodus 23.32. Doctor Covel. c. 14. p. 199. 1 Reason for their toleration. Romans
11.24, 25. 2 Reason. Psalm. 59.11.
and therefore though some of the branches be cut off, and the case of the rest
be most lamentable, yet not altogether desperate and incurable, if we consider
what the Apostle sets down, of their conversion and re-unition unto the good
right olive tree.

2. That the Prophet David speaking of them, made that prayer unto God, Slay
them not, O Lord, lest my people forget it, but scatter them abroad among the
Heathen, and put them down, O Lord, our defense, for many excellent ends; as
first; that their being scattered among the Christians, might show both the
clemency and severity of God, toward us mercy and clemency, and toward them
justice and severity, which may likewise happen, unto us if we take not heed,
as the Apostle bids us, Be not high minded but fear: and secondly, Romans 11.20.
We may not force the Jews to believe.
that being among the Christians, they might the sooner at all times by their
charity and prayers be reduced, the more willingly to embrace the faith of
Christ, when as unwillingly we may neither compel them, nor take their children
to be baptized from them. And therefore as the Princes of this Realm, for
diverse causes hurtful to their State, have banished them out of their
Dominions: so if they see good cause to permit them (as time may change the
condition of things) they may do, as by their counsel they shall be advised,
either the one or the other, to receive them or reject them without offense;
because we find no special precept or direction in Gods Word either to banish
or to cherish them in any kingdom.

2. For the Turks, the reasons are not much unlike, 2 Turks.
though something different, and in my judgment no less tolerable then the
other, because somewhat nearer to the Christian faith; therefore I leave them
to the Laws of each kingdom, to do as the wisdom of the Prince shall think
fit.

3 Papists.
3. For the Papists the case is far otherwise with them, then either with the
Turks or Jews; because,

1. They profess the same faith, quoad essentialia, the same Creeds, the same
Gospel, and the same Christ as we do.

2. It is not denied by the best of our Divines, but that they together with us
do constitute the same Catholic Church of Christ, though they be sick and
corrupted, yet not dead; and we strong and sound, yet not unspotted members of
the same; as I have more fully showed in my book of the true Church.

3. It is not agreed upon by all our Divines, that they are Idolaters, though
they be in great errors, and implunged in many superstitions; because every
Church in error, though never so dangerous, is not so desperate, as that
Church which is Idolatrous; or be it granted, (which some of our Protestants
will not admit) that they were Idolaters; Carol. Sigon. l. 5. c. 11. p. 274.
yet seeing not only seven special sorts of heresies, as 1. the Sadducees.
2. the Scribes. 3. the Pharisees. The Hemero-baptists, such as baptized
themselves every day. 5. The Esseni, which Josephus calls Essaei. 6. The
Nazarites. And 7. the Herodians; whereof some denied the resurrection, and the
being of Angels and spirits; but also Idolaters and heathens that knew not God,
but worshipped the Devil instead of God, were not inhibited to dwell and
inhabit among the Jews (of whose Religion notwithstanding God was as careful
to preserve the purity of it, and as jealous to keep them from Idolatry, as of
any Nation that then or ever after lived upon the earth) it is no question, but
if it please the King, permission may be granted them to exercise their own
Religion, not publickely and authoritative, equally with the Protestant, Grand
Rebel. c. 1. p. 5. and. 6.
but quietly, and so as I have showed in my Grand Rebellion; for, I am not of
their faith, which hold it more safe, and less dangerous, to be conversant with
the Turks, or Jews, and to have more neerness with them, then with an
Idolatrous Church that professes Christ; because, that where the greater
distance is from the true Religion, there the lesser familiarity, and
neerenesse should be in conversation, and the greater distance in communion;
therefore as the wrath of God was kindled against the Israelites, because they
had the Jews, their own brethren, in greater detestation then the Idumeans, or
the Egyptians, The least familiarity in conversation, where there is greatest
distance from truth.
whose idolatry must needs be far greater, and their Religion far worse, in
their own judgment, then that of the Jews; so we may fear the like anger
from God, if we will be so partial in our judgment, and so transported with
disaffection, as to prefer a blasphemous Turk, or an impious Jew before those
men, though ignorantly idolatrous, that do with all fear and reverence worship
the same God, and adore the name of Christ as we do.

And we read, that the Emperor Justinus, a right Catholic Prince, as Bishop
Horn calls him, Bishop Horn against F^kenham. Justinus gave a toleration to
the Arians.
at the request of Theodoricke King of Italy, granted license, that the Arians,
which denied the Deity of our Savior Christ, and were the worst of Heretics,
and therefore worse then any Papist, should be restored, and suffered to live
after their own orders; and Pope John, for the peace and quietness of the
Catholic Church, requested him most humbly so to do, which he did for fear
of Theodoricke, that otherwise threatened the Catholics should not live.

success that befell to King David's house for Solomon's permission of diverse
religions, to be divided into two parts, and the best ten Tribes for two to be
given unto a stranger; Deuteronomy. 17, 17, 19.
and the principal care of a pious Prince, being to preserve pure Religion,
which is soon infected by Idolatrous neighbors, do rather disprove all
toleration, then any ways connive with them that are of a different Religion:
and if we read the Oration of the league to the King of France, wherein that
Orator numbereth their victories, and innumerable successes, whilst they had
but one Religion, and their miseries, and ill fortunes, when they fostered two
Religions; it will appear how far they were from allowing a toleration of any
more then one Religion in one Kingdom.

The true cause of renting Solomon's Kingdom. Ps. 106.35.
Yet to this it may be easily answered, that Solomon's Kingdom was not rent from
his posterity for his permission of idolaters to dwell in his Kingdom, which
the Law of God did not forbid; but for that fault which his father taxed the
Jews with, they were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works, for
his commixtion of alliances with strangers, and the corruption of true
Religion, by his marrying of so many idolatrous wives, and so becoming
idolatrous himself, and thereby inducing his subjects the Israelites to be the
like: and for the Oration of the league, there is in that brave Orator want of
Logic, and ignoratio ^lenchi, non causae ut causae; for you know what the Poet
says, -- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putaet:
and we must not judge of true causes by the various success of things, and I
may say, it was not the professing of one religion, but the sincere serving of
God in that true religion, which brought to them, and will bring to others,
prosperous success against the infidels: neither was it the permitting of two
religions, or to speak more properly, the diversity of opinions in the same
religion, but their emulation and hatred one against another, their pride and
ambition, and many other consequences of private discords might be the just
causes of their misfortunes.

4. For the Puritans, Brownists, Anabaptists, Heretics, and Schismatiques,
that are deemed neither Infidels nor Idolaters, 4. Puritans.
but do obstinately err in some points of faith, as the Arians, that denied
the Divinity of Christ, and the Nestorians to them which sinned after baptism,
and the like pernicious heresies, though not all alike dangerous; or do make a
Schism or a rent in the Church of Christ, as the Donatists did in Saint
Augustin's time, and the Anabaptists and Puritans do in our days; I say, these
are not to be esteemed and expelled as deadly enemies, but to be suffered and
respected as weak friends, if they proceed not to be turbulent and malicious,
who then may prove to be more dangerous both to Church and State, then any of
the former sort that profess their religion with Peace and quietness: for it is
not the Profession of this or that religion, but the malice and wickedness of
the professor, What wrong Professors are chiefly to be suffered.
that is the bane and poison of the Church wherein it rests: for what is
diversity of opinions in the Church of God, but tares among the wheat? and our
Savior shows, that the tares should not be plucked up, but suffered to grow
with the wheat; to teach us, Matthew. 13.29.
that in respect of external communion, and civil conversation, all sorts of
Professors may live together, though in respect of our spiritual communion and
exercise of our religion, the Heretic shall be cast forth, Why to be
suffered? either for the exercise of the godly, or in hope to convert the
ungodly.
and be unto me tanquam Ethnicus and Publicanus, with whom notwithstanding I
may converse, as our Savior did, with hope that I may convert them unto him;
which could never be done, if they should be quite excluded our company, and
banished from all holy society.

And therefore as the prudent Prince sees the disposition, and observes the
conversation of any Faction, and the turbulency of any Sect, so he knows best
how to advise with his Council to grant his toleration to them that best
deserve it, not so much in respect of the meliority of their religion, as their
peaceable and harmless habitation among their neighbors without railing
against their faith, or rebelling against their Prince.

And thus, as the case now stands, I see not any Sect, or any sort of
Professors, that for turbulency of spirit, madness of zeal, and violency of
hatred and persecution to the true Protestants, are more dangerous to the true
religion, and deserve less favor from their pious Prince then these
Anabaptists, Brownists, and Puritans, that have so maliciously plotted, and so
rebelliously prosecuted their damnable designs, to the utter ruin both of
Church and State. Doctor Covell. cap. 15. p. 2 ^^. His description of the
Puritans.
Doctor Covell long ago, when they were not half so bad as they be now, says,
they pretend gravity, reprehend severely, speak gloriously, and all in
hypocrisy; they daily invent new opinions, and run from error to error;
their wilfulness they account constancy, their deserved punishment
persecution, their mouths are ever open to speak evil; they give neither
reverence nor titles to any in place above them: And to confirm this
description, read what King JAMES writes of them in his Basilicon Doron p.
160. and 161 and in the History of the conference at Hampton Court in anno 603.
p. 81, 82.
in one word, the Church cannot fear a more dangerous and fatal enemy to her
peace and happiness, a greater cloud to the light of the Gospel, a stronger
hand to pull in barbarism and poverty into all our Land, a more furious
monster to breed contempt and disobedience in all estates, a more fretting
canker to the very marrow and sinews of this Church and kingdom, then this
beast, who is proud without learning, presumptuous without authority, zealous
without knowledge, holy without Religion, and in brief a most dangerous and
malicious hypocrite, and were therefore banished from amongst us in the days
of Queen Elizabeth, but now deserve it far better, being more dangerous,
because far more numerous,; Huc usque. Our factious Puritans bitterer against
Kings then the Jesuits.
and therefore I cannot say with Saint Bernard, Aut corrigendi ne pereant, aut
coercendi ne perimant; for in my judgment they are incorrigible, and in their
own opinion they are invincible, having by lies and frauds gathered so much
wealth, and united such strength together, that, except the Lord himself had
been on our side, and made our very enemies the Papists to become our friends,
and to hazard their lives and fortunes according to their duty, to preserve the
Crown and Dignity of their king, as God most wisely disposes of things, when
he produces light out of darkness, and against their wills support our true
Protestant Religion from being quite defaced by these merciless enemies, we
might well fear what destruction would have come upon us.

And therefore considering the bitter writings of their Prophets old and new,
being fuller of gall and venom against Christian Kings, then can be found in
the books of the Jesuits; and considering the wicked practices, and this
unparalled rebellion of these new Proselytes, and the loyalty of those that
heretofore received least favor from the Church, and not much from the State:
Tell me I pray you which of these deserve best to be suffered in a Protestant
Church? they that maliciously seek her ruin, or they that unwillingly support
her from falling? for my self, I will ever be of the true Protestant faith; yet
for this loyalty of the Papists unto their King, I will ever be in charity, and
rest in hope, though not in the same faith with them: and I doubt not but His
Majesty will think well of their fidelity.

But as Saint Bernard says, Non est meae humilitatis dictitare vobis, it is
not for me to prescribe who are most capable of Grace, or who best deserves
the Kings favor, when his Princely Grace presupposes a sufficient merit, but
in humility to set down mine own opinion in this point of toleration, with
submission to the judgment of this Church: wherein also I humbly desire my
reader not to mistake me, as if I meant such a public and legal toleration, as
might breed a greater distraction in a kingdom, then the wisdom of the State
could well master, and raise more spirits then they could lay down; but such as
I have expressed in my Grand Rebellion; Grand Rebellion p. 5, 6.
that is, a favorable connivence to enjoy their own consciences, so long as
they live in peace and amity with their neighbors, but without any public
exercise of their Religion, which can produce nothing else but discord,
distraction, and destruction to that Kingdom, where two religions are professed
in Aequilibrio, with the same privileges and authority.

These and many more are the rights of Kings, granted them by God for the
Government of his Church, which they are to look unto, and to protect in all
her rights, service, maintenance, ordinances, governors, and the like, if they
look that God should bless and protect them in their ways, dignities, and
dues; because it is their duties and the first charge that God lays upon
them, to be nursing Fathers unto his Church: for God knew the Church should
have many enemies; and intus est equus Trojanus, and they are the worst that
are nearest unto kings, and do with Judas kiss, with fair words, and
Machiavilian counsels, betray both Church and King, and in the end destroy
themselves; for who deceived Absolon though rightly, but his own Counselor?
who betrayed Ahab, and that most wickedly, but his lying Parasites? and who
overthrew Rehoboam, and that foolishly, but his young favorites? Which thing
is purposely set down in the holy Scripture, to be a caveat for all Kings, not
to rely too much upon young Counselors; not that wisdom and prudence are
intailed to old age,, and inseparable from grayhaires, or divorced from green
heads; but because commonly experience is the fruitful mother of these fair
issues, and the multitude of years teaches wisdom: for otherwise there may be
delirium senectutis, the dotage of old age, as well as vanitas juventutis, the
folly of youth; and as Elihu says, Great men are not always wise, neither do
the aged understand judgment: but as Solomon says, ^ isdem, even in youth, is
the gray hairs and an undefiled life is the old age; as we see, young Joseph
was the wisest in all Egypt: Solomon, Daniel, and Titus, how wise, how learned,
and how religious were they in their younger years? So Alexander, Hanniball,
Scipio, in the feats of war; Lucan, Mirandula, Keckerman, and abundance more
in all humane learning that were but Neophyti annis, yet were egregii
virtutibus, young in years, yet very admirable for their worth. And Princes do
most wisely, when they make such election; especially when they are enforced to
call men to places of labor, and industry, they must have some regard to the
bodies, as well as to the minds of their servants, and choose men of younger
years, though not to be their favorites, but their confidents, according to
the French distinction, as His Majesty has lately made choice of one noble
servant, who is, (a^ Nazianzen speaks) (...): gray in the mind, though yellow
in the head, and supplying in all manner of excellent parts, what may be
conceived wanting in years, whose name, so much already catched at by envy, I
shall ever reverence, though now I purposely pass it over in silence.
and whom may the Church fear most of all, but her dissembling friends, that
are in most favor with Kings, and therefore seduce them soonest, insensibly to
wound the Care, and neglect the Charge that is laid upon them; because, as St.
Bernard says, Long plus nocet falsus Catholicus, quam si apertus appareret
haereticus, those eare-wigs are most pernicious, whose counsels seem to be
most specious, when they are but as the spirit of darkness, appearing like an
Angel of light, when they say, God indeed must be served, and the Word must be
preached, but, whether Bishop or no Bishop, whether in a sumptuous Church, or
private house, whether by an esteemed Clergy, or a poor mean Ministry, in
this manner, or in another fashion, it skilleth not much; Kings may well enough
give way to spare that cost, to lessen that Revenue, and to pull down these
Cathedrals, especially to give content unto the People, and to defray the
expensive charge of the Commonwealth.

But these counsels will not excuse Kings in the day of their account;
therefore let them take heed of such Counselors; and when they hear them begin
to speak against the Church, though they be-guild their beginnings never so
slily, let them either stop their ears with the Cockatrice, Psalm. 58.5.
that will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely; or
let them answer, as our Savior answered their grand instructor, Vade Satana,
non tentabis; Matthew. 4.10.
for it is most true, that, Qui deliberat, jam desivit; he that listens to them
is half corrupted by them; and so they may prove destructive both to
themselves, and to their posterity; for, as nothing establishes the Throne of
Kings surer, then obedience to God; so nothing is more dangerous then rebellion
against God, with whom there is no respect of persons; for he expects, Romans
2.11.
that as he made Kings his Vicegerents, so they should fear him, preserve the
right of his Church, uphold his service, defend his servants, and do all that
he commands them entirely, without taking the least liberty, for fear of the
people, to dispense with any omission of his honor, or suffering the hedges of
his Vineyard, the Governors of his Church, to be trodden down, and torn in
pieces, that the beasts of the field may destroy the grapes, and defile the
service of our God.

Therefore to conclude this point, let all Kings do their best to hinder their
People to corrupt the Covenant of Levi, which is a Covenant of Salt, that is,
Malach. 2.8. Deuteronomy. 33.11.
to endure for ever; let them remember Moses prayer; Bless Lord his substance,
and accept the work of his hands; smite through the loins of them that rise
against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again; and let them
always consider, that God takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants.
Psalm. 35.27.


CHAP. XI.
Shows, where the Protestants, Papists, and Puritans, do place Sovereignty;
who first taught the deposing of Kings; the Puritans tenet worse then the
Jesuits; Kings authority immediately from God; the twofold royalty in a King;
the words of the Apostle vindicated from false glosses; the testimony of the
Fathers and Romanists for the Sovereignty of Kings; the two things that show
the difficulty of government; what a miraculous thing it is; and that God
himself is the governor of the people.

2 The duty of the King in the government of the Commonwealth.
HAving set down some particulars of the Kings right in the Government of Gods
Church; it rests that I should show some part of his right and duty to serve
God, as he is a King, in the government of the Commonwealth; touching which,
for our more orderly proceeding, I will distribute my whole discourse into
these five heads.

Five points handled.
1. To justify his right to govern the people. 2. To show the difficulty of
this government. 3. To set down the assistants that are to help him in the
performance of this duty. 4. To distinguish the chiefest parts of this
Government. 5. To declare the end for which this Government is ordained of God.
1. Point. 1. Where the Protestants place Sovereignty.
1. We say that the Kings Sovereignty or royal power to govern the people, is
independent from all creatures solely from God, who has immediately conferred
the same upon him; and this we are able to make good, with abundance both of
divine and humane proofs: and yet we find the same adversaries of this truth
(though with a far less show of reason) that we met withal about Government of
Gods Church. For

2. In whom the Papists do place Sovereignty. The Pope's sad Message to Hen. 3.
Imp. Quem meritum investivimus, quare immeritum non devestiamus? quia ad quem
pertinet institutio, ad eundem pertinet destitutio.
2 They that are infatuated with the cup of Babylon, the Canonists and some
Jesuits do constantly aver, that summum imperium, the primary supreme power of
this Government, is in the Pope, (...), absolutely and directly, as he is the
Vicar of Christ, who has all power given him both in Heaven and earth; from
whom it is immediately derived unto his Vicar, and from him to all Kings
mediately by subordination unto him: so Baronius, Carerius, and others. But
Bellarmine and the rest of the more moderate Jesuists say, that this imperium
in reges, the Popes power over all Kings and States is but indirectum dominium,
a power by consequent and indirectly, in ordine ad bonum spirituale, as the
civil State has relation to Religion; and this great Cardinal, lest he should
seem fine ratione insanire, does (as the Heretics did in Tertullians time)
Caedem Scripturarum facere ad materiam suam, allege two and twenty places of
Scripture mis-interpreted, to confirm his indirect Divinity; and as Petiphars
wife, he produces very honest apparel, but to prove a very bad cause; and
therefore attributing to the Pope by the greatness of his learning, and the
excellency of his wit, more then he could justify with a good conscience, he
was so far from satisfying the then Pope, that he was well nigh resolved to
condemn all his works for this one opinion: Carerius, lib. 1. cap. 5.
and Carerius undertook his confutation ex professo, and taxes him so
bitterly, that he puts him inter impios haereticos, which he indeed needed
not to have done; because the difference is only in the expression, when the
Pope by this indirect power may take occasion to king and unking whom he
pleases, and do what he will in all Christian States.

3. The Anabaptists and Puritans either deny all government, 3 Where the
Puritans place the Sovereignty. Majestas regia sita est magis in populo quam in
persona regis. Parsons in Dolman:
with the Fratricelli, and all superiority by the title of Christianity, as the
Author of the Tract of Schism and Schismatics; or do say that originally it
proceeds, and habitually resideth in the people, but is cumulatively and
communicatively derived f om them unto the King; and therefore the people (not
denuding themselves of their first interest, but still retaining the same in
the collective body, that is, in themselves suppletive, if the King in their
judgment be defective in the administration, or neglect the performance of his
duty) may question their King for his mis-government, dethrone him if they see
cause, and resuming the collated power into their own hands again, may transfer
it to any other whom they please.

Which opinion, if it were true, would make miserable the condition of all
Kings; and I believe they first learned it from the Sorbonists, The Sorbonists
first taught the deposing of Kings, and why.
who to subject the Pope to the community of the faithful, say, that the chief
spiritual power was first committed by Christ unto them, and they to preserve
the unity of the Church remitted the same communicatively unto the Pope, but
suppletively, (not privatively, or habitually devesting themselves thereof)
retaining the same still in themselves, if the Pope failed in the faith of the
Church; and therefore he was not only censureable, but also deposable by the
Council, if he became an heretic, or apostated from the religion of Christ,
and to make this both the more plausible and probable, they alleged, how
Kings were thus eligible, and likewise deposable by the community of the
people; for out of this Buchanan says, Romani Pontifices long regum omnium
condition superiores, Buchan. de jure regni p. 25, and 91.
legum tamen poenis haud eximuntur; sed and eos, quanquam sacrosanctos
Christianis omnibus semper habitos, Synodus Basiliensis communi ordinum
consensu senatui sacerdotum obnoxios esse pronunciavit: that is, in brief, the
Popes are deprivable by the Council; So are Kings by the community of the
people: and so both the Papist and the Puritan do agree to depose their Kings,
Claudian de 4. Consul. Honorii
and as the Poet says, Ausus uterque n^fas, domini respersus uterque,
Insontis jugulo. --
never a barrel better herring; both alike friends to Kings.

But to this Blackvodaeus answers most truly, that although the Pope should
be deprivable by the Council, (which I am sure neither Pope nor Jesuit will
allow) yet for diverse different reasons betwixt the examples, Kings are not
deposable by their Subjects; especially if you consider the great difference
betwixt the Church of Christ, that is guided by the Spirit of God, and the
representation thereof in the flower of her Clergy, and a giddyheaded
multitude, Blac. cap. 23. p. 304.
that is led by their unruly and unreasonable passions, and are represented by
those, that either basely bought their Votes, as the Consuls and other great
men did the votes of the people of Rome, or that their partial and most
ignorant affection, oftentimes without judgment, have made choice of: ex quo
sequitur, ut non sit eadem populi potestas in regem, qu^ in pontificem est
Ecclesiae: So that the reason is far unlike.

But, though the Sorbonists, to justify their former tenet, The Puritans
opinion worse then the Jesuits in two respects.
were the first broachers of this unjust opinion of the deposition of Kings by
the people, from whence the Jesuits, to subject the King unto the Pope, sucked
it afterward: Yet in two main Respects I find this tenet, as it is held by the
Puritans, far worse then the doctrine of the Jesuits.

people may not restrain the power, which they have once transmitted unto the
King: when the Law of justice does not permit, that Covenants should be
repealed or a donation granted shoud be revoked, though it were never so
prejudicial to the donor: and Bellarmine makes this good by the example of the
soldiers, that had power to accept or reject their Emperor before he was
created, Bellar. in tract. cont. Pat. Paul.
but being once elected, they had no coactive power over him, whereas all the
Puritanes will make and unmake, promise and break, do and undo at their
pleasure.

Jesuits permit not the people nor any Peers to depose their King, until the
Pope, as an indifferent judge deputed by Christ, shall approve of the cause;
and our Sectaries depresse kings so far, as to submit them to the weak
judgment, and extravagant power of the people, who to day cry to Gideon, reign
thou and thy son over us for ever, and to morrow join with the base son of
Jerubbaal and the Sichemites to kill seventy of the Children of Gideon, Judges
9.
and to create Abimilech to be their king.

Our Opinion proved. Anti-Cav. in Os Ossor p. 25
But, though the Anti-Cavalier takes it ill, that I should affirm that the kings
power and right unto his government is immediately from God, yet if he would
believe learned Authors, he might find enough of this judgment; for the
sublime power and authority that resideth in earthly Potentates, is not a
derivation or collection of humane power scattered among many, and gathered
into one head, but a power immediately granted by God to his Vicegerents So
acknowledged by Act of Parliament, 25 H. 8. c. 12.28. c. 10. Dr Sarav. sol.
175. Bellar. de Laicis, cap. 6. and 8.
, quam nunquam fuisse populo demandatam legimus, which God never communicated
to any multitudes of men, says Saravia.

And Bellarmine himself against the Anabaptists confuteth their error, that
denied the power and authority of kings to be immediately from God; I. From
Script. Sap. 6. Esaias, 45. Hierem. 27. Dan. 2. Romans 13.1 Pet. 2. II. From the
Council of Constans. Sess. 8. and 15. III. From S. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 5.
c. 21. where he says, non tribuamus dandi regni potestatem nisi Deo vero;
which gives felicity in the kingdom of Heaven only to the godly, but the
earthly kingdoms he gives both to the godly, and to the wicked; nam qui dedit
Mario, ipse and Caesari, qui Augusto, ipse and Neroni, qui Vespasianis, vel
patri vel filio, Idem de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 3. Irvinus de jure regni. c. 2. p.
40.
suavissimis imperatoribus, ipse and Domitiano crudelissimo, qui Constantino
Christiano, ipse and Apostatae Juliano; And IV. it is proved from the
confession of the Popes of Rome, as Leo. ep. 38. and 43. Gelasius epist. ad
Anastasium. Greg. l. 2. epist. 61. Nicholaus epist. ad Michaelem: out of all
which says Irvinus, it is apparent, all and every king, non multitudini aut
hominibus sed Deo soli, regum regi, quicquid juris habent, acceptum far; And
he might consider that a thing may be said to be immediately from God diverse
ways, as specially.

1 (...), absque ullo signo creato. 2 (...) cum aliquo actu conjuncto.
that is,

1. Solely from God and no other; presupposing nothing praevious to the
obtaining of it; So Moses and Joshua had their authority from God.

Heningus fuse, c. 1. p. 4 and 5. de distinct. duplici jurisdict. Sive
electione sive postulatione, vel successione, vel belli jure Principi tamen
facto divinitus potestas data est. Cunerus, c. 5. de offic. Princip.
2. Jointly with an interposed act of some other instrument, as the Apostolical
power of Matthias was immediately from God, though his constitution was from
the Apostles; so Kings though some of them be after a sort elected by men; yet
as our Savior says to Pilate, that his power was from above, though he was
deputed by Caesar; So may they be said to have their authority immediately from
God, though they should be some ways deputed by men: for we must distinguish
betwixt the sovereignty, the Subject, and the collation of the Sovereignty to
the Subject; the Sovereignty is immediately from God, the Subject is from it is
natural cause, and the unition of the Sovereignty to the Subject, is likewise
immediately from God, not only approving, but appointing the same in all the
Kings of his ordination: or to speak with the Schools, we must distinguish
betwixt deputationem personae, and collationem potestatis, the designation of
the person, which is sometimes done by men, and that is where the King is
elective, and the donation of the power which is proper only unto God; for so
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 62.11.
God has spoken once and twice; I have also heard the same, that power
belongs unto God: and the Apostle says, the powers that are, are ordained of
God, Romans 13.2.
which is to be understood of the regal, or Monarchical power, because Saint
Paul's (...), 2 Pet. 2.13. Saint Peter's description betwixt the King and the
inferior Magistrates. A twofold royalty in a King. 1 Merum imperium.
higher powers are interpreted by Saint Peter, to be (...), Kings that are
supreme: where Saint Peter makes an excellent distinction betwixt the superior
and the inferior Magistrates: the superior is that which Saint Paul says is
ordained of God, and the inferiors, are they which Saint Peter calls (...),
such as are sent by the King,: for the better explanation of which place, you
must know that in every King or supreme Magistrate, we may conceive a double
royalty.

The 1 is merum imperium, or regni potestas, summa and plenissima; and this
(...), this fullness of power, and independent of any creature, and immediately
received of God, which the Civilians call jus regis, or munus regni, is in the
person of the King indivisible, not to be imparted by the King to any creature;
because he cannot divest himself, divide this power, or alienate the same to
any subject, no not to his own son, without renouncing or dividing his
Kingdom; How the King cannot do unjustly.
and by this the Civilians say, the King may govern sine certa lege, sine
certo jure, sed non sine aequitate and justitia, without Law, but not without
equity: whereupon it is a rule in the Common Law, hoc unum rex potest facere,
quod non potest injuste agere, which is to be applied to this inseparable
regality of the King; 2 Imperium dispositivum.
and has been often alleged by other Parliaments to justify the King from
all blame. The 2 is, imperium dispositivum, or jus gubernandi vel jurisdictio
the right of governing, or jurisdiction and distribution of justice; and this
may be derived and delegated from the King, legatis vitalitiis, either for
term of life, or during the Kings pleasure. But how? not privative, when the
King does not denude himself thereof, but cumulative and executive, to execute
the same, as the Kings Instruments for the preservation of peace, How the King
delegates his power to his inferior Magistrates.
and the administration of justice, as it appears in their patent; and this
subordinate power is not inherent in their persons, but only committed unto
them for the execution of some office; because that when the supreme power is
present, the power of the inferior officers is silent, it is in nubibus, fled
into the clouds, and like the light of the Moon and Stars vanishing, whenever
the Sun appears, for Kings, when they do transfer any actual power to the
subalternate Officers, retain the habitual power still in their own hands,
which upon any emergent occasion they may actually resume to themselves again,
which they could not do, if they parted with the habit and form of this
despoticall power of government, The words of the Apostles vindicated from the
false glosses of the Sectaries. Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. The testimony of the
Fathers for the Sovereignty of Kings. Tertul. ad Scap. and in apologet. c. 30.
Iren. advers. baeres. Valent. l. 5. c. 20. Optat. contr. Parmen. l. 3. (...).
Chrysostom. tom. 6. orat. 40. orat. 2. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 21.
that they have immediately received from God.

And, as the Scriptures make it plain, that the Kings right and power to govern
is immediately from God, so they make it as plain, that it is the greatest
right, and most eminent highest power that is on earth; for though the
cavillers at this power translate the words of Saint Paul, (...), not
potestatibus sublimioribus or supremis, but potestatibus superexcellentibus,
and say, that the word or particle (...) where S. Peter bids us submit our
selves to the King; (...), as to the chief, intends a resemblance only, and
not a real demonstration to prove the King to be the chief: Yet the malice of
these men, and the falsehood of these glosses will appear, if you consider that
the word, (...), habens se super alios, or (...) joined with (...) to the
powers that are ordained of God, must needs signify not any subordinate power,
but the supremest power on earth; because the other powers are directly said by
Saint Peter to be sent by the King, and the article (...) does as really
express the matter there, as in John i. 14. where the Evangelist says, and we
beheld his glory, (...), as the glory of the only begotten Son of God. And I
hope our Sectaries will not be so impudent, as to say that this signifies but
a resemblance of the Son of God.

But to make this point more plain, you shall hear what the Fathers and the
learned say; for,

I told you before, Tertullian says of Kings and Emperors, inde potestas,
unde and spiritus, and he is solo Deo minor inferior to none but God. Saint
Chrysostom says, he has no peer on Earth, but is the top of all men living.
Athanasius says, there is none above the Emperor, but only God that made the
Emperor. Q. Curtius l. 9.
Saint Cyrill in a Sermon upon that text, I am the vine, commends the answer
of a King, (whom Quintus Curtius affirms to be Alexander,) that being shot,
and his Subjects would have him bound to pull out the arrow, said, non decet
vinciri Regem, Bern. Tractat. de pass. Dom. c. 4. it becomes not Kings to be
bound, because none is superior unto them: Agapetus, a Deacon of Constantine,
says as much; and because it is a rule in the Civil Law, testem quem quis
inducit pro se, tenetur recipere contra sese: the testimony of our adversaries
is most convictive: therefore I beseech you hear what they say; for Rosellus a
great Catholic says, it is heretical to affirm, that the universal
administration of the temporal affairs is or must be in the Pope, when the
King has no superior on earth, but the Creator of heaven and earth. Caninus
also says, that the Apostle, Romans 13. spoke of the Regal and secular Power,
Cassan. Catal. glor. mundi p. 8. consider. 28. Card. Cusan. concord. Cathol. l.
3. c. 5. Vide Arnis. p. 5. de did. dupl. jurisdict.
and not of the Ecclesiastical; and Cassanaeus says, that Kings are the
highest, and most paramount secular power and authority that ever God appointed
on earth, and denies that either the old, or the new Testament, makes any
mention of an Emperor: and juris utriusque testimonia manifest declarant
imperialem dignitatem and potestatem immediate a filio Dei ab antiquo
processisse, said Philip King of France, in Constit. de potest. elect. Imperat.
Irvin. p. 33, 34, 35. quoteth many authors to confirm the same truth: Lombard,
Gratian, Melancthon, Cranmer, Tyndall, and abundance more without number do
likewise most peremptorily affirm, that the Kings Power is the supreme power
on earth: and as the mirror of our time, the Bishop of Winchester, observes,
the Scripture testifies, that their Throne, their Crown, their Sword, their
Scepter, their Judgment, their Royalty, their Power, their Charge, their
Person, and all in them are of God, from God, and by God; to show how sacred
they are, and ought to be unto us all; and so the very Heathens teaching
sounder Divinity then our Sectaries thought, and said that Kings were (...),
Homere Plutarch. Ovid. Fast. l. 5. Quia a jove nutriti and ab eo regnum ade, ti
sunt. Scapula in verb (...).
and (...), the Ministers of God, and not the servants of the people.

Good God! what shall we say then to those children of Adam, that will not
only with Adam be content to be like God, but with Antichrist, this (...),
Many-headed beast. 2. The difficulty of Government. 2. Things showing the
difficulty of Government.
as Plato calls them, will exalt themselves above all that is called God? they
will divest the King, and invest themselves with his right, and therefore,

2. This shows how difficult a thing it is to rule and govern this unruly,
aspiring, and ambitious multitude: for the fuller understanding of which
difficult duty, Osorius says, that two things are to be considered.

1. Suscepti muneris amplitudo, the greatness of the charge, which is of that
weight, that we can scarce think of a greater in all our life; the care of
Church and Commonwealth, and to rule millions of men far and near.

2. Gubernandorum qualitas, the quality and conditions of those men that are to
be governed; which (if there were nothing else to prove it) will sufficiently
show the difficulty of their government; for, if it be a very hard thing to
govern a man's self, how much harder is it to govern such a multitude of mad
men? for Cicero says, the multitude is the greatest teacher of error, the
unjustest judge of dignity, being without counsel, without reason, without
judgment; Cicero. Tusc 3. and de sinibus lib. 2. Plutarch. in Alcibiad.
and Plutarch calls them, pessimam veritatis interpretem, whereunto agrees
the answer of that Pope, who being demanded what was furthest from truth,
answered, populi sententia, the opinion of the People; and as they are the
weakest for judgment, so they are most instable in their resolutions; to day
crying Hosanna, and to morrow Crucifige; this is the nature of the People,
Osorius his description of the factious Puritans, most plainly seen verified in
our Rebels:
of whom these our Sectaries are the very dregs, the worst, and the basest of
all: I must crave leave to set down what Osorius says of them long ago, and
you may find, that this rebellion proves his words most true: for he says,
the desire and end of this faction is too much liberty, then which nothing can
be more averse to the office and government of Kings; for, it is the duty of a
King to cut off all heinous offenses with just punishments, the unbridled
people desires to be free from all fear of punishment; the King is the Minister
of the Law, the Keeper of it, and the auenger of the transgression thereof, the
people as much as possibly they can, with an impetuous temerity, pulls down
all Laws; the King labors to preserve peace and quietness, the people with
an untamcable lust turmoileth and troubles the peace of all men: lastly, the
King thinks not fit to distribute rewards and compensations indifferently to
all men alike, but the people desire to have all difference of worth and
dignity taken away, and infima summis permisceri, and to make the basest equal
with the best, whence it happens so, that they hate all Princes, and
especially all Kings quos immani odio persequuntur, whom they persecute with a
deadly hate; for they cannot endure any excellency or dignity: and to that end
they use all endeavor, ut principes interimant, vel saltem in turbam
conjiciant, either utterly to take away and destroy their Princes; or to
implunge them into a World of troubles; which thing at first does not appear,
but when the multitude of furious men has gathered strength, then at last
their impudent boldness, being confirmed by daily impunity, breaks forth to
the destruction of the royal Majesty. And a little after he says, Osoriu in
ep. Reginae Elizabethae praefix. l. de relig.
add to these things the abolition of Laws, the contempt of Rule, the hatred of
royal Majesty, and the cruel lying in wait, which they most impiously and
nefariously do endeavor, for their Princes: add also their clandestine and
secret discourses, where their confederacies are made for the extirpation of
their Kings, and to plot with unspeakable mischief the death of them, whose
health and safety they ought most heartily to pray to God for: and then he
adds, Pagina 24. and 25.
cum immodica libertatis cupiditate rapiantur, leges oderunt, judicia
detestantur, regum majestatem extinctam cupiunt, ut licentius and impunius
queant per omnia libidinum genera vagari; and this is most manifest (says he)
all their endeavors aim at this end, that Princes being taken away, they may
have an uncontrollable leave and liberty to commit all kind of villainies; and
to that purpose they have poisoned some kings, Revera mihi videtur esse ars
artium, hominem regere, qui certe est inter omnes animantes maxim and moribus
varius, and voluntate diversas. Nazian in Apol.
and killed others with the sword, and to root out all rule, Consilia plena
sceleris inierunt, they are full of all wicked counsels.

And therefore this being the condition of the people, as the Scripture shows
plainly in the Jews, by their continual Rebellions and murmurings against Moses
and Aaron; and we see it as plainly in our own time, when our people has
confirmed all that this Bishop said; it is not an easy matter to govern such
an unruly people: But we find that the rod of Government is a miraculous rod,
that being in Moses hand was a fair wand, but cast unto the ground turned to be
an ungly and a poisonous Serpent; to show that the people, being subject to the
hand of Government, is a goodly thing, and a glorious society; but let loose
out of the Princes hands, they are as Serpents, crooked, wriggled, versipelles,
A people well governed very glorious.
and as full as may be of all deadly poison: and the Prophet David makes the
ruling of the people to be as great a miracle, as to appease the raging of the
Seas; and therefore he ascribes this Government to be the proper work of God,
psalm. 65.7. God is the governor, and Kings are but Gods instruments. psalm.
77.20.
when speaking unto God, he says, Thou rulest the rage of the Seas, the noise
of his waves, and the madness of the people; for Kings are but Gods
instruments, and God himself is the ruler of his people, even as the same King
David shows, saying still to God, Tu duxisti populum tuum, Thou leadest thy
people like sheep by the hands of Moses and Aaron; God was the leader, and they
were but the hands by which he led them; for where God has not a hand in the
government of the people, it is impossible for the best and most politic heads
to do it: and this Solomon knew full well, when God bade him ask what he
should give him, and he said, Thou have made me King (he does not say the
people has made me) and I know not how to go out or in; that is, to govern
them: 1 Reg. 3.7 9.
therefore I pray the, give thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this
thy so great a people? that is, what one man is able to govern an innumerable
multitude of men? Thou therefore must be the Governor, and I am but thine
instrument; and that I may be a fit instrument to do thy work, I desire thee to
give me a docible heart.

They that reject their King, reject God,
Wherefore, O you Subjects without obedience, and you Divines without Divinity,
how dare you put any instruments into Gods hands, and refuse, nay reject the
instrument that he chooses, for the performance of his own work, to rule the
people? you may as well refuse God himself, even as God says unto Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.7.
They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me; so you that do rebel
and cast away your King that God has chosen, as his hand to guide you, and his
instrument to govern you, (...). Luke 10.16.
I pronounce it to all the World you have rebelled against God, and you have
cast away your God; for the rule of Christ must stand infallible, he that
rejects (or despises) him that is sent, rejects him that sent him.

CHAP. XII.
Shows, the assistants of Kings in their government; to whom the choice of
inferior Magistrates belongs; the power of the subordinate officers; neither
Peers nor Parliament can have supremacy; the Sectaries chiefest argument out of
Bracton answered; our Laws prove all Sovereignty to be in the King; the two
chief parts of the regal government; the four properties of a just War; and how
the Parliamentary Faction transgress in every property.

3. The assistance that God allows unto Kings to help them in their
government, of two sorts.
3. SEeing it is so hard and difficult a matter, ars artium gubernare populum,
the Mistress of all Sciences, and the most dangerous of all faculties to
govern the people, that Saturninus said truly to them that put on his Kingly
ornaments, they knew not what an evil it was to rule, because of the many
dangers that hang over the rulers heads, which under the seeming show of a
Crown of gold, do wear indeed a Crown of thorns: therefore, Vt raro eminentes
viros non magnis adjutoribus ad gubernandam fortunam suam usus invenies, says
Paterculus; as great men, of a wealthy and vast estate, are seldom without
great counsel to assist them to govern, and to dispose of that great fortune;
so Kings having a great charge laid upon them, are not only permitted, but
advised and counseled by God, to have 1. Wise Counselors,
1. Faithful and wise Counselors to direct them in the government of the
people. 2. Subordinate Magistrates to assist them in the government of the
people.


Tacit. annal. lib. 2.
1. Tacitus (as I said before) says, There cannot be an argument of greater
wisdom in a Prince, nor any thing of greater safety to the Commonwealth,
then for him to make choice of a wise and religious Counsel; because the most
weighty labors of the Prince do stand in need of the greatest helps:
therefore Agamemnon had his Nestor and Chaleas; Dionys. Halicar. lib. 2.
Augustus had Mecoenas and Agrippa, two wise Counselors, to direct him in all
his affairs; David had Nathan, Gad, Achitophel, and Hushai; and Nebuchadnezzar
had Daniel, Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego: and so all other Kings in all
Nations do choose the wisest men, that they conceive, to be their Counselors.

1. Subordinate Magistrates.
2. For subordinate Magistrates, Jethro's counsel unto Moses, and Moses
harkening unto him, as to a wise and faithful Counselor, makes it plain, how
necessary it is for the supreme Magistrate to choose such assistants, as may
bear with him some part of the great burden of government. Thus far it is
agreed upon on all sides, but the difference betwixt us and our new
State-Divines, consists in these two points.

1. About the choice 2. About the power
of these officers. A twofold difference.
For

1. We say, that by the Law of nature, every master has right to choose his own
servants: this is Lex gentium, ever practiced among all Nations; 1. About the
choice of inferior Magistrates and Officers. (...). 2 Cor. 4 5. Exodus 18.11.
why then should not the King make choice of his own Counselors and Servants?
they will say, because he is the servant of the Commonwealth: But how is that?
I hope none otherwise then the Minister is the servant of the Church, for
Christ his sake: and shall he therefore, that is your King, lose the
privileges of a common Subject? Besides, has not God committed the charge of
his people into the Kings hand, and will he not require an account of him of
their government? how then shall he give an account to God when the government
is taken out of his hands, and subordinate officers and servants put upon him?
I am sure, when the 70 grand Senators of Israel, the great Sanhedrim of the
Jews were to be chosen; Jethro says unto Moses, Thou shall provide out of the
people able men: mark I pray you, thou and not the people, shall provide them;
neither shall you find it otherwise in any History. Pharaoh, and not his
people, Genesis 41.41.
made Joseph ruler over all the Land of Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar, and not his
people, made Daniel ruler over the whole Province of Babylon: Dan. 2.48. Cap.
6.1, 2.
and Darius set over his Kingdom a hundred and twenty Princes, and made Daniel
the first of the three Presidents that were over all these. And what shall I
say of Ahashuerus, and all other kings, All kings choose their own Officers.
Heathens, Jews, or Christians, that ever kept this power, to choose their own
servants, Counselors, and Officers, except they were infant Kings, in their
nonage, and so not able to choose them.

But you will say that our Histories tell you, Ric. 2. Edw. 2. and others of
our Kings, had their Officers appointed, and themselves committed unto
Guardians by the Parliament; therefore why may not our Parliament do the like
in case of maladministration?

I answer, that I speak of the right of kings, 2 Reg. 19.37.
and not justify the wrongs done to Kings. Adramelech and Sharezer killed
Sennacherib their own Father; is it therefore lawful for other children so to
do? Why should we therefore allege those things, Quae insolentia populari,
quae vi, quae furore, non ad imitationem exemplo proponenda, sed justo legum
supplicio vindicanda sunt; which should rather have been revenged by the just
punishment of the Law, then proposed to be imitated by the example?

Therefore I say, that whosoever abridgeth the King of this power, robs him
of that right which God and nature has allowed him: whereby you may judge how
justly the Parliamentary faction would have dealt herein with our King, by
forcing Counselors and great Officers upon him; but I hope you see, it is the
Kings right to choose his Servants, Officers, and Counselors; what manner of
men he should choose, Jethro sets down. True Church. lib. 6. c. 4. etc.
And I have most fully described the qualities and conditions that they should
be endued withal in my True Church.

2. As our Sectaries differ much from the true Divines, about the choice, 2.
Difference, about the power of the subordinate Magistrates.
so they differ much more about the power of these subordinate officers, and
inferior Magistrates; for we say, they are always to be obedient to the
supreme power: or otherwise, ejus est deponere, cujus est constituere, he can
displace them that has appointed them; or if you say no, because I cited you a
place out of Bellarmine, where he says, the Soldiers had power to refuse
their Emperor while he was in fieri, to be elected; but not when he was in
facto, fully chosen and made Emperor; so the King has power to choose them,
but not to displace them. I answer briefly, that in creating or constituting
our inferiors, we may; but our superior we may not: because inferiors, in
the judgment of all men, None can depose him in whom the supreme Majesty
resideth.
have no jurisdiction over their superiors. And therefore elective Kings are
not deposeable in a Monarchical government: where the supreme power resides in
the Monarch; though perhaps the Kings of Lacedemon might be justly deposed,
because by the constitution of their Kingdom, the supreme power was not in
their Kings, but in their Ephori.

But our new Sectaries out of Junius Brutus, Burcher, Althusius, Knox, and
Cartwright, teach very devoutly, but most falsely, that in case of defailance
to do his duty, they may with the Tribunes of Rome, or the Demarchi at Athens,
censure and depose him too, if they see just cause for the same.

Blacvod. c. 33. p. 285. Grand Rebellion, c. 7. p. 52.
To confute which blasphemous doctrine against God, and so pernicious and
dangerous to this State, though others have done it very excellently well
already, and I have formerly showed the absurdity of it in my Grand Rebellion;
yet, because all books come not to every hand, I will say somewhat of it in
this place. If these Counselors, Magistrates, Parliament, call them what you
will, have any power and authority, it must be either subordinate, coordinate,
or supreme.

1 Subordinate officers can have no power over their superiors.
1. If subordinate, I told you before, they can have no power over their
superior, because all inferior Magistrates are Magistrates only, in respect
of those that are under their jurisdiction; because to them they represent the
King, and supply the office of the King; but in reference to the King; they are
but private persons and Subjects, that can challenge no jurisdiction over him.

2. that neither Peers not Parliament can have the supremacy. None above the
king at any time.
2. If they be supreme, then Saint Peter is much mistaken, to say the King is
supreme; and they do ill to disclaim this supremacy, when in all their
Petitions, (not disjunctively, but as they are an united body) they say, Your
Majesty's humble Subjects the Lords and Commons in Parliament: and besides,
they are perjured that deny it, after they have taken the Oath of supremacy,
where every one says, I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my
conscience, that the Kings Highness is the only supreme Governor of this
Realm, etc. But this is further, and so fully proved out of Bracton, the
nature of all the Subjects tenures, and the constitution of this government, by
the Author of The unlawfulness of Subjects taking up arms against their
Sovereign, that more needs not be spoken to any rational man. Yet because this
point is of such great concernment, and the chiefest argument they have out of
Bracton, is, that he says, Rex habet superiorem, The Sectaries chiefest
argument out of Bracton fully answered.
legem, curiam suam, comites, Barons; quia comites dicuntur, quasi socii
Regis, and qui habet socium, habet magistrum; and ideo si Rex fuerit sine
frano, id est, sine lege, debent ei fraenum ponere, nisi ipsimet fuerint cum
rege sine fraeno: and all this makes just nothing in the World for them, if
they had the honesty or the learning to understand it right; for what is above
the King? the Law, and the Court of Earls and Barons; but how are they above
him? as the Preacher is above the King, when he preaches unto him; or the
Physician when he gives him Physic; or the Pilot when he sayleth by Sea; that
is, quoad rationem consulendi, How the Law and the Court of Barons is above the
King
non cogendi, they have superioritatem directivam, non coactivam; for so the
teacher is above him that is taught, and the Counselor above him that is
counseled, that is, by way-of advice, but not by way of command; and to show
you that this is Bractons true meaning, I pray you consider his words; Comites
dicuntur quasi socii, they are as his fellows or Peers, not simply but quasi:
and if they were simply so, yet they are but socii, not superiors; and what
can socii do? not command, for par in parem non habet potestatem, that is,
praecipiendi; otherwise, you must confess, habet potestatem consulendi:
therefore Bracton adds, qui habet socium, habet magistrum, that is, a teacher,
not a commander; and to make this yet mo^e plain, he adds, Si Rex fuerit sine
fraeno, id est, lege, if the King be without a bridle, that is, says he (lest
you should mistake what he means by the bridle, and think he means force and
arms) the Law: they ought to put this bridle unto him, that is, to press him
with this Law, and still to show him his duty, even as we do both to King and
people, saying, this is the Law, this should bridle you: but here is not a word
of commanding, much less of forcing the King: not a word of superiority, nor
yet simply of equality: and therefore I must say, hoc argumentum nihil ad
rhombum, these do abuse every author. 3 That neither Peers nor Parliament are
coordinate with the King.


If their (...), (I speak not of (...), their natural strength and power) but
of their right and authority, be coordinate and equal with the Kings authority,
then whether given by God (which they cannot prove) or by the people) there
must be duo summa imperia, two supreme powers, (which the Philosophers say
cannot be; nam quod summum est, unum est, Ommesque Philosoph. and
jurisconsulti, ponunt summum in eo rerum genere quod dividi non possit Lactant.
l. 1. c. 3. (...). Marc. 3.14.
from whence they prove the unity of the Godhead, that there can be but one
God) and if this supreme power be divided betwixt King and Parliament, you know
what the Poet says, -- Omnisque potestas,
Impatiens consortis erit, --
Or you may remember what our Savior says, If a Kingdom be divided against
it self it cannot stand, and therefore when Tiberius, out of his wonted
subtilty, desired the Senate to appoint a colleague and partner with him, for
the better administration of the Empire, Asinius Gallus, that was desirous
enough of their Pristine liberty, yet understanding well with what mind the
subtle fox spoke, (only to descry his ill willers) after some jests answered
seriously, (...), that government must not be divided; because you can never
have any happiness where the power is equally divided in two parts, when
according to the well known axiom to every one, Par in parem non habet
potestatem. But to make the matter clear, The Case of our Affairs. p. 19.20.
The Laws of our Land acknowledge all Sovereignty in the King.
and to show that the Sovereignty is inseperably inherent in the person of His
Majesty, we have the whole current of our very Acts of Parliament acknowledging
it in these very terms, Our Sovereign Lord the King; and the Parliament, 25.
Hen. 8. says, This your Graces Realm, recognizing no superior under God, but
your Grace, etc. And the Parliament 16. Rich. 2.5. affirms the Crown of
England to have been so free at all times, that it has been in no earthly
subjection, but immediately to God, in all things touching the regality of the
said Crown, and to none other, and in the 25. of Hen. 5. the Parliament
declares, that it belongs to the Kings regality, to grant or deny what
Petitions in Parliament he pleases: and so indeed whatsoever authority is in
the constant practice of the Kingdom, or in the known and published Laws and
Statutes, it concludes the Sovereignty to be fixed in the King, and all the
Subjects virtually united in the representative body of the Parliament, to be
obliged in obedience and allegiance to the individual person of the King: and I
doubt not but our learned Lawyers can find much more proof then I do, out of
their Law to this purpose. And therefore seeing diverse supreme powers are not
compatible in one State, nor allowable in our State; the conceit of a mixed
Monarchy is but a foppery, to prove the distribution of the supreme power into
two sorts of governors, equally endued with the same power; because the
supreme power, being but one, must be placed in one sort of governors, either
in one numericall man, as it is in Monarchy; or in one specificall kind of
men, as the optimates, as it is in Aristocracie; or in the people, as in
Democracie; (...).
but if by a mixed Monarchy you mean, that this supreme power is not simply
absolute, quoad omnia, but a government limited and regulated, (...), we will
not much quarrel with our Sectaries, because His Majesty has promised, and we
are sure he will perform it, to govern his people according to the Laws of
this Land.

And therefore they that would rob the King of this right, They deserve not to
live in the Kingdom that diminish the supremacy of the King.
and give any part of his supreme power to the Parliament, or to any of all his
inferior Magistrates, deserve as well to be expelled the Kingdom, as Plato
would have Homer to be banished, for bringing in the Gods fighting, and
disagreeing among themselves; when as Ovid, out of him, says, Jupiter in
Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo: Because, as the Civilians say, Natural vitium
est negligi, quod communiter possidetur, utque se nihil habere putet qui totum
non habeat, and suam partem corrumpi patiatur, dum invidet alienae; and
therefore the same Homer treating of our humane Government, says, Nec multos
regnare bonum, rex unicus esto.
(...),
(...) --
which Aristotle does so infinitely commend, Arist. Metaph. lib. 1. Statius
Thebaid. lib. 1.
where he disputes, (...); and so does Plato and all the wise Philosophers
that followed after: because as the Poet says, -- Summo dulcius unum
Stare loco: sociisque comes discordia regnis.
And, as our own most lamentable experience shows, what abundance of miseries
happened unto our selves by this renting of the King's power, and placing it in
the hands of the Parliament, and his own inferior officers: and as those sad
Tragedies of Etheocles and Polynices, Numitor and Amulius, Romulus and Remus,
Antoninus and Geta, and almost infinite more, do make it manifest to all the
world.

. The two chiefest parts of the regal Government; the four properties of a just
war; and how the Parliamentary faction transgress in every property.
4. The chiefest parts of the Regal government, which are two. Exodus 2.14.
4. HAving spoken of those assistants, that should further and not hinder the
King in the Commonwealth, it rests that I should now speak of the chiefest
parts of this government: when Moses killed the Egyptian that wronged the
Israelite, and the next day said unto the Hebrew, that did injure his fellow,
Wherefore smitest thou him? the oppressor answered, Who made thee a Prince and
a Judge over us? 1 Samuel 8.20. 2 Samuel 5.2.
and the people say unto Samuel, we will have a King over us, that our King may
judge us, and go out before us and fight our battails. Out of which two places,
we find two special parts of the King's government.

Sigon. l. 7. c. 1.
1. Principatum bellorum, the charge of the wars; in respect whereof the Kings
were called Captains, as the Lord said unto Samuel concerning Saul, Vnges eum
ducem, 1 Samuel 9.16.
thou shall anoint him to be Captain over my people Israel.

1 Reg. 3.9. Psalm. 72.2. Araisaeus de jure Majest. l. 2. c. 1. p. 214.
2. Curam judiciorum, the care of all judgments; in respect whereof David, and
Solomon, and the other Kings are said to judge the people.

So Arnisaeus says, Majestatis potestas omnis consistit vel in defendenda
repub. vel in regenda, all the power of royalty consists either in defending
or in governing the Commonwealth, according as Homer describes a perfect
King, Homer Iliad. g.
(...).

And so you see the two principal parts of the King's government are the
Offices. 1. Ducis in bello gerendo. 2. Judicis in jure reddendo. 1. Part. In
the time of War. Ordo ille naturalis mortalium paci accommodatus, hoc poscit ut
suscipiendi belli autoritas atque consilium apud principes sit. Aug. cont.
Faust. l. 22. and Arnis. l. 2. c. 5. p. 345. Plato de legib. lib. 2.


1. Of a Captain in the time of War. 2. Of a Judge in the time of Peace.
1. Then it is the proper right of the King, and of none but the King, or he
that has the regal and supreme power, to make war, and to conclude peace; for
Plato in his Commonwealth ordained, that, Si quis pacem vel bellum fecerit cum
aliquibus, (...), and the Julian Law adjudgeth him guilty of High Treason, Qui
injussu principis bellum gesserit, delectumve habuerit, exercitum vel
comparaverit, that either makes War, or raises an Army without his Kings
command.

And to this part of the regal government, Luc. 14.31.32. Aristot. Polit. l.
7. c. 8.
which consists in the Militia in Arms, for the defense of the Kingdom,
pertains, 1. The proclaiming of War, which our Savior properly ascribes
unto the right of Kings, when he says not what State, or Commonwealth, Arnis.
l. 2. c. 1.
but What King going to war with another King? etc. 2. The concluding of Peace,
which our Savior ascribes also unto the King, in the same place. 3. The
making of leagues and confederacies with other foreign States. 4. The
sending, and receiving of Ambassadors. 5. To raise Arms, and the like, which
the Laws of God, and of all Nations justify to be the proper right of Kings,
and to belong only unto the supreme Majesty.

But then you will say, did not the Judges, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Jephta,
Judges 11.11.
Barac, Samson, and the rest make war, and yet they were no Kings? Why then may
not the Nobles make war, as well as Kings? I answer, that they do indeed make
war, and a miserable wretched war; but I speak of a just war, and so I say that
none but the King, or he that has the Kings power can do it; for though the
Judges assumed not the name of Kings, nor Captains, sed a potiore part vocati
sunt judices, but from the sweetest part of the Royal government were termed
Judges; yet they had the full power, and ducendi and judicandi populum, both of
war and peace, says Sigenius: and so the men of Gilead said unto Jephthe, veni
and esto princeps noster: and they made him their head by an inviolable
covenant. And of Moses it was plainly said, He was King in Jesurun; Deuteronomy. 33.5.
and when there was no Judge, it is said, there was no King in Israel: for I
stand not about words, when some were called Kings, for the honor of the
People, Judges 17.6.18.1.19.1.
and yet had no more power then Subjects, as the Kings of Sparta; and others
had not the name of Kings, and yet had the full power of Kings; as the
Dictator, and the Emperor, and the great Duke of Muscovie, and the like.

But, when a war is undertaken by any Prince, how shall we know which party is
in the right? for to make an unjust war, cannot be said to be the right of any
King: yet, as the Poet says, -- Quis justius induit arma Lucan lib. 1.

Scire nefas, summo se judice quisque tuetur.
Every one pretends his cause is just, he fights for God, for the truth of the
Gospel, the faith of Christ, and the liberty and Laws of his Country: how
then shall those poor men, that hazard their lives and their fortunes, yea,
and souls too, if they war on the wrong side, understand the truth of this
great, doubtful, and dangerous point?

I answer, all the Divines that I read of, speaking of war, Dambaud. in praxi
criminal. cap. 82.
do concur with what Dambauderius writes of this point, that there must be
four properties of a just war.

1. A just cause. 2. A right intention. Four properties of a just War.
3. Meet Members. 4. The Kings authority. Sine qua est laesa Majestas, without
which authority the Warriors are all Traitors. And I would to God our Rebels
would lay their hands upon their hearts, and seriously examine these four
points in this present War.
1. What cause have they to take Arms against their King, 1. A just cause.
and to kill and murder so many thousands of their own Brethren? they will
answer, that they do it for the defense of their Liberty, Laws, and Religion:
but how truly, let God himself be the Judge; for, His Majesty has promised
and protested they shall enjoy all these fully and freely, without any manner
of dimunution: and we know that never any rebellion was raised, but these very
causes were still pretended. And therefore,

2. Consider with what intent they do all this? 2: A right intention.
and I doubt not but you shall find foul weeds under this fair cloak; for
under the shadow of liberty and property, they took the liberty to rob all the
King's loyal Subjects that they could reach, of all or most of their estates,
and to keep them fast in prison; because they would not consent to their
lawless liberty, and to be Rebels with them against their conscience. And under
the pretense of Laws they aimed not to have the old Laws well kept, which was
never denied them, but to have such new ones made, as might quite rob the King
of all his rights, and transfer the same unto themselves and their friends; so
he should be like the King of Sparta, What Laws and Religion the Rebels would
fain have.
a Royal Slave; and they should be like the Ephori, ruling and commanding
Subjects. And for the religion, you may know by their new Synod, which are a
Synod not of Saints, but of Rebels, what religion they would fain have, not
that which was professed in Q. Elizabeth's times, that was established by the
Laws, justified by the pains, and confirmed by the blood of so many worthy
men and faithful Martyrs, but a new religion first hatched in Amsterdam, then
nourished in New England, and now to be transplanted into this Kingdom.

3. Meet Members.
3. Who are the persons that are employed in this war? he first of all, that is
the more disloyal, because he was a person of honor, that had so much honor
conferred upon him by His Majesty, and so much trust reposed in him, and would
notwithstanding prove so unthankful, as to kick with his heels against his
Master; and so follow, whom you know, passibus aequis, whose example, any other
man, that were not robbed of his understanding, would make a remora to retain
him from rebellion: and what are the other heads, but a company either of poor,
Who the Rebels are, and what manner persons they be.
needy, and mean conditioned Lords and Gentlemen, or discontented Peers that
are misled, or such factious Sectaries, whose blind zeal and furious malice are
able to hurry them headlong to perpetrate any mischief? for their Captains and
their Officers, I believe they fight neither for the Anabaptists creed, nor
against the Roman faith, nor to overthrow our Protestant Church, but for their
pay; for which, though they cannot be justified to take their hire for such ill
service, to rebel against their King, and to murder their innocent brethren;
Yet are they not so bad as their grand Masters; and for their common Soldiers.
I assure my self many of them fight against their wills, many seduced by their
false Prophets, others enticed by their factious Masters, and most of them
compelled to kill their brethren against their wills; and therefore in some
places, though their number trebled the Kings; yet they had rather run away
then fight; and what a miserable and deplorable case is this, when so many poor
souls shall be driven unto the Devil by Preachers and Parliament against their
wills?

4. The supreme authorrity.
4. If you consider qua authoritate, by what authority they wage this war, they
will answer by the Authority of Parliament, and that is just none at all;
because the Parliament has not the supreme authority, without which the war is
not public, nor can it be justified: for a war is then justifiable, when
there is no legal way to end the controversy by prohibiting farther appeals,
which cannot be, Albericus Gentilis de jure belli, l. 1. c. 2. Subjects can
never make a lawful war against their King.
but only betwixt independent States and several Princes, that have the
supreme power in their own hands, and are not liable to the sensure of any
Court; which power the Parliament cannot challenge; because they are or should
be the King's lawful Subjects: and therefore cannot be his lawful enemies: but
they will say, Master Goodwin, Buroughs, and all the rest of our good men,
zealous brethren, and powerful Preachers do continually cry out in our ears,
it is bellum sanctum, a most just and holy war, a war for the Gospel and for
our Laws and Liberties, wherein whosoever dies, he shall be crowned a Martyr.

I answer, that for their reward, they shall be indeed as Saint Augustine says
of the like, Res dura ac plena pericli est, regale occidisse genus.
Martyrs stultae Philosophiae, when every one of them may be indicted at the
bar of God's justice for a felo de se, a Malefactor guilty of his own untimely
death: and for their good Orators that persuade them to this wickedness, I
pray you consider well what they are: men of no worth, rebellious against the
Church, Rebels against the King, factious Schismatics, In what condition their
Preachers are; and of what worth.
of no faith, of no learning, that have already forfeited their estates, if
they have any, and their lives unto the king: and will any man that is wise,
hazard his estate, his life and his soul to follow the persuasions of these
men? my life is as dear to me, as the Earl of Essex his head is to him, and
my soul dearer; and I dare engage them both, that if all the Doctors in both
Universities, and all the Divines within the kingdom of England, were gathered
together to give their judgment of this War, there could not be found one of
ten, it may be as I believe not one of twenty that durst upon his conscience
say, this war is lawful upon the Parliament side; for though these Locusts,
that is, the German, It is contrary to the doctrine of all the Protestant
Church, for Subjects to resist their king
Scottish, and the English Puritan, agreeing with the Roman Jesuit ever
since the reformation, harped upon this string, and retained this serpentine
poison within their bosom, still spitting it forth against all States, as you
may see by their books; Yet I must tell you plainly, this doctrine of Subjects
taking up arms against their lawful King, is point blanck and directly against
the received doctrine of the Church of England, and against the tenet of all
true Protestants: and therefore Andreas Rivetus Professor at Leyden writing
against a Jesuit, Paraeus in Romans 13. Boucher. l. 2. c 2. Keckerm. Syst. pol.
c. 32. Jun. Brut. q. 2. p. 56. Bellar. de laic. c. 6. Suar. de. fid. cathol. c.
3. Lichfield. l. 4. 19. sect. 19. Field l. 5. c. 30.
that cast this aspersion upon the Protestants, that they jumpe with them in
this doctrine of warring against, and deposing kings, says, that no Protestant
does maintain that damnable doctrine, and that rashness of Knox and Buchanan is
to be ascribed praefervido Scotorum ingenio and ad audendum prompto. Juel and
Bilson and all the Doctors of the Church are of the same mind: and Lichfield
says, no Orthodox father did by word or writing teach any resistance, for the
space of a thousand years: and Doctor Field says, that all the worthy fathers
and Bishops of the Church persuaded themselves, that they owed all duty unto
their kings, though they were Heretics and Infidels; and the Homilies of the
Church of England, allowed by authority, do plainly and peremptorily condemn
all Subjects warring against their King for Rebels and Traitors, that do resist
the ordinance of God and procure unto themselves damnation: and truly I
believe most of their own consciences tell them so; and they that think
otherwise, I would have them to consider, that if they were at a banquet, where
twenty should aver such a dish to be full of poison, for every one that would
warrant it good, would thou venture to eat it, and hazard thy life in such
a case? O then consider what it is to hazard thy soul upon the like terms. So
you see the justness of the War on the Parliament side. But.

1. On the Kings side, it cannot be denied, but his cause is most just; for his
own defense, for the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, that is
established by our Laws, and for the rights of the Church and the just
liberties and property of all his loyal Subjects: this he testifies in all his
Declarations: and this we know in our own consciences to be true; and therefore

2. As his Majesty professes, so we believe him, that he never intended
otherwise by this war, but to protect us, and our Religion, and to maintain his
own just and unquestionable rights, which these Rebels would most unjustly
wrest out of his hands, and under the show of humble Petitioners to become at
last proud Commanders; for as one says, -- They whom no denial can withstand,
Seem but to ask, while they indeed command.


3. For the persons that war with him, they are the chiefest of the Nobility; 3
His assistants learned, honest and religious,
all the best Gentry, that hazard their lives, not for filthy lucre; for, the
Kings Revenues, being so unjustly detained from him, they are fain to supply
his necessities, and to bear their own charges; and the poor common Soldiers
are nothing wanting to do their best endeavors; neither need they to fear any
thing; because

4 His authority sacred and unquestionable. What the pretended Parliament is;
4. The King has a just right, to give them full power and authority to do
execution upon these Rebels, as I have proved unto you before.

And therefore the result of all is, that the Parliament side (under the
pretense of Religion, fighting if not for the Crown, yet certainly for the full
power and authority of the King, who shall have the ordering of the Militia,
that is, who shall have the government of this Kingdom, which is all one as
who shall be the King, they or King CHARLES, and which is the very question
that they would now decide by the sword) in taking away our goods, are thieves
and robbers; in killing their brethren, are bloody murderers, and in resisting
their King, are rebellious traitors; that as the Apostle says, purchase to
themselves damnation: when (as the Prophet Esaias speaks of the like Rebels)
being hardly bestead and hungry, Esaias 8.21, 22.
(as I believe thousands of them are in London, and other Rebellious Cities)
they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their God, and look
upward (as I fear many of them do, curse the King with their tongues, and God
in their hearts) and they shall look unto the earth: Matthew. 8.12.
and behold trouble and darkness, dimnesse and anguish, and they shall be
driven to darkness even to utter darkness, where there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, if by a true repentance they do not betimes rent their
hearts and forsake their fearful sins

And the Kings side, in this war, doing no further then the king gives
Commission, do no more then what God commands, and therefore, living, they
shall be accounted loyal Subjects worthy of honor: and dying, they shall be
sure to be everlastingly rewarded.

CHAP. XIII.
Shows, how the first Government of Kings was arbitrary; the places of Moses,
Deu. 17. and of Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. discussed; whether Ahab offended in desiring
Naboths Vineyard, and wherein; why absolute power was granted unto Kings; and
how the diversities of Government came up.

2 part of the regal government in the time of peace. Master Seldom in his
titles of Honor p. 15. That the first government of Kings was arbitrary.
2. HAving thus showed you potestatem ducendi, the Kings right and power of
making War, it rests that I should speak De potestate judicandi of his power
and right of judging and governing his people in the time of peace; touching
which we find none denying his right, but all the difference is about the
manner: where

1. I find Master Seldom rejecting, as ridiculous, the testimony of Justine,
which says, Populus nullis legibus tenebatur, sed arbitria regum pro legibus
erant; the people were kept under by no Laws but the will of their Kings was
all the Law they had; but as oportet mendacem esse memorem, so it behooves him
that opposes the truth to be very subtle, and very mindful of his own
discourse; otherwise a meaner Scholar, having such advantage as the truth to
assist him, may easily get the victory; for, though he goes about to confute
the reason that some allege, for the denial of those times to be governed by
any Law, because the word (...) is not to be found in all Homer, but
wheresoever he speaks of Justice, Homer (...) in hymnis ad Apoll.
he expresses the same by the word Themis, and says, that this is false,
which he proves from Homers (...), and his (...); and shows that there were
Laws before Homers time, from Talus his Laws, that were written in brass in
the Isle of Crete; yet all this may be answered, and Justines opinion prove
most true; Joseph. advers Appion. l. 51 Plutarch in lib. de Hero.
for Talus his time must needs be uncertain, and by (...), Homer means the just
measure of riming, but never uses (...) for the set Law of living; besides,
there were many ages, and many Kings before Homers time, and before Talus,
Minos, Radamanthus, or any other Lawmakers that you read of; Moses was the
first that I find, either giving Laws. or inventing Letters; and yet there
were many Kings before Moses; nine Kings named in one Chapter, Genesis 14.1, 2.
and what Laws had they to govern their people besides their own wills? and
therefore Master Seldom, vi veritatis victus, confesses that in the first
times, in the beginning of States, there were no Laws but the arbitrements of
Princes, as Pomponius speaks: Pompon. de origin juris, ff. l. 1. sect. 2.
Josephus regnu^ appellat imperium summum unius hominis, non ex lege, sed ex
arbitrio imperantis. Antiquit. l. 4. Saravia de imperand. author. l. 2. c. 3.
Barclaius l. 3. c. 16. Arnis. l. 1. c. 3. p. 49. 50. Irvinus cap. 4. p. 64, 65.
and page 4. he says, the people, seeing the inconveniences of popular rule,
chose one Monarch, under whose arbitrary rule their happy quiet should be
preserved; where also you may observe his great mistake, in making the Monarchy
to spring out of the Democracy; when as I have proved before, the Monarchical
government was many hundred of years before we hear mention of any other form
of government: but in any government, Doctor Saravia says, and he says most
truly, Quisquis summum obtinet imperium, sive is sit unus rex, sive pauci
nobiles, vel ipse populus universus, supra omnes leges sunt; ratio haec est,
quod nemo sibi ferat legem, sed subditis suis, se legibus nemo adstringit: huc
accedit and illa ratio, quod neque suis legibus teneri possit (scil. rex) cum
nemo sit seipso superior, nemo a seipso cogi possit, and leges a superiore
tantum sciscantur, denturque inferioribus.

And so Arnisaeus says, and proves at large, Majestatis essentiam consistere
in summa and absoluta potestate, that the being of Majesty and Sovereignty
consists in the highest and most absolute power. And Irvinus alleges many
testimonies out of Aristotle, Cicero, Vlpian, Dio, Constant. Harmenopolus, and
others, to p ove that Rex legibus non subjicitur.

And to make it yet more clear, that the kings power to rule his people was
arbitrary; Sigonius says most truly, that the power of governing the people
was given by God unto Moses before the Law was given; and therefore he called
the people to counsel, and without either Judges or Magistrates, jura eisdem
reddidit, he administered Justice, and did right to every one of them: So Joshua
exercised the same right, and the Judges after him; Sigon. de rep. Heb. l. 7.
c. 3. Hoc arbitrarium imperium expressit Deus. 1 Samuel 8. and David. Ps. 11.
Reges eos in virga serrea. Idem Ibidem.
and after the Judges succeeded the Kings, quorum potestai atque autoritas
multo major, ut quae non tam a legibus quam ab arbitrio and voluntate regis
profecta sit, whose power and authority was far greater, as proceeding, not so
much from the Laws, as from the arbitrament, and the will of the King, says
Sigonius: for they understood the power of a King in Aristotle's sense, Qui
solutus legibus plenissimo jure regnaret, who being freed from the Laws, or
not tied to Laws, might govern with a plenary right. And so Saul judged
Israel, and had altogether the arbitrary power both of life and death; and
quodam modo superior legibus fuit, and was after a sort above the Law,
undertaking and making War, pro arbitratu suo, according to his own will. And
in his sixth book he says, the Jews had three great Courts or Assemblies.

1. Their Council, which contained that company, Cap. 2.
that handled those things especially, which concerned the State of the whole
Commonwealth: as war, peace, provision, institution of Laws, creation of
Magistrates and the like.

2. Their Synagogue, or the meeting of the whole Congregation or people, Cap. 3.
which no man might convocate, but he which had the chief rule, as Moses,
Joshua, the Judges, and the Kings.

3. Their standing Senate, Cap. 4. Numb. 15. Plenum regnum vocatur quo cuncta
rex sua voluntate gerit. Idem.
which was appointed of God to be of the seventy Elders; whereof he says, that
although this was always standing for consultation; yet we must understand
that the kings, which had the Commonwealth in their own power, and were not
obnoxious to the Laws, made Decrees of themselves, without the authority of
the Senate, ut qui cum summo imperio essent, as men that were endued with the
chiefest rule and command: And we find that the king judged the people two
manner of ways.

1. Alone. 2. Together with the Elders and Priests.
2 Samuel 15 2, 6.
For it is said, that Absolon, when any man came to the king for judgment,
wished that he were made Judge in the Land, and he did in this manner to all
Israel that came to the king for judgment: and when the people demanded a King
instead of Samuel to reign over them, 1 Samuel 8,7.
and God said, They had cast him off from being their King; he signifies most
plainly, that while the Judges ruled, which had their chiefest authority from
the Law, God reigned over them, because his Law did rule them; but the rule and
government being translated unto Kings, God reigned no longer over them; Quia
non penes legem Dei, sed penes voluntatem unius hominis summa rerum autoritas
esset futura; because now all authority, and all things were not in the power
of the Law, but in the power of one man's arbitrary will.

But, seeing we are fallen upon the peoples desire of a king, let us examine
what right God says, belongs unto him; and because that place, 1 Samuel 8. is
contradicted by another, Deuteronomy. 17. as it seems, we will examine both places,
and see if Moses does any ways cross Samuel: Deuteronomy. 17.14. usque ad finem.
and truly I may say of these two places, that, as S. Aug. says in the like
case, Alii atque alii, aliud atque aliud opinati sunt; for some learned men
say, that Moses sets down to the king, legem regendi, the Law by which he
should govern the people, without wronging them; and Samuel sets down to
the people legem par^^di, the Law by which they should obey the king, without
resisting him whatsoever he should do to them; Spalat. tom. 2. fol 251.
And other Divines say, Haec est potestas legitima, non tyrannica, nec
violenta: and ideo quando rex propria negotia non possit expedire per proprias
res ac servos, possit pro negotiis propriis tollere res and servos aliorum: and
isto modo dicebat Deus quod pertinebat ad jus regis, G. Ocham. tract. 2. l. 2.
c. 25.
this is the lawful and just right of the king. Therefore to find out the
truth, let us a little more narrowly discuss both places. And

1. In the words of Moses, there I observe two special things.

1. The charge of the people. 2. The charge of the king.
1. Popular election utterly forbidden.
1. The people are commanded very strictly, in any wise, says the Text, to make
choice of no king of their own heads, but to accept of him whom the Lord did
choose.

2. The Kings charge.
2. The king is commanded to write out the Law, to study it, and to practice it;
and he is forbidden to do four special things, which are 1. Not to bring the
people back into Egypt, nor to provide the means to bring them, by multiplying
his horses. 2. Not to marry many wives that might entice him, as they did
Solomon, unto Idolatry. 3. Not to hoord up too much riches. 4. Not to tyrannize
over his Brethren.


Joseph Antiquit. l. 4.
And Josephus to the same purpose says, Si regis cupiditas vos incesserit, is
ex eadem gente sit, curam omnino gerat justitiae and aliarum virtutum, caveat
vero, ne plus legibus aut Deo sapiat, nihil autem agat sine Pontificis,
Senatorumque sententia, (which Moses has not) neque nuptiis multis utatur, nec
copiam pecuniarum equorumque sectetur, quibus partis super leges superbia
efferatur, that is, to be a Tyrant.

Rex Jacobus in his true Law of free Monarchs.
2. The words of Samuel are set down, 1 Samuel viii. 11. to the 18. verse, whereof
I confess there are several expositions; some making the same a prophetical
prediction of what some of their Kings would do, contrary to what they should
do, as it was expressed by Moses. So King James himself takes it; others take
it Grammatically, for the true right of a King, that may do all this, and yet
no way contradict those precepts forecited by Moses; to confirm which
supposition, they say, 1. The phrase here used must bear it out; for as the
Hebrew word signifies, as Pagninus notes, Morem, aut modum, aut
consuetudinem, and many other things, as the place and the matter to be
expressed do require, (because every equivocall word of various signification
is not to be taken alike in all places, but is to be interpreted secundum
materiam subjectam) yet the Septuagint that should know both the propriety of
the word, and the meaning of the Holy Ghost in that place, as well as any
other, (...). Apparet nomen juris significare hic potestatem jure soncessam.
Arnisaeus c. 1. p. 216.
translate the word to signify (...); and we know the Greek word (...), which
the Septuagint uses, and jus, which the Latin uses, is never taken in the
worser sense, the Scripture never using to call vices by the names of virtues,
or to give a right to any one to exercise tyranny which then might be better
termed jus latronis, because an unjust tyrant is no better then an open thief.
2. There is nothing here set down by Samuel, that is simply forbidden by the
Law of God, but that any, the very best Kings may do, as the occasions shall
requi e; for, being a King, he must have the royalty of his house supported,
and the necessities of his war supplied: and you may read in Herodotus how
Dioces, after he was chosen King, had all things granted unto him, that were
needful to express his royal state and magnificence; and here is nothing else
in the text; for if you mark it, the Prophet says not, he should kill their
sons, nor ravish their wives, nor yet take their daughters to be his
Concubines, which are the properties of a tyrant; Instat terribilis vivis,
morientibus haeres. Virginibus raptor, thalamis obscaenus adulter. Divit:
busque dies, and nox metuenda maritis; Quisquis vel locuples, pulchra vel
conjuge notus, Crimini pulsatur falso; si crimina desunt, Accitus conviva
perit; mors nulla refugit Artificem -- Claudian. de bello Gildon. Bilson diff.
fol. 356.
but he should take them to support his State, and to maintain his war, which,
as his necessities require, is lawful for him to do; so that, it is not the
doing of those things, but the motives that cause the King to do them, or the
manner of doing them, that do make it either an unjust tyranny, or the just
right of a King; for as Doctor Bilson says, kings may justly command the goods
and bodies of all their Subjects, in the time both of war and peace, for any
public necessity or utility. And Hugo de Sancto Victore says, Nunquam
possessiones a regia potestate ita elongari possunt, quin si ratio postulaverit
and necessitas, and illis ipsa potestas debeat patrocinium, and illis ipsae
possessiones debeant in necessitate obsequium. And so most Authors say, the
Subjects ought to supply the kings necessities, and he may justly demand what
is requisite and necessary for his public occasions; and who shall judge of
that necessity but his own conscience? and God shall judge that conscience,
which does unjustly demand what he has no reason to require; because the
greatness of his authority gives him no right to transcend the rules of equity,
whereof both God and his conscience will be the impartial Judges. And
therefore in Deuteronomy. Modus describitur, res non prohibetur; and in Samuel, Jus
ponitur, and ratio subintelligitur; for many things may be prohibited in some
respect, that in other respects may be allowed; and many things lawful in some
ways, which otherwise may be most sinful; as it is most lawful to drink, ad
satietatem, but not ad obrietatem, and many other the like things: so it is
lawful for the king to do all that Samuel says, ad supplendam reipubl.
necessitatem, and supportandam regiam majestatem, but not ad satisfaciendum suo
fastui, luxui, lucro, vanitati, aut carnali voluptati; which is the thing that
Moses forbids: So that in brief the meaning is, if the Subjects should be
unwilling to do what Samuel says, then the king, when just necessity
requires, may for these lawful ends lawfully assume them. And if he takes
them any other way, or for any other end then so, habet Deum judicem
conscientiae, and ultorem injustitiae.

But then it may be said, Ahab did not offend in taking away Naboths vineyard,
if Samuel did properly describe the right of kings.

I cannot say that Ahab sinned in desiring Naboths vineyard, blames him for
that desire; there is not a word of that in the text but for killing Naboth,
and then taking possession; for this he might not do, the other he might do, so
he do it to a right end, and in the right manner; wherein he failed,

Ah^bs sin.
1. In being so discontented for his denial, because his conscience telling him,
that he had no such urgent necessity whereby he could take it; and Naboth being
unwilling to sell it, he should have been satisfied.

2. In suffering his wife, whom he knew to be so wicked, to proceed in her
unjust course against Naboth.

Naboths fault
3. In going down to take possession, when he knew that by his Wifes wicked
practice the poor man was unjustly murdered, when he should have rather
questioned the fact, and have punished the murderers

Lex posterior derogat priori, specialis generali: and ceremonialia atque
forensia cedunt moralibus.
And yet Ahabs sin does not excuse Naboths fault, both in the denial of the
Kings right, if the king had a just necessity to use it; and also for his
uncivil answer unto the King, far unlike the answer of Arauna to King David,
but nearer like the answer of Nabal, which the Holy Ghost seems to take notice
of, when after he had said, The LORD forbid it me, which was rather a prayer
and postulation that God would forbid it, as we say, absit, when we hear of any
displeasing likelihood; then any declaration of any inhibition of God to sell
it, who never denied them leave to sell it until the year of redemption, the
Prophet tells us in the next verse, that Naboth said, 1 Reg 21.4. Which very
answer seems to be the cause, why Ahab was so much displeased.
I will not give thee the inheritance of my father.

But whether this speech of Samuel shows the just right of a King what he
might do, or his power what he would do, what belongs to him of equity, or what
his practice would be by tyranny, I will not determine: but I say, that
although it should not be a just rule for him to command: yet it is a certain
rule for them to obey; and though it should not excuse the king from sin, yet
it wholly disables and disavowes the peoples resisting their king; because in
all this the Prophet allows them none other remedy, but to cry unto the Lord:
for seeing God has given him directum dominium, The kings absolute power not
given him to enable him for oppression, but to retain his Subjects from
rebellion.
and absolutum imperium, though he should fail of his duty, which God
requires, and do that wrong unto the people, which God forbids; yet he is
solutus legibus, free from all Laws, quoad coactionem, in respect of any
coaction from the people, but not quoad obligationem, in respect of obedience
to God by his obligation; for though Kings had this plenitudinem potestatis, to
rule and govern their people, as the father of the family rules his household,
or the Pilot directs his Ship, secundum liberum arbitrium, according to his own
arbitrary will; yet that will was to rule and to guide all his actions
according to the strict Law of common equity and justice, as I have often
showed unto you.

Diodor. Siculus, l. 2. c. 3. Boemus Aubanus tamen asserit voluntatem regum
Aegypti, pro lege esse.
But though this arbitrary rule continued long and very general for Diodorus
Siculus says, that excepting the Kings of Egypt that were indeed very strictly
tied to live according to Law, all other Kings infinite a licentia ac voluntate
sua pro lege regnabant, ruled as they listed themselves; Yet at last corruption
so prevailed, that either the Kings abusing their power, or the people refusing
to yield their obedience, caused this arbitrary rule to be abridged and limited
within the bounds of laws, whereby the Kings promised and obliged themselves
to govern their people according to the rules of those established laws; for
though the supreme Majesty be free from all Laws, sponte tamen iis accomodare
potest, the king may of his own accord yield to observe the same; and as the
German Poet says, German. vates de rebus Frid. l. 8.
-- Nihil, ut verum fatear, magis esse decorum
Aut regalt puto, quam legis jure solutum
Sponte tamen legisese supponere regem.
and according to the diversities of those Laws, How diversities of government
came up.
so are the diversities of government, among the several kingdoms of the earth;
for I speak not of any Popular or Aristocratical state; therefore as some
kings are more restrained by their Laws then some others, so are their powers
the less absolute; and yet all of them being absolute Kings and free Monarchs,
are excepted from any account of their actions to any inferior jurisdiction;
because then they had not been Monarchs, but of Kings had made themselves
Subjects.

Thus you see, that rule which formerly was arbitrary, is now become limited,
but limited by their own laws, and with their own wills, and none otherwise:
for I showed you elsewhere, that the Legislative power resided always in the
King, even as Virgil says, Virgil Aeneid. l.
-- Gaudet regno Trojanus Acestes,
Indicitque forum, and patribus dare jura vocatis.
And as that mirror of all learned Kings says, Rex Jacobus in the true Law of
free Monarchs, p. 201.
King Fergus came to Scotland before any Statutes, or Parliament, or Laws were
made; and you may easily find it, that Kings were the makers of the Laws, and
not the Laws the makers of Kings; for the Laws are but craved by the
Subjects, and made only by him at their rogation, and with their advice: so he
gives the Law to them, but takes none from them; and by their own Laws Kings
have limited, and abridged their own Right and Power, which God and nature have
conferred upon them, some more, some less, according as their grants were unto
their people.

. The extent of the grants of Kings; what they may, and what they may not
grant; what our Kings have not granted, in seven special prerogatives; and
what they have granted unto their people.
ANd here I would have you to consider these two points, Two things
considerable about the privileged grants of Kings. 1. The extent of the grants
of kings. Prove. 30.15.
concerning these grants of Kings unto their Subjects.

1. Of the extents of these grants, 2. Of the Kings obligation to observe them.
for,

1. It is certain, that the people, always desirous of liberty, though that
liberty should produce their ruin, are notwithstanding like the daughters of
the Horse-leech, still crying unto their Kings, give, give, give us liberties
and privileges more and more; and if they may have their wills, they are never
satisfied, Till Kings by giving, give themselves away,
And even that power, which should deny, betray.


For the concessions, and giving away of their right to govern, That it is to
the prejudice of government to grant too many privileges to the people.
is the weakening of their government: and the more privileges they give, the
less power they have to rule: and then the more unruly will their Subjects be:
and therefore the people being herein like the horses the Poets faigne to be in
Phoebus chariot, proud and stomackfull, Kings should remember the grave advice
the Father gave unto Phaeton: Parce puer stimulis, sed fortius utere loris:
Sponte sua properant, labor est inhibere volantes. Ovid. Met. l. 1



They must be strongly bribled, and restrained, or they will soon destroy both
horse and rider, both themselves and their Governors: Yet many Kings,
Constrained gifts not worthy of thanks.
either forcibly compelled by their unruly Subjects, (when they might think,
and therefore not yield, that, Who gives constrained, but his own fear reviles,
Not thank't, but scorned, nor are they gifts, but spoils.)


Or else (as some intruding usurping Kings have done) to retain their unjustly
gained crowns without opposition, or as others, out of their Princely clemency
and facility, What moved Kings to grant so many privileges to their Subjects.
to gain the more love and affection, and as they conceived, the greater
obligation from their Subjects, have many times, to the prejudice of themselves
and their posterity, to the diminution of the rights of government, and often
to the great damage of the Commonwealth, given away and released the execution
of many parts of that right, which originally most justly belonged unto them,
and tied themselves by promises and oaths to observe those Laws, which they
made for the exemption of their Subjects.

Majora jura inseperabilia a Majestue, ne queunt indulgeri subditis, and ita
cohaerent ossibus, and ab illo separari, si ne illius destructione non possunt.
Paris. de puteo Arnisaeus l. 2. c. 2. de jure ma. Blacvod. c 7. page 75. things
that the King cannot grant.
But there be some things, which the King cannot grant, as to transfer the right
of succession to any other then the right heir, to whom it does justly belong:
quia non jam haereditas est: sed proprium adeuntis patrimonium, cujus ei pleno
jure dominium acquiritur, non a Patre, non a populo, sed a lege --: Because he
has this right unto the Crown, not from his Father, nor from the people, but
from the Law of the Land, and from God himself, which appointed him for the
same, says the Civilian: and therefore that vulgar saying is not absurd,
nunquam mori Regem That the King never dies: for as soon as ever the one
parts with this life, the other immediately without exspecting the consent
either of Peers or people, does by a just and plenary right succeed, not only
as his fathers heir, but as the lawful governor of the people, and as the Lord
of the whole kingdom, not by any option of any men, but by the condition of
his birth, and the donation of his God: and therefore the resignation of the
Crown by King John unto the Pope was but a fiction, that could infer no
diminution of the right of his successor: because no King can give away this
right from him, whom God has designed for it.

And there be some things, which no Christian King should grant away, as any of
those things, things that the King should not grant.
that being granted, may prejudice the Church of God, and depresse the glory of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ; as the giving way for the diminution of the just
revenues of the Church, the profanation of things consecrated to Gods service,
and the suppression of any of the divine callings of the Gospel, which are
Bishops, Priests and Deacons; because all kings are bound to honor God, and to
hinder all those things, whereby he is dishonored, either in respect of
things, persons, or places.

Things that kings have not granted away.
And there be some things, which the Kings of this realm have never granted
away, but have still retained them in their own hands, as inviolable
prerogatives and characteristical Symboles and Properties of their Supremacy,
and the relics of their pristine right, as in the time of peace, those two
special parts of the government of the Commonwealth, which do consist.

1. About the Laws.
1. About the Laws. 2. About the Magistrates.
The first whereof, says Arnisaeus, contains these particulars, that is, to
make Laws, to create Nobility, and give titles of dignity, to legitimate the
ill begotten, to grant Privileges, to restore Offenders to their lost repute,
to pardon the transgressors, and the like.

1. Then it is the right of the King jura dare, to give Laws unto his people:
for though (as I said before) the Subjects in Parliament may treat of Laws, 1.
Jus Legislativum. Johan. Beda. Page 25. The power of making Laws is in the King
and entreat the King to approve of them that they propose unto him; yet they
are no Laws, and carry with them no binding force, till the King gives his
consent; and therefore out of Parliament, you see the Kings Proclamation has
vim and vigorem legis, the full force and strength of a Law; to show unto us,
that the power of making Laws was never yielded out of Kings hands; nor can it
indeed be parted with, The case of our affairs, page 11.
except he part with His Majesty and Sovereignty; for the limiting of his own
power, by his voluntary concession of such favors unto his people, not to make
any Laws without their consent, does no way diminish his Sovereignty, or
lessen his own right and authority; Stat. West. 1. 3. E. 1. 3. and 6. and 42.
Stat. of Merch. 13. E. 1. West. 3. 18. E. 1. 1. Stat. of Waste. 20. E. 1. of
appeal. 28. E. 1. 1. E. 2. 1. and all the titles and acts of our Parliaments.
but as a man that yeildeth himself to be bound by some others, has the use of
his strength taken from him, but none of his natural strength it self is
lessened, (and much less is any part of it transferred to them that bound
him;) but that whenever his bonds are loosened, he can work again by virtue
of his own natural strength, and not by any received strength from his
loosers; so the natural right and interest of the Sovereignty, being solely in
the King, and the Peers and Commons, by the Kings voluntary concession, being
only interessed in the office of restraining his power, for the more regular
working of the true legitimate Sovereignty, it cannot be denied, but in
whatsoever the Peers and Commons do remit the restraint, by yiedling their
consent to the point proposed, the King works and acts therein absolutely
by the power of his own inherent Sovereignty; and all acts and laws so passing
do virtually proceed from the King, How the same acts may be said to be the
acts of the King, and of the Parliament.
as from the true and proper efficient author thereof: and may notwithstanding
be said to be the acts of the whole Court, because the three estates contribute
their power of remitting the restraint, and yiedling their assent, as well as
the King uses his unrestrained power.

And therefore Suarez says, that as condere legem, unus est ex pracipuis
actibus gubernationis reipublicae, ita praecipuam and superiorem requirit
potestatem, to make Laws is one of the chiefest acts of the government of a
Commonwealth, Suarez. l. 1. c: 8 n. 8.
so it requires the chiefest and supremest power and authority; quae quidem
potestas legislativa primario in Deo est, which legislative power is primarily
in God, and is communicated unto Kings (says he) per quandam participationem,
according to the saying of the wise man, Hear O ye Kings, because power is
given unto you of the Lord. Sap. 6.
And Saint Augustine calls Jura humana jura imperatorum, quia ipsa jura
humana per imperatores: Aug. in Joan tract 6.
all humane laws are the laws of Emperors or Kings, because they are made by
them, and the Holy Ghost speaking of the Kings of Judah, says, The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet; to teach us,
Genesis 49.10.
that whosoever swayeth the Scepter has the right to be the Lawmakers, which
is one of the prime prerogatives of Sovereignty.

2. Jus nobilitandi, the right of appointing the principal Officers of State;
2. Ius nobilitandi.
to cry up any of all his Subjects, whom the King will honor, as Pharaoh did
Joseph, and Ahasuerus did Haman and Mordecai, and to give them titles of
honor, per codicillos honorarios, aut per diplomata sua, as to make Dukes,
Marquesses, Barons, Knights, etc. does belong only unto the King, that has
only the supreme Majesty.

But if the Dukes, Earls, and Barons be so pliable to the Puritan faction, It
is the Doctrine of the Anabaptists and Puritans, that there should be no
Degrees of Schools, nor titles of honor among men.
to put down the spiritual Lords, I doubt that e're long the King shall have
but few Nobility; when not only the Mechanics and Rusticks will all cry out
against this Lordlinesse, and say, as they did in the rebellion of Jack Cade
and Wat Tyler.

When Adam delv'd, and Eve span,
Who was then the Gentleman?
And why should we now endure so many titles of vanity, and so many vain
honors to vapor it over us? but the Puritan Clergy also, seeing themselves
deprived of their due honor, and made all equal, all as base as Jeroboams
Priests, will be apt enough to blow up this conceit, and to put it into the
Creed of all the vulgar, that God made us all equal, and to be Lords is but to
be tyrants over their Brethren; and the Presbytery, whose pride could not obey
the authority of their Bishops, will not abide the superiority of any Lords;
but if they cannot Lord it themselves, will be sure to take away the Lordship
from all others.

And therefore if the Nobility be not wiser, then to lay our honors in the
dust, (as I see some about his Majesty, that would feign be the Priests to bury
it, which mere policy, though they wanted piety, should prohibit) they shall
find that Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1.
Jam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. When our Cottages are burnt,
their next Palaces shall not escape the fire; but through our sides their
Honors shall be killed, and buried without honor.

3. Jus legitimandi.
3. Jus legitimandi, the right of legitimation belongs unto the King, without
which legitimation the Lawyers tell us, that as the world now stands, a
mighty emolument would happen unto the Crown, if the King granted not this
grace to them that want it.

4. Ius appellationes recipiendi. Act. 25.11.
4. Jus appellationes recipiendi, the right of taking notice of causes, and of
judging the same by the last appeal definitively, does always belong to the
supreme Majesty; because that as Saint Paul appealed unto Caesar, so the last
appeal is to the highest Sovereign, from whom there lies none appeal, but
only to him that shall judge all the Judges of the earth.

5. Honores restituendi.
5. Jus restituendi in integrum, the right to restore men attainted, or
banished, or condemned to death, unto their Country, wealth, and honor, is
likewise a part of the royal right. Osorius de rebus Imman. p. 6.
So Osorius says, that Immanuel King of Portugal restored James son of
Fernandus, and his brother Dionysius, and others, unto their forfeited honors;
and so not only the Scripture shows how David pardoned Absolon and Shimei, 1
Reg. 2.26.
two wicked Rebels, and Solomon pardoned Abiathar that were all worthy of
death; Ventam crimiuosis indulgere.
but also Saint Augustine speaking of other Kings and Emperors, says,
judicibus statuendum est ne liceat in reum datam sententiam revocare, the
Judges may not pardon a man condemned to death; numquid and ipse Imperator sub
hac lege erit? but shall not the Emperor or King pardon him? are they likewise
under this Law of restraint? by no means: Nam ipsi soli licet revocare
sententiam, and reum mortis absolvere, and ipsi ignoscere; for he and he alone,
that is, the Emperor or King, may revoke the sentence, and absolve him that is
guilty of death. And so our King according to this his undeniable right, Our
kings unparalled clemency and piety toward the Rebels.
has most graciously, and not seldom, offered his pardon unto these
intolerable Rebels, a pardon not to be paralleled in any History, nor to be
believed, unless we had seen it, that a man could be so far inclined to
clemency and mercy, as to remit such transcendent impiety, which will render
them the more odious both to God and man; and their names the more infamous to
all posterity, that after they had filled themselves with all kind of
wickedness, with incredible transgressions, they should be sound contemners of
so favorable a pardon.

But though it be the Kings right to pardon faults, and to restore offenders;
yet herein all Princes should take great heed (especially when they have power
to take revenge, 2. Sam. 3.39.
for sometimes the sinners may be like the sons of Zervia, too strong for
David) how they pardon those great crimes that are committed to the dishonor
of God, and do so far provoke him to anger, as to plague both the doers and the
sufferers of them; because, that although they be soluti legibus suis, not
bound to their own Laws, Arnisaeus l. 1. c. 3. page 69.
yet they are not soluti ratione and praeceptis divinis, but they are bound to
observe Gods Laws, and to punish the transgressors of his Commandments; or if
they do not when they can do it, they shall render a strict account to God for
all their omissions, as they may see it in the example of King Saul. 1 Samuel
15.9.


6. Jus convocandi Synodos, Parliamenta, etc.
6. Jus convecandi, the right of calling Synods, Parliaments, Dyets, and the
like, were the rights of the kings of Israel, and are the just Prerogatives of
the kings of England, howsoever this faction of the Parliament has sought to
wrest it, as they do all other rights out of the kings hands, by their
presumption to call their Schismatic Synod, to which they have no more
color of right, then to call a Parliament.

7. Jus moan tas excudendi. Matthew. 22.20.
7. Jus excudendi, the right of coining money, to give it value, to stamp his
arms or his image upon it, (as our Savior says, Whose Image and
superscription is this? and they say to him Caesar's) is the proper right of
Caesar, the prerogative of the king.

The second sort of the King's right is circa Magistratus, 2. About the
Magistrates.
and contains jurisdiction, rule, creation of officers, appointing of
circuits, provinces, judgments, censures institution of Schools and Colleges,
collation of dignities, receiving of sidelities, and abundance more; whereof I
intend not to speak at this time, but refer my Reader to Arnisaeus, de jure
Majestatis, if he desires to be informed of these particulars. Arn s l. 2. c. 2.


And as these and the like are jura Regalia, the rights of Majesty in the time
of peace; so when peace cannot continue, it does properly belong unto the King,
and to none else, but to him that has the Sovereignty, whose right it is
alone, to make war, either to succor his allies, or to revenge great injuries,
or for any the like just causes; and, as he sees cause, to conclude Peace, to
send Ambassadors, to negotiate with foreign States, and the like, are the
rights of Kings, and the indeleble Characters of Sovereignty, which whosoever
violateth, and endeavors to purloin them from the King, does with Prometheus
steal fire from Heaven, which the Gods would not suffer (as the Poets feign) to
go unrevenged.

And these things (so far as I can find) the King never parted with them unto
his Subjects; and therefore whosoever pretends to an inderived power to do
any of these, and exempteth himself from the King's right herein, resists the
ordinance of God, and is guilty of High Treason, Ioh. Beda. 26.
what pretext soever he brings, says the Advocate of Paris.

And there be some things which our Kings have granted unto their Subjects, Ita
itiam Reges Aegypti quibus. voluntas pro lege est, legum tamen instituta in
cogendis pecuniis, quotidianoque victu sequebantur. Aubanus. What things Kings
have granted.
and restrained themselves from their full right; as the use of that power,
which makes new Laws, or repeals the old, or lays any tax or sums of moneys
upon his Subjects without the consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament;
and it may be some other particulars, which the Lawyers know better then I.

And all these Privileges of the Subjects are but limitations and restrictions
of the King's right, made by themselves unto their people; and therefore where
the Law cannot be produced to confirm such and such Liberties and Privileges
granted unto them, I say there the King's power is absolute, and the Subject
ought not in such cases to determine any thing to the disadvantage of the King:
because all these Liberties that we have, are enjoyed by virtue of the King's
grant, as you may see in the ratification of Magna Charta; where the King
says, We have granted and given all these Liberties.

But I could never see it produced, 9 Hen. 3.
where the King granted unto his Subjects that they might force him, and compel
him with a strong hand, by an Army of Soldiers to do what they will, or else
to take away either his Crown or his Life, this Privilege was never granted,
because this deprives the King of his supremacy, and puts him in the condition
of a Subject, and would ever prove an occasion of rebellion, when the people
upon every discontent would take Arms against their King.

And therefore this present resistance is a mere usurpation of the King's
right, a rebellion against his Laws, an High Treason against his Person, and a
resistance of the ordinance of God, which heap of deadly sins can bring none
other fruit then damnation, says the Apostle.

CHAP. XIV.
Shows the Kings grants unto his people to be of three sorts. Which ought to
be observed: the Act of excluding the Bishops out of Parliament discussed: the
King's Oath at his Coronation: how it obliges him: and how Statutes have been
procured and repealed.

2. The Kings obligation to observe his grants. Peter de la Primandas says,
Laws annexed to the Crown the Prince cannot so abrogate them, but his Successor
may disannul whatsoever he has done in prejudice of them. p. 597.
2. WE are to consider how far the King is obliged to observe his promise, and
to make good these Liberties and Privileges unto his Subjects; where I speak
not how far the father's grant may oblige the son, or the predecessor his
successor, who cannot be deprived of his right dominion by any act of his
predecessors; but for the rights of his dominion, how far precedent grants, and
the custom of their continuance, with the desuetude and non-claim of his right,
may strengthen them unto the Subject, and oblige the successors to observe
them, I leave it unto the Lawyers and Civilians to dispute: but I am here to
discuss how far the King, that has promised and taken his oath to observe his
Laws, and make good all privileges granted to his Subjects, is bound in
conscience to keep and observe them: Touching which, you must understand, that
these grants of immunities and favors are of three special kinds.

1. Of grace. 2. By fraud. 3. Through fear.
For,

1. The King that has his full right, either by conquest or succession over
his people, 1. All grants of grace ought to be observed.
to govern them as a most absolute Monarch, and out of his mere grace and
favor, to sweeten the subjection of his people, and to bind them with the
greater love and affection to his obedience, does minuere sua jura, restrain
his absolute right, bestow liberties upon his people, and take his oath for
their security, that he will observe them, is bound in all conscience to
perform them, and can never be freed from injustice before God and man, if he
transgress them: The true Law of free Monarchs, p. 203.
Quia volenti fit non injuria, because they do him no injury, when he does
voluntarily, either totally resign, or in some particularity diminish his own
right; but after he has thus firmly done it, he can never justly go from it:
and therefore King James says, that a King which governs not by his Laws,
can neither be accountable to God for his administration, nor have a happy and
established Reign; because it cannot be, but that the people seeing their King
failing of his duty, will be always murmuring and defective in their fidelity.
And

Yet the King's breach of oath does neither forfeit his right, nor warrant
their distoyalty: because another man's sin does no way lessen mine offense, and
neither God nor the King granted this privilege unto Subjects, to rebel and
take Arms against their Sovereign, when they pretend he has broken his
promise.

2. Grants obtained through fraud; which to be observed.
2. When the King through the subtle persuasions of his people, that pretend
one thing, and intend another, shall be seduced to grant those things that are
full of inconveniences; as our King was overreached, and no better then
merely cheated by the faction of this Parliament, to grant the continuance of
it, till it should be dissolved with the consent of both Houses, and the like
Laws that are procured by mere fraud, that soonest over-reacheth the best
meaning Kings. I answer with the old Proverb, Caveat emptor, he ought to have
been as wise to prevent them, as they were subtle to circumvent him; and
therefore, as Joshua, being deceived by the Gibeonites, could not alter his
promise, Josh. 9.20.
nor break his league with them, lest wrath should fall upon him, so no more
should any other King break promise in the like case.

But you must observe, that the Psalmist says, Psalm. 15.5.
The good man which shall dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, is he that
swears unto his neighbor and disappointeth him not, though it were to his
own hinderance: mark, Quicquid fit dolo malo, annullat factum and imponit
poenam, summa Angel.
though it were to his own hinderance never so much, he must perform it; but
what if he has promised and sworn that which will be to the great dishonor of
God, to the hinderance of thousands of others, and it may be to the ruin of a
whole Kingdom, which is a great deal more then his own hinderance, is a King
bound, or is any man else obliged to perform such a promise, or to keep such an
oath? to tell you mine own judgment, I think he ought not to perform it; and
our own Law tells us what grants soever are obtained from the King, under the
broad Seal by fraud and deceit, those grants are void in Law; therefore, seeing
the Act for the perpetuity of this Parliament was obtained, dolo pessimo, to
the great dishonor of God, and the ruin both of Church and State, when their
pretense was very good; though the goodness of his Majesty in the tenderness of
his conscience was still loath to allow himself the liberty to dissolve it,
until he had other juste^ and more clear causes to pronounce it no Parliament,
as the abusing of his grant to the raising of an Army, and the upholding of a
Rebellion against their Sovereign; yet I believe he might safely have done it
long agone, without the least violation of God's Law, when their evil
intentions were openly discovered by those Armies which they raised. For I
doubt not to affirm it with the Author of The sacred Prerogative of Christian
Kings, p. 144. if any good Prince, or his royal Ancestors have been cheated out
of their sacred right by fraud o^ force, he may at the fittest opportunity,
when God in his wise providence offers the occasion, resume it, especially
when the Subjects do abuse the King's concessions, to the damage of
Sovereignty, so that it redounds also to the prejudice either of the Church or
Commonwealth.

3. When the King, through fear, not such as the Parliaments fear is, 3. Grants
gotten by force not to be observed.
who were afraid where no fear was, and were frighted with dreams and
causeless jealousies; but that fear, which is real, and not little, but such
as may fall in fortem and constantem virum, does pass any Law, especially that
is prejudicial to the Church, and injurious to many of his Subjects; I say,
that when he shall be freed from that fear, he is not only freed from the
obligation of that Law, but he is also obliged to do his uttermost endeavor to
annul the same: it is true, that his fear may justly free him from all blame at
the passing of it, as the fear of the thief may clear me from all fault in
delivering my purse unto him; because these are no voluntary acts, and all acts
are adjudged good or evil according to the disposition of the will; the same
being like the golden bridle that Minerva was said to put upon Pegasus to guide
him and to turn him as she pleased: but when his fear is past, The will must
never consent to forced acts that are unlawful. His Majesty's answer to the
Petition of the Lords and Commons, 16. Julii p. 8.
and God has delivered him from the insurrection of wicked doers, if his will
gives consent to what before he did unwilling, who can free the greatest
Monarch from this fault?

Therefore His Majesty confessing (which we that saw the whole proceedings of
those tumultuous routs, that affrighted all the good Protestants and the Loyal
Subjects, do know that it could not be otherwise,) that he was driven out of
London for fear of his life; I conclude that the act of excluding the Bishops
out of Parliament, being past after his flight out of London can be no free,
nor just, nor lawful act; and the King when he is more fully informed of many
particulars about this act, that is so prejudicial to the Church of Christ, and
so injurious to all his servants, the Clergy whose rights and privileges the
King promised and swear at His Coronation to maintain, cannot continue it in my
judgment, and be innocent.

But this is answered by the answerer to Doctor Fern, Ob. Page 31.
that he is no more bound to defend the rights of the Clergy by his oath, then
the rest of the Laws formerly enacted, whereof any may be abrogated without
perjury, when they are desired to be annulled by the Kingdom.

Sol. His Majesty's answer to the remonstrance, or declaration of the Lords and
Commons 26. of May, 1642.
To which I say, that as His Majesty confesses, there are two special
questions demanded of the king at His Coronation.

1. Sir, Will you grant and keep, and by your oath confirm to the people of
England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England, your
lawful and religious predecessors?

And the king answers, I grant and promise to keep them.

2. After such questions, as concern all the commonalty of this kingdom, both
Clergy and Laity, as they are his Subjects, one of the Bishops reads this
admonition to the king before the people with a loud voice;

Our Lord and King, we beseech you to pardon, and to grant, and to preserve
unto us, and to the Churches committed to our charge all Canonical
privileges, and due law and justice, and that you would protect and defend us,
as every good King in His Kingdom ought to be the protector and defender of
the Bishops, and the Churches under their Government,

And the king answers,

With a willing and devout heart I promise and grant my pardon, and that I will
preserve and maintain to you and the Churches committed to your charge, all
Canonical Privileges, and due law and Justice, and that I will be your
Protector and defender to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good
king in His kingdom, in right, ought to protect and defend the Bishops and
Churches under their Government.

The Kings Oath at His Coronation twofold.
Then the king laying his hand upon the book, says, the things which I have
before promised, I shall perform and keep, so help me God, and the contents
of this Book.

Where I beseech all men to observe, that here is a twofold promise, and so a
twofold oath.

The first part of the Oath. Populo Anglicano. Vide D. p. 165.
1. The one to all the Commonalty and people of England, Clergy and Laity; and
so whatsoever he promises, may by the consent of the parties, to whom the
right was transferred, be remitted and altered by the representative body in
Parliament, quia volenti non fit injuria, and the rule holds good, quibus medis
contrahitur contractus, iisdem dissolvitur; and therefore as any compact, or
contract is made good and binding, so it may be made void and dissolved, mutuo
contrahentium assensu; by the mutual assent of both parties; that is, any
compact, where God has not a special interest in the contract, as he has in
the conjugall contract betwixt man and wife, and the politic covenant betwixt
the King and His Subjects; Contracts, wherein God is interessed, cannot be
dissolved without God.
which therefore cannot be dissolved by the consent of the parties, until God,
who has the chiefest hand in the contract, gives his assent to the
dissolution; and so, when things are dedicated for the service of God, or
Privileges granted for his honor; neither donor nor receiver can alienate the
gift, or annull that Privilege, without the leave and consent of God, that was
the principal party in the concession, as it appears in the example of
Ananias, and is confirmed by all Casuists.

The second part of the oath. Clericls Ecclesiasticis. D. p. 165.
2. The other part of the oath is made to the Clergy in particular; and so also
with their consent, some things I confess, may perhaps be revoked, but without
their consent, not any thing can be altered, in my understanding, without
injustice; for, with what equity can the Laity vote away the rights of the
Clergy, when the Clergy do absolutely deny their assent? just as if the Clergy
should give away the lands of the Laity; or as if I had lent the king ten
thousand pounds upon the public assurance of King and both Houses, to be
repaid again; and they without mine assent, shall vote the remission of this
debt, for some great benefit, The party to whom the bond is made, must release
the bonds.
that they conceive redounding to the Commonwealth; by which vote I should
believe my self to be no better then merely cheated; or, as if the
Parliament, without the assent of the Londoners, should pass an act, that all
the money which they lent, should be remitted for the releiving of the State; I
doubt not, but they would conclude that act very unjust; and so is this act
against the Bishops; because the Kings obligation to a particular body,
personal or politic, cannot be dispensed with by the representative Kingdom
without the releasement of that body, to whom the King is obliged.

For I find that all the Casuists will tell you, that juramentum promissorium
ita obligat, ut invito creditore, non potest in melius commutari; quia aliter
justitia and veritas non servarentur inter homines: and it is their common
tenet, Suarez. de juramento promiss. l. 2. c. 12. n. 14.
that it cannot be dispensed with, quia per promissum acquiritur jus ei cui fit
promissio, and utilitas unius non sufficit ut alter suo jure privetur, the
benefit of others must not deprive me of my right; This point is so clear,
that neither Scholar, nor any man of reason or conscience will deny it.

Therefore to persuade the king, that is bound by his oath to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Church and Clergy, to cast out the Bishops out of
their rights, or to take away their Lands, without their own consent (whom the
king by his oath has obliged himself to protect;) I cannot see how they can do
it without great iniquity, or His Majesty consent to it, and be innocent, when
he is fully informed of the Rights of his Clergy; whereas otherwise the most
religious Prince may be subject to mistakings, and so nesciently admit that,
which willingly he would never have granted. And if they can not persuade him
to do this without iniquity, how dare they go about to force and compel him
against conscience, to commit this and such other horrible impiety? but I
assure my self that God, who has blessed our king, and preserved him hitherto
without blame, as being forced to what he did, or not thoroughly understanding
what was our right, the Bishops being imprisoned, and not suffered to inform
him, nor to answer for themselves, will still arm His Majesty with that
resolution, as shall never yield to their impetuousnesse, to transcend the
limits of his own most upright conscience.

Yet still it is urged, they were excluded by act of Parliament, unjust, as
being done by the wisdom of the whole State, and the king should not desire it
to be altered.

I answer, that all Parliaments are not always guided by an unerring spirit,
heads of the most powerful faction, The case of our affairs. p. 17. How
powerful factions have procured Parliaments to do most unjust things. Turba
tremens sequitur fortunam, ut semper and odit damnatos. Juven. Satyra. 10. When
Kings were most powerful, they could get the Parliaments to yield to what
Statutes they thought best; when the Lords or faction were most powerful, they
forced their Kings to make what Statutes they liked best.
which are instances rather of their unsteady weakness, then of their just
power; when forsaking the guidance of their lawful head, they suffered
themselves to be led by popular pretenders, as when Canutus prevailed by his
arms, he could have a Parliament to resolve, that his title to the Crown was
the best; when Hen. 4. had an army of 60000 men, he could have a Parliament to
depose Rich. 2. and confer the Crown upon himself; when Edw. Duke of York grew
powerful, he could have a Parliament to determine the reign of Hen. 6. and
leave him only the name of king, for his life, but give the very Kingdom unto
the Duke, under the names of Protector and Regent; and then he could procure
the Parliament to declare that Hen. 4. Hen. 5. and Hen. 6 were but kings de
facto, non de jure; so Rich. the 3. as mere an Usurper as any, could
notwithstanding procure a Parliament, to declare him a lawful king, and Hen.
7. could procure the forementioned acts, that were made in favor of Edw. 4.
and Rich. 3. to be annulled; and Hen. 8. could have a Parliament to justify
and authorize his divorces, and Queen Elizab. could have a Parliament to make
it high treason for any man to say, that the Queen could not by Act of
Parliament bind and dispose the rights and titles, which any person whatsoever
might have unto the Crown: when as we know, it was adjudged in Hen. 7. that no
Act of Parliament, nor yet an Attainder by Parliament, can disable the right
heir to the Crown; because the descent of the Crown upon him purges all
disabilityes whatsoever, and makes him every way capable thereof.

Thus, as the Parliaments, when they were most prevalent, caused their kings
unwillingly to yield many things against right; so the kings, growing most
powerful, prevailed to work the Parliament to consent to very unjust
conclusions: and therefore it is inconsequent to say, this exclusion must be
just, because it is past by an Act of Parliament.

The case of our affairs. p. 20.
And therefore, as in the 15 year of Edw. 3. the king being unwillingly drawn
to consent to certain Articles, prejudicial to the Crown, and to promise to
seal the Statute thereupon made, lest otherwise his affairs in hand might have
been ruinated, (which we conceive to be just in like manner now, the king very
unwillingly drawn to pass this Act for the exclusion of the Clergy, which is
most prejudicial both to the Crown and the Church, and a mighty dishonor unto
God himself, lest otherwise more mischief might have followed, when he hoped
that this would have appeased the fury of that prevalent faction, which now the
kingdom sees it did not.) Another Statute was made the same year, reciting
the former matter, Statutes unwillingly procured from the king, repealed.
that was enacted, in these words; It seemed to the said Earls, Barons, and
otherwise men, that since the Statute did not of our free will proceed, the
same to be void, and ought not to have the name, nor strength of a Statute, and
therefore by their counsel and assent, we have decreed the said Statute to be
void, etc. So I hope our Earls and Baron,, and the rest, will be so wise and
so just, both to the king and to the Church, that seeing this Statute proceeded
not of the kings free will, as I believe their own conscience knows, and do
presume His Majesty will acknowledge, they likewise will consent, that the king
may make it void again.

. Certain Quaeres discussed, but not resolved; the end for which God ordained
Kings; the praise of a just rule: Kings ought to be more just then all others
in three respects; and what should most especially move them to rule their
people justly.
AND here I must further crave leave, to be resolved in certain Quaeres and
doubts, wherein I would very gladly be satisfied; for, seeing, as I told you
before, there are some rights of royalty, which are inseperabilia a majestate,
which the king ought not, and which indeed he cannot grant away; as there be
some things which he may forgo, though he need not; I demand,

ex diametro, or ex obliquo, either directly, or by consequent, or any other
way contradictory, or transgressive to the Law of God, ought to be kept and
observed; wherein I believe, and constantly maintain that it ought not: and I
say further, that by the Word of God, not any Lay men, be they never so noble,
never so learned, and never so many; but the Clergy, be they never so poor,
and never so much dis-esteemed, ought to be the resolvers of this point, what
is repugnant, and what consonant to the Law of God; Malach. 2.7.
because the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and the people must seek the
Law at his month; therefore it may be conceived no Statute can be rightly made,
that is not assented to, and approved (as all our former Statutes were) by the
Bishops, that are the chiefest of the Clergy, to be no ways contrary to the
Law of God.

absolute Monarch, to whom God has committed the charge and government of his
people, can without offense to God, change this form of government, from a
Monarchical to an Aristocraticall, or a Democraticall form of government;
which may be believed he cannot; because, though as I showed out of Saint
Augustine, the worser form, invented by man, may lawfully be changed into a
better: yet the best, which is only and primarily ordained by God, cannot be
changed into a worser without offense.

power, authority, and right, which God has given him, and without which he
cannot govern and protect his people, that God has committed under his charge;
wherein it may be conceived he cannot, because God must discharge him from the
charge that he imposed upon him before he can be freed and excused from it;
but, as the Bishop, on whom the Lord has laid the charge of souls, cannot lay
aside this charge when he pleases, so no more can the King lay aside the
charge of the Government, nor part with that power and right, Otherwise then by
substitution. Rege absente and durante beneplacito; or, quamdiu se been
gesserint substituti.
whereby he is enabled to govern them, and without which he cannot govern
them, until God, that laid this charge upon him, and gave him full power and
authority to do it, by some undeniable dispensation gives him his Writ of ease
to discha ge him.

Act or Statute, which disinableth any King to dissolve his Diet, Council,
Assembly, or Parliament, and inableth some subtle faction of his Subjects, in
some sort, to countermand their King, be not derogatory to the inseparable
right of Majesty, destructive to the power of government, and prejudicial to
all the loyal Subjects, and therefore void of it self, and not to be
observed; because such an act ought not to have been concluded: The Act for the
indissolubility of any Parliament, believed by many, to be of it self void.
wherein I leave the resolution to be dete mined by the Judges and Bishops of
this Land, and I will only crave leave to set down what may be thought herein,
viz. that such an Act or Statute is clearly and absolutely void.

sort, and in some kind, to change the fundamental constitution, and
Government of his Kingdom, from an absolute Monarchy, to another species, and
form of Government, either Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, or some other
form, emergent out of all these, such as we know not how to term it, and such
as was never known from the beginning of the world; a mixture indeed, which, I
told you before, no absolute King can be thought to do without offense, unless
he can prove his license from God to do the same.

denude himself of his Right, and by depriving himself of this power, to
disinable himself to discharge that duty, which God does necessarily require
at his hands; that is, to govern his people, by protecting the innocent, and
punishing the wrong doer; and when God shall call the King to an account, why
he did not thus govern his people, and defend those poor Subjects that were
loyal and faithful both to God and their King, according to the charge that he
laid upon him, and the right and power which he gave him to discharge it: It
may be feared, it will be no sufficient answer for any King to say, but I have
so laid away that power, and parted with that right unto my Lords and Commons,
that I could not do it; for it may be asked, where does God require him, or
when did he authorize him to divest himself of that authority wherewith he
endued him? how then can he do it, to the undoing of many people, without an
assured leave from God? therefore, as that Act which was made unrepealable, was
adjudged no Act, but immediately void, because it was destructive to the very
power of Parliament, Which may repeal their own Acts, but not destroy their
just power, not themselves, as it seems the Act of excluding the Bishops does,
and takes away as it were the soul of the Parliament.
and if any act should be made to destroy common right, or to hinder the
public service of God, or to disinable the right heir to enjoy the Crown,
or the like, those Acts are void of themselves; so any Statute that disinableth
the Kings Government, must needs be void ipso facto; as I have partly showed in
my Discovery of Mysteries. p. 32.

no King would ever grant such an act, unless he were either subtly deceived
and seduced, or forcibly compelled thereunto, for fear of some inavoidable
extremity, which (according to all outward appearance) could not otherwise be
prevented, without the concessions of such unspeakable disadvantages; as a man
gives away his sword when he sees his life in danger, if he deliver it not:
Therefore the premises considered.

Quaere is, whether any King should be bound and obliged to observe such
grants, and make good such Acts, In all these Quaeries I conclude nothing
whatsoever I believe.
as are thus fraudulently obtained, or forcibly wrested from him, and are thus
contradictory to Gods will, thus prejudicial to the power of Government, and
thus destructive to his Subjects: which for the fore said reasons is by many
men believed he is not; but that this right was unduly procured from him, so
when God inableth him, he may justly acquire it, and reassume it, without any
offense to God, or the least reluctance to his own conscience.

And if this Act, that has passed in our Parliament, makes it immediately to
be no Parliament, As I know not whether it does or not; neither will I
determine it.
as being now another form of government, which the Divines hold, ought not to
be effected; then certainly all Acts that passed since, are no Acts, but are
void and invalid of themselves.

Or be it granted, that the Act for the perpetuity of Parliament does not annul
the Parliament; yet it is doubted by many, whether the Parliament may not
themselves, without the kings pronouncing it void or dissolved, make it no
Parliament: Quid prodest tibi nomen usurpare alienum, and vocari quod non es?
when of Counselors for the King, they become Traitors unto the King, and of
Patriots, that should protect the Commonwealth, they become Parricides and
Catilines unto the same: because these duties, being as the soul, the life, and
the end of Parliaments, when these are changed, to be the bane and death of
King and Kingdom, it is doubted how it can be a Parliament, any more then a
dead carkase that is deprived of his soul, can be said to be a man; for the
circumstances and ceremonies of times, places, and the like, are not
essentialia Parliamenti, but as accidentia, quae possunt adesse and abesse sine
interita subjecti, and may be ad been esse, but are as Punctilio's in respect
of the end and essence of a Parliament.

And therefore, as God promises infallibly to do a thing, for example, that He
will not fail David, Psalm. 89.34. 1 Samuel 2.30.
his seed shall endure for ever: and of Eli, he said indeed, that his house and
the house of his father should walk before him for ever; yet this unchangeable
God, when the change is wrought in David, or his seed or in Eli his house,
David does immediately say, Thou have abhorred and forsaken thine Anointed,
Psalm. 89.37. 1 Samuel 2.30.
and art displeased at him; and of his promise to Eli, God says in the same
place, now be it far from me; so it may be conceived, that when any Parliament
changes its nature, I should never acknowledge Judas after he betrayed his
master, and resolved to persist in his wickedness, to be an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, no more then I should take the Temple of Jerusalem to be the house of
God, so long as it continued the den of thieves.
fails in its very being, and of a preservative becomes a poison, both to the
King and Kingdom; the King and Kingdom may then, without any change in
themselves, or failing of their former promises, justly say, they are no
Parliament; but, as the Romans said unto a worthy Patriot, that had formerly
saved them from the Senones, and at last became an enemy to the State, We did
honor thee as our deliverer, when thou did save us from the Senones, sed jam
nobis es quasi unus ex Senonibus; so may we say of any Parliament, that turns
to be the destruction of a Commonwealth; that it is but a shadow, and no
substance; a den of thieves and no Parliament of Counselors: And I assure my
self much more may be spoken, and many inanswerable arguments may be produced
to confirm this to be most true; so I have set down what I conceive to be true
about the Kings grants and concessions unto his people, and his obligations to
observe them.

And if His Majesty (whom I unfainedly love, and heartily honor, and in whose
service, as I have most willingly spent my slender fortunes, so I shall as
readily hazard my dearest life) be offended with me for setting down any of
these things, that my conscience tells me to be true, and needful to be known,
and my duty to declare them; I must answer in all humility and with all
reverence, that, remembering what Lucian says, (...), many men shunning the
smoke fell into the fire; and that Job says, Timentes pruinam opprimentur a
nive, which Saint Gregory moralizeth of them, that fearing the frost of man's
anger, which they may tread under foot, shall be overwhelmed with the snow of
Gods vengeance, that falls from Heaven, and cannot be avoided; I had rather
suffer the anger of any mortal man, then endure the wrath of the great God; and
now I have freed my soul, let what will come of my body: I will fear God, and
honor my King.

5 The end for which God ordained Kings,
5. We are to consider the end for which God ordained the King to rule and
govern his people; and that is, to preserve justice and to maintain peace
through out all the parts of his Dominions; for as the Subjects may neither
murmur nor resist heir Sovereign, at any time, for any cause, so the King must
not do any wrong or injustice to his meanest Subject; neither do we press the
obedience of the Subject, to give license unto the King to use them as he
lists, but we tell Kings their duties, as well as we do to the Subjects, and
that is to do justice unto the afflicted, and to execute true judgment among
all his people: for as Plato says, Psalm 82.3. Zachar. 7 9.
(...) all men cry out with one mouth how beautiful a thing is temperance and
righteousness: Cicero calls her the Lady and Mistress of all virtues: and
Pindarus says, that (...), Cice, o offic. l. 3.
a golden eye and a golden countenance are always to be seen in the face of
justice, and that Jupiter Soter dwells together with Themis: whereby he would
give us to understand, regem servatorem esse justum: Pindar. apud Athen. Cl.
Alex. and Sirom, l. 5
that a King must preserve his people by justice, as Clemens Alexand.
expounds it: because as Theognis page 431. says, (...), justice is that
virtue, which comprehends all virtues in it self; and therefore Solomon says,
that the Kings throne is established by righteousness: and justice exalts a
Nation, Prove. 16.12. c. 14 34. injustice destroys Kingdoms.
making it to flourish and famous; and justice destroys the people, when a
Kingdom is translated from nation to Nation because of unrighteousness; the
same being as it was said of Carthage fuller of sins then of people: as you see
the Monarchy of the Assyrians was translated unto the Medes and Persians, and
the most famous repub. of the Romans was spoiled, when forgetting their
pristine honesty, they became unjust. Lucan. l. 1.


-- Mensuraque juris
Vis erat. --
And the Law was measured by strength, and he had the best right which was most
powerful: and so the ancient nation of the Britons came to utter ruin and
destruction, propter avaritiam principum, injustitiam judicum, negligentiam
Episcoporum, and luxuriam populi, says Gildas. Ezechiel. 33.11. and 18.22.
Judges 17.6. Dan. 2.21.37. 1 Chronicles. 2 84. 1 Samuel 10.1. 1 Reg. 19 15. Romans
13.4. Tertul. ad Scap. c. 21. Optat. cont. Parmen. l. 3. p. 8. 5. Auson in
Monosyll. Et id possumus quod jure possumus. Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. hom. 2.
Ambros. apol. pro Davide c. 4. etc. 10. Aug. de civit. l. 4. c. 33. Greg. epis.
l. 2. ep. 110. Author libelli cui inscriptio brevis narratio quomodo Hen. 4.
etc. Bellar. de laic. c. 5. Rhem. anno 1 Pet. 2.23. Dela Cerda in Virgil. l.
11. p. 560. etc. Herod. l. 2.


And therefore God, that desires not the death of a sinner, much less the
ruin of any Nation, would have us to seek for justice, and to live uprightly
one among another; but as the sheep that are without a shepherd, wander where
they list, so, as you read often in the book of Judges, when the people were
without a King, there was no justice amongst them, but every man did that which
was right in his own eyes: therefore to prevent oppressions and wrongs, God out
of his infinite love, and favor unto mankind, from the beginning of the World,
called and appointed Kings to be his Vicegerents, to judge the earth and to see
that the poor and the fatherless have right: for besides many other places
that might be alleged, the Spirit of God says directly, ego dixi Dii estis,
and by me Kings do reign, that is, by my appointment, by my direction, and by
my protection, they do, and shall rule and reign over my people, as Tertull.
Optat. Saint Chrysostom. St Ambrose, St Aug. Saint Gregory, and the rest of the
most Orthodox Fathers have ever taught, and maintained; and therefore this is
not inventum humanum, as the Puritans have dreamed, and the Popes flatterers
have maintained, but it is an ordination of God, that we have Kings given unto
us, not to domineere and to satisfy their untamed wills, and sensual appetites,
but to administer justice and judgment unto their people, and so to guide them
to live in all peace and tranquillity; for as Auson says; Qui recte faciet,
non qui dominatur, erit Rex

And therefore Plinius Secundus in his panegyricks, says, ut foelicitatis est
posse quantum velis, sic magnitudinis est velle quantum possis, and bonitatis
facere quantum justum: as it is a great felicity to be able to do what we will,
so it is a most heroic resolution, to will no more but what we should, and to
do nothing but what is just; Claudian says to Honorius. Nec tibi quid liccat,
sed quid fecisse decebit,
Occurrat, mentemque domet respectus honesti.
and so Homer says, that Sarpedon preserved Licia, (...) through justice and
fortitude: whereupon the old Scholiast cites the words of Aeschilus (...),
that virtue and justice are ever coupled together: and Dio. Chrysostom. says,
(...), he is the best of men, that is, the most valiant and most just: Orat. 2.
and Herodian says of Pertinax, Plut. in vit. Cicero 2. orat. in Anton. Ovid.
Met. 6. Suet. de act. c. 2
that he was both loved and feared of the Barbarians, as well for the
remembrance of his virtues in former battles, as also (...) because that
wittingly or willingly he never did injustice to any man at any time. Plutarch
ascribes these virtues to Lucullus and to Paulus Aemilius; Cicero says the
like of Pompey, Ovid. of Erictheus; Suetonius of Octavius, Augustus his father;
Virgil of Aeneas; Krantius of Fronto king of the Danes; and of our late king
James of famous and ever blessed memory, we may truly say, -- Cui pudor and
justitiae soror
Incorrupta fides, nudaque veritas,
Quando ullum invenient parem?
Horat. lib. 1. Od. 26. Neither need I blush to apply the same to our present
King.

So you see how Justice exalts a Nation, commends the doers of it, and
crowns them with all honor, and as the Poet says, -- (...). he that works
justly shall have God himself for his Co-adjutor.

But here you must observe that, which indeed is most true; (...),
(...).
He is not a just man that does no hurt, Who rightly termed just.
but he that is able to do hurt, and will not do it, that can be unjust and
will not be: for it is no great matter to see a poor man that has no ability,
to do no wrong; but it is hard to use power right, even in the meanest office,
and therefore this is that, that is to be urged, to be then most just, when we
have most power to offend, which most properly does belong to all kings and
Princes, to put them in mind of their duties, to what end God has made them
kings: for they are but base statterers, Tacit. annal. l. 3. Plut. in Apotheg.
Eustath. ad Iliad. ss. Salust. in Orat. Cas. cont. Catil.
quibus omnia principum honesta atque inhonesta laudare mos est, that will
commend all the doing of Princes, be they good or bad: and which say, (...),
all things are honest and just that kings do, as that flattering sycophant said
to Antigonus, or like those Chirodicai: (...), who think justice lies not in
the Laws, but in their hands: because as Caesar says, in maxima fortuna
minima licentia est, the higher their places are, the more righteous they ought
to be, and the less liberty of sinning is left unto them: and that in respect
1 of God. 2. of others. 3. of themselves.

Kings ought to be more just then all others in 3 respects.
1. Where God has conferred much honor, there he exspecteth much equity, and
the more goodness, where he bestowed the more grace: ideo deteriores estis,
quia meliores esse debetis? and will men therefore be the more sinful, Luke
12.48. Salvian. de Pro. vid. l. 4.
because they ought to be the more righteous?

2. All men's eyes are upon the Prince; and as Seneca says of the royal
Palace, Perlucet omne regiae vitium domus; the houses of Kings are like
glasses, and every man may look through them: so their actions can no more be
hid, then the City that is placed upon an hill; but their least and lightest
acts are soon seen.

3. Their places are as slippery as they are lofty, Seneca in Agamemn. 2.1.
when (as one says) height itself makes men's brains to swim; and nunquam
solido stetit superba foelicitas, and proud insolency never stood sure for any
certain space; for, as God has made them Gods, so he can unmake them at his
pleasure; and as S. Augustine says, Quod contulit immerentibus, tollit male
merentibus, Aug. ho. 14.
and quod illo donante fit nostrum, nobis superbientibus fit alienum; what God
ha^h freely bestowed upon you without desert, he may justly take away from you
for your evil deserts; and what is ours through Gods gift, may be made another
man's through our own pride; and not only so, but as he has heaped honors
upon their heads, that they might honor him; so, if they neglect him, Job.
12.21. Job. 30.1.
he can power contempt upon Princes, and cast dirt in their faces, and make
them a very scorn to those that formerly they thought unworthy to eat with
the dogs of their flock; and then, Quanto gradus altior, tanto casus gravior,
the higher they were exalted, the more will be their grief when they are
dejected; as it was with those Kings, that being wont to be carried in their
royal Charets, were forced like horses to draw Sesostris Coach; Quia
miserrimum est fuisse felicem; because it is a most wretched thing to have been
happy, and not to be; or as the Poet says, Qui cadit in plano, vix hoc tamen
evenit unquam, Ovidius Trist. l. 3. Eleg. 4.

Sic cadit ut tacta surgere possit humo;
At miser Elpenor, tecto dilapsus ab alto
Occurrit regi, flebilis umbra suo.
And therefore all Kings should be ever mindful of the words of King David, He
that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; 2 Samuel 23.3.
and all these things that I have set down, should move all Kings and Princes
to set their minds upon righteousness, to judge the thing that is right, and
to live, Psalm. 58.1. What should move all kings to rule justly according to
Laws.
to reign and rule according to the straight rule of the Law; that so carrying
them justly and worthily in their places, the poor people may truly say of
them, Certe Deus est in illis, they may well be called Gods, because God is in
them: and if these things will not, nor cannot move them to be as mindful of
their duty, as well as they are mindful of their excellency, then let them
remember what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 149.8.
He will bind Kings with fetters, and their Nobles with linkes of Iron; and let
them meditate upon the words of King Solomon, where he says unto them all,
Hear O ye Kings, and understand, learn ye that be Judges of the ends of the
earth; give ear, you that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of
Nations, for power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the Highest,
who shall try your works, and search out your counsels; because, being
Ministers of his Kingdoms, you have not judged aright, nor kept the Law, nor
walked after the counsel of God, horribly and speedily shall he come upon you;
Sap. 6. usque ad verse. 9.
for a sharp judgment shall be to them that are in high places: for mercy will
soon pardon the meanest, but mighty men shall be mightily tormented: for he
that is Lord over all shall fear no man's person, neither shall he stand in awe
of any man's greatness, for he has made the small and the great, and cares
for all alike: but a sore trial shall come upon the mighty. And the Apostle
says, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10
31.
which things should make their ears to tingle, and their hearts to tremble,
whenever they step aside out of Gods Commandments. And thus we set down the
charge of Kings, and the strict account that they must tender unto God, how
they have discharged the same: whereby you see we flatter them not in their
greatness, but tell them as well what they should be, as what they are, and
press nor only obedience unto the people, but also equity and justice unto
the Prince, that both doing their duty, both may be happy.

CHAP. XV.
Shows the honor due to the King. 1. Fear. 2. An high esteem of our King;
how highly the Heathens esteemed of their Kings; the Marriage of obedience and
authority; the Rebellion of the Nobility how heinous. 3. Obedience, fourefold;
diverse kinds of Monarchs; and how an absolute Monarch may limit himself.

2. The honor that is due to the King.
2 I Have showed you the person that we are commanded to honor, the King; I am
now to show you the honor that is due unto him, not only by the customs of
all Nations, but also by the Commandment of God himself. Where first of all you
must observe, that the Apostle uses the same word here to express our duty to
our King, as the Holy Ghost does to express our duty to our father and mother;
for there it is said, (...), and here S. Peter says, (...): to show indeed
that the King -- urbi pater est, urbique maritus; The same that is due to our
Father and Mother.
is the common Father of us all, and therefore is to have the same honor that
is due to our Father and Mother: and I have fully showed the particulars of
that honor upon that fifth Commandment. I will insist upon some few points in
this place, and as the ascent to Solomon's throne was, per sex gradus, by six
special steps, so I will set you down six main branches of this honor, that
are typified in the six ensigns or emblems of Royal Majesty; for Six special
branches of the honor due to the King.
1 The Sword exacteth fear, and the word (...) signifies as much. 2 The Crown
imports honor, because it is of pure gold. 3 The Scepter requires
obedience, because that rules us. 4 The Throne deserves Tribute, that his
Royalty may be maintained. 5 His Person meriteth defense, because he is the
Defender of us all. 6 His charge calls for our Prayers, that he may be
enabled to discharge it.


1. Fear.
1. Kings are called Gods, and all the Royal Ensigns and Acts of Kings are
ascribed to God, as their Crown is of God, whereupon they are called (...),
crowned of God; Psalm. 21.3. Psalm. 18.39. Judge 7.17. Exodus 4.20.17.9. 1 Chronicles.
19 21. 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Sap. 17.21.
their sword is of God, whereupon the Psalmist says, thou have girded me with
strength unto the battle; their Scepter is the Scepter of God, for so Moses
rod, which signifies a Scepter as well as a rod, is called the rod of God;
their throne is the throne of God, and their judgment is the judgment of God:
and you know how often we are commanded in the Scripture to fear God; and the
Poet says, primus in orb Deos fecit timor: and where the^e is no fear of
God, there is no belief, that there is a God: for fear is the betraying of
the succors which reason offers; and when we have no reason to expect
succor, our reason tells us, that we should fear, that is, the punishment
which we deserved for those evils, which deprived us of our su course: The want
of fear the cause of all mischief.
and therefore this fear of the punishment, does often times keep us from
those evils: even as the Scripture says, timor Domini expellit peccatum: and
the want of this fear is the cause of all mischief, as the Prophet David
shows, when after he enumerated, the most horrible sins of the wicked, Romans
3.13.
that their throat was an open sepulcher, the poison of aspes under their lips,
their mouth full of cursing and bitterness, and their feet swift to shed
blood, he adds this as the cause of all, P. 14. V. 7.
that there was no fear of God before their eyes: And truly this is the cause
of all our calamities, that we fear not our King: for if we feared him, we
durst not Rebel and revile him as we do.

But what is the reason that we do so little fear either God or the king? Why
men do so little fear God and the King. Eccles. 5.6.
the son of Sirach shows, it is their great mercy and clemency: this, which
works love in all good natures, produces boldness, impudency, and Rebellion
in all froward dispositions, who therefore sin because God is merciful, and
will Rebel against their king, because they know he is pitiful and mild, and
will grant them pardon, as they believe, if they cannot prevail, which is
nothing else, but like spide^s, to suck poison out of those sweet flowers, from
whence the bees do gather honey, but let them not deceive themselves, for debet
amor laesus irasci, love too much provoked will wax most angry, and laesa
patientia fit furor: and therefore the son of Syrach says, Eccles. 55, 6.
concerning propitiation be not without fear, and say not, his mercy is great,
for mercy and wrath come from him; and his indignation rests upon sinners, so
though our king be as the kings of Israel, a merciful minded man, most mild and
clement, yet now when he sees how these Rebels have abused his goodness and
his patience, to the great sufferance of his best Subjects, he can draw his
sword, and make it drunk in the blood of the ungodly, that have so
transcendently abused both the mercies of God, and the goodness of the King.
When diverse people had Rebelled against Tarquin, and his son had surprised
many of their chief leaders, he sent unto his father to know what he should do
with them, the King being in his field, paused a while, and then summa Papavera
carpsit, with his staff chopped off the heads of diverse weeds and thistles, and
gave the messenger none other answer, but go, and tell my son what I am doing;
and his Son, understanding his meaning, What Tarquin did to Rebels.
did with them, as Tarquin did with the Poppies; so many Kings would have done
with these Rebels, not out of any love to shed blood, but out of a desire to
preserve Peace, not for any natural inclination to diminish their Nobility by
their decollation, but from an earnest endeavor to suppress the community
from unnatural Rebellion, ut poena in paucos, metus ad omnes, that the
punishment of some might have bred fear in the rest: What effects the Kings
clemency wrought-
and that fear of the King in them might keep his good Subjects from fear of
being undone by them. But all the World sees our King is more merciful, and
has sought all this while to draw them with the cords of love, which has bred
more troubles to himself, more afflictions to us and made them the more cruel,
and by their Oaths and Protestations, Leagues and Covenants, to do their best
to bring the King and all his loyal Subjects into fear, if they may not have
their own desires. But we are not afraid of these Bug-beares; because we know
this has been the practice of all Rebels to link themselves together with
Leagues and Covenants, as in the conjuration of Cateline; and the holy league
in France, and the like; and many such Covenants, and Leagues have been made
with Hell, to the utter destruction of the makers; as when more then forty men
vowed very solemnly (and they intended to do it very cunningly) that they would
neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul; for so they might be without
meat until the day of judgment, Act. 23.12.
if they would keep their Oath: and so these Covenanters may undo themselves by
such hardening their faces in their wickedness; The Rebels Covenants show they
are grown desperate.
because this shows they are grown desperate, and are come to that pass, that
they have little hope to preserve their lives but by the hazarding of their
souls; as if they thought the Devil, for the good service they desire to do
him, to overthrow the Church, to destroy thousand souls, may perchance do them
this favor, to preserve their lives for a time, to bring to pass so great a
work; whereas we know, the Church is built upon a Rock and God has promised
to defend his Anointed, so that all the power of hell shall never prevail
against any of these.

Wherefore to conclude this point, seeing God has put a sword into the hand of
the king, and the King bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.4.
but though it be long in the sheath, he can draw it out when He will, and
recompense the abuse of His lenity with the sharpness of severity, let us
fear; or if you would not fear, do well, says the Apostle, return from your
Rebellion, V. 3.
and from all your wicked ways, and you may yet find grace, because you have
both a merciful God, and a gracious king.

2. To have an high and good esteem of our King, and to make others to have
the like. 2 Samuel 15.6.
2. As we are to fear, so we are to reverence our King, that is, to have an
high esteem of His Majesty, and to manifest the same in our terms, speeches,
and communications accordingly, to gain the love of the rest of His Subjects
toward Him; and not as Absolon did, by cunning and sinister expressions, to
steal away the hearts and affections of His People; for, to make mention of
him either in our prayers, or Sermons, or in any other familiar talk, so, as
if he were a friend to Popery, an enemy to the Gospel, and careless of
Justice, and the like, (as too many of our Sectaries most falsely and most
maliciously have done) is rather to vilify and disgrace him, to work an odium
against him, and a tediousness of him, then to procure an honorable esteem
and reverence of him Cassiodorus says, stipendium tyranno penditur,
praedicatio non nisi bono Principi; Tribute is due to Tyrants, and ought to be
paid unto them; but honor and reverence much more to a good Prince; Romans
12.14. Matthew. 5.44.
and the spirit of God bids us, bless them that persecute us, and our Savior
says, bless them that curse you, that is, speak well of Tyrants that oppress
us, and speak not ill of them that speak ill of you; especially if they be your
Magistrates, or your King, whom (...) you are commanded to honor, even with
the same word (...) (therefore no doubt, but with the same honor) as we are
commanded to honor our Father, and our Mother; The fifth Commandment is the
most obliging of all the Commandments of the second Table. Ephesians. 6.2. How the
heathens honored their kings. C. Tacitus. lib. 14. Seneca de benefic. l. 30.
The reason of their reverence.
because the King is our Political Father; and is therefore commanded to be
reverenced by this precept, which (as the Divines observe) is of greater
moment, and more obliging, then any of the rest of the Commandments of the
second Table, not only because it keeps the first place of all these
precepts, but is also the first Commandment with promise, as the Apostle
observes.

And not only the Scriptures command us thus to honor, and to reverence our
King, but the very Heathens also did so reverence them, that they did adore the
Statues and Images of their Kings and Caesar's, as Tacitus reports; and it was
Treason for any man to pull away, or violate them, that fled unto them for
sanctuary; yea, it was capital for a man, that had the Image of his Prince
stamped in silver, or engraven in a Ring, to go to any unclean, or unseemly
place; and therefore Seneca says, that under the Empire of Tiberius, a certain
Noble man was accused of Treason, for moving his hand, that had on his finger a
Ring, whereon was engraven the portraiture of the Prince, unto his privy
parts, when he did urine; and the reason of this great reverence, which they
bare unto their Princes, was, that they believed there was in Kings (...), some
divine thing, which above the reach of man, was ingraffed in them, and could
not be derived from them; Raderus Comment. in Quint. Curt.
for so Raderus tells us, that this divine Majesty, or celestial spark, was
so eminent in the countenance of Alexander, that it did not only terrify his
enemies, but also moved his best Commanders, and greatest Peers to obey his
commands: and the like is reported of Scipio Africanus: A Macedonian Law.
and I find the Macedonians had a Law, that (besides the Traitors) condemned
to death five of their next Kinsfolks, that were convicted of conspiracy
against their King; and a Gentleman of Normandy, confessing to his Friar, how
such a thought came once in his mind, to have killed King Francis the first, A
Gentleman hanged for his thought.
but repenting of his intention, he resolved never to do it; the Friar absolved
him of his sin, but told the King thereof, and he sent him to his Parliament,
who condemned and executed him for his thought. Philip the first of Spain,
seeing a Falcon killing an Eagle, commanded his head to be wrung off; saying,
let none presume above their Sovereign; and in the Reign of Henry the fourth
of England, one was hanged, drawn, and quartered, in Cheapside London, for
jesting with his son, that if he did learn well, he would make him heir of
the Crown, meaning his own house, that had the Sign of the Crown, to prove
the Proverb true, non est bonum ludere cum sanctis, it is not safe jesting
with Kings and Crowns, and it is less safe to resist them, if you will believe
wise Solomon. And I have read of another King, that passing over a river, his
Crown fell into the water, one of his watermen lept in, and dived to the
bottom, and taking up the Crown, put it upon his head, that it might not
hinder his swimming and so brought it to the King again, who rewarded him well
for his pains, but caused his head to be chopped off for presuming to wear his
Crown. And all this is but an inanswerable argument to condemn our Rebels,
that neither reverence the Majesty of their King, nor respect the commandment
of their God.

3. 3. Obedience.
Obedience is another principal part of that honor which we owe unto the
king; and this obedience of the inferiors joined with the direction of the
superiors, do make any state most successful; but when these are divorced,
The marriage of obedience and authority, and the issue. Aeschylus. All must be
obedient.
then nothing goes right in that Commonwealth; for so the Sages of Greece
expressed it by the marriage that Jupiter made between (...) and (...), whose
child, brought forth betwixt them, was (...); to show unto us, that when
authority is married to obedience, and obedience proves a dutiful and good
wife to authority, the fruit of that match will be happiness to the whole
Kingdom.

And therefore if we would be happy, we must be obedient, and our obedience,
must be universal, in all things in the Lord.

Jussa sequi tam velle mihi quam posse necesse est. Lucan. l. 1.
So the people say unto Joshua, all that thou command us, we will do: Josh.
1.16.
and all must do it, the greater as well as the lesser, the noble man as well as
the mean man, yea, rather then the mean man; for though Rebellion in any one,
is as the sin of witchcraft, yet in a vulgar man it may admit of vulgar
apologies; but in a man of quality, in noble men in Courtiers, bred in the
Kings house, Noble men's Rebellion more abominable to God and man, then any
other.
in the Kings service, and raised by the Kings favor, it is Morbus
complicatus, a decompound sin, a transcendent ingratitude, and unexpressable
iniquity, the example more spreading, and the infection more contagious,
because more conspicuous; and the giddy attempts of an unguided multitude, are
but, as Cardinal Farnesius says, like the Beech tree without his top, soon
withered and vanishing into nothing without leaders, when they become a burden
unto themselves, and a prey unto others; therefore the contradiction of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, that were so eminent in the congregation, was a sin so
odious unto God, that he would have destroyed all Israel for their sake, as now
he punishes all England for the sins of those noble men, that have rebelled
against their King, Romans 13.1.
and were always like Sejanus as wayward, pleased as opposed. And therefore
St. Paul says, that (...), every soul must be subject to the higher power, and
he says, (...), you must needs be subject, or be obedient, Romans 13.5.
Obedience pressed by a three fold argument.
and he presses this obedience with many arguments, as

1. From Gods ordinance, because God has set them over us, and commanded us to
be obedient unto them, and therefore whosoever resists them, warreth against
God.

2. From man's Conscience, which tells us, Romans 13 4.
that he is the minister of God (...), for good, and therefore virtutis amore,
if we have any love to goodness, we ought to obey our King.

3. For fear of vengeance, because he bears not the sword in vain, but is,
v. 4. How we ought to behave our selves toward wicked Kings.
(...), a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil; therefore this
obedience to our King, is not (...), a thing of indifferency but of necessity;
for be our King, for his Religion, Impious, for his government, unjust, and for
life, licentious, as cruel as Nero, as profane as Julian, and as wicked as
Heliogabalus; yet the Subjects must obey him, the Bishops must admonish him,
the counsel must advise him, and all must pray for him; but no mortal man,
that is his Subject, has either leave to resist him, or license to reject him:
unless they reject the ordinance of God, and so fight against God; and you
know, (...), it is hard to vanquish God.

It is truly said by a learned Bishop, si bonus est Princeps, nutritor est
tuus, Ardua res homini est mortali vincere numen. Why God sends evil kings.
if thy King be good, he is thy nursing Father, and it is a great happiness to
his Subjects; sin malus est, tentator est tuus, but if he be evil, he is
either for the punishment of thy sins, or for the trial of thy faith; and
therefore receive thy punishment with patience, or thy trial without
resistance; and Aquin says, tollenda est culpa and cessabit tyrannorum plaga,
do thou take away thy sins, and God will soon take away thy punishment;
otherwise, as for our sins, we do often suffer droughts, floods, unseasonable
weather, sicknesses, plagues, and many other evils of nature, ita luxum and
avaritiam deminantium tolerare debemus; so when God sets up hypocrites, or
tyrants to reign over us, to be the scourges of his wrath, and the rods of his
fury, we must not struggle against God, but rest contented to endure the vices
of our rulers, as a just punishment of our wickednesses, says Cornelius
Tacitus Et Michael Palatinus Hungariae, dicebat, rege coro nato, etiamsi bos
esses, nobis obtemperandum est. Bonfin. dec. 4. lib. 3. Four kinds of
obedience. 1. Forced obedience. Romans 12.1. 1 Samuel 15.22.


But here you must observe, that there are diverse kinds of obedience;
especially, 1. Coacta. 2. Caca. 3. Simulata. 4. Ordinata.
1. Forced. 2. Foolish. 3. Feigned. 4. Well ordered.


1. The first is a forced and compelled obedience, merely for fear of wrath,
as Children learn, or Slaves do their duty, for fear of the rod; and this is
better then res^stance, though nothing like to that obedience, which S. Paul
calls (...); because this voluntary, and not extorted obedience, is that,
which is better then sacrifice.

2. Blind obedience.
2. The second is a blind obedience, such as the young youths, that being
commanded by their Abbat, to carry a basket of figs, and other Juncates unto a
solitary Monk, or Hermit, that lived in his cave, and loosing their way in
that unfrequented wilderness chose rather to dye in the desert, then taste of
those acates that they had in their Basket; and such obedience is most frequent
in the proselites of Rome, who will do whatsoever they are commanded by their
superiors though both they and their superiors do thereby commit never so great
a wickedness: where notwithstanding I must confess, that this blind
obedience is far better, both for Church and State, then a proud resistance,
when as the one produces nothing but some particular inconveniences, and the
other proceeds to an universal destruction.

3. Hypocritical obedience.
3. The third is an hypocritical, and dissembled obedience: that is, an
obedience for a time, till they see their time to do mischief, which is the
worst of all obedience, and therefore most hateful both to God and Man;
because it is but catenus, usque dum vires suppetunt, until they have the
opportunity, and have gotten sufficient strength, to shake off their
subjection, and to maintain their Rebellion; The obedience of our Rebels.
and this was the obedience of all our Rebels, our Sectaries and Puritans here
in England, who would also face us down, but most falsely, that it was the
obedience of the Primitive Christians; for so the grand impostor John Goodwin,
in his Anticavalierisme, says, they were only obedient to those persecuting
Tyrants, because as yet they wanted strength, and were not able to resist them;
but O thou enemy of all goodness, that so hate to become a Martyr for thy
God, that was martyred for thee, is it not enough for thee to play the
dissembling hypocrite thy self, but thou must tax those holy Martyrs, those
true Saints, The Author more out of patience for the wrong offered to the
Martyrs, then for his own abuse.
that reign with Christ in Heaven of hypocrisy, and disobedience in their
hearts, to the Ordinance of God? I could willingly bear with any aspersion
thou should cast in my face, but I am out of patience, though sorry that I
am so transported, to see such false and scandalous imputations, so unjustly
laid upon such holy Saints; yet this you must do to countenance your Rebellion,
to get the Rhetoric of the Devil to belly Heaven it self; and therefore what
wonder is it, that you should belly your King on earth, when you dare thus belly
the martyrs that are in Heaven.

4. The obedience of the Saints twofold.
4. The fourth is a voluntary, hearty and well ordered obedience, which is, the
obedience of the Saints, and is also Twofold, 1. Active. 2. Passive.
For,

1. The Saints knowing the will of God, that they should obey their King, 1.
Active obedience.
and those that are sent ot him, they do willingly yield obedience to their
superiors, and no marvel; because there cannot be a surer argument of an evil
man, then in a Church reformed, and a Kingdom lawfully governed, to resist
authority, and to disobey them that should rule over us, especially him, whom
God immediately has appointed to be his vicegerent, his substitute, and the
supreme Monarch of his Dominions here on earth; for all other things, both in
heaven and earth, do obsere that Law, which their maker has appointed for
them, when, as the Psalmist says, he has given them a Law which shall not be
broken; therefore this must needs be a great reproof and a mighty shame to
those men, that being Subjects unto their King, and to be ruled by his Laws,
will notwithstanding disobey the King, and transgress those Laws, that are
made for their safety, and resist that authority, which they are bound to obey;
only because their weak heads, or false hearts, do account the commandment of
the King to be against right, and what themselves do to be most holy and just.

But our City Prophets will say, Ob. Diverse kinds of Monarchie^
that although the King be the supreme Monarch, whom we are commanded to obey,;
yet there are diverse kinds of Monarchies or Regal governments; as usurped,
lawful, by conquest, by inheritance, by election; and these are either
absolute, as were the Eastern Kings, and the Roman Emperors, or limited and
mixed; which they term a Political Monarchy, where the King or Monarch can do
nothing alone, but with the assistance and direction of his Nobility and
Parliament; or if he does attempt to bring any exorbitancies to the
Commonwealth, or deny those things that are necessary for the preservation
thereof, they may lawfully resist him in the one, and compel him to the other:
to which I answer.

1. As God himself, which is most absolute, and liberrimum agens, Sol. Absolute
Monarchs may limit themselves.
may notwithstanding limit himself, and his own power, as he does, when he
promises and swears that he will not fail David, and that the unrepentant
Rebels should never enter into his rest; so the Monarch may limit himself in
some points of his administration; and yet this limitation neither transferreth
any power of Sovereignty unto the Parliament, nor denies the Monarch to be
absolute, nor admits of any resistance against him: for

1. This is a mere gull to seduce the people, I cannot devise words to express
this new devised government.
that cannot distinguish the point of a needle; just like the Papist, that
says he is a Roman Catholic; that is, a particular universal, a black white,
a polumonarcha, a many one governor, when we say he is a Monarch, joined in his
government with the Parliament; for he can be no Monarch or supreme King and
Sovereign, that has any sharers with him or above him in the government.

2. There is no Monarch that can be said to be simply absolute, but only God;
yet where there is no superior, but the sovereignty residing in the King, he
may he said to be an absolute Monarch (...). 1. Because there is none on earth,
that can control him. 2. Because he is free and absolute in all such things,
wherein he is not expressly limited: and therefore

3. Seeing no Monarch or Sovereign is so absolute, No Monarch so absolute but
someway limited.
but that he is some way limited either by the Law of God, or by the Rules of
nature, or of his own concessions and grants unto his people, or else by the
compact that he makes with them, if he be an elective King and so admitted
unto his Kingdom: there is no reason they should resist their King, for
transgressing the limitations of one kind more then the other: or if any, no
doubt but he that transcendeth the limits of God's Law, or goes against the
common rules of nature, ought rather to be resisted, then he that observes not
his own voluntary concessions: but themselves perceiving how peremptorily the
Apostle speaks against resistance of the Heathen Emperors that then ruled,
do confess that absolute Monarchs ought not to be resisted; (wherein also they
are mistaken, because the histories tell us, those Emperors were not so
absolute as our Kings, till the time of Vespasian, when the lex regia
transferred all the power of the People upon the Emperor, No Monarch ought to
be resisted.
Vlpian de constit. Principis; therefore indeed, no Monarch ought to be
resisted, whatsoever limitations he has granted unto his Subjects.

And the resisters of authority might understand, if their more malicious then
blind leaders would give them leave, that this virtue of obedience to the
supreme power makes good things unlawful, when we are forbidden to do them, as
the eating the forbidden tree was to Adam, and the holding up of the Arc, was
to Vzza: and it makes evil things to be good and lawful, when they are
commanded to be done, as the killing of Isaac (if he had done it) had been
commendable in Abraham, and the smiting of the Prophet was very laudable in him
that smote him, when the Prophet commanded him to do it: and therefore Adam and
Vzza were punished with death, because they did those lawful good things,
Rebels should well consider these things.
which they were forbidden to do; and the others were recompensed with
blessings, because they did and were ready to do those evil things, that they
were commanded to do, when as he that refused to smite the Prophet, 1 Reg.
20.38.
being commanded to do it, was destroyed by a Lion, because he did it not;
whereby you see, that things forbidden when they are commanded, and e contra,
cannot be omitted without sin.

Ob. Mandatum imperantis tollit peccatum obedientis. Aug. Sol.
You will say it is true, when it is done by God, whose injunction or
prohibition, his precept or his forbidding to do it, or not to do it, makes
all things lawful or unlawful.

I answer, that we cannot think our selves obedient to God, whilst we are
disobedient to him, whom God has commanded us to obey; and therefore, if we
will obey God, we must obey the King; because God has commanded us to obey
him; and being to obey him, non attendit verus obediens quale sit quod
praecipitur, sed hoc solo contentus quia praecipitur, he that is truly
obedient to him, whom God commanded us to obey, never regards, what it is
that is commanded (so it be not simply evil, for then as the Apostle says, it
is better to obey God then man, were he the greatest Monarch in the World) but
he considers, and is therewith satisfied, that it is commanded, and therefore
does it, says Saint Bernard, Bernard in l. de praecept. and dispensat.
in l. de praecept. and dispensat.

CHAP. XVI.
Shows the answer to some objections against the obeying of our Sovereign
Magistrate; all actions of three kinds; how our Consciences may be reformed; of
our passive obedience to the Magistrates; and of the Kings concessions, how to
be taken.

Sectaries and Rebels will object, that their conscience, which is vinculum,
accusator, testis and judex, their bond, their accuser, their witness and
their judge, against whom they can say nothing, and from whom they cannot
appeal, unless it be to a severer Judge, will not give them leave to obey, to
do many things, that the King requires to be done; and who can blame them for
obeying their conscience rather then any King?

reason, according to that measure of knowledge, which every man has, tells
us, what is good, and what is evil; then conscience concludes what is to be
done, and what not to be done; quia conscientia est applicatio notitiae nostrae
ad actum particularem, because our conscience is the application of our
knowledge to some particular act, Thom. 2. Sent. did. 14. part. 4.
says Aquinas: And this application of our knowledge to that act considers,

1. De praeteritis, of things past, whether such a thing be done, or not done,
Conscience a witness. Conscience a Judge.
and so our conscience is a witness that cannot err.

2. De praesentibus factis, of our present actions, whether the fact done be
good or evil, just or unjust, so our conscience is a judge according to the
measure of our knowledge.

3. De futuris faciendis, of future acts that are to be done, Conscience a
follower of reason. Reason obscured two ways. 1. Way. John. 16.2.
whether they ought to be done, or left undone.

But because our conscience springs from our reason, and our reason may be
clouded and obscured by a double error.

1. A false assumption, when we take those things to be good or true, which are
indeed evil or false, as they that think they do God good service, when they
kill his servants, even as the Rebels do at this very day, and that they
please God when they disobey their King.

2. A false application, or a false conclusion from a true assumption; as, 2.
Way. The Rebels offend both ways.
because I am commanded to love God above all things, therefore I am to hate
all things but God; or because, it is better to obey God then man; therefore I
must not obey the commands of any man.

So our conscience may be poisoned in like manner with the same errors; and
being so misguided, they ought not to bind us, but we ought rather to reform
them; for that, which truly should bind the conscience, What should bind our
conscience.
is not our judgment, but Gods precept, that either commands or forbids
such and such actions to be done, or not done.

And you know, that all actions are either, 1 good. 2. evil. 3. indifferent.
1. The good, God commands us to do them. All actions of three sorts.
2. The evil, he flatly forbids them to be done: and 3. The indifferent he
wholly leaves to the power of the Magistrate, to make them either lawful or
unlawful, good or bad, as he pleases.


And therefore, for the first two sorts of actions, because thy conscience has
Gods precept to direct thee, if thy reason, either through ignorance, Pride
blinds many men.
or the strength of thine own fancy, (which often happens to proud Spirits)
does not mislead thee, to call good evil, and evil good, it is safer for thee
to follow the dictamen of thine own conscience, then the command of the
greatest potentate; Act. 5.29.
for in all such cases, it is better to obey God then man.

But in all the other things, that are indifferent of themselves, the precept
of the King, or any other our lawful superior, We are too inquisitive of many
things
makes them to become necessary unto the Subject; because the command of the
superior Magistrate does bind more then the conscience of the inferior
Subject can do, for though the conscience, rightly guided by reason, is the
Judge of those things, which are either directly forbidden, or commanded, yet
in the other things, that are indifferent, the Magistrate is the more immediate
Judge under God, The Magistrate the immediate judge of indifferent.
which has given him power, either to command them to be done, or to forbid
them; and therefore the Subject, having the command of his King, (whom God
commands us to obey) for his warrant in things of this nature, either to do
such things, or to leave such things undone, his duty is not to examine the
reason of the command, but to perform what he sees commanded; for so S.
Augustine says, that although Julian was an Idolater, an Apostata, an
Infidel; yet, milites fideles servierunt imperatori infideli; but when it came
to the cause of Christ, they acknowledged none, but him that was in Heaven;
when he would have them to worship Idols, they preferred God before him; when
he said, August. in Psalm. 124. C. imperator. 11. q. 1.
lead forth your Armies, and go against such a Nation, they presently obeyed
him; they distinguished betwixt their eternal, and their temporal Lord, and
tamen subditi erant propter aeternum etiam domino temporali: and they never
examined the Justness of the war; because in all such cases, mandatum
imperantis tollit culpam servientis, Our reason and judgment misguided seven
ways. How our conscience may be reformed.
the fault must only rest upon the commander. And therefore, as our reason and
Judgment may be blinded in all actions, either with ignorance, negligence,
pride, inordinate affection, faintness, perplexity, or self-love, so may our
conscience too, when it erroniously concludes upon what our reason falsely
assumeth: and then, as I said before, our conscience is rather to be reformed
then obeyed, and if we be desirous, we may thus redress it.

1. From ignorance. 2 Chronicles 20.12
1. If it be of ignorance, let us say with Jehosophat, we know not what to do,
but our eyes are toward thee: and let us seek to them that can inform us, the
Orthodox not the Sectaries, which will rather corrupt us then direct us.

2. From negligence. John 3.1.
2. If it be of negligence, let us come without partiality or prejudice (as
Nicodemus did to Christ) to those that for knowledge are well able, and for
honesty are most willing, to instruct us.

3. From pride. 2 Cor. 10.18.
3. If it be of pride, let us pray to God for humility, and submit our selves
one to another, especially to them that have more learning then our selves, and
have that charge over us; for he that praises himself is not allowed, but he
whom the Lord praises; and singularity has been the original of all heresies
and not the least occasion of the troubles of these times, and the rebellion of
our Sectaries.

4 From in ordinate affection.
4. If it be from inordinate affection, quum id sanctum quod volumus, when every
one makes what he loves to be lawful, and his own ways to be just, let us
hearken to sound reason and prefer truth before our own affections; or
otherwise perit omne judicium, Seneca.
cum res transit in affectum, there can be no true judgment of things, when we
are transported with our partial affections.

5. From saintnesse.
5. If it be from faintness, let us be scrupulous where we have cause, lest we
should think it lawful to swallow a Camel, because we are able to strain a
gnat; and let us not be afraid, where no fear is, and think those things
sinful that are most lawful; A heavy judgment upon this Nation by mistaking
sins.
which is a heavy judgment of God upon the wicked, and has now lighted very
sore upon many of the Inhabitants of this Land, who think it Popery to say, God
bless you, and judge it Idolatry to see a Cross in Cheap Side.

6. From perplexity.
6. If it be of perplexity, when a man is close, as he conceives, betwixt two
sins; where he sees himself unable, though never so willing, to avoid both,
let him peccare in tutiorem partem, which though it takes not away the sin, yet
it will make the fault to be the less sin; as the casting away of the Corn,
which is the gift of God, and the sustenance of man's life, is an unthankful
abuse of Gods creature; Act. 27.38.
yet as S. Paul caused the same to be cast into the Sea for the safeguard of
their lives; so must we do the like, when occasion makes it necessary; as now,
rather to kill our enemies the Rebels, though we should think it to be ill,
then suffer them to wrong our King, and to destroy both Church and Kingdom;
When things are to be judged inevitable.
because that of two things, which we conceive evil, and are not both
evitable, the choice of the lesser, to avoid the greater, is not evil; but they
are then to be judged inevitable, when there is no apparent ordinary way to
avoid them, because that where counsel and advice do bear rule, we may not
presume of Gods extraordinary power without extraordinary warrant, says
judicious Mr. Hooker. Hooker Eccles. pol. l. 5. p. 15. 7. From too much
humility. Multos in summa pericula misit, venturi timor ipse mali. Lucan. l. 7.


7. If it be of too much humility, which is an error of less danger, yet by no
means to be fostered, lest by gathering strength it proves most pernicious,
they should pray to God to preserve them from too much fear; for though (as
Saint Gregory says) bonarum mentium est, ibi culpas agnoscere, ubi culpa non
est, ye (as I said before) it is a heavy Judgment, and a want of God's grace,
to be afraid where no fear is, and it makes men to commit many sins many times
for fear of sin.

And thus having rectified our conscience in the understanding of all these
things, we are bound by the commandment of God, to be obedient unto the
commands of our King; Act. 15.20.
for it is a paradox to say, Christians are free from the Laws of men; because
it was a humane law, touching things strangled and blood: and the Apostles do
exact our obedience unto humane Laws, Romans 13.1, 2. 1 Peter 2, 13.
even the Laws of Heathen and Idolatrous Emperors: and therefore, being bound
to obey them, they cannot be freed in conscience, from the Religion of them:
and so Dr. Whitaker says, that as the Laws of God must be simply obeyed,
without any difference of time, place, and circumstance; so must the Laws of
men be obeyed, as the circumstances do require; for example, he that is a
Roman, and lives at Rome, must obey the Roman Laws; and he says, that the
authority of the Magistrate, which is sacred and holy, cannot with any good
conscience be contemned; because it is the commandment of God, that we should
obey them; Whitaker contra Camp. p. 258.
and this (says he) does bind the conscience, when, (as the Apostle says) he
is to be obeyed for conscience sake.

But you will say, what if the King forbids me to do what God commands, high
Priest did to the Apostles; or commands me to do what God forbids, as
Julian did unto the Christians, and Nebuchadnezzar to the three children?

We have often answered, that in such a case, it is better to obey God then
man; Act. 5.25.
for it is sometimes lawful not to obey, but it is never lawful to resist.

What if he compells us by force and violence to do what God forbids us to do,
if he plays the Tyrant, violates our Laws, true Religion with dolatry and
superstition? may we not then, as our forefathers did heretofore unto
Chilperick King of France, and to Richard the second of this Kingdom, and
others, bridle them, and depose them too, if they will not be ruled by their
Great Counsel, the Parliament?

I answer, first, Non spectandum quid factum sit, sed quid fieri debuerit, Sol.
Heningus Arnisaeus de author. princi. in Pop.
we are not so much to regard what has been done, as what ought to have been
done, as Arnisaeus proves at large, and shows most excellently, with a full
answer to all the Articles, that were alleged against those Kings, how
unjustly they were handled, and deposed contrary to all right; and I wish that
book were translated into English. 2. I say, 2. Of our passive bedience.
that when our active obedience cannot be yielded, our passive obedience must
be used; for, were our King as Tyrannical as Nero, as Idolatrous as Manasses,
as wicked as Achab, and as profane as Julian; yet we may not resist, when as
Arnisaeus proves by many examples, Idem. cap. 3. p. 68.
that the Rebellion of Subjects against their King does overthrow the order of
nature; and Justinian says, quis est tantae autoritatis, ut nolentem principem
possit coactare? but in such a case, we must do as all the Saints did before
us: not as the Heathens, which thought them worthy of divine honor, Cicero pro
Milone.
which did kill a Tyrant, and said with Seneca, victima haud ulla amplior
Potest, Seneca in Hercul. sur.
magisque opima mactari Jovi
Quam Rex iniquus. --
But, as Christ himself suffered under Pontius Pilate, a most wicked
Magistrate, Christ and his Apostles suffered, but never resisted the lawful
Magistrate.
and registered in the breviary of our Faith, that we might never forget our
duty, rather to suffer, then to resist the authority that is from Heaven; and
as Saint Ambrose answered the Emperor, that would have his Church delivered to
the Arians, I shall never be willing to leave it; coactus repugnare non novi,
if I be compelled I have not learned to resist. I can grieve and weep and sigh,
and against the Arms and Gotish Soldiers, my tears are my weapons, for those
are the Bulwarks of the Priest, who in any other manner neither can, neither
ought he to resist: so must all Christians rather by suffering death, then by
resisting our King to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

But it is objected by our Sectaries, that His Majesty confesses, The Author of
the Treatise of Monarchy. p. 31.
there is a power Legally placed in the two houses, more then sufficient to
prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny.

The law provides that the king should not be circumvented and ^^ronged.
I answer, first, when it pleased the King of His grace, to restrain His own
power of making Laws, to the consent of Peers and Commons, that by this
Regulating of the same, it might be purged from all destructive exorbitan^es,
the very Law it self, being tender of the legitimate rights of the King, and
considering the Person of the Sovereign to be single, and his power
counterpoysed by the opposite wisdom of the two Houses, allowed him to swear
unto himself a body of Council of State, and Counselors at Law, and the Judges
also to advise him and inform him so, that as he should not do any wrong, by
reason of the restrayning Votes of the Houses, so he might not receive any
wrong by the incroachment of the Parliament upon his right: The Kings
concessions very large.
and the King, being driven away from his learned Counsel, and forced to make
the defense of his rights by writing, it is no wonder, if his concessions and
promises, as well in this point, as in other things, especially in that,
concerning the Act of excluding the Clergy, were more then was due to them, or
then he needed to grant, or then he ought to observe, being to the dishonor of
God, and the prejudice of his Church; when as nothing in Parliament, where the
wrong may be perpetual, should be extracted from him, but what he should well
consider of with the advice of his Counsel and what he should freely grant; and
whatsoever is otherwise done, is ill done, to the great disadvantage of the
King, and his Posterity, and the unjust enlarging of their power more then is
due unto them; yet

2. I say, if these words of His Majesty's be rightly weighed, they give no
color of resisting Tyranny by any forcible arms; but a^ Doctor Fern says
most truly of a Legal, D Fern in his reply to sever. treat. p. 32.
Moral, and Parliamentary restraint; for the wo^ds are, there is a power
legally placed in the Houses, that is, the Law has placed a power in them but
you shall never find any Law, that any King has granted, whereby himself might
be resisted and subdued by open force and violence: for as Roffensis says,
Roffensis de potest Papae 291. E^phanta Pythag l. De Regno apud Stobaeum. fol.
335.
Reges suo solius judicio reservavit Deus, qui stans in Synagoga deorum
dijudicat eos, God has reserved Kings to his own judgment: and the Heathen
man could say, as, Stobaeus testifies, primum Dei, deinde Regis est ut nulli
subriciatur, (...), first it is the privilege of God, next of the King, to be
subject unto none, because the Regal power properly is unaccountable to any
man, as Suidas says: and Josephus says, that the holiest men, that ever were
among the Hebrews (called essaei, or esseni, that is the true practisers of the
Law of God,) maintained, that sovereign Princes, whatsoever they were, ought
to be inviolable to their Subjects: A principle tenet of the Essaei. And some
think, that the Commonwealth is happier under a Tyrant, that will keep them,
in awe, then under too mild a Prince, upon whose clemency, they will presume to
Rebel. Jer. 27.5, 6. A memorable place against resisting Tyrants.
for they saw there was scarce any thing more usual in holy Scripture, then the
prohibition of resistance, or refusal of obedience to the Prince, whether he
were Jew, or Pagan, mild or tyrannical, good or bad: as to instance one place
for all, where the Lord says, I have made the earth, the man, and the beast
that are upon the ground, by my great power, and have given it to whom it
seemed meet unto me; and now I have given all those Lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my servant, (and he was both a Heathen, an
Idolater, and a mighty Tyrant) and all Nations shall serve him and his son, and
his sons son; and it shall come to pass, that the Nation and Kingdom, which
will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon and that will not
put their necks under the yoke of the King of Babylon, that Nation will I
punish (says the Lord) with the Sword, and with the Famine, and with the
Pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hands: therefore hearken not ye
unto your Prophets, nor to your Diviners, -- which speak unto you, saying, you
shall not serve the King of Babylon, for they prophesy a lie unto you; which he
repeateth again and again, they prophesy a lie unto you, that you should
perish; and may not I apply these words to our very time? God says I have
given this Kingdom unto King Charles (which is a mild, just and most pious
king) and they that will say, nolumus hunc regnare super nos, I will destroy
them by his hand; therefore, o ye seduced Londoners, believe not your false
Prophets, nay, hearken not to your diuiners, your Anabaptists and Brownists
that preach lies, and lies upon lies, unto you, that you should perish; for God
has not sent them, though they multiply their lies in his name: therefore why
will you dye, why will you destroy your selves, and your Posterity, by refusing
to submit your selves to mine ordinance? and what should God say more unto you
to hinder your destruction? and it was concluded by a whole Council, that, si
quis potestati regia, Council. Meldens. apud Roffen. l. 2. c. 5. de potest. papa.
quae non est (test Apostolo) nisi a Deo, contumaci and afflato spiritu
obtemperare irrefragabiliter nolnerit, anathematizetur. Whosoever resists the
Kings Power, and with a proud spirit will not obey him, let him be accursed.

But then you will say, this is strange doctrine, that wholly takes away the
liberty of the Subject, if they may not resist regal tyranny.

I think there is no good Subject, Sovereign that will speak against a just
and lawful liberty, when it is a far greater honor unto any king, to rule over
free and gentile Subjects, then over base and turkish slaves; but as under the
shadow and pretense of Christian liberty, many carnal men have rooted out of
their hearts all Christianity; Many evils do lurk under fair shows.
so many Rebellious and aspiring minds have, under these colorable titles of
the liberty of the Subjects and suppressing tyranny, shaked of the yoke of all
true Obedience, and dashed the rights of government all to pieces; therefore,
as the law of God and the rules of his own conscience, should keep every
Christian King from exercising any unjust tyranny over his Subjects; so, if men
will transcend the rules of true obedience, the Kings Power and authority
should keep them from transgressing the limits of their just liberty: but this
unlawfulness of resisting our lawful King. I have fully proved in my Grand
Rebellion, and it is so excellently well done by many others, that I shall but
acta agere, to say any more of it.

CHAP. XVII.
Shows how tribute is due to the King; for six special reasons to be paid;
the condition of a lawful tribute; that we should not be niggards to assist the
King; that we should defend the Kings Person; the wealth and Pride of London,
the cause of all the miseries of this Kingdom; and how we ought to pray for
our King.

4. TRibute is another right and part of that honor, which we owe unto our
King. Negotia enim infinita sustinet, The great charge of Princes.
equabile jus omnibus administrat, periculum a republica, cum necessitas
postulat, armis and virtute propulsat, bonis praemia pro dignitate constituit,
improbos suppliciorum acerbitate coercet, patriam denique universam, and ab
externis hostibus and ab intestinis fraudibus tutam vigilantia sua praestat:
haec quidem munera aut opere tuetur, aut quoties opus fuerit, tuenda suscipit;
qui autem existimat haec tam multa munera sint maximis sumptibus sustineri
posse, mentis expers est, atque vitae communis ignarus: and idcirco hoc, quod
and communi more receptum est, ut reges populi sumptibus alantur, non est
humano tantum jure, sed etiam diuino vallatum: Osorius de rebus Emanuel. lib.
12 p. 386.
says eloquent Osorius. For he undergoeth infinite affairs; he administreth
equal right to all his people; he expels and keeps away from the
Commonwealth all dangers, when necessity requires, both with arms and
prowess,; he appoints rewards to the good and faithful according to their
deserts; he restrains the wi^ked with the sharpness and severity of
punishments; and he preserves his Country and Kingdom safe by his care and
watchfulness, both from Foreign foes and intestine frauds; and these offices
he discharges indeed, and undertaketh takes to discharge them as often as any
need requires; And he that thinks that all these things, so many and so
great affairs, can be discharged without g eat cest and charge; is void of
understanding and ignorant of the common course of life; and therefore this
thing, which is received by a common custom, that Kings should be assisted, and
their royalty maintained, by the public charge of the people, is not only
allowed by humane law, but is also confirmed by the divine right.

Men should therefore consider that the occasions of Kings are very great;
abroad, for intelligence, and correspondency with Foreign States, that we may
reap the fruit of other Nations, vent our own commodities to our best
advantage, and be guarded, secured, and preserved from all our outward enemies;
and at home, to support a due State answerable to his place, to maintain the
public justice and judgments of the whole Kingdom, and an hundred such like
occasions, that every private man cannot perceive; and think you that these
things can be done without means, without money? If you still pour out and not
pour in, your bottle will be soon empty, and the Ocean sea would be soon dried
up, if the Rivers did not still supply the same: and therefore not only
Deioces, that I speak of before, when he was elected King of the Medes, caused
them to build him a most stately Palace, and the famous City of Ecbatana, and
to give him a goodly band of select men for the safeguard of his Person, and to
provide all other things fitting for the Majesty of a King, and all the other
Kings of the Gentiles did the like, as well they might, if it be true, that
some of them thought, Quicquid habet locuples, quicquid custodit avarus,
Gunterus.
Jure quidem nostrum est, populo concedimus usum.
But also Solomon, 1 Reg. 12.4. Tertul. to 3. de pudicit. c. 9. Pamel. in
Tertul.
and all the rest of the Kings of Israel required no small aid and tribute from
their Subjects; for though Tertullian out of Deuteronomy. 23.17. reads it, there shall
not be (...), vectigal pendens, a payer of tribute of the sons Israel; yet
Pamelius well observes it, that these words are not in the original, but are
taken by him out of the septuagint, which also says not of the sons, but
(...), of the daughters of Israel, that is, ex impudicitia and lupanaribus, for
their dishonesty, as it is said in the next verse, that the hire of a whore and
the price of a dog, Deuteronomy. 23.18. Aug. de Civit. dei l. 10. c. 9.
are an abomination unto the Lord, and so S. Augustine uses the word Teletae,
for those unchaste sacrifices wherewith such women did oblige themselves: and
so does Theodoret likewise: but that the Jews paid tribute, it is manifest our
of 1 Samuel 17.24. where this reward is promised to him that killed Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.25. in vulgata editione. 2. reg. 11.28.
that his father's house should be absque tributo, free from all tribute in
Israel, therefore certainly they paid tribute, and to make it yet more plain,
Solomon appointed Jeroboam, super tributa universae domus Joseph, says the
vulgar latin, over all the charge or burden of the house of Joseph, (that is,
of the tribe of Ephraim and Manasses) as our translation reads it: Barrad to 2.
l. 5. c. 21. p. 340.
and he appointed Adoniram the Son of Abda over the tribute, 1. Reg. 4.6.

Yea, though the Jews were the people of God, and thought themselves free, and
no ways obliged to be taxed by foreign Princes, that were Ethnicks: yet after
Pompey took their City, Josephus. l. 15. c. 18.
they paid tribute to the Romans; and our Savior bids us nor only to obey,
but also to render unto Caesar what is Caesar's, that is, (not determining the
quota pars, how much, as he does the tenth unto the Priest) but indefinitely,
some part of our goods, for subsidies, imposts, aids, loanes, or call it by
what name you will; and rather then himself would omit this duty, though he
never wrought any other miracle about money; yet herein, when he had never a
penny, Barrad. to 2. l. 10. c. 32. p. 317.
he would create money in the mouth of a fish, as S. Hierom and the interlin.
gloss do think, and command the fish to pay tribute both for himself and his
Apostle. Therefore we should render unto Caesar what is Caesar's: that is,
(...), which the Greeks take promiscuously, though the Civilians distinguish
them, de solo and fundo, de bonis mobilibus, and de mercibus, of our grounds,
of our goods, of our merchandise, we ought to pay subsidies, aid, and tribute
unto our King; and that not sparingly, nor by way of benevolence, as if it were
in our power to do it, or not to do it, sed ex debito, but as his due, jure
divino, and regula justitiae, as his proper importance annexed unto his Crown;
for I take it infallibly true, which Suarez says, Suarez. de leg. l. 5. c. 17.
n. 3. fol. 316. Tribute due to the King.
acceptationem populi non esse conditionem necessariam tributi ex vi juris
naturalis aut gentium, neque ex jure communi: quia obligatio pendendi tributum;
it a naturalis est principi and per se orta ex ratione justitiae, ut non possit
quis excusari propter apparentem injustitiam vel nimium gravamen; the consent
of the people is not any necessary condition of tribute; because the obligation
of paying it, is so natural, springing out of the reason of justice, that none
can be excused for any apparent injustice or grievance: and therefore the
Parliaments, that are the highest representations of any Kingdom, do not
contribute any right unto Kings to challenge tribute, but do determine the
quota pars, and to further the more equal imposing and collecting of that,
which is due unto Kings by natural and original justice, as a part of that
proper inheritance which is annexed unto their Crowns.

And therefore, our Savior does not say, give unto Caesar, but (...), the same
word which S. Paul uses, Matthew. 22. Romans 13. Latimer in Mat. 22.21.
when he bids us to pay our debts, and to owe nothing to any man, saying,
(...), pay to every man that which you owe: and Father Latimer says, if we
deny him tribute, custom, subsidy, tallage, taxes, and the like aid and
support, we are no better then Thieves, and steal the kings dues from him;
Navar. apud Suarez. de legibus sol. 300. fol. 311.
because the Law testifies tributa esse maxim naturalia, and prae^se far
justitiam, quia exiguntur de rebus propriis: and Suarez says, penditur
tributum ad sustentationen. principis, and ad satisfaciendum naturali
obligationi in dando stipendium justum laborauti in nostram utilitatem; tribute
is most natural and just to be paid to the king for our own good: therefore
Christ pleading for the right of Caesar, that was a Tyrant, says not, give
unto him, quia petit, because he demands it, but pay unto him, quae illius
sunt, the things that are his, and are due unto him, even as due as the
hirelings wages, which we are commanded not to detain for one night; because
this is a part of that reward and wages, Deuteronomy. 24.15.
which God allows him for all his pains and cares, that he takes to see
Justice administered in the time of Peace, and to protect us from our enemies in
the time of War; which makes the life of kings to be but a kind of splendid
misery, wearing many times, with Christ, a Crown of Thorns, a Crown full of
cares, while we lap our heads in beds of down; and therefore it is not only
undutifulnesse to deny him, or unthankefulnesse, not to requite the great good
that he does unto us, but it is also a great injustice, (especially if we
consider that as Ocham says, Qui est dominus aliquarum personarum, est Dominus
rerum ad casdem personas spectantium; omnia quae sunt in regno, sunt regis
quoud potestatem utendi eis pro bono communi, Ocha. tract. 2. l. 2. c. 22. and
25.) to detain that right from him, which God commands us to pay unto him, and
that indeed for our own good; as Menenius Agrippa most wittily showed unto the
People of Rome when they murmured and mutined for these taxes, that whatsoever
the stomach received, either from the hand or mouth, it was all for the benefit
of the whole body; so whatsoever the King receives from the People, it is for
the benefit of the people, and it is like the waters that the Sea receives
from the Rivers, which is visibly seen passing into the Ocean, but invisibly
runs through the veins of the earth, into the Rivers again; so does all
that the King receives from the People, return some way or other unto the
People again.

And there be six special reasons why, or to what end we should pay these dues
unto the King.

Six reasons for which we pay Tribute unto the king.
1. For the Honor of his Majesty. 2. For the security of his Person. 3. For the
protection of his Kingdom. 4. For the succor of his confederates. 5. For the
securing of our 1. Goods. 2. Estates. 3. Lives.
6. For the propagating of the Gospel, and defense of our Religion.
But for the further clearing of this point, you must know that every just and
Lawful tribute must have these three essential conditions, that are
proprietates constitutivae.

Three conditions of every lawful Tribute.
1. Legitima potestas, that is, the Kings power to require it. 2. Justa causa,
an urgent necessity, or need of it. 3. Debita portio, a due proportion,
according to the Kings necessities, and the peoples abilities, that he be not
left in need, nor the people overcharged. For,
As the Subjects are thus bound to supply the necessities of their King, so the
King is not to over-charge his Subjects; for the King should be the Shepherd
of his People, as David calls himself, and Homer terms all good Kings, and
not the devourer of his people, Kings should not over-charge their Subjects.
as Achilles calls Agamemnon for the unreasonable taxes that he laid upon
them; therefore good Kings have been very sparing in this point; for Darius,
inquiring of the Governors of his Provinces, whether the tributes imposed upon
them were not too excessive, and they answering, that they thought them very
moderate, he commanded that they should raise but the one half thereof, A
worthy speech of Lewis 9.
(which had Rehoboam bin so wise to do, he had not lost ten parts of his
Kingdom;) and Lewis the ninth of France, which they say was the first that
raised a tax in that Kingdom, directing his speech to his Son Philip, and
causing the words to be left in his Testament, which is yet to be sound
Registered in the chamber of accounts, said, be devout in the service of God,
have a pitiful heart toward the poor, and comfort them with thy good deeds,
observe the good Laws of thy Kingdom, take no taxes nor benevolences of thy
Subjects, unless urgent necessity, and evident commodity force thee to it, and
then upon a just cause, and not usually; if thou do otherwise, thou shall
not be accounted a king, King James his golden apothegme, Basilicon doron. l.
2. p. 99.
but a Tyrant; and it is one of the gracious apothegmes of our late noble and
never to be forgotten Sovereign, worthy to be written in in letters of gold,
where speaking to his son, he says, enrich not your self with exactions from
your Subjects, but think the riches of your Subjects, your best Treasures: and
Artaxerxes said, it was a great deal more seemlier for the Majesty of a King,
to give, then to take by polling, to cloth, then to uncloath, which belongs
to Thieves, not to Princes, unless they will stain their names: for as
Apollonius says, that gold, which is taken by Tyranny, is far baser then any
iron; because it is wetted with the tears of the poor Subjects: and therefore
Peter de la Primauday, says, they are unworthy of the title of Prince, that
lending their ears to such as invent new ways to get monyes from their
Subjects, and having against all humanity, Pet. de la Primauday: cap. 60. p.
670.
spoiled them of their goods, do either miserably consume them upon their
pleasures, or prodigally bestow them upon undeserving flatterers, that fat
themselves by the overthrow of others.

And therefore it behooves all kings to consider, that all men's goods are
theirs only quoad tuitionem, and defensionem, and their Subjects, quoad
possessionem and proprietatem; as you may see, where Joseph bought all the Land
of the Egyptians for king Pharaoh, Genesis 47.46.
and then let it them again in Fee-farme, to give the King the fifth part of
the fruit of it; and as you may conclude it from the eighth Commandment, which
says, as well to the King as to the subject, thou shall not steal; for if all
be his, he cannot be said to steal it; and if this precept concerns not kings,
then have they but nine Commandments; and therefore, be wise, O ye Kings, and
remember what Saint Augustine says, remota justitia quid sunt Regna nisi
Latrocinia? for though you may justly demand Tribute and Taxes, yet you must
have just occasions to use them, and you must take but a just proportion, or
else they may come unjustly unto you.

But who shall be the Judges of the Kings just occasions? in many kingdoms his
conscience; as the Roman Consuls imposed what taxes they thought meet upon the
Provinces they subdued; so Marcus Antonius being in Asia doubled their Tax, and
laid a second charge upon the People, which was very unreasonable, as Hebreas
told him, saying, The saying of Hebreas to M. Antonius.
if thou will have power to lay upon us two taxes in one year, thou must have
also power to give us two summers, and Autumns, two Harvests, and two Vintages:
and yet if our king do thus unreasonably tax us with more then we are able to
bear, we may reason with him, as Hebreas did with Mark Antony, refel his
arguments, Kings herein not to be resisted.
and repel his oppressions according to the course of Law, but we may not in
any case with the Sword make any resistance, either actual or habitual, against
him.

Kings occasions, and we know not his necessities: and therefore we cannot
determine what is just and unjust.

superior demanded without right, yet the inferior not only may rightly render
it without offense unto his conscience, but also ought to pay it without
resistance unto the Magistrate: for if the Jews were not free: and the Romans
had no right to demand Tribute of them, yet by our Saviors question unto Saint
Peter, and his replication unto the Apostles answer, it is apparent, that our
Savior was most free, and was no way bound to pay any thing unto the Romans,
not only qua Deus, as Hesselius says, Hesselius in Matthew. 18. Barrad. to. 2.
l. 19. c. 32.
but also as he was a man, as Barradius more truly proves: yet lest he should
offend them, as he says, tributum solvit quia voluit, he does most willingly
discharge it: to teach us, that we may and ought justly and without any scruple
of conscience pay that, which may be unjustly demanded: and the best Authors,
that I have read, are of the same judgment: we have no other remedy but to cry
to God, who can judge them for their injustice: and non caret modis, Greg.
Tholos. l. 26. de repub. c. 5. n. 25.
quibus possit, quando voluerit, hujusmodi principes tollere vel emendare.

But, though in most of the Eastern Countries, the Kings imposed upon their
Subjects, what taxes and tributes pleased themselves, as Augustus taxed all the
world, as much as he would, at his own pleasure, and Charles the fifth (says
Osorius) praeter pecunias quibus illum Hispani juverant, immania tributae
populis imperavit, besides those monyes, wherewith the Spaniard assisted him,
Osor. de rebus Emanuel l. 12. p. 386. What the Kings of England promised to
their Subjects.
laid most heavy taxes upon the people; which is indeed a branch of the
absolute right of Kings, and was originally practiced by most of them; yet here
with us, our Kings out of grace and favor unto their people granted such a
privilege unto their Subjects, and divested themselves of this right, to lay
no impositions or taxes upon their Subjects, without the consent of their three
States convened in the two Houses of Parliament; and this Princely concession,
being truly observed, may procure a great deal of love and peace unto the
king, and as much tranquillity and happiness unto the people. Neither do I
think that he loves his King, but am sure that he hates his Country, that
would persuade him for all the wealth of the kingdom, to violate his own grant
and faith herein; That we should not be niggards to assist our king.
but, as our king granted this favor, to impose no taxes without the consent
of his Parliament; so his Parliament in all duty, ought always with all
thankfulness, to acknowledge this special grace, and in requital thereof most
fully to supply his wants and support his necessities, whenever he acquaints
them therewith.

And therefore we ought not to be like those hide-bound Sectaries, and
close-fisted Puritans and Brownists, that are so miserably covetous, and
extreme niggards, that when the king makes known his wants and demands his due,
(for it is still his due, though he granted not to cesse it without their
consent) for his royal supportation and the safety of his kingdom, they will
find a hundred excuses to deny him, but never a penny to give him out of all
their wealth; and this is the cause of our misery, and may prove as fatal to
us, as it has been to the Constantinopolitans; whose churlishness and
niggardliness toward their Emperor, was the chiefest cause of the loss of
that great Empire and to make the Turk sit in Christ his Chair, to have
Mahomet adored where the Gospel was formerly published by as many famous
Fathers, as now England has Preachers; How Constant. was lost, and what the
Turk then said.
for the Emperor foreseeing the Siege, made many motions for contributions
toward the repairing of the Walls, and continue the military charge; but the
Subjects drew back, and pleaded want, until it was too late, and the City lost;
for though the enemy having a long time besieged it, was intended to give over
the Siege, and to be gone; yet tidings and intelligence being given him, that
the Soldiers within the Town, were grown very thin and discontented for want
of their pay, the enemy returned and in a short space took the City: and there
found in private men's hands, such infinite store of gold and all manner of
treasure, (the hundred part whereof would have paid all the Soldiers, kept out
the enemy, and preserved them all) that the Turk seeing the baseness of the
Citizens, so foolishly hiding their wealth, and denying just aid unto their
Emperor, stood amazed, and lifting up his hands to heaven, lamented their
folly, and asked what they meant, that having such a store of wealth, they
would suffer themselves to be thus destroyed, only for want of wit or of grace
to use it? and thence grew the Proverb among the Turks unto this day, when one
becomes very rich, you have been at the Siege of Constantinople. And I p ay
God it may not so fall out with us for our covetousness, that we prove not
Lucans speech to be true: omnia dat, qui just a negat, to lose all unjustly
unto strangers, unto rebels, because we deny what is just unto our King. But I
will conclude this point with the Poet, Astra Deo n^l majus habent, nil Caesare
terra,
Sic Caesar terras, ut Deus astra regit.
Imperium regis Caesar, Deus astra gubernat,
Caesar honor suo dignus, amore Deus.
Dignus amore Deus, dignus quoque Caesar honor est,
Alter enim terras, alter and astra regit.
Cum Deus in caelis, Caesar regat omnia terris,
Censum Caesaribus solvite, vota Deo.


5. Defense of the kings person.
5. Defense of his Person is another princ^pal part of that honor, which we owe
unto our King. And the very heathens did think their lives well bestowed for
their Gods, their family, and the father of the Country; how much more willing
should the Christians be, to hazard their lives in defense of their King, 2 Samuel 21.17. Lament. 2.4. Ps. 78.71.72. vide Hos. 3.4. c. 10.3. and Lament. 2.9.
which is, quasi unus e december millibus, worth ten thousands of us, being, as
the Scripture terms him, the Light of Israel, and the breath of our nostrils,
the head of his Subjects, the shepherd and Pastor of the people, and as the
word (...) imports, (...), the foundation of the people without which they
must all fall unto the ground; for where there is no governor, all must
perish, and there will be no Priest, no Prince, no Religion, no Nobility, no
good, 1 John 3.16.
but anarchy and confusion* and the destruction of all things. And if we ought
to lay down our lives for the brethren, as S. John says, how much rather ought
we to do it for our King? it is recorded in our annals, to his eternal praise,
Nulla gent ita sollicita est circa regem suum, sicut apes, unde rege incolumi
omnibus men's una est, and quando nequit volare, seri ipsum turba apum; and si
moritur, moriuntur and ipsae.
that Sir Hubert Syncler at the Seige of Bridge-north, seeing an arrow that was
shot at his Master, King Henry the second, stepped betwixt the shaft and his
Sovereign, and receiving the arrow into his body, was therewith shot through to
death, that he might preserve the life of his King, which otherwise had been
slain in his stead. So Turnbull had his name for killing a Bull, that had
otherwise slain one of the Kings of Scotland; and we read that when David was
assailed by a mighty Giant, named Ishibibenob, which was of the sons of Rapha,
the head of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass, Abishai the
son of Zervia, with the danger of his own life, runs in, succors the king,
and kills the Philistim. 2 Samuel 21.17. and so all other good Subjects have had
a special care to preserve the lives of their Kings, whom they loved better
then their own Parents, yea, then their wives or children, or their own lives,
as it appears by the foresaid examples, and abundance of the like, that you
may find in the Histories of the Heathens: for they had not learnt the new
divinity of our time, to destroy the King for the good of his Subjects, but
they thought, as it is most true, that salus regis est salus populi, and they
believed, as all good Christians do, that Vna salus nobis, nullam sperare salut
em,
Principe calcato, sublato jure coronae;
because as S. Chrysostom says, (...), Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 2.2. Aug. to. 9.
tract. 6. in Johan.
their safety is our security, and as S. August. says, si tollis jura
Imperatorum, quis audet dicere, mea est illa villa, if you take away the
government of Kings, who dares say, haec mea sunt, this or that is mine, as
now, God knows, since these Rebels have abused our King, we can say nothing is
our own; our houses, goods, lives and liberties, are at the disposing of them
that are strongest; what then shall we say of those Subjects that strive with
all their wit, wealth and strength to destroy their King? and if you ask me
why? I must answer, as Aristides was banished out of Athens, justus, quia
justus, so must our King be killed, if these men could do it with their Cannon
Bullets, because he is too good to reign over them; who deserved not a pious
David, nor a wise Solomon to rule over them, but a foolish Rehoboam, Ps. 2.9.
that would whip them with Scorpions, or such a one as would rule them with a
rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel: for had our King
been, not Caesar Augustus, but Augustus Severus, so severe as Henry 8. or some
other more unmercifull Princes, these Rebels durst as well eat their own
flesh, as thus to devour the flesh and bones of the Kings loyal Subjects, and
seek the death of the King himself.

For it is most certain of the vulgar people, and of ill bred natures, that
ungentes pungunt, pungentes molliter ungunt; and therefore though the manifold
offers of Peace, and the unparalled promising of Pardons to most obstinate
Rebels, do infinitely commend the piety, and declare the mildness of a most
clement Prince, and the refusal thereof betray the ungrateful stubbornness
of graceless Subjects to all posterity; yet, when the hairy scalpe of such as
still go on in their wickedness, will not so easily be rubbed off, I should say
to every King, put your trust in Gods assistance; and as the Holy Ghost says
to the King of Kings, Psalm. 45.3.
Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty; ride on with
thine honor, and let thy right hand teach thee terrible things: and those
thine enemies that would not thou should reign over them, cause them to be
brought, and let them be slain before thee, so shall thou be a ruler in the
midst of thine enemies; Luke 19, 27.
and some think that it were but just, if our King, though he be never so
loath, should now at last turn the leaf, and follow the example of God
himself, (who when his children regard not his grace, and set at naught all his
counsels, will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their destruction comes
as a whirle-winde) and should make London as Jerusalem, and as other the like
rebellious Cities, Prove. 1.16, 17.
(that the Lord in his just revenge of their iniquity has suffered to be
destroyed, The wealth and pride of the City of London have brought this misery
and calamity upon all the kingdom of England.
and to be made an heap of stones:) because the Londoners have showed
themselves in many things worse then the Jews, and for Rebellion have justified
all the Cities of the world: or if the King will not do this, though I dare not
say of them, as Antoninus, after he had heard the confession of a miserable
covetous wretch, said unto him, Deus misereatur tui, si vult, and condonet tibi
peccata tua, quod non credo and perducat te in vitam eternam, quod est
impossible; yet seeing their sins are so intolerable among men, and so
abominable in the sight of God, it is much feared, that (...), after their
hard hearts, Romans 2.5.
which cannot repent, they will still proceed to heap upon themselves the
heavy wrath of God, till there be no remedy to preserve them from utter ruin
and destruction; though from my heart I wish them more grace, and pray to
Almighty God, that -- Nullum sit in omine pondus; Or if this cannot be, that
they may escape that damnation, which the Apostle threatens to all them that
resist this ordinance of God. Romans 13.2. 6. Prayers for the Kings.


6. The last but not the least part of that honor which is due to our King, is
our prayers to God for him and as the other duty was to be performed by the
practice of all good Subjects; Aenisaeus c 2. p. 38

Tertul ad Scap. Ita Marius. Aurelius Christianorum militum orationibus ad Deum
factis, imbres and victoriam in expeditione Germanica impetra^it.


so is this to be observed by the precept of the Apostle, who though the Kings
were Ethnicks and Tyrants, yet commanded us to pray for them and that you may
know what manner of prayer the Christians made for their persecuting Kings.
Tertullian that lived under the Emperor Severus, says in behalf of the
Church, Omnibus Imperatoribus precamur vitam prolixam, imperium securum, domum
tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum, and
quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt; and I fear me, our Rebels pray for
none of these things to a most Christian King: Nam orare pro aliquo and in
exitium ejus machinari, annon haec sunt sibi contraria? for to pray for ones
health and long life, and to do our best to work his destruction. Non been
convenient. -- can never proceed from a true heart, but as the uncharitable
Papists prayed for the success of the Gunpowder Plot (which was a Treason
sine exemplo, quia crudelis sine modo) saying Gentem auferto perfidam
Credentium de finibus,
Vt Christo preces debitas
Persolvamus alacriter.
So the practice of these Rebels makes us believe their prayer is, Regem
auferto perfidum
Credentium de finibus, etc. I am ashamed to set down how the factious and
malicious Preachers of the reb^llious Cities, either neglect to pray at all, or
pray most seditiously and unchristianly for their own Liege Lord, and gracious
King: and therefore the curse of Judas lights upon them, that their prayer is
turned into sin, which should make them pray, that Judas his end should not
fall unto them.



But we that desire to follow the Apostles Precept, considering the greatness
of his cares and charge tha^ he does undergo, and the multitude of dangers that
he is liable to, will most heart^ly pray to God both in our Morning and our
Evening Prayers, both at our sitting and at our rising from our meat, Vt vivat
Rex, exurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimici; that God would give his Angels
charge over him to preserve him in all his ways, that he dash not his foot
against a stone: that his enemies may be clothed with shame, and that he may
flourish as the Lilly, that he may reign long and happily here, and reign for
ever in Heaven: this shall be my prayer for ever.

CHAP. XVIII.
The persons that ought to honor the King; and the recapitulation of one and
twenty Wickednesses of the Rebels, and the faction of the pretended Parliament.

3 The persons that must honor the King.
3. HAving seen the Person that is to be honored, and the honor that is due
unto him, we are now to consider in the last place, who are to honor him,
included in this word (...), honor ye him; which being unlimited and
indefinite, is equivalent to an universal; and so Saint Paul does more plainly
express it, Romans 13.1.
saying, (...), Let every soul be ^ubject to the higher powers; which is an
Hebrew Ideome, or Synecdochical speech, s gnifying the whole man; the word
(...) being usually taken in Scripture pro toto composito, for the whole man
composed of body and soul, as where it is said, Genesis 46.62^27. Act. 2.
that Jacob went down into Egypt with 70 souls, and S. Peter by one Sermon
converted 3000 souls: and the abstract word (...) is here taken (...), to show
that our subjection, obedience, and honor, which we are to ascribe unto our
King, must be not as hypocrites render it in show, from the ^eeth outwa d, but
really and indeed, ex animo, from our souls and the bottom of our h^arts, as
Aquinas glosseth it: and the concrete (...) added unto it, makes it the more
energetical, to show that all mortal men, none excepted, are ob iged, to do
this honor, and to yield this subjection unto their King: for, seeing every
man, both spiritual and temporal; and every sex, both man and woman; and every
degree of men, young and old, rich and poor, one with another, has an immortal
soul, as well as a mortal body, it must needs follow, that all, cujuscunque
gradus, sexus, and conditionis, are obliged both in soul and body to honor
and obey their King.

And yet it is strange to see how many men can exempt themselves and grant a
dispensation unto their souls for the performance of this duty; The Pope and
his Clergy would be freed from the subjection of Kings.
for the Pope will be freed, because he has a power above all powers, to
depose Kings and to dispose of their Kingdoms at his pleasure: and the Popish
Clergy will perform no duty unto their King, because their Function is
spiritual: but to all these I may truly say, as our savior does to the lewd
servant, ex ore tuo, out of the Fathers whom they acknowledge, and out of their
own Authors they are confuted, for Saint Chrysostom says, that whether he be
an Apostle, or Evangelist, or Prophet, Seu quisquis tandem fuerit, or whosoever
else he be, Pope, Cardinal, or Deacon, he is commanded to be subject to the
higher power: and that you may see what power he means, he points out the
same by the symbol, that is, of him that carries the sword, which you know
must be the secular Prince, and not the spiritual Pope: and so not only
Euthym. Theophylact Oecumenius, and other Greek Commentators do avouch, but
also those Epistles, which are recorded by Binius, and quoted by the Bishop of
Durham, as Leo 1. ep. 26. and 35. Simplicius 1. ep. 4. Felix 3. ep. 2.
Anastasius 1. ep. 78. Pelagius 1. ep. 16. Martinus 1. ep. 3. Agatho 1. ep. ad
Herac. Hadrian 1. ep. ad Constant. do make this most manifest unto us: and
therefore Espencaeus, convinced by such a cloud of witnesses, confesses very
honestly, that the Apostle here, Espenc in Tit. 3. 1. Digres. 10. p. 5. 13.
Paris. 1568. The wickednesses of the pretended Parliament showed by their
actions.
Docet omnes credentes mundi potestatibus esse subjectos, nempe, sive
Apostolus, sive Evangelista, etc. ut tenet Chrysostom. Euthym. and qui non,
Graeci?

And as the Popelings will be free, so the Presbyterians, and the faction of
this Parliament will be as free as they: and (because every wickedness
labors to exceed that which preceeded) these do not agree with the
Catholics (as Herod and Pilate did, to crucify Christ) in the same
conclusion and tenet of exemption, but they will go a note beyond Ela, and
surmount both Jesuit and Pope; and therefore they not only dishonor and
disobey their King, but they have violated and incroached upon all his rights,
and assumed the same into their own hands; for, to recapitulate some of their
choycest wickednesses.

Rome and the Jesuits teach, in Aphorismis confessariorum, ex Doctorum
sententiis collectis, p. 249. that Rex potest per rempublicam privari ob
tyrannidem, and si non faciat officium suum, and cum est causa aliqua justa and
eligi alius a majore part populi: which falsehood their own Divines confute,
when Royard says, Rege constituto, non potest populus jugum subjectionis
repellere: so these men maintain that diabolical tenet, that the Regal power is
primarily in the collective body, and derived to the king cumulative, not
privatiue; and therefore upon the kings neglect or maladministration, it
comes back again to the collective body, in whom it resideth suppletive, to
discharge the royal duty when the king fails to do the same; and then the
king so falling from his right, they may refuse obedience, and if they see
cause (which they can soon do) they may depose him from his office; which
impudent falsehood I have fully confuted in this Treatise.

Regal Majesty is a humane creature, or the ordinance of men primarily, and
therefore may be deposed by men; when as Cunerus could say, Sive electione,
sive postulatione, vel successione, vel belli jure princeps fiat, principi
tamen facto divinitus potestas adest: and therefore they have no power to take
away that which God has given him.

Nadab and Abihu adventured to offer strange fire upon Gods Altar, and with
Vzza to lay their profane hands upon Gods holy Arc; they have rejected the
Laws that the King with the advice and consultation of all his learned Clergy
has made, Though now I reckon not this among their wickednesses.
and they themselves sit in Moses chair, and have undertaken to reform the
Church, to make Laws, and compose Articles of our faith, with the advice of a
few factious men, that were never esteemed otherwise then faex Cleri, not
wo^^hy to be the Curates of those worthy Divines, whose feet they hurt in the
stocks, (...) the iron into their souls.

How they persecute the Bishops, and the best of the Clergy.
4. They have cast out all the Bishops, and all the faithful Ministers of
Christ out of all offices, that might further the Gospel, and administer
justice unto the people; they do rob them of their me^nes, and count sacrilege
to be no sin; and in very deed, they have persecuted the worthiest Clergy, in
many particulars, far worse then ever Julian, that wicked Apostata, did; the
Lord of Heaven give us patience to endure it, and suffer us not for fear of
any villainy, or calamity, to be dejected, and so fall away from his truth.

called and continued an Assembly, which the Pope would not do without the
Emperors leave, contrary to the Kings command; which is a mere and mighty
usurpation of the Regal right.

Revenues, Castles, Forts, Towns, Ships, and all that they could lay hand on,
and do in a hostile manner, with all violence, detain them from him, but what
he gains by his sword, to this very day.

fought against him, shot at His sacred Person, and sought most Barbarously to
kill him, under the color to preserve him; which is the finest piece of
Logic that ever was read.

rayled at him; slandered him, and most apparently and falsely belyed him, and
laid to his charge the things which we his Majesty's Subjects and Servants that
attend Him do know, that He neither did, nor knew.

encouraged and countenanced their ignorant brazen-faced Chaplains most
uncivil^y to rail at Gods Anointed in the Pulpit; and so they brought the
abomination, not of desolation, but of most horrible transgression into the
holy place, and made Moses chair the seat of railers.

tax the Subjects at their pleasure, and have raised infinite sums of money,
and no man but themselves knows how they have disposed, or what they have done
therewith.

Apprentices, they send out their Warrants and their Edicts, without and
against the Kings authority, which are but nugae, and the minims of their
doings.

negative voice in making Laws, but they may conclude them, and make them
obligatory without the Kings approbation or ratification; and that they may do
any thing conducible to the good of the Church and Commonwealth, any Law,
Statute, or provision made to the contrary notwithstanding.

What they say of their Covenants.
13. They are not ashamed to teach (as they do practice) that it is lawful for
them to make Covenants, Combinations, and Confederacies of mutual defense and
offense against any person whatsoever, whom themselves judge malignant, not
excepting the King himself; and they say, that it were better for them to
renounce their Baptism, then to forsake their Covenant, which they believe
will be more advantageous to the Kingdom, then all the Privileges that are
granted in Magna Charta, or the Statutes that have been made ever since.

Proclamations, trampled his Declarations under feet, and incountred the same
with rebellious Protestations.

To what they liken the kings pardons.
15. They persuade the people to give no ear to any discourse of Accommodation,
or conclusion for any peace; and say, that the King is not to be trusted; that
he will perform no promise that he makes, either in his Proclamations or
Declarations; and therefore that the Kings Pardons may be likened to a buckler
of glass, or a staff of reed, on which there is no trust, no committing
themselves to the defense of any such pardon. So we may say with the Poet, Nos
juvat alma quies, gens haec fera bella minatur;
Et quoties pacem poscimus, arma crepat.


Whence they learned their Divinity.
16. They teach the Doctrine of coercion, dedignifying, degrading, and
decapitating of Kings, when they deem them unworthy of that dignity; and their
arguments and reasons they collect and produce out of Dolman. Bellarm. Suarez,
and the Magazine of the most rigid Jesuits.

barbarously, and so irreverently, and so profanely abused our Service Book
that it would ^^ath your ears to hear, transcend modesty to tell you how they
have dealt with it; and they threatened, that if the Ministers would read it,
they should never read book again.

worst of Papists, the Jesuits, in a great many of the worst points of
doctrine that they teach; and yet being not well able to understand their
tenets, they hate Papists so much, How contrary to Christ's doctrine, Matthew.
13.29. they would root out all Papists
that they would root them out of their very being; they would destroy all the
Irish that are Papists, and drive all Papists out of England, out of the world,
that the name of Papists should be no more in remembrance; and contrary to all
reason, divinity, and humanity, they would force and compel every man to
profess the Religion that they are of, though some of them (as their
independents) are far on the other side, would have every man to have liberty
to profess what Religion himself likes best.

ingratefully and disloyally injured a most loving wife, and their own most
gracious Queen, for showing Her love, How they have wronged the Queen, the
Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, and Commons of this Land.
and discharging Her duty to Her husband: They have imprisoned, and barbarously
used some of the Nobility, most of the Clergy, and abundance of the Gentry, and
others of the best account of the common Subjects of this Kingdom; they have
plundered and robbed many thousands of men; they have killed and murdered as
many; they have made our Cities dens of thieves, our Churches prisons, and all
the Land Acheldama's, fields of blood; they multiplied the number of Widows,
Orphans, and Thieves without number, throughout the Land, and they filled the
whole Kingdom with miseries, lamentations and woes; and they have done so many
mischiefs, as if I should set them all down, would fill up another volume: And,

enough, to fill up the measure of their iniquity, they spared neither pains
nor cost to call in the Scots to assist them, How they labored to call in the
Scots.
to perpetuate the War, to fill our Kingdom with strangers, and to make our
calamities everlasting, so they fell from evil to worse, from discontent to
schism, from schism to open Rebellion, and their Rebellion more wicked then
any Rebels that we can read of in any History; which is the just judgment of
God upon them, that they which rebelliously run out of the Communion of Gods
Church, should most desperately run out of their own wits; and refusing to be
guarded by the Heavenly Angels, should give themselves to be guided by the
infernal Devils; which made a merry fellow, at the enumeration of their
abominable, and indeed innumerable wickednesses, to say, Hell was never better
then it is now, The speech of a merry companion.
because he thought the Devils were all in London, or otherwise it were
impossible that the Citizens which have received so many gracious offers of
pardons from His Majesty, and promises of other favors, should still continue
so wicked as they are, so gulled and seduced by this Parliament faction, that
non suadebis, etiamsi persuaseris; because, as S. Augustine says, impia men's
nolit intellectum, and they love to cozen and cheat their own souls by new
painting these old sins, and calling their faction faith, their madness zeal,
and their horrid Rebellion fighting for Religion; but as the Poet says, -- Non
tanti est civilia bella movere. Whatsoever pretenses move them to it, this
remedy will increase their miseries; for, if God be no more merciful to us
then their sin deserves, it may end here in an universal destruction, and
hereafter in their eternal damnation: for does not all the world see how God
scourges us with the rod of our own furious madness, and like as it befell
the Ammonites and Moabites, 2 Chronicles. 20.23.
that fighting against the Israelites, did help to destroy one another; so we,
striving not against Israel, but as we pretend, both against the Edomites,
against falsehood, do utterly destroy our selves.

Exemploque pari ruit Anglica turba, suoque
Mart cadunt coesi per mutua vulnera fratres.
And we that did keep our enemies in awe shall be now destroyed by the sons of
our own mother, but I confess our Land abounds with sins, and our sins have
justly deserved this heavy punishment to light upon us; yet I beseech our God
to chastise us with his own hands, and let us not fall under the swords of the
uncircumcised Philistines, that are a people much more wicked then our selves;
and if he will let our souls live, we shall praise his name.

21. When they had most fraudulently gotten His Majesty to pass an Act (which
though really intended, How they intended to get all Ireland to themselves.
yet to many men seems a very strange Act) to refer the managing of the
affairs of Ireland to the Parliament of England, then they took that course to
root out all the Papists, Irish, English, British, and indeed all the
Inhabitants of Ireland, except their own brotherhood, (for they could have soon
descried the mark of the beast in all the rest) which they thought would be
most effectual to further their design, and to bring the whole Kingdom of
Ireland to be inherited by their own faction; that is, to sell all the Lands of
the Rebels to themselves, (for they knew none else would buy it at that time,
and in that manner as they determined) and when they had thus locked the door,
and stopped the way of all relief unto the distressed Protestants of that
Kingdom, they might sing, Dimidium toti qui been coepit, habet; For they had
settled Scotland, and they had now grasped Ireland, and held it fast in Vulcans
net; and therefore now it might stay, till they could reduce E^gland (to make a
perfect work in all the three Kingdoms) to the same form of government both
in Chu ch and State, as they projected for the other; and because they would
have some places of entrance into Ireland, and hinder the Rebels to possess
the whole Kingdom, and also blind the eyes of the ignorant, not to perceive
their plot, How they blinded the people by their proceedings.
but to keep them still in some hope of redress, they sent such a party over
(and the Scots must be the most considerable part) as might keep their own
design on foot, and yet yield not an inch of any comfort to the spoiled and
expelled Protestant; for they left that party which they sent thither, rather
as a prey to their enemies, (as having neither clothes, meat, nor money) then
enabled by these accoutrements to subdue the Rebels; as it is better and more
fully declared by the Letter of the State of Ireland to the House of Commons,
then I can relate unto you.

What the Author saw in Ireland.
And I being in Ireland, seeing the deplorable state of that Kingdom, the
miserable distress of the mangled, starved, and naked Protestants; the little
children calling and crying for bread, and none to give it them; many worthy
Ministe s begging, or dying for want in the streets, and the poor barefooted
and hunger-bitten Soldier lamenting his hard fortune to be transplanted out of
Gods blessing into the warm sun; from plenty and prosperity, to be left as the
Traveller, betwixt Jerusalem and Hierico, half dead, betwixt merciless
Rebels, and more unmercifull friends; neither wholly to be destroyed, nor yet
to be releived, was much troubled and perplexed at these sad aspects; and being
entrusted by the Bishops my Brethren of that Kingdom, to agitate the cause of
the Church for our relief here in England; and to that end having a Letter
unto his Majesty, and a Remonstrance of our distressed condition, though with
the great hazard of my life at Sea, yet I arrived by Gods great blessing in
England, How used as soon as ever he came to his House.
and before I had been two days at home, my house was surrounded with a Troop
of Armed Soldiers, they entered in, seized upon my person, searched every
room, and every corner with a candle, not leaving the bedstraw whereon my
children lay unsearched; they took all my papers, and all the money they found
in my house, (even my servants money) to the sum of 40, and carried all with
me their poor Prisoner to Northhampton, and now I thought it was but an ill
exchange, to escape the Sea, and to fall into the fire; to shun the Lion, How a
precise Churchwarden would have hindered a Bishop to preach.
and to meeet a Bear, to eschew the Rebels in Ireland and to fall into the
hands of T aytors in England; and I knew not why, but only that I had often
Preached at T^w^^ster, (where being requested by Master Lockwood to supply the
place, the precise Churchwardens very peremptorily told me I should not do it,
because I was a royalist, and spoke against the Parliament, to whom I replied,
that he had no such authority to hinder a Bishop to Preach, and bad him look to
mend his glasse-windowes, that were all full of holes where the faces of the
pictures were plucked out) and in other Churches thereabouts, that they should
so honor and obey their King, as God commands us: for which refusal to be
admonished, I believe they are now (and perhaps will be more) hereafter
sufficiently punished.

But the Committee there finding in me no cause worthy of death or of bonds,
(Gods providence so mercifully watching over me, that it stopped their eyes,
that they looked not on my Grand Rebellion, which they had in their hands, and
would no doubt have utterly undone me, had they but espied the Capital title)
that I was dismissed; and I confess courteously used by Sir John Norwich.

Then afterward when time served, I repaired to His Majesty, and having
delivered my Letters, I spoke to Him and drew a Petition, (and I think I was
the first that petitioned in this kind, I do not repent it, neither am I
ashamed to confess it) and got some hands unto it, (as that worthy and noble
Gentleman Colonel Oneale can bear witness, the sum whereof was, that, the
Parliament having betrayed the trust that was reposed in them, wholly deserted
our relief, and giving us none other comfort then what I expressed in my
Discovery of Mysteries, c. 12. p. 24.
His Majesty would be pleased to consider, that we were his Loyal Subjects,
and that the care of us was committed by God to him, not to his Parliament, who
had left us in a worse condition then the Rebels had made us: and therefore, as
he justly required our faith and allegiance, so we humbly besought him, that
he would graciously vouchsafe unto us his princely care and assistance, some
ways to relieve us otherwise then by leaving us still in their hands, till we
and our families, in the languishing expectation of our redress, should
finally and irrecoverably perish while these crafty Merchants, thus bought and
sold us, and under the pretense of reformation used all their endeavors to
bring both Kingdoms to destruction.

CHAP. XIX.
Shows, how the Rebellious faction have transgressed all the ten Commandments
of the Law, and the new Commandment of the Gospel; how they have committed the
seven deadly sins; and the four crying sins; and the three most destructive
sins to the soul of man; and how their Ordinances are made against all Laws,
Equity and Conscience.

22. THey have, in no small measure, transgressed all the Commandments of God,
the ten Commandments of the Law, 1. They adore and put their trust in that
creature. Ps. 74. v. 4.7, 8. (...)? Quis tibi in mentem dolorem imposuit, ut
haec perficias magni Dei ore relicto? 2. How they have abused Gods house.
and the new Commandment of the Gospel. For,

1. The factious Rebels have other gods besides the God of Israel, when they
adore the creatures, and ascribe the incommunicable attributes of the creator
unto their Parliament, by calling it omnipotent, infallible, invincible, and
most blessed Parliament, as some of them have most blasphemously termed it; for
which blasphemies, no doubt, but as we by their Declarations and Ordinances
know they are not infallible, so God, I fear me, by their destruction will
show they are neither blessed nor invincible.

2. They not only make an idol of their Parliament, but are so far from
making to themselves any graven image, that they destroy all images, and are
just such as the Prophet David speaks of, which have done evil in Gods
Sanctuary, and have broken down all the carved work thereof with axes and
hammers, that have set fire upon his holy places, and have defiled the dwelling
place of Gods name, even unto the ground: for it is almost incredible how
barbarously, worse then any Turks or Jews, they have broken down those rare
and sweet instruments of Music, the Organs of our Churches, and have defaced
those excellent pieces of work, that, to the honor of God, were made and set
up in the windows of our Churches in Canterbury, Winchester, Lincoln, and the
other Cathedrals, by the best Artists in Christendom: which is a most horrible
fact, no ways commanded in this precept, and an irreparable loss to us and our
posterity; and therefore the Prophet David calls these defacers of such
carved and painted works, set up in his house the adversaries and enemies of
God, v. 4, and 5. and v. 11. foolish people, verse. 19, and 23. the haters of
God, verse. 24. and the blasphemers of his name, verse. 11. for none but such
would have done such Prophanations, as is done in God's house: but let them
take heed lest the Prophets prayer should light upon them, Ps. 74. v. 4.
Lift up thy feet O God, that thou may utterly destroy every one of these
enemies, which has done this evil in thy Sanctuary.

3. How they forswear themselves. (...). Menan l. perjurium est, nequiter
decipere credentem. Aug 4. How they profaned the Sabbath.
3. For swearing, not vainly but falsely, most wickedly, and forswearing
themselves over and over, again and again, and having more dispensations and
absolutions for their perjuries by their holy Prophets then ever the Popes gave
for adulteries, it is incredible to think, and impossible to number the heads
of these transgressions; and therefore if you believe that God was in earnest
when he gave this precept, you may be assured he will not hold them guiltless
that are such transgressors of it.

4. For the day wherein we should serve our God in his Church most reverently,
some of them worship him more unmannerly, then some of those blind Indians,
that worship the Devil himself, and others of them muster their men, plunder
their neighbors, and murder their brethren, which they believe to be the best
way to sanctify the Sabbath: and for which resting from their work, thus
religiously to serve the Lord, let them take heed, lest God should swear in his
wrath, that they shall never enter into his rest.

5. How they curse their Fathers and Mothers. Esaias. 8.21.
5. They curse their Father and their Mother that their days may be long in the
Land, which their pretended Parliament has promised to give them; for the King
is the Prince and Principal Father of us all; and the Prophet says of such
men, they shall curse their King and their God; and the Bishops are their
Fathers too, and they have cursed them long agone; and I fear they will not
cease to curse them, till their curses fall upon their own heads: and for all
other bonds of duty, and relations of Wives unto their Husbands; Children unto
their Parents; Servants unto their Masters: they are preached asunder, to make
way for the liberty of the Subject, to rebel by authority against his Sovereign.

6. How many they have murdered.
6. Whereas God says, thou shall do no murder, they gave that first commission,
though they had not the least color of any authority to give it, to kill,
slay, and destroy; and it is most lamentable to consider how many thousands
they have murdered, 7. How they loosened the reins to all lust hoc font
derivata clades, in patriam, populumque fluxit. Horat. car. l. 3. 8 How they
are like Argivi fares. (...). Ps. 94.12. 9. How they belyed all sorts of good
men. Quomodo Deus pater genuis filium veritatem, nempe sic diabolus lapsus
genuit quasi filium mendacium. Aug. super Ioh. Habac. 2.9. Gildas de exci dio
Britan.
and how they are thought worthy of the greatest honor and the best reward,
that have killed most of God's faithful servants, and the King's loyal
Subjects.

7. For adulteries, Fornications and all Uncleanness, they may now freely do
it, lust may flow like the river, whose banks are broken down, when they have
overthrown those courts of Justice, and were never at rest till they had most
violently suppressed the power and execution of all Ecclesiastical censures,
that were the chiefest bars and hindrances of these unlawful lusts.

8. For stealing, they have changed the name but not the nature of it: for
under the pretense of preserving to us the propriety of our goods, they have
not stolen, but plundered away, that is robbed us of all our goods, and carried
them into those Rebellious Towns, that are now the dens of these thieves, and
are stronger in their wickedness then the hills of the robbers: and that which
makes this sin most sinful, is, that it is established by a Law.

9. They have justified the Cretans, and proved themselves the right bastard
sons of the father of lies, filling all and every corner of this Kingdom with
palpable, intolerable, and incredible lies, slanders, and false
witnesse-bearing against God, against his Anointed, against the Church, and
against all the reverend governors of the Church, all religious Protestants,
and all the loyal Subjects of this Nation, that the Angels do now blush, and
the Devils do laugh and rejoice, to see they are so fruitful in begetting so
many Children so perfectly formed, and so compleately perfected in their own
image and likeness; and if ever the saying of Gildas was true, they have
proved it now: Moris continui gentis erat, sicut and nunc est, ut infirma esset
ad retundenda hostium tela, and fortis ad civilia bella: infirma, inquam, ad
exequenda pacis ac veritatis insignia, and fortis ad scelera and mendacia.

10. They have coveted an evil covetousness, 10. The extent of their
covetousness.
when they coveted all evil unto themselves; not only their neighbors houses,
goods, and lands, and all that are theirs, but also the patrimony of the
Church, the revenues of the Clergy, and all the rights and prerogatives of the
King, to be entayled upon themselves and their faction, that so they and theirs
might be both Kings, and Priests, and all, not to God, but to themselves and
their fellow Rebels in the government of this Kingdom.

And as they have thus transgressed all the old Commandments of the Law, How
they transgressed the new commandment of the Gospel. Genesis 4.9.
so they come no ways short in transgressing the new Commandment of the
Gospel: for their love to their brethren is now turned to perfect hatred, when
they say not with Cain, am I my brothers keeper? but with Apollyon, I will be
the destroyer of my brethren; neither will I sell them, as the brethren of
Joseph did him unto the Egyptians, but I will send them if I can possibly quick
to hell; let those L^yal subjects, that have been unexspectedly murdered, and
those many thousands that have been plundered of all their Estates, testify
to the World the love of these men unto their brethren, who have felt more
cruelty and barbarity and less charity from these holy Saints, then could be
expected from Jews, Turks, and Pagans.

23. Though every sin deserves the wrath of God, How they have committed the 7
deadly sins. Romans 6.23.
as the Apostle says in general, the reward of sin is death, be it little or
be it great: yet because some sins do more provoke the wrath of God, and do
sooner produce this deadly fruit then other sins; the Divines have observed
seven special sins, which they term the seven deadly sins: and these also
you may find committed in the highest degree by these factious Rebels: For

1. Pride, which is an high conceit of a man's own worth, 1 Their Pride. Quid
juvat O homines tanto turgescere fastu? Nam ut ait Comicus, (...).
far beyond his just deserts, and therefore, believing himself to be inferior
to none, scorns to be subject unto any, is the Father that produces, and the
nurse that cherishes all rebellion: and our Parliamentary faction, together
with the Assembly of their Divines, thinking themselves holyer then the Saints,
and wiser then their Brethren, have therefore made this unnatural war to
destroy us all, because we will not subscribe with them to destroy both Church
and State: this is the fruit of pride, but the punishment is, to be resisted by
God, who throws damnation upon their heads, because they resist the ordinance
of God.

2. Pride cannot subsist without means, therefore covetousness must support
it; and I showed you before how covetous these Rebels are, not of any good, 2.
Their Covetousness. Sacrilegia minuta puniuntur, magna jam in triumphis
feruntur. Senec. ep. 87. 3. Their luxury Certa quidem tantis causa est
manifesta ruinit Luxuriae nimium libera facta via est. Propert. eleg. 11. l. 3.
4. Their envy.
but of our goods, and of our lives, that they may enjoy our lands, even the
lands of the Church, that they may take the houses of God in possession: which
may prove to them like Aurum Tholosanum, or as Midas gold, that was the
destruction of that covetous wretch.

3. Their luxury and lust must needs proceed from fullness and pride: and I
believe, it is not unknown to many how these Rebels spend their time in
revelling and feasting, chambering and wantonness, which though never so
secretly done by them in the night, yet are they publicly seen in the day,
and seen to their shame, if they could be ashamed of any thing.

4. How envy has possessed their souls, it is almost beyond all sense to
consider it, they envy that any man should be king and themselves subjects,
that any man should be a Bishop and themseves Priests, or that any man should
be rich and themselves not so wealthy; therefore they will needs pull down what
themselves cannot reach unto.

5. If Epicurus were now living, or Sardanapalus came to these men's feasts, 5.
Their Gluttony and drunkenness.
they might think themselves the teachers of sobriety, and the masters of
abstinency, in comparison of these new gulists, who make a God of their
bellies, and fare deliciously every day that they can get it, more deliciously
then Dives; it is incredible to consider what they devour in delicates, and
how the Sisters teachers, eat more good meat, and drink better wines then the
gravest Bishops. 6. Their wrath and malices.


6. They are, as the Psalmist says, wrathfully displeased at us, and I know
not whether their envy at our happiness, or their wrath and anger that we do
live, is the greater; yet thanks be to God, Vivere nos dices, salvos tamen esse
negamus. And God I hope will preserve us still, notwithstanding all their
malice.

7. Their Sloth.
7. For their sloth, I was a while musing how these factious Rebels could any
ways be guilty of this lazy sin: for, as the Devil is never at rest, but
goes about continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; and
he says, Job. 1. he compasses the earth to and fro; so these children of this
world, being wiser in their generation then the children of light, (...).
are as diligent as their Father, they imagine mischief upon their beds, and
are a great deal more watchful, and more painful to do evil, to serve the
Devil, to go to Hell, then the faithful servants of God are to go to Heaven;
witness all the victories and successes that they had by this War, in the
night, not by any manhood, but by taking the Kings Soldiers careless in their
beds; yet, notwithstanding all this diligence to do wickedness, they are as
lazy as any sluggard, and as slow as the snayle to any goodness: they are
asleep in evil, and are dead in trespasses and sins, and cannot be awakened to
any service of God.

24. How they have grievously committed the four crying sins. 1. How they have
shed abundance of innocent blood.
24. The Scripture makes mention of four crying sins that do continually cry
to God for vengeance against the sinners; Clamitat ad coelum vox sanguinis, and
Sodomorum,
Vox oppressorum, merces retenta laborum.
And they are not free from any of these. For,

1. As the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 79.2.3. so they have done; and the streams
of blood, that, since the beginning of this unnatural War, they have most
unjustly caused to be spilt, and do flow like the Rivers of waters over the
face of this now unhappy Land, do with Abels blood continually cry against
them, and cannot choose but pull down vengeance upon their heads, when God shall
come to make inquisition for blood: and therefore though Pacem nos poscimus
omnes, Psalm. 9.12.
we all cry for peace, and the Kings clemency still proclaims pardon; yet
seeing it is God that makes Wars to cease, and the Prophet says, how can the
sword be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against Ashkelon? Jer.
47.7. as the bloody sin of Saul upon the poor Gibeonites, never left crying for
vengeance, until it was expiated by blood, even by the blood of seven of his
sons; so I fear me the much blood that these Rebels spilt, and the blood of so
many innocents that they caused to be slain, can never be expiated, and the
wrath of God appeased, until an atonement be made by blood, even a judiciarie
sentence of death against some of the head Rebels; for it is the voice of God,
that whosoever sheddeth man's blood, that is, without due authority, by man
shall his blood be shed, that is, by the due course of Law, and the power of
the Magistrate, that bears not the sword in vain, but is bound to punish
murders, and the unlawful putting of innocents to death, with the sentence of
a just death.

this Rebellion be concluded with the like peace by a general pardon, as the
other in Ireland is like to be?

alike, because they had some show of reason, and were provoked by the faction
and emissaries of this Parliament; but our Rebels had not the least colorable
cause, nor were provoked by any, but their own bloody desire to root out Gods
service and servants, when they had almost all things that they desired. I am
sure more then should have been granted unto them; and therefore in these, and
in many other respects that I could, but am ashamed to set down, I deem this
Rebellion of our English, and the invasion of the Scots, ten times more odious,
then the insurrection of the Irish.

Ezech. 16.49. 2. The sins of Sodom among them. 3. Their oppression.
2. The iniquity of Sodom was Pride, fulness of bread, abundance of idleness,
and contempt of the poor; and I have already showed how all these do rule and
reign in them.

3. For oppression, let their ordinances to take away our goods, without any
color of justice, and their actions, to make good their ordinances, to take
away our states, and deprive us of our liberties, be well examined, and the
world shall then see, whether they be oppressors, or I a transgressor for
affirming it.

4. For retaining of wages, letting pass their Soldiers that deserve not pay
for fighting so disloyally against their King, 4. The detaining of the wages of
God's servants.
and transgressing so undutifully the Commandment of God, which so precisely
bids them to honor the King, I would fain know by what authority, or law,
excepting their own lawless Ordinances, have they detained and alienated the
wages, means, and maintenance of those faithful Pastors, whom they sent away,
and caused them to fly and wander like Pilgrims, from place to place, without
any means or subsistence? O let them never think that these things can be
buried in oblivion, but that the sighs and groans of those faithful servants
of Christ do continually cry, 25. How they are filled with the most destructive
sins against their souls. And if I should parallel the wickednesses of this
pretend^d Parliament with the Sicilian Vespers, the Massacre of Paris, and the
Gunpowder Treason, it would exceed them all. 2. The wicked Ordinances of the
pretended Parliament. 1. Their bloody ordinance. 2. Their sacrilegious
ordinance.
and cry aloud in the ears of God for vengeance to be poured down upon the
heads of these their persecutors, which cannot escape, Cum surrexerit ad
iudicandum Deus.

25. As there be three Theological graces that build up, and complete a
Christian soul, Faith, Hope, and Charity; so there be three main vices that do
poison and kill every soul, Infidelity, Presumption, Philauty; and three others
that are destructive to all Christianity, Profaneness, Impudency, and
Sacrilege: The time will not give me leave to tell you how they are chained
about with these links of sin, and how indeed they are, as the Apostle says,
filled with all unrighteousness. The works that they do, can sufficiently
testify what they are. God forgive them the evil that they have done, and give
them grace to repent in time, that they may not perish everlastingly, Amen.

2. Having treated a little of the wicked practices and abominable actions of
the Puritan Faction of this Parliament; I should, according as I intended, set
down some of their unjust, impious, and diabolical Ordinances; which I find to
be so many as would fill up a whole Volume, and the poison of their wickedness
having swelled my Book to such a bulk already, I must therefore, crave leave,
to transmit the displaying of these dismal tragedies to some other scene; only
I must remember, which I believe will never be forgotten, while any wickedness
can be remembered; and that is,

1. Their bloody Ordinance to kill and slay, while we were all in peace, and
all praying for the Houses of Parliament.

2. Their sacrilegious Ordinance of taking away not the twentieth part, nor the
tenth, nor yet nine parts of ten, but all and every part of the goods and
revenues of the Bishops, Dea^es, and Prebends; and let them now, in their
old age, after they have wasted their strength, and consumed their years with
toylsome labors and indefatigable pains, in the Church of God, to save their
souls, either dig for bread, or beg for alms, or like out-worn Jades, die in a
ditch: their care for these men was to leave them not one penny to relieve
themselves while they lived; and I believe the prophanest Pagan, (it may be)
the Devil himself, could not show greater malice, or inflict a severer censure
upon the Clergy, then these zealous Christians have ordained; because such a
miserable life must needs prove far worse then a glorious death, when as
Jeremiah says, Jerem. Lament. 4.5. etc. 1. v. 11.
They that did feed delicatly, must stand desolate in the streets, and they
that were brought up in scarlet, must embrace dunghills,; they must sigh and
seek their bread, and give their pleasant things for meat to relieve their
souls.

3. Their unrighteous Ordinance, and ordinances, 3. Their unrighteous
ordinances,
to take away what part they pleased of their Neighbors goods, and all from
them whom they deemed Malignants; and I had almost said, that God himself,
which is Lord of all, could not more justly take them, then these men have
unjustly decreed to take them from us.

4. Their impious, odious and abominable Ordinance, 4. Their impious ordinance.
to compel men by oaths and Covenants to give themselves unto the Devil, and to
go to Hell in despite of their teeth; and that which makes me wonder most of
all is, that their Synod or Assembly has prefixed an exhortation to persuade
silly souls to take that wicked Covenant; and to cast a mist before their eyes,
that they may not only, let down little gnats, but also swallow this great
camel, they would justify the doing thereof by a twofold example.

The first of the Jews in Ezra's time, Ezra. 10.5. and 8. Nehem. 9.38.10.1.
that made a Covenant to serve the Lord, and to put away their strange Wives,
according to the Law.

The second of Christians, and indeed of most Christian Kings, and Princes,
that is, of Queen Elizabeth's assisting the Hollanders against the King of
Spain and of King Charles assisting the Rochellers against the King of France.

To both which examples, and all other things, that are contained either in the
Covenant it self, or the exhortation of the Assembly thereunto annexed; I do
understand, there shall be a full and a perfect answer made by one that has
undertaken the same ex professo; yet give me leave in the interim to say this
much.

1. What vows and covenants are allowable.
First, touching Covenants and Vows, it is plain enough, that although the
superior may with Ezra cause the inferior to Vow or swear the performance of
his duty, Genesis 24.3.
that he is bound by the law of God and nature to perform; so Abraham caused
his servant to swear fidelity, when he sent him for Isaack's Wife. Numb. 30.
per totum.
And so the King may cause his Subjects to take the Oath of their Allegiance,
and the lawful General, cause his Soldiers to swear their fidelity unto him;
yet the inferior subject can not swear, or if he swears, he ought not to
observe it, when he does it contrary to the command of him, that has command
over him; as you may see in Numb. 30. throughout. -- Therefore, as children may
not vow any thing, though it be never so lawful, contrary to their Fathers
command, or if they do, they ought not to keep it; so no more may any Subject
Vow, or make a Covenant, contrary to their Kings command, or if they do, they
ought not to observe it, and they are, as you see, absolved by God himself,

Ezra and the Jews did it, contrary to the command of Artaxerxes, that was
then their King, I answer, that it is most false; for,

Ezra was the Priest, Nehem. 8.2. and 9. and the chief Prince, that was then
over them, and Nehemiah had his authority from the King, and he was the
Tirshatha, that is, their governor, says the text, Nehem. 10.1. and therefore
they might lawfully cause them to take that Covenant.

leave, and a large commission from Artaxerxes to do all that they did; as you
may see See Ezra 7.11.22 etc.
; neither can you find any syllable that Artaxerxes forbad them to do this in
any place.

For so the text, says, Let it be done according to the Law. Ezra 10.3.
3. This Covenant of Ezra and his people, and Nehemiah's, was to do those things
that they had covenanted before to do, which God had expressly commanded them to
do, and which they could not omit, though they had not covenanted to do it,
without great offense; so if our covenanters swear they will serve God and be
loyal unto their King, as they vowed in their baptism, they shall never find
me to speak against them; but to propose a lawful Covenant, to do those things
that God commands, and is made with the leave and commission of the supreme
Prince, to justify an unlawful Covenant, to do those things that were never
done before, never commanded by God, but forbidden both by God, and especially
by the King, in the expressest terms, and most energeticall manner that might
be, is such a piece of Divinity as I never read the like, and such an argument,
2. The examples of Queen Elizabeth and King Charles answered. 1. By way of
Divinity.
a dissimili, that never scholar produced the like.

2. For the examples of Queen Elizabeth and King Charles, assisting Subjects
for their Religion sake, against their lawful princes, two things may be said;
the one in Divinity, the other in Policy,

First, for Divinity, I say, vivendum est praeceptis, non exemplis, we have the
sure word of God to teach us, what we should do, and no examples, unless they
be either commended, or allowed in Gods word, ought to be any infallible
pattern for us to follow; 2. By way of Policy.


Secondly, for Policy, which may be justified to be without iniquity, I doubt
not, but those men, which knew the secrets of State, and were privy to the
causes of their actions, are able to justify the proceedings of these Princes
in their assistance, which perhaps they did not so much simply in respect of
their Religion, as of some other State Policy, which we, that are so far from
the helm, have no reason to pry unto;

Besides, you may know that neither King Charles, nor Queen Elizabeth were
Subjects to the other Kings, but were every way their equal, if not more, and
independent Princes. And to bring the actions of such absolute Monarchs, How
wickedly they deceive the simple.
the one against the other, to justify the actions of Subjects against their
Sovereign, is such Logic, as the other example was Divinity; Queen Elizabeth
did so against the King of Spain; ergo, any Subject may do so against his king;
or rather Queen Elizabeth did that, which for ought we know, was most lawful
to be done against the king of Spain; ergo the Earl of Essex may do that, which
we do know to be most unlawful against King Charles: This is the doctrine that
they teach their Proselytes, but that they give this poison in a golden cup,
and hide their falsehood under a show of truth; but I hope ere long, you shall
have these things more fully manifested unto you.

CHAP. XX.
Shows, how the Rebellious Faction forswore themselves; what trust is to be
given to them; how we may recover our peace and prosperity; how they have
unking'd the Lords anointed: and for whom they have exchanged him; and the
conclusion of the whole.

AND now, having committed all these things, and much more wickedness then I,
though I had the tongue of Angels, can express, I am persuaded many of them,
seeing the miraculous mercies of our God in protecting and assisting His
Majesty, far beyond their thoughts and imaginations, do begin to think on peace
and accommodation, which they presuming on the Kings lenity made sure to
themselves whenever they pleased; and indeed, dulce nomen pacis; Esaias. 52.7.
and the feet of them that bring tidings of peace, are more specious then the
fairest countenance of Aurora, then the sweet face of Helen; Psalm. 85.10. Romans
1.7. 1 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 2. etc.
But seeing righteousness and peace have kissed each other, and the Apostle
joyneth grace and peace always together, as two dear friends says S. Aug. so
dear, that si amicam pacis non amaveris, neque te amabit pax ipsa; and these
men are filled with all unrighteousness, and have trampled the grace of God
and their King under feet, and having sworn and forsworn themselves over and
over, as, at their baptism, that they would keep Gods Commandments, whereof
this is one, Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. How the Rebels swore and forswore
themselves.
to be obedient unto our Kings; at their admittance to any office to bear
faith and true alleagiance to His Majesty; at the beginning of this last
Parliament, to maintain the Kings just rights and all the privileges of
Parliament, together with the liberty and property of the Subjects; and yet
immediately to forget their faith, to break all these oaths, and to make
shipwreck of their conscience, to drive the Bishops out of their House, which
is one of the first and most fundamental privileges of the Parliament, they
being the first of the three Estates of this Kingdom, to take away, not some,
but all the Kings rights out of his hands, and to make him no King indeed, to
take away all our goods, our liberties, and our lives at their pleasure,
Holland and Bedford showed what trust is to be given them.
and then to assure the Devil they would be faithful unto him, which were thus
faithless unto God, to swear again, and make a solemn Covenant with Hell,
they would never repent them of their wickedness, but continue constant in his
service, till they have rooted out whom they deemed to be Malignants; though
the King, who is wise as the Angel of God, that has the Kings heart in his
hand, Proverb. 21.
and turns it like the Rivers of waters, where he pleases, knows best what
to do, as God directs him; yet for mine own part, either in Peace or War, No
trust to be given to liars and perjurers. 2 Samuel 20.20.16.
I I would never trust such faithless perjured creatures for a straw; and
seeing that to spare transcendent wickedness is to increase wickedness, and to
encourage others to the like Rebellion upon the like hope of pardon, if they
failed of their intention, if our great Metropolis of London partake not rather
of the wise spirit of the men of Abel, then of the obstinacy of the men of
Gibeah, and delivered not unto the King the chief of those Rebels that rose
up against him, I fear that Gods wrath will not be turned away, but his hand
will be stretched out still, Judge. 20.
until he has fullfilled his determined visitation upon this Land, and
consummated all with their deplorable destruction, even as he did those
obstinate men of Gibeah and Benjamin; How the King desired the good of the
Rebels.
for though the King, beyond the clemency of a man, and the expectation of any
Rebel, has most Christianly labored, that they would accept of their pardon,
and save themselves and their posterity; yet their wickedness, (being so
exceedingly great, beyond all that I can find in any history, Rebellion it
self being like the sin of witchcraft, the Rebellion of Christians far worse,
and a Rebellion against a most Christian pious Prince worst of all; and such a
Rebellion ingendered by pride, fostered by lies, augmented by perjury,
continued by cruelty, The unspeakable greatness of their sins.
refusing all clemency, despis^^g all piety, and contemning God their Savior,
when they make him (with reverence be it spoken, which is so irreverently done
by them) the very pack-horse to bear all their wickedness, being a degree
beyond all degrees of comparison,) has so provoked the wrath of God against
this Nation, that I fear his justice will not suffer their hearts, that can
not repent, accept and embrace their own happiness, till they be purged with
the floods of repentant tears, or destroyed with the steames of Gods fearful
vengeance; which I heartily beseech Almighty God may (by the grace of Christ,
working true repentance in them for themselves, and reducing them to the right
way) be averted from them. And the best way that I conceive to avert it, to
appease Gods wrath, and to turn away his judgments from us, is to return
back the same way as we proceeded hitherto; to make up the breaches of the
Church, How we may recover the peace and prosperity of this Land.
to restore the Liturgy, and the service of our God to its former purity, to
repeal that Act, which is made to the prejudice of the Bishops and Servants of
God, that they may be reduced to their pristine dignity, to recall all
Ordinances that are made contrary to Law, and derogatory to the Kings right,
and to be heartily sorry that these unjust Acts and Ordinances were ever done,
and more sorry that they were not sooner undone; and then God will turn his
face toward us, he will heal the bleeding wounds of our Land, and he will
power down his benefits upon us; but till we do these things, I do assure my
self, and (I believe) you shall find it, that his wrath shall not be turned
away, but his hand will be stretched out still and still, until we either do
these things, or be destroyed for not doing them.

King James his speech made true by the Rebels.
Thus it is manifest to all the World, that as it was often spoken by our sharp
and eagle-sighted Sovereign, King James of ever blessed memory, no Bishop no
King: so now (I hope) the dull-ey'd- owl, that lodges in the desert, sees it
verifyed by this Parliament; for they had no sooner got out the Bishops, but
presently they laid violent hands upon the Crown, seized upon the Kings
Castles, How the Rebels have unking'd our King.
shut him out of all his Towns, dispossessed him of his own houses, took away
all his s^ips, detained all his revenues, vilified all his Declarations,
nullified his Proclamations, hindered his Commissions, imprisoned his faithful
Subjects, killed his servants, and at Edgehill and Newbury did all that ever
they could, to take away his life; and now by their last great ordinance for
their counterfeit Seal they pronounce all honors, pardons, grants,
commissions, and whatsoever else His Majesty passes under his Seal, to be
invalid, void, and of none effect; and if this be not to make King Charles no
King, I know not what it is to be a King: Hos. 8.4.
so they have unking'd him sine strepitu; and as the Prophet says, they have
set up Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew it not; What
kings they would have to rule us.
but whom have they made Kings? even themselves, who, in one word, do, and have
now exercised all, or most of the regal power; and their Ordinances shall be
as firm as any Statutes: and what are they, that have thus dis-robed King
Charles, and exalted themselves like the Pope, as if they were, (...), the
great Antichrist, above all that are called Gods? truly none other then king
Pym, king Say, king Faction; or to say the truth most truly, and to call a
spade a spade, king perjurers, king murderers, king traitors; Which S. Peter
never bade us honor. The Rebels brave exchange. Psalm. 146.20.
and I am sorry that I should join so high an office, so sacred a thing as
King to such wicked persons, as I have showed them to be; And what a royal
exchange would the Rebels of this Kingdom make? just such as the Israelites
made, when they turned their glory into the similitude of a Calfe that cateth
hay, and said, these be thy Gods, Psalm. 146.20.
O Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; for now, after they
have changed their lawful King for unlawful Tyrants, and taken Jothams bramble
for the cedar of Lebanon, the Devils instruments for Gods Anointed, Judge. 9.15.
they may justly say, these be thy Kings O Londoners, O Rebels, that brought
thee out of a Land that flowed with milk and honey, out of those houses that
were filled with all manner of store, into a land of misery, into houses of
sorrow, that are filled with wailings, lamentations, and woes, when we see the
faithful City is become an harlot, our gold dross, and our happiness turned
to continual heaviness.

But, as the Rutilians, considering what fruit they should reap by that
miserable war, wherein they were so far engaged, cried out at last, Virgil
Aeneid. l. 12.
Scilicet ut Turno contingat regiae conjux;
Nos animae viles, inhumata, infletaque turba
Sternamur campis. --
We undo our selves, our wives, and our children, to gain a wife for Turnus: so
our seduced men may say, we engage our selves to dye like dogs, that these
rebels may live like Kings, who themselves sit at ease, while others endure all
woes, and do grow rich by making all the Kingdom poor: and therefore O
England, -- quae tanta est licentia ferri!
lugebit patria multos.
when as the Apostle says, evil men and seducers wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived; for God is not mocked, but whatsoever a man
sows, 2 Timothy 3.13. Gal. 6.7.
that shall he also reap; for, though we for our sins may justly suffer these,
and many other more miseries; we do confess it: yet the whole world may be
assured that these Rebels, the generation of vipers, being but the Rod of Gods
fury, The Rebels sure to be destroyed. Contemptrix superum, sevaeque avidissima
caedis, and violenta fuit; scires e sanguine natam. 2 Samuel 7.1.
to correct the offenses of his children, such seeds of wickedness as they sow,
can produce none other harvest, then ruin and destruction to all these
usurping Kings, and Traitors, who think to please God by doing good service
unto the Devil, and to go to Heaven for their good intention, after they are
carried into Hell for their horrid Rebellion.

God Almighty grant them more grace, and our King more care to beware of them,
and when God does grant him rest with David, on every side round about him, to
restore his Bishops and Clergy to their pristine station, that when these
bramble rods are burnt, and these rebels fallen, the King and the Bishops may
still stand like Moses and Aaron to guide and govern Gods people committed to
their charge.

And thus I have showed thee O man, some of the sacred rights of royal Majesty,
granted by God in his holy Scriptures, practiced by Kings from the beginning of
the world, yielded by all nations, that had none other guide, but the light of
nature to direct them; I have also showed thee, how the people, greedy of
liberty and licentiousness, have like the true children of old Adam, that
could not long endure the sweet yoke of his Creator, strived and strugled to
withdraw their necks from that subjection (which their condition required, and
their frowardness necessitated to be imposed upon them) and thereby have
either graciously gained such love and favor from many pious and most clement
Princes, as for the sweetning of their well merited subjection, to grant them
many immunities and privileges, or have most rebelliously incroached upon
these rights of Kings, wresting many liberties out of the hands of Government
and forcibly retaining them to their own advantage, sometimes to the overthrow
of the royal government (as Junius Brutus and his associates did the Kings of
Rome) sometimes to the diminution of the dimidium, if not more then half his
right (as the Ephori did to the kings of Lacedemon) but always to the great
prejudice of the king, and the greater mischief to the Commonwealth; because
both reason and experience has found it always true, that the regal
Government, or Monarchical State, though it might sometimes happen to prove
tyrannical, is far more acceptable unto God, as being his own prime and proper
ordinance, most agreeable unto nature, and more profitable unto all men, then
either the Aristocratical or Popular Government, either has, or possibly can
be; for, as it is most true, that praestat sub malo principe esse, quam sub
nullo, it is better to live under an ill Governor, then where there is no Gove
nment; so praestat sub uno tyranno vivere, quam sub mill, it is better to be
under the command of one tyrant then of a thousand, as we are now under these
Rebels: who being not, faex Romuli, the worst of the Nobilty, but faex populi,
the dregs of the people, indigent Mechanics, and their Wives captivated
Citizens, together with the rabble of seduced Sectaries, have so disloyally
incroached upon the rights of our King, and so rebelliously usurped the same,
to the utter subversion both of Church and Kingdom, if God himself, who has
the hearts of all Kings in his hand, and turns the same, wheresoever he
pleases, had not most graciously strengthened his Majesty with a most singular
and heroic resolution, assisted with perfect health from the beginning of
their insurrection to this very day, to the admiration of his enemies, and the
exceeding joy and comfort of his faithful Subjects, and with the best aid and
furtherance of his chiefest Nobility, of all his learned and religious Clergy,
his grave and honest Lawyers, and the truly worthy Gentry of his whole Kingdom,
to withstand their most treacherous, impious barbarous, and I know not how to
express the wickedness of their most horrid attempts: so thou have before
thee life and death, fire and water, good and evil.

And therefore, I hope that this will move us (which have our eyes open, to
behold the great blessings, and the many almost miraculous deliverances and
favors of God unto his Majesty, and to consider the most horrible destruction
that this war has brought upon us) to fear God and to honor our King, to hate
the Rebels and to love all loyal Subjects; to do our uttermost endeavor to
quench this devouring flame, and to that end, with hand and heart, and with our
fortunes and with the hazard of our lives (which, as our Savior says, shall
be saved if they be lost) to assist his Majesty to subdue these Rebels, Luke
9.24.
to reduce the Kingdom to its pristine government, and the Church to her former
dignity, that so we may have, through the mercy of God, peace and plenty, love
and unity, so we may have, through the mercy of God, peace and plenty, love and
unity, faith and true religion, and all other happiness remaining with us, to
the comfort of our King, and the glory of our God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord; To whom with his Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honor, thanks,
praise, and dominion for ever and ever, Amen, Amen.

Jehovae liberatori.
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge ^. lin. 3.5. dele not. p. 5. l. 50. for make, r. made. p. 9. l. 23. for
hand, r. had. p. 27. l. 53. dele can. p. 39. l. 25. r. right to be. p. 51. l.
54. r. this day. p. 54 l. 37. dele and, p. 61. l. 21. r. that denied
repentance. p. 62. l. ^^. r. the same hope. p. 95. l. 18. for justice r.
injustice. p. 100. l. 49. for ye r. yet.

The Contents of the several Chapters contained in the RIGHTS of KINGS.
CHAP. I. Shows who are the fittest to set down the Rights which God granted
unto Kings: what causes men to rebel: the parts considerable in S. Peter's
words, 1 Pet. 2.17. in fine. How Kings honored the Clergy: the fair, but most
false pretenses of the refractary Faction, what they chiefly aim at, and their
malice to Episcopacy and Royalty. Page 1 CHAP. II. Shows what Kings are to be
honored: the institution of Kings to be immediately from God: the first Kings:
the three chiefest rights to kingdoms: the best of the three Rights: how Kings
came to be elected: and how, contrary to the opinion of Master Seldom,
Aristocracy and Democracy issued out of Monarchy. Page 7 CHAP. III. Shows the
Monarchical Government to be the best form: the first Government that ever
was: agreeable to Nature, wherein God founded it: consonant to Gods own
Government: the most universally received throughout the world: the immediate
and proper Ordinance of God, etc. Page 11 CHAP. IV. Shows what we should not
do, and what we should do for the King: the Rebels transgressing in all those:
how the Israelites honored their persecuting King in Egypt: how they behaved
themseves under Artaxerxes, Ahashuerus, and under all their own Kings of
Israel, etc. Page 17 CHAP. V. Shows how the Heathens honored their Kings:
how Christ exhibited all due honor unto Heathen and wicked Kings: how he
carried himself before Pilate, and how all the good Primitive Christians
behaved themselves toward their Heathen Persecuting Emperors. Page 23 CHAP.
VI. Shows the two chiefest duties of all Christian Kings: to whom the charge
and preservation of Religion is committed: three several opinions: the strange
speeches of the Disciplinarians against Kings are showed, and Viretus his
scandalous reasons are answered: the double service of all Christian Kings: and
how the Heathen Kings and Emperors had the charge of Religion. Page 27 CHAP.
VII. Shows the three things necessary for all Kings that would preserve true
Religion: how the King may attain to the knowledge of this that pertain to
Religion; by His Bishops and Chaplains, and the calling of Synods, etc. Page 34
CHAP. VIII. Shows it is the right of Kings to make Ecclesiastical Laws and
Canons, proved by many authorities and examples: that the good Kings and
Emperors made such Laws by the advice of of their Bishops and Clergy, and not
of their Lay-Counsellors: how our late Canons, came to be annulled, etc. Page
40 CHAP. IX. Shows a full answer to four special Objections that are made
against the Civil jurisdictions of Ecclesiastical persons: their abilities to
discharge these offices, and desire to benefit the Commonwealth: why some
Councels inhibited these Offices unto Bishops, etc. Page 47 CHAP. X. Shows
that it is the Kings right to grant Dispensations for Pluralities and
Non-residency: what Dispensations is: reasons for it: to tolerate diverse Sects
or sorts of Religions: the four special sorts of false Professors: S.
Augustines reasons for the toleration of the Jews: toleration of Papists, and
of Puritans, and which of them deserve best to be tolerated among the
Protestants; and how any Sect is to be tolerated. CHAP. XI. Shows where the
Protestants, Papists, and Puritans do place Sovereignty: who first taught the
deposing of Kings: the Puritans tenet worse then the Jesuits: Kings authority
immediately from God: the twofold royalty in a King: the words of the Apostle
vindicated from false glosses, etc. Page 64 CHAP. XII. Shows the assistants
of Kings in their Government: to whom the choice of inferior Magistrates
belongs: the power of the subordinate officers: neither Peers nor Parliament
can have Supremacy: the Sectaries chiefest argument out of Bracton answered:
our Laws prove all Sovereignty to be in the King. Page 70. The two chiefest
parts of the Regal Government: the four properties of a just war: and how the
Parliamentary Faction transgress in every property. Page 74 CHAP. XIII.
Shows, how the first Government of Kings was arbitrary: the places of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 17. and of Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. discussed: whether Ahab offended in desiring
Naboths Vineyard, and wherein: why absolute power was granted unto Kings, and
how the diversities of Government came up. Page 78. The extent of the grants of
Kings: what they may, and what they may not grant: what our Kings have not
granted, in seven special prerogatives; and what they have granted unto their
people. Page 83 CHAP. XIV. Shows the Kings grants unto His People to be of
three sorts, Which ought to be observed: the Act of excluding the Bishops out
of Parliament discussed: the Kings Oath at His Coronation: how it obliges him:
and how Statutes have been procured and repealed. Page 88. Certain quaeries
discussed, but not resolved: the end for which God ordained Kings: the praise
of a just rule: Kings ought to be more just then all others in three respects:
and what should most especially move them to rule their people justly. Page 92
CHAP. XV. Shows the honor due to the king. 1. Fear. 2. An high esteem of
our king: how highly the Heathens esteemed of their kings: the Marriage of
obedience and authority: the Rebellion of the Nobility how heinous. 3.
Obedience, fourfold: diverse kinds of Monarchs: and how an absolute Monarch
may limit himself. Page 98 CHAP. XVI. Shows the answer to some objections
against the obeying of our Sovereign Magistrate: all actions of three kinds:
how our consciences may be reformed: of our passive obedience to the
Magistrates: and of the kings concessions, how to be taken. CHAP. XVII.
Shows, how tribute is due to the king: for six special reasons to be paid:
the condition of a lawful tribute: that we should not be niggards to assist
the king: that we should defend the Kings Person: the wealth and pride of
London the cause of all the miseries of this Kingdom: and how we ought to pray
for our king. Page 116 CHAP. XVIII. The persons that ought to honor the king;
and the recapitulation of 21 wickednesses of the Rebels, and the faction of
the pretended Parliament. Page 121 CHAP. XIX. Shows, how the Rebellious
faction have transgressed all the ten Commandments of the Law, and the new
Commandment of the Gospel: how they have committed the seven deadly sins;
and the four crying sins; and the three most destructive sins to the soul of
man: and how their Ordinances are made against all Laws, equity, and
conscience. Page 213 CHAP. XX. Shows, how the rebellious Faction forswore
themselves: what trust is to be given to them: how we may recover our peace and
prosperity: how they have un-king'd the Lords Anointed: and for whom they have
exchanged him: and the conclusion of the whole. Page 127
PSALM. 39.5. (...).

Verily, every man living, or, in his best estate, is altogether Vanity: Sela.


OUR Blessed Lord and Savior says, the night comes, John 9.4.
when no man can work; therefore I must work the Works of him that sent me
whilst it is day; and S. Paul tells us, the time will come when men will not
endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts they shall heap to themselves
Teachers, that is, 2 Timothy 4.3.
Teachers enough, in every place, and every time, so the word (...) signifies;
but what kind of Teachers shall they heap unto themselves? the Apostle tells
you, they shall be teachers after their own lusts, that is, such Tub-teachers
of the new Order, as will study rather to satisfy their lusts, and to preach
what they please best, than to edify their souls.

And I believe all wise men see, that time is now, and not till now, fully
come; therefore it behooves all the true Teachers to bestir themselves to work
the works of him that sent them while it is day, while they have any time, and
while there is any true Light yet remaining, before the sad night and darksom
clouds of Errors and Heresies be grown so far, and to prevail so much against
the Truth, that you shall scarce find any place or person, where or by whom the
new lights may be confronted, and the old Truth confirmed unto us.

So it behooves me, and it is my duty, to employ my Talent to the uttermost of
my power against these false Prophets of the Great Antichrist, that is now come
into the world, and by these heaps of his Emissaries, labors quite to
overthrow the Church of Christ.

And as Clement records, that when Barnabas came to Rome, to preach the
Gospel of Christ, and diverse rejected it, he briefly said, In vestra potestate
est, vel recipere quae annuntiamus, vel speruere; It is in your choice, either
to receive what we teach, or to reject it; but we may not be silent, and not
speak quod vobis expedire novimus; what we know to be expedient and necessary
for you, quia nobis si taceamus, damnum est, and vobis, quae dicimus si non
recipiatis, pernicies est; Ciem. Recog. l. 1. p. 6.
so say I.

And therefore, that you may be something, and so happy, I beseech you listen to
these words, that testify, that in your selves, you are nothing but Vanity.
For verily, every man --

And the nearest way to exchange this Vanity for Eternity, and so to make us
happy that are in misery, is to know our own vanity, and to understand our own
misery: For Knowledge, says Hugo Card. is the way to God, and understanding,
says the Prophet David, Psalm. 49.12, and 20.
is that which distinguishes and differenceth man from beast; for man, though
he be never so great in honor, never so powerful in place, and never so rich
in wealth, yet, if he has no understanding, he is compared to the beasts that
perish.

And the two chiefest parts, which are like the Body and Soul of all the
Knowledge that makes us happy, are these two Precepts so much commended, and so
often urged unto us, even by the Heathens themselves, that yet notwithstanding
were destitute of all true Knowledge, that could make them happy, because they
knew rightly neither of those two things that they so much commended; which
were, 1. (...), Know God. 2. (...), Know thy self.
For,

John 17.3.1. to know God the only way to make us happy.
1. Our Savior tells us, this is eternal Life to know God (i.e.) to know the
Father to be the only true God, and whom he has sent, Jesus Christ: For the
Heathens knew, that God alone is the summum bonum, and the only true and
perfect Eternity, to which all men naturally have a propensity and desire to be
united; but yet cannot, because they know him not; and therefore is that
Precept, to know him, so often urged.

The reason why we know not so much of God as should make us happy
And the reason why we know not so much of God as we should, and which should
make us happy, is, because we know not our selves; we know not our own vanity
and misery: for the nearest way to bring us to Eternity, is to understand our
own vanity, and the first step to happiness is, to know our selves to be
unhappy, and that this unhappiness was derived unto us by that sad accident of
sin, which separated us from God, who is felicity and eternity, and made us
wholly to become vanity, and replenished with all misery: and therefore,

2. The very Philosophers could tell us, that to know our selves is the ready
way both to know God, 2. To konw our selves, the best way to know God.
and to enjoy God: For as he that knows God, will never rely on himself, so
he that knows himself, will always seek to rely on God, because he sees his
own vanity, his weakness, and his frailty to be such and so great, that he
cannot subsist without God; and therefore Socrates, seeing this sentence,
(...), Know thy self, engraven upon the Portal of the Temple of Apollo, and
considering with himself that there could be no access unto God, but through
his House, and no entrance into the House, but by the Door; and then seriously
musing with himself, why this Sentence should be set upon the door, he
concluded, that the readiest way to come to God, was to know himself; and
therefore he left the course and practice of other Philosophers, that searched
into the motions of the Heavens, and the influence of the Planets, and applied
their studies rerum cognoscere causas, to understand the causes of all natural
things, which they conceived was the only thing that could make them happy, and
bring them to enjoy the summum bonum; and he gave himself wholly to learn the
knowledge of himself, and he conceived there was no folly comparable to this,
to be painful and diligent to know all other things, and to be ignorant and
know nothing of himself; to study Arts and Sciences, and to forget himself; and
therefore non se quaesiverit extra, but he employed all his time and his pains
to know himself; because he conceived that the knowledge of himself would be
more beneficial to him than the knowledge of all other physical things
whatsoever: For which cause and no other, the Oracle, seeing him preferring the
moral Philosophy before the Natural, pronounced him the wisest man in Greece,
not because his knowledge was more complete, or his sufficiency greater than
others, but because his knowledge of himself was far better than the knowledge
of others that studied other things, and neglected to understand themselves.

And no marvel, that the Oracle should proclaim him for the wisest man that
does best know himself; because it is not only very good and profitable, but
also a very hard and difficult thing for a man fully and truly to know himself;
that is, to know,

Not only the quiddities and the qualities both of his body and of his soul,
which notwithstanding in themselves are most admirable and excellent, if we
consider,

1. The Parts and composition of the Body, which as the Prophet says, are
fearfully and wonderfully made, yea so admirably composed, that Galen says,
Galenus de usu partium. 1. The admirable structure of man's body.
the true expression, or the tight. Anatomization of them, is as an holocaust,
or Sacrifice, most acceptable to God, that has by that excellent composure of
this incomparable structure, showed his own most incomprehensible wisdom; as
you see, the least finger, and the least Joint of any Finger, has his use, and
cannot be spared by any means.

2. That far more noble part of man, that Spark of heavenly fire, 2. The
difficulty of understanding the particularities of the Soul.
and immortal spirit, which is his Soul, in the Original, Essence, Faculties,
Operations, Use, End, and the like, almost infinite Points thereof, wherein and
about which the best Philosophers have so puzzled themselves, that they rather
bewrayed their own Ignorance, than truly expressed any point of the most
necessary knowledge of this Substance, as learned Suarez, in his voluminous
work de Anima, shows; and Aristotle himself confesses, when he says, that
the more knowledge a man has of these things, the more occasion of doubting is
offered unto him; which made him as many men think, to define the Soul to be
(...), corporis phisici and organici vitam habentis potentia; which is ignotum
per ignotius, a definition harder, Arist. de Anima, l. 2. c. 1. tex. 6. Cicero,
l. 1. Tuscul. q. What man should chiefly know concerning himself.
or at least as hard to be understood, as the thing defined. Whenas Cicero,
reading (...) for (...), translateth the same to signify a continued and
perpetual motion, which is far short of the right definition of the Soul.

But especially to know man's Original, how he came into the world, his duty,
what he should do, and how he should behave himself, while he continues in the
world; his state and condition, how he stands in relation to his God that
made him, preserves him, and gives to him all that he has, while he lives
in this world, and what shall become of him when he dies, and departs out of
this world; these, and the like Considerations concerning man, are hard to
know, and few men do learn them, which is the reason that few do attain to
Eternal Life.

Yet as the Poet says, Plagae dant Animum. What effects Afflictions do work in
us.
And as S. Greg. says, Oculos quos culpa claudit, poena apperit; the eyes
which sin and transgressions have blinded, afflictions and punishments have
opened; because, as the Greek proverb says, (...), Persecutions bring
Instructions, and suffering teaches understanding; as the Children of Jacob,
being questioned and afflicted in Egypt, about their Brother, whom they had
sold unto the Ishmaelites, had their eyes opened, and their sin, which for so
many years they had buried in the Grave of Forgetfulness, and in the Pit, where
they had thrown their Brother, is now revived, and makes them to confess, and
to say one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we
saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; Genesis
42.21.
therefore is this distress come upon us; and so Crosses and Afflictions do
reduce our sins unto our remembrance, and extort Confession of their Misdeeds
from many others.

And therefore the Prophet David, either upon the consideration of Absolons
unnatural Rebellion and Persecution of him, What moved the Prophet David to
compose this Psalm.
that was both his King and his Father; or of some other violent and virulent
Temptation that had seized upon him, or else upon a Prophetical foresight of
the Captivity of his people in Babylon, as he shows in another place, saying,
By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept when we remembered thee O Sion;
or, as others think, Psalm. 137.1.
upon the consideration of the sad state, and distressed condition of many good
Christians laboring under the Cross, and Persecutions in this world, he
composeth this most Excellent Psalm of the brevity and shortness of man's life,
that he need not fear, he shall continue long in affliction; and he directs
the same to Jeduthim, a chief Musician, because the chiefest Artist can give
most grace, and the best life to any thing; and the best is best cheap,
Physician, Preacher, Lawyer, or whom you will.

And here in this Verse which I have read unto you, the holy Prophet
endeavoring to teach us how we may oversome all our maladies and
part^rbations, even as himself had done, with patience, he sets down a brief
definition, or rather a short description of man; A brief Theological
description of man.
not Phylosophically with Aristotle, to teach us what he is in his Essence;
Animal rationale risibile, a reasonable and a sociable creature, but
Theologically, by the light of Gods Spirit, to instruct us what he is in his
state and condition, and that is, Animal miserable mortale, a most miserable
mortal wretch, a worm and no man a vain thing, or mere vanity, and that is to
be understood while he lives in this world; for as all Divines conclude, there
be three states of man.

That there be three states of man.
1. Institutionis. 2. Destitutionit. 3. Restitutionis. That is, 1. Of his
Innocence, in Paradise, where he was created to holiness and true
righteousness, after the very Image of God himself.

2. Of his sinful condition, and corruption, while he lives here now in this
world.

3. Of his Restoration, begun here by grace in this life, and perfected with
glory in the life to come.

Of what state of man the Prophet speaks.
And, as Origin well observes, the Prophet David describes here, not what we
were in our Creation, nor what we shall be in our Glorification, but what we
are now in out natural state and corrupted condition of our peregrination, or
pilgrimage here in this world, whereof he faith, Verily, every man living, or
every man in his best estate, is altogether vanity.

Where summarily, you may see, that Man is the subject of the Discourse, and
Vanity is the Possession, the Inheritance, and the definition of every man; for
though God made not Death, but made man for perpetuity to be united to himself
in all Eternity; yet Sin brought forth death into the world, and Death went
over all, and so all are become nothing but mere vanity.

The difference betwixt Vanity and Eternity seen.
And truly, there cannot be a greater contrariety betwixt light and darkness, or
a further distance betwixt East and West, Heaven and Hell, than is betwixt
Vanity and Eternity, as you may see by the Names of the one, and the Nature of
the other; For,

1. By the names of Vanity.
1. Vanity, which the Greeks and the Septuagint here call (...), the Hebreaws,
to show the nature of it, do express the same by many very significant words
(as the Learned in that language do declare) and especially by these four words.

1. By Elil, which they say, signifies nothing, or a thing of no moment; in
which sense, 1. Elil. 1 Cor. 8.4. (...).
St. Paul says, That an Idol is nothing in the world; as if he had said, An
Idol is Al-el, not God; because the Idols are not Elohim, Gods that shall
continue, but Elilim, that is things of nothing, and things, which shall be
reduced into nothing.

And the Hebricians say, that this word Elil has great affinity with the verb
Ialal, which signifies to howl; because the following after Vanities, and the
vain things of this world, or the serving of Idols and worshipping of Images,
which is the vainest thing in the world, What the following after Vanities does
bring to us.
can bring nothing unto us, but weeping and howling, which the Latins call
Ululatus, and Ululatus is derived from the Greek word (...), or (...), that
signifies Perire and in nihilum redigere, to perish, and be utterly undone, or
to be reduced into nothing; even as the Psalmist says of all Idolaters, Psalm.
97.7.
Confounded be all they that worship carved Images, and that delight vain gods;
and as St. James says of those rich Worldlings, that follow atter the vanities
of this world, James 5.1. (...). 2. Hebel.
Weep and howl, for your miseries that shall come upon you.

2. By Hebel, which in Eccles. 1.1. is written Habel, from the verb Habal,
which signifies to vanish as a thing, Qua non est quidpiam, aut qua cite
desinit, which either is not any thing at all, or which suddenly perishes,
like unto a blast, either is nothing, or is of such a short continuance, as
though it were nothing at all; Sic enim Infantem Habraei halitum appellant, for
so the Hebrews do call their Infants blasts, says Sanctes Pagninus; and such a
blast wan Habel, whose righteous soul by an unexpected death was suddenly blown
up to heaven, to cry against the unnatural cruelty of his brother.

And accordingly to this signification of Hebel, the Greeks express the same
thing by (...), of (...), vilescere, to grow vile, and to be of no validity or
no worth in the world, as are all the things of this world, Philip. 3.8.
in comparison of the heavenly things, no better than dung and dross as the
Apostle speaks.

3. By Caza, which signifies a lie, 3. Caza.
and has great affinity with the verb Caschaph, to bewitch, as they are, as it
were bewitched, that are seduced to believe lies instead of truth; even as St.
Paul says unto the Galathians, Who has bewitched you? That is, deceived and
seduced you, from the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 3.1.
to believe the lies and false doctine of the Heretics, and the new-sprung
Preachers that are amongst you? And so the Prophet David calls all the vain
things of this world, Lying vanities, saying, O ye sons of men, Psalm. 4.2.
how long will ye blaspheme mine honor, and have such pleasure in vanity, and
seek after leasing? That is, such lying things as do bewitch men, to love them,
and to hunt after them, like those little children that run up and down all day
long to catch Butterflyes or Feathers, and when they have cathed them, they
have nothing but such fruitless things as are of no value, but like the Spiders
web, that will be no garment for them.

4. By Rik, which signifies inanity or vacinity, 4. Rik.
from whence the word Raka, that our Savior uses in the Gospel, and is taken
for a fool, whose head is empty, and void of all understanding, is derived; for
as when Kings are deprived of their Sovereignty, disrobed of their power,
dis-joyned from their Regality, they are as no bodies, I am sure no Kings; and
as Bishops silenced from preaching, and secluded from their Offices, are no
Bishops, but, as when Ciphers are separated from their Figures, they do make
just nothing at all, though they should be never so many, even so the creature
dis-joyned from God, and opposed to the Creator, and so likewise shadows
opposed to the substance, darkness to the light, lies unto the truth, and all
finite things to eternity; they are inania most vain, and nothing but
privations, or things that do suddenly vanish into nothing.

Out of all which words, and the like, that are used to explain this Vanity,
Aristot. Phisie. l. 2.
that Definition of Aristotle may well stand, Vanum id esse, quod ordinatum est
ad aliquid, sicut ad finem, and non potest attingere; that is vanity, which
cannot attain unto the end for which it was appointed; for so the Prophet Esaias,
Isa. 49 4:
after he had preached a long time, and had made many Sermons for the amendment
of the Jews, and yet could no more recall that stiffenecked people from their
abominations, thin we can reclaim our hearers from their transgressions, cries
out, In vacuum laboravi, I have labored in vain; I have spent my strength for
naught; and so man by his sin and disobedience unto his God, not attaining unto
his end, that is, his Union and communion with God, for which he was created,
and by which he should have enjoyed an everlasting happy Being, is now become
vain, and liable to be reduced to an eternal miserable Being, and to a far
worser condition than an everlasting nothing. And so you see what is Vanity.

But 2. The opposite thereof, which is Verity, and is derived a vero, 2. The
nature of Verity and Eternity.
from that which is a thing real, and not fained, or else a vere, from the
Springtime, because the Truth is always fresh, and springs, and is
sufficient to subsist of it self, and will prevail, as Zorobabel says, against
all assaults; and such a thing is Eternity, which is diametrically opposed unto
Vanity, and is called by the Greeks diuria, that is, Interminabilis vit aesimul
tota and perfecta possessio, Bettius de consolat, Philosop. l. 5.
an infinite boundless gulf of time, which no lin^ can fathom, no tongue can
express, says Bottius; because not only if you do retrospect and look backward
into the time past, you shall find, Cicero Not. Deorum, l. 1.
that, as Cicero says, Fuit quaedam ab infinito tempore aeternitas, quam nulla
circumscriptio temporum metiebatur; there has been a certain Eternity from an
infinite space of time, which no circumscription of time could measure; sed
qualis ea spatio fuerit, intelligi non potest, but what manner of space that
should be, cannot be understood, quod nec in cogitationem quidem cadit, ut
fuerit tempus aliquod, nullum cum tempus esset; neither can it fall into the
thought of man to consider truly, how any time should be, when as yet there was
no time: but also if you look forward, into the time to come, you shall find
that when there shall be neither Sun nor Moon, which are appointed to be the
measure of time, yet there will be an endless infinite space of time, that
cannot be terminated.

What time is, and how expressed. Apuleius de dogm. Platonis.
And Apuleius, the Platonist, says, that time is but the Image of Eternity, and
that time moves, but Eternity moves not, being naturally fixed, and eternally
immovable; and also that time passes toward Eternity, and ends in the
Perfection thereof, the time being dissolved whenever the Creator of this
world pleases; but Eternity abiding for ever.

Eternity how expressed.
And in this respect the Egyptians, that taught all by Hierogliphicks,
represented Eternity by a Circle, which had neither beginning nor ending; and
for the same cause, Numa Pompilius, that was unto the Romans, as Moses was unto
the Jews, the Author of all their Religion and Religious Ceremonies, and
others, the ancient Pontifices of the Romans, erected their Temples, which they
dedicated unto their gods, whom they conceived to be aeternal, in a circular
form; and Mercurius Trismegistus, one of the most ancient Philosophers that we
read of, expressed this Eternity by an intellectual Sphaere, whose Center is
every where, and Circumference no where; because Eternity cannot be bounded
within any compass, nor terminated by any Limits.

The difference betwixt Eternity and Perpetuity.
And the difference which these wise men assigned, betwixt Eternity and
Perpetuity is this, that Eternity is that which has neither beginning of
days, nor end of time, as is God alone, and none else; but perpetuity is that,
which though it had a beginning, yet it shall never have an end, as are the
Angels both good and bad, and the Souls of all men, both the righteous and
unrighteous.

All men desire perpetuity, and to be united to Eternity.
And therefore it is naturally ingrafted in the Soul of every man to affect
perpetuity, and to desire to have an Union and Communion with God, which is
Eternity; because as S. August. says, God made us for himself, that we might
be perpetually with him; and ideo irrequietum est cor nostrum douec requiescat
in eo; and therefore, as no Element, no thing, can rest satisfied and
contented, until it comes to its own proper place, as the fire to be on high,
and the stone to come to the bottom; so our hearts can never attain to any true
rest, until they do rest in God; and nothing in the world can satisfy the mind
of man, but that which is above man; neither can all the Gold of Ophir, all the
Sand of Tagus, all the Treasures of Egypt, all the riches of the World, and all
the allectives under Heaven, make a proportionable Object to satisfy the Soul
of man; for seeing, as some Philosophers have observed, the heart of man is
after a sort made triangle wise, and the world circular, therefore as a Globe
can never fill a triangular figure, so no more can the whole world replenish
the vast corners and the illimited desires of man's heart.

Therefore the very Heathens, that knew no more of God than what Nature taught
them, How the heathens affected to have an union with Eternity.
had an earnest desire to attain unto an Union with this Eternity; as we read
how Cleombrotus, hearing the Philosophers discoursing of the excellency of
Eternity, and the Felicity of the soul united unto the Deity, in an overhasty
desire of this Unition, tumbled himself voluntarily to death, that his soul
might presently enjoy that happy Life; and Socrates smiled upon his Hemlock,
that his Adversary gave him to dispatch his life, while he assured himself,
that it would send him from this mortal Frailty unto eternal felicity.

And not only these particular men, and the like learned Philosophers, and
wisest sort of men, but we read also, how those famous Nations of the
Brachmans, Indians, Persians, and indeed all other Pagans whatsoever, had this
desire of Immortality and Eternity imprinted in their hearts by the pen of
Nature.

And no marvel; Why they desired perpetuity.
for as thou can not like so well of the longest Lease of thy House or Lands,
as of the Freehold and Perpetuity; so there can be no true rest, nor any
satisfying content, in any transient thing, but only in that which is
perpetual; for when we have improved our Ambition to our own content, even to
the height of our hearts desire, and have attained to so much happiness as this
world can afford us, and are become the only men both in Court and Country,
both in Church and State, and as able to do so much in the Ecclesiastical
Affairs, as Ensebius Bishop of Nicomedia could do with Constantius, the Arian
Emperor; and as much in the Political State, as Haman could do with Ahasuerus,
Sejanus with Tiberius, or Hebraem Bassa with Saladine the Great Turk, who were
the only Favorites, that were most powerful with these great Monarchs, and as
dearly beloved of them, as Ephestion was of Alexander: or more than this, could
we come to be the Pope, that challenges to be the Head of the Church, or to be
such a Monarch as was Alexander, Nebuchaduezzar, or the most Illustrious of all
the Romans Emperors, yet then, we may be cut off with Belshazzar, in the midst
of our days; or if we can be permitted to spin the Thread of our Lives, to the
fullness of years, yet at last, and that soon enough, time and age will take us
down, and we shall bring our years to an end, even as a Tale that is told; and
then as Job says, the eye that saw us, shall see us no more, and the men that
feared us, shall fear us no more; but seeing that, as Solomon says, a living
Dog is better than a dead Lion, the poor living Snakes, that are now trod upon
by the Tyrants and Oppressors of this world, may then tread upon the Graves,
and trample upon the necks of their greatest persecuters; even as Diogenes did
upon those buried Kings and Princes, amongst whom he sought for the bones of
King Philip, but could not distinguish them from the bones of a Peasant.

But what of that? What matter of all this? when as the Divinity of the School
of Epicures is, that after death there remains nothing of us to be any ways
prejudiced, nor any thing any ways at all: and the Doctrine of the Stoics is
nothing different, when as Seneca, though he seemed to be a friend to that
Principle of the Immortality of the Soul, yet this is one of his proper
Aphorisms, that non potest esse miser qui nullus est; he cannot be a wretched
man that is no man; and to show that after death, there is no more tidings of
any man, he writes unto Martia, quod mors omnium est solutio, ultra quam mala
nostra non exeunt, How many men denied the immortality of the soul, and the
life that is to come.
that death is the resolution and period of all things, beyond which our evils
cannot extend; and Cicero tells us, that his friend Atticus was hardly persuaded
to believe the immortality of the Soul; and before him Cebes in Plato, was of
the same mind, and Dicaarchus that, as Cicero says, wrote three Books of the
mortality of the soul, and Panetius, whom Cicero in all his Offices does so
much commend, and so often imitate, and diverse Philosophers, as Epicurus and
Democritus, that lived in the time of Alexander the Great, were in like manner
so blinded by the devil, as not only to doubt, but also to believe this
damnable Doctrine; Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 7. Arnob. in Oct.
and Pliny judges this Doctrine to be puerile deliramentum, a childish
simplicity; and so likewise Cecilius, as Arnobius testifies, calls these
Tenets of the Christians Anniles Christianorums Fabulas, old wives Fables; and
Nicephorus writes, that Synesius the Platonist, quoad alia quae Christiani
profitentur, promptum se and facilem praebuit, Nicephorus, l. 14. c. 55.
approved well of all other points that the Christians professed, sed
Resurrectionis doctrinam nefandam ac detestandam judicavit, but the Doctrine of
the Resurrection he liked not; and the Poets cried out with Theocritus, Non est
Spes ulla sepultis. But as Catullus says, though Soles occidere and redire
possunt, Catul. ad Los^, p. 3.
the Sun and Moon may lie down and rise again, yet, nobis cum semel occidit
brevis lux, nox est perpetua una dormienda; when once our short life is fallen
down, we shall have one perpetual night to sleep, and so Lucretinus and
Enninus, and many more, were of the same faith.

And which is wonderful, in the School of Christ, we find some of the same
mind, as of old time, Hymenaeus and Philetus, with whom joined the
Valentinians, Corpocratians, Cerdonians, Gnostics, Marcionites, Selucians,
Manichees, Hieraclites, Priscillianists, and the rest of that litter, as
Saturninus, Basilides, Secundus, Marcus, Appelles, and some of the Popes
themselves, with John the 23, and Leo the 10. that as they were transcendently
wicked, so they were wickedly tainted with this error, and liked not of this
truth; and many more of their associates in these our own days, that following
Hobbs his Leviathan have fallen away from the faith, and as if, per (...)
animarum, the souls of these Heretics had entered into their bodies, they will
neither believe the resurrection of the body, nor the immortality of their
souls, and therefore they labor not for their union with this Eternity.

Yea, and that which is more to be admired, such is the corruption of our
nature, and the madness of our minds, that although the continual sight, and
most sensible apprehension of our vanity, and the shortness of our lives in
this world, mingles all our best wine with most bitter waters, and puts a stop
unto our pleasures, and many sad thoughts into our heads, and perplexities into
our hearts; yea, though it seems that there is in a man a kind of
inclination and disposition of nature, and an earnest desire to continue and
perpetuate his being; and that it is a thing universally, religiously (because
it is the principal foundation of all Religion) and peaceably received and
concluded throughout all the Christian world, especially by an outward and
public profession, that the soul of man is immortal, and shall so continue for
ever, and that there shall be a resurrection of the body, and another life
after this; yet seriously and inwardly in their hearts, not only the Epicures,
The many worldly professors of the Christian Religion, do believe neither the
immortality of the soul, nor the resurrection of their bodies, nor any other
life after this life.
and the Heretics aforenamed, and the Sadduces, the greatest Lords of the
Jews, that did not stick with open mouth to deny it, but also the greatest part
of these our Christian Professors, as I fear, do believe neither the
immortality of the soul, nor the resurrection of the dead, nor any other life
after this, the short life of their vanity.

For is it possible that men should be so haughty, and so proud, so covetous,
and such oppressors of their Neighbors, so sacrilegious, and such robbers and
spoylers of God himself, as we see men are, so as the Poet says, Vnde habent,
cura est paucis, sed oportet habere. Is it possible, I say, they should be
such, if they did believe, that their souls are immortal, that after this
momentary life of their vanity, their bodies shall awake and rise out of their
graves, and that Christ shall come to judge them according to the works they
have done in this life; and as he says himself, To render unto every one as
his deeds shall be? No surely, it cannot be, that they do believe these things;
but, as the Fool, whatsoever he professed with his mouth to deceive the world,
yet said in his heart, There is no God; so they, whatsoever they say in words,
yet factis negant, their deeds tell us to their faces, that they do but
dissemble, and deceive themselves, but they cannot deceive God, nor all wise
men, that will rather believe their own eyes, in what they see them do, than
their words, in what they say they do believe.

What a persidious fellow Carbo was.
And therefore as when Carbo swore any thing in the Senate, the Senators and the
people of Rome presently swear they did not believe him: So, when these
sacrilegious persons, and thief grievous oppressors of the poor, and the
rooters out of the innocent from their possessions, do profess that they
believe these things, What Apollo^orus dreamed
I do profess unto you, that I believe them not. But as Apollodorus, the
Tyrant, dreamed, that he was taken and flead by the Scythians, and his heart
thrown into a boiling Caldron, should say unto him, I am the cause of all this
mischief; so I say, The hearts of these men deceive them, for as the Wise man
says, The heart is deceitful above all things; and for a man to deceive
himself is the worse deceit in the world; for excepting the worst of thoughts,
which is the thought of the Fool, that said in his heart, There is no God;
there cannot be a more brutish and perverse thought than to imagine that the
soul perishes when the body is dissolved; for what need we care what evil we
do, what need we fear what Judge condemn us, or why should we abstain from any
of our desires, if our souls dye, when our bodies are dead?

But to show you, that whatsoever they say, yet they do not believe in any
eternal being, either of body or soul after the end of this their vanity: The
former point proved.
I pray you look into an excellent Book, though slighted by some Fanatic
spirits where the Wiseman shows how the profane worldlings, and the worldly
Atheists do make this conclusion of their incredulity, to be the ground and
foundation of all their impieties; for they say, but not aright, Our life is
short and tedious, and in the death of a man there is no remedy, neither was
there any man known to have returned from the grave; for we are born at all
adventure, and we shall be hereafter as though we had never been, for the
breath in our nostrils is as smoke, which being extinguished, our body shall be
turned into ashes, and our spirit shall vanish as the soft air. Sap. 2.1, 2, 3.
This is their says, and therefore they make this conclusion, saying, Come let
us enjoy the good things that are present, and let us speedily use the
creatures like as in youth, Cap. eod. v. 6, 7, 8, 9.10, 11, and
let us fill our selves with costly Wine and Ointments, and let no flower of
the Spring pass by us, let us crown our selves with Rose-buds before they be
withered; let none of us go without part of his voluptuousnesss, for this is
our portion, and our lot is this, Let us oppress the poor righteous man, let us
not spare the widow, nor reverence the ancient gray hairs of the aged; let our
strength be the Law of Justice, and let us lie in wait for the righteous. And
this was the very reasoning of Sardanapalus.

Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas. There is no felicity after death,
therefore soul take thine ease, sit down and be merry; and I fear it is the
occasion of so much wickedness in many men, and of such a deluge of sin in
these days, that does overflow both the Church and Commonwealth to the
destruction and ruin of many thousand souls, that in their hearts they scarce
believe their souls to be immortal, or that there shall be ever any
resurrection of their bodies, or any account to be given for what they do, for
so you see the reason why they oppress the poor, and rob both God and man, and
satisfy themselves with all kind of delights, because their breath in their
nostrils is as smoke, which being extinguished, their bodies shall be turned
into ashes, and their spirit, as they suppose, shall vanish as the soft air.

And truly, I think the conclusion very good, if there were any truth in the
premises; for though Plato and Socrates and Seneca, and the like virtuous men
did so much love virtue, for the very beauty of virtue, and did hate vice only
for the ugliness of vice; and Anselimus is reported to have said, he had rather
to be virtuous, though severely punished for it, than be vicious, though never
so highly rewarded; yet, because these Ejaculations spring from more than
ordinary knowledge, no less than some sparks of the motions of Gods Spirit,
which God sometimes wrought in the hearts of the Heathens, and much more in
Anselimus that was a Christian: It is contrary to all show of reason, that a
man, The incredulity of the life to come, the cause that men commit much
wickedness.
which believes the mortality of the soul, should have any desire to be
virtuous, or any fear to be most vicious, unless it be only for fear of some
Temporal punishment.

For if our time be but a very shadow that soon passes away, and after that
our end, there is no returning, why should I endure so much labor, and suffer
so much want, or want so much pleasure, as the reach of my wit, or the laws of
my strength can any ways afford me? or why should I abstain from any vice,
from any villainy, and fast, and weep, and mourn, and go in sackcloath and
ashes, if after one moment of time, I shall be reduced to nothing, and be never
more questioned, and neither rewarded for my good deeds, nor punished for my
evil doings.

Therefore I think that this Atheistical conceit of the annihilation of the
soul, and the incredulous thought of the immortality thereof, is the main cause
of so much wickedness, as is now raging in the world.

And on the other side, if men did but seriously think, and faithfully believe,
that after this short time of a few days pilgrimage, our souls shall remain
for ever, and receive either everlasting joys, if they do well, or eternal
punishments, if they do evil, I do assure my self, that men would have some
care for the time to come, and like Moses, choose rather to suffer a momentary
affliction with the people of God, Heb. 11.25.
than to enjoy the plesures of sin for a season, and so engage themselves to
endure the punishment of sin for ever.

The necessity of rooting out this incredulity.
And therefore to root out so pestilent an error, and to confirm so necessary a
truth, as is the doctrine of the Immortality of the soul for the perpetuating
of man; all wise men, that had any love of goodness in them, and all the holy
men of God, both in the Old and New Testament, and all the Fathers of the
primitive Church, and their successors, the Bishops, and other godly
Preachers, to this very day, have been careful to preach this truth, and have
showed themselves very punctual and plentiful in this point; for to let pass
what Ovid says, Morte carent animae, Ovid. Metam. Tibul. l. 4. Propertius.
Claud. Manilius l. 4. Plato in Tim. Cicero de repub. som^o Scip. and l. 1.
Tusc. quest.
and what Propertius says, Sunt aliquid manes, laethum non omnia finit;
luridaque evictos effugit umbra rogos; and what Claudian says, Haec sola
manet, bustoque superstes evolat; and to pass over the testimony of Pherecides,
that was Master unto Pythagoras, and of Socrates and Plato and Cicero, and the
rest of the Philosophers and Orators, that with unanswerable arguments have
maintained the souls of men to be immortal; and so likewise to pass by the
unanimous consent of the Fathers that were so plain and so plentiful to prove
the same, as you may see in S. Clement Recog. l. 1. Iren. l. 2. c. 63. and 64.
cont. Valent. Tertul. de res. carnis. S. Aug. dogmat. Eccles. c. 16. Arnobius
de fide resur. and the rest of them almost in every place, I find the
Prophets, and our Savior himself, and his Apostles be very exact and diligent
to declare the same, and to prove it so fully that the most incredulous heart,
if it were not filled with all blindness, could not conceive the least thought
against it.

Yet because the Devil is still tempting men to incredulity, and to doubt of
these things, and is still so powerful with these worldlings, that he quite
blinds them, so that they cannot see the clearest light, nor understand the
plainest truth.

Therefore to undeceive these silly souls that do so miserably deceive
themselves, we are still bound to defend and vindicate these truths; and in
that respect, I likewise shall not think much to produce some few Reasons that
the Devil himself cannot answer, to make it manifest, that although man in this
life is altogether vanity, and but a blast, of no continuance, as hereafter I
shall show unto you, yet God made man to be perpetual, for God made all things
that they might have their being, and especially man, not to be reduced to
nothing, and he made the soul of man immortal, and never to dye, but to live
for ever; For,

Arguments proving the immortality of the Soul, and the life to come.
1. Moses tells you, that when God had framed and made man of the dust of the
earth, He breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and so man became a
living soul, and not a dying soul, or a soul that should dye; but such a soul,
as should live for ever, because the soul is the cause of our natural,
spiritual and eternal life; whence the Latins do call the soul, Life, (...),
quia vivificat corpus dum adest, and seipsam cum abest a corpore. And when God
threatened Adam, that if he did eat of the forbidden fruit, Or surely dye. Genesis
2.17.
he should dye the death; that death signifies not the death of the soul, or
the annihilation of the body, but the dissolution or separation of the soul
from the body; that as it was made out of the dust, so it might return to the
dust again, which while the soul remained in it, unseparated, it could not
return; and this St. Paul shows plainly, when he says, (...) (...), If our
earthly house be dissolved, that is, 2 Cor. 5.
dis-joynted, as a house that we pull down is separated one part from another,
but not destroyed, so is the soul separated from the body, and neither of them
destroyed, and reduced into nothing; but the soul remains still immortal for
ever, and as God says, Genesis 3.19.
the body returns to the dust from whence it was taken.

2. It is said, that Abel being unnaturally murdered by his blood-thirsty
Brother, vox sanguinum clamabat ad deum; and the Hebrew word, says Collerus,
signifies, ex ingenti animi dolor exclamare, to cry out with a vehement grief
of mind, and queritando vociferari, and to complain with a most lamentable
voice; therefore surely his crying soul was still alive, though his slaughtered
body was lain dead.

3. God says unto Moses, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, and the God of your Fathers; therefore Abraham, Isaac, Exodus
3.15.
and Jacob, and the rest of their Fathers were still alive, (...), secundum
aliquid, and that is in respect of their Souls; because as our Savior says
unto the Sadduces, God is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living;
and the bodies of these men that were turned to dust, could not be said either
to be alive, or to be Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob: therefore Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob were still alive in respect of their Souls.

4. Moses is said to have died in the Land of Moab, and to be buried in a
valley over against Beth-peor, and yet S. Matthew. says, Deuteronomy. 34.5, 6. Mat.
17.3.
that when Jesus was transfigured on the Mount, Moses and Elias appeared to the
Apostles, talking with Christ, therefore Moses was dead, and not dead, and was
buried, and not buried, (...), (i. e.) dead in respect of his body, and living
in respect of his Soul; and so Moses and Elias were still alive, and they
themselves, in respect of their Souls, and not their shadows or phantasmes,
which can no ways be faid to be Moses and Elias, did then appear unto the
Apostles.

5. David says, I will not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord;
and yet David is dead, and was buried, therefore it is his Soul that lives.

6. The wise man says, that when a man dies, then shall the dust, that is,
Eccl. 12.7.
his body, return to the Earth, and the Spirit shall return to God that gave
it, and being with God, it cannot be dead, but remain immortal for ever.

7. When Lazarus died, he is said to be carried up by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom (i. e.) in respect of his Soul, Luke 16.22.
for his Body was not carried up into his Bosom: And so Dives being in
torments, must be understood in respect of his Soul; for it is said, that being
dead, he was buried, in respect of his Body; and therefore the Souls both of
the good and of the bad do still remain immortal.

8. Our Savior says, Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to
kill the Soul: therefore the Soul is immortal, whenas all the strength of man,
Mat. 10.28.
and all the power of Hell is not able to kill it.

9. The hope of Glory and Reputation, and the desire that every man has of the
continuance and perpetuity thereof, how vain soever it be, yet does it carry a
great evidence of the Immortality of our Souls.

10. The impression of that vice which robs a man of the knowledge of humane
Justice, and is always opposite to the Justice of God, and indelibly imprinted
in every man's Conscience, does infallibly conclude; that the Justice of God
requires the same should be chastised after death, and therefore that our
Souls must needs be immortal.

11. In the Book of Wisdom it is most plainly said, the souls of the righteous
are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment touch them; Sap. 3.1, 2, 3.
in the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, but they are in peace. A place
so plain, that sense can desire no plainer.

And many more Reasons might be produced to confirm this Truth, but these are
sufficient demonstrations to show unto you, that although man in respect of his
being in this life, is altogether Vanity, yet simply considered, he is to be
eternal, and to have a perpetual Being; because God never made man to have an
end, and to be reduced to nothing; but as the wise man says, he created all
things, and much rather man, that they might have their being.

Sap. 1.14.
And what madness is it therefore, that men will not believe this Truth?
especially considering, it is most certain, that the remembrance of their end,
and the shortness of their time here, how their days do pass away like a
Weavers shuttle, or like a Post that tarrieth not, will always be such a
corrasive to their Souls, as will put an end to all their earthly Comforts,
whenas nothing in the world is left us to rejoice in, but in that thing only
which is perpetual and remains ours for ever.

But then here you must understand, that besides the prime Eternity, which is
God, there is a twofold perpetuity of men.

That all men both good and bad shall remain and be perpetually.
1. The one, by our Unition with God, which is perfect felicity. 2. The other,
in our Separation from God, which is the Extremest Misery; And,
Seeing the Souls of men are immortal, and do naturally affect Eternity, as not
only Divinity shows, but also the soundest Philosophers have sufficiently
attested, and every man's Conscience, in the expectation of his reward for his
Actions, be they good or bad, persuades him to believe, it is most certain,
that those wicked worldlings which desire nothing but the Honors and the
Prosperity of this present Life, and those incredulous Heretics, both of the
former times, and of this present Age, which against their Consciences do
withstand this Truth, shall notwithstanding be perpetual, either in their Union
with God, or in their Separation from God, and as it is the greatest Comfort of
a Christian man to believe that he shall be everlastingly with God in all
happiness, so it is not the least torment unto a damned soul, to consider, that
he shall be for ever and ever in Torments, separated from God.

And therefore the Error is not, that men do seek for perpetuity, which they
shall be sure to have, but that they seek the same amiss.

The twofold error of men in seeking perpetuity. 1. Seecking it too late.
Either not that which is with their Union and Fruition of God; or if that, then
either not as they should, or not where they should seek it, that is, either
not in the due time, or nor in the right place, where it may be found; as,

1. For the time, many seek it, but too late; and so they miss it, because that
now is the time acceptable, and ex hoc momento pendet aeternitas, and our
perpetuity either with God, or without God, either in Joy or in Torments,
depends upon our demeanor in this present, and little short time, that we
have here to live.

2. For the Place, you may see how most men purchase Lands, build Castles,
gather Riches, 2. Seeking it in the wrong place.
heap up Treasures, and so lay down such Foundations of perpetuity here on
earth, as if they were to live here for ever; and they do so rely upon these
transient things, and mortal men, as if they were immortal Gods; and so they
seek for their perpetuity in the Regions of Vanity, and they would find perfect
Felicity in this Valley of Misery, but as the Israelites, by joining themselves
to Baalpeor, separated themselves from El shadai, the Almighty God; so these
men, by seeking Eternity in these vanities, shall never be able to find it, and
to be united with it, because Eternity and Felicity are not to be found here on
earth: For as the Apostle says, we have here no continuing City, and we are
but as Pilgrims and strangers here in this world, and our perpetuity is to be
expected, not in this life, but in the life to come.

And so by this large Introduction that I have made, you see that these words
of the Prophet are not to be understood of man simply considered, but of man
(...), in respect of his State and Condition in this life; for though man be to
abide for ever, yet as he is in this life, verily every man, --

And to prove this unto you, you shall find the wisest King and the most
learned Preacher that aver Israel had, assuring you, that there is nothing here
in this world but vanity and vexation of Spirit; and that you might the sooner
believe this Truth, he doubleth and trebleth his words, saying, Vanity of
Vanities, all is Vanity, that is, nothing else but mere vanity.

And lest proud Man should think, that this is meant of Gold and Silver, and
the like inanimate things of this world, or of the irrational Creatures, whose
Souls do perish with their bodies, and not of man, which is the Prince and Lord
of all Gods Creatures, the Glory of all Gods works, and the Image of God
himself, the Prophet David, that was both a great King and a great Prophet,
tells you plainly, that you need not doubt of it; Verily, every man living is
altogether Vanity, Sela.

Touching which words, I beseech you to consider, 1. The various Lections, Two
things to be considered about these words.
of this Text. 2. The chiefest Observations of this Text.


1. For the diversity of Reading it. 1. The diversity of reading them. 1 Word.


The first word, according to the Septuagint, is (...), which S. Hierom
translateth Enim; For, as the Cause of the brevity and shortness of man's life,
that it should be but a span long, as the phrase signifies, palmares fecisti
dies meos, because every man is vanity; therefore my life is so short.

Others, as Tremelius, do render it profecto or certe, surely or verily, that
we might assure our selves, and make no doubt of the truth and certainty of
this point, that every man, be he what he will, never so strong, never so wise,
and never so wealthy, yet is he but vanity.

But others would have both the Hebrew word, and the Greek Particle (...) to
signify, solum sive tantum and duntaxat, only, as if the Prophet meant, that,
of all Gods Creatures, only man, or man alone is the receptacle of all vanity;
and besides man, there is nothing else, wherein the signs of all vanity are to
be found so evidently as they are in man; because nothing in the world has so
far deviated and started away from the end for which it was appointed as man
has done; when as all other creatures stand according to Gods Ordinance; the
Stars keep their m^tions, the Moon observes her Seasons, and the Sun knows
his going down, only man knows not his duty, and so Esayas testifies, The
Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel has not know,
my people does not consider, Es. 1.3. and therefore only man deservedly and
signally is vanity.

The second word which is used in the Original is Chol, and it is a word of
both Numbers, and of all Genders, and the Septuagint read it (...), 2 Word.
which S. Jerome translateth omnia, all; the vulgar Latin renders it universa,
and Tremelius reads it omnimoda; and if I rightly understand them, they all
mean, that man is all manner of vanity, and that there is no vanity in the
world, and no foolery in the world, but you shall find the same in man.

The third word after the Septuagint, is (...); which S. Hierom, 3 Word.
and the vulgar Latin, and Tremelius translate vanitas; but Symmacus read it
(...), a Vapor, to which thing S. James compares the life of man, and uses
the same word, James 4.14.
saying (...), for our life is a vapor, that is, such a thing as soon rises,
and as suddenly perishes.

The fourth word, that the Septuagint read, is, (...), and Tremelius reads it
omnis homo, and our English reads it every man; but others, 4 Word.
to whom I rather assent, do understand it to signify totus homo, that is, all
or whole man, or, a man complete, soul and body; and accumulated with all the
perfections that man can have, and with all the goods either of Nature or of
Fortune that he may find under the Sun, yet is he but vanity.

The fifth word is (...), living, every man living, the which word Aquila
reads, (...), trectus, lifted up, and Symmachus reads it (...), standing or
subsisting, 5 Word.
and Tremel. translates it quantum vis constitutus maxim, how excellently
soever he be settled, and the sense is, is most Interpreters will have the
Hebrew word nitsan, to signify, that every state of man, or, man in every
state, and in what condition soever he is, King, Priest, Prophet, Honorable,
wealthy, or what you will, yet is he all vanity; and though such a one seems to
stand, and to be something, existing firm in his strength and vigor, yet in
very deed and in truth, the greatest, the strongest, the best and most powerful
of them, is nothing else, but mere Vanity.

And I would that all men would well consider it how vain they are. 2. The
special Points considerable in this Text.
And so you have the words of this Text explained unto you, (...), Verily, every
man, or, all man, living, or standing in his best estate and condition, is
altogether vanity, and all the vanity that can be found under the Sun.

2. For the Observations that may be collected out of this Text. I desire you
to note with me these six principal Points.

1. That man is nothing else but vanity. 2. That whole man is vanity. 3. That
every man is vanity. 4. That every man in his best estate is vanity. 5. That
every man in his beft estate is altogether vanity. 6. What Lessons of
Instructions you may collect to your selves, from these Observations of man's
Vanity; or what Application you may make of this Expression of the Prophet.
And so, as Solomon ascended to the Throne of his Majesty, per sex gradus, by
six special steps, so we shall descend to the nothing of our Mortality by these
six special Considerations; and then I hope, it will appear unto you all, what
a nothing they are, that seem now to be so very great, and what little reason
we have to be so much afraid as we are, of such great nothings.

But though the Application of the whole was the chiefest Point that I aimed
at, when I first began to treat of this Text, yet mine allowance of time, not
abusing your patience, will not permit me now to proceed any further than the
first Point at this time; That Man is nothing else but Vanity. And,

1 Point. That man is Vanity. James 4.6.
1. You may remember, that the holy Scripture says, God resists the proud,
but he gives Grace unto the lowly; and yet such is the pride of man's heart,
that Alexander would be no less than the Son of Jupiter, Xerxes would correct
the Hellespont, and write Letters of great threatenings to Mount Athos, that
deemed his words no more than the wind: Sapores King of Persia would needs be
styled Brother unto the Sun and Moon: The palpable pride of men.
and Caligula would (...), counter thunder God, and would needs be no less than
Jupiter Latialis, the very God of the Latins, and of all Italy.

And so the rest of the Caesar's were so transported with such palpable pride,
that all the Months of the year must be shared amongst them: and as of old
Janus that looked backward and forward, The Months shared among the Caesar's.
to the old year and the new, like unto Noah, that had seen the world before
the Flood, and that which was after the Flood, had the Month of January
dedicated unto him; so Mars the great Warrior, must have March; Nero must have
April, Claudins shall have Maii, Germanicus June, Julius July, Augustus,
August, Antoninus September, Domitian October, Tiberius November, and he
wittily demanded of the Senate, when they dedicated this Month unto him, what
they would do, when they should have more than 12 Caesar's? as Xiphilinus says.

Exodus 5.2.
So Pharaoh demands, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, to let Israel
go out of my Service, to serve the Lord? I know not the Lord, neither will I
let Israel go. Isa. 14.13, 14.
And the King of Babylon said in his heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will
exalt my Throne above the Stars of God; I will ascend above the heights of the
Clouds, and I will be like the Most High.

The pride of many base fellows.
And not only these great Kings and Emperors, that had some small kind of
greatness in them, had such aspiring thoughts, and seed of Pride in them, but
we find also that Clearchus, a base Fellow of Pontus, would needs be worshipped
as a God, and his Son must be called Lightning, as Suidas testifies; So
Menecrates, a mean Physician, would fain be taken for Jupiter, and Empedocles
the Philosopher, would in like manner have been deemed for immortal.

And so many more the like unlikely fellows would fain challenge to themselves
Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, and other services proper and peculiar to the
Eternal God: And if we our selves ascend not so high to be such prodigies of
pride, as these Heathens were, yet I am afraid, there are but very few of us
that are not some ways blasted with a vain conceit of their own worth; as you
may see some Deifying their own persons, and as it were adoring either their
fair faces, or their lovely eyes, or their goodly hair, now adays idolized by
many youngsters, as Absalon in former time seemed to do, or their exquisire
hands, or some other part or parcel of their well-shaped bodies.

Others, as the Prophet says, do sacrifice unto their net, and admire their
own wit, whereby they have drawn so much wealth into the same, and yet preserve
it from breaking, as the Apostles Net was preserved unbroken? when it drew to
land an hundred fifty and three great Fishes. Joh. 21.11.


A third sort of men make their strength to become the Law of Justice, and they
that are weak are just nothing.

A fourth sort are bubled up with an high conceit of their honor, and with
Haman, they are ready to burst if every knee does not bend, and every head be
not bare to them; and the golden Asses that have their purses full of Angels,
and their coffers replenished with such Deities, do think they should be adored
above all other creatures. And as Fastus inest pulchris sequiturque superbia
formam,
Beauty makes many proud, so likewise
Fastus inest sanctis, sequiturque superbia doctus;
The Scholar is often proud of his Learning, and the Holy Saint is not always
free from too high a conceit of his Sanctity. And then as St. Aug. says,
Superbia destruit quicquid justitia adificat.

And in brief, as the Devil told Adam and Eve, that they should be like gods;
The vain conceits of all the sons of Adam:
so there is not scarce any one of all the sons of Adam, but for some one thing
or other, though he will not say it with his tongue, yet will his heart
conceive, that he is similis altissimo, as good as the best. And such are the
thoughts of men. And holy Job says, that these men are so impudent and so
graceless, that they say to God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways; Job 21.14, 15.
what is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have
if we pray unto him?

But the Prophet David, that knew what is man better than all these men, to
pull down those high looks of the proud, and to batter the muddy walls of flesh
and blood, says, Man is like a thing of naught, his time passes away, Psalm.
14.^4.
nay flies away like a shadow; and here he says, Verily, every man in his
best estate is altogether vanity: So you see, man is but a vain thing; nay more
he is vanity it self, yea and more than that, which is a note above Ela, he is
altogether vanity.

And because, as St. Ambrose says, Amaritudo sermonum, the bitterness of
words, and the sharpness of our reproofs is oftentimes, medicina animarum, the
salve of our souls, I must crave leave, depreciari carnem hanc, as Tertullian
speaks, that is, to batter down the lofty towers of proud flesh, and to
vilify those that overprize themselves, like Simon Magus, that gave it out he
was (...), Act. 8.9. (...).
some great one, and to show unto you what a vanity or vain thing is man, and
that 1. In his ingress, or coming into the world. 2. In his progress, or
continuance in the world. 3. In his egress, or going out of the world.


1. His ingress.
1. I will not go about to shame you with the narration of your conception any
further, then what the Prophet says, In sin has your mother conceived you.
The purest Embrio was impure; and how many sins the Mother does commit, while
the child is in her womb, her self and God only knows: but when the Infant
comes forth, out of the narrow prison of his Mothers womb into the large field
of this wide world, you may consider, that the first act of his Tragedy is to
salute his distressed Mother, for all her pains to get him out of prison, with
cries and lamentations; and much more he would cry, if he knew, or could know
the many miseries, that he is to pass through, and must pass through them, if
he lives.

2. His progress. Ezekiel. 16.6.
2. The Infant being born, and as the Prophet says polluted in his own blood;
and the Lord saying unto it, Live, he has his progress and journey to pass,
into which he could never proceed any further, but make faces and noyses, and
lie and then dye, if he were left alone, and not tended by his Mother, or some
other Nurse, that must look unto him, and that for no few days, or months
neither, but some certain years at least.

And as soon as ever age has brought him to any wit, he falls to his shifts,
to delude his teachers, and co decline his own good; and when by his Parents
care and his Tutors pains, he is become ripe in his profession, a learned
Lawyer, a skillful Physician, a deep Politician, a great Artist, or a valiant
Soldier, what does he then, but use all his endeavors to supplant others, to
advance himself? and he cares not how, nor how many others he makes poor, to
make himself only rich.

Aug. de. verb. Dom. Ser. 17.
And yet, this is not all, for you may remember what St. Augustine says, Quid
est diu vivere nisi diu torqueri? nam vita presens est aerumnosa, quam humores
tumidant dolores extenuant, ardores exsiccant, era morbidant, escae inflant,
jejunia macerant, Augustinus.
joci dissolvunt, tristitiae consumunt, solicitudo coarctat, securitas hebetat,
divitiae jactitant, paupertas dejicit, juventus extollit, senectus incurvat,
infirmitas frangit maror deprimit, and post haec omnia mors intermit and
universis gaudiis finem imponit, ita cum esse desserit nec fuisse putetur. And
you may remember also that Job tells you, and Seneca tells his friend Lucilius
the very same, that vivere est militare, the life of man is a warfare here upon
earth; and Lucan says, Nulla fides pietasque viris, qui castra sequuntur.
Whether this be true or no, let the Warrior himself, and not I, be the Judge;
but for what Job says, you may see it literally verified throughout all the
world and all Christendom now to become the shambles of Christian blood.

The many miserable Wars of these last centuries of years even in Christendom.
The which men, if you consider their Civil breeding, and their much teaching in
the School of Christ, that does so straightly forbid all ambition, and all
revenge, and so earnestly enjoin all men to love one another; you may admire
that as Jerusalem justified Samaria, so the pretended Christian should justify
the bloody Turks, or men-eating Canibals, that glut themselves upon buried
carcasses, and do use as the Poet says, Pinguescere corpore corpus; and are
therefore deemed by the more civil Nations to be but the remote prodigies of
lost humanity. For,

If you now let your thoughts to consider, and your eyes to wander throughout
all the Christian Kingdoms of Spain, France, Germany, Poland, Sweden, Italy,
and the rest of the neighboring Nations that profess to believe in the same
Jesus Christ, and do hope to be coheirs of the same Kingdom of heaven, they
shall see most of these men striving to be, not homicidae cucurbitarum, the
cutters down of Cucumbers, as St. Aug. styled the Manichaeans; but Homicidae
Christianorum, the bloody killers of many good Christians, and so make Rivers
of blood, and Hills of Christian carcasses: And how he, that shed his blood to
redeem those carcasses, will judge of this, I am atfraid to speak, and tremble
to think of it.

And yet, you must not think that I say this to retard the courage, or to blunt
the Swords of our gallant Soldiers, that have just causes to make War; for
when wickedness grows so wilful, as to seek our lives, that desire to live
in peace, or to rob us of our livelihood, lands or goods that God has justly
given us, then you must know, that out God is the God of War, as well as the
God of Peace, and his name is the Lord of Hosts, and he will make his sword
drunk with blood, and will strengthen our hands, if we trust in him, to scatter
all those people that delight in War, and to destroy those Enemies that
maliciously labor for our destruction. What Wars the Author blames.


But I blame all shedding of Christian blood in any War, either to plant
Religion which should be done by preaching, and not by fighting, which in
seeking to make them Christian men, will make them no men, or dissembling
hypocrites, in stead of faithful believers, or else to satisfy the ambition
of any man that desires to enlarge his Dominion, and so unjustly to wrong his
neighbors, when as every man, from the King unto the beggar, should be
contented with what God has justly given him; and that policy can never be
justified, which is not every way consonant to equity, or especially for any
subjects put of a rebellious discontent, or ambitious desire to usurp the Power
and Authority of their Sovereign, to turn the sweet waters of Peace to become
rivers of Christian blood: This is that warfare which I chiefly discommend, as
the greatest of all vanities. But,

3. If the Sword or Bullet in this warfare, takes not man away, 3. His egress.
yets Age and Sickness will soon summon him to his death and dissolution; and
till then his whole life is spent inter suspiria and lachrymas, betwixt sighs
and tears, troubles of mind, and distempers of body, and a thousand such sad
accidents, that will soon bring hoc vitrium corpusculum, this our frail and
brittle body, and our distressed life to a miserable death; and when we dye,
or, as the Psalmist says, When the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn
again to his earth, and then all his thoughts, Psalm. 146.3.
and all his high designs, and vain conceits perish; and then it will appear,
which till then proud man will not believe, that the life of man is but a
flower that soon withers, a smoke that soon vanishes, and a bubble that
suddenly falls; or as others say; a shadow, a dream, a nothing.

And it were well for many men, if, as their great thoughts, either on some
deep plots of state, or how to hook unto themselves their neighbors
inheritance, or to wreak their malice on their poor brethren, or the like
(...), Castles in the air, as Aristophanes calls them, do vanish into
nothing, when their souls part with their bodies, so likewise their bodies and
their souls should then, with their Thoughts, return to nothing.

But that cannot be, for that now man's soul must pay for all his evil thoughts,
and suffer for all the wicked works, and the great wrongs that he has done;
and though a corpore vermis, and e vermibus foetor, his body turns to worms,
and those worms yield such Sent, as all the Spices of Arabia cannot keep away,
yet the living spirit of every wicked man, that cannot, and shall not die, must
now for his unrepented evil, be hurried into the dreadful Regions of all
horror, where it must live and lie for ever and ever, to suffer unsufferable
and unconceivable torments, a life that lives not, and a death that dies nor.

And so you see, that man is Vanity, and a wicked man in misery, worse than
vanity.

And therefore Reason should persuade you all to labor to become more than
men, that is, more than mere men; and to desire to be born again, not of flesh
and blood, but of water and of the Spirit of God, that you may be brought again
to that Union and Communion with God, which you had when we were first made by
God.

2. The Prophet says, that totus homo vanitas, all the whole man, that is,
both his Body and his Soul is vanity; for what is this body of ours, but a
piece of earth, 2 Point, That whole man is vanity. 1. The Body.
which we tread upon, Saccus stercorum, says S. Bernard, a sack full of dust,
to say no worse, and a Magazine of all Diseases, Coughes, Agues, Fevers,
Gouts, and what not? and when these have satisfied and feasted themselves upon
our bodies, what are our bodies but a feast for Worms?

And the Soul, though it be a pure Spirit, as it proceeded from God, yet as it
is now, 2. The Soul.
traduced from our Parents, as many Divines think it is, or as it is infused
into our flesh, as others do believe, and remains in our bodies; all the
Faculties thereof are corrupted; the Understanding is darkened with ignorance,
the Memory dulled with forgetfulness, and the Will defiled with
Misse-affections.

And so as Earth is good, and Water is good, yet being mingled together, they
do make, a dirty Puddle, and neither of them can be said to be then a pure
Element; so the body and soul of man, though both were good in their Originals,
and good in their own kind, yet now being both coupled together, as Mezentius
coupled the dead bodies to the living, they are both marred, and become so
deformed by corrupting one another, and associating themselves in their
desires, that now the eyes are the burning-glasses of Concupiscence, and
lusting after our neighbors Wives, Lands and Goods; the Tongue is a Razor of
detraction, to defame and slander our own Mothers Sons; the Throat is an open
Sepulcher; the Hands, Engines of violence, to rob, wound and kill; the Heart a
Mint of all Villainies; the Feet swift to shed blood; and the whole man is
become a Beast, says the Psalmist, and a Devil, Psalm. 74. John 6.70.
says our Savior, for one of you is a Devil.

And so you see that all the whole man, if he be but mere man, as he is
begotten of flesh and blood, in his best, is but vanity, in his next, inquity,
and in his worst consideration, a mere misery; and so miserable, that being but
mere man, he has little cause, with the Philosopher, to thank God that he was
made a man, when it had been better for him, as out Savior says of Judas,
that he had never been made, and never born.

Mark 14.21.
And therefore if we labor not to become more than men, that is, to be like
Bacchus, That we should labor to become more than mere men.
bis genitus, as the Poets faign of him, to be born again, of another Mother,
the spouse of Christ, and so to become double men, and to consist of the old
man, begotten of mortal Seed, and of the new man, that is, begotten by the
immortal Seed of Gods Spirit, we shall never be happy, and never otherwise,
than, as I said, vanity and misery; for though the old man be never so
Glorious, and never so honorable, the Offspring of Kings and Princes, and
though outwardly it appears never so beautiful, without blemish; yet if the
Inner man of the heart, that is begotten by Gods Spirit, be not found out, 1
Cor. 3.3.
the other is but (...), flesh, as the Apostle terms it; and flesh is an
Epithere given to Beasts by the Prophet, and that by way of disparagement too,
where he says, their horses are but flesh, and which is viler, Esa. 31.3.
all flesh is grass, that soon withers and rotteth, and becomes the Dung of
the earth: 1 Cor. 15.
and the Apostle says, that flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven, because that, as I showed you before, flesh and blood being but mere
vanity, which is the most opposite to Eternity, they can inherit nothing but
eternal misery.

3 Point.
3. As totus homo, so omnis homo vanitas, every man is vanity, that is, not only
the Fool, but also the wise man; for there is no remembrance of the wise more
than of the fool for ever; but as the fool dies, so dies the wise man;
therefore the wise man concluded, Eccl. 2.15, 16.
that this also is vanity.

And so likewise the young man as well as the old man, the rich as well as the
poor, and the strong as well as the weak, the heroic Achilles, as well as base
Thersites; may soon die, and vanish away to nothing.

How all the world is round and all things in the world in a perpetual motion.
And to be brief, you see, how the gallant Courtier, and the Royal Majesty are
no more exempted from vanity than the poorest Clown and meanest Subject; for as
Eternity is said to be an intelligible sphaere, whose Center is every where,
and his circumference no where, but in it self, as I showed to you before out
of Trismegistus, so the form of the whole world is sphaerical, and the (...) or
little world, which is man, in state and condition is also sphaerical and
round, even as round as a hoop, or rather indeed a mere circular-center,
without any circumference at all; and as the primum mobile, the first wheel of
all the Sphaeres of this whole frame, is ever in motion, and by that motion we
see that part which is now the highest, within a dozen hours to become the
lowermost; so suddenly is the change of the highest things; even so it is in
all things than are under the Sun; there is a perpetual motion, and that motion
changes all things; which made holy Job to say, a Saying worthy to be
remembered, that although man is but of few days, few indeed, God knows, and
those few days are full of troubles, and that we all know; yet in those few
days he comes forth like a Flower, that is, by little and little, and he is
cut down, that is, in a moment, he flies also as a shadow, that is, very
swiftly, and never continues in one stay, but is still divolved from one
condition to another: For our blessed Lord God and loving Father, Job 14.1, 2.
out of his wise Providence, and secret love to man, has so tempered all the
Accidents, and the whole course of man's life, with such proportion and equal
counterpoyze of occurrents, that ever and anon Joys and Sorrows are mixed
together, good haps and sad tidings succeed one another; as for example, David,
as it were to day, is a poor Shepherd, The vicissitude of King David's condition.
keeping his Fathers Flock, and pulling away his sheep out of the Lions Claws;
and as it were to morrow, he is magnified in the Court of Saul, he is matched
with the Kings Daughter, and saluted for the Kings Son in Law, and his
epithalamium is, Saul killed his thousands and David his ten thousands; yet
presently he flees as a banished man, and he is prosecuted and persecuted, as
a Partridge is hunted upon the Mountains; but within a while he is crowned
King, and reigns in a short space over all Israel, even from Dan to
Beersheba, and as a gallant Conqueror overcomes all his enemies round about
him; yet that Glory must not last long, but his own, not only undutiful
Subjects, but also his ungracious and unnatural Son Absalon must drive him once
again to flee, not to preserve his Kingdom, but to save his Life; and because
the Wheel turns round, this Cloud suddenly vanishes, Absalon is hanged and the
King is joyfully received, and honorably restored to his Royal Throne; and
after all this, he had many the like changes, of sundry kinds of Accidents,
sometimes gladsom, and sometimes doleful, while he lived.

So the Son of David, and the Son of God, Jesus Christ, in the second of Math.
And of the condition of Jesus Christ.
is presented with Gifts, and worshipped as a God, by the Kings and wise men of
the East, and in the same Chapter he is persecuted by King Herod, that he was
fain to flee into Egypt to save his life; yet afterward, he was so magnified
by the people, that he was fain to hide himself, to prevent his being crowned
King, and upon Mount Tabor he was to transfigured in Glory, that his Face did
shine as the Sun; and not long after, upon Mount Calvary, he was so disfigured
with sorrow, that confusion went over his face, so far, that as the Prophet
says, in him there was neither form nor beauty; so upon Mount Olivet, even
now, there was an Angel comforting him, and by and by, an Agony affrighting
him: and so upon the Cross, even now, he cries as one destitute of all help,
My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? and by and by after, as a man full
of comfort, and confidence in Gods favor, he says, Father, into thy hands I
commend my Spirit.

And if the time, and your patience would give me leave, I could amplify to
you this Point, in the like revolution of this wheel, I dare not call it of
Fortune, as the Heathens did, but of Gods Providence, as the Scripture shows
it is, in Abraham, in Joseph, in Moses, in C. Marius, in Alcibiades, and in
abundance more of those Worthies, whose lives you may read in the holy
Scripture, in Plutarch, and in many other Authors; and which were variarum for
tunarum viri, men that had tasted of all conditions, and had experience of all
kind of Life, being tossed up and down, and up again, and so still turn, and
turn again and again, from a good condition to a bad, and from a bad to a good
again.

But I had rather persuade you all to make that use of this variable vanity
which Sesostris King of Egypt did of the sad condition of those Kings, that
horses-like he compelled to draw about his Caroach: for he having four captive
Kings, set them like horses to draw his Caroach (even as King Edgar is reported
to have Kennady King of Scots, Malcolme King of Cumberland, Duffnal and
Gruffith Kings of Wales, Maxentius the Arch-Pyrat, and Huval a great Prince, to
row his Barge upon the River Dee) and Sesostris marking how one of his
caroached Kings, Speed Chron in the life of Edgar, p. 349.
still as he drew, looked back upon the Wheels of his Chariot, demanded of him
what he meant, so often to look behind him? the poor King, unaccustomed to such
a trade, submissively answered, it was to see how that part of the Wheel which
is now highest, becomes presently the lowest, and then again immediately the
lowest becomes highest, and so still wheels his round, and never continues
in one stay.

Whereupon, the wise Sesostris, rightly apprehending that serious Emblem,
presently commanded the Kings to be set at liberty, as well weighing with
himself, how suddenly God can change the course, and turn the Wheel of all
mortal things; and as he can loose the bonds of Kings, and cast them down with
Nebuchadnezzar from their stately Palaces to dwell among the Beasts of the
field, as he did great Bajazet from his Royal Empire, Turkish Hist. in the life
of Bajazet, p. 220.
to be carried about with Tamerlane in an iron cage; so he can bring them again
out of prison, as he did Joseph, Manasses, and Henry the Third, of this
Kingdom; he can raise them again out of the dust, as he did Job, to his former
dignity, and Nebuchadnezzar from the fields, to be re-established in his Royal
Throne; As now blessed be God he has most graciously done to out most Gracious
King
and he can if he please, add more Glory unto them than ever they had before.

This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes; and this he can
easily do, and he can suddenly do; and we are not worthy to know how soon he
will turn our wheel, and make the poor men rich, and the mean men Lords, as he
has lately made the rich men poor, and the great Lords to be without their
Lordships; for there is nothing biding, but as my Text says, omnis homo
vanitas, as well tne commanding Lords, that do now reign as Kings in the great
Babylon of this world, as the poor ejected Bishops and other Servants of
Christ, that are wandering, and perhaps wanting bread in the wilderness of this
world. What the former Doctrine should teach us. 1 Lesson.


And this Revolution of all men, and of all earthly things, should teach us all
these two special Lessons.

1. Never to be exalted or puffed up with pride when we are lifted up to honor
and greatness, nor to be troubled and discontented when we see them that were
Servants, Eccl. 10.7.
ride upon horses, as the wise man speaks, that is, when we see such as were
Vassals, made Lords, and many wicked mean men magnified as Princes; which now
you may behold in many Kingdoms of the world: These Sermons were firs preached
in the time of the usurping Rebels.
For though as the Poet says Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum.
None is more insolent than the Beggar when he is on horseback; none more
tyrannical than Servants or women, that were made to obey, and not to rule,
when they become to be the Masters of their Masters; of which thing the Prophet
complains, that Children and such as should be ruled, are the Oppressors of
the people, Es. 3.12.
and women do rule over them.

Yet they may remember, that the wheel of such prosperity has often turned,
and the Horse has many times cast his Rider; and you know what the Prophet
David says, I my self have seen them in great power, ruling and domineering
over their brethren, and flourishing like a green Bay Tree: and I went by, and
perhaps durst say nothing to them, but Io, within a little while they were
gone, and I sought after them, Psalm. 36.37.
but they could no where be found; and we may chance live to see the like
Changes, and tumbling down of many of such wicked men, as the Prophet David
has seen.

2. The former Point should teach us never to be dejected, or cast down with
grief and despair, 2 Lesson.
when we see our selves, or our friends, that were Lords and Companions of
Princes, walking alone as servants upon the earth, or when we see the Prelates
of the Church jeered at with the good Prophet, or abused with the holy Apostles.

For as the prosperous wheel of the wicked may soon turn, and their great
honors be quickly brought down to the dust; so the adversity of Gods Servants
may likewise turn, and these poor nothings may soon be raised to great honors;
when as the Poet says, Nocte pluit tota, redeunt Spectacula mane. And as the
Prophet says, heaviness may endure for a night, but Joy comes in the Morning.

So we may be to day sick, and at the point of death, and to morrow sound and
well again: and to night, with Joseph, clapped up in prison, and perhaps with
Mardochaeus, condemned to die, and yet before the next night be exalted as they
were, to great honor; for God who is just and Omnipotent, can turn man to
destruction, and immediately say come again ye children of men; Psalm 90.3.
and you know what the Prophet says, For a little moment have I hid my face
from thee, that is, for thy trial, but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord, thy Redeemer, Es. 54.7.
that is, out of prison, and out of all other troubles whatsoever.

And therefore whatsoever thy troubles be, and how low soever thou art
dejected, yet as the Poet says, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito.
Let no Misery prevail against thy Manhood, but to strengthen thy heart, and to
rowze up thy Courage, remember, not only what the Scripture says, but what
also the very Heathen could tell thee, saying, Rebus in adversis facile est
coutemnere vitam. Martial. in Epigt.

Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
It is the property of a poor spirit to be weary of life, and to wish for
death, when we are cast down with miseries and contempt; quia dulce mori
miseris; because death is a sweet Guest to all miserable Hosts; but the true
Christian Fortitude, yea and true Manhood is courageously and pleasantly,
Vanities do make no man better.
with no dejected countenance to pass, and pass through all adversities, and to
deem himself never the better when he is clad like Herod in his royal Robes,
nor one jot the worse, when he is clothed like John Baptist in Hair-cloath,
with a girdle of Leather about his loins, because the accessions of these
vanities, silks, velvets, or gold laces, do make no man better, nor the want of
them any man the worse. But he that goes like Hercules, in the Lions skin may
prove as brave a Soldier, as any of them that like the Commanders of Darius,
do glister in their Gold and Scarlet; and yet many times to save their heads,
betake themselves like Dromedaries, unto their heels, and the poor ejected
Bishop, in his bare Coat, may make as heavenly a Sermon, and convert many more
souls, than the hundredth pound Independent, or the false Presbyterian tone, in
his long Cloak, and velvet Jacket.

Which makes me never to be much troubled or moved at the revolution of this
Wheel, or the loss of these vanities, but to say with that Heroic Pompey, when
after he had been crowned with the greatest honors of Rome, and now fallen
into the greatest calamities, he cheerfully said, as Lucan witnesses, -- Non
me videre superbum
Prospera fatorum, nec fractum adversa videbunt.
His prosperity never made him proud, and adversity should never cast down his
courage; and my witness is in Heaven, that I am a thousand times more grieved,
to see the profanation of Gods service, and the poor worship of him, now used
in very many places; that is, how meanly, sluttishly, negligently and
disorderly our good God is served, than of mine own losses, how great soever
they are For we brought nothing with us into the world, neither shall we carry
any thing out of this world; and I know not whether I shall live till to
morrow, when, as the Tragedian says: Quem veniens dies vidit superbum,
Hunc fugiens dies vidit jacentem.
Whom the Sun rising has seen strong and lusty, the Sun setting, saw him dead
upon the ground, because as my Text says, Every man is vanity: Yea,

4. Point.
4. (...), Every man living, or every man in his best estate is vanity: And you
know there be but two states of every man, A twofold state of man.
1. Living. 2. Dead.


And when a man is dead, he soon becomes vanity indeed, he is reduced to
nothing, he knows nothing and he can do nothing: And therefore let us have
but a little patience, and within a very little little while, those mighty men,
that now oppress their neighbors, and tyrannize over Gods servants, shall
return to nothing, and be able to do just nothing against us; and then as
Solomon says, A living Dog is better and can do more, then these dead Lions.

I, but you will say, Interim ego ringor, and we may suffer very much before
these Lions become dead; therefore, it were well for us that they were dead
before we suffer, and that, as Caracalla said of his brother Geta, Sint divi
modo non sint vivi, they were Saints in heaven, so they might not be such
Devils as they are here now on earth.

I answer 1. To thee, that art thus troubled, as the Prophet says unto the
Jews, The Vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak
and not lie; and though it tarry, Hab. 2.2.
yet wait thou for it, because it will surely come, and not tarry; that is, any
long time, or longer than the appointed time, so tarry thou the Lords leisure,
and thy deliverance will come in his appointed time; and if thou think, it
tarrieth long, then pray thou to God, that it may come the sooner; and though
the young teachers of the new way to heaven, have obliterate it, yet do not
thou forget that good old Prayer of our Liturgy, but say, O God make speed to
save us, O Lord make haste to help us; and God will hear thy prayers, and will
help thee, because as the Poet says, How powerful prayer is.
Offendunt nunquam thura precesque Jovem
Sed dominum mundi, flectere vota valent.
Prayers and Supplications are the most powerful prevailers to obtain any
thing at the hands of God.

2. For those that wrong thee, and trouble thee, I pray thee remember but what
my Text says, Every man living, or in his best estate while he lives is
altogether vanity.

And therefore, the greatest men can never be able to do what they would do,
either for themselves, or against others: And this will the more plainly
appear, if we take but a little view of all the estates that are accounted the
best estates of men; for though there be many states and kinds of life, that
are deemed very good, yet there be four Estates of men, that I find, by the
worldly wise, to be judged best; and The The four states of men that are
accounted the best.
1. Is of them that excel all others, (...), in health and strength of body. 2.
Is of them that abound in wealth, in riches in prosperity. 3. Is of them that
are (...), most eminent in fame, glory and honor. 4. Is of them that have
plenitudinem (...), the fullness of Power and Authority to rule and govern the
rest of the people.


These are accounted the best estates of men; and yet man in all, and in every
one of these four estates, is a poor vain thing, and altogether vanity; For,

1. Health and strength of body are but vanity; 1. Satate.
and though the Tyrants and Oppressors say, come, Let our strength be the law
of Justice; Sap. 2.11.
for that which is feeble is found to be nothing worth, therefore let us crush
the righteous, and banish all those honest men that are not for our turn, Verse.
12. and 16.
but do upbraid us with our offending the Law, and do abstain from our ways as
from filthiness; yet we see that a little sickness can bring down the greatest
strength, and waste the health of the strongest and the stoutest men.

And besides, we know that, as the Lion which is the strongest upon earth, and
the Whale, which is strongest in the Sea, and the Serpent or the Eagle which
are the strongest in the Air, are of more strength than is in any man, were he
as strong as Hercules; or were they as strong as all these, yet their great
strength cannot preserve them from death, nor keep them without sickness. And
if you will compare them unto other creatures, you shall find that the
Peacocks train is more beautiful, than all the trimmings of the proudest
Galland; and as the Dromedary is swifter than any Foot-post, so the Nightingal
has a sweeter voice than the best Musician.

And in a word, the basest creatures have been found able enough to be the
death of the strongest men, for a little Steeletto killed Eglon King of Moab,
Judge. 3.21. 1 Samuel
Goliath the great Giant, was stricken down with a peble stone. Anacreon was
choked with the stone of a Raison, Fabius strangled with a hair, Herod the
Proud eaten with Lice, and Antiochus the Cruel, destroyed with Worms, and Hatto
the Traitor, pursued to death by an Army of Rats: These were but poor things
and weak instruments to destroy strong men, and to cispatch great Monarchs, and
yet we see how they have done it.

And therefore, thou, that think thy self a brave, strong and stout
Soldier, remember what good counsel the Prophet gives thee, saying, Jer. 9.23.
Let not the strong man glory in his strength; so let not the healthful man
promise any long life unto himself, whereas our life and fortune, and all that
we have, are as the Poet says, -- Tenui pendentia filo, hanging upon a weak,
feeble Spiders thread, Quod attropos occat, which the least blast of Gods
displeasure can break all to pieces.

2. Wealth and riches are more vain, 2. State.
and of less value than our health and strength, when as all the wealth in the
world yields but small comfort to him that is full of sickness, and wants his
health; therefore the Prophet David speaking of those wealthy worldlings, that
do rely, and are so proud of their riches, says, Man walks in a vain
shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches and cannot tell
who shall gather them. And we know, says Holcot, Psalm. 39.7.
that in a shadow there is a threefold consideration: 1. Indigentia luminis, 2.
Assistentia frigoris, 3. Apparentia corporis,
And that is, a threefold want, 1. A want of Light, 2. A want of Heat, 3. A
want of Substance.


Which are easily seen and perceived in every shadow.

And so all the greedy worldlings, and the covetous hunters after wealth are
environed with these three main indigences and wants; For,

1. They have no light in their understanding, but their heads and brains are
empty, when their barns and their shops and coffers are full; and so at last,
they themselves do most woefully confess it, saying, We have erred from the way
of truth, and the light of understanding has not shined into us; Sap. 5.6.
for if men had but the least understanding in the truth of things, they might
soon perceive, that riches are neither simply ours, nor very precious, or of
much value in themselves; but they do, as Boethius says, make a fairer show,
and bring more benefit unto us, Boethius de consol. Philos. l. 2. c. 5.
when they are spent, than when they are kept, because liberality makes men
famous, and to be loved, and covetousness makes them odious, infamous and
ridiculous; and Solomon says, this is a sore evil which he saw under the Sun,
namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt; Eccl. 5.13.
when it had been better for them to have been without them than to have them.
For as the rich Citizen of Rome that never offended the Commonwealth, nor
meddled with either of the two opposite factions of Sylla and Marius, yet being
desirous to know who were proscribed for the Enemies of the State, and running
to see their names, he finds himself among the first, and then he cries out, woe
is me, that my wealth and my fair house at Nola do cause me to lose my head: so
the riches of many a man have begot him enemies, and those enemies, for none
other cause or crime, but to get his Lands or his wealth, have brought him to
his end; as perhaps the riches of many a Protestant will conclude them to be
Roman Catholics; as we read the like in the case of the Guelphes and the
Gibilines, when the Gibilines proving themselves to be no Guelphes, And I wish
the Lands and fair houses of many innocent Papists may not be proved to be the
lands of Irish Rebels.
yet was their riches and their treasures seized upon, as the wealth of the
Guelphes.

And yet as the hoording up of riches, and the growing great and wealthy in the
world makes us miserable and hated, so the dispersing of them abroad, and the
profuse wasting of our wealth, makes us poor, and to be despised, yea and to be
neglected of our friends, and scorned of our enemies.

And therefore surely riches are but very poor things, when we can neither
possess them without envy, nor bestow them without penury, neither have them
without danger, nor want them without contempt.

2. The wealth and riches of the worldlings can yield them but cold comfort,
when God turns away his face from them, and they are left to the counsels of
their own hearts; for though the glittering of the Jewels may draw thine eyes
after them, the pleasant prospect of the Fields may delight thine heart, thy
gay apparel may make thee show very fair and beautiful to the beholders, and
the multitude of thy servants may seem to prove thee very happy among thy
neighbors; yet we all do or may know, that there is none of these things but
at some time or other has proved to be the destruction of their possessors:
For, as when the poor Passenger may rejoice and sing before the most ravenous
Robber, and in the sight of the most barbarous Plunderers, so thy wealth and
thy Jewels, thy pockets full of Gold, and thy back full of bravery, may make
thy heart sad, and thy head full of perturbations, and in every moment to be
afraid to be assailed and slain in all the paths that thou shall walk.

And whereas the man that has none but himself to serve himself, need not fear
to be betrayed by his Servants: the rich man that needs more, and the noble
man that keeps many Servants, may well fear there may be a Judas among
twelve, and a Traitor in his own house; and as Humphrey Banister betrayed his
Lord and Master, Henry Duke of Buckingham, that had been too good a Master to
him; Speed, l 9 c. 19. p. 927.
so may one of thy chiefest Servants sell thee and betray thee too, into the
hands of thy greatest Enemies, even as we read in Stories of many Kings that
have been so likewise dealt withal.

And therefore Wealth and Riches can afford us no true comfort, nor yield us
any certain assistance, even in this life; when by getting them, we do
oftentimes lose our selves, or at least hazard our safety by saving them.

3. Our Savior Christ speaking of the deceitfulness of Riches, and S. Paul
calling them uncertain riches, Mat. 13.22.
do sufficiently show unto us, that the wealth and riches of this world do but
promise fullness, when they intend to bring us nothing but emptiness; 1 Timothy 6 17.
for you see, all our Money is, as it is called, current, and all our riches
transient, like a torrent stream that flows apace, or as the summer snow,
that presently melts, sometimes before it falls; and all the wealth in the
world is but contingent, with one man to day, and with another man to morrow;
as your selves may see, how within these few years, many men scarce worth a
Groat, became worth thousands; and as many others that were worth thousands,
became not worth a Groat.

Aug. Confess. l. 6.
And therefore S. Aug. speaking of the things of this world, says, Si quid
arrisisset prosperum taedebat apprehendere, quia priusquam pene teneretur,
avolabat; if any worldly prosperity smiled upon me, and seemed to offer some
happiness unto me, yet I was loath to accept it and to lay hold upon it,
because commonly all the pleasure of this world is fled from us before we can
scarce fasten on it; and as the wise man says, extrema gaudii luctus occupat:
Sorrow and sadness do follow both out Profits and our Pleasures hard at the
very heels: For as the Player appears upon the Stage, and then presently
after few words, exit, he is gone; so the wealth and prosperity of this world
do but salute us, and then immediately depart from us, even while we are most
busy about them, and when they seem to smile most of all upon us.

And I could make this plain unto you by more examples than I have time to
express: For we read of Marcus Attilius Regulus, that was a Roman Consul,
Boethius de consol. l. 2. c. 5.
and had laid Fetters upon many Africans, yet being unhappily taken by the
Carthaginians, he found himself presently environed, and then miserably tied in
the Conquerors Chains; and it is written of Cheops King of Egypt, that erected
the Pyraemides, which were all built of Theban Marble, and were of that huge
height, and monstrous Magnitude, that one of them was 20 years in building,
though it is reported there were circiter december hominum miriades, about 10
Myriades of men, as Herodotus says, or 100000 men, Herodoc. l. 2* p. ^2.
Sandys, l. 2.
as others write that did continually work upon it (the same containing, as
Sands affirms, eight Acres of ground at the bottom, and ascending by 255
steps to the top, and every step being of three foot in height, and of a
proportionable breadth) and yet this great King that was of this great power,
before his death, became so poor, that he was compelled to prostitute his own
Daughter to relieve his wants.

So Belisarius, that in the days of Justinian 1. was one of the bravest
Soldiers and of the greatest Commanders of the world, to whom the Lady and
Empress of the world, Rome it self owed her self thrice at the least; and who
took two mighty Kings, Gilimer King of Africa, and Vitiges King of the Goths,
to be his Prisoners, yet within a little while this great man, as some writers
do report, came to that poor pass, as he was fain to cry, Date ob^lum
Belisario, quem virtus exaltavit, malitia depressit, and fortuna caecavit; O
give one halfpenny to Belisarius, whom virtue has honored, envy hated, and
fortune spoiled and made him now a poor blind Beggar.,

And Pedro Mexia sets down the miserable ends and other strange traverses
endured by diverse Kings, Emperors, Dukes, and other great Princes, Treasury of
times, l. 4. c. 37 Pope John whom Mart. 5. succeeded, An. 1410. Pope Clement,
that was imprisoned by Charles 5. 1527. Archbishop of Flor. and four Cardinals
butchered, 1448. The Bishop of Liege Brother to the great Duke of Burgoyne, and
10 Abbats massacred in his presence.
whereof he accounts no less than 13. besides 2 Popes, 2 Bishops, 4 Cardinals
and 10 Abbots, that within one hundred and fifty years, were thrown down from
the Pinnacle of Prosperity, to the lowest Gulf of Adversity; as George King of
Bohemia, Charles Duke of Burgoyne; Uladislaus King of Poland, Constantinus
Paleolagus Emperor of the East, Charles 8. King of France, James 4. King of
Scots, John de Albret King of Navarre, Jews Sforza Duke of that rich and
goodly Country of Millain, Francis 1. King of France, that was the Patron of
all Learning; and those three great Kings, Muley Mahomet King of Fez and
Morocco, Abdelmelec his Uncle, and Sebastian King of Portugal that came to a
miserable end, and died all three in one day, being Monday the 4th. of August,
1578. and which is worthy to be remembered above all, John Justinian that
traiterous Villain, who covenanted with Mahomet to betray Constantinople, so he
would make him King, which the great Turk promised, and accordingly performed;
but after three days struck off his head, as his Treason well deserved; and so
I wish may be the reward of all disloyal Traitors.

And therefore seeing not only wicked Potentates, but also most famous Kings
and Princes and most excellent Prelates have been reduced to such ends, what
wonder is it that many great Scholars, and many reverend Bishops (whom their
worth and learning raised to some height of dignity) should be thrown down, as
they were of late by envy and hatred, into the depth of misery. The time would
be too short for me to tell you of Craesus the rich King of Lydia, Darius the
great Monarch of Persia, Manius Acilius the proud Consul of Rome, holy Job, the
richest in the Land of Hus, and warlike Caius Marius, when he had hid himself
in the Fens or Bogs of Mynturnes, and of many thousands more, that were
exceeding rich, and most honorable, and in a moment of time became extreme
poor and miserable.

But you may see it every day, that as the Poet says, Rich Cresus may suddenly
become as poor as Irus.
Irus and est subito qui modo Croesus erat. And there is none of us but he may
consider how many great and honorable persons have been suddenly disgraced,
and how many well left Heirs and wealthy men have in an instant consumed all
their wealth, and wasted their Patrimony like a Snow-bal, and then came to be
pitied by their Friends, and scorned by some others, whom formerly they
despised, and thought them not worthy to eat with the dogs of their Flocks;
such is the nature of wealth, and so great is the vanity of all worldly riches,
that the wise man says, They betake them unto their wings, and flee away like
an Eagle (i.e.) very swiftly. Prove. 23.5.


And yet for all this, it is a wonder to see the folly of most men showed in
the pursuit of this idle vanity; Plutarch in vita Phyrri, p. 404.
for it is reported how Cyneas, a most excellent Orator, endeavoring to
dissuade King Pyrrhus a brave Soldier from his expedition against the Romans,
asked him, what he would do when he had subdued them? and he answered, that he
would bring Cicily into his subjection; and what will your grace do then, said
the Orator? the King replied, then we have a fair passage to go to bring in
Carthage, and to conquer Africa: And when you have conquered them, what will
you do, said Cynaeas; We will then, said the King, bring all Macedon under the
yoke of our Obedience. And when both Rome and Cicily and Carthage and all
Macedon have felt the stroke of your Majesty's Sword, what will you do then I
pray you? said the Orator; then the King perceiving what he meant, smilingly
answered, we will then take our ease, and begin to make Feasts, and continue so
every day, and be as merry together as possibly we can be. And what lets us
now, my good Lord, said Cyneas, but that we may be now as merry and more quiet,
since we enjoy enough to effect all that presently, without any further travel,
or more trouble, which we are about to go to seek with such shedding of humane
blood of others, with so much manifest danger unto our selves.

Yet notwithstanding all this, the Learned Orator could not dissuade that
ambitious Prince from this his high attempt, he could no ways prevail to make
him desist from that uncertain Enterprise; but he would rather hazard all that
happy estate which he did now enjoy, than leave off the deceitful hope of those
things which he did so much desire.

And indeed such is the condition of all the sons of men, most dangerously sick
of the same desperate disease; for though as the Poet says, and he says the
truth, that man is but, Somnus, Bulla, Vitrum, Glacies, Flos, Fabula, Foenum,
Umbra, Cinis, Punctum, Vox, Sonns, Aura, Nihil.
That is in few words, a dream, a shadow, a thought, a nothing; yet all or most
of this little time that we do enjoy, we expend in following after the vain
wealth, and deceitful riches of this world, that we shall find to be but empty
clouds, without water, or like the Apples of Sodom, that being greedily
grasped, will soon turn to smoke, and then speedily vanish into nothing; and we
shall find our selves at last just like the Mill-wheel, that turns still, and
turns round from day to day, and yet at the years end is in the same place
where it was at the beginning.

So we tumble and toss and turn to gather wealth, and to grow great in this
world, and yet in the end we shall find our selves just in the same condition
as we were at the beginning; for naked we came into the world, and naked we
shall return again.

What need we then be so unjust, and shame our selves, either unduly to seek
what we ought not to have, or unhonestly to deny what we ought to pay? Truly I
am ashamed, that should be verified among Christians, which was complained of
by the heathens, Terras Astraea reliquit; that Justice could not be found in
any Court on earth; or what Solomon said of the Jews should be found amongst
us, I saw the place of Judgment (the highest Court he meant) and wickedness was
there, and the place of Righteousness, and iniquity was there. Eccl. 3.16.


But though neither shame of men, nor fear of God can make us leave this
iniquity, but that we will continue still like Jews and Pagans, yet the truth
is, that man in this rich estate, that is yet so palpably vain, when it is so
unjustly procured, can be nothing else but mere vanity.

3. Honor, Glory, and a high esteem, to be famous among men, are accounted
great in this world, and so they are indeed; but I mean great vanities, and the
greatest of all vanities: For health is a happiness, especially while it
lasts, and Riches have some substance in them, and we may do good with them,
as others do much evil with them; but honor arid fame are nothing else, but a
vain blast of a poor man's breath, or a little bending of a Beggars knee, an
idle Ceremony, fruitless I am sure (therefore a great vanity) and it may be out
some fair show of some outward reverence, when perhaps there is indeed much
inward hate; because the Tongue oftentimes praises those most highly, whom the
heart detesteth most deadly. Or were it not so, yet all honor is accounted,
but 1. Of a short continuance, and therefore a great Vanity: For, 2. Of a small
Extent, and therefore a great Vanity: For,


1. Behold how great was the honor of Haman, and how suddenly was he hanged:
Look upon Nebuchadnezzar, how he is to day saluted with Hail, Glory of the
world; and to morrow scorned like a Beast: and consider how glorious were
Pharaoh, Senacherib, Alexander, Cyrus, and others; and yet, behold how speedily
they were vanished into nothing; and how many great men and most honorable
Personages have you lately seen so highly honored and magnified both in Court
and Country, as the only Emblemes of all honor, and how suddenly have they
been either killed or headed, and their Glory buried in the dust, if not turned
into worse? For the Scourge of Envy from below, and the Twigs of Ambition from
above, do hunt and whip all honor unto death: And we know that many men while
they lived, have been so unhappy, as to see their own honor buried: Or, if
some have left a glorious Name behind them, as Josias did, when they left the
world; yet we find that many famous men while they lived, have been quite
forgotten, for want of Writers, when they were dead: For how should we have
known the valor of Hector and Achilles, and the wisdom of Nestor and Ulisses,
if Homer had not recorded the same unto posterity? Or how should we have
understood the Piety of Constantine, and the Clemency of Theodosius, if
Eusebius, and other Ecclesiastical Writers had not declared the same unto us?
And of those that have been as happy in the Trumpeters of their Fame, as
themselves have been Famous in the Actions of their Lives: we see, that as
Death took away the Authors, so time has wasted away their Writings; and (as
the Poet says) What wonder we that Writings fail,
When stately Tombs do wear;
The very Stones consume to noughts,
With Titles they did bear.


Or be it granted that a man might truly say, I shall live when I am dead; and
as Ovid says, Perque omnia secula Fama Si quid hobent very vatum prae sagia,
vivam, Ovid. Metamorph. l. 12. in fine.
-- Nomenque erit indelebile nostrum. My name shall remain indelible among the
Posterities; yet if you do attentively weigh the most infinite spaces of
Eternity, you shall find that the prolonging of our Names on earth can yield us
no great Felicity; for if we compare the stay of one moment with ten thousand
years, they have some proportion, though it be but very small; but this number
of years how often soever it be multiplied, yet it is no way comparable to
Eternity, because limited things may in some sort be compared among themselves,
but that which is infinite admits no comparison at all, says Boethius; And
therefore the longest Fame, be it as long as you can imagine, Boethius de
consol. Phil. l. 2. c. 8
yet it is but of a very short continuance. And,

2. It is of a very small Extent; For you may learn by Astronomical
Demonstrations, that the compass of the whole earth in comparison of the
Heaven, is no bigger than a Pins Point; and of this earth, not above the fourth
part is known to be inhabited, says Ptolem. and that which is inhabited, is
distinguished by many Nations of different Languages, Fashions, and
Conversations, whereby it happens, that the same Fact which in some Country
is laudable, in another place is punishable: therefore our Fame and Glory must
be penned up in a very narrow bound, commonly within the compass of one Nation:
For if it should go further, yet the difficulty of travel over many Seas, the
diversity of Speeches, so hard to be understood, and the scarcity of Traffic
to be generally transported, will never permit our Fame to spread it self very
far: For if the Glory of the Roman People, in the time of Cicero, when it was
most flourishing, and they were Terrarum Domini, Masters of most places that
they knew, yet did not pass beyond Mount Caucasus, that lies betwixt Scythia
and the Indians, as the Orator confesses, then certainly the Glory and Fame of
any particular man can never penetrate, where the Glory and Trophies of such a
Glorious Nation could not pass.

And therefore all the Honor of this world, and the greatest Fame of the
Noblest men, whether it be for Birth, Wealth, Valor, Learning, or what you
will, yet can it neither last long, nor extend it self very far; and therefore
must it needs be a very great Vanity. And so you see that every man in his most
Honorable estate is Vanity. Nay more than that,

most excellent state is thought to be that, which is most powerful in
Authority to rule and command all others; but the Vanities that are incident
and attendant on this state, would require a Volume to display them: I will
only say what Horace has most truly, and you may daily see, how that, Saepius
ventis agitatur ingens Pinus,
Et decidunt Turres, feriuntque summos
Fulmina Montes.


And so you see that every man in his best estate, let his state be what you
will, yet he is but Vanity: Nay that is not all; For,

omnimoda Vanitas, altogether vanity; and this is one degree of Calamity
further than all the rest: For to consider that every man is vanity, is bad
enough; but to be vanity in our best estate, is worse, and in that estate to be
altogether vanity, is worst of all: because this shows unto us that man is
but mere Vanity, and nothing else but vanity, or vain in all that he is, and
vain in all that he does; as

1. Vain within, and vain without; vain in his Body, and vain in his Soul.

2. Vain in his thoughts, vain in his words, and vain in all his works; And,

3. Not only totaliter vanitas, wholly vanity, but also universa vanitas, all
vanity; so that there is no vanity in the world that can be named or found out,
but you may find the same in man; as, Pride is vanity, and you may find enough
of that in man; lies are vanities, and most men are so addicted and delighted
either to invent lies, to hear lies, or to relate lies, that you shall almost
find nothing in most men but lies; and so of all other vanities whatsoever
they be, they are to be found in man; Antoninus for methods sake, ranketh them
into three special Series; 1. Iustalitatis, Antoninus part. 1. tit. 2. c. 8.
Sect. 3.
of instability, which the Preacher handles from the first Chapter, unto the
fourth Chapter. 2. Iniquitatis, of iniquity, whereof the Preacher treareth from
the fourth Chapter unto the twelfth Chapter. 3. Paenalitatis, of penalty, which
the said Preacher sets down in the last verse of the twelfth Chapter, For
God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it
be good, or whether it be evil.


Others term the first degree of Vanities, to be the vanity of our Creation.

The second degree they call the vanity of our Condition.

The third is the vanity of our Dissolution.

1. Touching the vanity of our Creation, God put no trust in his servants,
says holy Job; that is, he trusted them not with such a stability, Job 4.18.
or he made them not so absolute that they should be independent, and free from
all possibility of falling; and therefore seeing that nihil est omne quod ex
nihilo est, all in themselves are nothing, which are made of nothing, as Origin
says, this possibility to vary, and to be reduced to their first privation and
nonentity, is nothing else but an innate vanity, or a momentary nothing, if
they be not still upheld and sustained by their Creator, who as the Apostle
says, Bears up all things with his mighty word, Heb. 1.
or with the word of his power, that is, Jesus Christ; Yet,

2. The vanity of our Creation was but comparative, as the creature stood in
collation with Gods infinite purity; but when Adam sinned, he made himself the
destroyer of his own stability, the defacer of his own excellency, and to be
come nothing but mere vanity; so that every creature now, the worst of all the
creatures, and all creatures might insult over his Apostasy, and say unto him,
Art thou become like one of us, art thou become as vain as we?

And because all of us were then in the loins of Adam, as Levi was in Abraham
when he met with Melchisedech, therefore his calamity was not personal, but
specifical; and his iniquity brought a vanity upon us all, which is the vanity
of our condition; so that now every man is nothing else but vanity, the Saint
as well as the sinner, the rich as well as the poor, and the Noble man as well
as the beggar; for as soon as the noblest of men is inobled with the name of a
man, so soon does he inherit the title of a vain man, or a man of vanity, that
is replenished with all vanity, because filled with all unrighteousness. But

3. The vanity of our Dissolution is the last and the worst of all vanities.
And this is,

1. When they see that they themselves are Beasts (these are the very words of
the Scriptures) For that which befalls the sons of men, befalls beasts,
Eccles. 3.18, 19, 20.
even one thing befalls them; as the one dies, so dies the other, yea they
have all one breath; so that a man has no pre-eminence above a beast, for all
is vanity, all go unto one place, all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
again.

2. When they find that they themselves are worse than beasts, when the spirit
of the beast that goes downward to the earth, vanishes, and is reduced to
nothing; but the spirit of the man that should go upward, and be united to
Eternity, shall descend to be chained in everlasting misery; Vbi nec tortores
deficientur, nec miseri torti morientur, sed per mill millia annorum cruciandi
nec tamen in secula liberandi. Where they shall have torments without ease, and
be tormented without end; and this is a vanity indeed, Vanitas vanitatum, the
greatest of all vanities, because the bond of our union with God is here
dissolved, and we are divorced from all the happy Eternity.

And thus I hope you see that man, be he never so excellent in condition, so
eminent in place, or so powerful in authority, yet here is no exception, no
exemption, no limitation, but he is altogether vanity.

And, though the time will not give me leave to amplify all the particulars
that might be showed you out of this Text; yet I desire your patience to give
me leave to apply all briefly unto our selves, and to learn from hence this
fivefold Lesson, which may serve as a fivefold shield to preserve us from all
iniquity here, and from all misery hereafter.

1. To eradicate and root up that stinking weed of pride and haughtiness that
Lucifer labors to spread so far, and to stick so f^st in the heart of every
man; for why should thou be proud, thou vain thing, that art but dust and
ashes, and altogether vanity? what have thou to be proud of? the Lion may boast
of his strength, the Bezar of his precious stone, the Panther of his colors,
and all other creatures of some singular excellency that is in them; but what
have thou, that stand there with a stiff neck and proud looks, but what
thou have received, and art just like the Jay decked about with borrowed
ornaments, and have nothing of thine own to animate thy pride but what thou
robbest from the bruit beasts? and yet the fair Lady is proud of her white
hands and pleated hair, and lumina quae possunt sollicitare Deos; but alas two
or three fits of an Ague will spoil all, or else Age will make fair Helen to
become as wrinkled as Hecuba.

Nay more than this, I have seen too much pride and arrogance in some, that of
all others should be most humble, and teach others to be meek and lowly, which
is a great shame, that thou, which teach another, teach not thy self, and
considerest not what a vain thing thou art, and what little reason thou have to
look so big, and to lift up thy head so high.

Yea, the Saint-like Separatist, like the boasting Pharisee, will be proud of
his holiness; Aug to. 2. Epist. 58.
but as St. Aug. says, Quod justitia aedificaverat Pharisaeus, superbia
destruebat, atque ideo non placuit Deo, quia placebat sibi; this pride spoyleth
and poysoneth all our goodness, because that as humility makes men like unto
Angels, so pride made the Angels Devils, and men to be like Devils.

2. The consideration of our vanity should ever put us in mind of what the
Prophet says, Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man; rely
not on them, for there is no help in them, and the best of them, and greatest,
is not able to do the good he would do, because he is altogether vanity, and
when his breath goes forth, Psalm. 146.3, 4.
he shall turn again to his earth, and then all his thoughts perish; and as
Strigelius says, Omnia sunt hominum tenni pendentia silo.

And many times the greatest friends, that we rely upon will show themselves
like Theagines, that was surnamed (...), smoke, Quia magnifice pollicebatur,
cum esset pauper, because he promised great and mighty things when he was but a
poor scoundrel. And therefore it is but a great vanity to rely upon vain man
that is altogether vanity, and will let thee fall, when thou have most need of
help.

3. This may encourage us not to fear what man can do against us; let men
threaten and fret and storm as much as they will, and do as much as they can,
yet fearing God, we need not fear any of them, because the greatest and most
powerful man is but vanity, and altogether vanity; and if God be with us, who
can be against us? Quia non plus valet ad dejiciendum terrena poena, quam ad
erigendum divina tutela.

4. This very point should teach us wholly to rely on God, that never fails
them that put their trust in him; but is, as the Prophet says, Deus in
opportunitatibus, a present help in trouble, and helps us always in the most
needful time of trouble, holding us up by his hand, as he did St. Peter, when
we are ready to sink.

5. And lastly, this only lesson of man's vanity, should ever put us in mind,
not to waste and trifle away our short time in the pursuit of vain pleasures
and loathsome vanities, when as the hunting after honors, and the scraping of
wealth and riches together, is none other, than like silly childrens running up
and down to catch Butterflyes, or as the Prophet says, Like the Spiders web,
that will make no garments for them, or rather like the Cockatrice Egg, that
brings forth a fiery Serpent to be the destruction of him that hatcheth it, and
so are the vanities of this world.

And here I should show the folly and vanity of those vain men, that to
purchase unto themselves the reward of their imp^ety, and the wages of their
unrighteousness, are so greedy to rob the Church of Christ, and to snatch away
the lands and houses of God into their possessions; but that I intend, if God
lend me life and health, to set forth a full and ample Declaration, to be
exhibited to the high Court of Justice before Jesus Christ, the righteous
Judge, against Sacrilege, and all sacrilegious persons Which I have now
published in the beginning of this Book.
to show what little reason vain man, and proud vanity has to soil his God, to
rob the Church, and to destroy himself.

And therefore this much shall serve at this time to show unto you, that it is
most certain, That every man in his best estate is altogether vanity. And God
grant that all my hearers may make the right use of what I have said, Amen.

O Lord my God;
Did not thou save me, and deliver me from my most malicious enemies, that
sought my life, and have thou not snatched me out of the jaws of death? And did
not I then promise and vow, In the Epistle before the seven Golden Candlesticks.
to do my best endeavor to serve thee, and to honor thee without the fear or
flattering of any man? And have thou not since many times delivered me from the
mouth and teeth of that (...), the Beast that ascended out of the bottomless
pit, the great Antichrist that was so wrathfully displeased against me?

Therefore by the grace and assistance of thy blessed Spirit I am resolved, and
I will continually pray to thee, for thy help, to perform the promise and vow
that I made unto thee; and for that cause, I will take no Fine for any of the
Bishops Land but what shall be given to repair the Church, while I live;
neither will I Lease any of it for any longer term than 21 Years, unless it be
for the better improvement thereof unto my Successor, nor any otherwise than
my conscience shall tell me the same to be most just and indifferent both for
my self, my Successor and the Tenant; and I will do my best and uttermost
endeavor to do and to perform all that I say and set down in this Treatise to
be the duties of a faithful and godly Bishop: And I wish with all my heart
that all my Reverend and Learned Brethren, the Bishops, would do so likewise;
yet I blame them no ways, if they see good reasons and just cause to do
otherwise, Quia plus vident oculi quam oculus; and I were too saucy and
peremptory if I thought my self wiser or juster than my Brethren.

Jehovae Liberatori.
FINIS.
The Author of the foregoing Treatises has Published another Book, Entitled
the Best Religion, wherein is largely handled the Texts of Scripture following,
which do contain the Fundamental Points of Christian Religion. Sold by Ph.
Stephens at the Gilded Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1 THe Mysteries of the Rainbow, Preached before the King, upon Genesis 9.13. I do
set my Bow in the Cloud, etc. 2 Gods Love to the World, Preached before the
King, upon John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, etc. 3 The worthiest Saying, Preached before the King, upon 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ,
etc. 4 The Best Helper, Preached before the King, upon Romans 8.31. If God be for
us who can be against us? 5 The Way to happiness, Preached at Westminster, upon
Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, etc.
6 The fruitful Knocking, Preached at Westminster, upon Rev. 3.20. Behold I
stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, etc. 7 The Celestial
Fire, Preached before all the Judges, upon Luke 12.49. I came to send fire upon
the earth. 8 The Necessity of Repentance, Preached at White Hall, upon Luke
13.5. I tell you nay; but except ye repent, etc. 9 S. Peter's Charge, Preached
at Westminster, upon John 21.21, 22. Peter seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord,
what shall this man do? etc. 10 The Royal Feast, Preached at Westminster, upon
Matthew. 22.11, 12, 13. And when the King came in to see his guests, etc. 11 The
Paschal Sacrifice, Preached at Westminster, upon 1 Cor. 5.7. For Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us. 12 The three chiefest Graces, Preached before
the King, upon 1 Cor. 13.13. Now remain faith, hope, and charity, these three.
etc. 13 the Foolish Builders, Preached at White Hall, upon Mat. 7.26, 27. And
every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, etc. 14 The
weeping woman, Preached before the King, upon John 20.11, But Mary stood
without at the Sepulcher weeping. 15 The Dove-like Wings, Preached before the
King, upon Psalm. 55.6. O that I had wings like a Dove, then would I fly away,
and be at rest. 16 The Resolution of Pilate, first Preached at S. Paul's Cross,
afterward enlarged, upon John 19.22. What I have written, I have written. 17
The Delights of the Saints, first preached at S. Paul's Cross, afterward
enlarged upon Romans 1.7. To all that be at Rome, beloved of God, etc. 18 The
Misery of Man, Preached at S. Paul's Cross, upon Romans 6.23. The reward of sin is
death. 19 The Knowledge of God, Preached before K. James, upon Exodus 34.6, 7.
The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful and gracious, etc. 20 The Incarnation of
the Word, Preached at S. Mary's in Cambridge, upon John 1.14. And the Word was
made flesh. 21 The Passion of the Messiah, Preached within the Cathedral Church
of S. Paul, upon Luke 24.46. Thus it behoved Christ to suffer. 22 The
Resurrection of Christ, Preached within the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, upon
Mat. 28.5, 6. He is not here, for he is risen, etc. 23 The Ascension of our
Savior, and Donation of the Holy Ghost, Preached at S. Mary's in Cambridge,
upon Ephesians. 4.5. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, etc. 24 The Duty of Christians, Preached before K. James,
upon 1 These. 5.28. Brethren pray for us.

