Imprimatur.

Jo. Battely.

A CATECHISM Truly representing the Doctrines and Practices OF THE CHURCH OF
ROME, WITH AN ANSWER thereunto.

By a Protestant of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

The Second Edition Corrected: With a VINDICATION of a Passage in the said
CATECHISM from the EXCEPTIONS made against it, in A Reply to the Answer of the
Amicable Accommodation.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

THE PREFACE.
IT has been a complaint of late amongst some of the Romish Church, that the
Protestants have misrepresented the Doctrine of their Church, to make That and
Them odious to the World: And on the other side, the Protestants accuse several
of the late Writers in that Church, of concealing, disguising and palliating
their Doctrines, the better to impose upon and seduce those to their Religion
that do not sufficiently understand it. The latter justify their charge by
producing such Authors as have in several Ages not only taught that Doctrine,
but taught it as the Doctrine of their Church: The former deny the charge by
appealing from particular Authors to an higher Authority, to Councils and
public Acts and Decrees, to Missals, Breviaries, Catechisms, etc. Now though
those Protestants are not to be blamed, when the Authors they quote have been
first licensed and approved in that Church, and were never afterward condemned
by it; yet in composing this Catechism out of their Writings, to avoid
contention as much as I can, I have generally observed their directions, and
have seldom made use of particular Authors among them, but when it is for the
Explication of a Doctrine that is not sufficiently explained, or for
confirmation of a Doctrine generally received. And if after all, any shall
oppose his own, or the Sentiments of some Authors of a later date, to these
Authorities I here produce; I conceive we have no more reason to take the Sense
of their Church from their particular opinion, and modern Explication, than
they would have us to take it from particular Authors among themselves, which
they decline. I am very confident that the Quotations throughout are true
(exceping what Errors may happen to escape the Press) having again and again
examined them; and I have been as careful as I could not to mistake the sense
of them; that I might rightly understand and truly represent the Doctrine which
I profess to censure; for without a faithful and impartial examination of an
error, there can be no solid or true confutation of it.

The Reader will easily observe, that the Roman Catechism is all along on the
left Page, and the Reply on the right.

A Roman Catechism Faithfully drawn out of the allowed Writings of the Church
of Rome.


THE REPLY TO THE Roman Catechism.


SECT. I. Of the Church, and Rule of Faith.


SECT. I. Of the Church, and Rule of Faith.


Q. 1. What is the Church of Rome?
A. The Church of Rome is that society of Christians, which professes it
necessary to Salvation We do say, define and pronounce that it is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, for every man to be subject to the Pope of Rome.
Extravag. Vnam Sanctam de majoritate and obedientia.
to be subject to the Pope of Rome, as the alone visible Head of the Church
Bellarm. de Eccles. milit. l. 3. c. 2. ss. Nostra autem sententia. and cap. 5.
ss. respondeo neminem.
.

R. 1. WE read of Christ the Head, from whom the whole Body is fitly joined
together, Ephesians. 4. 16. And the holding and adhering to that head [Coloss. 2.
19.] is the one great Note of the Church, given by S. Austin de unit. Eccles.
c. 3 and. 4. But there is neither in Scripture, nor Antiquity any evidence for
a visible Head, and much less for the visible Head the Pope, and least of all
that it is necessary to Salvation to be subject to him.

If it is necessary to Salvation to be subject to him, it is as necessary to know
who is the Pope; but that the World has often been divided about, when there
were sometimes three, and for about 40 Years together two Popes equally
pretending to the Chair. Vid. Theod. Niem. de Schism. univers.

Q. 2. HOw comes subjection to the Pope to be necessary to Salvation, and an
essential note of the Church?
A. Because the Pope is Christ's Vicar, S. Peter's Successor Council. Trid.
Sess. 6. Decret. de Reform. cap. 1. Bulla Pii 4. sup. form. Juram.
, and has the supreme power on Earth over the whole Church Con. Trid. Sess.
14. c. 7.
. The Church is called one as it has one invisible Head, Christ; and one
visible who does possess the Chair at Rome, as the lawful Successor of S. Peter
Prince of the Apostles Catech. Romans par. 1. c. 10. n. 11.
.

R. 2. IF Christ gave no such power to S. Peter, or the Pope be not S. Peter's
Successor, then the Pope has no pretense to this Power. And if we consult
Scripture, we read that Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, etc. for
the work of the Ministry, and the edifying the Body, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. but that
he gave one Apostle pre-eminence above the rest, and much less absolute power
over them, we read not. This Sovereign power they were forbidden to attempt or
desire, Matthew. 20. 26. and S. Paul was so far from acknowledging it, that he
challenged an equality with the rest of the Apostles, Gal. 1. 15, 17. and upon
occasion withstood S. Peter, Gal. 2. 11.

To this we may add the judgment of S. Cyprian. The other Apostles are the same
S. Peter was, endowed with an equal fellowship of honor and power. Epist. de
unit. Eccles.

Q. 3. WHat Authority does the Church of Rome challenge?
A. She declares that she is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches Council.
Later. 4. Can. 2. Council. Trid. Sess. 7. de Bapt. Can. 3. etc.
, and that to believe her so to be is necessary to Salvation Bulla Pii 4. super
form. Jur.
. Pope Innocent the 3d thus declared, as God is called universal Lord, because
all things are under his Dominion: So the Church of Rome is called Catholic or
Universal, because all Churches are subject unto her Apud Ezovium, Annal* 1199.
.

R. 3. AS it was foretold (Isaiah 2. 3) so it was fulfilled, Out of Zion shall
go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. There the Church
began, and therefore in the Synodical Epistle of the second General Council of
Constantinople, Jerusalem is called the Mother of all Churches. Baron. A. D.
382. p. 461.

If the Church of Rome is the Mistress, because she is the Mother (as Pope
Innocent the first would have it, Epist. 1. Council. Tom. 4. p. 5.) then
Jerusalem should have been the Mistress as well as Mother. If the Mistress,
because she was once the Imperial City, then Constantinople was so likewise;
and accordingly it was Decreed in the 4th General Council, that of Chalcedon,
Can. 28. That the Church of Constantinople should have equal privileges with
that of Rome, because she is the Imperial Seat.

And if she claims this Sovereign Authority upon any other reason, she never
had, nor can ever prove a right to it.

This is confirmed by Pope Pius 2. (when a Cardinal) Epist. 288. p. 802. who
says, That before the time of the Nicene Council, little regard was had to the
Church of Rome.

Q. 4. HOw does the Church of Rome exercise, or what use does she make of this
Authority?
A. She requires all persons upon her sole Authority, to receive and believe
the Doctrines she proposes to be received and believed Council. Trid. Sess. 13.
decret. de Euchar. and Sess. 25. Decret. de Purgatorio. And there are above
100. Anathema's in that Council in point of Doctrine against such as do not so
believe.
, and without the belief of which she declares there is no Salvation Bulla Pii
4. super form. Juram. This is the true Catholic Faith without which no Man can
be saved.
.

R. 4. GAL. 1. 11, 12. The Gospel which was Preached of me is not after man;
for I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

Verse. 8. 9. Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that which we have preached, let him be accursed, or be under an
Anathema.

The Church of Rome expressly professes not to receive her Doctrine by special
Revelation: or if she did so pretend, she cannot avoid S. Paul's Anathema,
when, for instance, she requires to bow down before an Image, which the
Scripture forbids; and forbids to read the Scripture, which is required.

And without doubt the Text of the Apostle holds as much against any other, as
against himself or an Angel from Heaven; and it would have been true if he had
added, If we or an Angel, or the Church of Rome preach any other Gospel, etc.

Q. 5. Does not the Church of Rome acknowledge the Holy Scripture to be a
sufficient Rule for Faith and Manners?
A. No: For there are some Doctrines proposed by that Church as matters of
Faith, and some things required as necessary duty, which are by many Learned
Men amongst themselves confessed not to be contained in Scripture.

R. 5. WE read in Scripture of the Faith once delivered to the Saints; Jude 3.
and 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All [or the whole] Scripture is profitable for Doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

The Scripture is a rule sufficient in it self, and was by Men divinely
inspired, fully delivered to the World; and so neither needs, nor is capable of
any further addition.

So Tertullian says, Let the Shop of Hermogenes show that this thing is
written. If it be not written, let him fear the woe pronounced against them that
add to or take from Scripture. Contr. Hermog. c. 22.

Q. 6. WHat Doctrines of Faith and matters of practice and necssary Duty, are
thus acknowledged not to be in Scripture?
A. The Doctrines of Transubstantiation Scotus in 4. sent. did. 11. q. 3. and
Yribarn in Scot.
, of the seven Sacraments Bellarm. l. 2. de effectu Sacram. c. 24, 25. ss.
secunda probatio. Cassander. Art. 13. ss. 2.
, of Purgatory Roffens. contr. Luther. art. 18.
, and the practice of Half-Communion Council. Constan. Sess. 13. Cassander. Art.
22.
, Worshipping of Saints and Images Bellarm. de cult. Sanct. l. 3. c. 9. ss.
praeterea. Cassand. Consult. Art. 21. ss. 4.
, Indulgences Polyd. Virg. de invent. lib. 8. c. 1.
, and Service in an unknown Tongue Bellarm. de verb. Dei. li. 2. c. 16. ss. Sed
neque and At objicies.
, and several others.

R. 6. S. Augustine on the contrary determines, lib. contr. Petil. l. 3. c. 6.
If any one concerning Christ and his Church, or concerning any other things
which belong to Faith or Life, I will not say if we, but (which S. Paul haeth
added) if an Angel from Heaven, preach unto you besides what ye have received
in the Law and Evangelical writings, let him be accursed. For as all Faith is
founded upon divine Authority, so there is now no divine Authority but the
Scriptures; and therefore no one can make that to be of divine Authority, which
is not contained in them. And if Transubstantiation and Purgatory, etc. are not
delivered in Scripture, they cannot be Doctrines of Faith. Therefore S. Basil
(when about to sum up a confession of Faith) says, it is as well an evident
defection from the Faith, to introduce any thing that is not written, as it is
to reject any thing that is. Homil. de fide.

Q. 7. WHat does the Church of Rome propound to her self as an entire Rule of
Faith?
A. Scripture with Tradition; and she requires that the Traditions be received
and reverenced with the like pious regard and veneration as the Scriptures; and
whosoever knowingly contemns them is declared by her to be Accursed. Council.
Trid. Sess. 4. Decret. de Can. Script.

Q. 8. WHat do they understand by Traditions?
A. Such things belonging to Faith and Manners, which were dictated by Christ
or the Holy Ghost in the Apostles, and have been preserved by a continual
succession in the Catholic Church, from hand to hand without writing, Council.
Trid. ibid. Bellarm de Verbo, l. 4. c. 2. init.

R. 7. 8. Matthew. 15. 9. Our Savior says of the Pharisees; In vain do they
worship me, teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of Men; forbidding that as
unlawful which God has not forbidden, and requiring that as a necessary duty
which God has not required.

Tradition. is but another word for delivering to another; which may either be
by word or writing; and thus the Faith and Doctrine contained in the Gospel, is
called Tradition by the Apostle. 2 These. 2. 15. And so Irenaeus calls the chief
Articles of our Faith Apostolical Tradition. lib. 3. c. 4. But in the
Ecclesiastical sense, Tradition is ordinarily taken for what is not written in
Scripture, and in this sense we deny that there are any other Apostolical
Traditions concerning Faith and Manners, than what are contained in Scripture;
and that (whatever the Church of Rome pretends) no such are to be received with
the like regard as the Scriptures, or are necessary to Salvation.

So S. Hierom in cap. 1. Aggaei, the Sword of God [his word] does smite those
other things, which they do find and hold of their own accord, as by
Apostolical Tradition, without the Authority and testimony of Scripture.

S. Cyril Hierosol. does affirm, that it behooves us not to deliver, no not so
much as the least thing of the Holy mysteries of Faith, without the Holy
Scripture, etc. that is the security of our Faith, not which is from our own
inventions, but from the demonstration of the holy Scriptures. Cateches. 5.

Q. 9. WHat are those Traditions, which they profess to have received from
Christ and his Apostles?
A. There was never yet a sum of them published, but they tell us that of this
nature are, The offering the Sacrifice of the Mass for the Souls in Purgatory
Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 2.
, the mystical Benedictions, Incensings, Garments and many other things of the
like kind Ibid. c. 5.
, Salt, Spittle, Exorcisms, Chrism, and Wax-Candles used in Baptism Catech.
Romans par. 2. c. 2. n. 59, 65, etc.
, etc. the Priests, shaving the head after the manner of a Crown Ibid. c. 7. n.
14.
.

R. 9. MArk 7. 8. Laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the Tradition of
Men, as the washing of Pots and Cups: and many other such like things ye do.

The Church of Rome has no more to show for their holy Water and Incensings,
and Salt and Spittle, etc. than the Pharisees for their Traditions: and since
they no less impose and set them up as Divine, than the other, they are alike
guilty with them.

S. Basil says in Reg. brev. Reg. 95. It Is necessary even for Novices to learn
the Scriptures, that the mind may be well confirmed in piety, and that they may
not be accustomed to humane Traditions. For otherwise in tract of time, a
fondness for such Traditions may raise them to an equal authority, and they may
be thought of as much necessity as what is contained in the Scriptures
themselves; as experience has fully showed.

Q. 10. Does the Church of Rome agree with other Churches in the number of
Canonical Books of Scripture?
A. No. For she has added to the Canonical Books of the Old Testament, Tobit,
Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, the two Books of Maccabees(a), and a
new part of Esther, and of Daniel; which whole Books with all their parts
Wherefore does the Council add with all their parts, unless that all should
understand those parts also, about which there was sometime a dispute, belong
to the Sacred Canon of the Bible? Ibid c. 7. ss. Deinde quis.
, whosoever rejects, as not Canonical, is accursed. Council. Trident. Sess. 4.
Decret. de Scriptur. (a) These Books are so sacred, as that they are of
infallible truth. Bellarm. de verbo l. 1. c. 10. ss. Ecclesia vero.


R. 10. 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given iy inspiration of God.

2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

The Apocryphal Books were wrote after Prophecy and Divine Inspiration ceased,
and so as they could not be of Divine Authority, so were not received by the
Jewish Church (to which were committed the Oracles of God. Romans 2. 2.) nor by
the Christian Church, as the 60th Canon of the Council of Laodicea does show,
where there is a Catalogue of the Canonical Books, without any mention of these.

So S. Jerome also declares, As therefore the Church does read Tobias, Judith,
and the Books of the Maccabees, but does not receive them into the Canonical
Scriptures: So it does read the two Volumes of Wisdom and Eccl siasticus for
the edification of the people, not to establish the Authority of Ecclesiastical
Principles, in prologo Proverb. See Bellarm. de verbo, l. 1. c. 10. init. The
ancient Church allowed those Books to be read in the Church for their
usefulness (as we do) but did not esteem them to be Canonical, that is, to be
written by persons divinely inspired (as does the Church of of Rome).

Q. 11. ARe the people in the Church of Rome permitted to read the Scripture in
the vulgar Tongue, or a Tongue vulgarly known?
A. No, It was formerly absolutely forbidden, then they were for a time
permitted to read translations of their own, under the caution Reg. Ind. libr.
prohib. Reg. 4.
of a License, where it could be obtained; but since they are again forbid it,
or to have so much as any Summary or Historical Compendium of it, in their own
Tongue Index libr. prohib. auctor. Sixti v. and Clem. viii. observat. circa 4.
Regulam.
.

R. 11. UNder the Law, the people had the Scriptures in a Tongue vulgarly known.

Luke 16. 29. They have Moses and the Prophets; and they were required to read
the Law, and to be conversant in it, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. These words which I command
thee this shall be in thine heart, etc. and accordingly our Savior sends them
thither, Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures. So it was under the Gospel, S. Paul
requires and advises that his Epistle be read to all the Brethren; 1 These. 5.
27. and if so, it was wrote in a language they understood. And so it was in the
Primitive Church, therefore S. Chrysostom exhorts his Auditors that were
secular Men, to provide themselves Bibles, the Medicines of their Souls, to be
their perpetual instructors, Comment. in Colos. 3. 16. And to serve this end
the holy Scriptures were very soon translated into many vulgar tongues by
learned men.

Q 12. FOr what reason is the Scripture thus prohibited among them?
A. Because (say they) if it be permitted to be read every where, without
difference, there would more prejudice than profit proceed from it, through the
rashness of Men. Reg. Ind. libr. prohib. Reg. 4.

R. 12. IN the Apostles times there were some that wrested the Scriptures unto
their own destruction, and yet the Apostle S. Peter thought of no other
expedient than to give the Christians a caution, that they were not also led
away with the errors of the wicked, and to advise them, that they should grow
in knowledge. 2 Pet. 3. 16, 17, 18. The way to prevent this therefore is not to
keep the Scriptures from the people (which were written for our Learning, Romans
15. 4. and that we might believe, Joh. 20. 31.) but to exhort them to a
diligent perusal of them. Math. 22. 29. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures.

The Sheep should not cast away their skin, because Wolves sometimes hide
themselves under it, says S. Austin de Sermon. Dom. in monte.

Q. 13. SInce the Scripture may be misunderstood, and the meaning of it is
often disputed, have they no Judge to determine the sense of it?
A. They say, it belongs to the Church (of Rome) to judge of the sense and
interpretation of Scripture, and no one may presume to interpret the Scripture
contrary to the sense which Mother Church has held and does hold. Council.
Trid. Sess. 4. Decret. de Edit. and usu Script.

It cannot be called the Church of God where the legitimate Successor of St.
Peter in the Roman Chair, and the undoubted Vicar of Christ does not preside:
-- what the Church does teach is the express word of God, and what is taught
against the sense and consent of the Church is the express word of the Devil.
Cardinal Hosius (...) expresso Dei verbo, p. 642, 643.

R. 13. WHile the Apostles were alive, the Churches of Christ in matters of
Dispute applied themselves to them, as in the point of Circumcision, Acts 15.
2. but since they of the Church of Rome can neither prove the like
Infallibility in their Church, nor direct us where it is, we think our selves
as well in our Church, as they can be in theirs; and that as long as we have
the Scripture for a Rule, the Church is to be referred to the Scripture, and
not the Scripture to the Church; and that as Scripture is the best expounder of
it self, so the best way to know whether any thing be of Divine Authority, is
to apply our selves to the Scripture.

If I would have the Church demonstrated, it is not by humane teachings, but by
the Divine Oracles, says S. Augustine, de enit. Eccles. cap. 3.

The way for understanding the Scriptures is to demonstrate out of themselves
concerning themselves, says Clemens Alex. Strom. l. 7. p. 757. The sum of all
is this, the Scripture is the only rule of Faith; the way to judge aright of
that rule, is by the sober and modest use of our own reason; a help to judge of
that rule, is the sense especially of the primitive Church: but to make the
Church the sole judge of Scripture, and to obli^e^us to follow that, without
attending to Scripture as the rule, or our own reason as the judge, is to leave
us without Scripture or reason.

SECT. II. Of Repentance and Obedience.


SECT. II. Of Repentance and Obedience.


Q. 14. WHat does the Church of Rome teach concerning Repentance?
A. 1. It teaches that Contrition (which is a sorrow for sin past, and a
purpose of not committing it for the future) though perfected with Charity, is
not sufficient to reconcile a person to God without Penance, or Confession to a
Priest either in act or desire. Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 4. Catech. Romans Pars
2. de Sacrament. poenit. n. 38.

A. 2. She teaches that Attrition, or imperfect Contrition, proceeding merely
from the fear of Hell, is equivalent to Contrition by virtue of Confession. For
the Council of Trent does teach that the Sacraments do conser grace upon those
that are disposed Council. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 6.
, and that Attrition does dispose to receive the grace of the Sacrament of
Penance, and leads to justification Sess. 14. cap. 4. Bellarm. de poenit. l. 2.
c. 18. ss. Sed sciendum est. [See Quest. 78].
.

R. 14. COntrition is but another word for Repentance, and Repentance is a
qualification for Pardon and Reconciliation. A broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise. Psalm. 51. 17. Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. Cast away from you
all your transgressions, etc. and make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for
why will ye die, etc.

Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so
iniquity shall not be your ruin.

Acts 3. 19. Repent and be converted that your sins may be blotted out.

The same Texts which make Contrition sufficient without Confession to the
Priest, make Attrition insufficient without there be Contrition. And as the
former Doctrine of the insufficiency of Contrition without confession, makes
that necessary which God has not made necessary: so this latter of the
sufficiency of Attrition upon Confession to the Priest, without Contrition,
makes that unnecessary which God has made necessary. And what can be a bolder
invasion upon the divine Authority, than either to require other conditions of
Salvation than God has required (as is done by making confession to a Priest
necessary to Salvation) or to dissolve the obligation of those conditions which
he has required (as does their Doctrine of Attrition with Confession)?

Q. 15. WHat is the Judgment of the Church of Rome as to good Works?
A. The Church of Rome does affirm that the good Works of justified persons do
truly deserve eternal Life Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 16.
; and that if any one does say that such works do not truly deserve an increase
of Grace here, and eternal Life, and an augmentation of glory hereafter; let
him be accursed Ibid. Can. 32.
.

Our good works do merit eternal Life, not only by virtue of Gods Covenant and
acceptance, but also by reason of the work it self Bellarm. de justif. l. 5.
c. 17.
.

R. 15. TRuly to deserve, is to make God our debtor; to him that works [i. e.
that meriteth] is the reward not reckoned of Grace but of Debt: Romans 4. 4. But
can a Man be profitable to God? Job 22. 2. Our Savior teaches us that we
cannot, Luke 17. 10. when ye shall have done all these things which are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable Servants: we have done that which was
our duty to do. A Command to do it, and Grace to obey that Command, and a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory as a reward. [2 Cor. 4. 17.] will
shame the pretense of real merit, and turn the Anathema upon themselves. And
they may as soon reconcile light and darkness, as the grace of God, and merit
of Christ, to this Doctrine; although for a cover they have confounded them
together in the same Canon.

Q. 16. But is there no allowance for such as have not good works of their own
sufficient to merit for themselves?
A. Yes there are Indulgences to be obtained, by which persons may be
discharged from the punishment of sin here and in Purgatory: And if any affirm
these Indulgences to be useless, or that the Church has not power to grant
them, he is accursed. Council. Trid. Sess. 25. Decret de Indulg.

The Popes and Prelates of the Church are Judges appointed by God to remit
faults and punishments in his name by an Indulgence, if so be Justice be
satisfied, through the application of the satisfactions of Christ and the
Saints. Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 5. ss. Jam vero.

R. 16. TO pardon sin and remit the punishment, only belong to God, according
to Psalm 32. 5. I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. What God binds, no person can unty, and what
he unties no man can bind. But this course of Indulgence for a long time
practiced, and still upheld in the Church of Rome, does unty what God does
bind; and remits where God does not remit. It makes sin easy and cheap, and
prostitutes the strict rules of Christianity to the basest purposes. So Polyd.
Virgil says, when Indulgences were grown common, many men did less abstain
from doing evil actions. De invent. l. 8. c. 1. For when persons, for example,
can have a plenary Indulgence for so trivial a satisfaction as the standing
before the doors of S. Peter's Church at Rome, when the Pope blesses the people
at Easter, it makes sin as easy to be committed as pardoned. It may be for the
honor of the Apostolical Chair, (which Bellarmin says was the reason of it
Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 12. ss. Observe. 2c.
but is a great dishonor to God. So that who can now wonder that there was no
use of Indulgences in the Primitive Church, as their Bishop of Rochester says
Roffens. contr. Luther. art. 18.
?

Q. 17. HOw far do those Indulgences extend?
A. They do extend sometimes to days, sometimes to years, nay some of them were
plenary Bellarm. de Indulgent. l. 1. c. 9. init. Plenary Indulgence does take
away all the punishment due to sin. Ibid ss. Indulgentia Quadragen.
Indulgences; some were for a discharge from temporal punishments here, others
from the pains of Purgatory Ibid c. 7. ss. Et quidem.
, and some did grant an eternal reward to those that observed the Conditions
required.

Q. 18. UPon what Terms were those Indulgences to be obtained?
A. By Money This is implied Council. Trid. Sess. 21. c. 9. though it is called
by the soft name of Alms.
, Pilgrimages So, many are granted to particular Churches in Rome, for the
benefit of Pilgrims.
, assisting the Pope So, those that upon the motion of Pope Alexander III. took
up Arms against the Albigenses, had by an Indulgence the promise of an eternal
reward. Baron. ad A. D. 1179. n. 7.
, reciting certain Prayers So Pope Alexander the 6th granted to those that
recited this following Prayer to the blessed Virgin, and S. Ann her Mother,
30000 Years Indulgence.
. etc.

HAil Mary full of Grace, the Lord be with thee, thy Grace with me. Blessed be
thou among Women: And blessed be S. Ann thy Mother, from whom, O Virgin Mary,
thou have proceeded without Sin and Spot; but of thee has Jesus Christ been
born, the Son of the living God. Amen.

Thesaur. Var. Exercit. in great. Sodal. B. V. M. Bruxel. Edit 2. An. 1658. p.
287.

R. 17, 18. THE Scandal given by Indulgences was so notorious, that they
endeavored to soften them; and Order was given by the Council of Trent for
reforming the Abuses of them; but when the Fathers there thought not fit to
discover those Abuses, and did only forbid wicked Gain, Sess. 25. Decret. de
Indulg.
they left a large scope for the making a Gain of them. And besides as
formerly, so two of the Popes under whom that Council sat, [viz. Paul 3. and
Julius 3. A Bull of Indulgence to the Fraternity of the Altar, Paris 1550. v.
B. Taylor' s Def. part 2. l. 2. p. 8.
] proceeded in much the same course as their Predecessors, if they did not
exceed them: for by their Bulls, there is granted to all such of the Fraternity
of the Holy Altar, that visit the Church of S. Hilary of Chartres, during the
six Weeks of Lent, 800700 Years of Pardon, besides 13 or 14 Plenary
Indulgences. And since that Urban the 8th Bullar. to. 3. page 74.
, and Clement the 10th A. D. 1671. Bull upon the Canonization of five Saints.
, have granted by their Indulgence a Plenary Remission of Sins, and the last of
them at point of Death.

S. Austin had no such Opinion of Pilgrimages, for he says, Tom. 10. de
Sanctis, Sermon. 47. He has not said, Go unto the East and seek Righteousness;
sail to the West, and receive Indulgence. For give, and it shall be forgiven
thee; Indulge, and it shall be indulged to thee.

Q. 19. UPon what Pretense or Reason is the Doctrine and Practice of
Indulgences founded?
A. Upon Works of Supererogation That Supererogation is necessary to
Indulgence, no one can deny, says Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 2. init.
, that is, the overplus of the Satisfactions of Christ and the Saints, which is
a Treasury Council. Trid. Sess. 21. c. 9.
committed to the Churches custody So Pope Clem. 6. Constit. extrav. in Bellar.
ibid.. ult.
, and to be disposed of as She sees meet Bellarm. ibid. c. ^.
.

R. 19. ROmans 8. 18. I reckon that the Sufferings of this present Time, are
not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed in us: So, 2
Cor. 4. 17. Romans 14. 12. Every one of us shall give an account of himself to
God. If there be no comparison betwixt the Reward and our Sufferings for it,
then no one has Merit or satisfactions to transfer to another: And if every Man
must give an account of himself, then no Man can be benefited by the Merits and
Satisfactions of another. But supposing there is a superabundance of
satisfactions in the Saints; yet what need is there of them, when there is such
an infinite value in the Sufferings of Christ, who by one Offering has for
ever perfected them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. Or who gave the Church
the Power so to apply them?

Q. 20. WHither do the Souls of those go that die in a state of Grace, but are
not sufficiently purged from their Sins, or have not had a Plenary Indulgence
for the Remission of them?
A. Such go to Purgatory, a place of Torment in the other World, near to Hell
Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2. c. 6. SS. Quinta est, and Deinde.
, where they are to continue till they have made full satisfaction for their
Sins, and are thoroughly purged and prepared for Heaven, whereinto no unclean
thing can enter Catech. Romans par. 1. c. 6. n. 3.
.

Q. 21. HOw come those Persons to be punished in the other World, who depart in
a state of Grace out of this?
A. Because they have not here fulfilled the Penance imposed upon them, or is
due from them to God.

Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 6. and 7.

R. 20, 21. THat those that die in a state of Grace, are yet in a state of
Torment, and are to be purged in the other World, is contrary to Scripture and
Antiquity. Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus. Verse. 30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified. Verse. 33. 34. Who
shall lay ary thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies.
Who is he that condemns? As Justification and Condemnation are here opposed
by the Apostle, so are Condemnation and Glorification; and he that is justified
upon the same reason that he cannot be condemned, shall be glorified. Now the
Elect are justified before, and when they go out of this World; and
consequently shall have nothing laid to their Charge in the next; for that were
to condemn them after they are acquitted, and to punish them after they are
pardoned.

The Servants of God then have peace, then enjoy quiet rest and security; when
being drawn from these storms of the World, we arrive at the Haven of our
everlasting Habitation and security; when this Death being ended, we enter into
Immortality; says S. Cypr. de Mortal. SS. 2.

Luke 23. 43. Our Savior says to the penitent Thief, To day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. Paradise is acknowledged to be the Seat of the Blessed
Bellarm. de Sanct. Beat. l. 1. c. 3. Testim. 4.
; and if there was a Purgation necessary for Sinners, he that believed and
repented not till the last moment of his Life, might be well supposed to need
it; and should have been sent rather to Purgatory than Paradise.

Gregor. Naz. says, That after the Night of this Life there is no Purgation;
and that it is better to be corrected and purged now, than to be sent to the
Torment there, where the time of punishing is, and not of purging. Orat. 15. in
plag. grand.

Q. 22. OF what duration or continuance is the punishment of that State?
A. It is but temporary in its Nature, for an appointed time; and the Person is
to continue in it till he is purged from his sin, and has suffered the
Punishment due to it.

Catech. ibid. Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2. c. 8. ^^. Quantum ad primum.

R. 22. THE State that Believers immediately enter upon after Death, is said to
be Life for the Comfort, and everlasting for the continuance of it.

Joh. 5. 24. He that believes on him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and
shall not come into Condemnation; but is passed from Death unto Life.

So S. Cypri in; The End of this Life being completed, we are divided into the
Habitations of Everlasting, either Death or Immortality. Ad Demetr.. 16.

Q. 23. IS there no way by which the Souls of those that are in Purgarory may
be delivered out of that Prison, and their time of Torment shortened?
A. They may be helped and delivered by the Suffrages Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
Decr. de Purgat.
of the Faithful that are alive; that is, by Prayers, Alms, and Masses Council.
Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 3.
; and other Works of Piety, such as Indulgences Bellarm. de Purgat. l. 2. c.
16. SS Ad haec.
.

R. 23. LUKE 16. 26. Betwixt us and you there is a great Gulf fixed, so that
they which would pass from hence to you [to relieve you] cannot, etc.

As the State in which Abraham and Lazarus were, needed no relief; so that in
which the Rich Man was, could not obtain it. For says Epiphanius, After Death
is no help to be gotten by Godliness or Repentance. For Lazarus does not there
go to the Rich Man, nor the Rich Man unto Lazarus, etc. For the Garners are
sealed up, and the Time is fulfilled. Contr. Cathar. Haer. 59.

And if a Man's own Repentance cannot help him, much less can another's good
Works profit him.

So says S. Jerome; While we are in this present World, we may be able to help
one another, either by our Prayers, or by our Counsels: but when we shall come
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noah, can
entreat for any one, but every one must bear his own Burden Lib. 3. Com. in
Galat. c. 6.
. And he elsewhere says, That what shall be to all in the Day of Judgment,
this is accomplished to every one at the Day of Death in Joel c. 2.
.

Q. 24. IS the Doctrine of Purgatory a Matter of Faith, and necessary to be
believed?
A. Yes: For whosoever shall say, that there is no Debt of Temporal Punishment
to be paid, either in this World or in Purgatory, before there can be an
admission into Heaven, is accursed Council Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 30. and Sess. 25.
Decret. de Purg.
. And whosoever shall say, the Sacrifice of the Mass is not to be used for the
Dead, is accursed Ibid. Sess. 22. Can. 3.
; and this is one of the Principles, without the belief of which there is no
Salvation Bulla Pii 4ti.
.

R. 24. BIshop Fisher an Author of theirs says, That there is no or very
little mention of Purgatory among the Ancients Roffens. Lutheri confut. Art.
18. and Polyd. Virg. de Invent. l. 8. c. 1.
. And it is then no little incroachment upon the Christian World, to make that
now a Doctrine of Faith, and to require it upon pain of Damnation to be
believed.

Q. 25. IN what place were the Souls of the Patriarchs, and other good Men,
before the coming of Christ?
A. Before the Death, and Resurrection (a), or Ascension of Christ (b), the
Gates of Heaven were opened to none; and the Souls of good Men departed, were
detained in a certain place, called in Scripture, Abraham's Bosom Catech. Ibid.
, and by the Schools, Limbus Patrum, and is the uppermost part of Hell; the
lowermost being the place of the Damned, next above that Purgatory, next to
that Limbus Infantium, above that Limbus Patrum Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2. c. 6.
SS. Quod autem.
. (a) Catech. Romans par. 1. c. 6. n. 3. 6.
(b) Bellarm. de Christ. l. 4. c. 11.


R. 25. WE read that Elias was taken up into Heaven, 2 Kings 2. 11. and he and
Moses appeared in Glory, Luke 9. 31. Mat. 17. 2. after the manner of that State
in which they were. For whereas the Fashion of our Savior's Countenance was
altered, and his Face shone as the Sun, and his Raiment was white and
glistering as the Light, it is said of them, that they appeared in Glory. And so
the Condition Abraham was in is represented (as Heaven it self is in Scripture,
Luke 14. 15.) after the manner of a Festival Entertainment: Thus Lazarus is
said to be in his Bosom, Luke 16. 22. (as S. John lay in our Savior's, Joh.
13. 23.) and others are said to sit down with Abraham, etc. Matthew. 8. 11. The
Bosom of Abraham is therefore no other than the Heavenly Paradise, the blessed
Abode of good Men in the other World.

So S August. expounds it; The Bosom of Abraham is the Rest of the blessed
Poor, whose is the Kingdom of Heaven, into which after this Life they are
received. Quaest. Evangel. l. 2. c. 38.

Q. 26. IN what condition were they while thus detained in Limbo?
A. They only suffered the Punishment of loss, being deprived of the Vision of
God, and sustained by the blessed hope of a Redemption, did enjoy a quiet
Habitation.

Catech. Romans ibid. n. 3.

Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2. c. 14. SS. Confirmatur.

R. 26. THey are not agreed in the Nature and Condition of the Place; for the
Catechism says, N. 3. They were sustained by Hope, and were without any sense
of Grief. And presently, N. 4. That although they were without other sense of
Grief, yet being kept in suspense, were tormented with the hope of that blessed
Glory which they did expect.

But the Scripture tells us, that the State where Abraham was, was not only a
State of Rest, but also of Comfort, Luke 16. 25.

Q. 27. HOw and when were they delivered thence.
A. They were delivered by Christ at his decent into Hell Catech. Romans ibid. n.
5. 6.
; so that ever since, that place remains empty Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2. c. 6..
octava est.
.

R. 27. IT was at our Savior's Ascension, that he led Captivity captive,
Ephesians. 4, 8.

So Tertullian; He ascended into the Height, that is, Heaven. He led Captivity
captive, that is, Death, or human Servitude. Contra Marcion. l. 5. c. 8.

Q. 28. WHat use do they make of this Doctrine?
A. Hereby they are enabled to give a Reason, why there is neither Precept nor
Example in the Old Testament for the Invocation of Saints departed Bellarm. de
Sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 19.. Item. Exodus
, because they were for their punishment enclosed in this place, and were there
held bound by the Devils Catech. Romans ibid. n. 5.
, till delivered by Christ. And so the People of those Times only prayed to
God, and did not use to say, Holy Abraham, pray for me, etc. Bellarm. ibid.


R. 28. THere is neither Precept nor Example for the Invocation of Saints in
the New Testament; and if that be the Reason for the Project of a Limbus before
Christ, it may be a reason for a Limbus still; and they may as well exclude the
Saints from Heaven now as then, if there be no more for their Invocation in the
New Testament, than was in the Old. And so much is also acknowledged. Thus
Salmero (a Learned Disputant in the Council of Trent); Such Invocations of
Saints, have no express Ground in all the Scriptures Ad 1 Timothy 2. Disp. 7.. Sed
cum ante and nec obstat quod.
. And Faber positively affirms, The Primitive Church never looked but on one
Christ; and never worshipped any other than the Holy Trinity Fab. Stapul.
Praef. in Evang.
.

SECT. III. Of Divine Worship.


SECT. III. Of Divine Worship.


Q. 29. OF what does the Service in the Roman Church consist?
A. It consists of Prayers and Hymns offered to God, Angels and Saints; of
Lessons taken out of the Scriptures, and Legends; of Professions of Faith in
the Creeds; and is so composed, as that there are Responses for the People to
bear a part in.

R. 29. THere was a time when Cardinal Quignonius at the Instance of Pope Paul
the 3d, reformed the Breviary; and instead of Legends, had set Scriptures for
the Lessons; but Pope Pius Quintus, who afterward undertook to reform it also,
prohibited that of Quignonius Bulla praefixa Breviar. Romans Jussu Pii V. Edit.
, and instead of the Scriptures, placed Legends again, and so it continues.

Q. 30. IN what Language is their Service performed?
A. It is performed in all places among them in the Latin Tongue, which is in
no Place vulgarly understood.

Q. 31. IS the having the Service in an unknown Tongue injoined in the Church
of Rome?
A. Yes: It Is required that it should be celebrated in the Latin Tongue; and
whosoever shall say that it ought to be administered in the Vulgar Tongue, is
accursed Council. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 8. and Can. 9.
. Hence when of late Years the Missal, or Mass Book, was translated into
French, it was declared by Pope Alexander the 7th, to be a Seed-Plot of
Disobedience, Rashness, and Schism; and he calls them that did it, Sons of
Perdition; and does condemn, reprobate, and forbid that Missal, or what shall
hereafter be published in any other manner Collectio quorundum Authorum, cum
Decretis. Paris. 1661.
. And the whole Clergy of France, in a Letter to the same Pope upon that
occasion, says, That a Translation of that kind is the Cause and Seed-Plot of
many Errors Ibid. p. 62.
.

R. 30, 31. IN Divine Worship (as in all other Actions) the first thing to be
considered is the End, and the next thing is the Means conducing to that End.
The End is the Honor of God, and the Edification of the Church; and then God
is honored, when the Church is edified. The Means conducing to that End, are
to have the Service so administered, as may inform the Mind, engage the
Affections, and increase Devotion. But that cannot be done, where the Tongue
it is celebrated in is not understood, since we are informed, affected, and
edified only as we do understand.

Thus we are taught by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 2. He that speaks in an
unknown Tongue, speaks not unto Men. Verse. 11. If I know not the meaning of
the Voice, he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me. Verse. 16. If thou
shall bless with the Spirit, [by the Gift of an unknown Tongue] how shall he
that occupies the room of the unlearned say, Amen, at the giving of Thanks?
How can the People be attentive to the Lessons, answer at the Responses, be
devout in the Prayers, profess their Faith in the recital of the Creeds, when
they do not understand what is read, prayed, or professed? Thus does St.
Ambrose comment on 1 Cor. 14. It is evident that the Mind is ignorant, where
the Tongue is not understood, etc. The unskilful Person hearing what he does
not understand, knows not the Conclusion of the Prayer, and does not answer,
Amen; that is, that it is true, that the Blessing may be confirmed. For by
those is the Confirmation of the Prayer performed that answer, Amen. So that
where the Prayer is not consented to, it is not our Prayer; and where it is not
understood, it cannot be consented to.

Q. 32. WHat are the Objects of Worship in the Church of Rome?
A. Besides the Blessed Trinity, they do apply themselves in their Devotions to
Angels, Saints, and the Virgin Mary.

R. 32. MAT. 4. 10. Our Savior answers the Devil, It is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him ^^ly shall thou serve. As Divine Worship is
due to God; so it is not lawful to give it to any other, it being his peculiar
Prerogative.

The Church of Rome does acknowledge this; but says, That the Worship they give
to Saints and Angels, is not of that kind. Catech. Romans Part 3. c. 2. n. 8.
Par. 4. c. 6. n. 3.

And therefore we must consider what that Worship is which is peculiar to God,
and what can be thus peculiar, if Prayer is not? So thought St. Ambrose, Thou
only art to be invocated. De obitu Theodos.

For God alone can receive our Prayer, or can give what we pray for, or be the
Object of our Faith and Trust. So the Apostle, How shall they call on him, in
whom they have not believed? Romans 10. 14. So that to invocate any other than
God, is to transfer that Honor to them which is peculiar to God.

Q. 33. WHat Honor do they give to the Angels?
A. 1. The Church of Rome does teach, that the Angels are to be worshipped
Catech. Romans par. 3. c. 2. n. 8, 9. venerari, adorare colere.
, invoked, and prayed unto, as they do willingly undertake the care of our
Eternal Salvation Ibid. n. 10.
. And so they have Litanies and Prayers composed for this purpose Litaniae SS.
Angelorum, vid. Horologium Tutelaris Angeli a Drexelio. p. 84. Duac. 1623.
.

A. 2. They teach, that as every particular Person has a Guardian Angel from
his Birth Catech. Romans Par. 4. cap. 9.. 1. n. 4, 6.
, so it is fit for them to commit themselves more particularly to him Horolog.
Drex. p. 108.
; after this manner, (as it is in a Book not long since published in our Tongue
The Child's Catechism. 1678.
:) Blessed Angel! to whose care and custody our loving Creator has committed
me, defend me this day, I beseech you, from all dangers, and direct me in the
Way I ought to walk.

R. 33. WE do honor the Holy Angels, as they are God's Ministers, and are sent
forth to minister unto them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. But to
worship or pray to them* we dare not, as it is what they themselves do refuse
and abhor, Rev. 19. 10. and the Scripture does condemn as a sign of a Fleshly
Mind, vainly intruding into those things which we have not seen, Col. 2. 18.
Theodoret upon this Text says, That the practice of worshipping Angels
obtained a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia; and was therefore forbid by the
Synod of Laodicea, as appears by the following words; For Christians ought not
to forsake the Church of God, and depart aside and invocate Angels, and hold
Meetings, which are things forbidden. Conc. ^aod. Can. 35. And he adds, That in
his time Oratories of St. Michael were there to be seen: All which they were
induced to, upon a pretense of Humility, that since God is not to be seen,
approached to, or comprehended, therefore it is sit to sue for his Favor by
Angels: But, says the same Father, this is so far from Humility, that it is in
truth a^ Insolence. For it is founded upon a presumption of knowing that which
they neither do, nor can understand; and whilst they would be wise above what
is written, do effectually overthrow that which is written: by not holding the
Head, and forsaking the only Mediator betwixt God and Man, Christ Jesus.

Q. 34. WHat Religious Honor do they give to the Saints?
A. They pray to them as their Intercessors, make their Confessions to them
Vid. Form of Confession.
; offer Incense, and make Vows to them; venerate their Images and Relics.

Q. 35. FOr what Reason do they pray unto Saints?
A. That by their Aid and Help they may obtain Benefits from God Council. Trid.
Sess. 25. de invocat.
, who does confer many Favors upon Mankind, by their Merit, and Grace, and
Intercession Catech. Romans par. 3. c. 2. n. 12. Missal. Romans proprium Missarum
de Sanctis.
.

Q. 36. AFter what manner do they pray to Saints?
A. They pray to them as Favorites with God, that they would take them into
their protection, and would obtain those things of God for them which they do
want. Therefore they plead, that they have two different Forms of Prayer; for
to God they properly say, Have Mercy upon us, hear us: To a Saint, Pray for us.

Catech. Romans par. 4. c. 6. n. 3.

Q 37. BUt have they not those Forms in their Missals, Breviaries, and common
Books of Devotion, which are particularly and immediately applied to the Saints
for obtaining what they want?
A. Yes: It is too manifest to be denied; and tho they have been more sparing
of late Years, yet nothing formerly more frequent. As for instance, in a Missal
printed at Paris, An. 1520. fol. 51. there is this Prayer to St. Agnes.

O Agnes, Woman of the Lamb, do thou enlighten us within. Destroy the Roots of
Sin. O excellent Lady, after the Grievances of the World, do thou translate us
to the Company of the Blessed.

R. 34, 35, 36, 37. THere is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Reason for all, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.

Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather,
that is risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of God, who also makes
Intercession for us.

The Scripture knows no difference, nor does teach us to distinguish (as they
do) between a Mediator of Intercession and Redemption; but on the contrary
teaches, that he alone makes Intercession for us, who died and rose, and is at
the Right Hand of God, and he alone has a right to our Prayers, and to him
alone may we address them.

So Origin: All Prayers, and Supplications, and Thanksgivings, are to be sent
up to God the Lord of all, by that High Priest who is above all Angels, being
the iiving Word of God. L. 5. cont. Cells. p. 233, 239.

So again; We ought to pray only to the God over all, and his only Son the
first born of every Creature, who, as our High Priest, offers his Prayers to
his God, and our God. Lib. 8. p. 395, 402.

To have other Mediators and Intercessors, is not to hold the Head, in the
Judgment of the Apostle, Colos. 2. 19. and so the Council of Laodicea
determines, where it is said, Christians ought not to forsake the Church, and
invocate Angels. -- If any Man therefore be found to give himself to this privy
Idolatry, let him be Anathema; because he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, and betaken himself to Idolatry.

By which we are taught what to conceive of the Doctrine and Practice of the
Church of Rome, which has innumerable Mediators besides Christ, and by whose
Merits and Intercession they promise themselves the more effectual Audience and
Success in the Court of Heaven. For if there be but one Mediator betwixt God
and Man, then that one Mediator does exclude any other Mediators, as well as
one God does exclude other Gods. A plurality of Mediators being no more
consistent with one Mediator, than a plurality of Gods is with one God. And we
may as well conclude, that though there be that are called Mediators, yet to us
Christians there is but one Mediator; as though there be that are called Gods,
yet to us there is but one God: 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. Such a Mediator as is able to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make Intercession for them. Heb. 7. 25. And as we can need no other Mediator
(when he is a Mediator for us) so it is to undervalue his Mediation to seek
elsewhere for it.

Q 38. WHat is the religious observance and Worship they give to the Uirgin
Mary?
A. They fly unto her as the Advocatrix of the Faithful, the Mother of God,
that by Prayer to her they may obtain help, through her most excellent Merits
with God.

Catech. Romans par. 4. cap. 5. n. 8.

R. 38. WE do honor the blessed Virgin as the Mother of the Holy Jesus, and as
she was a Person of eminent Piety while on Earth, and a glorious Saint now in
Heaven; but we do not think it lawful to give that Honor to Her, which belongs
not to a Creature, and does equalize Her with her Redeemer, as they do in the
Church of Rome. For, is Christ an Advocate? She is an Advocatrix. Is he a
merciful High Priest? She is the Mother of Mercy. Has he Merits? so has she,
etc. These and the like Phrases are usual in their Offices.

Q 39. HAve they not some singular Forms of Devotion to her?
A. Yes: For apprehending her to be in Glory superior to all created Beings,
they offer a Service to her, beyond what they give either to Angels or Saints.

Q. 40. AFter what manner do they apply themselves to her?
A. According to some Missals, they ask her to command her Son, by the right
and authority of a Mother Missal. Paris. An. 1520. fol. 65.
; or, as it is in the Breviaries used at this day, show thy self a Mother Brev.
Romans Fest. Assump.
. They pray to her, that she would loose the Bands of the Guilty, bring Light
to the Blind, would make them mild and chaste, and cause their Heart to burn in
love to Christ Officium. B. M. In the Hymn called Planctus B. M. Antwerp, 1641.
.

But because these things are dispersed in other Books, I shall direct the
Reader to a Compendium of this kind, in a Book printed lately in London, where
the Author says, That whatever Gifts are bestowed upon us by Jesus, we receive
them by the Mediation of Mary. No one being gracious to Jesus that is not
devoted to Mary. That the Power of Mary in the Kingdom of Jesus, is suitable to
her Maternity. -- And tho the condition of some great Sinners may be so
deplorable, that the limited Excellency and Merits cannot effectually bend the
Mercies of Jesus to relieve them; yet such is the acceptableness of the Mother
of Jesus to Jesus, that whosoever is under the verge of her Protection, may
confide in her Intercession to Jesus. That the Person devoted to her, is to beg
of her to accompany him as his Sacred Guide, Advocate, and Champion, against
the Assaults of Sin and Sensuality. Contemplations of the Life and Glory of
Holy Mary, etc. p. 7, 8, 9, 14. Printed, An. 1685.



Much after the forecited manner did the Council of Constance invoke the
Blessed Virgin, as other Councils used to do the Holy Ghost, calling her the
Mother of Grace, the Fountain of Mercy; and they call on her for Light from
Heaven.

And at this day it is a common practice, instead of Prayer to God before their
Sermons and Exhortations, to say, an Ave Maria, etc.

R. 39, 40. WE cannot but wonder at the Applications made to the blessed Virgin
in the Church of Rome, whose Acts on Earth, and whose Power in Heaven, the
Scripture does very sparingly relate, or is altogether silent in. We read
nothing there of her bodily Assumption into Heaven, nor of her Exaltation to a
Throne above Angels and Archangels Brev. Romans Aestiv. Fest. Assump.
. We read nothing there of her being the Mother of Grace and Mercy Officium
parvum B. M. ad Maturin. Catech. par. 4. c. 5. n. 8.
, the Queen and Gate of Heaven, the Advocatrix of Sinners Completor.
, and of her Power in destroying all Heresies in the World Fest. Assump.
, and being all things to all Missale Paris. ibid. V. Le Psaultier de Jesus.
Hymn, Ave Spes fola.
.

When we read so much of the Blessed Virgin in Books of this kind, and so
little of her in the Divine Writings, we cannot but reflect upon what is said
by Epiphanius, of a certain Sect of Women that in his Time offered Cakes to the
Virgin Mary, which he calls an Impious Thing, and says is altogether contrary
to the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost Haeres. 78. p. 1054. Par. 1622.
. And he further adds; This the Holy Ghost does warn us of, in which Christ
says, Woman, What have I to do with thee? etc. Where he calls her Woman, and
as it were prophesying, to refute those Schisms and Heresies which he knew
would arise in the World; and that no one being moved by a certain admiration
of the Blessed Virgin, might turn himself to those dotages of Heresies, etc.
And he adds; Let the Virgin Mary be honored, but the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost be adored Haeres. 79. N. 4, 7, etc.
. And much more has that Father there to this purpose.

But what would this good Father have said, if instead of a Chair adorned and
set forth in honor of the Virgin Mary, (as those Women did) he had found her
advanced to a Throne of a Mediatrix in Heaven? What if instead of Cakes, there
had been Litanies and Prayers offered to her, and that in more abundance than
to Christ himself? What if he had found them praying, O holy Mother, succor
the Miserable, help the Weak, comfort those that mourn? (Breviar. Romans Aestiv.
Suffragia.) I doubt not but he would have said of this, what he does of the
other, That they would obtrude her upon us for God, and have called it Heresy
and Idolatry.

Q 41. What External Representations or Memorials have they in the Church of
Rome, which they give a veneration and worship unto?
A. They have the Relics and Images of the Virgin Mary and Saints. Council.
Trid. Sess. 25. de invoc.

Q 42. What do they mean by Relics?
A. The Bodies or remainders of them, or particular Things belonging or
relating to them when alive, as an Arm, or Thigh, Bones or Ashes Ex Decret.
Regist. Praefix. Brev. Romans
; and the part in which the Martyrs suffered Catech. Romans Par. 3. c. 2. n. 15.
; or the Things by which they suffered, as the Chains with which St. Peter was
bound Brev. Romans Par. Aestiv. Aug. Fest. Petri. ad vinc.
.

R. 41, 42. Deuteronomy 34. 6. He [God by Michael] buried Moses, etc. but no Man
knows of his Sepulcher unto this day. S. Barradas the Jesuit upon the place
says, It is the common Opinion of Lyra, Abulensis, Cajetan, and others, that
the Sepulcher was hid, lest the Israelites, who were inclined to the worship of
Idols, should worship Moses as God. For they say, that when the Devil would for
that reason have showed the Grave and the Body of Moses to the Israelites, S.
Michael hindered; and this was the Contention spoken of Jude 9. Seb. Barrad.
Itinerar. Fill. Israel.

But the Jews could give no greater Honor to the Body of Moses, than is given
to Relics in the Church of Rome; and if that was Idolatry, and Moses's Body
was concealed to prevent it, then there is as much reason to think it unlawful
now in this case, as it was then in that.

Q. 43. FOr what Cause do they show this regard to Relics?
A. As by the Veneration of them they obtain the help of the Saints Council.
Trid. Sess. 25. de invocat.
, whom the Relics relate to; and many Benefits are thereby conferred by God
upon Mankind; for by these the Dead have been raised, the Infirm cured, and
Devils cast out Catech. Romans ibid. Breviar. Romans ibid.
.

R. 43. WE read of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18 4. that he brake in pieces the Brazen
Serpent that Moses had made: and the reason was, because the Children of Israel
did burn Incense to it. The Brazen Serpent was of God's own Institution, Numb.
21. 8. by looking up to which, the People were formerly cured. And tho it was
preserved among them as a Memorial of that Divine Operation; yet when abused to
Idolatry, he cut it in pieces: It then lost its Honor, and was but a
Nehushtan, a piece of Brass. And were these (which are so called) truly Relics
of Saints, and did work those Miracles they pretend, it would be no reason for
that Reverence and Worship they give to them; but the Reverence and Worship
given to them should, according to good King Hezekiah's practice, be rather a
reason to give them a decent Interment, than to enshrine them

Of this Opinion is the Modest and Judicious Consult. Art. 21. de Venerat.
Reliq. Sub fin.
Cassander, (an Author of their own) who says, That if these things were
looked into, there would be found abominable Cheats; as St. Martin found the
Monument of a Thief worshipped instead of a Martyr; and that since they serve
for Gain and Superstition, it is fit that there should be none of them exposed
to view.

Q. 44. What kind of Reverence or Worship is required to be given to Images
and Pictures in the Church of Rome?
A. They kiss them, uncover the Head, and fall down before them; offer Incense,
and pray to them, and use all such postures of Worship, as they would do to the
Person or Persons thereby represented (whether Christ, the Virgin Mary, or
other Saints) if they were present: And whosoever does think otherwise, is
accursed Council. Trid. Sess. 25. de invocat. Catech. Romans Par. 4. c. 6. 11. 4.
. And accordingly the Priest is to direct the People to them, that they may be
worshipped (b). (c) Ut colantur Catech. Romans Par. 3. c. 2. n. 24.


R. 44. THE Second Commandment does teach us the contrary, Thou shall not make
unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven
above, etc. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them. In which
there are two words to be considered, the one Pesel, which we rightly translate
Graven-Image, for it properly signifies any thing carved and cut out of Wood or
Stone, and so it is about forty times rendered in the Greek Translation [(...)]
a graven thing. So that an Idol and an Image are there fobidden, and an Idol
because its an Image. The next word is Themunah, which does properly signify a
similitude or likeness (as is confessed) and is always so translated. And thus
it was understood by the Fathers. So Justin Martyr when he recites this Law,
says, God forbad every Image and Similitude [(...).] And therefore Cassander
grants that the Ancient Christians abhorred all Veneration of Images. Consult.
Art. 21. de Imagine. Indeed the Command is so express and full against this
Practice, that there has been a kind of Self-condemnation in the Church of
Rome; whilst they commonly either altogether leave out this Second Commandment
The Child's Catechism, printed 1678.
, or render it imperfectly and by haives, Thou shall not make to thee an Idol
The Abstract of the Scripture-Catechism.


Q 45. What do they profess, is their intention in the Reverence they give to
Images and Pictures?
A. They declare that the Honor given to Images and Pictures, is referred to
the Prototypes Council. Trid. Ibid.
, or the Persons represented by them, whether God the Father, Christ, Angels or
Saints: And when they do fall down before the Image or Picture, they do worship
God, or Christ, the Angel or Saint.

R. 45. IF an Image be a representation of a Divine Person, and Worship be due
to the Image for the sake of the Person represented in it; then such as the
Person is, such must the Worship be that is due to his Image; and what is due
to the Person if present, is due to the Image in his absence. For to give one
Honor to the Person, and another to the Image, a superior to the Person, and
an inferior to the Image, is to terminate the Worship in the Image, and not
pass it from thence to the Person, as Gretser the Jesuit argues De Cruce l. 1.
c. 49.. Secundo itaque.
: But if it be to pass from the Image unto the Person, then we know what they
do when they kiss and uncover their Heads, and bow down to, and worship an
Image; and have reason to remember the Apostle's advice, 1 John 5. 21. Keep
your selves from Idols.

Q. 46. WHat regard have they to the material Cross or Crucifix?
A. 1. They ascribe peculiar Virtues to it, and pray that God would make the
Wood of the Cross to be the stability of Faith, an increase of good Works, the
Redemption of Souls Pontificale in bened. novae Crucis.
.

2. They use all expressions of outward Adoration, by Kissings, and
Prostrations, etc. Missale Fer. 6. in Parasc.
.

3. They pray directly to it, to increase Grace in the Godly, and blot out the
Sins of the Guilty Brev. Sab. ante Domin. Pass. and Fest. invent. Crucis.
.

4. They give Latria to it, which is the Sovereign Worship that is peculiar to
God Pontif. Romans ordo ad recep. Imper. Rubr. 1. and Gretser de Cruce, l. 1. c.
49.
.

R. 46. THE Church of Rome, tho without any authority from Scripture (which
uses the words promiscuously Gal. 4. 8. (...), Ye did service to them which
were no Gods. Romans 1. 25. (...), They served the Creature.
, makes a distinction betwixt Latria and Dulia; the former is the Worship they
give to God, the latter the Worship they give to Saints. Now they grant, that
to give Latria, or Sovereign Worship, to any besides God, is Idolatry; and,
that were not the Host the very Body and Blood of Christ, it would be no less
than Idolatry to give that Honor to the Host, which they give to Christ: And
then we understand how to call that Worship which they give to the Cross: they
call it Latria, and we may by their leave then, call it Idolatry. For whatever
the Host is, the Cross to be sure is but a Representation, and not the Person
worshipped.

Q. 47. DO they think it lawful to represent God and the Blessed Trinity by
Pictures and Images, and to worship them?
A. Such Pictures are not only almost every where received in the Church of
Rome, but universally tolerated by that Church Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2. c. 8..
ultimo probatur.
, and are both recommended as expedient for the People Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
de sacr. Imag. Catech. Romans par. 3. c. 2. n. 20.
, and proposed to them to be worshipped Cajetan. in Aquin. q. 25. art. 3.
.

R. 47. THere is nothing more expressly forbidden in Scripture, than the making
any Image or Representation of God, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. Take ye good heed unto your
selves (for ye saw no manner of similitude, etc.) lest ye corrupt your selves;
and make you a Graven Image, the similitude of any Figure. If it had not been
derogatory, or had been acceptable to God, he would have chosen a similitude to
have appeared in; but being he did not, they were not to presume to make one
for him. This is to change his Glory, Romans 1. 23, etc. And to place such an
Image in a Christian Temple, is abominable, says St. Austin De Fide and Symb.
c. 7.
. And thus to describe the Trinity, is a deformation of it, says Cassander
Art. 21.. de Imag.
.

Q. 48. UPon what Pretense do they offer to make such Representations of God?
A. They say, they do thereby represent not God, but some of his Properties and
Actions, after the manner they are described in Scripture: As when Dan. 7. 9.
The Ancient of days is said to sit on a Throne, having the Books opened before
him; thereby signifying his Eternity and Infinite Wisdom Catech. Romans Ibid.


R. 48. BUT what is this to those Images and Pictures, equally used by them,
and which are taken from no resemblance in Scripture; such are their
descriptions of the Trinity in Unity, as of God the Father like an old Man,
having the Son lying in his Bosom, and the Holy Ghost over his Head like a
Dove? etc.

2. God himself never appeared in any Form; and so the resemblance in Daniel
was only a Prophetical Scheme, and did no more belong to God, than the Eyes and
Ears that are ascribed to him in Scripture.

3. God cannot be represented at all but by such Properties and Effects; and if
an Image of God be forbidden to be worshipped, then the Image, even of such
Properties and Effects, is forbidden to be worshipped.

Q. 49. BUt are not such Descriptions of God, the way to represent him, as if
he was like unto one of us?
A. Such Pictures are not without danger to be exposed to such as cannot read
the Scriptures, if they are not taught that they are to be taken Metaphorically
Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2. c. 8. SS. Respondent.


R. 49. CAssander, an Author of theirs, says, I wish those from whom this
Information is to be received were not the Authors of these Superstitions; and
he adds, That the teaching is not enough, without the occasions be removed.
This he says of all Images, but more especially of such as are made to
represent God Art. 21. de Imag.
So much did he differ from the Trent Catechism, which says, No one is so
ignorant, as to believe the Divinity to be expressed by an Image Catech. ibid.
n. 20.
.

SECT. IV. Of the Sacraments.


SECT. IV. Of the Sacraments.


Q. 50. What is a Sacrament?
A. A Sacrament is a sensible thing, which by the Institution of God has a
Power, as well of causing as of signifying Holiness and Righteousness Catech.
Romans par. 2. cap. 1. n. 11.
.

Q. 51. HOw many Sacraments are there in the Church of Rome?
A. There are seven, viz. Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance,
Extreme Unction, Orders, and Matrimony Council. Trid. Sess. 7. can. 1.
.

Q. 52. IS this Number determined to be a matter of Faith?
A. Whosoever says, that there are more or fewer than seven instituted by
Christ; or that any of the seven are not truly and properly Sacraments, is
accursed Ibid.
.

R. 50, 51, 52. CAssander says, that we shall not likely find any before Pet.
Lombard [who lived about 1139.] that did define the Number of the Sacraments
Art. 13.. de number. Sacram.
. And St. Austin is very positive that there are but two of Divine Institution
Epist. ad Januar. 118. Our Lord Jesus Christ, says he, has knit Christians
together with Sacraments most few in number, most easy to be kept, most
excellent in signification, as are Baptism and the Lord's Supper.
. Now, that there should be Sacraments of Divine Institution, that are neither
instituted in the Gospel, nor were known to be so till 1100 years after our
Savior, nor be made a matter of Faith till 1500, may be a Doctrine received in
the Church of Rome, but will not easily be believed by any out of it. By a
Sacrament we mean (as our Church does) an outward sign of an inward Spiritual
Grace, given unto us, ordained by Christ, as a means whereby we receive the
same, and as a pledge to assure us thereof. And in this sense we deny that
there are any other Sacraments truly and properly so, besides Baptism and the
Lord's Supper.

Q. 53. What are the Parts of a Sacrament?
A. The Parts of a Sacrament are the Matter or Element, and the Form or Words
of Consecration: So the Matter in Baptism is Water; the Form is, I baptize
thee, etc.

R. 53. THat a Sacrament should consist of Matter and Form, and yet either have
no Form, as Confirmation and Extreme Unction; or have neither Matter nor Form
of Divine Institution, as Penance and Matrimony, is to make them Sacraments,
and to be none. Our Church rightly says of the Additional Sacraments, they
have not any visible Sign ordained of God, Article 25.

Q. 54. OF what Virtue are the Sacraments?
A. The Sacraments contain the Grace which they signify, and confer Grace [ex
opere operato] by the work it self, upon such as do not put an Obstruction Con.
Trid. ibid. Can. 6. and 8.
. For these sensible and natural Things, work by the Almighty Power of God in
the Sacraments, what they could not do by their own Power Catech. Romans ibid. n.
27.
.

R. 54. It Is not sufficient that adult Persons have no Indisposition to receive
the Grace of the Sacraments; for there is also required a Mind well-instructed,
a sound Belief, and a Heart well inclined for that purpose.

2. The Virtue in the Sacraments does not proceed from the Elements and Words,
or the Almighty Power of God working in them; but from the Blessing of God in
consequence of his Promise, to all such as rightly partake of them, and are
qualified for it.

Q. 55. What is there necessary to a Sacrament on the part of those that do
officiate?
A. It Is absolutely necessary, that those that do make and consecrate the
Sacraments, have an intention of doing at least what the Church does, and does
intend to do.

Council. Trid. ibid. Can. 11.

R. 55. FRom hence it follows, that if there be no intention, the Sacraments
are none. And so there is no certainty whether the Priest be a Christian, or a
Priest, or whether in the Eucharist, the Elements continue not Elements after
Consecration, and what is taken for the Host be no more than Bread. For without
the Intention, neither is the Priest Baptized nor Ordained, nor are the
Elements Consecrated. This Bellarmine confesses, No one, says he, can be
certain with a certainty of Faith, that he receives a true Sacrament; seeing a
Sacrament is not made without the intention of the Priest, and that none can
know. l. 3. c. 8.. dicent.

Of Baptism.
Q. 56. Who may administer the Sacrament of Baptism?

A. It chiefly belongs to Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; but in case of
necessity, Men, or Women, Jews, Infidels or Heretics may do it, if they intend
to do what the Church does.

Council. Trid. Sess. 7. de Bapt. Can. 4.

Catech. Romans par. 2. c. 2. n. 24.

Of Baptism.
R. 56. OUR Savior gave Commission to the Apostles, and their Successors in
the Office of the Ministry, To teach all Nations, baptizing them, Mat. 28. 19,
20. So that Women, Jews and Infidels have no more a power to administer
Baptism, than they have to teach, or to be Priests. It was by virtue of a
Commission that the Apostles, etc. were to baptize* and consequently those that
have no Commission, are not to baptize.

Q. 57. What Ceremonies are used in the Administration of Baptism in the
Church of Rome?
A. Before Baptism, there is Chrism or Oil mixed with Water in the Consecration
of it Catech. ibid. n. 11. and 60.
.

2. Exorcism composed of certain Words, Prayers and Actions, for driving away
the Devil Catech. ibid. n. 65.
out of the Child, and the Salt, etc. And the Priest is to blow in the Face of
the Child, after the form of a Cross, saying, Go out of him Satan, etc.
Pastorale Antwerp. 1625.
.

3. The Forehead, Eyes, Breast, etc. are to be crossed, to show that by the
Mystery of Baptism, the Senses are opened to receive God, and to understand his
Commands. Catech. n. 67. Pastor ibid.

4. Then some exorcis'd Salt is to be put into the Mouth, to signify a
deliverance from the Putrefaction of Sin, and the savor of good Works Catech.
ibid. n. 66.
. And the Priest in putting it into the Mouth, says, N. Take the Salt of
Wisdom, and let it be a Propitiation for thee to Eternal Life. Amen Pastor.
ibid.
.

5. Then the Nose and Ears are to be anointed with Spittle, and then the Child
is to be brought to the Water, as the blind Man to Siloam, to signify it
brings Light to the Mind. Catech. ibid. n. 68

After Baptism, 1. The Priest anoints the top of the Head with Chrism Catech.
ibid. n. 72.
, and he adds, Let him anoint thee with the Chrism of Salvation Pastor. ibid.
.

2. He puts a white Garment on the Baptized, saying, Take this white Garment,
which thou may bring before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that thou may
have Life Eternal. Catech. ibid. n. 73.

3. A lighted Candle is put into the Hand, to show a Faith inflamed with
Charity, and nourished with good Works. Ibid. n. 74.

R. 57. IT is pleaded for the Rites and Ceremonies used in the Church of Rome,
that they are appointed for the Sanctity and Majesty of Divine Worship; and
that the Gifts and Benefits contained in the Sacraments, may be the better
imprinted on the Mind Catech. par. 2. c. 2. n. 59.
.

But can we think it for the Majesty of the Sacrament of Baptism, to have it
dressed up like a form of Conjuration, that the Child must be supposed to be
possessed with the Devil, and the Priest must blow in his Face, three times
after the manner of a Cross, with a Get thee out, Satan, before he can say,
Peace be with thee: And that he must cross him half a score times or more, from
part to part, in preparation to Baptism?

Can we think it for the Majesty of it, to have Salt exorcised in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and to put it into the Mouth of the Child, for
a Propitiation unto Eternal Life? Can we think it for the Majesty of this
Ordinance, that the Priest should, how modestly soever, put some of his own
Spittle in his left Hand, and then taking it thence with the Thumb and
Forefinger of his right Hand, touch both Ears of the Infant, and say, Epheta,
be thou opened, and then his Nostrils, and say, For the odor Sweetness; but
thou, O Devil, fly, etc. and then on his right Hand, after the manner of a
Cross, saying, N. I deliver unto thee, the Mark of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
thou may drive the Adversary from thee on every side, and have Life Eternal?
etc.

And what are the Benefits imprinted on the Mind by these, and the like
fantastical Ceremonies? Or where is it that such Benefits are promised, as
these are said to signify? Is it not rather a debasing of it, to have such
Rites and Prayers introduced into it, which are said to signify and contain
that which Baptism was never intended and appointed for? As to give an instance
in the Salt used in it.

The Exorcism of the Salt.
IExorcise [conjure] thee, O Creature of Salt, in the Name of the Father
Omnipotent, and in the love of our Jesus Christ, and in the virtue of the Holy
Spirit. I exorcise thee by the Living God, by the True God, by the Holy God,
who has created thee for the safeguard of Mankind, and has commanded it to
be consecrated by his Servants for the People that come to believe, that in the
Name of the holy Trinity thou be'st made a wholesome Sacrament to put the Enemy
to flight. Therefore we pray thee, O our Lord God, that in sanctifying thou
do sanctify this Creature of Salt, and in blessing thou do bless it, that
it may be a perfect Medicine to all that take it, etc.

And in the Prayer, it is said, That thou will favorably regard this thy
Servant, and that taking this first food of Salt, thou would not suffer him
any longer to hunger; so that he may be filled with Heavenly Food, etc. All
this and much more may be read in the Pastorale, ibid.

Of Confirmation.
Q. 58. IS Confirmation a Sacrament?

A. It Is properly and truly a Sacrament; and whosoever holds otherwise, is
accursed Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. de Confirm. Can. 1.
, and an Heretic Bellarin. Doctri. Council. Trid. etc. de Confirm. c. 1.
.

Of Confirmation.
R. 58. THE Roman Catechism says, That Sacraments cannot be instituted by any
but God Catech. ibid. n. 9. and 12.
. And yet the great Schoolman Alex. Ales says, Christ did not institute nor
declare Confirmation to be a Sacrament Par. 4. Q. 9.
. And then by their own Confession it is none.

Q. 59. What is the Matter of the Sacrament of Confirmation?
A. The Matter is Chrism, which is an Ointment compounded of Oil Olive and
Balsam, and consecrated by the Bishop Catech* Romans par. 2. c. 3. n. 2, 7.
, upon Maundy Thursday Sum of Christian Doctrine, Land. 1686.
.

R. 59. CHrism was anciently used in Confirmation; but that it was either of
Divine Institution, or the Matter of a Sacrament, is not said, nor can be said
with any truth or certainty. For if we look for it (where things of Divine
Institution are to be sought for) in Scripture, there is not the least Syllable
for it.

Q. 60. What is the Form of Consecration?
A. The Form is the Words used by the Bishop, when he croses the Forehead with
the Chrism, viz. I do sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and I confirm thee
with the Chrism of Salvation, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Catech. n. 2. and 11.

R. 60. IT is said, from the authority of Pope Fabian Catech. Romans ibid. n. 6.
and 12. and Bellarminus de confirm. c. 2.
, that Christ instituted the Matter and Form of Confirmation, but Alex. Ales
says, it was ordained by the Meldensian Council Par. 4. Q. 9. M. 1.
. And indeed the Roman Catechism, after some pretense to Divine Institution,
thinks it safest to resolve it into the authority of the Church.

Q 61. What Ceremonies are used in Confirmation?
A. In the Anointing, the Bishop dips the tip of his Finger in the Chrism, and
making a Cross, says, I do sign thee, etc. Pontif. de Confirm.
.

2. After Confirmation, he strikes the Person lightly on the Cheek, that he may
remember he is to suffer all Injuries for the Name of Christ, with Patience and
Courage Catech. n. 25.
.

3. Then the Person to be confirmed, setting his Foot upon the right Foot of
the Godfather Pontif. ibid.
, is to have his Head bound with a clean Head-band for some days more or less,
with reverence to the Holy Chrism, which done, the Band is to be preserved in
the Vestry (Sacrarium) or other clean place, till the following Ash Wednesday,
to be burnt to holy Ashes Pastorale.
.

R. 61. Whether we consider the far-fetched significations of the Ceremonies
in the Church of Rome, or the Virtue they put in them; the abuse in them is
intolerable: As for instance, That in Consecration of the Chrism for
Confirmation, the Bishop blows upon it, to signify the descent of the Holy
Ghost for the Sanctication of it Bellarm. de Confirm. l. 2. c. 13.. tertio
halat.
. That it has a power of Sanctification as the Instrument of God Ibid.. Quarta
Caeremonia.
. So the Bishop prays in the Consecration of it, That God in bestowing
Spiritual Grace upon this Ointment, would pour out the fullness of
Sanctification, and that it may be to all that are to be anointed with it, for
the Adoption of Sons by the Holy Spirit. Amen. Pontif. Romans
. But where is there any Promise of God for the Sanctification of this Chrism;
or where the Institution for its being an instrument of Sanctification to us?

Of the Eucharist. Q 62. What is the Eucharist?
A. It Is a Sacrament wherein is truly, really, and substantially contained
whole Christ, God-Man, Body and Blood, Bones, and Nerves Catech. Romans par. 2.
c. 4. n. 33.
, Soul and Divinity, under the species or appearance of Bread and Wine Conc.
Trid. Sess. 13. de real. praes. c. 1. A Sum of Christ. Doct. printed 1686.
.

Q. 63. HOw do they attempt to prove this?
A. From the Words of our Savior, This is my Body; which, say they, do clearly
demonstrate, that the same Body which was born of the Virgin, and is now in
Heaven, is in the Sacrament. Catech. p. 2. c. 4. n. 26.

Q. 64. What becomes of the Bread and Wine after Consecration?
A. Upon Consecration there is a Conversion of the whole Substance of the Bread
into the Substance of Christ's Body, and of the whole Substance of the Wine,
into the Substance of Christ's Blood; which Conversion is usually called
Transubstantiation. Conc. Trid. ibid. c. 4. Council. Later. 4. Can. 1.

Of the Eucharist.
R. 62, 63, 64. NO such change of the substance of the Bread, Into the
substance of Christ's Body, etc. can be inferred from our Savior's Words, This
is my Body, Mat. 26. 26. for, it is not said this is turn^d into my Body, but,
this is my Body; which if to be taken literally, would rather prove the
substance of the Bread to be his Body. Therefore Cardinal Cajetan acknowledges
that it is no where said in the Gospel, that the Bread is changed into the Body
of Christ; but that they have it from the authority of the Church. Cajet. in
Aquin. 3. par. q. ^5. art. 1.

2. It Is further evident that the words are not to be taken in their proper
sense, when it is as well called Bread after Consecration as before it, 1 Cor.
10. 17. c. 11. 26, 27, 28. So that as the Bread was his Body, so what was
called his Body was also Bread at the same time it was his Body; signifying
that in its natural substance it was Bread, and in a mystical relation his Body.

3. It Is to be observed, that the mystical relation which the Bread by
Consecration has to Christ's Body, is sufficient to give it the name of his
Body. For it is the usual way of Scripture, to call things of a Sacramental
nature, by the names of those things they are the figure of Aug. Epist. 23.
. So Circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis 17. 13. And the killing,
dressing, and eating the Lamb is called the Passover, Ex. 12. 11. And after the
same manner is the Bread in the Sacrament Christ's Body; That is, as
Circumcision was the Covenant, and the Lamb the Passover, by signification and
representation, by type and figure, And so the Elements are called by the
Fathers, The Signs Orig. dial. 3. contr. Marcion.
, the Symbols Eusebius. them. Evang. l. 1. c. ult.
, the Figure Aug. contr. Adimant. c. 12.
of Christ's Body and Blood.

Q. 65. What is then that, which is seen and tasted in the Eucharist?
A. The things seen and tasted, are the Accidents only of Bread and Wine; there
is the Savor, Color and Quantity of Bread and Wine, without any of their
Substance; but under those Accidents there is only the Body and Blood of
Christ. Catech. Romans n. 37, and 44.

R. 65. OUR Savior appealed to the senses of his Disciples, Luke 24. 39.
Handle and see me, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have.
Take away the certainty of sense, and there is no discerning a a Body from a
Spirit: And grant Transubstantiation, and we take away the certainty of sense.
For there are all the Accidents, the Savor, the Color, etc. of Bread and
Wine, without Bread and Wine which they are the Accidents of: And there is the
Body of Christ, without any of the Accidents belonging to that Body, without
quantity, figure, parts or place, as is acknowledged, Catech. Romans ibid. n. 43.

Q. 66. IS the Body and Blood of Christ broken, when the Host is broken and
divided?
A. No, because Christ is impassible Abridgment of Christ. Doctrine, c. 11. ss.
Euchar.
; and besides there is whole and entire Christ under either Species or Element,
under the Species of Bread, and under every Particle of it; under the Species
of Wine, and under every drop of it. (b) Conc. Trid. ibid. c. 3.


R. 66. IF every particle of the Host is as much the whole Body of Christ, as
the whole Host is before it be divided, then a whole may be divided into
wholes; for divide it and subdivide it, it is still whole. Whole it is before
the division, whole it is in the division, and whole it is after it. Thus
unreasonable, as well as false, is the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which
yet they profess no person can be saved without the belief of. Conc. Trid.
ibid. Can. 1, 2, 3, 4. Bulla Pii. 4.

Q 67. DO they Administer the Sacrament in both kinds of Bread and Wine?
A. Not to the People, who are permitted to receive it only in one Kind, and
are denied the Cup. Trid. Sess. 21. c. 1.

R. 67. IT is acknowledged, that our Savior instituted and delivered the
Sacrament in both kinds Council. Constant. Sess. 13. and Trid. Sess. 21. c. 1, 2.
And that it so continued even in the Church of Rome for above 1000 years after
Consult. Cassandri. Art. 22.
And yet with a non obstante to both, they forbid the people to drink of the
Cup; and declare, Whoever thinks it necessary to receive in both kinds, is
accursed Council Trid. ibid. Can. 1.
.

Q 68. FOr what Reason does the Church of Rome deprive the People of what our
Lord is granted to have instituted?
A. It is for just and weighty causes Con. Trid. ibid. c. 2.
, such as these, 1. Lest the Blood of Christ should be spilt upon the Ground.
2. Lest the Wine by being kept for the Sick, should grow eager. 3. Because many
cannot bear the taste or smell of Wine. 4. Because in many Countries, there is
such a scarcity of Wine, as it is not to be had without great charge and
tedious Journies. 5. To disprove those that deny whole Christ to be contained
under each Species Catech. Romans ibid. n. 66.
.

R 68. THese are the just and weighty causes for their overruling the plain
precept of our Savior, Matt. 26. 27. Drink ye all of it: And yet whosoever
shall say they are not just and sufficient reasons, is accursed Council. Trid.
ibid. Can. 2.
. As if it was sufficient to forbid Wine in the Sacrament to all, because some
few cannot bear the taste or smell of it: And it was a just cause to deprive all
Countries of it, because some have not Wine, or cannot obtain it without
difficulty. And how can they by this half-communion disprove those that deny
whole Christ to be contained under each species; when it is given as a Reason in
their Canon Law, why the officiating Priests must not receive the Body without
the Blood, because the division of one and the same mystery cannot be without
Sacrilege De Consecr. did. 2.
Which surely is an Argument, That whole Christ is not contained under each
Species.

Q. 69. WHat is the Mass?
A. In the Sacrifice of the Mass, the same Christ is contained, and unbloodily
offered, who bloodily offered himself upon the Altar of the Cross. Conc. Trid.
Sess. 22. cap. 1.

Q. 70. OF what Virtue is the Sacrifice in the Mass?
A. It Is truly a Propitiatory Sacrifice, and is available, not only for the
Sins, punishments, and satisfactions of the Living, but also for those of the
Souls in Purgatory. Ibid.

Q. 71. IS this necessary to be believed?
A. Yes; and whosoever denies any of this, is accursed Conc. Trid. Sess. 22.
Can. 1.
, and incapable of Salvation Bulla Pii 4.
.

R. 69, 70, 71. THE Scripture when it extols the perfection and infinite value
of Christ's Sacrifice, does infer from it, that there needed not therefore any
repetition of it. Heb. 7. 27. He needed not daily, as those high Priests, to
offer up sacrifice, etc. for this he did once, when he offered up himself. But
if the same Christ is offered in the Mass as was on the Cross, and that
unbloody sacrifice is alike propitiatory as the bloody, there is then a
repetition of the same sacrifice, and he is daily offered. And what is it to
say the one was bloody and the other is unbloody, when the unbloody is of the
same virtue, and is applied to the same end as the bloody? So that as if Christ
had again been bloodily offered up, there had been a repetition of that
Sacrifice; so there is a repetition of it when he is offered up unbloodily. To
have then a perfect Sacrifice daily repeated, and a sacrifice without
suffering, and a propitiation and remission without Blood, are alike
irreconcilable to the Apostle, Heb. 9. 22, 25. Who says, Without shedding of
Blood, is no remission; and that once in the end of the World has Christ
appeared to put away sin, by the Sacrifice of himself.

Q. 72. MAy the Priest communicate alone, tho there be none besides to
communicate?
A. Yes, the Church of Rome does approve and commend solitary Masses, and
accounts them a Communion; partly because the People do spiritually communicate
in it, and partly because it is celebrated by a public Minister, not only for
himself, but also for the People. Conc. Trid. ibid. cap. 6.

R. 72. THE Apostle calls the Lord's Supper a Communion, and says, all are
partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. And Cassander says, It cannot
be properly a Communion unless many do partake of it; and adds from the Council
of Nants, That it is absurd to say, Lift up your hearts, etc. when there is none
communicates with the Priest Consult. Art. 24. de Solit. Miss.
. And yet the Council of Trent declares, Whosoever shall say such Masses are
unlawful, and to be abrogated, is accursed Sess. 22. Can. 8.
.

Q. 73. WHat Honor is to be given to the consecrated Host?
A. They give Latria, or the same Sovereign Worship which is due only to God
Council. Trid. Sess. 13 cap. 5.
; they Adore it Missale Romans Can Missae.
; they Pray to it, etc. Brev. Romans Him. in F. Corp. Chapter
. And whosoever holds it Unlawful or Idolatrous so to do, is accursed Council.
Trid. ibid. Can. 6.
.

R. 73. WE do freely own that Christ is to be adored in the Lord's Supper; but
that the Consecrated Elements are to be adored, we deny. If Christ is not
corporally present in the Host, they grant their Adoration to be Idolatry
Coster. Enchir. c. 8. n. 10.
. And that he is not corporally present any where but in Heaven, we are taught,
Acts 1. 11. and 3. 21. whither he went, and where he is to continue till his
second coming to judgment.

Q. 74. WHat are the Ceremonies used in the Mass?
A. The Ceremonies in the Mass, respect either Things, Actions or Words; among
the Things, are Garments, Places, Time, Vessels, Cloths, Incense, Lights, etc.
Bellarin. Doctr. Trid. de Sacr. Miss.

Q. 75. WHat are the Garments used by the Priest in the Mass, and what is their
Signification?
A. 1. The Amice or white Veil, which he puts over his head, signifies
mystically, either the Divinity of Christ covered under his Humanity, or the
Crown of Thorns; and morally, Contemplation or Hope. In putting it on, he
says, Put on, O Lord, the Helmet of Salvation upon my Head, that I may
overcome all diabolical Temptations.

2. The Alb or long white Garment, signifies mystically the white Robe put on
our Savior; and morally, Faith and Innocence. In putting it on, he says, Make
me white, O Lord, and cleanse my Heart, that being whitened in the Blood of the
Lamb, I may enjoy everlasting gladness.

3. The Girdle signifies mystically, the Cords wherewith our Savior was bound;
and morally, (being turned up on both sides) the two means to preserve
Chastity, viz. Fasting and Prayer. When he puts it about him, he prays, Gird
me, O Lord, with the Girdle of Purity, and quench in my Loins the humor of
Lust, that there may remain in me the Virtue of Continency and Chastity. The
like account is given of the Maniple, Vestment and Stole, and of the diverse
Colors of the furniture used in the several seasons, for which I refer the
Reader to the Manual of the poor Man's Devotion, Chap. of the Ornaments of the
Mass.

R. 74. 75. THE Council of Trent says, That the Ceremonies of the Mass, such
as Mystical Benedictions, Lights, Incensings, Garments, etc. are from
Apostolical Tradition Sess. 22. c. 5.
, or as others, were instituted by the Holy Ghost Bellarinus cap. de Sacr. Mis.
: And that as they serve for the majesty of that Sacrifice, and to raise the
mind to the contemplation of the Divine things concealed in it: So none of them
are superfluous and vain Catech. par. 2. c. 4. n. 81.


Which how to reconcile to the numerous Crossings and Sprinklings, etc. used in
the Celebration of the Mass, will be as difficult for them to undertake, as it
is at the present for others to conceive. As for Example,

When the Priest is clothed with the Garments, rehearsed before, he comes to
the Altar, and standing on the lowest step just against the middle of it, he
makes a profound Reverence to the Altar and Crucifix. Then he ascends, and
having placed the Books, etc. in order, he descends to the lowest step, and
turning himself to it, with his hands joined before his Breast, and making a
reverence to the Altar or Crucifix, he begins the Mass standing upright, and
drawing with his right hand (his left hand laid on his Breast) the sign of the
Cross from his forehead to his breast, he says with an audible voice, In
nomine Patris, etc. Then he joins his hands before his breast, saying with a
loud voice, Introibo, etc. The Minister standing on his left hand behind him
bowing, says, Ad Deum, etc. Then the Priest with the Minister say the Psalm,
Iudica me, with Gloria Patri, at which he is to bow his Head to the Cross. Then
he repeats the Introibo, making with his Right hand the sign of the Cross, from
the Forehead to the Breast. Then he bows his Head and Body to the Altar, and
says, Confiteor Deo, and there he stands bowing till the Minister says
Misereatur: And when the Minister begins Confiteor, he lifts up himself. When
he says Mea Culpa, he smites thrice upon his Breast with the Right hand. The
Confession ended, the Priest standing does Answer, Misereatur Vestri. Then
drawing the Sign of the Cross with his Right hand from the Forehead to the
Breast, he says Indulgentiam, and standing with his Head bowing, he proceeds
to Deus te Conversus, etc. with a loud Voice to the Prayer, Aufer a nobis,
which he is to say secretly.

I should tire the Reader to go on; for thus the Missal proceeds in its
Ceremonies in all the remaining parts of the Service. Ritus Celebr. Miss. [See
Reply 57.]

The Sacrament of Penance. Q. 76. WHat is the Matter and Form of the Sacrament
of Penance?
A. The Matter is Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction. The Form is, I
absolve. Catech. Romans par. 2. c. 5. n. 14. and 15.

Of Penance.
R. 76. WE are told, that the Matter of a Sacrament is some what sensible
Catech. Romans par. 2. c. 1. n. 11.
, usually called the Element: But then how is Penance a Sacrament which has no
such Matter? For where is the Matter that is sensible, in Contrition, etc? The
Fathers in the Council of Trent to avoid this, call it Quasi materia, a matter
after a sort Council. Trid. Sess. 14. cap. 3.


Q. 77. WHat is Confession?
A. Confession with them, is a particular discovery of all mortal sins to the
Priest, with all their Circumstances that do increase or diminish the sin, as
far as can be called to mind Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 5. and Catech. ibid n.
48.
; without which, neither Forgiveness nor Salvation is to be obtained Trid. ibid
Can. 6. and 7. Catech. n 44.
.

R. 77. WE grant Confession to men to be in many Cases of good and excellent
use, public in case of public scandal; private to a spiritual Guide for
disburthening of the Conscience, and as an help to Repentance, according to the
advice of the Apostle, Jam. 5. 16. Confess your faults one to another. But to
make Auricular Confession, or particular confession to a Priest, necessary to
forgiveness and salvation, when God has not so made it, is apparently to teach
for Doctrine the commandment of men: And to make it necessary in all Cases, is
to make of what may be a useful means a dangerous snare, both to the Confessor,
and those that confess.

Q. 78. OF what kind is the Absolution, which the Priest grants upon Confession?
A. The Absolution is not only Declarative, but Judicial, and the Sentence
pronounced by the Priest, is as if pronounced by the Judge himself Council. Trid.
ibid. c. 6. and. Can. 9.
; he perfecting what God causes Catech. par. 2. c. 5. n. 17.


R. 78. TO pardon sin, and absolve the sinner judicially, so as the Conscience
may rest firmly upon it, is a Power reserved by God to himself. So David, Psalm.
32. 5. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest. So 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And therefore
the Authority of the Priest is only ministerial, and declarative, and
conditional. Men do show a Ministry in the forgiveness of sins, but do not
exercise a right of power. They pray, but it is God forgives, says St. Ambrose,
de Spir. l. 3. c. 19.

Q. 79. WHat is the Benefit of Absolution?
A. Although a sinner is not so affected with such a sort of grief for his sin, as
may be sufficient to obtain pardon; yet, when he has rightly confessed to a
Priest, all his sins are pardoned, and an entrance is opened into Heaven by the
power of the Keys in Absolution Catech. ibid. n. 38.

R. 79 THE grief which is sufficient to obtain pardon, is contrition; and so
the grief which is not sufficient to obtain pardon, must be Attrition: And the
meaning then is, That Attrition with Absolution, is as effectual as Contrition.
[See Reply 14.] This is confirmed by many of their Authors. So Gul. de Rubeo,
He that confesses his sins, grieving a little, obtains remission of them by the
Sacrament of Penance ministered to him by the Priest in Absolution. In 4.
Sentent. did. 18. q. 1. A Doctrine, that if made a Rule for strict Practice,
will set men free from all obligation to the Duties of Repentance, and Gospel
Obedience.

Q. 80. WHat is Satisfaction?
A. It Is a Compensation made to God, by Prayer, Fasting, Alms, (a) etc. for all
offenses committed against him (b); fo as that the Offender is thereupon purged
from the defilement of sin, and discharged from all temporal Punishments due to
him, either here, or in Purgatory Catec. Romans ibid. n. 65. and 66.
(a) Catech. ibid. n. 75.
(b) Bellarinus de satisfact. Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 7. SS. Quarta
propositio.
.

Q. 81. HOw do these Works become thus satisfactory?
A. They are meritorious and satisfactory Catech. ibid. n. 72, 73.
, as they are united to the Satisfaction of Christ Bellarin. de forma
satisfact. Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 4. ss. Respons. non est quidem.
.

R. 80. 81. THE giving satisfaction to the Church in case of Scandal, and the
imposing Penances upon notorious offenders, is a necessary and useful part of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. But to make that a satisfaction to God which is
given to the Church; and to make our works to satisfy, though but as an appendant
to the satisfaction of Christ, we can by no means allow: not the former,
because it is derogatory to the Justice of God; not the latter, because it is
derogatory to the merits of our Savior. For what can make a satisfaction to
God, but the Obedience and Suffering of our Savior? Or what need is there of
another satisfaction after that of our Savior? Heb. 10. 14. By one offering he
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. And therefore to ascribe a
Satisfaction to our own Works (tho in Conjunction with his) is to take the
Sufficiency and Virtue from his, and to give it to our own. And indeed,
Bellarmine does not scruple to say, That there is but one actual Satisfaction,
and that is ours, tho it is by his, ours does prevail. De Purg. l. 1. c. 14.
Ingolst. 1605. ss. Tertius tamen modus.

The Sacrament of Extreme Unction. Q 82. WHat is the Matter of the Sacrament of
Extreme Unction?
A. Oil of Olive-berries Catech. Romans par. 2. c. 6. n. 5.
consecrated by a Bishop, which aptly signifies the Grace of the Spirit with
which the Soul of the sick is invisibly anointed Council. Trid. Sess. 14. de
Extr. Unct. c. 1.
.

Q. 83. WHat is the Form of it?
A. The Form is, By this holy Anointing, God pardon thee, whatever thou have
offended by the fault of the Eyes, Nose or Touch. Catech. ibid. n. 6.

Q. 84. WHat are the Parts anointed?
A. The Eyes because of seeing, the Ears because of hearing, the Mouth because
of tasting or speech, the Hands because of touching, the Feet because of
motion; the Reins, because the seat of Lust. Catech. ibid. n. 10.

Q. 85. WHen is this anointing Administered?
A. It Is to be Administered, only when Persons are supposed to be near the point
of Death, and in imminent danger of life Conc. Trid. ibid c. 3. Bellarm. Extr.
Unct l. 1. c. 2. ss. Accedit.
, whence it is called Extreme Unction, as last of all to be applied Catech.
ibid. n. 2. and 14.
.

Of Extreme Unction.
R. 82. etc. WE read, Mark 6. 13. when the Twelve Apostles were sent forth,
they anointed with Oil many that were sick, and healed them; making use of that
anointing, not as a natural or necessary means, but as a mystical sign of the
miraculous cure to be wrought by the power, and in the Name of Christ: And as
long as this power continued in the Church, so long there might be a reason for
continuing and using this Rite. And so accordingly the Apostle directs, Jam. 5.
14. Is any sick, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray
over him, anointing him with Oil in the name of the Lord. And the prayer of
faith shall save the sick, etc. But as this then was not necessary, so when the
power ceased, there was no reason for the continuance of this sign. And yet
this Ceremony of Anointing is not only continued in the Church of Rome without
any pretense to the power, but the nature and the use of it is wholly perverted
from what it was in Apostolical times. For 1. This Rite was then used (...)
ring of the infirm and sick, but was not necessary (...) for we find them also
cured by imposition of hands, (...) 16. 18. Acts. 9. 17. by a Word, Acts 9. 34.
by taking by the hand, Acts 3. 7, etc. But in the Church of Rome it is made
absolutely necessary. 2. In Apostolical times it was a mere significant Rite,
but in the Church of Rome it is made properly and truly a Sacrament, and
whosoever says it is a mere Rite, is accursed Council. Trid. Sess. 14. Can. 1.
. 3. It was used in Apostolical times properly for corporal maladies; but in
the Church of Rome it is properly for the Soul, and accidentally for the Body
Bellarm. de Extrem. Unct. l. 1. c. 2. ss Probo igitur.
. 4. It was used then for the recovery of the sick and infirm; but here it is to
be applied only to those that are judged to be past it.

Of the Sacrament of Orders. Q. 86. IS Ordination a Sacrament?
A. It Is truly and properly a Sacrament, and does confer Grace; and whosoever
denies this, is accursed. Council. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 1. and 23. cap. 3. and
Can. 3.

R. 86. WE account Ordination to be of Divine Institution, and that by it a
Ministerial authority and commission is conveyed, and question not but a
blessing does accompany the Commission; but how necessary soever this Office is
to the Church, and grace for the exercise of it, yet as that grace is neither
annexed to the New Covenant, nor is promised to it, we cannot admit it to be
properly and truly a Sacrament.

Q. 87. WHat are the several Orders instituted for the Service of the Church?
A. The Orders always received by the Catholic Church are seven, the greater
and less; the greater are the Priest, Deacon and Subdeacon; the less are the
Acolythus who is to carry the Candle and assist the Subdeacon; the Exorcist,
who is to attend, and pray over them that are possessed with the Devil; the
Reader, and the Ostiarius, or Door keeper. Catech. par. 2. c. 7. n. 12, 15, etc.

Of Orders.
R. 87. WE know of no authority there is for any Order under a Deacon; so as to
anathematise them that do not receive them (a). We know of no authority for the
Forms used in the ordination of those lower Orders; as, when the Bishop admits
any to that of Exorcists, he reaches to them a Book in which the Exorcisms are
contained, and says, Receive, and commit to memory, and take the Power of
Laying on of Hands upon the Possessed, or Baptized, or Catechumens (a) Council.
Trid. ibid. Can. 2.
Catech. ibid. n. 17.
.

We know of no authority for this kind of procedure; for those forms of
conjuration contained in those Books, or for the use of those Rites therein
prescribed, for Exorcising Persons, Houses, Cattle, Milk, Butter, Fruits, etc.
infested with the Devil. See the Pastorale Mechlin, and the Manual of
Exorcisms, Antiverp 1626. Bp. Taylor's Disswas. Sess. 10.

Of the Sacrament of Marriage. Q. 88. IS Marriage truly and properly a
Sacrament?
A. Yes, and whosoever denies it so to be, is accursed. Council. Trid. Sess. 24.
Can. 1.

Of Marriage.
R. 88. ST. Austin says, That signs when applied to Religious things, are
called Sacraments Epist. 5.
. And in this large sense he calls the sign of the Cross a Sacrament in Psalm.
141.
; and others give the same name to washing the Feet Cypr. de lotione pedum.
and many other mystical rites. And so we may allow the Translation of the
Vulgar Latin, which reads Sacramentum for what the Apostle calls a Mystery,
Ephesians. 5. 32. But then Matrimony does no more confer grace, nor does nor is,
what a Sacrament does or is, than Washing the Feet, or using the sign of the
Cross; which Bellarmin, after all the Virtue he ascribes to it, will not allow
to be properly and truly a Sacrament De imag. l. 2. c. 30 ss. Dices ergo.
.

Q. 89. MAy those that are in Holy Orders Marry, or those that are married be
received into Orders in the Church of Rome?
A. No, those that are married may not be admitted Council. Later. 1 Can. 21.
and Later. 2. Can. 6.
, those that are admitted may not Marry, and those that being admitted do
Marry, are to be separated.

Q. 90. IF Marriage is a Sacrament, and so confers Grace Catech. Romans par. 2.
c. 8. n. 17.
; how comes it to be denied to those that are in Holy Orders?
A. Those in Holy Orders are the Temple of God, etc. and it is a shameful thing
that they should serve uncleanness, as it is determined. Later. Council. 2. Can.
6.

R. 89. 90. THE Apostle on the contrary, says, Marriage is honorable in all,
Hebr. 13. 4. and gives an hard Character of that Doctrine which forbids it, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3. And how lawful it was, the direction of the Apostle about it, 1 Timothy 3. 2. does show. And how convenient it is, is manifest from the disorders
and mischiefs attending the prohibition of it in the Romish Church (which wise
men among themselves have lamented) and have thought it would be for the Honor
of Christian Religion, and the Priesthood it self, that this Right and
Privilege be restored to the Clergy Polyd. Virgil. de invent. l. 5. c. 4. and
Cassander Consult Art. 23.
.

FINIS.
The CONCLUSION.
I Might have added a 5th Section about the Jurisdiction which the Church of
Rome challenges over Princes, and about their Canonization of Saints, their
Consecration of Agnus Dei's, and Beads, etc. and the use these and the like are
applied to. I might have further considered their Notes of a Church, and showed
how many of them are not true, or however do not belong to the Church of Rome;
but that would be too large a Subject to enter upon: And what has been said
will be sufficient to show how far that Church has erred from Truth and
Reason. For if we set their Councils, Missals, Breviaries, Rituals and
Catechisms on one side, and Scripture and Antiquity on the other; we shall find
their Doctrines and Practices as well opposite to those, as they are opposite
to ours: And may be assured that Persons may sooner lose their Eyes, than find
there such a Primacy of St. Peter, as they contend for, or the Vicarship of the
Pope, the Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Images, Service in an Unknown
Tongue, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and the rest that we contend against.
Scripture and indubitable Antiquity, are the Authority we appeal to, thither we
refer our case; and can heartily conclude with that of Vincentius Lyrin. That
is to be held, which has been believed every where, always, and by all, Contr.
Haer. c. 3.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
A Late Author having some days A Reply to the Answer of the Amicable
Accommodation. page 19.
since thought fit to single out a Passage of the foregoing Catechism, to help
out his Charge which he produces against the Church of England, for
Misrepresenting the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome; I shall take
the advantage of this new Edition, of showing on which side (so far as this
Catechism is concerned) the Misrepresentation lies. Thus he begins.

Another way of Misrepresenting the Papists, is in pretending to deliver their
Doctrine, and then to insert something which is notoriously false, and
absolutely detested by them: This is what is done by the Author of a Catechism
lately published, who undertakes to give a Systeme A Catechism truly
representing, etc. page 56.
of Popish Doctrines truly Represented, according to their own most received
Authors, and Councils; and coming to speak of Images, he says the Papists PRAY
TO THEM; which is so foul a Misrepresentation, that the Author of the Answer to
The Papist Misrepresented plainly condemns Page 17.
me, for making it a part of my Misrepresentations, as if 'twere never charged
against the Papists. This, says he, would insinuate, as tho WE did directly
charge them Ibid.
with PRAYING to their Images, without any further respect; which we are so far
from charging them with, that I do not know of any people in the World liable
to that charge. Thus what one Protestant asserts positively, as the Doctrine
and Practice of the Papists, another Protestant rejects as a Misrepresentation
so foul, as not to be imputed to the worst of Infidels.

But if after all this clamor, the aforesaid Answer does charge the Church of
Rome with Praying to Images, with a Farther Respect; and the Catechism does not
charge them with Praying to Images, without a Farther Respect; Then wherein
does one Protestant assert positively, what another rejects as a
Misrepresentation? And if this Charge, of thus Praying to Images, be alike
maintained and proved by both, Where is the Misrepresentation? And here to do
right to the abovesaid Answer, to the Catechism, and to Truth in both, I shall
set down the words at full, as they are in the one and the other; and which our
Author, for Reasons best known to himself, has forborne to do. To begin with
the Answer. It says,

It does not look fairly, to put the The Doctrine and Practice of the Church of
Rome, in Answer to the Papist Misrepresent. c. 1. p. 17.
Title of Praying to Images; for the Question is about The Worship of Images:
Whereas this Title would insinuate [So as it is in the Reply, but then
immediately follows] I do therefore grant what our Author says, viz. That all
the veneration they express before Images, whether by Kneeling, Praying,
lifting up the Eyes, burning Candles, Incense, etc. is not at all done for the
Image, but is wholly referred to the things represented, which he intends to
honor by these Actions. But I hope now it is no Misrepresenting for us to say,
That they do Kneel, Pray, Lift up their Eyes, burn Candles, Incense, etc.
before their Images; WHICH IS ALL I CHARGE THEM WITH AT PRESENT. This Charge at
present would have discovered too much, and have put a wary Reader upon looking
farther, and therefore it was not fit to be inserted: And if he had, then the
Misrepresentation had been spoiled: For the Answerer a little after returns to
the point, after this manner:

To come now to our Author's Reflections on the Misrepresentation he says has
P. 21, 22.
been as to this point [of Praying to Images]. A Papist Represented believes it
damnable to worship Stocks and Stones for Gods; or to Pray to Pictures or
Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, or any other Saints.

What says the Answerer to this?

These Expressions are capable of a double sense; and therefore this is not
fair Representing.

(1.) To worship Stocks or Stones for Gods, may signify two things: 1. To
believe the very Stocks or Stones to be Gods. And this we do not charge them
with. 2. To give to Images made of Wood and Stone, the Worship due only to God,
etc. And if they will clear themselves of this, etc.

(2.) To Pray to Images of Christ, or the Blessed Virgin, may likewise be taken
in two senses. 1. To Pray to them, so as to expect to be heard by the mere
Images, and so we do not charge them with it. 2. To Pray to them, so as to
expect rather to be heard by themselves, for praying to them by their Images.
And if this be not so, To what end are the Prayers made in the Consecration of
Images, for those that shall pray before them? To what purpose do so many go in
long Pilgrimages to certain Images, if they do not hope to be better heard for
Praying there?

A little after, the Answerer farther Replies, He [the Misrepresenter, etc.] is
come at Page 23.
last to Veneration before Images. And is this all? Dares he deny Veneration to
Images? When the Council of Trent has determined it ^ Eisque venerationem
impertiendam. What is this Veneration before Images only? Bellarmine has a
Chapter on purpose to prove, That true and proper Worship is to be given to
Images. And was he a Misrepresenter? Suarez says, It is an Article of Faith,
That Worship is to be given to them. But if the Veneration be only before them,
Why are they Consecrated, and set up in places proper for Adoration?

So that what more evident, than that the Answerer does not only charge, but
prove it upon them, that they do pray to Images, but with a further respect,
and that 1. from the consecration of them; 2. from the places they are set up
in; 3. from Pilgrimages to them.

Let us now proceed to the Catechism, which thus propounds the case:

Quest. 44. What kind of Reverence, or Worship is required to be given to
Catechism Q. 44. p. 42.
Images and Pictures in the Church of Rome?

Ans. They kiss them, uncover the Head, and fall down before them; offer
Incense, and pray to them, and use all such postures of Worship as they would
do to the person or persons thereby represented, etc.

Quest. 45. What do they profess is their intention in the Reverence they give
to Images and Pictures?

Ans. They declare, that the Honor given to Images and Pictures, is referred
to the Prototypes, or the Persons represented by them, whether God the Father,
Christ, Angels or Saints: And when they do fall down before the Image or
Picture, they do worship God, or Christ, the Angel or Saint.

From which Answers laid together, or either of them entire, it manifestly
appears, that they are therein said to pray to Images, as those Images
represent the Person whom by those Images they direct their Worship to. For the
Prayer is to the Object to which the Veneration is to be given, but the
Veneration is to be given (says the Council of Trent) to the Image, as thus
representing; and so is the Prayer.

In conclusion, the Answer and the Catechism both agree;

1. That there is in the Church of Rome a praying to Images.

2. That they pray to them after the same manner as they bow and burn Incense
to them, which is with respect to the Prototypes, or Persons represented.

3. That praying to Images, with respect to the Prototypes, is a praying to
Images.

So that our Author has been very unfortunate in the discoveries he has made
of a direct opposition betwixt Protestant and Protestant in this matter. And if
he has been alike partial in his other Collections from Protestant Authors as
in this, he will gain no Credit to the Cause he labors to defend, nor do any
injury to that he does oppose.

But perhaps though the Answer and the Catechism are at last found to agree,
yet what they agree in, is a Misrepresentation; and that to charge the Church
of Rome with praying to Images, is to charge them with what is notoriously
false, and absolutely detested by them (as the Author suggests). To this there
needs no other Reply than what is above transcribed from the Answer; viz. That
to pray to Images, may be taken in two senses: 1. To pray to them, so as to
expect to be heard by the mere Images, without any further respect; which we
are so far from charging them with, that we know not of any People in the
World, who are not like Stones and Stocks themselves, who are liable to that
charge. 2. To pray to them with a farther respect to the Persons thereby
represented, and so as to expect to be rather heard by themselves, for praying
to them by their Images. And if this be not so, to what end are the Prayers
made in the Consecration of Images, for those that shall pray before them? To
what purpose do so many go in long Pilgrimages to certain Images, if they do
not hope to be better heard for praying there? Or why are they set up in places
proper for Adoration? Why are the people required to give Veneration and
Worship to them? And lastly, Why do they direct their Prayers to them? As they
do to the Cross, which they salute after this manner, Hail, O Cross, our only
Hope, in this time of the passion. Increase grace in the godly; and blot out
the sins of the guilty; as the Catechism has showed, Q. 46.

These things require a little consideration; and when our Author has proved
them not to be held or practiced by their Chu^^h, then it will be time en^^^h
to call what has been charged upon them, A.foul Misrepresentation, and
notorious falsehood; but till then, I must beg his pardon if I continue of the
same mind, and conclude as before, That a part of the Worship given to Images
in the Church of Rome, is, in the sense before spoken of, To burn Incense, and
to pray to them.

FINIS.

