A DISCOURSE Concerning the CELEBRATION OF DIVINE SERVICE IN AN Unknown Tongue.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC LXXXV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
CArdinal Hosius; Sanders; Epist. Cler. Gall. Extract. ex Regist. Fac. Par.
Procez, etc. quoted in this Tract by the page, refer to a Book, called,
Collectio quorundam gravium Authorum, qui Sacrae Scripturae aut divinorum
officiorum in vulgarem Linguam Translationes damnarunt, etc. printed at Paris,
1661.

The Quotation, page 2. though out of Sixtus Senens. are the Words of Ambrosius
Compsae, who severely condemning Cajetan for the aforesaid Saying, It is
better, etc. gives this as a Reason that that Opinion primo a Diabolo inventa
est.

ERRATA.
Page 1. Marg. lin. 3. for 1 read 2. p. 8. l. 20. r. were often. p. 21. marg.
dele In Genes. Lit. L. c. 8. and in Ps. 99, p. 25. l. 26. dele little. p. 28.
l. 1. after together, r. for Conjuration. p. 45. marg. l. 9. dele i. p. 48. l.
26. r. Sfentopulcer.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE CELEBRATION OF Divine Service IN AN Unknown Tongue.
Article 24.
UPon this Argument the Church of England does fully declare it self in these
Words, It is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the Custom of
the Primitive Church, to have public Prayers in the Church, or to minister the
Sacraments in a Tongue not understood of the people.

But if we consult the Doctors of the Church of Rome about it, we shall find
them, as in most other points, differing extremely amongst themselves.

Comment. in Eccles. 5. 1.
Mercer, a very learned person, and Professor of Hebrew at Paris, is so free as
to say, Temere fecerunt, etc. They amongst us have done rashly, that brought in
the Custom of praying in an Unknown Tongue, which very often neither they
themselves, nor our people In 1 Ep. Corinth. c. 14.
understand. And Cardinal Cajetan says, Melius est, etc. It is better for our
Church that the public Prayers in the Congregation be said in a Tongue common
to the Priests and people, and not in Latin. Others of them are of another
Mind, and say that the having Divine Service in a Tongue known to Stapleton.

Quaest. quodl. Quaest. 2. Sixtus Senens. Biblioth. l. 6. annot. 263.
Portraiture of the Church of Jesus Christ, c. 14.


the people is new and profane, and the Doctrine requiring it Diaboli
calliditatem sapit, smells of the craft of the Devil. And that the Church in
making use of the Latin Tongue therein, received it by inspiration from the
Holy Ghost; as a late Author says.

With what consistence soever the former sort may speak to Truth and Reason;
yet I am sure the later speak with consistence enough to the Opinion,
Declarations and Practice of their Church; as is evident Conc. Trid. Sess. 22.
^. 8.
from the Council of Trent (the present Standard of the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome) S. C. Answ. to Dr. Pierce, c. 15.
which I find thus Englished to my Hands by a noted person of their Church.
Though the Mass contain [great] instruction for Gods faithful people, yet it
seemed not expedient to the Fathers [of the Council] that it should be
celebrated every where in the Vulgar Tongue: Wherefore retaining in all
Churches, the ancient Rite [or rather Retento ubique cujusque Ecclesiae an.
iquo ^itu.
in all places the ancient Rite of every Church] approved by the Holy Roman
Church, the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; lest Christ's Sheep should
hunger, and the Children asking Bread, none should be found to break it to
them, the Holy Synod commands Pastors and all that have care of Souls, that
during the celebration of Mass, they should frequently either by themselves, or
others, expound some part of those things, which are read in it; and among
other things let them explain the Mystery of the most Holy Sacrifice,
Sanctissimi hujus sacrificii aliquod mysterium.
[the Words are, Some Mystery of this Holy Sacrifice] especially on Sundays and
Feasts.

Canon 9.
And they conclude, If any one shall say, that Mass ought to be celebrated only
in the Vulgar Tongue, let him be Anathema.

Collectio quorundam Author. etc. cum Dicretis, etc. 1661.
To this I shall add for a conclusion, the Judgment of the late Pope Alexander
the Seventh, in a Brief he sent to the Clergy of France about a Translation of
the Missal into that Language, at that time newly published; in which he says,
that Some Sons of Perdition had arrived to that madness, as to Translate and
Publish it, etc. A Novelty we abhor and detest as the Seed-plot of
disobedience, rashness, sedition, and schism, and of many other evils, and
therefore that French Missal, or what shall hereafter be published in any other
manner, we condemn, reprobate and forbid.

From all which we may perceive, what an evident repugnancy there is betwixt
the Doctrine of the Church of England, and that of Rome in the matter before
us: And therefore for the better understanding the Case and discerning which is
in the Right, and which in the Wrong, I shall discourse of it in the following
order.

First, I shall consider the Phrase, an Unknown Tongue.

Secondly, I shall enquire into the lawfulness and expediency of celebrating
Divine Service in a Tongue not understood by the People. For so much is
affirmed by the Council of Trent, and denied by the Church of England.

Thirdly, I shall enquire, whether the celebrating Service in a Tongue not
understood by the people, has been the ancient custom of every Church? For so
much also is affirmed by that Council, and denied by the Church of England.

Fourthly, I shall consider, whether the Provision made by the foresaid
Council, of having Some part of the Mass expounded, be sufficient to
countervail the mischief of having the whole in a Tongue not understood by the
people, and to excuse that Church in their injunction of it?

Fifthly, I shall enquire whether upon the whole, the public Service of God
ought not to be celebrated in a Tongue vulgarly understood? Which Proposition
whosoever holds, is anathematized by the foresaid Council: And yet is owned by
the Church of England.

SECT. I.
Of the Phrase Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Toward the fixing the sense of this Phrase, we are to observe,

the Vulgar Tongue of a Country, which is universally understood by the Natives
of what rank or quality soever. Such was the Latin Tongue formerly in Rome;
such now is English with us.

Before we dismiss this, it is to be further considered,

1. That there are different Dialects or ways of expressing and pronouncing
the same Tongue: which differences of Words, or pronunciation do not so alter
the Tongue, but that throughout under all these variations it agrees in much
more than it differs; so that he that speaks the one, is generally understood
by him that uses the other. Such anciently were the different Dialects of the
Greek Tongue, well known to the learned: And such are the Northern, Southern
and Western ways of speaking amongst our selves in this Nation.

2. Where there are these different Dialects, there generally is one way of
speaking, which either from the eloquence, or fashionableness of it, so far
prevails, as to be the Standard of the Tongue, and to be used in Writing Books,
Letters, etc. and is understood by all. Such I conceive was anciently that
which is called the common Dialect in Greek: And of the like kind is that which
is spoken in and about the Court, and by Scholars and persons of a liberal
education amongst us; and elsewhere.

3. If a Tongue in process of time, by a mixture of other Nations, or by the
removal of a people from one Country to another, or by any other cause comes to
be so altered, as the Mother and Original Tongue is not to be understood (as
Ledesma De Script. Div. and Missae sacr. celebr. ling. vulg. c. 20. ^. 5.
says it is in Spain) then it is no longer a Vulgar Tongue, but is to be
reckoned amongst the unknown.

II. There is a common Tongue, which though

Thus it was anciently in many places with the Greek and Latin. The former of
which, was once the common Tongue of a great part of the then known World, and
continued so to be from the time of Ci^. pro Archi^. Hiero^. Tom. 9. l. 2.
prooem. ad Galat. Tom. 3 praef. l. in pa^alip.
Cicero, to that of S. Jerome, for the space that is of 400. if not 500. Years.
Insomuch, that not only the Scriptures were read in Greek in the public
Congregations from Egypt to Constantinople; as Ledesma c. 33.
S. Jerome informs us; but the Christians also had their Worship (as is
confessed) and the Fathers preached to them in that Language. So did S.
Chrysostom, S. Basil, S. Cyril and S. Athanasius in their several Sees of
Antioch, Caesarea, Jerusalem, and Alexandria.

And the Latin was so well known, understood, and commonly spoken together with
the Vulgar L. Valla Eleg. praef. Ledesma, c. 3. 2. 7.
Tongue in diverse Countries, (through the industry of the Romans in their
several Provinces) that the Vulgar was scarcely more. Thus we find it in the
Proconsular Africa, where (though less accurately spoken than at Rome) it was
so well understood, L. 1. confess. c. 14. Retract. l. 1. c. 20. In Ps. 138. De
verb. Apostol. Sermon. 24. De Doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 14
that S. Austin says, he learned that Language of his Nurse, and at play, and
did write as well as preach in it for the use of the Vulgar: And calls it our
Speech, whereas the Punick was the Vulgar Tongue of that Country.

And such a common Tongue is French in Flanders, Lingua Franca in the
Streights, and English in some parts of Wales.

a Learned Tongue, which though common amongst the Learned, yet they being few
in comparison of the Vulgar, that understand it not, it cannot be called a
common Tongue: Such are Greek and Latin now.

IV. There is a Tongue understood and spoken Persick and Indian with us.

The use of all this niceness, is partly to clear the state of the Question,
and partly to prevent many of the Objections which the case is cumbred with:
And without the observing of which, the Dispute will be turned from the point
that is controverted, to that which is not. As it happens for the most part
among those of the Church of Rome that undertake the management of this Cause;
who do either distinguish where they are not to distinguish, or do not
distinguish where they should distinguish. For sometimes they oppose the
Dialects of a Tongue to that Tongue of which they are the Dialects: At other
times they oppose the common Tongue to the Vulgar: Sometimes they confound the
Learned Tongue with the common: And then again oppose the learned and utterly
unknown, as if these two were of as different kinds as known and unknown.

To give an instance of each of these:

Ledesma, c. 9. n. 4, 5, 9. c. 20 n 2. Sanders orat. de Ling. Offic. Eccl.
Do they undertake to show how unfit and unreasonable it is to translate the
Service or Scriptures into a Vulgar Tongue? they endeavor to make it out by
showing how unfit it is to think of Translating. and how unreasonable it is to
expect they should be translated into the several Dialects of each Tongue?
Would they farther show that the Divine Offices, etc. were not of old so
translated? they attempt to prove it from their not having been translated into
different Dialects. As if the Dialects of a Tongue differed as much from each
other, and all from the main Tongue of a Nation, as a learned Tongue differs
from the Vulgar. Which is (to speak charitably) for want of observing, that the
Dialects are but several modes of speaking the same Tongue; and that ordinarily
there is some common Standard, which (as I have said) overrules the rest, and
is a guide common to all: As here in England, notwithstanding there be several
Dialects, and that there is one in Scotland differs much from them all; yet
there is but one Translation of the Bible, and one Service for the use of the
whole, and that is fully if not equally understood by all.

Furthermore, would they prove, that anciently Ledesma, c. 9. n. 6.
the Christian Churches used not a Vulgar Tongue in Divine Service? they
presently multiply Authorities to show, that in many places they used Greek
Lizettus de SS. in vulg. non vert. p. 51.
and Latin, and that Greek and Latin were oftentimes not the Vulgar Tongues
where they were so used. As if the common Tongue (for such were those two in
elder times, where they were not the Vulgar) was opposed to the Vulgar, as much
as unknown is to known; and each was inconsistent Bellarm. de verbo, l. 2. c.
15.
with the other. Thus they tell us from S. Jerome, That the Vulgar Tongue in
Galatia was in effect the same with that of the Treviri in Germany: And yet
there, and in the neighboring Countries, they had the Scriptures, if not their
Divine Service in Greek. Not observing that Greek was the common Tongue of
those parts, and that both that and a Vulgar were there freely and generally
spoken; as Greek and Latin, as well as the Gallick Tongues were so frequent in
Massilia, that it was called Trilinguis, as S. Jerome shows in the same
Dissertation of his. So that these two, the Common and Vulgar, are so far from
being inconsistent, that (notwithstanding the bold saying of our Countryman
Sanders, That the common people understand Orat. ut antea.
nothing but their Mother Tongue.) The experience of all Ages, as well as our
own shows that they are frequently met together.

But to proceed, would they demonstrate that they do and may lawfully use the
Latin now in Divine Service, they attempt with great industry to Ledesma, c. 9.
n. 1. c. 27. n. 9.
prove that both that and the Greek were anciently used therein. And so they
confound the learned and the common Tongue, and compare those times and places,
in which the Latin and Greek were commonly known and understood, with our times
and places, in which neither of them are understood but by the Learned.

Ledesma, c. 27. n. 9. Sanders orat. Bellarm. de verb. l. 2. c. 16.
Lastly, Would they show that S. Paul, in 1 Corinthians, 14. does not oppose
Service in Latin, they undertake to show, That he opposes no other Service
than what is altogether unknown and no Body understands, as Persick and
Arabic, and that he does not condemn a Learned Tongue; thereby supposing the
Learned Tongue and Tongue altogether unknown to be different in kind, whereas
they only differ so, that the one is rarely understood and by very few, in
comparison, and the other is understood by none.

Now in all this they say little or nothing to the purpose. For if they plead
for their Latin Service, as Greek was in Galatia, and Latin in Africa, who is
their Adversary? For these Tongues were (as I have showed) in those and the
like places as well or little less spoken and understood than the Vulgar and
Mother Tongues. And the Protestants do not think it unlawful to have the common
Service in a Tongue which is commonly understood (though it be not the Vulgar
Tongue of the Nation) especially in Maritim and Provincial Countries, where
there is a concourse of diverse Nations, and where either these several
Languages are understood, or there is a compound Language that serves for all,
as the Lingua Franca before spoken of.

But if they plead for Latin, as it is now (when a Dead and Learned Tongue)
that is where it is not known at all, as in the West Indies (where yet it is as
much used by those of the Roman communion in Mass, as in Europe) or where it is
not known to the Vulgar people, as it is with us, and every where else, then
they speak to the purpose, (for that the Reformed do oppose) but then the way
of arguing hitherto taken notice of is of no use to them in the World; and is
no more to the purpose than if they would undertake to prove that there is at
this day a famous University at Athens, and that Latin is the Vulgar Tongue now
at Rome, because these were so formerly.

So that if we will know where the Controversy lies, and what is contended for
and against, we must restore things to their proper places; and I think all may
be brought to an Issue, by putting and resolving this plain Question, viz.

SECT. II.
Qu. Whether it be lawful and expedient to use such a Tongue in the public
Worship of God, as is not vulgarly or commonly understood by the people;
according to the way at this day required and practiced in the Church of Rome?
If we would enquire into the lawfulness of such things as appertain to Divine
Worship, we must apply our selves to the Holy Scripture; being in matters of
that nature to determine of Right and Wrong, Lawful and Unlawful, according to
the Directions, Commands, and Prohibitions of it. If we would be satisfied
about their Expedience, we must consider the Nature, Ends, and Use of what we
enquire about. This therefore is a proper method for the Resolution of the
foregoing Question: But because the Apostle (in his Discourse upon this
Subject, 1. Cor. 14.) does argue from the ends and use of the several Offices
belonging to Divine Worship, and because the like Order may give some light and
force to what follows; I shall first of all,

I. Treat of the Ends for which Divine Worship, and the several Offices of it
were instituted.

II. Consider whether those Ends may be attained when the Worship is performed
in a Tongue not understood?

III. Whether the Worship so performed as to leave those ends unattainable,
will be accepted by God?

IV. I shall consider the Apostle's Discourse upon this Argument; and whether
it can be reasonably concluded from thence, That Divine Worship so administered
as not to be understood of the people is unlawful.

I. In the first of these the Masters of Controversy in the Romish Church do
proceed with great tenderness and no little obscurity. For would we know what
the Worship is they would have in an Unknown Tongue? they answer, it is the
public only they defend.

P. Sanctae not. in Epist. P. Molinaei, c. 17. n. 6. T. G. First reply to Dr.
Stiling fleet, sect. 3.
For as for private, says one, It is lawful for every one to offer his lesser
Prayers to God in what Tongue soever he pleases. And says another, All
Catholics are taught to say their private Prayers in their Mother Tongue.

As if it were possible to assign such a vast difference betwixt them (when the
Dispositions, Reasons and Ends, required and intended, are the same) that what
is lawful, expedient and necessary in the one, is unlawful, inexpedient and
unnecessary in the other; Or as if the saying private Prayers in Latin, was
never heard of, practiced, or encouraged in their Church.

Again, Would we understand to what purposes the Divine Offices do serve; and
whether the Edification, Instruction and Consolation of the people De verbo, l.
2. c. 16. Sect. obj. quart.
be not some of those Ends. Bellarmin answers,

1.) That the principal end of Divine Offices is not the instruction or
consolation of the people, but a Worship due to God from the Church. As if
there were no regard to be had to the special ends of those Offices, such as
the Instruction and Consolation of the people: Or as if God could be honored
by that Worship, where those ends are not regarded.

Annot. 1 Cor. 14. p. 463.
2.) The Rhemists add, That Prayers are not made to teach, make learned, or
increase knowledge, though by occasion they sometimes instruct; but their
especial use is to offer our Hearts, desires and Wants to God, etc. As if there
were no Offices in God's Worship appointed for Instruction, and increase of
Knowledge; and which are performed in an Unknown Tongue amongst them, as well
as Prayer. Or as if their Adversaries did either deny it to be the special use
of Prayer, To offer our Hearts, etc. to God: Or did Censur. propos^t. Erasmi,
prop. ^. Poncet discour. de L' Advis. chapter 1.
affirm that the special use of it is, To teach, make learned, and increase
knowledge; as they with others do falsely suggest, and would fain have believed.

But to set this in a better light; and that we may understand what are the
Ends and Uses for which Divine Worship was appointed, and after what manner
they are to be respected; It is to be observed,

1. That Divine Worship in its first notion respects God as its Object; and so
the end of it in general, is the giving Honor to him by suitable Thoughts,
Words and Actions.

2. That he has appointed several ways and Offices by which he will be so
honored; and in which, as the Honor does terminate in him, so there redounds
from thence benefit to the Church.

3. That the Benefits redound to the Church according to the nature of those
Offices, and the special Ends they were designed unto; As the Word of God is
for our instruction and comfort, etc. The Lord's Supper for the increase of
Faith in God, and love to him through Jesus Christ. The Praising of God is to
raise our Affections, and to make us more sensible of his goodness, and to
quicken Rhen. Annot.
us in our duty. The especial use of Prayer (that I* may use the Words
forecited) is to offer up our Hearts, Wants and Desires to God; and that by
conversing with him, we may be the more ardently excited to the love Part. 4.
c. 2. Sect. 7. 8.
and adoration of him (as the Trent Catechism does express it)

4. That those Offices are to be performed so as may effectually answer those
Ends, and as we may receive the benefits they were appointed for: From whence
it follows,

5. That if the Offices of Divine Worship are to be performed by Words, those
Words and that Tongue (in which they are administered) must be such as will not
obstruct but promote, and in their nature are qualified to attain those Ends.
And if those Ends cannot be attained without the Tongue, in which the Service
is performed, be understood: It makes that means as necessary in its kind as
the End; and it is as necessary that the Tongue used for those Ends in Divine
Worship, be understood, as that those Ends should be respected, or that there
should be a Tongue used at all. For it is not God but Man that is immediately
respected in the Words (since there is no more need of Words to God, than of
Words that are vulgarly understood) and so it is not for him but Man, that this
Tongue or that, or indeed that any Tongue at all is used. And if it be
requisite that there be a Tongue and Words used in public Worship, and which
all persons present are supposed to join in, and receive benefit by; then it is
as necessary for the same reason to use Words significant and understood, as to
use any Words at all. For, says S. Austin, De Doctr. Christ. ^. 6. 16
what does the soundness of Speech profit, if not followed with the
Understanding of the Hearer? Seeing there is no reason at all for our speaking,
if what we speak is not understood by them, for whom, that they might
understand, we spoke at all.

From what has been said, we may be able to vindicate such Arguments of the
Protestants for Divine Service in a known and vulgar Tongue, as were taken from
the Ends of Worship, against the replies made to them by their Adversaries of
the Romish Church. As,

1. The Protestants argue in general, that the End of Divine Offices is for the
Edification, Instruction and Consolation of the people; but these Ends cannot
be attained in a Tongue not understood by them.

Bellarm. de verbo, l. 2. c. 16. Sect. Obj. 4.
To this it is replied, That the Proposition is false, because the chief end of
Divine Offices is not the Instruction or Consolation of the people, but a
Worship or Honor due to God.

An Answer that became not so great a Man. For (1.) He argues as if those Ends
were opposed, which are not only consistent, as Principal and Subordinate, but
also inseparable in the Case; such are the Honor of God, and the Edification
of the Church.

(2.) The Answer is not to the purpose, unless it could be proved, That either
the Edification of the People, is no End of the Divine Offices; or that the
Worship is complete, though that End be not respected or attained in them. But
if it be an End, and the Service defective without that End be pursued; then it
is not, that this is a subordinate End, and the other a Principal, that will
destroy the force of the Argument, and justify the use of an Unknown Tongue,
when persons are not edified by it.

2. The Protestants argue in particular that there can no profit proceed to the
Church from Prayers not understood.

Bellarm. ibid. Sect. Obj. 2. Ledesma, c. 13. n. 11.
To this it is answered, That it is false, because the Prayer of the Church is
not made to the people, but to God for the people. And so there is no need that
the people understand, and it is sufficient if God understands.

But (1.) if this Argument hold, it will prove that which they do decline, and
be a Reason as well for Private as Public Prayers in an Unknown Tongue. For
Private Prayer is also made to God, and by this way of reasoning it will
follow, That it is sufficient that God understands it, though it is not
understood by him that uses it.

(2.) Grant we to them what is not to be denied, That Prayer is not made to the
people, but to God for the people: Yet grant they must and do to us, that, It
is the offering up our Hearts, Wants and ut supra.
Desires to God, and is to excite us to the Love and Adoration of him.

But if we cannot offer up our Hearts, Wants and Desires to God, nor be excited
to the Love and Adoration of him, by what we do not understand; then it is as
necessary for us to understand, as it is to have those Qualifications when we
pray. For both are supposed; for that we pray, respects God, but that we speak
in public Prayer respects the Church. And though the principal End (as they
call it) be regarded, and it be an Honor and Worship given to God: Yet if the
less principal be neglected, and the Service is not ordered to the increase of
Faith, Love and Devotion in those that offer it (as it cannot be where the
Words, and so the things prayed for in those Words, are not understood) it
makes the Honor, said to be given to God, next to none: And it is much at one,
whether there was no end at all propounded in Worship, or such an End, as
through a defect in it shall render the service no better in it self, and no
more acceptable to God, than if there were none. But of this more anon.

II. I shall consider whether these Ends for which Divine Service is appointed,
can be attained, when it is performed in a Tongue that is not understood? The
Apostle says, That the Offices of Divine Worship are intended and should be
ordered for the Edification of the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 4, 5. That is, say the
Rhemists, (explaining that Phrase) Page 461.
For increase of Faith, true Knowledge, and a good Life. But when this comes to
be applied to the Case of Divine Service administered in an unknown Tongue, they
set aside the increase of Knowledge and Instruction, as if it were not
concerned in it. So does Bellarmin, who says, Though the Minds De verbo, l. 2.
c. 16. Sect. Obj. 2.
of common people be not instructed by Service in an Unknown Tongue; yet their
affections are not without the benefit of it.

If this Argument signifies any thing, it must be either because Divine Service
is not a means appointed for our Instruction, and then he must thwart not only
the Apostle (who says it is for Edification, and consequently for Instruction,
a Branch of it) but also their own Church in the Sess. 22 c. 8.
Council of Trent, which says, That the Mass does contain great* Instruction
for the faithful. Or else he must say that the means of Instruction may be
rendered ineffectual at the pleasure of the Church, (as it is granted it is by
being in an unknown Tongue) and yet neither the Church be blamed, nor the
Institution of such Means for such an End be disparaged, nor the Souls of Men
receive any damage by the want of that Instruction, and the Means appointed for
it. So that as far as Instruction is an end, and the Divine Service is a means
for that End, it is granted that the keeping it in an Unknown Tongue does
defeat that end: For he says, That the Minds of common people are not
instructed by Service in an Unknown Tongue. And now what an usurpation is this
upon God, to withhold that Means that he has appointed, or to defeat the Means
of that End that he has appointed it for? What an injury to the Souls of Men?
And how much accessory must that Church be to the Miscarriage and Damnation of
such as perish for want of that Knowledge and Instruction the Service and
Offices of the Church do contain, and they might receive from it?

But suppose that end be lost, and the peoples Minds be not instructed, yet
their Affections are not without the benefit of it. This is spoken with a
Caution and Reservation becoming one that saw farther into the consequences of
what he said, than he cared to own. He says at large, their Affections are not
without the benefit of it: But how the Affections could be benefited, without
the Mind is instructed; or what the Benefit is which the Affections are not
without, he is sparing to tell us. But however the Rhemists advance a little
farther; for they with no little confidence do Annotat. in 1 Cor. 14. p. 462.
determine, It is plain that such as pray in Latin, though they understand not
what they say, do pray with as little tediousness, with as great Affection and
Devotion, and oftentimes more than others, that pray in a Tongue they
understand. The Cardinal told us, That the Affections are not without benefit,
though the Mind be not instructed: But now it is to a Demonstration plain (in
these Men's account) that not only the benefit is as great, as if people do
understand, but oftentimes greater than if they did understand. So that what
more self evident, than that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion? But yet as
plain as it is, the Saying is so downright a Contradiction to the common sense
of Mankind, that I think a Man may venture as roundly to assert, that it is
plain, a Man may see without Light, as that he may pray with Affection and
Devotion, though he do not understand, and with as great as if he did: And he
may with as good a Grace maintain, That the best way to see, is to put out the
Light, as affirm with them, That such as pray in Latin, though they do not
understand, oftentimes pray with more Affection and Devotion than they that do
understand.

But because this is asserted with so much confidence, Ledesma, c. 13. n. 13.
Censura proposit. Erasmi, prop 5.
and that, To say that people are not profited without they understand, is
condemned not only as an erroneous, but wicked assertion; I shall look back,
and (leaving the extravagancy of the latter as self-exposed) consider whether
the Affections are not without benefit, and that the Soul can be devout and
affected, where the Understanding is not instructed, nor the Mind is concerned
in the Service we are conversant in? The resolution of which depends upon the
consideration of the Soul of Man, and the several faculties of it.

Concerning which it shall suffice to observe,

1. That in all reasonable and deliberate Acts, there is more or less so
necessary a concurrence of the prime faculties of the Soul, viz. the
Understanding, Will and Affections, that none of them can be said to be
excluded. 2. That in all such Acts if the Understanding be not the leading
faculty, and of such influence, that the others cannot act without it (which
must be supposed, for how can a person affect or choose what he does not know?)
Yet without that, the Acts cannot be In Psalm. 46.
termed reasonable. So Cassiodore, No body does any thing wisely which he does
not understand. 3. That in the Acts of Religion, the presence of the
understanding is as much required as in any other rational Acts whatsoever; The
renewing of the Mind being there the Spring of all spiritual Action; Romans 12.
1, 2.
and the whole called from thence a reasonable Service. And therefore if in
other Cases the Affections cannot move or be profited without the help of the
Understanding, then as little can it be supposed in Religion, and the Offices
belonging to it, where the Understanding is Sonus Cordis, In Genes. Lit. L. c.
8. and in Ps. 99.
(as S. Austin calls it, applying it to our purpose) The note of the Heart.

Now to say, That the Affections are not without profit, though the Mind be not
instructed; and that they that do not understand, do pray with as little
tediousness, and as great Affection and Devotion as they that do understand
(not to repeat the rest of the stuff before cited) is to say that the
Affections have no dependence in Nature upon the Understanding; or that
Religion requires less of us than any other reasonable Acts whatsoever; and
that what we cannot do without being Lunaticks or Idiots in other matters, we
may there creditably do, and speak, and act, as absurdly as we will, with
allowance.

But this kind of Doctrine is only to serve a turn, being fitted to those that
are fitted for it, and to whom nothing can be absurd, which some Men say: For
there are those amongst them cannot digest it; and do determine otherwise. So
Salmeron In 1 Cor. 14.
the Jesuit, If any one prays privately, and the things prayed for are not
understood by him, he wastes his time: So he that speaks publicly in an
Unknown Tongue, which others do not understand, he does yield no Fruit; and
then certainly others receive none. This the Council of Trent does acknowledge,
when it declares (as abovesaid) It seems not expedient to the Fathers, That the
Mass be celebrated in the Vulgar Tongue: And presently adds, Lest the Sheep of
Christ should hunger, and when the little ones ask bread, there is none to
break to them; The Holy Synod commands all that have the care of Souls,
frequently, etc. to expound somewhat of it. So that they grant without such
Explication, the Faithful may hunger and be without profit; for what need would
there be of Exposition, if the people may be as devout without it as with it? I
shall conclude Exposit. in Psalm. 18.
this with that of S. Austin, We ought to understand, that we may sing with
humane reason, not as it were with the Voice of Birds. For both Parrots, and
Crows, and Pies, and the like, are often taught by Men to pronounce what they
do not know -- But to sing with understanding is granted by the Divine Will to
mankind. So that according to him, if we set aside Rhodiginus, l. 3. c. 32.
the Understanding, the Parrot of the Cardinal Ascanius, had it been taught the
Lord's Prayer, or other Forms of Devotion, as well as the Creed, might have
contended in competition with those that hear, and sing, and pray, with Words,
without understanding. Since whatever Affection and Devotion is pretended to
without Knowledge, is Jerem. 23. 16.
like a Vision of a Man's own Heart, and not of Divine Illumination, that does
either proceed from Imagination or Imposture.

But that we may not think this Assertion of theirs [that there may be profit
without understanding, and Devotion without knowledge] to be unreasonable, they
both produce Experience, and endeavor also to give a rational account of it.
The Page 401. Hosius, p. 9.
former is appealed to by the Rhemists; As for Edification, that is, for
increase of Faith, true Knowledge, and a good Life, the experience of a few
Years has given all the World a full demonstration, whether our Forefathers
were not, etc as devout, as we are in all our Tongues, translations and English
Prayers.

Ledesma, c. 21. n. 23.
And we are told, That the people know what is done in the general, to wit,
That God is worshipped and honored; That the Priest prays to him; That good
things are asked of him for the people; and thanks given to him, that the
memory of Christ and his Passion are celebrated, and the Sacrifice offered to
God. This no Clown is ignorant of; and this is enough.

This is somewhat like the course taken by Socrates, that said, He only prayed
in general, because what particular things were good for him, the Gods knew
better than himself. But whether this be done among them, with as much reason;
and whether with any respect to our Religion, and the several Offices of it, is
now to be considered.

For our satisfaction herein we may observe,

I. They grant, That the people can and do understand no more by their Service
than the general intent, and Points of it.

II. That the people cannot apply these Generals to the particular Points of
it. So the Rhemists; P. 463.
The simple people are not bound to know to what Petition their part
pertains, etc. It is enough that the people can tell this holy Oraison [the
Pater noster] to be appointed to call upon God, etc.

III. That no more is necessary; and though they are to ask special things of
God, yet it-is not needful to understand what, or how, or when, or if at all
they are specially prayed for. For then they would understand the specials.

But now this state of the Case will not solve the Point. For,

I. This is contrary to the Apostle, who does maintain, That as the public
Service of God is to be ordered so, as to be for the edification of the 1 Cor.
14. 7, 8, 9, 16.
Church; so the Church cannot be edified, without the Offices are administered in
a Tongue that shall as distinctly and particularly signify and point to the
thing thereby to be expressed, as a Trumpet or the like Instrument does give
notice by a distinction of Sounds, when to advance or retreat, when to fight
and when to forbear. And that every person, the unlearned as well as the
learned, may know how to apply his Amen thereunto; but which he can no more do
without understanding the Tongue, than He can know what motion or posture he is
to observe that has the Trumpet sounding to him without any distinction, and
whose Sounds and Notes being confounded, give no direction to those that are to
be guided by it. In 1 Cor. 14.
So Aquinas, How shall he say Amen, when he knows not what is prayed for;
because he cannot understand, Quid boni dicas, nisi quod benedicas; What good
thou say, except that thou do bless?

II. The nature of the thing is against it. For as the Offices are various, and
distinguished by their Ends and Uses; and we cannot attain those Ends, nor make
use of those Offices, without the understanding of those Ends and Uses: So
there are particular things respected in those Offices, which unless we also
respect, we lose the benefit of them; but that we cannot do without a
particular knowledge of them. As for example, the Romish Catechism faith, That
Prayer is the Interpreter Part. 4. c. 1. Sect. 3. c. 2. Sect. 2, 4, 10. c. 4.
Sect. 3. 7. c. 6. Sect. 2. de orat. Domin.
of the Soul, and is directed to God or the Saints. That therein Men do confess
their sins, and pray for the pardon of them; that they beg for others and
themselves things Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal; that therein also they give
Thanks for whatever good they have received, and do enjoy. Now as these things
are of different kinds, so according to their kind they require different
dispositions, and so what are suitable to the one will not be suitable to the
other. But if the knowledge be only general, that cannot produce special
dispositions; and he that ventures to be particular therein, may rejoice and
give Thanks when he is to mourn and confess; may mind Earthly things when the
Prayer is for Heavenly; may imprecate when he should bless; and instead
Catechis. c. 6. Sect. 3.
of Ora pro nobis, may say Miserere nobis, that is, make a Saint to be God, and
apply that to the Officer of the Court of Heaven, which he should address only
to the Judge. He may be all the while in a posture of contradiction to the
Church, and have his dispositions so little suited to the solemnities of it,
that the Priests may say to such, with some little variation, in the Words of
the Gospel, We have piped unto you, and ye have mourned; we have mourned unto
you, and ye have danced. So that unless they will say, There are no need of
particular dispositions, according to the kinds, and special uses of the
Offices of Religion, they must say, That Service in an Unknown Tongue, is not
for the edification of the Church. So Aquinas again, He who does hear and not
understand, Ibid.
is not edified as far as he understands not, although he undestand it in
general.

III. If this were true, That a confused general knowledge is sufficient, yet
this will not help them, or justify them in the use of an Unknown Tongue: For
even the general knowledge they pretend to, does not proceed from the Tongue
(for that they understand not) but is obtained some other way, that is by some
actions and Postures, some particular Words and Phrases, some Ceremonies and
Signals given in the administration of their Service: And which would signify
as much for the most part without the Tongue and Words, as with the Tongue that
is not understood.

IV. I shall add, That whereas they pretend experience in the case, and which
for the present we shall not so far question, as utterly to deny, but that
there may be, and is some Devotion amongst the ignorant sort of them; yet so
far as this Devotion of theirs is real, it must be because of somewhat
understood, but so far as it is without Instruction, so far unquestionably it
proceeds only from the imagination; and if it rises from no better or higher a
cause, whatsoever semblance it may have of Devotion, yet it has no right to
that Character. I shall make this clear by an instance or two. Not many years
since, in a certain City of Brabant, there was for ornament a large Statue
erected at a Conduit near the Marketplace, to which the Country people as they
passed to and fro, did often pay their Devotions (not discerning any difference
betwixt that and an image of a Saint) so much to the public scandal, that (to
prevent any such mistake for the future) it was by command transformed into a
little Boy, with a change also of the posture. Now if we would enquire into
this Devotion, it is much what the same we are discoursing of. There wanted not
an inward disposition, that inclined the people to it; there wanted not outward
expressions, for they bowed before it, kissed the Feet of it, said their Pater
nosters, etc. before it, and all with as much Devotion, as if it had been the
Image of S. Roch, or S. Sebastian, or S. Michael himself (the Protector and
Patron of the place). And yet all this being applied to a common, and not a
religious Object, and being only the Fruit of Imagination and not of
Instruction, it deserved another name than Devotion, and was not so accounted
by themselves. And now, why what is given, suppose to a right Object, but
without knowledge, should not be equivalent to the other, that was intended to
a right, but was addressed, by mistake, to a wrong, is not easy to discern?
Furthermore, Let us suppose a Case, A person being beforehand possessed with a
report of certain persons met together upon a design of Conjuration, comes to
the place, and finds the Company there assembled; and hearing all that they
say, performed in a Language he understands not, he presently is seized with a
pannick fear, and is every moment in expectation of the foul Fiend's appearance
at their Summons, but is all this while abused, and under a mistake, for the
persons were there met for Religious Worship, and so the ground of his fear
imaginary. On the other hand, a person comes into a place, where he finds
several met together, who using much the like postures as if they were at their
Devotions, and also Words he understands not, but what for ought he knows, are
the same that are used in the Church Service, he falls upon his Knees, pulls
out his Beads, says an Ave Maria, or Pater noster, or what he has been used to
in that kind. And now can there be any reason after all to conclude, That this
Man's Devotion arose from any other cause than the others Fear, and that both
did not proceed from the imagination? And can there be any reason to think,
that what proceeds from such a cause, is fit to be Sainted, and be entitled to
the name of true Piety and Devotion? So that to talk of Devotion without
Instruction, or Instruction sufficient to create it, is to talk against the
sense of Mankind, in which there may be, for ought I see, as much of mystery,
but no more sense than in the wonted De verbo, l. 2. c. 16. Sect. Obj. 2.
praeterea.
saying of Anthony of Padua, produced by Bellarmin on this occasion, That is a
perfect Prayer, in which the mind is so swallowed up into God, that it does not
understand its own Words. In this they agree, that in both Cases the Words and
the Understanding are separated, but in this they differ, That His
Understanding was (as it seems) beyond the Words; but in our Case the Words are
beyond the Understanding. In both there is no need of Words, and where they are
used, they cannot be the means of Devotion; which is no more to be found
without the understanding, than the Understanding can be, can attend, or be
moved by Words that it has no knowledge of.

So that let them either take away the Words altogether, and use no Tongue in
their Service, and turn all into mummery and pageantry: Or else let them use
such Words as will stir up religious Catechis. Trid. p. 4. c. 8. Sect. 3.
Affections in the faithful, and answer the End for which they are used in
public (as they confess)* For though we should be of the same mind with
Bellarmin, That Instruction is not in the De verbo. l. 2. c. 16. Sect. Object.
4.
Sense, but in the Words; yet how a Man can understand the sense contained in
the Words, without understanding the Words containing the sense, is as hard to
understand, as how we can be Religious and Devout, without understanding, and
for we know not what.

But to proceed to another Question.

III. Let us consider, Whether the worship so performed, as to leave those Ends
unattainable, will be accepted by God? Divine Worship respects God as its
Object, and so the End of it is the giving Honor to him by suitable Thoughts,
Words and Actions (as has been before observed) but how that honor is to be
given, as the nature of the thing, and Divine Institution are the Rule; so when
that Honor is given to him, the Ends, for which the Worship it self is
appointed and the Offices of it do serve, must determine. And if these Ends are
not respected, nor can be attained in the way of its ministration, we may be
confident, That as the Worship is not then worthy of God, so it is not accepted
by him. Now,

As it has been already showed what those Ends are, so it has been proved, that
those Ends are not to be attained, where the Service is not in a Tongue known
to the people, and so consequently will not be accepted by God. And for this we
have the judgment of the Romish Church, when they discourse practically upon
this Argument, and without respect to the controversy before us. Of this I
shall give an instance in Prayer, (a point most of all insisted upon) of which
it is said in Part 4. c. 8. Sect. 1.
general in the Romish Catechism, That it is of special concernment after what
manner we pray; for although Prayer be a saving good, yet unless it be rightly
performed, it does not profit. And Ibid. c. 2. Sect. 4
elsewhere they insist upon several things that render our Prayers ineffectual,
as the ignorance of what we pray for; and the want of attention or assent to
what we pray, etc. And certainly if the Prayer without these Ends be not
acceptable to God, then such a ministration of it, as renders those Ends
unattainable, cannot be lawful to us, or be thought approved by him.

But how well and truly soever they speak in a case remote from Controversy,
yet when they come to controvert the Point in hand, they do in effect unsay all
that they have said; and then the Prayers used in the Church, though not at all
understood by the people, are magnified for their use and benefit to Man, and
for their acceptance with God.

Annot in 1 Cor. 14. p. 462. Et Annot. in Mat. 21. 16.
Thus the Rhemists, We doubt not but it is acceptable to God, and available to
all necessities, and more agreeable to the use of all Christian people to pray
in Latin than in the Vulgar, though every one in particular, understands not
what he says. And (says Cardinal Hosius,) When De ling. vernac. p. 9.
done to give honor to God, it is acceptable to him, and no understanding of
Words can be compared to it.

To say that our Prayers are hindered of their virtue through ignorance or want
of attention, etc. And that they be acceptable to God, though we understand not
what we say, are things irreconcilable. But setting aside the contradiction in
it, they are not without some pretenses to prove that the efficacy of the
Divine Offices does not depend upon the peoples understanding them. Now I might
ease my self of these kind of Pleas, because they suppose that which has been
already disproved, viz. That the affections can be benefited without the
understanding. But yet because they are frequently produced to prove as well
the no necessity of Service in a Vulgar Tongue, and the lawfulness of having it
in an Unknown Tongue, as that a Service of that kind is acceptable to God, and
efficacious to the people, I shall before I conclude this Head (to which they
more peculiarly belong) take them into consideration.

Now their Arguments are taken partly from Scripture, and partly from some
cases supposed to be parallel to this.

Object. 1. They say, That the Children in the Temple, as well as the people
cried, Hosanna to the Ledesma, c. 13. n. 1.
Son of David, Matthew. 21. 16. whereas they understood not what they said: And
yet this was our Savior pleased with, and defended them in.

But this is said with very little Reason: For

Answ. 1. It is more probable that they did understand, than that they did not:
Hosannah being a form of solemn acclamation; and as easy to be understood by
them in the signification; so also in the application of it to Christ upon this
occasion; which, says S. John 12. 17, 18. was, Because the people had heard
that he raised Lazarus. And whereas our Savior applies that of Babes and
Sucklings to the case, that was not because these that cried Hosannah were
such, but that because God never wanted Instruments of his Glory, but could
make use of such as were mean and unfit in themselves for it.

2. Supposing they did not understand, where is the consequence, that because
young Childrens Prayers proceeding from the instinct of God's Spirit be
acceptable to God, therefore the voices of other simple Annot. in Matthew. 21. 16.
folk, now in the Church, though they themselves understand not what they say,
be mavelous grateful to God, as the Rhemists say. As if an extraordinary case
should be a Rule for us in an ordinary; and that Prayers proceeding from
Children, by the instinct of God's Spirit, and who were little less
miraculously empowered to do it, than the Ass of Balaam (if they were
Sucklings, and such as could scarcely speak, as Ledesma would have it) should
teach us to choose what we do not understand. Or as if what was grateful to God
from Children, who were in no capacity of doing better than following of
others, though they did not understand, should excuse, nay recommend the
Service of those that are in a capacity of understanding, and yet understand no
more of what they offer to Almighty God in particular, than if they were Babes
and Sucklings, and such as had no understanding.

The Apostle in 1 Cor. 14. 20. does upon this occasion exhort, Be not Children
in understanding, so as to think God pleased with that which does not benefit
us; or so as to think, That he who is so merciful as to accept according to
what a Man has, should also be so remiss as to accept him that brings not
what he has. That when God has given us a Tongue and Understanding, we should
be debarred of the use of both in his Worship and Service, and yet our Service
and our selves be as well accepted, as if both were employed therein. Certainly
what will avail, where there is no capacity, will not avail when there is a
capacity; and therefore it is a mean way of arguing, and will receive the same
answer, That they that Bellarm. l. 2. de effectu Sacram. c. 32. Rhem. annot. p.
461.
have no use of Reason, are truly and efficaciously baptized, and so there is
no need of understanding; and it would have confuted it self, if they had
added, (as they should) therefore those that have (...) understanding, may as
lawfully act, and shall be as certainly accepted, though they use not that
understanding, as if they did.

Ledesma, c. 13. n. 7. Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel, c. 52.
Object. 2. Among the Jews the Prayers of the Priest, when he entered into the
Holy of Holys, were accepted, though the people were without, Lev. 16. 17. and
Luke 1. 9, 10. Therefore the Service of the Church may be so said, as all the
people understand it not, and also be accepted.

Answ. 1. It is acknowledged on both sides that the High Priest's entering into
the Holy of Holies, was typical of Christ, and the Atonement made by him, and
consequently what the people could not bear a part in. But since the people are
concerned with the Priest in the Offices of our Religion, and are to set their
Amen to it, there is no parity betwixt the case then and the case now.

2. How is this a proof that they had their Service in an Unknown Tongue? Or if
they were to have it in a Known Tongue, how can they infer, That the High
Priest might have used an Unknown Tongue, when praying with the people, and
that this should have been as acceptable to God, and as beneficial to them, as
if it had been understood?

Ledesma, ibid. Bellarm. de verb. l. 2. c. 16. Sect. Obj. 2.
Obj. 3. But they say, it proves thus much, That Prayers though made for them,
that do not hear or are absent, are effectual; and then why not as well for
them that do not understand them though present?

This is an Argument they much insist upon.

But,

1. If this were of any force, then we need no more to pray for our selves,
because others pray for us, than we are not bound to understand what we pray,
because thosethat pray for us do understand.

2. The Dispute is not, Whether persons in some cases may not be benefited by
the Prayers of others, though they do not understand them, as when the Church
prays for the absent as well as the present, and Christ in Heaven intercedes
with success for his Church here, and those that are present pray for Children,
Lunaticks, and delirous: But whether such Prayers are acceptable to God, which
a person himself is obliged to join in, and yet so little understands, as he
knows not what he prays for, whether for himself or others; nor can be certain
whether indeed he prays at all. Monica prayed for her Son Austin with that
Fervor and Devotion, with such passion and continuance, that S. Ambrose told
her, It was impossible a Son of such Prayers and Tears should miscarry: But if
she had prayed in a Language she understood not, she would not have known what
she prayed for, and she would then have found no Tears for her Prayers; or if
she had had Prayers and Tears, they had both been lost with her Son. And
although the Ledesma, ^. 13. n. 13. Bellarm. ibid.
Priest be a public person, and offers up our Prayers to God, yet this does not
at all exclude the faithful from a share in them: And therefore as the Priest
is the Mouth of the Congregation, and as such, he must use a Tongue the
Congregation understands: So the Congregation is to attend to him, and to give
their Amen, and Assent to what he in their name offers to God: And he is
neither Priest nor Mouth to them, if he prevents them in their part, and
renders them incapable of bearing a part in it, by using a Tongue they
understand not. And therefore it is as necessary the Congregation should
understand as the Priest, and if he do otherwise, he can no more justify
himself, than if he did celebrate the Service in a Tongue he himself knew
nothing of, and which neither the one nor the other did understand. So that
upon the whole, we have reason to conclude Orat. de ling. Offic. Eccles.
with Sanders, That an Unknown Tongue is not profitable for the people; though
he will not allow it for that Reason to be unlawful.

And that is the thing I shall now particularly enquire into, by considering,

IV. Whether from the Apostle's Discourse upon this Argument, it can be
reasonably concluded, That Divine Service so administered, as not to be
understood of the people, is unlawful?

In the Apostle's Discourse upon this Argument, 1 Cor. 14. there are two things
agreed in betwixt the contending parties.

I. That the Service of God is so to be ordered, as may be for the edification
of the Church, v. 4, 5, 12. And that what is inconsistent with the general,
much more the universal Edification of it, is not to be allowed.

II. That an Unknown Tongue in such Assemblies and Offices as the Apostle
speaks of, is inconsistent with, and cannot be for the public Edification, v.
2, 6, 9, 11, 14, 16.

But though it be thus far agreed, yet they afterward divide upon it from the
Protestants.

For,

1. Some of the Church of Rome do say, That it is evident from this place of
Scripture, that a Vulgar and Known Tongue was not used in those days in Public
Worship.

2. That if so be such was then used, yet the Apostle does not forbid the use
of an Unknown Tongue in it.

The first do wholly found what they have to say, upon Verse 16. How shall he
that occupies the room of the Unlearned [or Idiot] say Amen, at thy giving of
Thanks?

Ledesma, c. 27. n. 5, etc. Sanders, orat. de lingua, etc.
This shows [say they] that such giving of Thanks was not accustomed to be made
in the Vulgar Tongue; for had the Service been in the Vulgar, there needed no
Man to have supplied the place of the Idiot.

This at first sight may seem a pretty Argument to one that understands no more
than Latin and English; but the mischief of it is, that it is not true. Of this
mind is Bellarmin, etc. who says,

De verbo, l. 2. c. 16. Sect. alii ergo. Rhem. annot. p. 458. Marg.
1. That the Greek Phrase (...), according to the use of that Tongue, does not
signify one that is in the stead of an Idiot or unlearned, but thereby are
meant all rude unlearned Men. So Chrysostom and Theophylact expound it, etc.

2. There was no such custom in Apostolical times, and long after, of one to
answer in the place of the Vulgar; but that the people were wont to answer, as
is evident from Justin Martyr, etc.

V. Petrae sanctae c. 17. ^. 5. Touchstone of the reformed Gospel, c. 52. p.
138.
After this Argument has been so clearly relinquished, it might have been
omitted by us, had it not been reassumed with no little assurance and triumph
by others since Bellarmin's time.

II. Those among them that do quit this, yet hold that the Apostle does not
forbid a Tongue so unknown, as the Latin is now, in Divine Worship. And for
this they offer several Arguments, which will be all comprehended, and I
conceive cleared, by considering,

1. What is meant by the Unknown Tongue, which the Apostle condemns?

2. What by the Assemblies, in which such an Unknown Tongue is forbid?

3. What by the Service used in those Assemblies?

4. How far the Apostle's Prohibition is to be extended?

Ledesma, c. 26. Rhem. annot. p. 461.
Quest. 1. As to the first.

They say, That the Tongues condemned were miraculous and extraordinarily
infused, but what they plead for is acquired and learnt.

A. But supposing the Tongues were miraculous; yet what is this to the case in
Hand, when they were not condemned for being miraculous (for as such they were
Gifts from God and Signs to Men) but as they were abused, and used neither to
the Glory of God, nor the Edification of the Church. And by parity of reason,
every Unknown Tongue, as well what is acquired as infused, is condemned also.
The Miraculous Tongue was forbidden, when it did not profit, when it was a
speaking to the air, when he that spoke was a Barbarian to him that heard, and
when he that heard could not say Amen to him that spoke, Verse 2, 9, 11, 16.
And if a Tongue acquired be as much unknown as a Tongue infused, the Reasons
being common to both, the one is as much prohibited in those circumstances as
the other.

Nay, according to their way of arguing, it will follow, That if Tongues
miraculously infused, which were a sign to them that believed not, might not be
used in the Cases abovesaid, then much less may such as are acquired, by
Education and other humane ways.

Bellarm. ibid. Sect. vera igitur. Sect. at objicies. Sect. in posteriore.

S. C. p. 176.


But they say farther, That the Apostle speaks of a Tongue which no one
understands in the whole Church, but not of that which is understood by some,
at least by him that officiates.

But for this they offer no manner of proof, neither is there any. For (1.) the
Apostle speaks of such a Tongue as is not for the Edification of the Church;
but if some only understand it, those that do not understand, are no more
edified by the understanding of the rest, than if none understood it. (2.)
There are two sorts of persons concerned, one that can say Amen, and another
that cannot, whom the Apostle calls Unlearned. But the Unlearned are as well
(as he says) to be respected as the Learned; and the Unlearned being
ordinarily more than the Learned; it must consequently be such a Tongue which
all or the most did understand that he pleads for; and such a Tongue, which
none or the fewest did understand, that he pleads against.

Annot. p. 461.
Lastly, They say, The Apostle condemns a Barbarous Tongue, but not that which
is understood by Learned and Civil people in every great City, as Hebrew, Greek
and Latin. So the Rhemists. Harding in Jewel. divis. 3. p. 116. Joh. Baptistae
de Rubeis Rationale, l. 2. c. 9. Sanders orat. etc.


And we are further told, That all Tongues are Barbarous, except those three.

But all this is spoken very precariously. For the Apostle excepts no Tongue,
as a Tongue, from being barbarous. For that is barbarous with him that is not
understood, whether it be Hebrew or Arabic, Greek or Scythian, Latin or
Dalmatick. In this Sense Ovid took it, speaking of himself in Exile, amongst
the Getae, Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intelligor ulli:
I am here a Barbarian, because I am not understood by any.


And in this sense it is here taken by ancient Expositors. Thus S. Jerome, Every
Speech which is In loc.
not understood is barbarous. Thus S. Chrysostom, Salmeron. Iyra in loc.
and indeed several also amongst themselves.

So that upon the whole it is manifest, that the Apostle means by an Unknown
Tongue, that which is not understood of the People.

Bellarm. c. 16. init. Rhemists annotat. p. 462.
Quest. 2. What are the Assemblies in which the Apostle condemns the use of an
Unknown Tongue?

The Champions of this Cause in the Church of Rome, do allege, That much of
the Chapter refers to Spiritual Conferences and collocutory Exercises then used
in lesser Assemblies, which they endeavor to prove more especially from the
Directions given by the Apostle, Verse 27, etc.

If we should grant that part of the Apostle's Discourse refers to such
Conferences, yet what is this to that part of it that treats of Public
Worship? Or indeed what is it to the purpose at all, when there were mostly the
same Offices used in one as the other, and the same End prescribed to the use
of them in both? Those that do thus distinguish, have not ventured to tell us
where the Apostle does treat of the one, and where of the other: And it is
evident that he applies his Argument of Edification to the whole, and then
proceeds from one Office to another, from Prophesying to Praying, and Singing,
if not also to the Lords Supper. Now where the End is common to all, without
distinction, the means conducing to that End are in all alike to be observed.
And if in those lesser Assemblies (when they expounded, prayed or sung) they
were to use a Tongue known to the Assembly, because without so doing, the Ends
of their so assembling would have been defeated, then certainly it was, if not
more, yet at least as necessary, that the same order be observed when the whole
Church came together into one place.

Quest. What was the Service used in those Assemblies, and that was forbidden
to be celebrated in an Unknown Tongue?

Bellarm. ibid. Sect. Vera igitur. Sect. ad hanc igitur. Rhemists annot. in 1
Cor. 14. 26. p. 460.
Some of the Church of Rome will understand it only of preaching; and those
that do grant it to respect Prayers, yet will have it understood of such
Prayers as were inspired. But what though the Prayers were inspired, when they
were to be uttered in a Tongue known to the Church, and were not to be used if
they were not for the Edification of the Church; as they were not if not
understood? And is not the Reason as full against Prayers not inspired, when
they are not understood? The Question is not about Prayers, inspired or not
inspired; but known and unknown; according to which all the Offices of the
Church are to be tried, as to their lawfulness and expedience.

Sanders orat. p. 64, 66.
But let the Prayers be as they will, yet say they, The Apostle treats of them
occasionally only.

Supposing this so to be, yet that is not to the purpose, for the Question is
not whether the Apostle, treats so expressly of Prayer as of prophesying; as
whether the prohibition of an Unknown Tongue, and the Argument taken from the
End of Divine Offices lie not as expressly against praying as prophesying in
that way? And whether the Words, If I pray in an Unknown Tongue, my Spirit
prays, but my understanding remains unfruitful, etc. v. 14, 16. are not as
plain as he that speaks [or prophesyeth] in an Unknown Tongue, speaks not
unto Men, etc. If the Prohibition be the same, and the reason of the
prohibition be the same in both; then it is not the being expressly or
occasionally handled, that can make so vast a difference, as that the former
shall be lawful, and the latter unlawful.

Quest. 4. How far is the Apostle's prohibition to be extended?

This will be determined partly from what has been before said, and partly
from the current of the Apostle's Discourse, who as he lays down that general
Rule, Let all things be done to Edifying; so upon that principle, he prohibits
the use of an Unknown Tongue, as inconsistent with it, Verse 14. If I pray in
an Unknown Tongue, my Spirit prays, but my understanding remains
unfruitful. Where he does not speak of a better and worse, and prefer that
which is understood before Bellarm. Sect. in posteriore.

Rhemists annot. p. 460.


that which is not (as they would have it) but he speaks of a good and bad; and
so does absolutely condemn an Unknown Tongue for the unprofitableness of it.
For, says he, My Spirit prays, not the Affection, but the Spirit in the gift
of an Unknown Tongue (as many of the S. Chrysostom. Homil. 35. Theophylact.

Salmeron in loc. Hieren. in loc.


Ancients, and some of themselves expound it) But my understanding remains
unfruitful, to my self, that is, if I do not understand it; and to others, if
they do not understand me, as the Apostle does explain it, Verse 16.

So that from the whole we may with good Reason conclude, That the
administration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue is as unlawful as express
Scripture can make it: And that after all their attempts to decline, pervert
and overthrow it, the fourteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, remains in full force against the Opinion and Practice of the
Church of Rome; and is a sufficient Reason on their part, to keep the
Scriptures in an Unknown Tongue, as long as their Service is, contrary to the
Scripture, celebrated constantly in it.

SECT. III.
I shall enquire, Whether the celebrating Divine Service in a Tongue not
understood of the people, has been the ancient Rite of every Church?
I. I shall consider whether it has been an ancient Rite?

II. Whether from the time of its having been a Rite, it has been the Rite and
Custom of every Church?

Both of these are affirmed by the Council of Trent.

Qu. I. Whether it has been an ancient Rite?

Ancient is a Term of an uncertain date, and seems to have been chosen by the
Council upon mature deliberation; lest peradventure if it had been determined,
it might have been so late, as to be of no authority in it self; or so early,
as, for want of truth, it might have given a foul shock to its own Authority.
But however, because nothing can be antienter than what is first, let us
consider how Service was administered in Apostolical times, and so downwards, as
much before the Council as any thing can be reasonably said to be ancient by
it. I have already accounted for the Apostle's sense in this matter, which
Cassander calls (after S. Chrysostom De Offic. pii viri, p. 865.
in loc.) an Apostolical Command for Service in a Tongue understood of the
people. And if we take a step lower, and so proceed, we shall find an
uncontrollable Evidence for it, both as to the Judgment and Practice of the
Church. In the first place (setting aside the pretended Liturgies Salmeron in 1
Cor. 14. Sect. His igitur. Apolog. sub fin.
of S. James and S. Clement, which are however plainly for it, as is
acknowledged) is Justin Martyr, that flourished about 150 years after Christ,
who relates, That after the Bishop had concluded his Prayer and giving of
Thanks, all the people did assent to it with an Amen. Which they could not have
done, as the Apostle and Fathers affirm, unless they understood what was prayed
for. To this purpose does Clemens Alexandrinus also write, who lived toward the
close of the second Century.

Origin, who lived about the middle of Contra C^s. l. 8. p. 402. Cantabr.
the third Century, says, The Greek Christians in their Prayers used the
Grecian, and the Romans used the Roman Words, and each prays and praises God
in his own Tongue. And the Lord of all Tongues does hear those that pray In
orat. Dom. n. 22.
to him in all Tongues, etc. S. Cyprian at the same time, does say, That the
Mind in Prayer does think of nothing else but what is prayed for. And therefore
the Priest before Prayer does prepare the Minds of the Brethren, by saying,
Lift up your Hearts, that when the people does answer, We lift them up unto the
Lord, they may be admonished, that they ought to think of nothing but the Lord.
For not the sound of the Voice, but the Mind must pray to the Lord.

Apad Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 8.
Dionysius Alexandrinus, that lived in the same Age, in a Letter to Xystus
Bishop of Rome, does write of a person that having been baptized by Heretics,
upon the hearing the Questions and Answers at the Baptism of the Orthodox,
questioned his own Baptism. But says he, we would not rebaptize him, because
he had for a good while held Communion with us in the Eucharist, and had been
present at our giving of Thanks, and answered, Amen.

Tom. 2. Arg. brev. ^eg. 278.
S. Basil, who flourished about the year 370, putting the Question, How the
Spirit prays, and the Mind is without Fruit? answers, It is meant of those that
pray in a Tongue unknown to them that hear. For when the Prayers are unknown to
them that are present, the mind is without Fruit to him that prays, etc.

Tom. 1. in Psalm. 28.
And as to the Practice of the Church in the public Service, he declares, That
the people had the Psalms, Prophets and evangelical Commands: And when the
Tongue sings, the Mind does search out the sense of the things that are spoken.
And he relates how the Christians used Tom. 2. Epist. 63. Cler. Neocaes. Tom.
1. Hexameri. Hom. 4. sub fin.
to spend the Night in Prayers, Confessions and Psalms; one beginning, and the
rest following. And that the noise of those that joined in the Prayers, was
like that of the Waves breaking against the Shore.

With him we have S. Ambrose agreeing (that lived much about the same time) who
says, It is In 1 Cor. 14. v. Nam siora. ero.
evident that the Mind is ignorant, where the Tongue is not understood; as some
Latins that are wont to sing in Greek, being delighted with the sound of the
Words, without understanding what they say. And again, the unskilful hearing
what he Ibid. Quis supplet locum.
does not understand, knows not the conclusion of the Prayer, and does not
answer Amen, that is, it is true, that the Blessing may be confirmed. For by
those is the confirmation of the Prayer fulfilled, that do answer Amen, etc.
And he does show Ibid. Si a. omnes prophetant.
what an honor is given to God, what a reverence is derived upon our Religion,
and how far it excells the Pagan, that he that hears understands, and that
nothing is in the dark.

Tom. 3. Comm. l. 7. in Lu^. 15. p. 169. Par. 1614.
And he says, This is a symphony, when there is in the Church a concord of
diverse Ages and Virtues: that the Psalm is answered, and Amen said, etc.

Toward the latter end of the same Century lived S. Chrysostom, who says,
That the people In 2 Cor. c. 8. Homil. 18. (...).
are much concerned in the Prayers, that they are common to them and the Priest;
that in the Sacrament, as the Priest prays for the people, so the people for
the Priest. And that those Words and with thy Spirit, signify nothing else --
And what wonder is it, That in the Prayers the people do talk with the Priest?

In 1 Cor. 14. Hom. 35.
And elsewhere he says, That the Apostle shows that the people receive no
little damage, when they cannot say Amen.

L. 2. c. 16. Sect. idem etiam. v. Chrysostom. Tom. 4. Par. 1621.
To conclude, Bellarmin says, That in the Liturgy which bears this Fathers
name, the parts sung by the Priest, Deacon and People, are most plainly
distinguished.

Tom. 1. Epitap. Paulae ad Eusto^hium. E^ist. Paulae ad Marceilam.
To him let us add S. Jerome his cotemporary, who declares that at the Funeral
of Paula in Jerusalem, the multitude did attend, and sung their Psalms in
Hebrew, Greek, Latin and Syriack, according to the Nations they were of. And we
are further told, That at Bethlem there resorted Gauls, Britains, Armenians,
Indians, etc. and there were almost as many Choirs of Singers as of Countries;
of a different Tongue, but of one and the same Religion.

Tom. 10. prooem. 2. ad Galat.
And the same Father tells us, That at Rome the people sounded forth Amen, like
to the noise of Thunder.

Next let us consult S. Augustine, of the same time, who says, That no body is
edified by what he does not understand. And, That the Tom. 3. in Genes. l. 12.
c. 8. Lib. de Magis^ro c. 1, and 7. De Catechis. rud. c. 9.
reason why the Priest lifts up his Voice in the Church when he prays, is not
that God, but the people may hear and understand, and join with him. And that
whereas the Bishops and Ministers of the Church were sometimes guilty of using
barbarous and absurd Words that they should correct it that the people may most
plainly understand, and say Amen.

In Psalm. 18.
And elsewhere (as has been quoted before) exhorts that they be not as Parrots
and Pies that say they know not what.

C. 16. Sect. sed neque.
Thus far our Authorities do proceed with little interruption. For Bellarmin
does grant, That not only in the times of the Apostles, all the people were
wont to answer in Divine Offices; but that the same was a long time after
observed both in the Eastern and Western Church, as is evident from S.
Chrysostom, S. Jerome, etc.

Now having derived the Title thus far for above 400 years, we need not be much
solicitous for what was introduced afterward; but yet for a farther
confirmation, I shall add some Testimonies of a later date. Such is that known
Edict of the Emperor Justinian (who dyed Anno 565.) in Novel. 123. See this
vindicated in Bishop Jewels reply to Harding's answ. p. 128.
which it is thus enacted, We command all Bishops and Priests to celebrate the
holy Oblation, and the Prayers in sacred Baptism, not in a low, but such a
Voice, as may be heard by the people; that thereby their Hearts may be raised
up with greater Devotion, and Honor be given to God; for so the Holy Apostle
teaches, in the first to the Corinthians, For if thou only bless with the
Spirit, etc.

To this I shall add that of Isidore Hispalensis, that De Eccles. off. l. 1. c.
10.
lived in the end of the fifth Century, who says, That it behooves that when it
is sung in the Church, that all do sing; and when Prayers are offered, that all
do pray; and when there is reading, that all do read, and silence being made,
that all hear.

This is also agreeable to the former Opinion of the Church of Rome it self;
and for proof of which, what can we desire more than the Declarations of Popes
and Councils? and this we have. For we Aentas Sylvius Hist. Bohem. l. 1. c. 13.
Anno 860.
read of a permission given by the Pope to the Moravians, at the instance of
Cyril (who had converted them and other Nations of the Sclavonians) to have
Divine Service in their own Tongue; and that he and the Conclave were induced
to it (when not a few did oppose it) by a Voice from Heaven, that said, Let
every Spirit praise the Lord, and every Tongue confess to him, as Aeneas
Sylvius, afterward Pope, relates.

Council. Tom. 24. Epist. 2. 7. Paris, 1644.
And Pope John the VIII. (not long after, in Anno 880.) writes thus to Sfento
opulcer, a Prince of the Sclavonians, We command that the Praises and Works of
our Lord Christ, be declared in the same [Sclavonian] Tongue. For we are
admonished by sacred Writ, to praise the Lord, not only in three, but in all
Tongues, saying, Praise the Lord all ye Nations, praise him all the people. And
the Apostles filled with the Holy Ghost, spoke in all Tongues. And S. Paul
admonishes Let every Tongue confess; and in the first to the Corinthians, he
does sufficiently and plainly admonish us, that in speaking we should edify
the Church of God. Neither does it hinder the Faith or Doctrine, to have the
Mass sung, or the Gospel and Lessons well translated, read, or other divine
Offices sung in the same Sclavonian Tongue; because he who made the three
principal Tongues, viz. Hebrew, Greek and Latin, made all to his praise, etc.

Can. 9.
And conformable to this is the Decree of the Council of Lateran under Innocent
III. Anno 1215. that because in many parts, within the same City and Diocese,
there are many people of different manners and Rites mixed together, but of one
Faith, We therefore command that the Bishops of such Cities or Diocesses
provide fit Men who shall celebrate Divine Offices, according to the diversity
of Tongues and Rites, and administer the Sacraments.

Vid. Cassandei Liturg. c. 36.
This may be further confirmed by the very* Offices of the Church of Rome; but
this is sufficient to show that the Church of Rome has departed from
Scripture, Antiquity, and it self, when it does require that Divine Service be
performed in a Tongue unknown to the people: and that it was never the opinion
of the Fathers, nor any Church, nor even of the Church of Rome, that it is most
expedient to have it so performed. So little was it then thought Epist. Cleri
Gall. collect. p. 63. Epist. P. Alex. 7. in Collect. p. 69. Hosius, p. 64.
that religious things the less they are understood, the more they would be
admired; and that to preserve a reverence for them, and the people from
dangerous errors, it is requisite to keep them from being understood. So little
was it pleaded, that there are any Tongues sacred in themselves; and Bellarm.
Sect. Septimo. P. Sanct. c. 17. n. 3. E. W. Truth will out, p. 45, 47.
that as the three upon the Cross of Christ, are to be preferred before others,
and to exclude the rest; so the Latin as next to the head of Christ, is the
most venerable of the three. So little was it then thought that there is a
certain kind of Divinity in Latin, and Boterus, c. 22. Portraiture, c. 14. p.
224. Bellarm. l 1. de missa, c. 11. Sanders orat. p. 72.
something more of Majesty, and fitter to stir up Devotion than in other
Tongues. So little were they afraid, that Latin would be lost, if the Service
were not kept in it; or however, so little evident is it, that they valued the
preservation of that Tongue above the Edification of the Church.

Lastly, So little did they think of the expedience of having the Service in
one common Tongue, as Latin, Rhem. Annot. p. 461.
That Christians wherever they travel, may find the self same Service, and
Priests may officiate in it as at home. As if for the sake of the few that
travel, the many that stay at home should be left destitute, and for one Man's
convenience, 10000. be exposed to eternal perdition. These are Arguments coined
on purpose to defend the Cause, and so are peculiar to the Church that needs
them.

II. Let us consider, Whether from the time of its having been a Rite, it has
been the Rite of every Church.

Cassander. Liturgy. c. 11, 13, 15.
To this I shall only produce their own Confessions, for it is acknowledged
that the Armenians, Egyptians, Habassines, Muscovites and Sclavonians,
Ledesma, c. 33. n. 5. Bellarm. c. 16. Sect. obj. ult. Salme on. in 1 Cor. 16.
Sect. septimo.
have their Service in a Tongue known to the people. And their giving them the
hard Names of Heretics, Schismatics and Barbarous, will not save the Council
from being fallible, when it says, It is the rite of every Church.

But were there no such Churches in the World, that herein practiced contrary
to the Church of Rome, yet it would no more justify her, than it can make that
good which is evil, that expedient which is mischievous to the Church of God,
or reconcile one part of the Council to the other, that when it has declared,
The Mass contains great instruction for the people, yet adds, That it is
expedient and an approved Rite, that it be not celebrated in the Vulgar Tongue.

But say they, this is granted, If there were no interpretation, but that is
provided for by the Council, for it is ordered, That lest Christ's sheep should
hunger, all that have the care of Souls shall frequently expound, etc. And that
we are now to consider.

SECT. IV.
Whether the Provision made by the Council of Trent, for having some part of
the Mass expounded, be sufficient to countervail the mischief of having the
whole celebrated in a Tongue not understood of the people, and to excuse the
Church of Rome, in the injunction of it?
S. C. Answ. to D. Piece, ^. 175. Sanders orat. p. 63.
This is the last refuge they betake themselves to; confessing that without an
Interpretation S. Paul is against them, but with this, they plead, he is for
them.

But what shall we then think of the case in their Church at a time, when as
the people could not understand, so the Priests could not interpret, and wanted
both the gift, and had not acquired so much as the art of it? What shall we
think of their case, and their Church, that has neither provided nor does use
such an Interpretation as the Apostle speaks of, but what differs as much from
it in respect of the light it gives to the people, as both that and the Tongue
they use, do in the way by which they are obtained? If it were a translation,
what a ludicrous thing would it be for a Church in its constant Service to
take, suppose, the Lord's Prayer in pieces, and first pronounce it in Latin,
and then Extract. ex regist. Facult. P^r. an. 1525. Collectio* p. 8. Censurae,
An. 1655* p. 18. Procez. contr. Voisin An. 1660. p. 55. etc. Epist. Cleri An.
1660. p. 62.
in English? But as they do not permit their Offices, not the Horae B. Virginis,
Breviary, or Mass Book to be translated into a Vulgar Tongue: So the verbal
translation of it, during the celebration of Mass, was never thought of by the
Council, but was thereby condemned, as the cause and seedplot of many errors;
as we are informed in a Letter, wrote upon the occasion of Voisin's
translation, by the whole Clergy of France, to Pope Alexander the Seventh.

And whatsoever the Exposition did refer to (let Orat. etc. p. 63.
it be what it will) yet it was not to the devotional Part, as Sanders declares;
who (after he had pleaded that an Unknown Tongue with interpretation, was the
perfect fulfilling of S. Paul's advice) perceiving a difficulty behind, throws
all off with this, If the Interpretation of Prayers be laid aside for a season,
it is however not to be thought, that it is to be omitted for ever, etc. So
that at most, no more was intended than a short exposition of some doctrinal
Point or Ceremony (which might as well be called an Exposition of the Breviary,
or any other Book, containing much the same things, as the Missal) And it is
probable that so much as this also was never intended, which if ever, is very
rarely practiced amongst them. Insomuch as Ledesma Cap. 15. Sect. Decret. Con.
Trid. n. 2.
says, That the sense of the Council was, That the people should be instructed
only by Sermons, Indeed they would rather have this go for an Argument, than
dispute it. They do as the Irish by their Bogs, run over it lightly, for fear
if they tread too hard, it will S. C. Answ. p. 176.
not support their cause but stifle it. And therefore they wheel off again, and
then tell us, That it being a known set Form, in one set Language, those that
are ignorant of it at first, need not continue so, but by due attention and
diligence may arrive to a sufficient knowledge. As if the poor people are
inexcusable, if they do not arrive to a sufficient knowledge of the Tongue
(which must be learned before the things) without other helps than their own
attention and diligence; when the Priests and others are trained up to the
knowledge and understanding of Latin by Rules, Masters, and frequent exercise.
Surely they had the Mass in Latin, when the Learned themselves Elegant. Praef.
did not understand it, as Valla says. They had the Mass in Latin, when the
greatest part of the people did not understand it, as Faber relates. They had
In 1 Cor 14. Cassand. Liturg. c. 36. Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. 6. Annot. 263.
the Mass in Latin, when not only the people but the Priest and Deacons, rarely
understood what they prayed, for as Billet, etc. confess. And where was then
their attention and diligence, that to their lives end, either daily rehearsed
it, or often heard it, and yet never understood it? And is it not so still,
when notwithstanding all the noise of Exposition, Manuals and Primers, etc. for
the use of S. C. p. 176.
the Vulgar, yet (setting aside some little Forms, and the Ceremonies of it)
they are so ignorant of the Contents of the Missal or Mass Book, that as to the
matter of it, they know it not from the Breviary; nor would know it from the
Alcoran, if read in the same Tongue, alike pronounced, and the same falls and
postures were used in the reading of it? So that what more plain than the means
they have provided is not sufficient for to instruct and edify the people; and
that after all, they do hold this instruction unnecessary, and that the people
are safe without it? And this is the case, for it is generally resolved by
their Casuists, both for Priest and People, that they do their duty and merit,
when they say their Prayers, Salmeron. in 1 Cor. 16. Disp. 3.
though they do not understand; so Eckius, so Salmeron, etc. And if it were
otherwise, very few would do their duty, when so very few do at Instruct.
Sacerd. c. 13. n. 5, and 6.
all understand what they say, as Cardinal Tolet does determine. So indulgent
are they; and very reasonable is it that they should be so, that when they have
put out the peoples Eyes, they should take good care to make the way broad and
smooth for them.

But in good earnest, can we think this way as safe as it is broad, and that
there is no Ditch into which both Priest and People, if alike blind, may fall
and perish? And if there be, must not the case of that people be very
lamentable that are wholly left to the ability and sincerity of their Priest?
who if he wants the former, may, through ignorance, turn the most solemn part
of their Service, as it happens, into Nonsense or Blasphemy. And if he wants
the latter may use a Spell for Prayer, and the ancient charm D. Stillingfleet
Answ. to T. G. c. 3. Sect. 3.
of Abracadabra for Ave Maria (as a learned person has observed). Nay instead
of baptizing in the sacred Name of the Father, etc. he may do by the person, as
a Jew under the profession of a Priest, is said to have done by a certain
Prince in the last Age, and baptize him in the horrid name of the Devil. There
is then nothing so absurd or wicked, which, according to the case, may not be
practiced. And neither Prayers be Prayers, nor Sacraments Sacraments, nor
persons Christians, as long as the Priest does alone know, or neither Priest
nor People understand.

But supposing that there be no defect in either of these, and that the whole
Service is faithfully and understandingly performed; yet if the Tongue in which
it is performed be not understood of the people, there can be no understanding
of the sense contained in it; and where the sense and matter is not understood,
there cannot be (as I have showed) those dispositions of Soul, that attention
of Mind, that Faith which gives the Amen to our Prayers, etc. and which renders
the Service acceptable to God and beneficial to our selves; and consequently a
service so contrived, as shall defeat those ends, is one of the greatest
mischiefs that can befall a Church, and must render the Romish Church
inexcusable in the injunction of it, and justify those that have reformed it.

SECT. V.
We are come to enquire, Whether upon the whole, the Service of God ought not
to be celebrated in a Tongne vulgarly understood?
The Church of Rome does anathematize, and doom to Hell, those that hold a
Vulgar Tongue necessary in Divine Service; and does both absolutely forbid
their own Missal to be so translated, and persecute those that have so used it.
And yet they B llarm. c. 16. sub fin. T. G against D. Stilingfleet, Sect 8. n.
3. p. 28. Ledesma, c. 33. n. 1.
cannot, dare not say it is unlawful in it self. For it is better to have it in
the Vulgar than not at all; says one. It is matter of Discipline, says a
second. It has been granted in some cases, is acknowledged Cassander. de off.
pii viri, p. 865.
by others. And it is most expedient to have it in the Vulgar, says a fourth.
And if so, why this diligent care to prevent and suppress it? Why this outcry
against it? Why this Severity? What need of such Decrees and Anathemas of
Councils? What need such Commands of the Popes for Princes to oppose it with
all their force (as that of Gregory VII. to Vratislaus of Bohemia) what reason
is there for a general Convention of the Clergy of a Kingdom to proceed against
a translation of their Missal? When if we consult the ends for which the
public Service was instituted, if we consult the reason of the thing; if we
consult Scripture, or Fathers, or the practice of the Church for about seven
hundred Years together, we shall find that it is not only expedient, but
necessary to have it in a Tongue understood of the people, and that the Church
of Rome that is so forward in its Anathema, is under a precedent, and greater
one, even that of the Apostle, Whosoever shall preach any other Gospel, let him
be Anathema. So that which is most to be respected, the Anathema of Heaven, or
that of the Council; the command of God, or a Decree of a Pope; the Church of
God in its best times, or the particular Church of Rome in latter Ages; whether
the edification of the Church of God, or the will and interest of a corrupted
Church, is not difficult to conceive. And therefore we may end as we Art. 24.
began, with the Church of England. It is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word
of God, and the custom of the Primitive Church, to have public Prayers in the
Church, or to minister the Sacraments in a Tongue not understood of the people.

FINIS.

