The Kingdom of God in Power. A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir
JOHN SHORTER, Knight, Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of LONDON; AT GROCERS-HALL,
November the 20th, 1687.

By Daniel Williams Minister of the Gospel.

Published by his Lordships Command.

LONDON: Printed for J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultry. 1688.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN SHORTER, Knight, Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of
LONDON.
My LORD,
WHen your Lordship desired me to Preach before you, the improvement of it to
the greatest usefulness was my concern. To this end it was needful to fix on
Subjects suitable to an Auditery so promiscuous; none occurred to me so
conducive to my purpose as this, which led me to deal with all men in things
most important to their Eternal Condition; and yet to mind your Lordship and
Brethren of somewhat referring to your present Office.

The second Subject I Preached on, was pursuant to this, viz. The Dedication of
our Lives to Christ and his Interests, from Phil. 1. 21.

After I had Preached the Second time, I was surprised with a Request of your
Lordships and some of the Aldermen to Publish both these Discourses; but there
wanted not many Reasons, which prevented any design of Compliance with that
desire, tho enforced by your undeserved respects to one so much a Stranger.

But finding some few days past, that after all my care to obviate any such
snrmises; some passages in that Second Sermon are misrepresented, as irritating
of the Church of England: I am inclined to Publish very soon that Second
Discourse, if I may prevent or remove any such offenses, which are now at least
more fatal than any Imprudent Propagators thereof do apprehend.

Being thus disposed to publish the last, I am obedient to your Lordships
repeated entreaties in sending out the First Sermon in its order.

Tho two days being all the time I had to prepare either of these Discourses,
and absence from my Library limiting me to the use of no Book besides the
Bible, are my just Apology for some defects in them; yet I must say, that I
have delivered nothing but what I believe to be the Will of God; and had my
helps or abilities been more considerable, I would not debase matters of so
great concernment, by vain Sallies of Wit; nor deaden their common use by
laborious Periods, or a lighter Style. The Institutions of God have their
proper decency, and are best managed by a tendency to Spiritual Ends, and
general Edification.

The substance of the Account of the nature of the Kingdom of God, I give in
Scripture-words, tho chiefly for greater Conviction; yet also that none may
arraign it as Cant, without ridiculing the Divine Oracles, which surely must
command dread in all who esteem themselves by a Christian Name.

I believe, Your Lordship in calling us Nonconformists to preach before you,
and we in undertaking that Labor, can have no Turn to serve, besides the
enlargement of Christ's Kingdom; and the revival of the Power of Godliness, so
much degenerated into Formality among all Parties. We value Capacious Places no
otherwise, than as an opportunity for this: and now we enjoy such, we desire no
attempts for more Splendid ones, to the offense of any.

Perhaps Your Lordship may share in our wonder at the silly Descants of some on
our Persons and Performances in this Liberty: We must needs be Tradesmen,
because we have preached so long without Public Sallary. Our Sermons are Cant,
because we use Scripture-Expressions, though in their proper sense: They are
Enthusiastic, if we say any thing of Heart-work, or the Spirit's influence; We
do nothing but whine, and make faces, if we appear in the least moved by what
we say and believe, or seem concerned to prevail with our Hearers. We do ill to
preach now, we do not suffer by it: though they know we thought it our Duty,
when we paid so dear for it. Or at best, that Contingent Events should
supersede our Labors, as a prudential Act: when we are under a solemn
dedication to the Work of Christ, as Ministers; and our Labors to bring the
Souls of men under the power of Truth, will prove the best security to the
Professors of it; when great Offers, and awakening Fears will trample on the
clearest Notions of an Unregenerate Heart. But I enlarge too far.

Your Lordship's acting the part of a Christian Magistrate, is recompense for
whatever Censures you undergo: the World is not yet of the temper, to speak
well of all that do well: and Christ exempts not the Vsefullest from hardships,
on this lower stage. Peace of Conscience in having performed our Duty, and the
Testimony of Christ to our Faithfulness in the Great Judgment, is all the
Comfort a Christian can now be sure of, and what he ought to be contented with.

There are many Prayers sent to the Throne of Grace for Your Lordship; That you
may want neither Wisdom nor Steddiness in a Place so Eminent, and Circumstances
so perplexing. That Promise (which has somewhat of a Rule in it) is applicable
to you, Prove. 11. 3.
The Integrity of the Upright shall guide them.

That you may find this accomplished to Public Conviction, and a Comfortable
Event of your Present Employ, is the unfeigned Desire of

Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Daniel Williams.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, etc.
1 COR. IV. 20. For the Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power.
THE Apostle in the latter part of this Chapter, does more than hint at some
Attempts against the credit of his Person and Ministry; the Men he points at as
guilty of this design, did not only wear a Christian Name, but pretended to a
more than common Zeal and Light, while they imputed to the Apostle some
contemptible plainness and remisness.

He not only vindicates himself, but threatens an Enquiry into these plausible
pretenses of theirs; resolving on that Enquiry, to determine, whether that
extraordinary Profession was expressive of the power of Godliness, or only a
dead Image; and whether the improved Doctrines they boasted of, were the great
essential T^uths of the Gospel, and those delivered in a manner conducive to
the advancement of Gods Kingdom. This is the sense of v. 19.

My Text is a Reason of that designed Enquiry; and the force of it, as a
Reason, lay in these Implications.

All this noise may be without any Substance; the Power of Religion lies in
somewhat above these pretenses; the Kingdom of God, which is the only valuable
Concern, consists not in Externals, but in the Power of Religion: and it is most
suspicious, that these censorious Pretenders (who obstruct my Ministry) are
little sharers in, or Friends to the Kingdom of God, after all this fair show
in the Flesh.

On these accounts, the Apostle's search in order to a Judgment of these men's
Profession and Doctrines, was justifiable and necessary. And his Practice, with
the Reason of it, calls all Christians, tho not to busy or uncharitable
Surmises; yet to a prudent Examination of Men, that deal with them in the
concernments of their Souls. And more especially, if they challenge the Graces
and Truths we have received, and pretend to outdo and blast the Labors of such
we have profited by, as if none but they could be Instruments of conferring
Grace, or investing us in the privileges of the Church.

This Examination is frequently enjoined, 1 John 4. 1. 1 These. 5. 21. God has
given us a Rule to judge of Men and Doctrines by; and some degree of Abilities
to judge of them by that Rule.

It is true, Paul as an inspired Person, had an extraordinary Spirit of
discerning, which ordinary Christians cannot pretend to. Nevertheless, God has
appointed private Christians to try all Doctrines by the Scriptures, Acts 17.
11. and directed our Judgment of men by their Fruits, Matt. 7. 16, 20. As men,
we are not utterly incapable to compare and judge of these; as Believers, there
is an additional fitness for it by the Life, and anointing they have received.
This spiritual Life is not so void of Sensation, Job 12. 11.
but that the Ears can try Words; and God's promise is a security, that the
Anointing shall prevent their finally erring in fundamental Truths, 1 John 2.
27.

These things must excuse any Christian from blindly giving up his Faith, or
Hope, to such who can most daringly pretend to Dominion over them. He ought to
plead a Judgment of Discretion as his right, in what concerns his own Faith and
Practice. And tho some (whose designs be thereby justly suspected) decry this
private Judgment; let not us be discouraged from the use of it. For it is a
more public Judgment, if true, than the mistaken Sense of a whole Council.
It Is what distinguishes us from Bruits, in our deliberate Acts. Yea, they that
condemn it, are forced to use this private Judgment in the choice of their
Church and Guides.

But I shall wave any further regard to the Connection of the Text, with the
rest of the Chapter, and improve it as a Rule, to judge our own State by, under
this plain Position,

Doct. The Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power.

With what concern ought we to attend to a Truth, which is designed to
discriminate the very Professors of Christianity? And which implies, that many
such Professors are deceived in their chief concernments in Religion; as being
content without that Power, wherein the Kingdom of God consists? Yet what is
more usual with fallen Man, than to debase Religion to what his own Lusts and
Fancy will prescribe? He is scarce perswadeable, that God will exact more from
him, than a carnal, idle spirit is disposed to allow. We are content, that some
external Homage be paid to the Almighty; and that some slight attempts and
seize be intended; but we confine our religious endeavors within those
limits; not regarding that real godliness consists chiefly in such dispositions
and acts, as express the supreme interest of God in the Soul; and the effectual
energy of his Grace and Power in a renewed mind.

The Text tends to awaken deep convictions in you, That God has not admitted
vain man into the Consult about the Nature or Standard of his Kingdom; nor will
he model the Statutes of it according to a Sinner's Judgment and Hopes; but
whether they will be his Subjects, or continue their Rebellion, his Kingdom
truly is, and will shortly appear to be, not in Word but in Power.

I shall give you, 1. Some account of what is intended by the Kingdom of God.

2. I shall under the same Heads explain, how it is not in Word but in Power:
and evidence the truth of the Doctrine.

I begin with some account of the Kingdom of God. This has various
acceptations in Scripture, and denotes several things, more than is designed by
this Kingdom in my Text: as

1. Gods Providential Government over all things.

This is that Kingdom which rules over all. Psalm. 103. 19.
He has not so left the Creatures to their own Conduct, but that he secureth
his blessed ends by his management of them. This is that Dominion, to be
subject to which, no man's consent is asked: to which all are obedient against
their repugnant inclinations, and deepest contrivance. Sinners in their utmost
neglects of the revealed will of God, yea in their most notorious violations of
them, are subject to this Providence, and serve its purposes. Surely the wrath
of man shall praise thee, Psalm. 76. 10.
and the remainder thereof thou shall restrain. By this Kingdom's influence it
is, that blessed Effects do often proceed from dismal Causes; and what seems very
destructive, does contribute to the best event. We may well say of this
Kingdom, it is in Power; it being the irresistible execution of what the Divine
Will has decreed; yea is the effective will of the Supreme Disposer of all
things.

2. The glorious State, Rewards and Privileges of God's Subjects in the
highest Heavens: That Is the Kingdom of glory, and completes the things begun in
this Kingdom of Grace. There God rules, and is obeyed in a manner
incomprehensible to us. We shall be Subjects, and yet Kings, Rev. 1. 6. Rev. 1.
6.
We must always pay our homage, but in Princely Robes. Bodies and Souls will
bear an amazing resemblance of Christ our Head. Phil. 3. 21.
And tho the Divine Essence, 1 John 32.
whose glory all the Mediatoral Contrivances of Christ's Kingdom referred to, 1
Cor. 15. 28.
will be all in all, yet we shall behold in the Humane Nature of Christ, as
great manifestations of God, as Men or Angels were capable of; the divine glory
shines in the face of Christ above all other things; and he seems designed
to be a Mediator of fruition, for the improvement of the Glory of Angels, as
well as the other glorified Subjects of that Kingdom: The Glory of God does
lighten that Heavenly City, and the Lamb is the light thereof. By all our
present improvements we labor for, Rev. 21. 23.
and hasten to that Kingdom; and therein terminate all the blessed methods we
are under in this our lower state.

But the Kingdom of God which my Text refers to, is the Moral Government of God
among men on Earth, especially as he is King Redeemer, in and by the Lord Jesus.

There be three things belonging to this Kingdom, which are severally called by
this same term, the Kingdom of God, and each of them may well be intended by
the Holy Ghost in my Text.

I. The Gospel, which contains the Laws, Institutions, and Charter of this
Kingdom.

II. The Graces and Actings which qualify men as Subjects of this Kingdom; and
express God's Authority over them, and their Loyalty to Him.

III. All true Believers, who are the real Subjects that make up this Kingdom.

I might insist on some other things, but these will be of greatest use to us,
and are principally intended.



So it is taken, Mat. 21. 43.
Mat. 21. 43. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you: that is the Gospel.
But when I use the word Gospel, I do not mean the Gospel, in opposition to the
Mosaical dispensation, as it is often used. The Gospel Administration in this
sense is often called in the Evangelists, the Kingdom of Heaven, as being a
fairer, more full, and powerful Edition of the Institutes of this Kingdom, than
was published before; tho yet the Kingdom commenced, and had its essential Laws
and Rules long before Christ's coming. But I mean the Gospel as a Law of Grace;
in opposition to the Law of Works delivered to man in his Innocent State.

To direct your conceptions in this important Truth. You must consider, 1. That
God had, and exercised a Supreme Authority over men, as he was their Creator.
He enacted Laws for our observance, well becoming his Nature to injoin and our
Condition to obey. For some time we continued Loyal in Adam, our common Head:
but by his fall, Mankind became rebellious against God; and by the Penal
Sanction of the law of Works, and the Rule fixed for man's propagating his
Condition with his Nature, we lost our original power to obey; and forfeited
our right to all that Good which was promised to perfect obedience; Yea, are
exposed to the utmost misery in that Curse denounced against the least sin.
Gal. 3. 10.
This is the condition of all men as related to God as our Creator; though he
has lost nothing of his right to command, or punish his Rebellious Creatures.

How justly might our injured Lord have confined our state to these methods?
Who might complain? if God had finally executed that judgment which past on all
men unto condemnation. Romans 5. 16, 18.
The irremediable state of Devils on their Rebellion, may awaken Mankind, to
ascribe all new overtures for happiness to the riches of the Grace of God. Yea,
every part of that Curse which exerts its self by any degree of misery in Soul
or Body, should convince us, that it is of mere mercy we are not bound in chains
to the judgment of the great day.

2. Immediately after the fall, God erected a new Kingdom in and by Christ as
Redeemer. In the Curse denounced against the Serpent, he opened a door of Grace
to sinful Man. He treats with us in order to our recovery, and resolved
eventually to save the Elect: yet this was to be in no other way, but by
becoming subject to the Rules of this new Kingdom. This Kingdom is owing to
Christ as the procuring Cause; and the management thereof was deputed to him.
He managed it in a variety of successive administration; as Lawgiver he enacted
Terms of life, Rules of practice, Directions for Worship and Discipline among
his Subjects. He published blessed Promises, and denounced Threats against the
unperswadeable.

No man was ever saved but by the Rules of this New Kingdom, and owes it to the
Grace and Merits of Christ: though every dispensation did not give equal
notices of Him, or that explicit knowledge of God-man Redeemer;
notwithstanding that Sacrifices pointed to Him, and sundry Prophetic
Revelations foretold Him.

3. All Mankind are under all the Laws of this Kingdom, as far as they can
attain to the knowledge of them.

They are obliged to obey the terms of Life, which are injoined by the Redeemer
in their respective Age, and Place. Life is offered to them, and they are
saveable on those terms. Sinners now act a new Rebellion, as well as bind the
first Curse on themselves, when they refuse obedience to the Remedial Law. Yea,
they aggravate their ruin by their wilful obstinacy, which is a great part of
the undoing-impotency of Mankind. Awful is that complaint of Christ, wherein he
leaves the blood of lost man on their own heads; John 5. 40.
Ye will not come to me, that ye may have life. Refusers of Christ add to their
Rebellion against the Creator, most notorious disloyalty against the Redeemer,
who has an additional claim to dominion over us. 1 Cor. 6. 10.
For, We are bought with a price, and therefore should glorify him with our
bodies, and our souls, which are his: And he had a respect to this new acquired
Authority in his death; Romans 14. 9.
for, to this end he died, and rose again, that he might be Lord both of the
dead, and of the living.

All of us are further engaged to observe all the Laws of his House, the Rules
of Worship and Practice, yea, every Institution of his. There is an amazing
Sovereignty in the different promulgation of these to the World: but to give my
sense thereof, would exceed the limits of one Discourse.

to him. Thus you must understand that Scripture; The Kingdom of God is not in
meat, Romans 14. 17.
and drink; but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. q. d.
The dominoin of God over Christians, and their loyal state of obedience to God;
lies not in your poor differences about meat, or such low matters. Therefore
judge not others, who may differ from you; nor be you satisfied with your own
usages in these less momentous things, as an evidence of your Christian state:
God's Kingdom is in far higher matters, even in righteousness, peace, and joy
in the Holy Ghost. How can any man after so plain a signification of the Divine
Will, place all his Religion in trifles; or sacrifice the undoubted
Concernments of God's Kingdom, to disputable things of far less moment? Peace
alone, by this Text, is more valuable, than all the things for which some have
long divided the Church. This is the Kingdom of God as erected in the heart,
and is inclusive of whatever denotes sincere subjection to Christ. To this
belongs every Grace which is essential to a real Christian, and all those acts
which are necessary to express the prevalency of such Graces over all opposite
Vices and Defects.

This Kingdom is advanced to the degrees of men's improvement in the Divine
Life, and the Dominion of God over their Designs and Actings.

III. The Kingdom of God is used for all true Believers; Col. 1. 13.
They are all translated into the Kingdom of Christ. By their consent to the
terms of the Gospel, they who were Aliens, are Naturalized; and the Outlawry is
reversed, which stood against them as Rebellious Subjects. This Kingdom is of
the same extent with the Church Mystical; and as these Subjects multiply, it is
enlarged.

It Is true, that all who credibly profess subjection to Christ, are Parts of
this Kingdom, as it is visible and external: they are Subjects in the judgment
of Charity, and as to external Privileges. This Christ asserts in that Parable;
Mat. 13. 47, 48.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Net cast into the Sea, and gathered of
every kind, which when it was full, they drew to shore; and gathered the good
into Vessels, bnt cast the bad away. You see that Hypocrites and Sincere
Believers are of the Kingdom: but Hypocrites belong to it, as they wear the
visage of the Sincere; and therefore the name of Subjects belongs to them only
equivocally. Whereas in the most proper sense, it is confined to men heartily
devoted to Christ. He is eminently King of Saints; Rev. 15. 3.
even of such who have unfeignedly subscribed his Covenant, Psalm. 50. 5. All
such are esteemed by him for his People, and they, yea only they can say
concerning God, Isa. 33. 22.
The Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.

I can hardly forbear to bewail the dangerous condition of many men professing
Christianity. Crowds will be found Rebels in heart, dead as to a Spiritual
Life, whilst they have a name to live: Rev. 3. 2.
and obeying their Lusts, when they bow the Knee to Jesus.

Having finished this Account of the Kingdom of God; I proceed to explain how
it is not in Word, but in Power. And with the Explication I will insert the
proof of the Doctrine, That the Kingdom of God in the three forementioned
Instances is not in Word, but in Power.

Whatever men's Conceits be of this Kingdom, it will be found to consist not in
Weak Appearances, but in effectual Realities. It attaineth the ends of the
Constitution, it is expressive of a Divine and Supernatural Virtue, and is not
a dead Image, and carnal Matter.

1. The Gospel of Christ our Redeemer is effectual by the Spirit, to recover
fallen Men, and to govern, and improve them unto eternal Life.

This is not an empty Sound, it consists not in low or weak Matters, but is
Life and Power. Every command is enstamped with the Authority of the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and is not the faint advice of poor Mortals. Men disobey them
at their utmost peril, Hebr. 12. 25. Life and Death is annexed to them by a
Sovereign, who is able, and resolved to execute his Royal Sanction. They have a
Virtue in them to dispose us to Obedience, and are holy, spiritual and perfect.

The Matters revealed by the Gospel are not vain Conceits, but glorious
Realities; they are beyond the Light of Nature to conceive; they shine in a
Light fit to illuminate the darkened minds of Sinners; and when they are
apprehended, they must inspire with the highest Resentments, and make lasting
Impressions on the Soul.

The Promises are not doubtful Words, but great and sure; they contain all
that is good, they are founded on the Veracity of God, who cannot lie; and on
the Virtue of Christ's Undertakings and Death, which cannot be disappointed.
Yea, they are mighty, to dispense the Grace contained therein to needy Souls;
and are the effectual Instrument to invest men in all the blessings of the
Covenant, when the Condition is performed by them.

The Sacraments, and all Institutions of Christ, as to Worship or Discipline,
are powerful to improve our Graces, mortify our Lusts, maintain our Converses
with God, and dispense Joy and Comfort, through the Operation of God by them.

The Arguments urged by the Gospel, are fit to move, and have all in them
necessary to an Instrument of moral Government.

The Presence of God is promised, and the Efficacy of all these means argue the
Spirit's operation by them; they are the Vehicle of the Holy Ghost, and
therefore when we are profitable to the Souls of Men, 1 These. 1. 5.
our Gospel comes to them not in Word only, but in Power, and in the Holy
Ghost.

This Gospel is called, The Arm of God revealed, the Scepter of his Kingdom,
and Rod of his Strength. This affords those Weapons which are mighty through
God to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
and bringing every thought to the obedience of Christ. God has appointed it
to raise dead Souls, and subdue rebellious Sinners to his Government. In the
Institutions of the Gospel God meets us, and blesses us; he communicates
Light and Strength, whereby the weak Christian is enabled to persevere.

What Trophies of its Power are in Heaven and Earth? How many great Sinners
has it changed? Every Age and Place where it comes, yield a Testimony of its
Energy; restraining some, turning others from Idols, to serve the Living God;
from a carnal Life, to a spiritual. This has made the Ambitious and Covetous
to Postpone all to the concerns of an invisible World, and sacrifice their
former Idols, to the Profession of Truth.

How many weak Christians has it strengthened to do, and suffer unexpected
things? What Joy has it infused into sadned Hearts? On these accounts, the
Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1. 16.
to every one that believes.

2. The Graces and Actings which qualify the Subjects of Christ, are so
spiritual, real and sublime, as to argue a Divine life, and the Dominion of God
in the Soul.

What this Kingdom requires and effects, are not bare Pretenses, weak
Attempts, slight Seize, or external Performances; these are too mean for
God to injoin or accept.

He does not paint a dead Carcass, but raise it to Life: he creates a new
Heart, wherein his Laws are prevalent Dispositions, and communicates a nature
too Divine to derive its birth from a lower Original than Regeneration by the
Spirit, John 3. 3.

Hence all real Christians are said to be born of God, 1 John 5. 4.
and partakers of the divine Nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Our crying Lord, Lord, and all external Alterations, signify little in this
new Man, Ephesians. 4. 24.
which after God is created in Wisdom, and true Holiness. I will hint at some
particulars which have the chief place in this Kingdom, and you will see that none
of them is in Word, but in Power.

Faith is not a faint assent to the Truths of the Gospel, but such a realizing
of invisible Objects, reliance on Christ, and consent to Him the Redeemer, as
purifieth the Heart, works by Love, and derives from Christ fit supports in
the way of truth and holiness to eternal Life.

Gospel Repentance is not a bare sorrow for Sin, but a true hatred, and
forsaking of Sin on Gospel-motives.

Our love to God is not in a few kind or sleighty thoughts of God, but a
prevalent esteem of God, and delight in him, as the supreme Good; and this
expressing it self in sincere Obedience to his strictest Laws, and Zeal for his
Interests when most despised. John 14. 23.
If a man love me, says Christ, he will keep my words: If we love any thing as
him, it is a hating of him by the Rules of this Kingdom.

The Worship which Christ insisteth on, and disposes all his Subjects for, is
in Spirit and in Truth; Joh. 4. 24.
it is no slight performance, nor by humane Inventions. Prayer must be a
fervent pouring out of the Soul to God, and not lip-labor: Psalm. 62. 8.
Hearing the Word is of no esteem with him, Isa. 29. 13.
unless the heart be obedient to the word, Jam. 1. 25.

Baptism is not the putting away the filth of the flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God. That is, Baptism lies in the
Souls true Correspondence to, and Performance of our Baptismal Profession and
Vows, and not a mere sprinkling of water in an external act of the Minister.

Receiving the Lords Supper is not the bare partaking of the Consecrated
Elements; but Communion with our Crucified Christ, by Faith and Love, under the
quicknings of the Spirit, Joh. 5. 53, 63. We see that God chiefly regards the
inward Worship of the Soul, and not bodily performances.

The same power extends to every thing, wherein Religion is concerned: if this
Kingdom of Grace obtains in the Soul, Gods Authority is set above our wills,
humors and lusts; Satan is dethroned, Sin has not Dominion over us, Romans 6.
6, 14. Spiritual things are relished above sensitive good: we are brought to
live to God, and not to carnal self: and there is an impartial respect to all
Gods Commandments, Psalm. 18. 22.

To finish this particular, this Kingdom consists of Holy Inclinations in the
Heart, and implies a degree of strength to act those Inclinations. Here are not
faint Velleities, and uneffectual Desires or Complaints; but a Spirit of Power,
2 Timothy 1. 7.
of Love, and a sound Mind; whereby Temptations are in a good measure resisted,
and Holy Actions performed.

This is the Model of the Kingdom, this his Gospel Injoineth, this his Grace
Effects, and any thing below it would not improve a Sinner to the Holiness
our Redeemer designed reconciled Sinners to. God's Kingdom never has place,
where any of these Essentials are wanting, or where there is only some dead
form of them.

3. Believers who are the Subjects of Gods Kingdom, are not mere Professors of
Christianity, but truly Regenerate and Practical Christians.

They are of another spirit than what they once were; or the rest of the World
continue yet to be; their extraction is higher, being born not of the will of
the flesh, John 1. 13.
or of the will of man, but of the will of God, They have far different
apprehensions of Spiritual objects than a carnal mind is capable of; these
practically know the great things of God in a Spiritual evidence, being taught
by him, Ephesians. 5. 4.
as the truth is in Jesus. They are a people made willing in the day of God's
power. Psalm. 110. 3.
Then a mighty Arm subdued their obstinacy without violence; silenced their
prejudices, and made them obedient by agreeable inclinations to the Law, and
powerful convictions of God's Authority and Goodness. Their Religion is not in
empty speculations. As every truth tends to practice, so they feel the power of
Truth. The objective Glory of Christ transformeth them into the same Glory, 2
Cor. 3. 18.
in their measure. They walk with God whom the world knows not; they live above
what Sinners dote on; to please and honor God is their governing-aim; To keep
a Conscience void of offense toward God and men, is their exercise; and
working out their Salvation, is their chief business; while as Pilgrims here,
they are waiting for the expected Inheritance: These live the life of Christ,
are acted by his Spirit which dwells in them by an abiding Relation, and are
appointed for his glorious purposes.

They are not Hypocritical pretenders, tho censured as Cheats by such men whose
Corruptions represent all better pretenses as Hypocrisy. How much do the
Conceptions, Designs, Experience, Seize and Actings of these men, exceed
the rest of mankind? There is more Piety in many of their common Actions, than
in the Religious Performances of others: these are they whom the Apostle
describes as a chosen generation, Mat. 2. 9.
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, fit and designed to
show forth the praises of him, who called them out of darkness into his
mavelous light.

Can any of you doubt these express Characters of all sincere Christians? Of
these, and only these Christ's Kingdom does consist. There are such persons in
the World, or God has no Kingdom in it. Such as are wholly otherwise in their
Temper and Actings, are Rebels and Aliens in Gods esteem; and declared
incapable of Eternal Glory.

Perhaps some of you may Profanely Scoff at this account, as if it were
impossible to be thus Sincere and Spiritual; or it were needless to be thus
Pious, Just, Temperate, or Heavenly-minded: but be it known to you, that you
will shortly be convinced, your selves ought to be such men; and passionately
wish all this could have been truly said of you.

I have designedly given the Character of the Subjects of this Kingdom in
Scripture-Expressions, lest any should esteem it a Fancy, which they owe not
that regard to, as to judge of themselves by it. But I hope you cannot shut
your eye against the Testimony of God; nor put any Gloss on those Scriptures
which can prevent your suspecting your own Condition. Must not you think now,
how few are Members of this Kingdom? How unlike am I to these Subjects of
Christ, when I never found any of these things, nor proposed them to my self as
things necessary to be attained by me? What a change must there be in my Heart
and Life, before such a wretch can be meet to be partaker of the Inheritance
with the Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12.
as every real Christian is?

It remains that I apply more particularly such things as you have heard of
the Nature and Power of this Kingdom.

1. What you have heard of the Gospel may direct us in our judgment of a Gospel
Ministry.

We Ministers are appointed by Christ to persuade Sinners both to yield
subjection to God Redeemer, and then to walk in all due Loyalty toward Him;
all our Administrations must be managed by those Laws which respect our Office,
otherwise we affront the Lord Jesus, in whose Name we act, and become useless
to Men, for whose good we are designed.

The matter of our Preaching ought to be the Gospel, Act. 28. 31.
even the Kingdom of God, and the things which concern our Lord Jesus Christ;
the manner ought to be such as most conduces to render it effectual to those
Ends for which it is published. Ministers are to do their utmost, that this
Gospel may come not in Word only, but in Power, and that all may be brought to
a compliance with it.

Therefore we ought not to make State Affairs, Act. 19. 8.
human Conceits or dictates of Men, the matter of our Preaching; the Rules of
the Covenant of Works, nor the Law of Nature as under a respect to that
Covenant, are not to be urged by us; tho the Law of Nature as a rule of our
Actions, is still of force in this Kingdom of God Redeemer, and so must be
insisted on.

The great things we ought to persuade, are the things God has made the terms
of Life to redeemed Man. The methods of Reconciliation must be intended; for
God now deals with Men not only as his rational Creatures, but as fallen
Sinners, under new Overtures for Life. Sinners must be directed by us to
Christ, as He on whose Shoulders this New Government is, and in whom there is
Grace, Strength and Pardon, which our Apostasy made impossible by the Law of
Works.

The great Doctrins of Regeneration, Repentance, Faith in Christ, love of God,
and sincere Obedience (as explained by the Gospel Standard,) are the things to
be urged as conditions of Salvation; should we mistake these Terms of Life, or
neglect to persuade your Compliance therewith, other things would be vain, and
leave you dead in your sins. What profit is it that you learn and do all things
else, if you submit not to the Terms of the Gospel? For this is the lowest Rule
of Gods judgment by which the salvation of any sinner is possible. Romans 2. 16.
He will judge the secrets of all men by the Gospel.

The manner also of a Ministers preaching of these Truths is considerable. We
should publish these in the greatest Evidence, and in a way most probable to be
attended with the influence of the Spirit. Much of that divine Power which
persuades you, is exerted in fitting the Preacher to plead with you. Ministers
of the Gospel are therefore to avoid the enticeing words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor.
2. 4.
and must preach in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power. We must
represent things in the greatest plainness; urge Gospel Arguments with the
fullest Evidence and Importunity, approving our selves to every man's Conscience
to the utmost, for their Conviction and Persuasion. It Is not invaluable to you
that the Minister in all his work is under the power of what he preaches, and
does all in a humble dependence on the blessing and power of the Holy Ghost.

This Ministry answers the Gospel description; this has a tendency and fitness
to subdue Souls to Christ; this is that the Lord Jesus (who ordinarily works
according to the aptitude of means) does usually bless. Such a Ministry is a
sign that God intends the enlargement of his Kingdom; and according to what
appears of it among us, we may expect proportionable Effects. The Lord bring
the vain Minds of Hearers to approve this sort of Preaching, and convince us
Ministers of all levity and mistakes in our Ministration.

2. What you have heard of the nature of Grace, and Loyal Actings toward
Christ, may sharply reprove all such who seem by Principle to place Religion in
any thing short of this Power. It Is needful they lock up the Scriptures (those
Royal Statutes of Christ) who dare place Christianity in external Rites, tho
the Heart and Life be unsanctified. Its Disloyalty to Christ to exchange his
Institutions for human Inventions. Col. 2. 18, 19, 23.
Yea, it is Disloyalty to exclude internal Worship for external, and define
Graces and spiritual Acts by no more than a dead Image of them. How must they
debase Religion who commend Pomp for spiritual Devotion, and make carnal
Observances serve instead of Gospel Faith and Love? Surely they little regard
the Authority and Constitutions of Christ, who account Attrition to be
Repentance, and represent Pilgrimages, Confession, Penance, and blind Obedience
to the Church, etc. too like an Atonement for the absence of the essential
Terms of Life. What can more expressly contradict Men's pleasing God by mere
external Acts or Profession, than my Text does? But alas! the Doctrine of Opus
operatum is too natural to a dead sinner, to be confined within the Walls where
first avowed. All are too apt to throw off Duties as a Penance, and think the
eternal Spirit is satisfied with bodily Homage. Many judge that Ordinances
edify them as a mere Charm, without any due exercise of Soul in them: A mistake
in this essential Point, is the reason also why many jear at the Graces of God,
promise Life to a just and civil demeanor, and scoff at Holiness as
Preciseness. The like Effects of a carnal Spirit is Men's esteeming Regeneration
to be no more than external Baptism, when that is but a visible Representation
of the nature of it, and a Seal and Instrument of investitute in Gospel
Blessing, on supposition that we are inwardly Regenerated. What a gross conceit
is it, that Conversion is but a turning from a gross Infidels State by a bare
external Profession of Christianity, tho the mind be still unrenewed, and the
Heart unimpressed by a divine Principle? From these Sentiments Men ridicule all
Pretenses to those things which the Scriptures expressly declare concerning
every Believer, as praying in the Spirit, Communion with God, Union to Christ,
Spiritual Joy, etc. tho the things are intelligible by any that are judicious,
and experienced by such as have any converse by Faith with God and spiritual
Things. It Is pity that a profane Spirit should arraign the Matters peculiar to
a Life so far above its self; especially when God has told us, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
A natural man cannot know the things of God, because they are spiritually
discerned. But whilst they must be foolishness to them, Luke 7. 35.
Wisdom will be justified by its Children, as better Advocates and fitter
Judges.

Nevertheless the Devil attains a destructive End by these Notions; for his
Dominion is supported, and poor sinners are secure in a State of Rebellion
against Christ, whiles they flatter themselves as Subjects to him, because they
do a few trifles which neither Satan nor their Lusts forbid, and Custom,
Interest, or natural Conscience persuade to. How will any Soul among you who
stands guilty of this Charge dare to look the Blessed Redeemer in the Face?
What terror will surprise you, when you are accused by him as disloyal in your
very Principles, and asserters of that for Religion whereby Gods Sovereignty
over the Heart is excluded, and all real actings of Grace unprovided for? You
have reproached that which God lays the greatest Stress on, which his Kingdom
chiefly consists in, and his Saints most value themselves by.

Before I proceed to the Exhortations I design, it is needful to insert two
Cautions that may obviate our abuse of this Subject.

1 Caution. Do not deny this Power of Religion concerning any Person or Party
without manifest Grounds.

Charity binds you to think all are truly Religious that profess to be so,
unless their Defects or Works palpably blast their Pretenses, or their
Profession be nullified by a direct contradiction. As the power of Religion
should not be sacrificed to a Ceremony, so lesser Faults do not warrant us to
accuse men as wanting the power of Godliness. Whatever is consistent with the
habitual subjection of a Soul to Christ, cannot justify our excluding that
Soul out of Christ's Kingdom. We may say, yea must affirm of Men differing from
us in many things, 1 Cor. 1. 2.
The same Christ is their Lord and ours. Peace and Love are essentials in
Christ's Kingdom; and shall we challenge our own interest by being censorious;
or enviously narrow the Dominion of our Blessed Redeemer?

2 Caution. Despise not the external Institutions of Christ under pretense of
this Power; the Power and Spirit of Christ concur with his Ordinances, and the
life and vigor of our Graces are exerted in those Ordinances, and nourished by
them.

That Spirit is a delusion which puts Men above divine Appointments, and the
Guilty are as truly Superstitious as the greatest Formalist. Whiles we are
Subjects of Christ's Kingdom here below, we must attend the Ordinances of the
lower State of this Kingdom, and divine Institutions are parts of this Kingdom;
which tho it be not in word so as to exclude the Power, Act. 28. 19, 20.
yet it lies in power as inclusive of a Christian Profession and external
Ordinances.

The next improvement I shall make of the Text, is by way of Exhortation,
wherein I shall regard the Kingdom of God as the power thereof lies in Graces,
and acts expressive of a divine Life, and the governing Authority of God in the
Soul. This includes the two other particulars; for these are the effects of the
Power of the Gospel, these answer the spiritual Rules and Demands of the
Gospel; and because of these the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom are not
Hypocrites, but truly regenerate and practical Christians.

1. Be thoroughly convinced that the Kingdom of God is in these Graces and vital
Acts, and can consist in nothing lower. I have given you undoubted Proof of
this, if you will believe the Gospel beyond your own Fancy, or Satan's
suggestions: And whether you will enlarge your judgment to Gods decision or no,
the time is near when this great King will judge the secrets of your hearts and
lives by this very Gospel Rule. Romans 2. 16.


It Is undoing to most Professors of Christianity, that they fondly persuade
themselves the Demands of God are not so high and exact, as truly they be; it is
true indeed, he makes not legal Perfection to be the Condition of a Right to
Life, but yet he enjoins a spiritual Life and Faith (extensively taken) in
order to our Interest in Christ, and to Salvation on his account. Joh. 3. 36.


Methinks you can hardly in a serious Frame conceive how any thing below real
Grace and vital Acts should serve your turn. Consider the glorious Nature of
God; and can mere external Performances be suitable to him, either to injoin or
accept? Mal. 1. 14.
Would Christ have died to raise dead Sinners to no more Conformity to God than
an unholy Heart, and hypocritical Actings amount to? Are the design of the
Gospel, and the attested Influences of the Spirit answered by a dead Soul or
formal Duty? Judge you whether an ungodly, stupid, graceless Professor of
Christianity, can either here or in Eternity serve the purposes, for which God
erects this Kingdom among Men? What delight can his holy Nature take in such?
What Service or Glory can he and his Christ have by such? Yea, what
satisfaction can such Men have in God or Heaven? These and the like
Considerations may well awaken you to juster apprehensions of this matter, and
convince you that the Kingdom of God must lie in this Power. And if it be
needful to add more, consider wherein can the Kingdom of Satan and Dominion of
Sin consist, but in the want of these gracious Qualities, neglect of those
Acts, and the prevalency of what is opposite to them?

Set therefore this Standard before the Eye of thy Soul, as that which thou
must examine thy self by, and be conformable to, if thou desire to belong to
this Kingdom of the Redeemer.

Labor industriously for, Exhort. 2.
and rest not contented till you have attained this Power of Religion.

I do in the Name of your Redeemer press you to get the Graces, and perform
those Acts which argue a spiritual Life, and the restoration of Gods Image and
Authority in your Souls. Be Christians in Truth as well as in Name; let no
external Performance or Profession content you; see that your Wills be
subjected to God, that your Lives be regulated by his Laws, and all your
religious Acts inspired with a divine Power. This is the principal matter we
are to treat of with you, and what you are chiefly concerned to attend to. To
accomplish this, it is, that you are entrusted with the Means of Grace, and yet
spared after so long provoking Obstinacy, which is more aggravated by your
treacherous Pretensions.

That I may enforce this Exhortation, I shall desire you to apply to your
selves these few Motives.

You pretend and engage to no less than this Power of Religion by your
Christianity. Mot. 1.


What you despise in others and neglect in your selves, even this you pretend
to, and have solemnly Promised. Do not you profess to be the Subjects of
Christ? Have not you renounced the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and
Covenanted to fight under Christ's Banner? And ought you not to be and do all
this truly? Renounce all these Rivals with Christ, and he must then Reign in
Power. Can you think that the Covenant you have sealed so often at the Lords
Table, engages you to no more than external Profession? When you stipulated
with Father, Son and Spirit, was no more intended than that you would pay them
a slight bodily Worship? Sure you profess as much sincere Subjection as the
strictest, in professing your selves Christians; and are not you Hypocrites
then, whiles your Souls are unregenerate, and your Lives not governed by the
Laws of Christ? Tit. 1. 16.
Oh! tremble to think that you profess to know, and yet in works deny him. Your
Hearts breath Rebellion against God, whiles you seem Loyal to him. What
agreeableness to thy Name do a covetous, intemperate, carnal, irreligious
Spirit and Life bear? Renounce the Name, or else be and do what that Name is
designed for.

How sad will the thoughts of thy State be, when thou find thy self branded
by the Heart-searching God, as one that has a Form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
but denying the Power thereof. The word we render Form, is Mo(...), q. d. they
have the visage or appearance of true Piety; thou will be found a Virgin
without Oil, at the Feast without a Wedding Garment; the Son that said to his
Father, I will work in the Vineyard, but failest to do so. Surely, what
induces thee to profess to be a devout Christian, should incline thee to be so.

2. Any thing short of this Power of Religion will avail you nothing, but
greatly damage you.

You are Enemies in Gods account whatever you perform, and he will treat you as
such when the time of Retribution comes. How will thou, Oh rebellious
Christian, endure that Sentence? Luke 19. 17.
Bring these my enemies that would not that I should Reign over them, and slay
them before me. What a loss will thou sustain when thy Gold becomes Dross, when
thy Knowledge, Duties, yea, all thy Religion is vain? Oh that so much should be
attained in vain, and done to no purpose! You will find that if your Graces be
not sincere, they will not save; yea, and if they partake not of this Power,
they are but gilded Vices. Your feigned Faith is but Unbelief; your pretended
Love is Enmity, your partial Obedience is Rebellion; and will God reward, nay,
must not God severely punish unbelieving, irreconcilable, rebellious
Professors of Christianity, and give you a Portion with the most profane? Nay,
your Guilt is aggravated, and your Woes will be the greater. What profit will
you reap by Orthodox Principles, Mat. 11. 23.
while you are Hypocrites in Heart? Church Membership will expose to the forest
rebukes; Mat. 8. 12.
for if the Children of the Kingdom perish, they are cast into outer darkness.

At last pity your selves. Why should you be at any pains, if you will not do
enough to bring you to Heaven? Can any thing this side Glory be the Reward you
intend by being Religious? Why then will you not be so Religious as to obtain
that Glory? Oh! mock God no longer, delude thy own Soul no more; thou art
almost a Christian, be altogether so; or the Convictions, and Helps that have
almost persuaded thee, will aggravate thy ruin when thou fallest into Hell,
from a pitch so much higher than the Atheist and Pagan.

3. Very plausible Appearances of Religion may be without this Power.

Men may appear sincere to others, yea, to themselves, and yet be Hypocrites.
There is a very probable Form, without the Power of Godliness. Every living
Grace has its dead Image; thy Heart may be hard when Groans abound; thou
may cry loud and often to God, and thy Soul never pray; thy Affections may be
on Earth, when thy Eyes are lifted up to Heaven. So inward is the Life of
Grace, and so deceitful are our Hearts, that we can say of the seemingly
greatest Christians, but as Peter did of Silvanus; a faithful Brother, 1 Pet.
5. 12.
as I suppose. (For the Supposition may regard that, as well as the uncertainty
of his being Peter's Messenger): Yea, we are so subject to deceive our selves,
that we have need to pray with David, Lord search me, and try me.

Alas! How many with Alexander may have great Zeal, and want Integrity?
Promise much, and perform the contrary. Jer. 42. 5. 2^.
You will be found Virgins with Lamps, and yet want Oil; seem lively Saints,
and be dead Sinners. We may with bleeding Hearts consider, that very many have
been not far from Grace, and yet never attained it, because some one Lust
opposed it, or some one Idol prevented it. It Is a great thing to be truly
Religious. The best natural Temper, the most splendid Acts, the exactest
Profession, are not infallible Evidences of a Man's being truly Pious; but are
separable from saving Grace.

You have need therefore of the strictest care and jealousy in dealing with
your Hearts. Oh! look to it, that your Religion has in it the undoubted
Characters of a spiritual Life; and of Gods Kingdom being set up in you, in its
very Power. The hardest task is to arrive at this Power of Godliness; to get
Carnal-self dethroned, and the Government of Christ cheerfully submitted to.
Act. 20. 25.
This Kingdom in its Duties and Privileges has been long preached to you; now
God is importunate that you exclude not your selves from the Rewards of it, by
Rebelling against the Laws and Terms of it. Were you acquainted with the Nature
of Christ's Kingdom, it would soon be desirable. The King is our rightful Lord,
and not an Usurper; He has the tenderness of a Father, is infinitely Wise and
Good: He admits all his Subjects to the State of Children, yea, the Dignity of
Kings. All the Laws of it refer to our Good, and tend to our Perfection; and
whatever is required of us, he is present to assist us in; yea, ready to
forgive all Weaknesses consistent with sincere Endeavors: And can you refuse
this easy Yoke of Christ from day to day? Will you refuse this, that you may
continue Slaves to the Devils, and Servants to your Lusts? Oh! that even now
you were made willing, and able to submit to Christ; and inspired with that
Divine Nature which agrees to this State, that is, even the heavenly Kingdom
begun. Oh! perish not in your Misconceits, and wilful Disobedience after all
these Pleadings.

3. Improve in the Power of Religion, if you have attained to any degree of it.

There are remains of Weakness and Disloyalty in the best of us, and so there is
place for our utmost Endeavors to become more suited to this happy State in our
Temper and Behavior. How much are we short of our Fellow Subjects in Light,
Heb. 12. 22, 23.
Strength and Love? We are come to mount Zion, the City of the living God, to
an innumerable Company of Angels to the Church of the First Born, and the Souls
of just Men made perfect. We serve the same Lord, we partake of the same
Nature, are admitted to the same Relation, and we expect the same Glory which
our King does design us to as well as them: And must not these things cause a
Blush in us, that we are so remiss in our Improvements? Can they fail to awaken
our Souls to proceed from strength to strength? Psalm. 84. 7.
Therefore, let Mortification be your work while any Lusts remain. Be more
Spiritual in every Duty, more Renewed in your Minds; and let all your Works be
more perfect. What should be so much your concern, as that the Laws of Christ
have a more absolute Authority in you, that Gods Image impress the whole Man,
and your Souls be more enlarged and listed up in all the ways of this Kingdom?
Rest not till you find Christ Rules alone, and that you entirely live to Christ
under the very constraints of Love to Him. How happy will you be, when the very
Peace of God rules in your Hearts, yea, so rule as that it restrains all that
may interrupt it, and command to all that can express and maintain it? When
this is your Frame, your Delights will be more refined; Psalm. 43. 4.
you will now live much nigher to God, your exceeding Joy, 2 Pet. 1. 11.
and have an abundant Entrance to his Palace above, when a few Days are over.
Resolve then that you will still grow up into Christ, till nothing inspires you
but his Life, and nothing be done by you but what is Loyalty to Him.

4. Visibly express the sincerity of your Subjection to God, and the Efficacy
of his Grace in your Souls. This is incumbent on all Christians; but I shall
apply my self more especially to you that are Magistrates, and the occasion of
this Assembly. You do profess your selves real Subjects to Christ; evidence
then, that real Christians are more fitted to serve their Generation than other
Men. Let Christ Govern by all your Power, and his Interests be advanced by you
to the utmost of your Talents. Convince the World, that nothing can allure or
affright you from exact Obedience to Christ's Laws, and Fidelity to his
Concerns. Christ's Eye is on your Hearts, and Behavior, in your present
Circumstances. The Eyes of many of very different sorts are on you; yea, the
credit of Religion is concerned in your Behavior. And it is but a few Days,
when you must with awakened Spirits review your present Actings; it may be
under afflictive Dispensations, when thrust off your present Stage: But
certainly, when you come to die, and appear before the Tribunal of the Lord
your Judge. Therefore create not bitter Reflections by selfish Aims, sinful
Neglects, or unbecoming Deviations. A tormenting Conscience in that Day, will
not be countervailed by any present Advantage. You are employed in a time that
may evidence the utmost which a Christian can do or endure. But whatever may be
your Exercise, let it be seen, that you serve Christ with the same honorable
Thoughts of him, and Devotedness to him, as ever. You have the same Lord, whose
Laws Authority and Interests do not vary with the uncertain Motions of this
lower World; and whose Concerns are of an infinitely higher Nature than the poor
and perishing Toyls of Mortals.

That I may improve and enforce this Exhortation, Consider.

1. As Christians* and as Magistrates* you are the Subjects of Christ, and so
owe the utmost Fidelity and Serviceableness to him. If you are real Believers,
you are of his Kingdom; and that admits none that will not serve Him without
Limitations. Duty and Gratitude binds you to act with a Supreme regard to
Christ; and to all others only in subordination to Him. You must with Joshua,
follow him fully. Josh. 15. 8.
It ill becomes you to consult with Flesh and Blood. Gal. 1. 16.
For did not you Covenant thus with Christ; Lord, do but save me, and I
solemnly surrender my self to thee? What tho his Service may expose you to some
Acts of Self-denial, does not he deserve that from you? Shall a dying Christ
endure so much for you, and will you think a little Contempt too much to bear
for him? Does not He in the midst of his exalted Glory in the Heavens,
intercede for you? And can you in a little painted Honor forget to plead his
Cause? Shall your Mite (which also is His) be unimployed for Christ, who daily
lays out his Power, Wisdom and Fullness, for every Believers use?

As you are Magistrates, you are appointed to the Service of this Redeemer. All
Power and Judgment is committed to him; Magistracy is his Ordinance, and should
be executed in Christ's behalf, as well as the Ministry. He is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, and has appointed the Rulers of the Earth work in his
Kingdom, whether they attend it or no. Magistrates have the Sword, as Ministers
have the Word; they have the Coercive Power, we the Persuasive; and Christ will
as truly bring the unfaithful Magistrate to an account for his Neglects and
Mistakes, as the unfaithful Minister.

2. Your Sovereign Lord will prosper you, according to what he designs to
effect in your Day, and by your Hands. You serve him who manageth all by his
Providence; and has chalked out in his Purpose, what shall be executed in
every Age. De jure, the Kingdoms of the Earth are his from the First; but from
Age to Age he is advancing Men's acknowledgment of his Dominion, and erecting a
holy Government in the World, on the Ruins of Satan's Kingdom. He has a Kingdom
which all the Powers of Hell shall not extirpate the ruder beginnings of, Dan.
7. 14.
nor prevent its utmost growth. This Kingdom lies in the Dominion of Light over
Darkness, Truth over Error, Holiness over Sin, pure Gospel Worship over corrupt
Worship, and the Interests of Jesus over all Rivals. It includes the
devotedness of earthly Powers to Christ's Service, and a national Dedication to
him as Supreme Lord. Isa. 49. 7.
This Kingdom he enlarges in set times, Zech. 14. 9, 16, 19.
and toward the latter Days more eminently, Rev. 11. 15.
upon the desolations of Paganism and Antichristianism. This happy time I live
expecting, and rejoice in some hopeful, tho awful Prognostics of.

It pleases Christ more eminently to employ his real Subjects as his
Instruments to advance his Interests by; and they shall not want an Anointing
to fit and succeed them, let the Work seem never so hard, Dan. 11. 32.
and the Success never so improbable.

It Is not in you or me to allot our selves our Day or Work; we must take that
as our great Disposer has allotted. This only is incumbent on you, that you
fill up your Places, and see that Christ wants no Service he calls you to, and
qualifies you for.

It Is not without his Counsel that you are at this Season in the Magistracy;
this he appointed you to and has some design to scrue by you: And tho it now
appears not what may be the Influence, or Event of this Surprise, leave that to
him, whose Counsels are a great depth, and does nothing in vain; yea has
ordinarily some great things to do by such, whom he signally calls to an
opportunity of Service. You ought therefore to do what good your Hand finds to
do from day to day, and that with all your might. Resign up your selves to his
Conduct, and be faithful in present Trust, within the bounds of your Places.
Keep innocent in all your VVays; suppress all Sin, and advance Righteousness.
Whiles you are thus Exercised, you may expect the Presence of God with you, and
have a considerable Influence in whatever work Christ has now in hand. Others
may little esteem any Usefulness of this Kind; but what to a discerning
Christian can be more pleasing, than contributing any thing to Christ's
Interests? What can be more honorable than to be one of them whom Christ
designs in that account? Rev. 17. 14.
They that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.

3. The Kingdom of Glory is reserved, and will be certainly bestowed on all
such as are Loyal to Christ in all their present Trust. 2 Timothy 4. 8.
They that follow the Lord, shall Reign with him. Will you repent present
Hardships when you stand about the Throne? Can you grudge him a few days
Service, who hope to be ever with him? Will you not in those Rivers of
Pleasures, even relent that your Service was no greater? You will wish, Oh that
I had exceeded the utmost, which I did best perform! That I had been entrusted
with Opportunities for more difficult work! It Is no such wonder the damned
should have lived to themselves and guide their Course by secular Interests.
But that the Heirs of Glory should be afraid, or ashamed of their Fidelity to
Christ, would be strange.

Must not these things reallized by Faith, endue you with new Vigor. Oh!
therefore gird up the Loins of your Minds; be prepared to endure Reproach, and
any Evil that may attend you. Be fortified against all Allurements; be not of
them that are corrupt with Flatterys, which sometimes are more ensnaring than
Frowns. Dan. 11. 32.
Whatever others choose, see that in all your perplexing Doubts you be most
sollicitous, What now would Christ have me to do? And let your Determinations
be fixed, by the Light you gain through that Enquiry. Examine your Duty as under
the Eye of Christ, and resolve in it as Men persuaded, that your Happiness or
Misery depends only on his Favor, or his Frowns; and that he will deal with you
according to your Faithfulness to him. He will not put you off with vain Hopes,
or an imaginary Kingdom; if his Grace rule in you, and you express it in your
Station, by a Carriage becoming the Living Subjects of this Kingdom of Grace.

FINIS.

