AN ABSTRACT OF THOSE ANSWERS Which were given in the ASSEMBLY of the LORDS in
the High Court of PARLIAMENT, UNTO THE NINE REASONS, SENT UP FROM THE HOUSE OF
COMMONS, Against the VOTING of BISHOPS in PARLIAMENT.

Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

That Bishops ought not to vote in PARLIAMENT.
BEcause it is a very great hinderance to the exercise of their Ministerial
Function.



2 It is propter majus bonum Ecclesiae.

3 The Apostles unnecessarily put themselves to more hindrances, to work for
their livelihood, Act. 20.24. 1. These. 2.9. 2. These. 3.8.

4 What hinderance can it be to their calling, that once in three years, when
they must necessarily attend the Convocation, they divide some part of that
short time to the attendance of Parliament?

Because they do vow and undertake it at their Ordination, when they enter
into holy Orders, that they will give themselves wholly to that Vocation.



2 The Bishop hopes they will give themselves wholly to that, and not to any
other Trade or Vocation.

3 Wholly, in a Moral and not in a Mathematical sense, that will admit no
Latitude: Else, there might the same exception be taken against their just care
of provision for their household affairs.

Because Councils and Canons in several Ages do forbid them to meddle in
secular affairs.

H. 8.

2 So are they by the same Statute, because the Lords have declared, that the
Bishops vote here by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: And all Canons that
cross with those, are there abolished.

3 So are they by the same Statute, as thwarting the Kings Prerogative to call
Bishops by Summons to Vote in Parliament.

4 So they are by the Vote in the House of Commons, 21. Maii 1641. because they
are not confirmed by Act of Parliament.

5 This Argument was in a sort deserte^ by Mr. Perpoint, and confessed to be but
an Argumentum ad hominem.

Because the 24. Bishops have a dependency upon the Archbishops, and because of
their Canonical obedience to them.

are Pares, their Equals: And as Bracton tells us, Parin Parem non habet
imperium. What has Canonical Obedience to do with a Vote in Parliament,
declared in this Bill to be no Ecclesiastical, but a secular affair?

2 This Argument reaches not the two Archbishops, discharged in the Rubric
from this Oath, and therefore is no reason for the passing of this bill.

Because they are but for their lives, and therefore are not fit to have
Legislative power over the honors, inheritances, persons, and liberties of
others.



2 Many Peers have been created for their lives only, and the Earl of
Surrey for the life of his Father, who yet voted in this house.

3 The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are chosen for one Parliament only,
and yet use their Legislative power. Nor will their being elected difference
their Cause; for the Lords use that power, in a greater Eminence, who are not
elected.

4 A Burgess, that has freehold but for term of life only, may vote and
assent to a law in Parliament.

5 No such exception was ever heard of in the Diets of Germany, the Corteses
of Spain, or the three Estates of France, where the Prelates vote in all these
Points, with the Nobility and the Commons.

Because of Bishops dependancy and expectancy of Translations to places of
greater profit.



2 This may be said of all the Kings great Officers, of all the noble members
of both Houses, who may be conceived, as well as Bishops, to have their
expectances, and consequently to be deprived by this Reason of voting in
Parliament.

3 This Argument reaches not at the two Archbishops, and so falls short of the
votes, which are to be taken away by this Bill.

That several Bishops have of late much encroached upon the Consciences, and
properties of the Subject. And they and their successors will be much
encouraged still to encroach, and the subject will be much discouraged from
complaining against such encroachments, if 26. of that Order be to be Judges
upon these complaints. The same Reason extends to their Legislative power, in
any Bill to pass for the Regulation of their power, upon any emergent
inconveniency by it.

For they shall not vote as Judges in their own cause, when they are legally
charged: And if they should vote, what were that to the purpose, when the
Lay-Peeres are still four to one? The Bishops (assisted with a double number
of Mitred Abbots, and Priors) could not hinder the Laws made against the Court
of Rome, the Alien Cardinals, and Prelates, the Provisors, the Suitors to the
Popes Consistory under Ed. 3. Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. much more may those emergent
exorbitances of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction be soon curbed and redressed
in this inequality of votes between the Temporal and Spiritual Lords. So as
this Argument does not so much hurt the votes, as it quails the courage of the
Bishops, who may justly fear, by this and the next Argument, that the taking
away of their votes is but a kind of forerunner to the abolishing of their
jurisdiction.

Because the whole number of them is interessed to maintain the jurisdiction
of Bishops; which has been found so grievous to the three Kingdoms, that
Scotland has utterly abolished it, and multitudes in England and Ireland have
petitioned against it.

Scotland has done so, and some in England and Ireland would have it so: And
yet peradventure ten times as great a sum as these desire the contrary.

2 There will be found Peers enough in the Upper House to reform any thing
that is amiss in the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, although the 26. Prelates
should be so wicked as to oppose it: as there were found Peers enough in that
noble House, to curb the Court of Rome, and the Revenues of the Cardinals
under Ed. 3. To meet with the Provisors under Rich. 2. To put all the Clergy
into a Praemunire under Hen. 8. And to reform the Religion, 1. Eliz.
notwithstanding the opposition of all the Bishops.

Because Bishops being Lords of Parliament, it sets too great a distance
between them and therest of their Brethren in the Ministry, which occasioneth
pride in them, discontent in others, and disquiet in the Church.

Moral Philosophy, which affords no Demonstrations. All are not proud that
vote in Parliament, nor discontented, that are not so employed. This Argument
fights only against the title of being Lords, which is not the Question at this
time. And were those Brethren so wise and well affected as they might be, they
would rejoice rather that some of their own profession are advanced to those
places, wherein they may be capable, upon all occasions, of doing good offices
to them, and to this whole Church.

FINIS.

