AN ANSWER To a Late Printed Paper, Given about by some of the CHURCH OF ROME.

In a LETTER to a GENTLEMAN.

The Third Edition.

Imprimatur. April 8. 1686.

Rev. 2. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at
the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE Popish Paper.
IT will not be denied but that the Church of Rome was once a most pure,
excellent, flourishing and Mother Romans 1. 8.
Church.

This Church could not cease to be such, Romans 16.
but she must fall either by Apostasy, Romans 6.
Heresy or Schism.

I. Apostasy is not only a renouncing of the Faith of Christ, White, defense
of his Way. p. 435.
but the very Name and Title to Christianity: No Man will say, that the Church
of Rome had ever such a fall, or fell thus.

II. Heresy is an adhesion to some private and singular Opinion, King Jam. in
his Speech to the Parliament.
or Error in Faith, contrary to the general approved Doctrine of the Church.

If the Church of Rome did ever adhere to any singular or new Opinion, Whitaker
in his Answer to D. Sand.
disagreeable to the common received Doctrine of the Christian World, I pray
satisfy me as to these particulars, viz.

1. By what General Council was she ever condemned? 2 Demonst.


2. Which of the Fathers ever writ against her? Fulk in c. 22 These. Sect. 7.
Or,

3. By what Authority was she otherwise reproved? For, It seems to me a thing
very incongruous, Reynolds in his 5th. Conclusion.
that so great a Church should be condemned by every one that has a mind to
condemn her.

III. Schism is a departure or division from the Unity of the Church, whereby
the Band and Communion held with some former Church, is broken and dissolved.

If ever the Church of Rome divided her self by Schism from any other Body of
faithful Christians, or brake Communion, or went forth from the Society of any
Elder Church: I pray satisfy me as to these particulars.

1. Whose Company did she leave?

2. From what Body did she go forth?

3. Where was the true Church which she forsook?

For it appears a little strange to me, that a Church should be accounted
Schismatical, when there cannot be assigned any other Church different from
her, (which from Age to Age, since Christ his time, has continued visible,)
from whence she departed.

To my honored Friend, Mr. S. B.
SIR,
I Had no sooner perused the Paper which I received from you, but I perceived
that it was penned for the sake of such, as either are not well acquainted with
the matters of Controversy betwixt Us and the Church of Rome, or with the Way
and Method of arguing. To such as these they are wont to pretend high: To those
that are ignorant of the former, they talk of Antiquity and Universality; and
to such as are unskilful in the latter, of Demonstrations, and self-evident
Principles, of Axioms and Definitions. But all this is a mere flourish of
Words; for if these things come strictly to be examined, instead of Antiquity,
we shall too frequently find Forgery and Imposture; instead of the Catholic
Church, the Church of Rome; instead of Demonstrations and Definitions,
Sophistry and Fallacious Arguments. And after this strain is this Paper wrote,
in which things are so artificially mingled, that they look very speciously to
those that do not understand them; and are so well fitted to work upon the
easy, the ignorant, and inconsiderate, that after it had been printed, as I
perceive, long since in Fiat Lux, it is again singled out, to be put into the
Hands of such as they have a design upon. But I shall endeavor to unravel it,
and hope, by that time that I have done, that what is therein said will appear
to be wholly insufficient to justify their Church, and acquit it of those
Crimes it is charged with: And this I shall do by showing,

First, That the whole is false.

Secondly, That the particulars are very fallacious.

The former I shall make good by these following Considerations:

I. That a Church may fall from what it once was.

II. That the Church of Rome is not now what it was in Apostolical and
Primitive times; when it might most of all pretend to be (as he calls it) a
most pure, excellent, and flourishing Church.

III. That the alteration from what it was then, to what it is now, is to the
worse; and that it is thereby intolerably corrupted.

If these Propositions be proved, then the way taken by our Author will
signify nothing; since it will not be worth the while to enquire how it is,
whether it be fallen by Apostasy, Heresy, or Schism, when it is demonstrable
that so it is, that it is fallen.

I. That a Church may fall from what it once was; that is, from its primitive
Purity and Simplicity in Faith and Manners, is evident to any that will read
the Scriptures, and mind what is therein said of the Churches of the Jews,
Sardis and Laodicea; or that are acquainted with Ecclesiastical History. And
this they of the Church of Rome are bound to grant; who must acknowledge,
according to their own Principles, that we once were a Church, when in their
Communion; and that call us Apostatical, Heretical, and what not, since we have
forsaken it.

II. That the Church of Rome is not now what it was in Apostolical and
Primitive times, but is changed in Principles and Practice.

First, In Principles, as,

1. That the Pope is Christ's Vicar; that is, that he is the Universal Pastor
over Christ's Flock, and has a Jurisdiction over all Churches whatsoever, is a
new Principle. This the Scripture (which the Church of Rome of old used to
appeal to) is so far from giving any Countenance to, that our Savior expressly
cautions the Apostles against any such Usurpation. Luke 22. 25. When there was
a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the greatest; he said
unto them, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, etc. but it
shall not be so: but he that is the greatest [or will be great, Mark 10. 43.]
among you, let him be as the younger, etc and in the 30. v. says, ye shall sit
upon twelve Thrones, etc. not preferring one before the other. And lest what he
had occasionally spoke to Peter, Mat. 16. 19. Whatsoever thou shall bind on
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. should be misconstrued, he does give the
same power to the rest of the Apostles, both before his Death, Mat. 18. 18. and
also after his Resurrection, Joh. 20. 23. And if we would understand the sense
of Antiquity, as to this matter, I know no surer nor shorter way, than to see
what is said by the Councils; for then the Fathers may be supposed to speak
most impartially and with greatest authority; and of this I shall give you a
brief Account. The first general Council was that of Nice, called by
Constantine the Great, and held An. 325. which in the sixth Canon does thus
decree, That the Bishop of Alexandria, and accordingly of Antioch, and of other
Provinces, should have power over their own Provinces, according to ancient
Custom, and the Custom in that case of the Church of Rome; and that none
should invade the Privileges of each other. The same is said and confirmed in
the second Canon of the second general Council held at Constantinople by the
command of Theodosius the Emperor, An. 380. And farther ratified by the third
general Council at Ephesus, in the Year 431. Can. 8.

If we go forward, we shall find that it was farther decreed in the abovesaid
Council of Constantinople, Can. 3. That the Bishop of Constantinople should
have the order of Primacy next to the Bishop of Rome, because it is New Rome.
And what is thereby to be understood, is sufficiently declared in the 28th.
Canon of the Fourth General Council assembled at Chalcedon* An. 451. in which
it is decreed, That the Church of Constantinople should have equal Privileges
with that of Rome, there being the same Reason for that as the other, as it was
the Imperial Seat: and accordingly is there a particular Instance given in case
of Appeals, Can. 9. From this Jurisdiction which every Church had over its own
Members, proceeded other Canons: as, That those who were excluded the Communion
of one Church, should not be received by another; so Can. 5. of the aforesaid
Council of Nice. That no Appeals should be made to foreign or transmarine
Churches; so the Council held at Milevis in Africa, (where S. Augustine was
present,) An. 416. Can. 22. which Canon L. 2. de Romans Pon. cap. 24.
Bellarmine confesses was made with a particular respect to Rome. To the same
purpose the sixth Council held at Carthage, An. 420. (in which also S.
Augustine was) passed a Decree Can. 31.
. From all which you may observe, 1. That the Bishop of Rome had anciently a
limited Jurisdiction, it was over his own Province only. 2. That the
Jurisdiction which he had over his own Province was such as all other Supreme
Bishops had over theirs. 3. That none had a power to transgress the ancient and
settled bounds of Jurisdiction, or to invade those of another. 4. That the
Honor given to the Bishop of Rome (whatever priority it was that he had) was
not by any Divine Authority, but as Rome was the Imperial Seat. 5. That the
Honor and Privilege which it had by that means, was what another was capable
of; for the same was given to Constantinople. 6. That none of these Decrees in
those General Councils were ever opposed by the Church of Rome, 'till the
Council of Chalcedon. 7. That at that time the pretenses of the Pope's Legates
were universally opposed and rejected. And I may add, 8. That what was at any
time in those days claimed by the Church of Rome, was claimed not upon any
Divine Authority, but only upon the Authority of the Council of Nice, (as it
appears from the transactions in the aforecited Council of Carthage.) 9. What
was then claimed under that pretext, was upon a pretended, if not a forged,
Canon of the Council of Nice, which was detected so to be by that Council of
Carthage, and their Usurpation rejected, as is evident from the Acts of that
Council, and the Epistle written by the Fathers there assembled, to Pope
Celestine upon it.

From all which it appears (and more I could show) that there was no such thing
originally, as this Universal Pastorship, which the Bishop of Rome does now
challenge, and that Rome is therein changed from what it was.

And now let our Author ask (if he please) by what Councils was the Church of
Rome ever condemned? And you may answer, by the four first general Councils.
Let him ask again, Which of the Fathers ever wrote against her? And you may
answer, no less than 1068. for so many were then convened in all these four
Councils. And if this suffice not, we may turn him to the Councils of Milevis
and Carthage beforementioned, and to others also of good Authority, besides
particular Fathers. I have been the longer upon this, not only because it
could not be well comprised in less, but also because if this Claim of theirs
fall, their Cause must fall with it.

2. Another new Principle of theirs is, That the Pope has at least, in ordine
ad Spiritualia, a Power over all Kingdoms within the Church, and of deposing
Kings in case of Heresy, or Obstinacy, etc. and of absolving Subjects from
their Allegiance to them when thus deposed. That this is the Principle of their
Church is plain from Can. 3. of the Fourth Council of Lateran, and from the
Council of Trent, in Sess. 25. de reform. c. 19. where it is somewhat covertly
expressed, for a Reason which the state of Affairs at that time made necessary.
That this is the Doctrine of their Church, is proved beyond all contradiction,
by the present Lord Bishop of Lincoln, in his late Learned Treatise Of Popery,
etc.

But that this Doctrine of theirs is new, is commonly confessed among
themselves, and maintained so to be by several of their own Communion, and
which any one may so far receive satisfaction in, from what is written by Roger
Widdrington (alias Preston) in his Apologia pro Jure Principum, and his
Humillima Supplicatio ad Paulum Quintum.

3. Transubstantiation was not originally an Article of their Creed, as it is
now. So it is said by Jo. Tribarn, Comment. in 4. Sent. Scoti. l. 4. Did. 11.
Q. 3. disp. 42. Sect. 1.
an approved Author of theirs, In primitiva Ecclesia de substantia fidei erat,
etc. It was of the substance of Faith in the primitive Church, to believe that
the Body of Christ was contained under the species of Bread and Wine; but it
was not of Faith, that the substance of the Bread should be turned into the
Body of Christ, and upon Consecration should not be Bread. For, says he, this
was not found out by the Church till the time of Innocent the Third, in the
Council of Lateran, where many Truths that before lay hid are explained in the
Chap. of Firmiter Credimus, amongst which this of Transubstantiation is the
chief. So also says Peter Tataret Com. in 4. Sent. p. 101. col. 1. Ven. 1607.
and p. 142. col. 1.
. And this was the Opinion of Scotus In 4 Sent. did 11. q. 3. SS. ad argument.
pro prima and did. 10. q. 1. SS. quantum ergo.
, the great Schoolman.

Now it is supposed that Scotus, who lived within 150 Years after, must better
understand what was the Doctrine of their Church before it, and what was the
sense of that Council concerning it, than he that comes about 450 Years after,
and chides him for so doing, with a minime probandum Bellarmin l. 3. de Euchar.
c. 2^.
.

4. The Doctrine of Infallibility, respecting their Church as the Seat of it,
was not anciently known, neither claimed by themselves, nor granted by others.
Amongst all the directions given in Scripture for finding out the truth, there
is not one word to this purpose; and amongst all the Disputes in the Primitive
Church, we find no such course taken for the final determination of them, as
the having recourse to the Apostolical Chair of Rome. Heresies were not then so
scarce, nor the confutation of them so easy, as that this relief should be
forgotten. And it seems they themselves did then as little understand their own
Privileges, as they did the Principles of Faith; for this was never so much as
thought of, in all those Councils which were called on purpose for the
suppression of Heresies, and where the Legates of the Pope were present: Nay to
this very day they are at a loss where to go for it, whether to the Pope, or a
Council, or both, or Tradition, or the Collective Body of Christians; that is,
they know not whether to give up the Cause or to maintain it. I must confess,
if I should hear a person solemnly declare, that he has Treasure enough in his
possession to enrich the whole World, and should gravely invite all persons to
address themselves to him, but in the mean time perceive (though he has been
of the same Mind for several Years,) that he can neither tell where it is, nor
is he and his Family for all this the richer, or in a better condition than
other Folk, I should vehemently suspect him either to be a notorious Impost or,
or perfect Lunatic. And when we hear the Church of Rome confidently asserting
its own Infallibility, but find withal that she knows not where to fix it, and
that its ruptures and differences are in the mean time as great as in other
Churches, and what are never ended by the way it pretends to, but by plain
downright force, I cannot for my heart but think there is for the most part
more of Interest than Reason in the Case, and what they themselves do rather
live by than believe.

But in my mind there is no better Evidence that this is new, than that it is
false; and no better evidence that it is false, than that it has mistaken. Of
which, besides what has been, or shall be farther said of alterations in that
Church, I shall give you two plain Instances, The Council of Trent Sess. 4.
d^cr. 1.
says, that Traditions are to be received with equal reverence as the
Scriptures; and Maldonat C^m in Joh. 6. p 317.
tells us, that The giving the Eucharist to Children, was a Tradition in the
Church for 600 Years after Christ; which is now condemned (as he shows) by the
Council of Trent. Again, S. Hierom In I^a c 6. etc. 8.
says, that the Latin Church then did not receive the Epistle to the Hebrews
amongst the Canonical Scriptures: But that is now taken into the number by
them, and required so to be under an Anathema, Sess. 4. Decr. 1. Conc. Trid.
Now Infallibility and Fallibility are contradictory, and if that Church has
erred, (as erred she has) then she cannot be infallible, and so consequently
the Infallibility of the Church of Rome was not the Principle of the Primitive
Church of Rome.

I could show as much of Novelty in the Doctrines of Indulgences, Purgatory,
the Mass's being a Propitiatory Sacrifice, and of no Salvation out of the
Romish Church, etc. but what I have said I think is sufficient.

Secondly, The Alterations are as great in point of Practice; the Church of
Rome differs therein as much from what she originally was: As,

1. The keeping the Scriptures and public Service in an unknown Tongue, is
new. The first is evident from the Translations of the Scripture into several
Languages, and especially into the Latin, (at that time a vulgar Tongue) of
which no sufficient Reason can be given, were it not for the use of those that
understood not the Originals. The latter is not only clear from 1 Cor. 14. but
what Bellarmine De Verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 16.
does acknowledge; who says, That the custom of the Peoples saying Amen,
[that is to what they understood,] as they did in the Apostles time, continued
long in the Western as well as Eastern Church.

2. Worshipping of Images, which was first established in the second Council at
Nice, but is so different from and contrary to the practice of the Primitive
Church, that Cassander Consult. Artic 21. sect. 4.
(an Author of theirs) says, that the Christians had not then so much as
Images in their Churches; and does farther declare from Origin, that the
Ancients ab omni veneratione (the very word used by the Council of Trent, Sess.
25. decret, de Invocat.) imaginum abhorruerunt, that all Veneration of them was
abhorred. To this I refer the worshipping of Saints, which was so little
thought of, that many of the Fathers did not think that the Souls of any should
enjoy the beatifick Vision, and be in a state of happiness till the
Resurrection, as Stapleton Defens. Eccl. cont. Whitaker, l. 1. c. 2. Tom. 1. p.
868.
does show. And it seems not to have been an Article of Faith in the time
either of Lombard or Scotus, the former of which says Sent. l. 4. did. 45.
It Is not incredible the Saints do hear what we say; and the latter In 4. did.
45. Q 4.
that it is probable God does reveal our prayers that are offered unto them. It
was then the Doctrine of probability only, but now all are required to believe
it under an Anathema, by the Council of Trent Sess. 25. de Invocat.
.

As much is to be said concerning the Innovation of Worship to the Virgin Mary,
of which we read nothing in Scripture or Antiquity, unless in what was
practiced by the Heretics, called Collyridiani in Epiphanius Haeres. 79.
, that used to carry about her Image, and offer Cakes and Worship to it; with
whom that good Father thus encounters: What Scripture has delivered any such
thing, etc. Let Mary be in honor, but let the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost be worshipped; let no man worship Mary.

3. Communion in one Kind expressly contrary to the Scripture, and the former
practice of the Romish Church. The former is acknowledged by the Council of
Constance Sess. 13.
when they decreed with a notwithstanding for it. The latter is acknowledged by
Cassander Artic. 22.
, who says, That the Roman Church it self retained the practice of receiving
in both Kinds, for above one thousand years after Christ, as is evident from
innumerable testimonies of ancient Writers.

To these I might add the practice of saying private and solitary Masses, of
the Adoration of the Host, and carrying it about in Procession, Confession, (as
used in their Church,) etc. But I shall forbear.

III. These alterations are to the worse; and gross Corruptions. For if the
Pope is not Christ's Vicar originally, and by his Deputation, then he is so far
a great Usurper. If he has not a Power over Kings, to depose them, and absolve
their Subjects from Allegiance to them, then those of them that have used that
power have been notorious disturbers of the World. If their Church be not
infallible, and can no more penetrate into, or resolve and determine points of
Faith than another, they do deceive and are deceived. If Transubstantiation be
a Doctrine of their own, and not of Christ's, they usurp upon his Prerogative.
If the Scriptures are free to all, then their Church is guilty of the damnation
of all amongst themselves, that perish through the want of knowing and
understanding them; and of all the ignorance in the Christian World, which
proceeds from that cause. If worshipping Images, Saints and Angels, the Host,
and Relics, be not Christian Doctrine, and that these are no lawful Objects
of such Worship, then they are Idolaters. If Christians are obliged to partake
of the Wine as well as the Bread in the Lord's Supper, then what are they that
deny and forbid it? In fine, they that do such things are no Friends to the
Kingdom of Christ and the Christian World.

If all this be true, that a Church may fall from what it once was, and be
altered to the worse, and that theirs is so, then we need not spend time in
disputing what Apostasy, Heresy and Schism is, upon which we may talk
prettily and subtly; or by which of them that Church is fallen, as long as fallen
she is. But yet to clear the matter of all wrangling Disputes, I shall consider
these things also; and show,

Secondly, That the particulars are very fallacious; which will appear from the
consideration of the several Terms.

1. Most pure, excellent, flourishing Mother Church; of all which little or
nothing is said in the places of Scripture quoted by him in the Margin. If we
consult the Epistle to the Romans, there referred to, we shall find, That it
was so far from being at that time a flourishing Church, that it is there not
once so much as called a Church. The Apostle directs two Epistles to the Church
in Corinth, and two to the Church of the Thessalonians, and one to the Churches
of Galatia; but to the Romans he writes thus, Chapter 1. v. 7. To all that be in
Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints; as if they were yet Converts at
large, without any other settled Constitution, than what was in the House of
Aquila, which he therefore calls a Church, Chapter 16. v. 5. And therefore
Salmeron, aware of it, thinks St. Paul would not call them a Church purposely,
because of the Factions that were there at that time betwixt the Jews and
Gentiles. Tom. 13. in Romans 1. disp. 7. p. 299. col. 2.

But if we should grant it a Church; yet how does that, Romans 1. 8. prove that
it was flourishing, when it is only said there, Your Faith is spoken of
throughout the whole World; and in Chapter 16. v. 19. (for I suppose that is the
other place he would refer to) Your obedience is come abroad unto all Men; by
which doubtless no more is to be understood, but that the Conversion of many to
Christianity in that City was spread throughout the Roman World; and did tend
much to the propagation of it, as that City was then the Imperial Seat.

This is the explication given of this place by some of their own Writers, viz.
Rigaltius, in his Notes upon St. Cyprian, Epist. p. 78. and Tolet, who in c. 1.
ad Romans Annot. 16. call it a true Exposition, and says it is to be understood
as 1 These. 1. 8.

As for the Term Mother, I hope he means not that the Gospel first came from
thence; for in that sense she was a Daughter, and not a Mother. And if any
Church could pretend to any Authority from that consideration, it must be
Jerusalem, which in this sense was the Mother of us all. But if he means
thereby that she was an Original and Apostolical Church, planted by the
Apostles, or in Apostolical times (for so Tertullian uses these Words alike,
lib. de praescript. cap. 21. when he calls them Matrices and Originales
Ecclesiae, and again Ecclesiae Apostolicae) then such also was Ephesus in Asia,
and Corinth in Achaia, etc. as Tertullian there shows, c. 32, and 36. of which
Churches it will be hard for him to find any thing remaining, and which, while
they did remain, he must acknowledge to have fallen, and been grossly corrupted.
And therefore Rome's being a Mother Church, in this sense, is no security
against Apostasy, Heresy and Schism.

2. Apostasy, he says, is a renouncing not only the Faith of Christ, but the
very Name and Title to Christianity. This indeed is Apostasy with a Witness;
but as it is no more than a Branch or particular kind of it, so it can be no
complete or true definition of it. It being just as if he should say, that
Theft is the violent and forcible taking away of another Man's Goods; which
indeed is the highest degree of it, and what we usually call Robbery; but there
are other sorts of Theft besides; and though it be never so surreptitiously and
clandestinely done, it is as well Theft, and a breach of the Eighth Commandment
as the other. So it is in the present case; the highest degree of Apostasy is
a renouncing the very name of Christian, the turning a Renegado, a Turk, or
Jew: But that is Apostasy also, when there is a departure from the Faith of
Christ, or from any great Article or Articles of it. And so far a person may be
truly an Apostate, and yet retain the Name and Title to Christianity. I must
confess, I always took those to be Apostates, whom the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 4. 1. that depart from the Faith of Christ, who yet seem to have continued
in the profession of it. And I am apt to believe Antichrist will be thought an
Apostate; and yet it is the opinion of many among themselves, that he shall
retain the name of Christian. But if this will not do, I must refer him to the
Bulla Coenae of Pope Paul the Fifth, where it is said in the first Article of
it, Excommunicamus, etc. We excommunicate and anathematise, etc. all Hussites,
Wicklevists, Lutherans, Zuinglians, Calvinists, Hugonots, Anabaptists,
Trinitarians, and a Christiana fide Apostatas, ac omnes and singulos alios
Haereticos, etc. and all Apostates from the Christian Faith, and all other
Heretics, etc. which is doubtless spoken of such as have not, nor are supposed
to have renounced the Name and Title to Christianity. So that either the Pope
in one of his most solemn Bulls is mistaken, or this Gentleman: And if we take
to the former, as I hope he either in modesty, or for a more important reason
which he is privy to, will allow, then the Church of Rome may be fallen by
Apostasy, though she does retain the Name and Title, and will needs be the
only Church of Christ.

3. Heresy, he says, is an adhesion to some private or singular Opinion or
Error in Faith, contrary to the general approved Doctrine of the Church.
Before we admit this Definition, there are a great many things to be
considered; as first, that the relation which he makes Heresy to have to the
Doctrine of the Church, is not current amongst themselves. For many of them do
say, that Heresy is Nihil aliud quam Error in rebus fidei cum pertinacia,
Heresy is nothing else than an Error in the matters of Faith with obstinacy,
as Sayrus acknowledges in his Clavis Sacerdotum, l. 2. c. 9. n. 34. and Durand
is of the same mind (notwithstanding what Sayrus says of him to the contrary)
as appears l. 4. did. 13. Q. 5. where he makes the respect which Heresy has
to the Church, to be because the Church is constituted, per unitatem fidei, by
the unity of the Faith: So that according to these, the respect which Heresy
has to the Church, is only from the respect which the Church has to the
Faith: And to find out what Heresy is, we must enquire not what the Church is,
but what is the Faith. And if so, a Church, even that of Rome, may fall by
Heresy, though she may hold the general approved Doctrine of the Church. But I
doubt, if we should admit the whole, and yet take it in any sense but one, viz.
for the general approved Doctrine of the Church of Rome in the last Ages of it,
that we shall find her guilty in this point also. Shall the Church be taken for
the primitive Church three or four hundred years after our Savior, then they
are guilty of Heresy who will have the Pope to be Christ's Vicar, and to have
Jurisdiction over all Churches; that do maintain worshipping of Images, Angels
and Saints, to be lawful and necessary, etc. contrary to the general approved
Doctrine of those Ages. Should we take the Church for the Church Catholic in
any Age (as Cassander does, Consult. Artic. 22.) that is, the Congregation of
Christ's faithful people all over the World, then still Rome would fall into
the same condemnation, since that she is but a little part in comparison of the
whole. Should we take Church again for the Romish Church in the first Ages of
Christianity, it would then also condemn it self, as I have before showed. And
I see no way for them, even according to this definition, (which is perfectly
one of their own making) to avoid this imputation, but by stiffly maintaining,
that they thereby understand the Church of Rome for some Ages last past; if
that will do; and then we know where to find them, and what to understand when
they talk of the Church.

4. Schism, he says, is a departure from the Unity of the Church whereby the
Band and Communion held with some former Church is broken. This is as lame and
fallacious a definition as any of the rest. For by foisting in that word
Former, which he after runs upon, he restrains it to one particular Branch of
Schism; and it is just as if he should say, A Church is an Assembly of
Christians that join in Communion with each other in the City of Rome; which
none will allow to be a sufficient definition of a Church: For that term added,
In the City of Rome, does no more than prove that the Assembly of Christians
there met is a Church; but is no definition of a Church; for then no Church
could be out of the City of Rome, and every Church, if it be a Church, must be
in that City, and no where else, if that be a true definition of it. So it is
here, the word Former added to the definition of Schism here given, does prove
no more than that a departure from the Unity of a Former Church is a species
and sort of Schism, but is no adequate definition of it. For if it is, then no
Church can be guilty of Schism, that does, how unwarrantably soever, refuse to
hold Communion with, or does break off from the Communion of a Church that was
not a Church before it. And consequently, though the Church of Jerusalem had
denied to hold Communion with any Church whatsoever, (though it were even with
the Church of Rome it self,) she could not be guilty of Schism, because she was
the first Church, and none was prior to her. And we also should be quit of that
blame (if we had nothing else to say for our selves) forasmuch as a Church was
founded here in Britain two years before that of Antioch; and St. Peter was
seven years at Antioch before he presided at Rome, as Baronius says, An. 35.
Number. 5. and An. 39. Numb. 23. from whom, and from which time they pretend alone
to derive their Supremacy.

And now this will hold, although the Church thus separated from had given no
reason or color at all for it. For according to the definition of our Author,
it must be a Former Church which the departure must be from to make it Schism.
We may indeed say, that Schism is when the Band or Communion held with any
Church, is (without just reason) broken and dissolved; because all Christian
Churches ought to maintain Communion with each other, where it may be had: But
if so, then the Church of Rome is the most Schismatical in the World, that
denies Communion with all Churches that are not in all Tridentine points one
with her.

If you now, Sir, reflect upon his Scheme and frame of Arguments, you will see
that they hold in nothing which he produces them for.

For what will it signify, if it be granted that the Church of Rome was once a
most pure, flourishing Church, if she be now abominably corrupted? What if she
was a Mother Church planted by the Apostles, and watered with their Doctrine,
and their Blood, when she now preaches another Doctrine than she was taught by
them, and has grossly corrupted that Faith which they did there establish? What
if she was a Mother Church to some other Churches, yet, that as it gives her no
Authority over those whom she was not in any sense a Mother to, so even not
over such as she might pretend that Relation to, when she is now not to be
approached to, or held Communion with, without apparent hazard of Salvation;
and is fallen from those Principles and that Faith which she at their first
conversion instructed them in? When she is fallen by Apostasy, Heresy and
Schism.

By Apostasy, as she has forsaken the Primitive Church, and is not now what
she originally was, either in Faith or Manners.

By Heresy, as she has received new Articles of Faith, that were not such
before; and so obstinately persisted therein, that she has turned the Anathema
upon all Dissenters in those points from her. Such Articles she has embraced,
and does now hold, as have been condemned by Councils, wrote against by
Fathers, and reproved by Authority.

Some of these she was particularly charged with, and reproved for; and in
others she is as much concerned, as if particularly charged, because she has
embraced those things which were by them condemned. For if the things and
principles were condemned, whoever holds them is as much so condemned by that
Authority, as if particularly named. As they will acknowledge, that if a Church
now in Communion with them should fall off from them, she is thereby as much
under the Anathema of the Council of Trent, as if she had at the meeting of
that Council been so far faulty, and thereby been particularly condemned.

By Schism she is fallen, as she denies Communion with all other Churches in the
World, whether they were so before she was a Church, or were Churches converted
and established at the same time with her, or that have embraced the Christian
Faith since she did. The company of such she has left: From these Bodies she
is gone forth: And these were the true Churches which she forsook. So that she
will be found as often guilty of Apostasy, as there are particulars of Faith,
Doctrine, Worship and Manners, which she is fallen from the Primitive Church
in. As often of Heresy, as she has new Principles of Faith, and which the
Church was not then acquainted with. As often of Schism, as there are Churches
in the World, that she will not hold Communion with, only because they will
not embrace those Principles, or join with her in those practices which she
holds contrary to them, and with them to the Primitive Church.

And thus, Sir, I have made good, I hope, what I first undertook, and if
thereby any service can be done to you or our Religion, it will be a great
satisfaction to,

SIR, Your Servant.

FINIS.

