royal blazon or coat of arms WR MR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT By the King and Queen, A
PROCLAMATION, For Encouraging Mariners and Seamen to Enter themselves on Their
Majesty's Ships of War.
WILLIAM R.

WE being desirous to give all due Encouragement to all such able Seamen as
have not been in Our Service the last Year, (or being in the Service have been
regularly Discharged therefrom) who shall Voluntarily Enter themselves in Our
Service, on Board Our Ships of War in Our Royal Navy, have thought fit, by and
with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Publish this Our Royal Proclamation.
And We do hereby Promise and Declare, That all such Seamen as either have
already since the Fifteenth of January last Voluntarily Entered themselves, or
shall, before the Twentieth of March next, Voluntarily Enter themselves with a
Commission or Warrant Officer of any of Their Majesty's Ships, or with Justice
of Peace or Chief Magistrate of a Corporation, to Serve on Board any of Their
Majesty's Ships of the First, Second or Third Rates, or of the Fourth Rate of
Sixty Guns and upwards, and shall actually appear on Board the Ship for which
they shall so Enter themselves by the Second of April next, and whose Entry, as
aforesaid, shall appear by Certificate under the Hands of the Justices of the
Peace or Chief Magistrate, or by the Oaths of the Officers of the Ships with
whom they shall be Entered, shall Receive a Months Pay as Our Freee Gift and
Royal Bounty, which shall be Paid them before the respective Ships to which
they belong shall Sail. And We do hereby Command and Require the said Seamen to
Repair on Board the respective Ships on which they shall so Enter themselves,
and give their Constant Attendance, for fitting out to Sea such Ships as each
of them do belong unto. And We are also Graciously pleased to Declare, That
Conduct-Money, according to the Practice of the Navy, shall likewise be Allowed
to such able Seamen as shall Voluntarily Enter themselves on Board any of Our
said Ships, according to the true meaning of this Our Royal Proclamation. And
for the prevention of any Deceits and Abuses that may happen by any Person or
Persons leaving the Ships to which they belong, and Entering him of themselves
on Board any other of Our said Ships, as aforesaid, in Order to the Obtaining
of the Bounty-Money herein before Granted, We do hereby likewise Direct,
Declare and Command, That such Seamen, belonging to any of Our Ships or Vessels
whatsoever, as shall leave any of the Ships or Vessels to which they belong,
and Enter themselves on Board any other of Our Ships, in Order to the Obtaining
of the said Bounty-Money, shall not only lose the Wages due to them in the
Ship, which they shall so leave, but also be severely Punished according to
their Demerits.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Three and twentieth Day of February,
1692/3. In the Fifth Year of Our Reign.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1692/3.


