Dr WILLIAMS's SIXTH SERMON AT Mr. BOYL'S Lecture, 1695.

The Divine Authority of the Scriptures.

A SERMON Preached at St. Martins in the Fields, Sept. 2. 1695. BEING THE Sixth
of the LECTURE For the said YEAR, Founded by the Honorable ROBERT BOIL,
Esquire.

By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cocke^ill, Senr and Junr: At the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey. M DC XC VI.

HEB. I. 1, 2.
God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
etc.
IN these words we have (as has been observed)

1. A description of Revelation, it is God's speaking, or declaring his Will to
Mankind.

2. The Certainty of that Revelation, it is by way of Declaration, God who at
sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke, etc.

3. The Order observed in delivering that Revelation, as to Time, Manner, and
Persons; In time past by the Prophets, and in the last days by his Son.

4. The Conclusion and Perfection of that Revelation, it is in the last days by
his Son.

Under the Second I have showed,

1. That there has been such a Revelation.

2. That the Scripture is of Divine Revelation, and has upon it the Characters
belonging to such Revelation.

For the better disposing of what I had to say Sermon. V.
under this Head, I proposed Four Questions to be resolved, viz.

Q. 1. How we can prove the Matter of Scripture to be true?

Q. 2. How we can prove the Matter of Scripture to have been of Divine
Revelation?

Q. 3. How we can prove the Books of Scripture to have been of Divine
Inspiration?

Q. 4. How we prove these Books that are now extant, and received by the
Christian Church as Canonical, to be those very Books?

I have already Treated of the Two former, and shall now take the Two latter
into Consideration.

Where we may observe somewhat as to the Writers, and then as to Inspiration.

1. As to the Writers; of whom we may reckon Three sorts.

(1.) Merely Human; such as St. Luke speaks of, that out of a good and pious
intent, took in Luke 1. ^.
hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which were most
surely believed. And this may be done without any material Error by Persons
duly qualified for it.

(2.) Those that had what they wrote immediately dictated, or at least approved
by such Persons as were inspired. So Eusebius says that the Hist. Eccles. l.
2. c. 15. l. 5. c. 8.
Gospel of St. Mark was approved by St. Peter, and St. Luke's by St. Paul.

(3.) Such as were immediately Inspired in the writing, as St. Peter and the
rest of the Divine Writers are supposed to have been.

Now though the first of these may be sufficient in ordinary cases, and of good
use in the extraordinary, where there is no better; yet where the Salvation of
Mankind is concerned, there is somewhat farther necessary, and that is, that
the Persons that write should be assisted and guided by the Holy Spirit of God,
or write by the direction and approbation of those that are Inspired.

2. As to the Inspiration, that is Twofold:

(1.) Either when the Matter, Words* and Order, are immediately Dictated by God
Exodus 20. 1, 22.
himself; as the Decalogue was, and all that was Revealed by Voice; for then it
was as Discourse with us.

(2.) Or, When Persons Selected wrote by Direction or Command from God, what
was Revealed to them, as to the Matter only, whether by way of Declaration, or
Representation.

In which last case the Persons Inspired took their own way; which is the
reason of the difference in Style and Phrase between their several
Compositions; that, for example, Isaiah writ in a lofty courtly Style; and that
Amos, a Herdsman, writ after a more Rustical way. So Erasmus says of St. Luke,
that he writ in a purer and clearer Style, because of his skill in the Greek
Tongue.

Here the Office of the Divine Spirit was to suggest the Matter, or to
represent the case, to assist and supervise, so that no Error should be in the
Original Copy; though he left each to the liberty of their own way in
expressing it. As if we were to send several Messengers upon the same Errand,
we deliver the Message to them, and tell them what they are to say; but leave
every one of them to express it as they think fit, and as they are able: Each
of which is a faithful and wise Servant, though he keeps not exactly to the
very words of his Master, and all agree in the drift and substance, though they
differ in the expression or circumstance. So it is in the Evangelists, where
they all agree in the material parts of the History, though they differ often
in the words, and sometimes, perhaps, in some minute passages relating to it.

In one or other of these two senses, the Scripture may be said to be wrote by
Divine Inspiration; that is, either by immediate and verbal Suggestion, or by
Direction: And this I shall now endeavor to prove, by answering the Third
Question, viz.

Q. 3. How we do prove the Books of Scripture, which contain the matter of
Revelation, to have been of Divine Inspiration?

In proceeding upon this I shall premise:

1. That the proper course for proving the Divine Authority of the Scripture,
is to begin with the Matter, abstracted from the Books, (as I have already
done) and then to proceed from thence to the Books.

And therefore they begin at the wrong end, that would disprove the truth of
the Revelation, or Matter contained in Scripture, by such Objections as they
make from the Writing, and the Books. For the Matter stands upon a proof and
evidence of its own (as I have showed) and will stand, though the written Word,
or Scripture, should fail of supporting its own Authority.

Therefore those that will venture upon disproving the Revelation, must in
reason begin with the Matter; let them there try their skill, and call in
question the proof by which that is supported. But this we have already
prevented, by having proved the Matter of Scripture to have been of Divine
Inspiration.

2. Though there seems not to be so clear and full a proof for the Inspiration
of the Books, as there is for the Matter, since the Matter has the utmost
attestation it is capable of, viz. Miracles; but there were no Miracles wrought
to prove these Books to have been of Divine Inspiration, Sermon. V. p. 12.
(as has been before observed): Yet if we prove that the Books were written by
Inspired Persons, and that what they Wrote is the same with what they Taught,
it is equivalent, and much of the same Force and Authority.

For what need was there of Miracles to prove the Books to be written by
Inspiration, when the Persons writing them were Inspired, and that what they
wrote is the same with what they taught, and when what they taught was
confirmed by the Miracles which they wrought?

Therefore while the Authors were in being, there needed no Miracles to prove
these Writings to be theirs, when they themselves asserted them so to be: And
after their decease we have as much reason to believe the Scriptures which they
wrote to have been of Divine Inspiration, as what they taught to be a
Revelation; both now depending upon the like Evidence, that is, Testimony, as
to which we have no more proof of the Matter, than we have of the Books.

3. From hence it follows, That not to believe the Scripture to have been of
Divine Inspiration, is in effect to reject and deny the Revelation therein
contained: The Scripture being the best, and in the present circumstances of
Mankind, the only means left for the conveyance of it; I say, in the present
circumstances, it is the only means; for when the circumstances were other than
they are now, or have been for Sixteen hundred Years and upwards, there was
then no such absolute need of a written Word: When the Instructors of Mankind
had their Lives protracted to a vast extent, as it was with the Patriarch's of
Old; or when there were Inspired Persons alive to teach and rectify any
mistakes that might arise and disturb the Peace of the Church; as it was in the
times of the Apostles.

But when things fell into an ordinary course, and that fallible Persons (as
all afterward were) might mistake in their reports of Doctrine, etc. and the
weak memories of others not retain what they had been taught, and that the
insincere would wrest what was taught to serve their perverse designs; the case
being thus altered from extraordinary to ordinary, so was the means of
conveyance. And God, that committed the Divine Oracles to be taught by Persons
whom he thought fit to inspire, employed the same Persons to commit that
Revelation to writing for the future Preservation of it, and the conveying it
down safe and entire to Posterity. Without which Mankind, in these
circumstances, neither could themselves have been certain of what they were to
believe, nor could they have sufficiently proved to others what it was they
were obliged to receive and to believe, as wanting Authentic Monuments and
Records for it. So that we have sufficient reason to believe that the same
Divine Goodness* that did make known his Will to Mankind, would take the best
means, and did take the best means for the continuing and preserving it.

And Scripture being the only means of that kind, becomes a Rule of Faith; and
so is of Authority sufficient to oblige us to receive and obey it.

If the Matter of Scripture be true and of Divine Inspiration, we are obliged
by it, though the Writing, or Book containing it, should be only of Human
Composition; because it is the Doctrine, and not the way of delivery, that
passes the immediate Obligation upon us: But when the Book containing that
Matter, as well as the Matter it self, is of Divine Authority, and composed by
Divine Appointment, Direction, or Inspiration, it obliges us by virtue of the
Composition, as well as the Matter; and both are to be jointly received as
proceeding from one and the same Original and Authority.

But having asserted this, That the Scripture is the only means of conveyance
of the Will of God to Mankind, and what becomes a Rule of Faith to us; it is
fit to return to the Question proposed, viz.

How we can prove the Scripture to have been of Divine Revelation; or that
those Books, so called, were wrote by the Direction and Command of God, or by
Inspiration from him?

A. 1. I Answer in the same way as before, That as there is no Revelation, if
the Scriptural Revelation be not that Revelation; so there is no written
Revelation, if the Scripture be not that Book, and be not Inspired. And then we
should want the only certain means of conveyance, which is Writing, or should
have been wholly left to the doubtful and uncertain hand of Tradition, for the
knowledge and preservation of Revelation.

Now, I think, this to be an Argument of considerable force for the Divine
Authority of Scripture; that without this means we should after a Revelation be
in effect without a Revelation: For so it will be if the Scripture contain not
that Revelation, and that we have no sufficient Record, if that be not the
Authentic Record of it.

But to come nearer the point.

2. I Answer, That there is as much proof for the Inspiration of the Scripture,
as the matter is well capable of, and as much as is sufficient; and if that be
so, then it is unreasonable to reject it; for they who do so, can do it upon no
less pretense, than that they would have such a proof as the matter is not
capable of, and more than is sufficient for the proof of it. But that there is
such a proof for the Divine Authority of Scripture as is sufficient, I think,
will be evident if we show,

1. That the Scriptures have for proof of their Inspiration, the Testimony of
such as were Inspired.

2. That they were written by Persons Inspired, and that were Inspired when
they writ them.

3. That they are worthy of such Authors, and have upon them the Characters of
such Inspiration.

1. The Scriptures have for proof of their Inspiration, the Testimony of such
as were Inspired. The Testimony of Persons Inspired is as much a Proof of
Inspiration, as if it had been a matter they themselves were Inspired with; and
therefore the Evidence that we have for the Inspiration of such Persons, is a
sufficient Evidence for the Inspiration they give Testimony to. As for
instance, suppose that we have not as good evidence for the Inspiration of the
Old Testament as we have for the New; yet if the New does justify the
Inspiration of the Old, quotes it as such, and bestows that Character upon it;
then by virtue of such a Testimony, we have as good Evidence for the Old as we
have for the New. The mere Quotation of a Book by an Inspired Person, whether
as to the Author, Words, or Matter, does not give the like Authority to that
with what he himself Acts 17. 28. 1 Cor. 15. 33. Tit. 1. 12.
does write by Divine Inspiration; for then Aratus and Menander, Epimenides and
Callimachus, who were Heathens, and are Quoted by St. Paul, would become
Inspired Writers.

But the Scriptures of the Old Testament are cited by our Savior and the
Apostles as the Oracles of God, and as Books of Divine Authority, and which
they produce and appeal to upon all occasions in justification of the Doctrine
which they taught: So we are told that all Scripture, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16.
(...), or the whole Scripture (as Dionysius Carthus. expounds it) is given by
Inspiration of God.

And what is meant by the Scripture, is no other than what was generally
received by the Luke 24. 44. V. Josephus con. App. l. 1.
Jewish Church as such, and which our Savior distributes after their manner
into the Three known parts, viz. The Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the
Psalms: Which division comprehended in it all the several Books; the Prophets
containing not only the Books properly so called, but also the Historical, as
written by Inspired Persons; and the Psalms containing all the Poetical.

And they descend yet lower; for of the Thirty nine Books of the Old Testament,
there are very few, not above Seven or Eight, but what are quoted in the New
Testament by Name, or for some remarkable Passage, and as Books of the same
Character.

So that if we can prove our Savior to be infallible, and the Evangelists and
Apostles inspired (as we have done before, when we proved the Matter revealed
by them to have been of Divine Authority), at the same time we prove the
Scriptures of the Old Testament to be of Divine Inspiration; because they had
this Testimony and Credit given to them by those that were themselves
Infallible and Inspired.

The like Testimony have we for the Divine Authority of St. Paul 's Epistles,
by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16.
who gives them the same Title of Scripture with the Books that were of the
Jewish Canon; Our beloved brother Paul, according to the wisdom given unto him,
has written unto you, as also in all his Epistles: -- Which they that are
unlearned and unstable wrest, as also the Other Scriptures.

But though this be a good and sufficient Proof, where it may be had, yet it is
not applicable to all; since the last of the Inspired Writers could have no
such Evidence; as Malachi among the Jews; and St. John in the Primitive Church,
who survived all the rest of the Divine Penmen. And therefore where this Proof
of the Attestation given to some is wanting as to others, we must have recourse
to other Arguments that will supply what is deficient. The Old Testament has
the Testimony of the New to vouch for its Divine Authority; but what can thus
testify to the New, when there is no other Revelation, and no Inspired Persons
to come after?

But this will be helped by the next Evidence, which is, That

2. The Scriptures were written by Persons Inspired, and that were Inspired in
the writing of them.

(1.) They were written by Persons Inspired: Thereby is meant, that whoever
were the Authors, known or unknown, we have yet good and sufficient Evidence
that the Penmen were Inspired both as to the Matter and Manner or Way of
Writing. (But this belongs to another place.) Or that the Authors of those
Books were the same that before taught by Inspiration.

That the Writers of the Old Testament were of this kind, we have already
proved from the Testimony of the New, as far as that is of Authority to verify
it.

And that the Evangelists and Apostles, whom we have before proved to be
Inspired, were the Authors of the Books of the New Testament, we have as good
Assurance as the Jews had that the Pentateuch was written by Moses, or the
Psalms by David; or that ever there were such Philosophers as Plato and
Aristotle, or such Physicians as Hippocrates and Galen, or any Books writ by
them.

Nay, so much the stronger Evidence have we, as it has been the Duty (as they
thought) and the Interest of so considerable a part of mankind as the
Christians are, to preserve these Records safe and entire, and to take care
that they be such in all points as they received them; and consequently
according to their sense of them they are of Divine Inspiration, and wrote by
those Inspired Persons. And for which there can be no greater Evidence than
this sort of Tradition; unless we would have God reveal to every particular
person, That the Authors of those Books were Inspired; or point it out by some
special Miracles, which shall serve as the Star to the Wise Men, to direct us
to it.

But since this is wanting, and cannot reasonably be expected, we must rest
satisfied with that which is the only possible Evidence, and which not only the
Primitive Christians did admit as sufficient, but was not contested by the most
violent Adversaries of their Religion: Among whom the Question was not, Whether
the Persons reputed to be Inspired, were the Authors of those Books? or,
Whether those whose Authors are not known, were of the same condition with
those that were known? but, Whether the matters of that supposed Revelation,
and contained in those Books, were true, and that those Authors were sincere
Relaters of it?

And whereas there were some Books of Scripture that were not so early and
universally embraced as others, yet they were not so much V. Eusebius* Eccl. Hist.
l. 23. c. 24, 25. l. 5. c. 8. l. 7. c. 24, etc.
doubted of as to their Authority, as the Authors, (such as the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the second and third of St. John, and the Revelation); unless it were
by the Alogi that Epiphanius writes of, who rejected the Works of St. John as
not agreeable to their Opinion, That Christ was a mere Man.

(2.) The Sacred Penmen were Inspired in their Writing, in the sense before
spoken of, p. 4. For,

1. There was as much need to Write, as to Teach; to Write with respect to the
absent, and to Posterity; as to Teach and Preach to the present; for there is
no other way to Teach in those cases, than by Tradition or Writing. But the
Defect which those Holy Men found all their Discourses labored under as to
their Conveyance by Tradition, through the infirmity of Human Nature, and an
incapacity of transmitting the Matters now contained in the Scriptures, to
future Ages in that way, without Prejudice, Corruption, and Abuse, disposed
them, under the direction of the Holy Spirit, to commit them to Writing. So St.
John 20. 31. These things are written, that ye might believe. So St. Peter, 2
Pet. 1. 5. I will endeavor that ye may be able after my decease to have these
things always in remembrance.

2. There was as much need to Write by Inspiration, as to Teach by Inspiration,
for Writing is but another way of Teaching. And if the Apostles had the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost in all matters of moment when they Taught, it is
reasonable to suppose (had we no other Evidence for it) that in the same
Circumstances they had the same Assistance in what they Writ.

Nay, so much the more might it reasonably be expected, that they should have
the Assistance of that Divine Power operating upon their Minds, and guiding, as
it were, their Pen in what they Writ; as what they Writ was to continue in the
Church, and to be a Standard of Faith, and Rule of Life to all Ages: Whereas
what they Taught could continue no longer than the Memories of fallible men
could retain it.

So that we may conclude, That if they Taught and Preached by the special
Assistance of the Holy Spirit, they were also under the Conduct of it when they
Writ.

3. Those Divine Penmen conceived themselves to be alike Inspired in what they
Writ, as in what they taught. Therefore we generally Phil. 1. 1. 1 and 2 These.
find the Apostles, and St. Paul always, unless when he writes in conjunction
with others, to begin their Epistles with a Declaration of their Commission and
Authority by virtue of their Office, Paul an Apostle, etc. requiring the same
regard and the like submission to what they Writ, as to what they Spoke when
present.

And as they thus magnified their Office, so they writ as from Christ himself,
after this and the like form, Grace be to you, and peace from God our father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 1. 7, etc.

Nay, they insist upon their Inspiration, which they received when they writ,
to gain it Authority with those they wrote to. So St. Paul, Gal. 1. 1. Paul an
Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, etc. Ver. 11, 12. I
certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, is not after
man; for I neither received it of man, nor was I taught it but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ. And that Apostle expressly says, The things that I
write unto you are the commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 37. 2 Cor. 1. 13.

So St. Peter, 1 Epist. 5. 12. I have written briefly, exhorting and
testifying, that this is the true grace of God, wherein ye stand.

Now if they conceived themselves to be Inspired in Writing, who themselves
were Inspired (as has been before proved) and did Write with the same
Apostolical Authority as they Taught, it is certain that they were Inspired in
Writing; for they were the best Judges of their own Inspiration, and could best
know when they were Inspired. And therefore if any would undertake to disprove
the Divine Authority or Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures, they must first of
all prove that those Writers were not inspired, nor did ever give sufficient
Evidence that they were Inspired. But if they were Inspired, and do withal
declare that they Wrote those Books by Inspiration, we have as much reason to
receive those Books as such upon their Affirmation, as we have no believe that
they themselves were Inspired, or did ever Teach by Inspiration.

4. There is the same Proof for the Inspiration of the Apostolical Writers, in
their Writing, as their Teaching, as what they Write is the same with what they
Taught; and therefore what they Taught being confirmed by sufficient Evidence
to be from God, so must what they Writ; the same Proofs that belong to the one,
belonging to the other. And accordingly they in their Writings often appeal to
what they Taught, as concordant with what they Writ, and to the Testimony given
to the one for the confirmation of the other.

They appeal to what they Taught: So St. Paul, 2 Cor. 2. 13. I write none other
things to you, than what you read, or know and acknowledge. So Gal. 1. 8, 9.
Though we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that ye
have received, let him be accursed.

So they appeal to the Evidences of their Inspiration in Teaching, for a
confirmation of what they Writ: So 2 Cor. 12. 12. Truly the signs of an Apostle
were wrought among you in all patience, and signs and wonders, and mighty
deeds. Gal. 3. 5. He that ministers to you the Spirit, and works miracles
among you, does he it by the works of the Law, or the hearing of Faith? From
whence it is that the Apostles challenge the same regard to be paid to their
Writings, as their Teaching; which they could not have done, were not their
Writings of as good Authority as their Teaching, and were they not alike
directed and assisted in the one as the other. So St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a
man so account of us as of the ministers of Christ, or Apostles. 1 Cor. 5. 3,
4. I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already as
though I were present, etc. in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are
gathered together, and my Spirit, etc.

All which is to give Authority to what they writ; but what Authority could
that be of to oblige others to receive it, if they themselves received it not
by Inspiration; and that their Teaching and Writing were not the same, and
obtained in the same way?

3. The Holy Scriptures are worthy of such Authors as were Inspired, and have
upon them the Characters of such Inspiration.

Lecture V.
I have before proved, That the Matter contained in Scripture has upon it the
Characters of a Divine Revelation. But the Design before us now is, to show,
That the Writing it self has upon it such Characters as will entitle it to
Divine Inspiration, and is worthy of such Persons to write, as were Inspired.
And that,

1. If we consider who the Persons were that were the Penmen of the Sacred
Writ; that were as well Ignorant and Illiterate, as Learned. Amos 7. 14.
Thus we find in the Old Testament, an Amos that was no Prophet, nor Prophet's
Son, nor bred up in their Schools, but an Herdman, and Gatherer of
Sycamore*fruit, is made at once a Prophet, and as Inspired, as the Great, the
Noble, and Eloquent Isaiah: And under the Gospel, we find a Matthew and a John,
as well as a Luke; a Peter as well as a Paul. For when the Workmanship proceeds
not from the Hand, but the Intelligent Mind; not from the Instrument, but the
Efficient; it is not what the Hand, the Instrument, and Agent is, but what the
Efficient pleases; and so God could make an Apostle and an Inspired Person out
of an Illiterate Fisherman, as well as out of him that sat at the Feet of
Gamaliel. For God chose the foolish things of the world to confound the wise,
and the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty, etc.
that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 27.

And as it was in Preaching, so it is in Writing the Gospel, in which God no
less gave them a Mind to indite, than a Mouth and Wisdom in Teaching, to speak.
So that they needed no Luke 21. 14, 15.
more to meditate before, what to write, than in that case what they should
answer. It was there as the Spirit gave them utterance, and here as that did
direct, and assist, or suggest. St. Paul exhorts Timothy, to give attendance to
reading, till he himself should come to give him farther Instruction; and to
meditate and give himself wholly to them, that his profiting might appear to
all, 1 Timothy 4. 13, etc. But we find no such dependence on human means in what
they wrote: Then it is Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by
Jesus, and God the Father; the Gospel he wrote was the same he taught; and
which when he wrote, he no more received from man, than when he taught, and
which he was taught by the revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. 1, 11, 12.

And therefore where all was by Revelation, it was not as the Man was, but as
he was made: And as St. Peter was as much an Apostle, an Inspired Teacher, so
he was as much a Divine Writer as St. Paul, and writes with the same Divine
Power and Authority, and with as much Certainty and Infallibility.

So that there are as few Objections (if we strictly consider it) made against
the most Illiterate as the most Learned of the Inspired Writers; against St.
Matthew and John, as against St. Luke; against St. Peter, as St. Paul. But now
if those Writers had wrote after man (in St. Paul's Phrase) and purely from
themselves, As it was naturally impossible that ever those Unlearned Persons
should apply themselves to study at the Age of St. Peter, and write of the most
sublime Arguments more to the satisfaction of Mankind than the profoundest
Philosophers; so it was impossible but that in their Compositions they should
have been guilty of manifold Mistakes, when they wrote of such various Points,
and Points of no small difficulty to explicate. But when the Unlearned of them
are as free from Error as the Learned, and as little liable to exception in
what they writ, it is evident they writ from the same Spirit with, and had the
same Assistance as the Learned.

And therefore the supposed Errors in any of them could not proceed from
Inadvertency, or Unskilfulness, or want of right Information; but are rather
Errors supposed and imaginary, than real; the Mistakes of the Reader or
Transcriber, rather than of the Penmen; as I have already showed. (Sermon. IV.)

For if the Errors had proceeded immediately from the Writer, they would have
appeared more in the Composures of the Unlearned than the Learned: But when the
Unlearned are as free from them as the Learned, it is an unquestionable sign
that the Unlearned wrote from the same Spirit as the Learned, and both from a
Spirit that is Divine.

2. The Scriptures will appear to be worthy of such Authors as are Inspired, if
we consider the way in which they are written, which though not with excellency
of speech, or of wisdom, that is, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 4.
human, yet have such a Majesty and Authority shining through the whole, as
gives them a Luster as much beyond other Books, as the Bodies of Angels which
they assumed for some special service, excelled those of Mortals, and that were
of a Natural Composition; and of which we may say in the like Phrase as
Nicodemus of our Savior, That none could write after this manner, except God
were with them.

I freely acknowledge, that they are not written according to the ordinary
Rules of Art and Method, which Almighty God is no more obliged to observe, than
he is to govern the World by the Methods and Rules that are ordinarily observed
among Mankind.

For as in the Government of the World, where there are different Ends to
pursue, and diverse Means to be made use of, God confines not himself to act as
we would in such cases, but acts above all Rule known to us, and sometimes
punishes where we would spare, and spares where we would punish; sometimes
gives to those that we would deprive of such Favors, and deprives those of
them to whom we should think fit to give: So it is in the Divine Composures, in
which he makes use of different Hands and Instruments, as there are different
Tempers in Mankind: He makes use of the Poetical Vein in David, the Oratory of
an Isaiah, the Rusticity of an Amos, the Elegancy of a Luke, the Plainness of a
Peter, the Profoundness of a Paul, to serve the common Design of instructing
Mankind in the knowledge of God, and their Duty to him, without that Artificial
Method which the Learned Part of the World expect to find, and think fit to
observe.

The Heavens and the Earth have upon them the Signatures of an Almighty Power
and Wisdom, and which we may with David employ our most serious Hours in the
Contemplation of, with Pleasure and Advantage. But yet there is no strict Order
visible to us, nor can be observed by us in the Situation of the
Constellations; nor can we give a reason why Orion and the Pleiades, or
Arcturus, are placed in that Quarter of the Heavens which is assigned them: And
the Earth is not like a Garden laid out in order, but rather there seems to us
a rude Variety in the disposition of it; and yet notwithstanding, who is there
that does not under all these seeming Disadvantages, find out the Traces of a
Divine Original, and enough to entitle God to the Creation of all? And so it is
in the Holy Scriptures, where there often seems wanting the Accomplishments of
Human Eloquence, the enticing words of man's wisdom, and that Decorum and
Artifice which the Books of Human Contrivance and Invention are embellished
with: But as the Apostle says, when he declined the words which man's wisdom
(whether of Philosophers or Orators) teaches, it was that their Faith might
stand not in the wisdom of men, but in the 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5.
power of God: So we may see under the Veil of a seeming Irregularity so much
Beauty shining forth, and experiment so much Virtue proceeding from it, that it
will evidently appear, that the less there is of Man in the Composure, the more
there is of God, and that it can have none for its Author and Inditer but him;
and which Irregularity can no more detract from the Authority and Divine
Inspiration of the Scripture, than it can be questioned whether the Sun be the
Fountain of Light, because of what we that are at a vast distance from it, call
Spots. For we are at a great distance from the Apostolical Age, and much more
from the latest times of the Inspired Writers of the Old Testament, and so must
needs be under some difficulties from our unacquaintedness with the Style and
Way of Writing, as well as the Customs of those Ages. And there will be
therefore some Spots and Dark Places in them as there are in the Sun, not for
want of Light and Elegance originally in them, no more than for want of Light
in the Sun; but because of some Deficiency in our selves, that are at a
Distance, and under such Circumstances as intercept our Sight, and hinder us
from making true and exact Observations. But if we could but stand, as we are
to judge of Pictures, in the same Light in which they were drawn; and had lived
in the same Ages in which those Books were written, we should be able to make a
much truer Judgment, and penetrate much farther into the meaning of them, than
we now can do.

But now though all the Parts of Scripture are not equally alike, but like the
Inspired Writers themselves, of whom some were bred up in the Nurseries of
Learning, and others fetched from the Fishery and the Sheepfold; yet are they
all plain in the same essential Doctrine, and in which the Salvation of Mankind
is concerned.

And not only so, but the Style and Order of Words, if thoroughly understood as
to their Propriety, Elegance, and Use, would be very surprising (if we may
judge of what we do not know, by what we do); which has not been unobserved
even by some of the Heathens. It was Dionysius Longinus the Rhetorician, that
admired the Majesty and Sublimity of Moses's way of writing. It was Amelius the
Platonist, that at the same time as he called St. John a Barbarian (a Title
which the Greeks and Romans bestowed upon Eusebius. Praepar.
all but themselves) found in his Gospel the Wisdom of a Philosopher.

But above all, we may see the Footsteps of a Divine and Extraordinary
Assistance in the admirable Discourses of our Savior and the Apostles upon
several occasions. Let us, for instance, take a view of our Savior's last
Discourse with the Disciples just before his Death, as recorded by St. John,
chap. 14. etc. Turn we again to that of St. Paul about a Future State, and a
Resurrection to it, which is the subject of 1 Cor. 15. See it again in the
close and sensible Argumentations of the Author to the Hebrews. See it also in
the very Digressions which those Holy Penmen sometimes, by breaking off from
their Subject in hand for a while, do fall upon; where we shall find that which
is equivalent to what is ordinarily said by the Prophets in the Messages they*
delivered, Thus says the Lord* and what is as expressly said, and will as much
be found to be of Divine Revelation. It was certainly as much an effect of the
Divine Power to Direct, and Assist, and even Inspire those Writers with such
sublime Notions, such convincing Arguments, as it was of the Divine Commission
to send the Prophets with Authority to publish the Divine Commands and Theol.
Polit. c. 8.
Decrees. And therefore it is a very frivolous Exception which a late Author
makes against the Divine Authority of the Apostolical Writings, That they
consist of long Deductions and Argumentations; whereas, says he, God does not
reason, but command, as he did by the Prophets. But how often do we find in the
Prophets God arguing with the Jews about the Vanity of their Idolatry, from the
Incomprehensible Perfections of his Nature, etc.? How often using Arguments to
convince them of their Immoralities and Impieties? How often exhorting them to
Repentance and Reformation, from the most powerful Considerations? And
therefore why are the Apostles less inspired for that reason than the Prophets?
When God speaks to Men, and teaches one man by another, it is often after the
manner of men; and therefore as he does sometimes require absolute Obedience to
his Commands, so at other times he condescends so far as to show them the
Equity and the Reasonableness of them, both equally becoming the Divine
Majesty, and which are a glorious Instance of the Divine Wisdom conspicuous
throughout the Holy Scripture; thereby adding both to the Excellency and the
Usefulness of it; and advancing it in both above any Book in the World. And for
this, take the Word of one (who is Anima Mundi, Sect. 1.
otherwise no Friend to our Religion, or to the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures) though in contradiction to himself.

As the Luster of an Oriental Diamond is more clearly perceived when compared
with Counterfeit Stones; so Christianity appears in its greatest Glory and
Splendour, when compared with the Obscurity of Paganism; the Deformity of the
one serving as a Foil to the other. Nor does the Divinity of the Scriptures
ever better appear, than when compared with the Follies of the Talmud, the
Alchoran, or the Constitutions of the Heathen Lawgivers; which is an infallible
sign of their Excellence, that they so well bear the Test of Comparison. Thus
(...) he.

IV. General.

How we prove the Books that are now extant, and received by the Christian
Church as Canonical, to be those very Books that were writ by Persons Inspired?

Now this will receive a sufficient Answer, if we prove,

1. That there were once such Books.

2. That these are the very Books which were once said to be Canonical and
Inspired.

3. That these Books are not corrupted, so as not to be the Books now which
once they were.

1. The first of these is not denied by the most violent Adversaries, such as
Appion was to the Jews, and Celsus to the Christians.

2. That these are the Books which were heretofore Penned by Inspired Persons,
and received by the Universal Church as such, we have as much Evidence as we
have or can have for any thing past or distant in time or place from us, and
which we our selves have not seen: And if we call in question the Sufficiency
of the Evidence, or the Truth of what is proved by it, we take away all the
Evidence that we can have, and the Truth and Certainty of whatever has been, or
is, which we have not seen our selves. So that either these are those Books, or
there is nothing of that kind which we can depend upon*

3. These Books are uncorrupted, I mean, by Design, or by Accident.

If by Design, it must either be by Jews, Heretics, or those that are called
Orthodox.

1. If by the Jews, that must either be before the time of our Savior, or
after it. If before, they would have certainly been taxed for it by our Savior
and the Apostles, who upon all occasions appeal to the Scriptures; and yet
never charge them with any such Falsifications.

V. Hieron. in 6. Isa.
If they were corrupted by the Jews after our Savior's time, How came they to
leave those Prophecies uncorrupted which manifestly and principally prove our
Savior to be the Messiah? For surely if they adulterated, or expunged, or
added to the less, they would have offered as much violence to the greater. But
it is eviden^ V. Philo de. Egress^ Israel. ex* Aegypto.*
the Jews were in a high degree superstitious, in preserving the Copies of the
Scripture sound and entire.

Or if they would have attempted this, how could they do it, and not be
discovered and challenged for it by the Christians, who from that time forward
had the Scriptures of the Old Testament in their custody as well as themselves?

2. It could not be by the Heretics, because the Scriptures were soon
dispersed over all the Christian World, and were read both in public and
private; and with that Care and Faithfulness, that they chose rather to part
with their Lives, than become Traditores, and deliver up their Bibles to be
burnt; and keeping then so watchful an eye upon them, they could not be
perverted by their fraudulent Arts, but they would soon be observed and
complained of; especially by those whose Office it was above others to study
and preserve them.

Irenaus l. 1. c. 29. Tertul* contra Marcion. l. 5. Epiphan. Haer. 42.
So when Marcion falsified the Text, he was presently detected and exposed for
it.

3. Nor could it be by the Orthodox, if any of them were so weak as to think to
serve their Cause by it: For as to the Old Testament, they were as watchfully
observed by the Jews, as the Jews were by them; and both the Copies of the Old
and New were so soon and so far dispersed, that neither could any one attempt
it with any likelihood of success, nor all agree in it, when impossible to
convene for it.

And therefore when Manichaeus and his Followers pretended the Corruption of
the Scripture in their own vindication, they could not make out their Charge,
though provoked by St. Austin, Aug. de util. Cred. c. 3.
etc. to it.

Use. We may observe from hence, what a Blessing we enjoy above the Ages of
Tradition, when the knowledge of the Truth was conveyed from hand to hand;
which so sensibly declined, that the Truth was soon turned into Fable, and that
so few Years after the Flood as the time of Terah, the greatest part of the
World was overrun with Idolatry; so that for the retrieving it, God drew
Abraham out of that infected Mass* and enjoined him to set up a Family
separated from the rest of the World, that out of that he might constitute a
Church for his Service.

But we have that which those Ages wanted* a Written and Certain Rule for our
Faith and Manners; and that so plainly and intelligibly wrote, and so
completely and entirely furnished with all things necessary for us to know in
order to the Happiness of another Life; that as none in the Christian Church
(where the Guides and Teachers are faithful to their Flock) can be or must
unavoidably be ignorant; so neither can any person be defective in the
knowledge of his Duty, or void and destitute of a power of doing what is
necessary toward his Happiness, unless by his own fault. If we keep but to our
Rule, that is as an Infallible Compass to direct us, and we shall never fall
short of knowing what God has revealed, or of obtaining what he has promised.

And here we may farther reflect upon our Happiness in this Church, that we
have not the Key of Knowledge taken from us, and the Truth locked up in an
Unknown Tongue (as in the Church of Rome) but plainly and faithfully rendered in
our own Language, for the Instruction and Edification of all.

What remains then, but that we make this our daily study, and labor to
acquaint our selves with the Rich Treasures of Useful and Necessary Knowledge
contained in those Sacred Repositories, and making them as David did, a Lamp to
our feet, and endeavoring to conform our selves in all points to their holy
Prescriptions; and then we shall most certainly have reason to rejoice in the
Comfort of the Promises, and with Patience look for that blessed hope and
glorious appearance of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

To whom, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
SErmon I. 2d Edit. P. 11. l. 4. r. manner. P. 13. l. 21. for only r. wholly.
Sermon VI. ^. 2. Marg.(...) IV. P. 10. l. 11. dele. both the Comma's. P. 25. l.
12. before and after that is dele(,).


