Mr. WAKE's SERMON BEFORE THE House of COMMONS.

June 5th, 1689.

Jovis 6o die Junii 1689
Resolved,

THat the Thanks of this House be given to Mr. Wake for the Sermon he Preached
before them yesterday; And that he be desired to Print the same.

Ordered,

THat Mr. Gray do give him the Thanks, and acquaint him with the Desires of
this House accordingly.

Paul Jodrell, Cl. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, AT St. MARGARET'S
WESTMINSTER June 5th. 1689.

Being The FAST DAY Appointed by the KING and QUEEN's Proclamation, TO Implore
the Blessing of Almighty God upon their MAJESTY'S Forces by Sea and Land, and
Success in the War, now declared, against the FRENCH KING.

By WILLIAM WAKE, Chaplain in Ordinary to their MAJESTY'S, and Preacher to the
Honorable Society of Gray's-Inn.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and William Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet street. 1689.

JOEL, II. 12, 13. Therefore also now says the LORD, Turn ye even to Me with
all your heart, and with Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning.

And rent your heart and not your garments, and turn unto the LORD your God,
for He is Gracious and Merciful, slow to Anger and of great Kindness, and
repents Him of the Evil.


THough the time of this Prophecy be uncertain, so that neither the Jewish
Rabbis, nor Christian Antiquaries are able to give us any tolerable account of
it, yet is the Design plain, and the words of my Text a most proper and
pathetick enforcement of the Great duty of this day, to turn unto the Lord our
God with all our Heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning,
-- for he is Gracious and Merciful, slow to Anger and of great Kindness, and
repents him of the Evil.

If we look into the foregoing Chapter, we shall there find an astonishing
Account of the great Evils that were just ready to befall the Jews for their
Sins. But that which is yet more surprising, is, That though all this was about
to come upon them, yet were they nevertheless insensible of their danger, nor
took any the least care to prevent their utter desolation.

To awaken a stupid and inconsiderate People, a Nation dead in Sin and
Security, in the beginning of this Chapter he prepares a lofty and magnificent
Scene. He sets before them a Prophecy of yet greater dangers than any they had
hitherto experimented, and that in a manner so unusual, with such a Pomp of
Words, and in such Triumphant Expressions, as carry a terror even in the
Repetition of them.

Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, sound an Alarm in Joel II. 1.
my holy Mountain; Let all the Inhabitants of the Land tremble, for the day of
the LORD comes; for it is nigh at hand: A day of darkness and of gloominess;
-- 2.
a day of Clouds and of thick darkness; as the Morning spread upon the
Mountains; a great People and a strong, there has not been ever the like,
neither shall be any more after it. A fire devours before them, and -- 3.
behind them a flame burns: The Land is as the Garden of Eden before them,
and behind them a desolate wilderness. The Earth shall quake before them; the
-- 10.
Heavens shall tremble; the Sun and the Moon shall be dark; and the Stars shall
withdraw their shining.

Whatever be the Import of these Phrases; whether by the mighty and terrible
Host here spoken of, we are only to understand that swarm of Judaei putant in
diebus Joel tam innumerabilem Locustarum super judaeam venisse multitudinem, ut
cuncta complerent, and non dicam fruges, sed ne Vinearum quidem and arborum
Cortices, ramosque dimitterent, ita ut omni virore consumpto arentes
arborumrami, and sicca vinearum flagella remanerent. Hieron. in Joel I. v. 6.
Locusts, and other Insects, that we are Chapter I. 4.
before told were utterly to devour all the Fruits of the Land: Or whether
under the Character of these, we shall See among the Ancients, St. Hierome.
loc. cit. Drusius in Joel I. 1. Grotius in Joel I. 5. Theodoret in Cap. 1. 4.
(...). v. pl.
with most Interpreters, comprehend the numerous and mighty Armies of the
Chaldaeans and Babylonians, which at diverse times brought such Desolations, as
we read of, upon the Jews: This is plain, that we have here the denunciation of
some Judgment worthy of God, and great as the sins and incorrigibleness that
occasioned it.

And now, who would not here expect the final desolation of such a People as
this? But behold, God even yet in his Anger remembers Mercy; and tho they had
hitherto neglected all the Calls and Invitations of his holy Prophets to
Repentance, yet He resolves once more to try, whether they would now at least
in their dangers hearken to his Admonitions: He raises up Joel at once both to
set before them his Judgments, if they continued still impenitent; and to
encourage them, by repenting, not only to prevent their Ruin, but to assure
themselves of his Favor. That though they had so long neglected him, yet if
they would (...). ver. 12.
now, even now at the last, return with a true Zeal, and a sincere Affection to
their Duty, they should not fail to meet with a favorable acceptance from him:

Therefore also now says the LORD, Turn ye even to me, with all your heart,
and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: And rent your heart, and
not your garments, and turn unto the LORD your God: for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

It is not my intention to seek a Parallel of all this, either in the sins, or
in the danger of our own Country. I would willingly hope, that neither our
Guilt, nor our Incorrigibleness have been so heinous as theirs, nor shall any
such deplorable Judgment as this, ever, I trust, be made the punishment of what
our Iniquities have indeed but too justly deserved. No, blessed be God, who by
a wonderful Concurrence of great and singular Mercies, seems rather to call
upon us to celebrate his Goodness, than to deprecate his Judgments; to praise
his Name in Hymns of Triumph and Eucharist, than to weep between the Porch and
the Altar, in melancholy Litanies to avert his Anger, and implore his Mercy.
But yet since the Goodness, as well as Judgments of the Lord, are designed to
bring us to repentance, and that whether we look back into our own particular
Actions, or consider those Public and National Transgressions, whereby we have
so long and loudly called to Heaven for vengeance; we must with shame and
indignation confess our selves some of the greatest of Sinners; I cannot but
think, both the Solemn Occasion of this Day, and the Design of my Text, to be a
most proper and seasonable Admonition to us, to turn unto the Lord our God, and
to implore his Blessing upon our present Enterprises, that those vile Insects,
the Locusts and Caterpillars, that have so barbarously consumed our Neighbors
round about us; our worse than Assyrian or Babylonian Enemies, may not be able
to prevail against us.

And indeed, however it has pleased God, as at this time, to give us some
Encouragement to trust in his Mercy; yet we cannot so soon forget, that we have
also born the punishment of our sins. For not to repass upon the things that
are at a greater distance from us; let the Instances still fresh in all our
Memories, speak to us: What just Apprehensions did we but very lately lie under
of our Lives, and of what is yet dearer to us than our Lives, our Liberty, and
our Religion? How did our Enemies not only project our Ruin, but as, if it were
already accomplished, begin to say in their hearts, nay, they began freely to
speak it out to us; Aha! so would we have it: Persecute Psalm. LXXI. 9.
them, and take them; for there is none to deliver them.

And if now we are no longer exposed to those dangers that so lately threatened
us; if God has begun, upon our late more serious Concern for Religion, and more
general return to him, to give us some Testimony of his gracious Designations
toward us; This certainly ought to be so far from lessening our solemn
Humiliation at this time, that it should rather engage us to be the more
forward in perfecting our Repentance, the greater Encouragement we have to
hope, that it shall be accepted at our hands. And I must now beg leave, with so
much the more Earnestness, to enforce the Duty of my Text: Therefore also now,
says the LORD, turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning:

And rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the LORD your God.



By how much I hope I may with the greater assurance propose to you the Promise
of it for your Encouragement: For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.



I have already pointed out to you the two great parts of my Text; and which
must therefore be the Subject of my Discourse upon it; viz.

I. The Address of the Holy Prophet to his Country, and in that the
Exhortation; which I am earnestly in the Name of God to recommend unto you this
day; To turn unto the LORD your God with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning.



II. The great Encouragement which he offered to induce them, and which ought
to be of no less a force to stir up all of us to a serious and diligent
performance of it. For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil.



I begin with the former of these, the Exhortation of my Text: I. To turn unto
the LORD your God with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and
with mouring.



And here I presume I shall not need to tell you, That all this is but a larger
Paraphrase of what I may in other Words call a General and National Repentance,
of those Public and National Sins which had provoked God Almighty to send down
so many Judgments upon them, and to threaten them with yet greater, if they
continued still in their Impenitence. And indeed, what could be more
reasonable, than by such a Solemn and Universal Acknowledgment both of the
Evils they had committed, and of the Judgments which they deserved, and of the
sorrow they were now touched with for their Offenses, to appease God's Anger
for that General Incorrigibleness, by which they had so long exposed both his
Goodness and his Justice to Contempt, among the Heathen round about him?

For however it be very certain, that all the outward pomp and solemnity of
Repentance, the fasting, and the weeping, and the mourning, are at best but a
form of Godliness, empty and unprofitable, unless there be also added to these
that true and inward change of Mind, in which alone consists the Power of it;
yet there may be such Circumstances and Cases put, wherein this Duty must pass
beyond the Heart and the Closet, and the Humiliation will be imperfect, if it
be not as publicly set forth to the Eyes of Men, as it is sincerely performed
in the sight of God.

And such especially must be the Repentance for National Sins. Where Men's
Transgressions have been open and notorious, there their Return also must be no
less Solemn and Evident; that so the Honor as well as Justice of God may be
vindicated in their Forgiveness; and some sort of Reparation made not only for
the Guilt which they have contracted, but also for the Scandal which they have
given to his Honor and Religion in the World.

Now it is this which at once both declares the Piety, and commands the public
Humiliation of THIS DAY. (...). Chrysostom. Hom. ad pop. Aniooch. 3.
And for the due discharge whereof, I must entreat you to go along with me in
these following Reflections.

1st. That though, as I have just now shown, there must be the public marks of
Sorrow and Humiliation in our public Repentance, yet we must by no means stop
in these; nor think that this is all that God requires of us in order to our
forgiveness.

This was indeed the Vanity of the Jews heretofore, and is too much the folly
of some misguided Christians now. Their Indignation against their Sins, and
against themselves for having committed them, was spent especially in the
outward appearance of sorrow. They rent their Clothes; 2 Samuel iii. 31.
and put on sackcloath; they wept, and fasted and went 1 King. xxi. 27.
softly; and then they supposed they had done their business; though it may be
their Souls were not yet Humbled; nor their Hearts at all broken with any true
Contrition for their Sins.

And so among those of the Church of Rome at this day. If we may believe some
of their greatest Casuists, an external Worship is sufficient to carry a man to
Heaven, without the trouble of the true inward Devotion of the Soul: He may
repent without Contrition; may fast with a full Meal: Nay, and if the Pope
pleases, This Passage is so very Extraordinary, that I ought to give some
Account of it. Pope Boniface IX. having granted a large Indulgence at Rome,
whether the Lombards, by reason of the Wars they then had, could not go to gain
it, at the Prayer of John Galeas, Visconte of Milan he grants the same
Indulgence to Milan he had done at Rome, viz. that all the Subjects of the said
Galeas, though they had neither Confessed their Sins, nor were Contrite for
them, should yet be absolved of all their Sins; only for visiting a few
Churches, and paying the Sum of Money prefixed by the said Bull: -- Cioe (says
their own Historion) che Ciasciascuno nel dominio del Visconte, se ancho non
fosse contrito, ne Corfesso, fosse assoluto di ogni peccato. Bern. Corio nella
sua Hist. di Milan. terza part. page 629. Ed. Venet. 1565.
may obtain a plenary remission of his Sins, se ancho non fosse confesso ne
contrito; though he has neither confessed them to any Priest, nor finds in his
own Heart any manner of Contrition for them.

I shall not need to say how many new ways of Salvation of this kind they have
found out; by wearing a Leathern Girdle about their Loins, or Scapularies over
their Shoulders; by listing themselves See Dr. Brevints Saul and Samuel at
Endor. Crasset devotion veritable envers la Stc. Vierge. part. ult.
into such or such certain Fraternities; by dressing of Altars, and going on
Pilgrimages; by Holy Water, and Agnus deis: And all which, and infinite more of
the like kind, if, as our late Masters tell us, they are not Authorized by
their Church, yet I am sure are publicly Recommended by their Greatest Men,
and generally practiced too, without any censure or contradiction among them.
This is certain, that all these, and whatever Artifices of the like kind, Men
may please either to flatter themselves, or to delude others withal, without a
true Contrition, and a serious Reformation they are all but Vanity; They make a
show of Piety in the Eyes of Men, but they avail nothing to our forgiveness
with God.

I will not dispute of what use some of these External Performances may be to
assist our Repentance, and render our Sorrow for Sin the more solemn, and so in
some Cases, as I have before observed, the more pleasing to God. I know well
enough that St. Paul has told us, that Bodily Exercise, where it is discreetly
ordered, does profit a 1 Timothy 4. 8.
little, though it be not like Godliness, profitable for all things. But then
as it is plain, that the greatest part of those Follies so much magnified and
recommended in the Church of Rome, are but vain and ridiculous Impositions to
cheat the silly and superstitious Multitude; so it is certain that the best of
these things are neither in themselves Meritorious, much less Satisfactory for
Sins, as they pretend them to be, nor otherwise of any value at all with God,
than as they are attended with that true Repentance, which alone can either
incline his Mercy or obtain our Forgiveness.

If we will therefore make our solemn (...). Chrysostom. Hom. ad Antioch. 3.
Humiliation this day acceptable to God, and available to our selves, our
Country, and our Religion, we must take the Method of the Prophet in our Text:
We must turn unto the Lord our God with all our Heart, and then our fasting,
and our weeping, and our Mourning shall indeed be pleasing unto him. We must
rent our Hearts and not, i. e. rather than our Garments; must humble our Souls
first, and then the violence we do our Bodies will be considered by him. When
Jonah denounced Gods Judgments against Niniveh, we read in his 3d. Chapter,
That the People of Niniveh believed, and Proclaimed a fast, and put on
Sackcloath, from the greatest of them even unto the least. (...), etc. Chrysostom.
ad Antioch. Hom. 3.
But was this therefore that Repentance for which he spared them? No, it is not
so much as once mentioned among the Reasons of it. It was the Reformation of
their Lives that tied up his Hand, and sheathed his Sword, ver. 10. And God saw
their Works, that they turned from their Evil way; and God repented of the Evil
that he said he would do unto them, and he did it not.

2. And this brings me to a second Remark for the farther clearing of this
great Duty; viz. That not only these outward marks of penitence are not
sufficient to the discharge of it, but though we should to these add a true and
real sorrow of heart for the Sins we have committed, even this would not be
sufficient to purchase our forgiveness.

Now by true sorrow, I do not mean that little imperfect sorrow, which looks
rather to the danger of our Condition, than to the heinousness of our Offenses;
and bewails our Transgressions more out of an apprehension of those Judgments
that may be the Consequence of them, than out of any real regret that we have
sinned against a most Gracious and Merciful God. For however those of the other
Communion, out of their great tenderness to Sinners, have declared such a
sorrow as this, if accompanied with Confession, to be sufficient for Men's
Salvation; and therefore have resolved, that true Contrition or a sorrow for
sin committed, with a purpose of sinning no Conc. Tr. Sess. xiv. cap. 4.
more, is not necessary to the Sacrament of Penance, after the Commission of
mortal Sin, but that Attrition is sufficient, though a Man knows it to be no
more; Yet I suppose it needless in this place to obviate any such gross Error,
however otherwise of very great danger, in the Practice of this Duty. Be the
sorrow for sin never so sincere; and our Resolutions thereupon no more to
return to the Commission of it never so firm and well grounded, yet if instead
of making good these Resolutions we shall stop here, we are but half Penitents;
we yet want that change of life, which alone is able to complete the Nature,
and render the Practice of our Repentance acceptable unto God, and available to
our forgiveness.

3. In short, thirdly, if we will truly discharge that Repentance, to which we
are here called, we must do it not by being sorry for our Sins, or by resolving
against them, but by an effectual forsaking of them; i. e. as our Text speaks,
By turning unto the Lord our God. This is that which alone can implore his
Favor, and commend us to his Mercy. And this was what I before observed in the
Case of Niniveh: When God saw their works that they turned from their Evil way,
then he repented him of the Evil that he had said he would do unto them, and he
did it not.

Nay, but it is not any turning unto God that will suffice neither: We must
turn Veraciter integraliter. Lyr. Mercer.
even unto him, and with all our Revera, Ex animo, non simulate. Drus. serio ac
bona fide. Grot.
Heart: Words very Emphatical, and which offer to us two great Conditions,
which are absolutely necessary to render our Conversion every way such as it
ought to be. First, That it must be hearty and sincere: There must be nothing
of the Hypocrite mixed with it; our Souls must go along with our outward
Performances; and these penitential appearances be the true Declarations of
that real inward sorrow which we feel in our Hearts for our Offenses. For God
is Psalm. xliv. 21. 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 9. Romans viii. 27.
not a Man that he should be mocked. He sees into our very Souls, and knows the
secrets of all the Children of Men. And Secondly, That it must be entire and
without reserve: As we must be sorry for every Sin we have already committed,
so we must resolve against ever committing any for the time to come; Habac. i.
13.
For God is of purer Eyes than to behold the least Iniquity; and if our
Repentance be sincere, so shall we be too. The same Piety which moves us to
hate any Evil, will equally fill us with an Aversion against all. And if we
desire to continue but in one Offense, it is because that we do truly repent of
none.

So that now then if we will answer the design of this day: if we will render
our fast such as the Lord has chosen, and has promised to reward with the
Blessings both of this life, and of that which is to come; we must not think it
enough that we comply with the outward Ceremonies and show of Repentance, but
we must indeed resolve to bring forth the fruits of it. Whilst we Address our
selves to God for Pardon, we must take heed to dispose our Souls in such a
manner, that we may be fit to receive it.

And if we thus improve the great Solemnity of this day, we shall not fail to
meet with a favorable acceptance at the Throne of Grace. God Joel. ii. 18.
will be jealous for his land, and pity his People: He will perfect the great
Deliverance he has begun for us, and once more render us the fear and the Deuteronomy.
ii. 25.
terror of all our Enemies round about us. Our Faith which has so often
triumphed over all the Arguments of its Adversaries, shall now no less triumph
over all their black Designs to root it out and to destroy it; and show to all
the World, that though for our Trial God may sometimes permit the Winds to
blow, and the Floods to rise, and the Storms to beat against our Church, yet
has he founded it on that Rock that shall never fail; Nor Matt. xvi. 18.
shall the gates of Hell, either the Power of France or the Cunning of the
Jesuit, or the Malice of Both, ever be able to prevail against it.

And this brings me to the other thing I am to speak to: Our Encouragement to
this Duty. II. For God is Grciouas and Merciful, slow to anger and of great
Kindness, and repents him of the Evil.



It is not at all needful for me to enter on any particular Explication of all
these Gracious Attributes, and show what Arguments every one of them affords to
engage us to Repentance. Two things in General there are, which will at first
sight arise from them to excite us to it, viz. 1st The Goodness and Mercy of
God to the greatest Sinners upon their Repentance.

God is Gracious and Merciful, and of great Kindness.

2dly His unwillingness to pronounce any Judgments at all against them, and his
readiness to recall them, if they repent.

He is slow to Anger, and Repents him of the Evil.

And 1st Of the Goodness and Mercy of God to the Greatest of Sinners upon their
Repentance.

He is Gracious and Merciful and of great Kindness.



When God Proclaimed his own Name in the midst of the People of Israel, we read
in the xxxiv. of Exodus, that he chose to do it not so much in the terrible
Attributes of his Majesty and Power, as in the soft Idea's of his Mercy and
Goodness, The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7.
long-suffering and abundant in Goodness and truth; keeping Mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin. And if we look into
all the following Representations which he makes of himself, whether by his
Holy Prophets under the Legal, but especially by our Blessed Savior and his
Apostles under the Christian Dispensation, we shall find there is no Character
he so much delights in as this of being Good and Gracious, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to Repentance. 2 Peter iii. 8.

And now what more forcible Encouragement can any one desire to bring him to
Repentance, than to be thus assured of the Goodness and Mercy of God to the
greatest of Sinners, if they Repent? That he will not only forgive him upon his
return, but will even assist him with Grace and Strength in the doing of it.
That he desires not the death of the most Profligate Offender, but rather that
he should turn from his wickedness and live. In a word, That he has promised
forgiveness, without exception, to the most wicked Men upon their Repentance;
so that if they will but yet break off their evil Course, and keep his
Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, they shall surely live, they
shall not dye. Ezekiel. xviii. 21.

Many are the ways, and excellent the Methods that God has taken to convince us
of his Mercy, and the time would fail me to enter on a particular Consideration
of them.

Sometimes he declares not only that he is ready to pardon us if we repent, but
that he even desires we should repent that he may forgive us. And least his
Word should not be sufficient, he confirms that desire with an Oath, Ezekiel.
xxxiii. 11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye
from your Evil ways, for why will ye die O House of Israel?

Sometimes he Expostulates with us in the way of Reasoning, to see if by that
means he may be able to bring us to consider his Love and Affection to us.
Isai. i. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the Isaiah 1.
Evil of your doings from before mine Eyes; cease to do -- 16.
evil, learn to do well. -- Come now and let us reason -- 17.
together, says the Lord: Tho your Sins be as Scarlet, -- 18.
they shall be white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as
Wool.

If he Exhorts us to Repentance, he always does it upon this Promise, that he
will Pardon us if we repent. If we turn from our Sins, Iniquity shall not Ezekiel.
xviii. 30.
be our ruin.

If he threatens Judgments, yet still he keeps a reserve for Mercy to triumph
over Judgment; and will rather be thought inconstant in his most Peremptory
Decrees, than inexorable to Repenting Sinners. Thus he commanded Jonah to go to
Niniveh, and to pronounce an utter destruction against it. He fixed the very
time too, Yet forty Jonah. iii. 4.
days and Niniveh shall be overthrown. But what now was the issue of all this?
Why, the City believed, and feared God, and turned from their Evil way: And God
repented of the Evil that he said he -- 10.
would do unto them, and he did it not, Jonah. 3.

And what must the Consequence of all these Reflections be, but to engage us
not to despise the Goodness of God, whereby he thus Graciously invites us to
Repentance; but to conclude with Holy David, Psalm. cxxx. 3. If thou LORD
should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O God who may abide it? But
there is Mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared.

And what I have now said of Gods mercy in General, will yet more hold in the
other Part of this Character, wherein is set out to us in Particular. Secondly,
his great unwillingness to pronounce any Judgments at all against Sinners, and
his readiness to recall them upon their Repentance.

He is slow to anger, and repents him of the Evil.



And because I would now, were I able, speak not so much to your Reason, as to
your Sense and Experience, to your Consciences and Affections; I will for the
Proof of this no more lead you back to the Israelites in this Prophecy; to
Past-times, and unknown Countries; but will rather desire you to consider your
own Times, your own Country, and if you will allow me freely to add it, your
own Souls. Which of all these will not afford me an evident Demonstration of
the Patience and long-suffering of God? And speak him in the words of the Text,
to be a God slow to anger, and that repents him of the Evil?

That after so many Sins, as we have every one, the very best of us committed,
we are yet alive this day, whereas God might, if he had pleased, long since
have cut us off in the midst of our Sins: That after so many calls and
invitations as he has sent to bring us to Repentance, he is still pleased to
call and to invite us to it: That notwithstanding we have so far abused his
Goodness and long-suffering, as to improve that which above all things should
have the most engaged us to our Duty, into an encouragement to go on the rather
in our Sins; he nevertheless still continues to us the Offers of Pardon and
Peace, if we will even now in this our day consider the things that make for
our Peace: What is all this but a most Demonstrative, as well as a most
Affectionate Proof, that God is indeed slow to anger, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to Repentance?

That he has delivered us out of so many dangers, in which, but for his
Providence over us we must long since have perished: That he has smitten us in
Mercy, not in Judgment; to correct and admonish, not to ruin and destroy us:
That upon our deprecating his Anger, he has at any time heard our Prayers, and
answered our Desires: What is this but a plain Evidence that he smites not
willingly, nor loves to afflict the Lam. iii. 33.
Children of Men: and so is a God repenting him of the Evil that he is at any
time forced either to threaten us with, or to bring upon us.

And if we look into his Dispensations toward us in the common concern of our
Country and our Religion; How slow must that God have been to Anger, who after
so many years Attendance, nevertheless still calls upon us, as at this day, to
turn from our Evil way, and from the violence that Ezekiel. xviii. 30.
is in our Hands, that our Iniquity may not be our ruin?

And for his repenting him of the Evil, which we have sometimes forced him by
our continual Provocations to send upon us: Let the Instances which we our
selves have known suffice to tell us, how unwilling he has shown himself to
bring us to an utter desolation.

When it pleased God for our iniquities, to despise, in his indignation, both
the King and the Priest; Lam. ii. 6.
and by the deplorable Judgment of Civil Confusions, had proved and exercised
us about Twenty Years; with what a Miracle of Mercy did he Psalm. cxxvi. 1.
turn again the Captivity of Sion, and restore to us both our Government and
Religion, as before?

When this would not do, but our Sins and our Prosperity returned together; so
that we were again in a very few years become ripe for judgment; He called
forth a destroying Angel; He put a new Sword into his Hand, and commanded him
to slay his Thousands and Ten Thousands in our Streets. The PLAGUE consumed our
Strength, and hardly was that passed, when another Vengeance, a devouring FIRE,
such as scarce any Age or Country has ever heard of, burnt down our Dwellings.
And had not the Hand of God wonderfully interposed, we must have been as Sodom,
and we should have been like unto Isaiah i. 9.
Gomorrah.

And yet how did he then cover us with his hand in that day of his displeasure?
He neither suffered our Enemies to invade us from abroad, nor any Domestic
Quarrels to embroil us at home. He preserved us in Peace; he sent again the
Blessings of Plenty and Prosperity among us, and our City is risen more Great
and Glorious out of its Ashes.

What shall I say to the fears and jealousies we have labored under since,
from a restless Party, Enemies to the Name of Protestant, and by Principle
conjured, if they can, to root it out of the World?

In how many dangers has God delivered us? And how many Designs, for ought we
know, may he have prevented, which have not yet been brought to light? And when
at last, either to awaken us the more effectually to a Repentance of our sins,
or it may be to accomplish the number of their Iniquities, he delivered us over
for a little while into the hands of our Enemies; and to convince the most
incredulous among us, what the true Spirit of prevailing Popery is, suffered
them with such an inconsiderate Fury to pursue our Ruin, that no Ties, either
of God or Man, were sufficient to restrain them; but all Obligations, whether
of Justice or Conscience, were equally trampled under their feet: How did it
then please our Almighty Defender to assert his Character of being a God
repenting him of the evil that he had brought upon us, in a manner that is the
Wonder and Astonishment of the present, and, that I am persuaded, shall be the
Praise and Triumph of his Church in all succeeding Generations?

He raised us up a Deliverer out of the House of his Servant David. He touched
his Princely Heart with a Generous Sense both of the Evils which we had
suffered, and of the greater that we apprehended. His Honor and his Zeal
enflamed him to do somewhat worthy Himself; and that might answer the mighty
Hopes God had prepared us to conceive of Him. He meditated the great Work of
delivering our Country from Oppression, and our Religion from Destruction. And
by the Blessing of God, he accomplished it, in a manner, so extraordinary in
all its Circumstances, as, I think, should not suffer us to doubt from whose
Providence it was, that this Redemption was sent to us. This was the Lord's
doing, and, whatever it is, I am sure ought to be, mavelous in our Eyes: And
may, I think, be a final, I hope it shall be an effectual Confirmation to us of
this Great Engagement of our Text, to turn to him with all our hearts; viz.
That he is a God repenting him of the evil; and therefore whose Mercy, if we
now truly do so, we may securely depend upon both for the forgiveness of our
sins, and for our deliverance from those dangers which our sins have so justly
exposed us to.

And now what remains, but that having all these great Encouragements, such
Promises, or rather, such an Earnest of God's Favor to us, we resolve, every
one of us, seriously to comply with the great Design both of this Day and of
this Discourse; and by our sincere Repentance for our past Offenses, obtain
that Blessing we so much desire both for our Country, and for our Religion.

Never was there a time wherein we had greater Reason to hope for God's
Acceptance than at this Day; and such an Occasion as this, to implore his
Favor, there may not perhaps again occur in the Course of many Ages.

For indeed what is it that we are now assembled to recommend to His Mercy, but
in Effect the preservation of our Selves, our Laws, our Liberties, and our
Religion, against the Violence of those who have long conspired both Their and
Our destruction.

That he would preside in our Councils, and go forth with our Armies; and so
direct the one, and prosper the other, that we may again enjoy the Blessings of
Peace and Security; that there may be no decay, no leading into Psalm. cxliv. 14.
Captivity, and no just complaining in our Streets.

And this he will do, if we be not our selves wanting to our own preservation.
Only let us act as becomes Good Christians, and True Englishmen; let us do all
things for the Glory of God, and for the Safety, Honor, and Welfare of our
Country: In the words of Joab to his Brother Alishai, upon an Occasion not much
different from our own at this time; Let us be strong, and of good Courage, and
let us 2 Samuel x. 12.
play the Men for our People, and for the Cities of our God; and then he will
not fail us, nor forsake us.

But if instead of pursuing the things that make for our Peace, we shall still
go on to precipitate our own destruction: If when we are called this Day to
turn unto the LORD our God with all our hearts, and with fasting, and with
weeping, and with mourning; we shall instead thereof fast only for strife and
for debate: Isa. lviii. 4.
If when we should be here prostrating our selves before the LORD, to implore
the Completion of that Great Deliverance he has begun to work for us; we shall,
on the contrary, continue ungratefully to murmur against his Providence, and be
ready almost to implead his Justice for what he has already done; and with
those repining Israelites of old, be looking back again to our Egyptian
Bondage, when we are brought even within prospect of the Promised Land: In a
word, If when we should be uniting our selves against the Common Enemy of our
Country and Christendom, we shall suffer a Spirit of Faction and Sedition, of
Mutiny and Discontent; of private Interests, and unseasonable Resentments, to
distract our Councils, and divide us against one another; What can we then
expect, but that God should at last give us over into the hands of our Enemies,
and make those that hate us to rule over us.

Wherefore now, arise O ye Worthies, ye Chosen, and Counselors of our Israel;
Consult, consider, and resolve: And may the God of Heaven; the God before whom
we are here assembled this Day; He who has, and does, and we trust will still
deliver us; our Rock, and our Defense against the Face of our Enemies, so
direct and prosper all your Consultations, that the Children which are yet
unborn, may rise up in their Generations, and call you Blessed, when they shall
enjoy the Benefits of that Peace, that Security, which we trust shall descend
to them, through your Wise and Vigorous Resolutions.

Behold this day the Eyes not of your own Nation only, but of all the Nations
round about us, fixed upon you: The Fortunes, I do not say, of every single
Person among you, though that were somewhat; nor of your own Country and
Religion only, which ought to be much more valued; but what is yet more
considerable, the Fortunes of all the Reformed Churches, and distressed
Countries of Europe, depending on the success of our present Enterprises. This
is the fatal Crisis, that must secure or ruin both them and us for ever.

May the Consideration of all these things, inspire every one of you with a
Spirit suitable to that great Trust that is here committed to you: A Spirit of
Wisdom and Understanding; a Spirit of Prudence and Discretion; a Spirit of
Charity and Moderation; but above all with a Spirit of Piety and Unity; that
being endu'd with all these excellent Qualities, ye may become the Repairers of
our Breaches; the Restorers of our almost lost and trampled Liberties; the
Defenders of our Faith; the Support of your Country; the Avengers of your
barbarously abused Allies; the Scourge and Terror of the Universal Enemy of
Truth, Peace, Religion, Nature: In short, of all the common Laws and Rights of
God and of all Mankind.

May your Councils be Governed with such a Calmness and Temper, as may settle
and compose all the unquiet and dissatisfied Spirits (if there be any) yet
remaining among us; and suffer none to regret our wonderful preservation, but
those only whose fury had once prompted them to attempt, and whose Principles
still carry them on, to desire our Destruction.

May your Resolutions be as speedy, as the public Necessities are pressing;
and their Execution be accompanied with a Fidelity and Success that may equal
not only our Expectation, but even our very Hopes and our Desires.

And for the accomplishment of all these Blessings, and whatever else may serve
to make these Kingdoms Happy.

May We all this day, fast the fast which the Lord has chosen; to loose the
bands of wickedness, to Isa. Lviii. 6.
undo the heavy-burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free.

Let us confess our wickedness, and be sorry for Psalm. xxxviii. 18.
our sins.

Let us turn to the LORD our God with all our Joel. ii. 13.
heart; and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.

Let us deal our Bread to the Hungry, and bring the Isa. Lviii. 7.^
Poor to our Houses.

Then shall we call, and the Lord shall answer; we -- 8.
shall cry, and he shall say here I am. Our light -- 9.
shall break forth as the Morning, and our righteousness as the Noonday.

God shall come, and shall not keep silence: He shall Psalm. l. 3.
save us from our Enemies, and put them to shame Psalm. xliv. 7.
that hate us.

He shall arise, and all our Adversaries shall be scattered; Psalm. Lxviii. 1.
they also that hate us shall flee before us; Like -- 2.
as the smoke vanishes, so shall we drive them away; Exodus xv. 16.
terror and dread shall fall upon them.

So shall all our Mourning be turned into Laughter, and our Heaviness into Joy;
and we shall yet sing the Song of Moses and of the Lamb, when he shall have
given us rest from all our Enemies round about us;

Salvation and Glory, and Power, and Praise, and Thanksgiving, be to him that
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for Ever and Ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
BOOKS Published by the Reverend Mr. WAKE.
Printed for RICHARD CHISWELL.
AN Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] 4o.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, against
the Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the new Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART: in which the Account that has been given of the
Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully Vindicated, the Distinction of Old and
New Popery, Historically asserted, and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
point of Image worship, more particularly considered.

Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against Monsieur de Meaux and his Vindicator, the SECOND PART.

A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host: In Answer to the Two Discourses lately
Printed at Oxford, on this Subject. To which is prefixed a Large Historical
Preface, relating to the same Argument.

Two Discourses of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead. 4o.

A Continuation of the Controversy between the Church of England and the
Church of Rome, being a full account of the Books that have been of late
written on Both sides.

An Historical Treatise of Transubstantion. Written by an Author of the
Communion of the Church of Rome; rendered into English. With a Preface.

Preparation for Death; being a Letter sent to a Young Gentlewoman in France,
in a distemper of which she died.

Printed for WILLIAM ROGERS.
A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry; in which a Late Author (viz.)
the Bp. of Oxford's true and only Notion of Idolatry, is considered and
confuted 4o.

The Sum of a Conference between Dr. Clagett and F. P. Gooden, about
Transubstantiation. Published by this Author. And to be added to Dr. Clagett's
Sermons now in the Press, which will be Published this Term.

Printed for Richard Chiswell, and William Rogers.
AN Exhortation to Mutual Charity and Union among Protestants. In a Sermon
Preached before the King and Queen at Hampton Court, May 26. 1689.

A Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at St. Margaret's
Westminster, June 5. 1689. Being the Fast Day appointed by the King and Queen's
Proclamation, to implore the Blessing of Almighty God upon their Majesty's
Forces by Sea and Land, and Success in the War now declared against the French
King.

Other Tracts by the same AUTHOR.
A Sermon Preached at Paris, on the 30th of January, S. V. 1684/5.

The Present State of the Controversy.

Sure and Honest Means for Conversion of all Heretics; and wholesome Advice and
Expedients for the Reformation of the Church. Translated, and Published with a
Preface.

A Letter from several French Ministers fled into Germany, upon the account of
the Persecution in France, to such of their Brethren in England, as approved
the King's Declaration touching Liberty of Conscience. Translated from the
Original French.


