WARM BEER, OR A TREATISE WHEREIN is declared by many reasons, that Beer so
qualified is far more wholesome then that which is drunk cold. With a
confutation of such objections that are made against it; published for the
preservation of health.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by R. D. for Henry Overton, And are to be sold at his shop
entering into Pope's Head Alley out of Lumbard-street in London, 1641.

To the Reader.
GAlen has a saying in his second book De facultat. naturali, in the end of
his 9. chapter, and that is this; Studium eorum laudandum est qui vel explanant
recte dicta a sapientibus, vel supplent si quid omissum sit ab eis: The which I
hope, gentle Reader, will be a protection for this my book against such as
think nothing well done which they do not themselves, for that I endeavor to
do both these things which Galen commends, that is, explain some points
heretofore writ by our learned Masters and not regarded; and also to add some
things before not thought upon by them. And although I have no great hope by
this my writing to work a general good, because errors long used make us both
blind and deaf, be the truth never so apparent, not unlike the owl, as
Aristotle says, whose sight the sunbeams dull; yet I doubt not but some will
take it thankfully, and making use will take benefit thereby, assuring
themselves I write nothing here, which I hold not for the truth, and have made
long experience of, both by self, and diverse of my friends. I have therefore
published it in our native tongue, respecting a general good, referring the
commendations of the thing to the proof, and us all to the Almighty. Amen.

The preface of the Publisher to the Reader.
CHristian and beloved Reader, hearing of this ensuing Treatise of warm beer
lying in the hand of a worthy Gentleman and friend of mine, I made bold to send
to him for it; who hearing of my practice according, did very kindly send it to
me: The which, after I had read the same, and considered the arguments brought
for the proof thereof, and weighed them together with mine own experience in
the use of it, I was thereby exceedingly strengthened in my judgment, and
abundantly confirmed in my custom. Then speaking of this treatise and the
subject matter thereof to some of mine acquaintance and friends, and what
benefit I found by the use thereof, they desired to see the same; and when they
had read it, they entreated me that it might be printed, and that I would
declare mine own experience which I had found by constant use of the said warm
drink, that it might be published for the general good: to whose request I
could not but consent. And therefore I shall not speak any thing by way of
commendations of this book, but will leave it rather to the judicious Reader
and true practicer thereof; and will only relate unto you what I have found
true by long experience. First, heretofore when I did always drink cold beer,
and now and then a cup of wine, I was very often troubled with exceeding pain
in the head, which did much distemper me; also with stomach-ach, toothache,
cough, cold, and many other Rheumatick diseases: But since my drinking my beer
(small or strong) actually hot as blood, I have never been troubled with any of
the former diseases, but have always continued in very good health constantly
(blessed be God) yet I use not to drink wine, because I find that hot beer
(without wine) keeps the stomach in a continual moderate concoction: But
wine and hot beer does over-heat the stomach, and inflameth the liver,
(especially in cold stomachs which have hot livers) and men oftentimes drinking
wine to heat their cold stomachs, they thereby also inflame their livers, and
so the helping of the cold stomach is the means of the destruction of the
liver: But hot beer does prevent this evil, for it heateth the stomach and
causes good digestion, and nourishes and strengthens the liver. And that
hot beer, actually made hot does cause good concoction, you may conceive it by
this comparison: The stomach is compared to a pot boiling over the fire with
meat; now if you put cold water therein it cease the boiling, till the fire
can overcome the coldness of the water, and the more water you put in, the
longer it will be before it boil again, and so long time you hinder the meat
from being boiled: So it is with the stomach. If you drink cold beer, you
hinder the digestion of the meat in the stomach; and the more cold you drink,
the more you hinder it. Also, cold water does not only hinder the boiling of
the meat in the pot, but also causes the meat to be hard, so that if it should
boil six hours longer then ordinary, yet still the meat will be hard and never
tender and soft: Right so it is with the stomach. Cold beer does not only
hinder concoction, but also harden the meat in the stomach, as you may see by
them which drink over much cold beer at or after dinner or supper; six hours
after they will vomit up the same meat again, as raw and undigested as if it
were but even then eaten: which they could not have done, if they had not
cooled their stomachs so much with cold beer: because nature would have
digested the meat before that time. But on the contrary, hot water put in a
boiling pot with meat, hinders not the boiling thereof, neither does make the
meat hard, but continues the boiling thereof, nourishing the meat with
sufficiency of liquour, and makes it soft and tender fit to be eaten: So in
like manner does hot beer to the stomach: It hinders not concoction, nor
hardens the meat in the stomach, but contrariwise, it continues its
concoction, and makes it fit for the nourishment of the whole body.

Again in the second place, as this hot beer is excellent good for the keeping
of the stomach in good order for concoction, and consequently good health; so
it is most excellent for the quenching of thirst. For I have not known thirst
since I have used hot beer: let the weather be never so hot, and my work great,
yet have I not felt thirst as formerly. Nay although I have eaten fish or flesh
never so salt, which ordinarily do cause thirst and dryness, yet I have been
freed from it by the use of hot beer, and have been no more thirsty after the
eating of salt meat then I have after fresh. And the reasons make it manifest
being confirmed by experience, if we consider when a man is thirsty, there are
two master-qualities which do predominate in the stomach, namely heat and
dryness, over their contraries, cold and moisture. When a man drinks cold
beer to quench his thirst, he sets all four qualities together by the ears
in the stomach, which do with all violence oppose one another, and cause a
great combustion in the stomach, breeding many distempers therein. For if heat
get the mastery, it causes inflammation through the whole body; but if cold,
it surfeteth the body, and brings a man into fluxes and other diseases: But
hot beer prevents all these dangers, and makes friendship between all these
enemies, viz. hot and cold, wet and dry, in the stomach; because when the
coldness of the beer is taken away by actual heat, and made as hot as the
stomach, then heat has no opposite, his enemy cold being taken away, and
there only remains these two enemies, dry and wet in the stomach: which heat
labors to make friends, as you may see in this example. In fire there is
heat and dryness: and in water there is cold and moisture, which are opposite
to the qualities in the fire: Now if you throw the cold water upon the fire,
you set these opposites together by the ears, but if you would quickly quench
the fire, take hot water and throw thereon, and one bucket full of hot water
will quench more fire then four buckets of cold. The reason is, because of the
extreme opposition between hot and cold: but when the coldness of the water is
taken away and it made actually hot, then hot water to hot fire agrees as like
to like, and peace being made between hot and cold, the heat makes friendship
between wet and dry.

Also you may see wet and dry easily reconciled by heat, in another example:
Take a dry piece of woollen cloth, and throw it upon cold water, and you shall
see how wet and dry will oppose one another: the water will not let the cloth
sink into it, and the dry cloth will not let the water enter into it; but the
cold water will slide off from the dry cloth, and the cloth will swim upon the
water: But if the water be made hot, and the cloth thrown thereon, they will
immediately embrace one another without any opposition.

So likewise, if you put cold water upon dust, wet and dry will so oppose each
other, that the dust will not suffer the water to sink into it, but the water
will trull up and down on the dust like quicksilver: but if the water be hot,
and put never so lightly upon the dust, it will incontinently sink into it
without opposition. And thus you see by these examples how heat is as it were a
means to make friendship between wet and dry. Even so it does in the stomach:
When one is exceeding thirsty, the beer being made hot and then drunk into the
dry stomach, it immediately quenches the thirst, moistening and refreshing
Nature abundantly.

But some will say, Cold beer is very pleasant to one that is thirsty: I
answer it is true: But pleasant things for the most part are very dangerous.
Cold beer is pleasant when extreme thirst is in the stomach, but what more
dangerous to the health? How many have you known and heard of, who by drinking
of a cup of cold beer in extreme thirst, have taken a surfeit and killed
themselves? What more pleasant then for one that has gone up a hill in summer
time and is exceeding hot, to sit down and open his breast that the cool air
may blow therein? And yet how dangerous is it? For a man in very short time,
for getting himself, takes a sudden cold, and surfets thereon, which costeth
his precious life for his pleasant air. Therefore we must not drink cold beer,
because it is pleasant; but hot beer, because it is profitable, especially in
the City for such as have cold stomachs, and inclining to a consumption. I
have known some that have been so far gone in a consumption, that none would
think in reason they could live a week to an end: their breath was short, their
stomach was gone, and their strength failed, so that they were not able to walk
about the room without resting, panting and blowing: they drank many hot drinks
and wines to heat their cold stomachs, and cure their diseases, especially
sweet wines, but all in vain: for the more wine they drank to warm their
stomachs, the more they inflamed their livers, by which means they grew worse
and worse increasing their disease: But when they did leave drinking all wine,
and betook themselves only to the drinking of hot beer so hot as blood, within
a month their breath stomach and strength was so increased, that they could
walk about their garden with ease, and within two months could walk 4. miles,
and within three months were perfectly made well as ever they were in their
lives. And I doubt not but many that have practiced this thing can witness the
truth of these as well as my self: So having performed the request of my
friends to set down my experience and the reasons moving me, I leave it now to
the practice of such as by themselves or their Physicians are satisfied of what
use it may be to them, desiring the Lord to add his blessing, for his glory
and for their comfort. Amen.

F. W.

In commendations of WARM BEER.
WE care not what stern grandfires now can say,
Since reason does and ought to bear the sway,
Vain grandames say saws never shall make me think,
That rotten teeth come most by warmed drink.
No grandfire, not, if you had used to warm
Your mornings draughts, as I do, far less harm
Your raggie lungs had felt; not half so soon,
For want of teeth to chew, you would used the spoon.
Grandame, be silent now, if you be wise,
Lest I betray your ^^^^ing niggardize:
I wot well you no physic ken, nor yet
The name and nature of the vital heat.
'T was more to save your fire, and fear that I
Your pewter cups should melt or smokifie
Then skill or care of me, which made you (...)
(...), and stamp to see me warm my beer.
Though Grandfire growl, though grandame (...), I hold
That man unwise that drinks his liquour cold.
W. B.

A Treatise of warm drink.
CHAP. I. The use and necessity of drink.
NOt without great judgment have the poets feigned Prometheus to have entered
into the heavens, and by Pallas help to have brought from thence celestial
fire, naming one thing and intimating another: nor with less dexterity of wit
does Homer in his eighth book of Iliads call a method in writing (...) a golden
chain, seeing that it is as impossible without it to declare any thing orderly,
as to search through all the secret places of the Labyrinth without Ariadnes
clue of yarn. And seeing a method does require his definitions, divisions,
subdivisions, and such like, in a brief yet ample manner, so as nothing be
superfluous or wanting, I will do my good will to speak all, yet in as few
words as I may, fitting my speech agreeably to the multitude for whom it is
written, not affecting curiosity as a thing only meet for the learned.

You shall understand then that the whole contents of this book depend only
upon this question; Which is more wholesome in the regiment of health, drink
made actually hot by the fire, or (as it is now used) actually cold, and
sometimes made cold.

First therefore I think it necessary to show the occasion why provident Nature
has imposed a kind of necessity of drinking upon us.

Secondly to show and make manifest whether drink made hot does as well or
better supply those necessities, as drink being actually cold or made cold?

Thirdly to examine the reasons and confute the objections which are given for
the maintenance of actual cold drink.

Fourthly to set down all such discommodities as do and may arise from the use
thereof.

Fifthly to show the good and profit that redounds to the body by the use of
actual hot drink.

Lastly to make it manifest, that it is no new device, but a thing which has
been in common use amongst the Romans and Grecians, and is and has been used
always among whole nations and religions.

Understand then that according to the rules of physic, drink is used for
three purposes. First to allay our thirst; secondly to intermingle with our
food; thirdly to be the vehiculum and carrier of the nourishment into the
universal body. Which three are comprehended under two, according to Galen,
Lib. 1. De usu partium, that is, under the allaying our desire of drinking, and
being the instrument and means to boil the meat in the stomach.

The allaying then of thirst being the first cause why we are constrained to
drink, let us begin with it, and examine the reasons which may be made for the
profit of the one, and the offense of the other. The which we shall more easily
do, if we first call to remembrance what thirst is.

This word Sitis, which in english signifies thirst or drought, according unto
Plato is nothing else but a desire of drink, for these be his words, Sitis vero
est concupiscentia potionis, Thirst is a desire of drink; although Aristotle in
his book De Republica cited by Athenaeus, says, drought is a desire of hot or
cold drink, and in his book De anima defines it to be the desire of cold and
moisture: His words are these, Sunt autem fames and sitis appetitus: quorum
fames quidem appetitus est rerum calidarum and siccarum; sitis vero, humorem
and frigus efficientium, Hunger is an appetite after hot and drying, but thirst
of things effecting moisture and cold. Which opinion of Aristotle, being clean
opposite unto our argument handled in this treatise, does seem at the first
blush so fully to manifest the matter, as that it may seem great folly to
apprehend any thing which is so merely contradictory, and no little impudency
to oppose my self as of my self against so great a philosopher: And therefore
it concerns me either to prove that drink actually hot does better cool and
moisten the body then cold, or else Aristotle's meaning is not directly as his
words do seem literally to pretend: The which I think may easily be apprehended
and collected, if we will weigh the tenth section in his Problemes; where
inquiring what the cause should be why other creatures do sooner prey of and
eat dry meat then moist; but man more often moist then dry: He answers thus,
because man is most hot, which causes him to desire to be cooled. Whereby it
is to be noted, that he only makes mention of moisture to cool him, the which
agrees with Galen in his book of unequal temperatures where he does prove the
occasion of thirst to be drought, which is remedied per humidum, not per
frigidum, that is, by moisture, not by cold. For although it cannot be denied
but that heat does procure thirst, yet look into the reason, and you shall find
it is propter inopiam humiditatis, because it has not his just proportion of
moisture; which causes us in the hot time, if we labor much whereby we
excessively sweat, to desire to drink, for the cause above alleged. But to
enter into further consideration of the matter, let us examine the reasons why
cold should be necessary in allaying thirst. It appears to me, that it is
either to the end to extinguish it, or to mitigate it. But extinguish it by any
means it cannot. For let any man that is exceeding dry, eat any thing that is
never so cold, not having any moisture joined with it, and he shall find by
experience that it may well choke him, but in no sort allay his drought. And
for mitigating his drought how dissonant it is to reason that drought joined to
drought, be it never so cold, can work that effect, let the Reader judge, being
clean against the principles of learning; Nam omne tale additum tali, facit id
ipsum magis tale, For every like joined to its like intends more the ground of
its likeness, that is, the quality wherein they are alike.

Then if it be alleged that the drought having heat joined with it, requires
cold, in respect of his heat, as dryness does moisture, and so cold joined
with moisture does best remedy both, because Contraria contrariis curantur,
contraries are cured by their contraries; yet it seems to me a matter far
unfit for two causes: the one, although that be Galens ground, yet it is not so
to be taken literally, but as it stands with that ground likewise, which is,
that Omne repentinum naturae inimicissimum est, All sudden alterations are
contrary to nature: and therefore cold being added to heat, unless it were in
a far more remiss degree then the heat, does work great inconveniences, or
endanger the life; as it is to be seen in those who drinking cold drink being
hot fall sick to the death. The other reason is, for that it is not possible
that every man, woman or child, who being hot desire drink, can upon every
motion so proportion the cold that it shall just fit the degree of heat; and
then if it be too small by his antiperistasis it hurts where it should help:
if greater then the heat requires, in stead of allaying the heat it utterly
kills it. For the testimony whereof, besides our daily experience, there be
infinite histories extant; as for example, Paulus Jovius writes that Candella
Scala prince of Verona being hot in his armor drank out of a fountain cold
water, and presently died. He writes also that the Dolphin of France son to
Francis the French king, then in his time being, although he were a lusty
strong Gentleman, yet he being hot at tennis, and drinking cold drink fell sick
and died. The like happened to Pompeius Columna who was Viceroy in Naples for
Charles the fifth. Amatus Lusitanus an excellent physician in his time, in his
Centurie reherseth three histories of young men who died drinking cold water
and wine, in their heat.

CHAP. II. That actual hot drink does quench the thirst as well as cold drink,
or better.
BUt because I may observe a method, now we have found what thirst is to be
termed according to the ancient Philosophers minds, let us according to the
second point pretended to be handled in this place, show that hot drink does
better satisfy all circumstances necessarily required, then actual cold drink.

You have therefore heard that Nature has enforced a necessity of drinking
uopn us for two causes: the one for allaying our thirst, the other to be a
means to boil, and being boiled to carry and spread our nourishment universally
in our bodies. As touching the first point, thirst being dryness requires his
contrary, as Plato says in his aforenamed book, which is moisture for his
antidote and help. But to prove that hot drink does soonest perform that, I
will use two arguments.

1. Whatsoever does most speedily carry and disperse moisture into the body,
does best and soonest cure dryness. But heat does speediliest carry and
effectualliest distribute moisture; Therefore it does best help dryness.

My minor I prove out of Aristotle, where he says, In caliditate est vis
aperiendi fortissima, In heat is a most strong force of opening. Again Galen in
his book de facultatibus, knowing that heat joined with liquour does enforce
the quicker passage, prescribing a draught of water in the disease of the
stone, commands that it be drunk hot: which also is one of the reasons why we
make our potions to purge, to be taken hot of our patients.

Our second argument is this. Whatsoever moisture being come to the place
destinated for it does best unite, and effectualliest enter in, does soonest
work according to his nature and quality: But heat does best unite it self
with heat, and so conduct the moisture in: Therefore it does most effectually
allay our thirst.

My minor I prove out of Aristotle, where he says, Similia similibus gaudent,
that Is, Like rejoice in their like: and in his second book De generat. and
interitu, where he shows that the liker things be the sooner they pass into
one another and unite: for says he, Quae inter secognatione continentur little
transitus admodum velox est; qua quidem si caruerint est tardus: propterea quod
facilius unum quam multa commutatur, Things agreeing in quality, their passage
from one to another is swift; which agreement if they want it is slow: because
the more like the things be the sooner they do pass into one another. By which
it is apparent my minor is true, That heat does soonest unite with heat, and so
by consequence hot drink best allayeth thirst. And in another place he has
this saying, Quaecunque ex uno in unum recedunt, eadem uno tantum consumpto
gigni; quaecunque ex duobus ad unum pluribus labefactatis, Things passing into
one another by one contrariety are united, one being only consumed; but things
passing into one another by two or more, are united after the corruption of
more contrarieties. Which plainly demonstrateth that drink being already made
warm does sooner pass, enter, and allay thirst.

As concerning the second point, that is, That it does best boil the meat in
the stomach, and from thence serve for a general vehiculum, I reason in this
sort.

That liquour is more fit to be used for boiling the meat in the stomach, that
is more aiding to good concoction: But drink actually hot is more assisting to
good concoction then cold: Therefore more fit to be used.

My minor I prove in this sort: Concoction is nothing else but Alteratio
nutrientis in propriam qualitatem ejus quod nutritur, The alteration of the
nourisher into the quality of the thing nourished: as Galen does show in his
second book De facultat. nature. cap. 4. and in his 3 book De facultat. natural.
cap. 7. which alteration grows by putrefaction: for ex corruptione unius fit
generatio alterius, by the corruption of one thing another is generated: but
this putrefaction is soonest and most naturally performed by heat and moisture,
which both are supplied in warm drink: Therefore drink made actually hot, is
more assisting then cold. But understand by the way that this putrefaction is
meant, not as Galen in some places takes putredo to be mutatio substantiae
putrescentis corporis ad interitum ab aliena caliditate, a change of the
substance of the body putrefying to its own destruction by the heat of another,
but it does corrumpere, manente semper substantia rei eadem, mutatis solummodo
accidentibus, corrupt, the substance remaining ever the same, the accidents
only changed: but to the proof of our minor which is, That putrefaction is
soonest performed per humidum and calidum, and so consequently better assisted
by warm drink then by cold, Galen says that concoction is performed by
natural heat: which natural heat is nothing but a temperate heat proportioned
with moisture: therefore my minor is, proved. And that natural heat is a
temperate heat rightly proportioned, as I have alleged, although it be so
manifest as it needs no proof, yet I will prove it by Galens authority where
he says, Naturalis calor est recta and mensurata caliditas quae in humido sibi
proportionato consistit, Natural heat is an equal and well measured heat
consisting in moisture proportionable unto it: and in his second book De
ratione victus, describing what a fever is he says, that an ague is mutatio
caloris nativi in ignem, which is as much to say, as the altering of a
temperate moist heat into a fiery dry burning: and Trincavell in his epistle
De medicina treating of concoction of the stomach says, that primum and
proximum internum ejus instrumentum quo ille utitur in concoquendo est suus
naturalis calor, qui non est res aliqua diversa and aliena a natura and ejus
substantia: and is calor est temperatus non excedens rationem naturae illius,
rei its first immediate internal instrument, which it uses in digestion, is
its own natural heat, which is not a thing different and alien from his nature
and substance; and this heat natural is temperate, not exceeding the nature of
the thing it self.

Then as concerning the other branch of the proposition, which is, That it is a
fitter vehiculum, I this way prove it.

Cold drink is apt to stop and stay long in the stomach, and therefore not so
fit to be a vehiculum and carrier, as that which does with more facility
pass: and that it does so, I prove it out of Trincavell in his 3. book of his
Consilia, where giving advise with other physicians to one that had a windy
stomach, he forbad cold water to drink, because says he, being actually cold
it does tarry long in the stomach before it passes away. But because some
perchance will say, it may be cold water does so, but cold drink does not,
therefore hear what Scola Salerni says of our beer. They say it does inflare
and obstruere, breed wind and stop, and therefore unfit for a vehiculum: and
so much for the point.

CHAP. 3. The reasons and objections for the use of actual cold drink are
examined.
NOw as touching the third thing promised to be handled in this book, let us
examine the reasons which are given for the use of actual cold drink, and
first let us allege such authorities (if there be any) as do make any way for
it. I remember Pliny in is 28. book of histories, his 4. chap. affirms that
it is against nature for us to drink hot drink, because, says he, No other
creature does use it, nor is there any beast but desires cold drink.

Again Bernardino Gomes a Spanish physician in his Enchiridion amongst other
remedies allows cold drink, and made cold with snow, for a wholesome remedy
against the gout, and morbus arthriticus, which he would not have done if it
had been hurtful, or a weakner of the stomach.

Monardus also in a treatise he writes of drugs that came from the west
Indians, commends cold drink, and affirms hot drink dest roieth the liver.

It is alleged that it better quenches thirst, that it helps concoction,
whereas hot destroieth it.

It is alleged cold drink is good and pleasing unto the taste of man, and so is
not hot.

It is alleged the finest spirits fly away in the heating, whereby it
nourishes not so much.

That Pliny so writes I cannot deny, but with how little consideration of
the matter let the reader judge; he uses no argument to maintain his opinion
but only this, It is not fit nor good for us, because bruit beasts love it
not, which only imitate their natural instinct; and so does thereby as it
were infer, that it is not natural unto us. But how ridiculous and how
unworthy a reason it is to be answered, let any man judge: for it is as much as
to say because bruit beasts eat their food raw, therefore it is against nature
for us to have ours roasted or sodden: But if I should so say, I doubt not but I
should not be believed. And therefore as small cause is there to believe Pliny
in the other; for it is one and the self same reason.

Secondly, whereas Bernardino Gomes the Spaniard in the aforenamed place, not
alleging any reason for his opinion, might very well be answered without
reason; yet because it shall be seen how little credit his authority ought to
carry, and of how small worth it is to be esteemed, I will endeavor to give
the reason, why it is a mere senseless thing either so to affirm or write,
unless only for the avoiding of a further inconvenience, as I will hereafter
declare.

First gouts and all diseases of that kind depend on and grow most especially
from the weakness and crudity of the stomach, which Trincavell in his 96.
counsel does make manifest. These be his words, Nulla particula majore^ vim
habet podagram and id genus dolores procreandi quam ventriculus, qui vel suapte
natura fit crudior and imbecillior quam ut possit recte conficere cibum
ingestum, vel ex incongrua victus ratione, No part conferres more influence to
the breeding of the gout and diseases of that kind then the stomach: which
either of its own nature is too crude and weak for to digest the meat, or else
because of its incongruous power and virtue.

Now to prove that the stomach is said to be rawer when as it wants heat, and
that we use to call that raw which wants concoction by heat, hear what
Johannes Langius Fol. 75. writes: these be his words, Quicquid a calore nativo
and congenita viscerum caloris temperatura non fuerit concoctum and elaboratum,
id cum in corporis alimentum converti nequeat, crudum appellare solet
Hippocrates, Whatsoever is not well concocted by the natural and connate
temperature of heat in the bowels, seeing it cannot be changed into the
nourishment of the body, Hippocrates uses to call it crude.

Consider then, gentle reader, if the gout be especially bred through the
weakness of the stomach for want of heat, how unfit a general medicine cold
water is, and what warrant Gomes his authority is for us: For although Galen
gives two reasons how the gout is bred, which are Imbecillitas articulorum,
and affluxus materiei, imbecillitie of the joints, and abundance of gross
humors; yet the principal is a bad stomach. But because I will not judge that
a man in any sort learned will so much pass himself in writing, but upon some
great reason moving him thereunto, I conceive he calling to mind Galens words,
where he says, Vinum potens nervosis particulis nocet, Strong wine hurts the
sinewy parts; or peradventure Mesues where he says, Vinum per se nocet
articulis and nervis, Wine of it self hurts the joints and nerves; giving
this reason, because fundendo and attenuando maximo calore suo excitat
fluxiones, by running through and attenuating it does with its most powerful
heat provoke fluxes; and living in a place where there was nothing but strong
sack, thought of two evils the least was to be chosen, and knowing water could
not so vehemently pierce and carry fluxes, as those strong wines, advised
water. But if this or some such like reason moved him not, I think it very
absurd for any man of learning to write, and too foolish for us to believe: and
therefore you may understand that upon what occasion soever Gomes wrote, it is
no warrant for us.

Thirdly, that Monardus writes hot drink destroies the liver, and cold
contrarily helps, I cannot deny; but yet I will show that in so saying he
plays the right Spaniard, who means least the matter that he seems to
speak plainest. For whereas in general words he affirms hot drink to destroy
the liver, he afterward makes such an exception, as I think few at this day
live who be not comprehended within some one branch thereof: so that he either
says nothing in his general position, or else so little that few there be
that it concerns. And that this is true you may judge by his exception
following, where he says that these here under excepted may best drink their
drink actually hot, viz. old men, idle persons, whether it be in body or mind,
and that have weak stomachs, or abound with raw and crude humors, all that
have infirmities in their lungs or pipes of respiration, all that have weak
backs or weak kidneys, all that be subject to windiness, all youth and young
children. Judge now, indifferent reader, how many live in this age, who have
not some touch of this exception. And although he seems to make it current (yea
made cold with snow) for them which have hot livers, I pray you how many be
there of those that have not cold stomachs? And whereas he says that cold
drink cools the liver, I absolutely deny it, unless he means killing for
cooling. And for proof I produce Galen upon one of Hippocrates aphorisms,
where he says, Aquae frigidae occursus aut vincit nativum calorem aut
colligit; whereas hot drink by deoppilating does eventilate it naturally, and
so preserve it in temper: for I dare affirm where one has his liver hotter
then naturally fitteth without obstructions, thousands have not; which that
common disease at this day Flatus hypochondriacus does plainly prove: and
therefore to what small purpose Monardus authority is, let every one judge.

Now for the fourth objection, where it is alleged that cold drink does better
quench the thirst, I have in the beginning of this treatise so fully handled
that point, that it were a frivolous thing to trouble the reader with any thing
more concerning that matter; and therefore I will recite the fifth objection.

Which is, Cold beer helps concoction in the stomach. How untrue this is, I
will plainly show: All cold is an enemy to concoction: but drink not actually
made hot is cold: therefore drink not actually hot but cold is an enemy to
concoction, and therefore helps it not.

My minor I prove out of Aristotle in the fourth book of his meteors. These be
his words, Frigus quatenus frigus est cuicunque calori concoctionique
adversarium, est and cruditatis parens, Cold in its own nature is an adversary
to whatsoever heat and concoction, and is the parent of crudities: and Galen
primo Technic. says, Frigidi est officium been appetere, male autem digerere,
It is the nature of cold to affect powerfully, but to digest poorly: And
further seeing concoction is performed by warmth, it must needs be decayed by
often working upon cold: for mark but this infallible argument and you shall
easily see the truth: Every agent does also suffer it self something in the
action, so as natural heat daily and almost hourly expugning the cold drink
taken into the body does every time suffer something, and so in small time does
wax weaker and weaker. How true this is daily proof does make manifest: for how
many men do you see after they come to five or six and forty years, or at the
most fifty, troubled with the stone and gout, who were not before? which
happens upon no other cause but ob debilitatem stomachi, by reason of the
imperfectnesse of their stomach, which having long suffered in his daily action
with the cold, is now become infirm.

Sixthly it is alleged, cold drink is pleasing to the taste, and so is not the
other: which truly if it were true might seem a reasonable cause why we should
(if imminent danger of inevitable hurts did not depend on the use of it) addict
our selves to take it cold. But how false this is let Aristotle witness in his
3. book De anima, the 10. chap. who disputing of tasting says Est ipse sapor
qui gustu percipitur: atqui nihil absque humiditate saporis efficit sensum, It
is favor which is perceived by the taste, but nothing without humidity makes
any sense of favor: and in another place, Omne quod ipsius efficit sensum
humiditatem aut actu aut potentia habet, Every thing that makes it self
sensible has humidity in it actually or potentially: and in another place, At
vero cum gustabile sit humidum, necesse est and instrumentum sensus ipsius
neque humidum esse actu, neque etiam tale ut humectari non possit humidumque
evadere, But seeing every tastible thing is moist, it is necessary that the
instrument of that sense be neither actually moist, neither yet such as cannot
be made moist: whereby is plainly proved that taste consists not in coldness
but in moisture: And therefore it is said lapides and gemmae carent sapore,
stones and pearls have no taste, quia carent humiditate: Indeed cold rather
diminishes, then adds any thing to taste as may be seen in winter either in
wine or beer being very cold: for according to Aristotle cold is rather
qualitas tangibilis quam gustabilis, a tangible then gustable quality: but if
any at the first do not like the taste of hot drink, it is only for want of
use, and that by experience I find, having used it almost a year and a quarter
before the writing hereof.

But as concerning the seventh objection, which is, that cold drink nourishes
best, in respect that heating of the beer passes away its finest spirits; I
thus answer: Beer having sustained a great boiling, those spirits which remain
in it after that boiling, will not part with so small a heating: and of that I
have made this experience; I have taken a kettle with a broad mouth and therein
put three pottles of beer, and have boiled it half an hour to a gallon, and
then I have set it in a pot with a limbech, and I have drawn from it as much
aqua vitae as I could from a gallon, which was immediately put out of the
barrel into the pot: which absolutely overthrows that objection. Yet if it had
not been so, our drink could not have received any blemish: for first it is not
in any open vessel, and secondly it never boyls. But seeing it holds in the
greater, of necessity it is not to be doubted in the lesser; for a majore ad
minus is a good argument.

But now to the eighth and last objection: which is, That it opens the pores
too much and makes one catch cold: Although there be little sense or reason to
maintain this objection (neither indeed can I conceive any color of reason)
yet I will reason something against it.

Nothing joined to his like can make an extreme, but where the thing joined is
in greater degree then the thing to which it is joined, nor can it make it
greater unles it be in quantity. Therefore if natural heat which is in the
stomach do not by too much opening of the pores cause one to catch cold, the
heat of hot drink as we drink it cannot: because it is as little or less then
the heat to which it joyneth. For were it in extreme or hotter then naturally
the stomach should be, we could not drink it. For otherwise why could we not
drink any thing scalding hot? therefore it diminishes none and adds little,
but preserving all natural warmth it can give no occasion of offense; for if
this were otherwise, wherefore do we commend hot broth, or eat hot meat, which
in respect of his grossness keeps longer hot, and likewise advise exercise,
but because natural heat should purge animam per poros cutis and ductus
convenientes, that is, the blood through the pores of the skin and convenient
passages: but leave off before you heat your self violently, and you shall
never catch cold: for it is a violent heat does extenuate and make way for
cold. And therefore it is most evident that it suggests not the least cause in
the world of that inconvenience. And so much for this point.

CHAP. IIII. The hurt that arises from the use of actual cold drink.
NOw it remains that we do show the hurt that cold drink does procure, as the
sixth position by order to be entreated of does require. That it helps not the
body, before is proved, but that it hurts all and every principal part shall
now be showed. We will divide the body of man into three parts or sections, the
head and that therein contained; the breast and all therein contained above the
Diaphragma; and all that is contained in the ventre inferiore: But cold drink
hurts all these, therefore my first position is true, viz. That it hurts all
the principal parts. And because I will make it more manifest, I will
particularly speak of every several thing, first beginning with the head, and
the least offenses: and because the teeth are the first instruments we use in
receiving our food, I will first speak of them. To prove that cold is an enemy
to them, I produce Hippocrates in his first book and 18. Aphorism, where he
says, Frigidum dentibus inimicum, that is, Cold is an enemy to the teeth;
where although he adds not the reason, yet it seems to be for two causes:
the one, because it takes away their nourishment, as extinguishing their
spirits; the other, because it alters from their nature the nerves inserted in
the roots of the teeth: which Aristotle in his problems does seem to intimate,
when he says that they contain but little heat propter tenuitatem meatuum by
reason of the narrowness of the passages, and therefore are easily overcome
with the coldness of the bier: for you must understand that into the
hollownesse of the teeth there come sinews a tertia conjugatione, and also that
diverse small veins and hairy arteries do branch in the inward part of the
teeth, whereupon diverse times the teeth being bored blood issues out. There is
also inwardly a thin film or membrane, which in no sort can endure cold, and
yet will be cut or filed without feeling; because the one is imparted to the
uttermost part, the other to the root and hollownesse. If then bier in respect
of actual coldness be such an enemy to the teeth, which Nature has provided
for so many good purposes, as first, to divide our meat and to prepare it for
our stomach; secondly, to be a means to articulate and grace our speech,
whereby it comes to pass that those that want their teeth cannot bring forth R
nor S; thirdly, to be an ornament and beauty to our face and countenance: for
want of the teeth causes the mouth to fall in with an undecent relapse of the
lips into the hollownesse of the mouth. If I say there were no more but this,
it were sufficient to think it too-too unfit for a man to use.

But to go further, I will prove it is hurtful to the tongue, to the jaws, to
the passage which we call oesophagus, the high way unto the stomach, and so by
that means to the brain it self: not taking this position for my defense, that
cold is, and so it may be interpreted outward cold, but that the actual cold
of drink taken into the body. And this way I prove it: The tongue is made first
of flesh proper and peculiar to it self, and also of a thin membrane or skin,
common to the rest of the mouth, three pair of sinews, and many veins, ten
muscles, and a most strong ligament: these sinews come from the third and
fourth and seventh conjugation. Oesophagus, which is the passage between the
mouth and the stomach, is formed and made of two membranes proper to it self,
and covered with a third outwardly, ligaments vertebratum prognata, sprung from
the ligament of the backbone, of diverse veins and branches coming from vena
cava and coronaria ventriculi, of diverse arteries coming from aorta, the noble
artery which feeds all the body rising out of the midst of the heart, and of
sinews from the sixth conjugation called stomachici; glandules likewise it
has, and two muscles. Now Hippocrates says frigidum esse inimicum nervis,
Cold is an enemy to the sinews, and to the marrow of the back, and generally to
all spermatick parts, of which condition and state the brains are: If then cold
be an enemy to the sinews, and the tongue, and the high way to the stomach
formed of sinews; and if without the action which is performed by those sinews,
there can be no perfect working, who can deny but drink taken actually cold,
hurting and being an enemy to the sinews, is offensive to the tongue and those
other parts compounded of them? For although it cannot be denied but the
muscles strike a stroke also in their motion, yet they being made ex nervis,
sibris, tendinibus, carne, vena, and arteria, and the sinews which are
divaricated into the muscles being parts sine quibus fieri non potest motus,
that is, parts without which these can be no motion, any offense committed to
them must needs be hurtful to all the rest.

But some will say, Grant that this is so, which way do you make good that the
brain suffers by this?

Even this way, setting all controversies aside, and not allowing Aristotle's
opinion in his 3. book De historia animalium, nor in his book De somno and
vigilia, nor De respiratione, nor Alexanders opinion in his book De anima, nor
Averroes in his second College, nor Avicens doubtful opinion which he holds
tertio de animal. page prima primi; but affirming with Hippocrates and Galen
that all sinews take their beginning in the brain (whether in the forepart or
the hinder-part, is not here a matter pertinent) I say that offense being done
to them in the mouth, so near to their root, is imparted ad radicem, and so
consequently to the brain: for I acknowledge two sensible feelings and
impartments, as I may term them, in the sinews: the one, peculiar to the part
to which it does serve; the other, common, and spread through the whole body:
and by it is the brain hurt, between whom is such affinity, that the inward
part of the sinews is white and soft, almost like unto that of the brains. And
therefore diverse times Biasro de villa Franca does affirm it the occasion of
the Apoplexy. Again, it may be proved it breeds a frenzy, both proper and
improper, by stopping the passages of choler, whereas striking up ad septum
transversum per nervos in ipso dispersos, as Paulus Aegineta affirms, it
inflames it, and so causes phrenitis spuria; and diverse times striking up to
the head per venas and arterias, it inflames the meninges of the brains, and so
causes an exquisite phrensi. Which plainly is proved by Hippocrates, where he
says in his 4. book and 17. aphor. white Vrines be dangerous; the reason
whereof is, because choler in respect of those obstructions is ascended to the
head, which otherwise would descend into the passages thereunto destinated by
Nature. And of this I know many examples, and not long since in Sussex (where I
dwell) at a place called Marfield, an hammerman coming in hot and drinking cold
drink fell mad, and within short space so died. Furthermore although it be a
sufficient argument to prove it hurts the eyesight and the hearing, because
it hurts the brains; yet I will more particularly prove it. For although the
body of the eye be compounded of many parts, as of six muscles, six films or
skins, three humors; yet it is also compounded of sinews, veins, and arteries,
which come a juguribus and carotidibus, and by these both the visible animal
and vital spirits are carried to the eyes, as may well be proved by their
defect in those that be dying or use women too much: Then thus I reason.
Whatsoever decays concoction destroys all those, and so consequently the
eyesight and hearing: for Depravata concoctio in stomacho, as Galen says,
nunquam corrigitur in hepate neque in aliis: stomachus enim est materia omnium
aegritudinum, Bad concoction in the stomach is never mended in the liver, nor
in any other part: for the stomach is the cause of all diseases.

But that cold drink does spoil and destroy concoction, shall be proved as it
comes by order to be handled.

The hearing also it must needs offend; so as although some that have no great
dullness think it cannot be, for that they hear well; yet no doubt if from
their infancy they had used the other, they might hear better. For compare his
hearing that hears best, and you shall find other creatures hear better then
he. But to our purpose; seeing it is before proved that it hurts the organa
vocalia, that is, the mouth, the tongue, and oesophagus, in respect of the
sinews; it must needs follow that it also hurt the hearing. For the sinews of
the first conjugation do spread into many branches: the greater whereof go into
the ear, and the membrane of the exquisite sense, and carry all sounds to the
brain; the lesser, to the tongue and larynx, in respect whereof, by reason of
the sympathy, the hurt of the sinews of the tongue is imparted to the ears.
Hereupon it comes to pass that those that be dumb be also deaf; and those
which naturally be deaf, be always dumb; and he that cannot hear by any
outward sound, let him hold a thing in his teeth and he will hear. Which is
used for a proof amongst excellent physicians, to try whether the fault be in
nervo auditorio: though I am not ignorant that there is Altera causa societatis
veteribus incognita, nempe canaliculus cartilagineus velut aquae-ductus, qui a
secundo auris meatu ad os and palatum fertur, Another cause of society or
sympathy between them unknown to the Ancients, to wit, a little gristly cane,
as it were a water spout, which stretches from the second passage of the care
unto the mouth and palate, acknowledged by all anatomie-Masters.

Now to pass downward along the throat, it is one of the greatest occasions
that is of a most dangerous disease proper to that part, and that is the
squinancy. For Aetius fol. 399. reckoning diverse causes of that disease, uses
these words, Maxim autem frigiditas and frigidi potio magis quam ardores
plagae, and ossa, etc. Especially cold, and cold drink be the occasions of that
disease above all other. Where although Aetius gives not the reason, yet I
conjecture it is for two causes: the one, ob constructionem, and the other,
because it hurts and distempers the nerves serving for that part: which caused
Archigines to say Occultae anguinae causam esse in quibusdam nervis qui ad
stomachum deferuntur dum male assiciuntur, That the cause of a secret squinancy
is in the nerves which are carried unto the stomach, they being ill affected.

But to pass further, let us examine what hurt it does to the lungs: Arnoldus
de villa nova in his Regimine sanitatis, has this saying, Generaliter malum
est sanis bibere multam aquam frigidam, quia extinguit calorem innatum and
pectus offendit, Generally it is evil for sound bodies to drink much water
cold, because it does extinguish the natural heat, and offend the stomach.

Again, in another place he says, Pro canna pulmonis caveant a potibus
actualiter frigidis, which is as much to say as, In respect of the pipe of the
lungs beware of drinking any thing cold. Again Paulus Aegineta says, Frigida
actu nocent pulmonibus, Things drunk cold hurt the lungs: and Galen says it is
such an enemy to the lungs and breast as many die thereby.

But peradventure some will object, that Galen meant of the coldness of the
air, and not of the coldness of drink. But to reclaim all men out of that
error, I will make it manifest that it was meant of things actually cold taken
inwardly. And therefore Hippocrates, speaking of ye and snow used to cool
wine, says, it breaks veins and procures coughs; and Galen in his book of good
and bad nourishment does show that he means cold drink taken into the body,
because he does seem with a certain distinction to grant it to some; yet to
drink it, says he, over-cold or cooled with snow breeds infinite sorts of
hurt. And although strong bodies do not feel it presently in the heat of youth,
yet when youth declines they begin to feel it in their joints and other parts
of their body when there is no help.

But because, as the saying is amongst Lawyers, Lex plus laudatur, quando
ratione probatur, that is, The law is most praiseworthy when it is proved by
reason, so is physic; and therefore I will show how the drink passes to the
lungs, and how passing thither it hurts and offends; not taking any notice of
Hippocrates in his 4. book De morbis, where he uses many reasons against it,
nor yet of Aristotle who contends for the contrary. But Hippocrates well
understood does not contradict the truth, as in many other places he shows, and
all other ancient Philosophers, as Plato, Philoponus, Locrus, Plutarch, and
experience it self confirms. Understand then when I say drink goes to the
lungs, I mean not all the drink we take into our mouth, but some portion
thereof: And because I am to show which way it passes thither, therefore I
think it not amiss to recite a place of Galens De simplicium medicinarum
facultatibus, where he denies not but some part of our drink does pass by the
rough artery into the lungs: And in his methodus medendi he commands that in
ulcers of the rough artery we should lie along on our backs, and hold the
medicine in our mouths, whereby it might by little and little go into the
rough artery. Hippocrates in his book (...) does in plain words teach that some
portion of our drink does pass that way. These be his words, Homo, inquit,
maximam partem in ventrem bibit: Gula enim sive stomachus velut infundibulum
potus copiam and quaecunque volumus excipit: bibit autem and in guttur ac
arteriam; minus vero, and quantum latere possit per primum illapsum: operculum
enim exactum operit, ut ne permiserit quidem aliquid amplioris potus penetrare,
For the weasand or the stomach as a tunnel receives plenty of liquour or what
else we will; whence it comes to pass that a man does drink the most part into
his belly: but he does also drink into his lung-pipe or rough artery, less
indeed and so much as can slide in, in the swallowing; for so exact a lidde
does cover it that it will not suffer any great quantity to enter. By these
authorities now you do not only learn that part of our drink does pass to our
lungs, but also by what passages, to wit, per asperam arteriam, being taken in
per rimam epiglotidis. It is therefore to be understood that our windpipe pipe,
being called aspera arteria in Latin, has joining to the top of it, next to
the mouth, a certain stopple, as it were, formed of diverse muscles, sinews,
veins and arteries, called Larynx of our anatomy-Masters, whose uppermost part
has a covering formed like a little tongue, which stops it that nothing we
eat can descend into the windpipe; for when we offer to swallow any food it
bears upon that, and so stops it the closer: But when we drink, some little
quantity of liquour slides in between the chink.

It may be some unlearned will say, What is this to the lungs? I answer, from
thence it goes to the lungs: for to omit that aspera arteria is cartilaginea
semicirculariter, as not appertaining to this treatise, I am to show you how it
is clothed duabus tunicis, quarum altera interior est oesophago, linguae,
palato, and ori communis; altera exterior magis tenuis: Haec arteria ubi ad
jugulum pervenit, bivio distracta in pulmonem, numerosa serie spargitur inter
venam arteriosam, and arteriam venosam media, that from that it may draw blood,
and into this transmit air: And by this means does the drink taken into the
rough artery enter the lungs. Nevertheless peradventure some will say, grant
all this be true, yet why does cold drink hurt the lungs?

I answer, for diverse causes: but one effectual cause here to be mentioned is,
because it is contrary to the temper of the lungs; for the lungs be hot,
although Hippocrates in his book De cord seems to affirm the contrary: for
it is but comparative in respect of the heart. Nor do I respect some other
places both of Galen and Hippocrates touching that point, and therefore here I
omit them, as not appertaining to this place, affirming with some of our late
writers the lungs to be hot, being nourished with the most aeriall and
spiritual blood elaborated in the right concave of the heart.

Furthermore cold drink hurts in another respect, for that the lungs be easily
affected with obstructions and phlegmatic humors: which all come a frigida
temperatura, that is, of cold. By this may the Reader see how cold drink does
hurt to the lungs, that he needs not rest satisfied only because Galen so
says, but because reason persuades.

Now it follows to prove it an enemy to the stomach; which if we do,
considering the stomach is radix corporis, which nourishes the whole body, as
Hippocrates says, I hope there is none so obstinate but will adjudge it worthy
the forbearing. Therefore concerning this (because it falls out here in course
to be spoken of) I will add something not spoken of before.

Understand then that drink actually drunk cold, is not hurtful to the stomach
in one respect only, but in diverse. First, in respect of the composition of
it; Secondly, in respect of the temper; Thirdly, in respect of the parts that
depend upon it; Fourthly, in respect of of our life it self.

In respect of its composition; because it is compounded ex tunicis, venis,
arteriis, and nervis, to which cold drink is the greatest enemy: witness
Trincavell, in his first book of his counsels, his xxxix. counsel, where he
has this saying, A cervisia frigida prorsus abstineto, quia maxim nocet
nervis.

2. In respect of its temper, because naturally it should be warm; as may be
seen by the provident care of Nature, placing it sub Diaphragmate, which not
only by his own proper heat, but also with a foreign heat borrowed from the
heart, does warm it. It has also on the right side, the liver; on the left
side, the spleen; in the lower part, omentum and colon intestinum having
plenty of fat; and in the fore part epiploon, with the help of peritonaeum,
and the muscles abdominis, and vena umbilicalis are to it a covering: in the
hinder part there are the muscles of the back, and last of all a great branch
of vena cava and the great artery: which all show that Nature has encompassed
it round about, like a caldron, with fire. How fond a thing is it then to cool
that which nature would have warm, and how contrary to the health of man?

Thirdly, in respect of the parts that depend upon it, it is very prejudicial,
as shall be showed. And first to begin with the head; the stomach never
suffers in any small degree, but the head bears his part also; so the
offense done to the one is committed to the other. Which happens in respect
of the great community of those great sinews which come a sexto conjugio, from
the brain unto it. That this is true, although it be so well known to men of
learning that there needs no proof, yet for the better satisfaction of the
unlearned, let them but weigh these instances following.

First, the stomach being but troubled with melancholy you shall see the brains
participate of the same: so the stomach never suffers hunger, but it does
lacessere cerebrum vibratis nervis; yea, such is the communion between them,
that neither the one nor the other does hardly suffer, but conjunctive,
together. For let the head be wounded, and the scull be broken, whereby dura
matter is but exposed to the air, or let any thing but press it or the brain,
and presently the stomach will vomit aut flava aut aeruginosa; because the
stomach jure societatis is drawn in sympathiam per similitudinem and vasorum
communionem: which be the chiefest causes of sympathy, as Galen in his comment
ad Sect. 1. lib. 31. Epid. does well note.

The heart suffers likewise by communion, as may be seen in cardiaca
passione, that is, swounding, Syncope, and the utter exclusion of all strength;
which comes diverse times, the mouth of the stomach being ill affected, as if
the heart it self were.

The meseraick vains also suffer, being by cold stopped, and so made unable to
draw as naturally they should; and thereby is nourishment hindered. It does for
the like respect and cause hurt the liver: for, as Galen 1. De Symptomatum
causis, does excellently show, and Andreas Laurentius does notably explain,
exhaustus partium is chiefly necessary to nourishment, and then their sucking
and drawing. For the parts that be exhausted still draw from the next, until
they come to the last, which is the stomach: so that the meseraicks being
stopped, the order of the whole body is perverted, and there either remains no
appetite, or a preposterous one, for want of just feeling: Et hujus
insensibilitatis causa, as Laurentius says, est refrigeratio nervi, obstructio
ejusdem, exsolutio facultatis appetentis.

But some will say, let this be so; how prove you drink drunk actually cold
does stop?

To make this clear hear what Arnoldus de villa nova says in the Treatise he
wrote to the King of Aragon for the preservation of his health; to whom upon
some respects he granted both actual and potentiall cold drink in the
canicular days, having (as it seems) a strong hot stomach, but advises him
to add to it a little vinegar: because, says he, to those that have strait
meseraicks, it is necessary: The reason was, because without vinegar it would
stop. And in another drunk when it has them all, a multo fortiori, not to be
drunk when they be gone. To demonstrate that it is berest of them in the
boiling, weigh but this: Take water boiled, and water never boiled, and set
them out in the frosty weather, and that which has been boiled will first
freeze: Which is because its warmest parts are exhaled out of it.

But it may be objected, that although water will do so, yet the composition of
beer has taken that away; and therefore beer is freed from that fault.

I answer, set beer and water out, and beer will freez as soon as water. But
let us look into the composition of beer: It is made of barley, water, and
hops. Barley is cold in the first degree, hops hot in the second: now a thing
hot in the second degree, put to double so much of a thing cold in the first
degree, makes but a temper: but if it did, this is nothing to the actual
cold, although it were something to the potentiall: for it is the actual cold
we stand on. And therefore water, beer, or whatsoever it be, if it have but the
positive degree of cold, all is one. To our purpose: Arnoldus in his regiment
of health, has these words, omnis cervisia ex grano est grossior quam vinum,
and multum difficile ad digerendum place he finds fault with drinking of cold
water; because, says he, it is sluggish, and impedit omnem cursum, and
stops all passages. Trincavellius also says, cold drink hurts all that
have obstructions and impostumes. Again, Galen De locis affectis says cold
does spirituum vias and cursus impedire; and Aristotle says, it does
congelare. Avicen 2. Cautic. tract. 1. cap. 4. says, est etiam vitandus potus
aquae in mensa, water is to be eschewed at the table. Whereof Averroes
expounds the reason to be, because, priusquam stomachus calefecerit,
infrigidat and incrudat, before the stomach can warm the meat, by cold water it
is cooled and crudified. And Galen, knowing that cold water was stopping,
caused it therefore for the stone to be made hot (where he would have it to
deoppilate) as before is alleged.

But it may be objected; grant all this you write is true, what is this to our
beer which has endured a boiling?

I answer, it is more vehement against our beer then water unboyled: and this
is the reason. Water which never was boiled has in it all its aeriall parts,
which be both his warmest and finest parts, and most penetrable; and therefore
if not to be drunk when it has them all, a multo fortiori, not to be drunk
when they be gone. To demonstrate that it is bereft of them in the boiling,
weigh but this: Take water boiled, and water never boiled, and set them out in
the frosty weather, and that which has been boiled will first freeze: Which is
because its warmest parts are exhaled out of it.

But it may be objected, that although water will do so, yet the composition of
beer has taken that away; and therefore beer is freed from that fault.

I answer, set beer and water out, and beer will freez as soon as water. But
let us look into the composition of beer: It is made of barley, water, and
hops. Barley is cold in the first degree, hops hot in the second: now a thing
hot in the second degree, put to double so much of a thing cold in the first
degree, makes but a temper: but if it did, this is nothing to the actual
cold, although it were something to the potentiall: for it is the actual cold
we stand on. And therefore water, beer, or whatsoever it be, if it have but the
positive degree of cold, all is one. To our purpose: Arnoldus in his regiment
of health, has these words, Omnis cervisia ex grano est grossior quam vinum,
and multum difficile ad digerendum facit oppilationes in visceribus, etc. All
beer, says he, made of grain is thicker then wine, and being hard to digest it
makes obstructions in the intrals: what can be more plainly spoken to our
purpose? Schola Salerni says, it does inflare and obstruere, break wind and
stop; which is as much as we endeavor for this point to prove. And because it
shall be known that howsoever you make your beer, yet it is stopping of it
self, and therefore much the more drunk cold, note these diversities, that beer
made of barley only is most cold; that that which is made of barley and oats
less nourishes and less stops; and that that which is made with much
wheat is more nourishing, and most stopping.

But to the last point, which is, Drink taken cold into the stomach indamageth
our life; which I prove in this sort: Whatsoever is a decay or downfall to our
spirits, indamageth our life: But cold drink taken into the stomach does so:
Therefore cold drink taken into our stomach, indamageth our life.

My minor I prove in this sort: Life, according to Paracelsus, in his book De
vita rerum, is nothing else but Spiritus: These be his words, Vita rerum nihil
aliud est quam essentia spiritualis, invisibilis ignis, impalpabilis res,
spiritus, and spiritualis res, Life is nothing else then a spiritual essence,
an invisible fire, an impalpable thing, a spirit, and a spiritual thing: and
death is no more then inversio virium and virtutum, the altering and overthrow
of our strength: Seeing then our life is a spiritual thing, and spirits be the
food and nourishment of spirits, as Ficinus in his book De sanitate tuenda does
well observe, my major must necessarily follow, that to be a decay to the
spirits is to abbreviate our life. My minor, viz. that cold drink taken into
the stomach does decay the spirits, I prove thus. The spirits are engendered of
the blood (and that Montanus in his Counsels does take notice of, where he
says in this sort, Spiritus sunt semper proportionati sanguini; nihil enim
aliud sunt quam vapor sanguinens been concoctus, The spirits be proportioned to
the blood; for they are nothing else but the vapor of the blood well digested)
whatsoever then makes ill blood, makes ill spirits; and whatsoever does so,
shorteneth our life: but cold drink works that, therefore it shortneth our
life. My major is averred by Montanus in the place before cited: My minor I
prove in this manner. God blood is made by good concoction: but the actual
cold in the stomach breeds crudity and not concoction, and that crudity
consequently ill blood: therefore cold breeds ill blood.

My minor I prove in this sort out of Aristotle, lib. 4. De partibus Animalium,
where he says, Calor vim habet concoquendi, Heat has the force to concot; and
in his second book De generatione Animalium, where he also says, Frigus est
privatio caloris, Cold is the privation of heat: what hinders then but the
conclusion is good, That actual cold drink breeding ill blood causes a defect
of the spirits, and so consequently abreviateth our life? For Galen in his
first book De humoribus, says, Virium robur adesse nequit ubi crudorum humorum
copia coacervata est, that is, Strength can not be where store of raw humors
be: and in his book De sub. Facult. Nature. he says, all actions come from
concoction.

But to make it somewhat plainer, I will use some more authorities. Our life
(as Galen observes) does consist in natural heat and radical moisture; which
is nothing else (as Avicen writes) then an oily unctious vapor arising from
the blood: to which Aristotle consents. This natural heat, as Avicen in lib.
de complexionibus writes is diminished two ways: Aut per resolutionem
naturalis humiditatis, aut per augmentum extrancae, that is, Either by decay of
natural moisture, or by the increase of foreign. Now natural moisture does
decay either by the air, in which we live, that dries it up; or by labors of
the body or mind ill proportioned, as he testifies in his first book Fenic.
act. 4. cap. 7. and foreign moisture does increase, either by the use of meats
which by their own nature engender and breed it; of which sort are Mellons,
Cucumbers, and such like fruit, being either immoderately, or unseasonably
eaten; or else of ill concoction: by means whereof such an unnatural humor
does grow in our bodies, that the outward and remote parts deprived of their
nourishment languish, wither, and die, because they are not nourished. Which
Isaac de Febribus does well note, using these words, Talis humor per depravatam
concoctionem a natura alienus propagatur, ut externae and remotae corporis
parts, privatae suis alimentis, languescunt, exarescunt and emoriuntur, quia
non nutriuntur. Hereby may the Reader discern in what sort actual cold does
offend our life: upon great consideration therefore did Avicen in his fourth
book, Canone 4. Capitulo, De rebus quae caniciem retardant, use these words,
Digestio est radix generationis naturalis and non-naturalis humoris, that is,
Digestion is the root of the generation of natural and unnatural moisture.

But some ignorant person will say, although the stomach be offended, yet the
liver may make good blood, if so be it be not distempered.

To the which I answer, No more then a Cutler a good blade of naughty iron, and
bad steel: which is not possible, be he never so good a workman. For as the
iron and the steel, being the material cause of the blade, cannot contrary to
their nature be made perfect in the workmans hand: no more can the chylus,
first made in the stomach, being the material cause of blood, being bad be
made perfect by the help of the liver.

By this now you see how contrary to our health it is to use actual cold
drink. But let us examine what hurt it does to other particular parts.
Hippocrates has these words in his Aphorisms, Sedi, pudendis, utero, vesicae
calidum amicum, frigidum inimicum, that is, Heat is a friend, but cold an enemy
to the seat, the privities, the belly and bladder: And Cornelius Celsus says,
Frigidum inimicum intestinis, vesicae, utero, etc. that is, Cold is an enemy to
the intrals, bladder, and stomach. So, as it appears, it hurts the bladder,
the bowels and the kidneys, the mother, and what not: But because we will not
conclude it is so, because Hippocrates and Celsus say it is so, we will
examine, first, the reason, and then experience, the best master in trying any
thing.

The reason why it hurts the bladder is in respect principally of the neck
thereof, which being stopped with a musculeous substance cold offends, and
diverse times procures a strangury. But this will be thought very untrue and
unlikely, that drink drunk cold can pass so to the bladder, and there offend:
but let us examine experience, and see whether it ever have been known so.

Forrestus, an excellent Physician, alleges in himself the cause of a
strangury, happening unto him to the great indangering of his life, to be
drinking of cold beer after his return out of Italy. And I know my self a
gentleman of great worship (who because he is living shall not be named) who
coming from hunting hot, and drinking cold drink, suffered such pain, as I
being with him did fear some erosion in the neck of the bladder. Besides it
diverse times comes to pass, that with cold this part suffering a resolution,
the party can in no wise hold his water, but it comes from him without his
knowledge.

To the mother also it is hurtful, as Hippocrates, Cornelius Celsus, and
diverse learned Authors write; whereof although they give not the reason, yet I
will show it may be so in diverse respects: as first, in respect of its
composition, being made ex tunicis, nervis, venis, arteriis, and ligamentis, to
all which cold is an enemy as has been proved before: Secondly, in respect of
its temper, which naturally ought to be hot, because Injectum semen calore
multo eget ut suscitetur, concipiatur, formetur et foveatur: Thirdly, in
respect of its vicinity with other parts, as the bowels and the bladder,
between which est maxima conjunctio per villos complures, to which cold is a
great enemy: Whereupon seldom is the mother diseased, either by inflammation
or otherwise, but either an inordinate desire to go to the stool or of urine
does ensue: so great is the affinity between the matrix, bowels and bladders.
And last of all cold is hurtful to the matrix in respect of its community with
the stomach; for that the stomach being hurt with cold transfers, tanquam ad
sentinam and cloacam corporis, such abundance of superfluities to the matrix,
as does evert its natural temper and strength, and is the author of many
irreparable diseases.

But some will say, that this is strange, although it be true that cold will
work these effects in the mother, that beer drunk actually cold can pass to
these places being so remote, and the cold can there be left or offend.

But to confirm it by experience, these instances I have seen: About the year
of our Lord 1590. I was with a gentlewoman one Mr Clarks wife of Jarcks hill in
Kent, in whom, laboring of a cancer in her matrix, I tried this experience,
that giving her beer actually cold she would immediately be in the greatest
pain in the world, but give it her hot and she felt none. Another woman dwelt
in Houndsditch, at the sign of the gilded cup, seven years since, who
likewise laboring of a cancer in the matrix, if you had given her cold beer,
it made her be in great pain, if hot, in nothing so much: By which it is
evident that the beer did pass so cold, as that it gave a sensible feeling of
the difference. And therefore it is not to be doubted but that the actual cold
was an enemy, being so much more misliked of Nature then the hot.

Now let us examine by what means drink received actually cold hurts the
bowels, according as our ancient physicians write: For my own opinion, I hold
it hurts them many ways: First, in respect it breeds crudity in the stomach,
whereof grows fleam, which fleam descending into the bowels breeds
intolerable collicks, and worms. Secondly, it breeds windiness, which
likewise is the nurse of extreme inconveniences incident to the bowels. Lastly
fluxes, although non primario tamen jure societatis, that is, not primarily yet
by right of society. Seeing therefore it has been heretofore proved it is so
general an enemy to our health, in hurting all and singular our principal
parts, I may well conclude with Aristotle in his fourth book of Meteors, Cold
is an enemy to our nature: and so by consequence drink drunk actually cold; and
therefore to be eschewed.

CHAP. V. The benefit that arises from the use of actual hot drink.
BUt now according to our promise we will show the great good that arises of
hot drink: and although in laying open the defects of drink taken actually
cold, there is much spoken of the good that redounds to the body by the use of
hot drink; yet because according to our determinate course it comes in order to
be entreated of, I shall say something not before said.

First therefore it shall be proved it helps the stomach, and by that means the
head, and by that means the liver, and by that means the bowels, and by that
means the spleen, and by that means the kidneys and bladder, and by that means
the matrix in women, and by that means keeps back old age, and consequently
preserves life. And although in handling of the defects which cold beer
procures unto all these parts, I have sufficiently by the hurt of the one laid
open the help of the other, yet I will add unto my first sayings new reasons,
because I will not be tedious to the Reader, not renewing any authorities
heretofore cited, but alleging Authors of no less moment.

Galen 3. Technic. has this saying, Calidiora calido iribus iudigent
auditoriis, Things whose temper tends to warmth have need to use helps of the
same nature: then thus I reason. The stomach is an office of warmth; Therefore
it must needs be helped with warmth: agreeable to the which position is our
beer made actually hot. Now to prove that the stomach being warm must be helped
with warmth, and that it is not any way without hurt to be bereaved of his
warmth, mark what Avicen. 3. Tract. cap. 5. intimates: where writing of warmth
in man's body, he counsels, nay rather forbids, that no man wash his
hands in warm water: because says he, the heat is drawn out of the stomach by
the warmth of the water, by which digestion in the stomach is hindered, and
that being vitiated, it is a means to breed and engender worms. Which declares
how profitable it is to put our drink hot into our stomach, in respect of
keeping warmth there which by cold would be repelled: And our ancient
physicians have been so jealous of decaying the warmth of the stomach, that
they have forbidden us to stand near a great fire after eating, for the reason
above named. In like manner, and for the same cause, does Avicen forbid a man
to walk fast after eating, Ne calor propter motum attrahatur ad parts
exteriores, Lest the heat by stirring be drawn outwardly. How much more
consonant is it therefore to reason to use warmth in the stomach, whereby
natural heat is increased, then to use things cold, whereby it is lessened?
And this Hippocrates in his Aphorism which begins In hyeme multus cibus, etc.
does make plain; who holds that in winter we can eat most meat: whereof Galen
giving the reason says, it is because the outward cold keeps in the heat in
the stomach, and makes it stronger: And yet I remember Arnoldus De villa nova,
makes such doubt of cold, that he seems to take exceptions at Galens words,
and says, if the outward cold be great, it is necessary the stomach be well
covered, naturally or artificially, or else it will weaken it.

But let us examine the reason, how helping the stomach it helps the head:
which thus I prove. Whatsoever is the means whereby the head is least oppressed
with excrementitious matter, is helpful to the head. But hot drink is so:
Therefore hot drink, etc.

My minor I prove in this sort: Whatsoever suggesteth least cause of
unprofitable matter, is the cause the head is least oppressed. But hot drink
does so: Therefore hot drink is helpful. The minor thus I prove: Whatsoever
fortifyeth concoction suggesteth least cause of unprofitable matter: But hot
drink does so: Therefore etc. The minor is thus proved: Whatsoever preserves
the stomach in natural warmth fortifyeth concoction: But hot drink does so:
Therefore hot drink fortifyeth concoction. The minor is true: For whatsoever
temperate heat joyneth it self with natural heat preserves the natural heat
of the stomach: But warm drink being temperate joyneth with the other:
Therefore hot drink preserves the natural heat of the stomach. Now it is
evident that the warmth of actual hot beer is in no extreme, but after a sort
contrary to both the extremes, and therefore temperate: For Montanus in his
Counsels says, Mediocria temperata sunt ad sua extrema tanquam ad sua
contraria, that is, Mediocrities are called temperate as well in respect of
their extremes, as in respect of their contraries.

Now will I also prove that by helipng the stomach it also helps the liver, in
this sort: whatsoever washes the stomach naturally, and keeps the meseraicks
open, does help the liver: But hot drink does so: Therefore it helps the liver.
But before I prosecute the argument any further, I will show how in performing
that, it helps the liver; which it does two ways: First, because in washing
the stomach and bowels it produces inanition, which causes appetite; which is
a desire of new matter fit for new blood: Secondly, because in keeping open the
meseraicks it keeps the liver from any great obstructions, whereby it breeds
warmth according to nature, and also brings continually good nourishment for
the liver to work upon. And to prove this, That hot drink does so, according as
my minor requires, I produce Arnoldus De villanova, who writes thus, Aqua
calida stomachum lavat, and ventrem purgat, Hot water washes the stomach, and
purges the belly. And that heat does this in respect of its actual heat, let
Avicen witness, who commending medicines for ulcerated lungs, wishes they be
administered warm, because of piercing; thereby acknowleding warmth to be the
means of piercing.

Furthermore that drink actually hot, helps also the spleen, may easily be
proved: for that the liver receiving good nourishment makes good blood, and so
overchargeth not the spleen with abundance of matter to its grievance or
annoyance.

Again, how by helping the stomach it does good to the kidneys and bladder, I
thus prove. Whereas the kidneys and bladder are subject to that grievous
disease of the stone, hot drink is a means to withstand it, by two principal
effects: the one, in that it strengthens nature, whereby she frames no moist
cause fit to form that disease; it being most principally bred by a slimy
matter, first hammered in a feeble stomach: the other in that it does so scour
the kidneys and uriners by his actual heat, as there can no slime remain
until it can be baked to a stone, although the kidneys were of the hottest.

And that this is approved by learned men, Arnoldus de villa nova may be
president; who giving compounded waters, having a specificall diverting faculty
of themselves, to pierce, commands that they be drunk as hot as they can be
endured, because it adds to their deoppilative virtue.

But to the other point, which is, That it helps the matrix: Trincavell calls
the matrix of women sentinam corporis; and hot drink being a means by
strengthening the stomach to make every member do his office, as before is
showed, causes the less to be transferred thither and so takes away all
annoyance that may grow of any extraordinary superfluity. It is also a means
by its deoppilating virtue to bring into natural course that which is
according unto nature to be avoided: And by these two means it is a principal
occasion to make women fruitful: who diverse times by defects growing of
obstructions, and other grievances of nature through much surcharge of
superfluity, become barren. Thus have I given you a taste how helping of the
stomach, it helps the matrix. But for the proof of the last point, which is
that it keeps back the defects of old age, and is a means to prolong life, let
us call to mind what old age is, and what life; and upon what occasion the
defects thereof are hastened or deferred. Ficinus lib. 1. De sanitate tuenda
says, Vita nostra est tanquam lumen in naturali calore, caloris autem pabulum
est humor aerius, atque pinguis tanquam oleu^: so as sive humor deficia^ sive
prorsus excedat, sive inqu^netur, statim calor naturalis debilitatur, and
tandem debilitat^ extinguitur. And another learned man writes thus Tam diu
anima hanc molem in colit, quam diu humorum de fectus aut intemperies, miser^
morborum parens, non ingruit: hinc enim senectus quae debilitat animi vires
mutatque colorem, So long does the soul inhabit this lump, as the defect of
moistness, or distemper, the miserable parent of diseases, does not invade:
for hence comes old age, which does debilitate the strength and change the
color. And Vives says, Quam diu retinetur calor naturalis in corpore
temperatus, perseverabit sanitas, and observabitur habitus juvenilis, As long
as natural heat is retained temperate in our body, we continue our health,
and keep the habit and show of youth.

Now the defects of old age are commonly as follow; 1. Horinesse of hair, 2.
wrinckles in the face, 3. leanness of body, 4. defect of memory, 5. general
weakness of the whole body, 6. bad sight, 7. thickness of hearing, 8. much
phlegm 9. diseases of the lungs: If then I prove cold beer hastens these, and
hot beer retards and mitigates them, I hope I shall be thought to prove my
assertion

First then let me consider whereupon the hair takes its alteration: The causes
of the grainesse of the hair are, aut humor frigidus latens in poris, either
cold humors lurking in the pores, aut ariditas, ut in segite maturescente, or
dryness, as in ripe corn; aut debilitas virtutis, or weakness; aut corruption
pituitae, or corruption of the phlegm: and according unto Aristotle, cap. 2.
De historia animalium, aliquando adventus nimii caloris externi, sometimes the
access of too much external heat: All which to be produced by actual cold
drink, shall be proved severally.

And first, That breeds cold humors most that weakens the stomach: But it is
proved that cold drink does so: and therefore it breeds them most.

Secondly, dryness it mightily procures in this respect; for being a means
that the laudable concoction cannot be made, the parts that should draw it do
refuse it as not fit for them, and so wither for lack, and run into a
marasmus, which is a weakness of all the virtues in the body; which arises ab
inopia humoris, from want of moisture.

That it is a means that phlegm putrifies must necessarily follow: for ex
debili calore fit putrefactio, from weakness of heat comes putrefaction;
which that which is actual cold procures, and so necessarily hastens that
symptom of old age. For care is said and the much use of fish to procure
hoarinesse of hair for no other cause but for the reasons abovesaid.

Then that it procures wrinckles in the face does consequently follow; for that
they proceed, vel ex carne extenuata, either from the extenuation of the flesh;
vel ex carne vacua, or from emptiness.

Leanness of body follows; because plenty of spirits is not bred by ill
concoction.

Defect also of the memory; because Nature fainting can not serve all the
senses, and so it draws nearer still to the heart, neglecting the farthermost
to maintain life: and besides, because it breeds much phlegm, an enemy to
memory.

Bad eyesight it procures; because it causes defect of the spirits; and
because the body abounding with much phlegm breeds thick spirits, which make a
dull sight.

Thickness of hearing; because ex debili calore multi torpores, from weakness
of heat arises heaviness, and this hinders the perfectness of hearing: and
because it causes scarcity of spirits, which can not serve all the senses
exquisitely.

Much phlegm, another defect of age, it causes also; because it weakens the
stomach and so is cruditatis parens; and ex cruditate pituita, the parent of
crudity, from whence comes phlegm.

Diseases likewise of the lungs; because Catharres be the companions of ill
digestion: and so what with those, and what with the stopping of phlegm, the
lungs must needs suffer. And therefore the reason why actual hot drink is said
to mitigate all these, is because it does fortificare digestionem, ex qua
multiplicantur spiritus vivi, strengthen digestion, by which the vital spirits
are multiplied; which being the pabulum of our senses, the one can not fail
while the other increases. And therefore Arnoldus de villa nova says, Dum
spiritus and calor naturalis non debilitatur, neque pili canescunt, neque cutis
corrugatur, So long as the natural heat is not weakened, neither does the hair
wax gray, nor the skin grow shriveled nor wrinckled. And how it is a means to
preserve life shall be showed.

CHAP. VI. Herein is showed how the Grecians and Romans used hot drink.
NOw to come to the last point, which is, That it is no new devised thing, but
that which has been used amongst the Grecians and Romans in the time of their
longest age, and is in use at this day in countries where they live far
longer then we do; which shall be proved by diverse clear testimonies.

And first to prove it was in use amongst the Grecians, hear what Philostinus
that excellent physician, wrote unto his countrymen: He counseled them in the
spring and all winter to drink their liquour calidissimum, most hot; and in the
summer lukewarm: so that at all times he shows that cold drink was not to be
used.

Athenaeus also in his eighth book, speaking of Stratonicus the harper, says
he called Rhodios, Cyrenaeos branchos, and their city, civitatem porcorum;
quia Rhodios deliciis exsolutos, and calidum bibentes, contemplatus, albos
Cyrenaeos nuncupabat, Rhodiumque oppidum, civitatem porcorum: Rhodios qui them a
Cyrenaeis color diversos autumans, at ob luxus similitudinem, and
proclivitatem eandem in voluptates, cum porcis urbem illorum comparans.

Moreover Julius Pollux in his Onomastico propounds this question, Whether the
ancient Fathers drank their water hot? and concludes they did: And Lucianus in
his Asino writes that the Grecians used their drink hot; which Arrianus
likewise in his controversies proves. Apuleus makes the same manifest,
speaking of Fotis in this manner; Ecce Fotis, mea jam domina, cubitu reddita,
jacta proxime rosa serta and rosa soluta in sinu uberante, ac me pressim
deosculato and corollis revincto, ac flore prosperso, arripit poculum ac
desuper aqua calida injecta porrigit ut biberem, etc.

But for further proof, I will prove it both by ancient writers of prose, and
also poets, that the Romans used it.

And first Varro, in defining this word Calix by the Etymology, says it comes
of the Latin word Calidus, because in it, Calidus apponebatur potus, Hot drink
was served.

Paulus likewise the lawyer, speaking of the difference between the vessels
that they heated water in, says there is no great difference between Cacabus
and Ahenum; for in the first they boil their meat, and in the other their water
to drink: And Julius Pollux in his 9. book, calls that vessel Ahenum where
they boiled their water to drink.

Seneca in his first book De ira makes mention of hot water, the which was in
use to be drunk in his time: And in his second book the 25. chapter. Dion
likewise in his 57. book proves the same in the history of Drusius, son to
Tiberius: And in his 59. book, entreating of Caius Caligula, who killed an host
for selling hot water in the time of the funeral of Drusius, as a man
irreligious to sell hot water for delicious drinking in time of common
mourning. Moreover Marcellinus in his 28. book shows that all taverns were
forbid to sell any hot water or wine until four a clock in the afternoon.

Again Cornelias Tacitus, writing of the poisoning of Britannicus, shows how
the means they wrought to poison him without suspicion was, to bring his drink
so hot that he called for cold water to allay it, wherein they had put the
poison.

Pliny also in his 7. book, speaking of Marcus Asinius makes it manifest:
for, says he, the drink being too hot, he held it in his hand to cool, until
one sitting next to him remembered him of it, and said it would be too cold.

Now to prove it by the authorities of poets, I will first begin with Plautus,
who in his comedy of The vaunting soldier, says, Lu. Neque ille hic calidum
exbibit in prandium. Pa. Neque tu bibisti? Lu. Dii me perdant si bibi, Si
bibere potui. Pa. Qua jam? Lu. Quia enim absorbui; Nam nimis calebat, amburebat
gutturem; that is, Lu. Neither did he drink hot wine to his dinner. Pa. Nor
thou? Lu. As god shall help me, I neither drank, neither could I. Pa. What
then? Lu. I supped it; For it was so hot it burnt my throat. What can be more
plain then this?

Again the same Author in another comedy brings forth Labrax speaking to
Neptune in these words: La. Edepol, Neptune, es balneator frigidus, Cum
vestimentis posteaquam abs te abii algeo. Nec Thermopolium quidem ullum ille
instruit, Ita salsa^ praebet potionem and frigidam: that is, La. Truly,
Neptune, thou art a cold bath-keeper, Since I came from thee I freeze in my
clothes. Neither does he keep any hotwater-shop, He gives us so salt and cold a
potion. The like sayings be many in Plautus which for brevity sake I omit.

Horace also when he writes to Telephus, in his third book of his Odes has
this saying, Quo chium pretio cadum
Mercemur: quis aquam temperet ignibus:
For Chian wine what men exact:
Who Will our water to warmth redact.


And Juvenal in his fifth Satyr has this saying, -- Quando ad te pervenit ille,
Quando vocatus adest calidae gelidaeque minister.
When will anon anon Sir come,
For hot and cold to have custom.


Likewise Martial, in his verses he made to Sextilianus the great drinker,
says thus, Jam defecisset portantes caldae ministros,
Si non potares, Sextiliane, merum.
They had lackt hot water by this time,
Had not Sextilian drunk wine.


And in his second book of Epigrams these be his words: Te conviva leget mixto
quincunce, sed ante
Incipiat positus quam tepuisse calix:
The toss pot will thee read but that must be
Only until his hot cup cooled he see.


And in his 8. book against Caecilianus, these be his words: Curre age and
illotos revoca, Caliste, ministros,
Sternantur lecti, Caeciliane, sede.
Caldam poscis aquam, sed nondum frigida venit:
Alg^t adhuc nudo clausa culina foco.
Run, call thy unwash't servants, sit
Your couches, Caecilian sit.
Thou call'st, No hot water within?
Nor cold yet in our cold kitchen.


And in his last book, these be his words: Frigida non desit, non deerit calda
petenti;
Sed tu morosa ludere parce siti.
Ye want not cold nor shall ye hot;
But spare to please your dainty throat.


By these authorities I hope I have made it plain, that it was used many
hundred years amongst the Romans. For if we consider the age that Plautus
lived in, which was some five hundred and seventy years after the building of
Rome; and the poisoning of Britannicus in Nero's time, you shall find it to be
808. years after Rome was built: and Martial lived under Domitianus, 835. years
after Rome was built, which was more then 300. years. Neither did Plautus write
it as new devise, but as a thing long before in use.

Now to the other point, That it is used at this day amongst whole nations, I
will prove by Grovani Petro Maffei the Jesuit, who in his 6. book of histories
writes that they of China do for the most part drink the strained liquour of an
herb called Chi^^ hot. And Persino the Italia^ writes, that he saw himself tres
principes Grapponenses* which came to kiss Pope Gregory the thirteenth foot
(and it is but a little while since) who drank nothing but hot water, affirming
it to be the custom of their country.

Thus have I according to my promise handled severally all the points promised
in the beginning: if not to thy satisfaction, impute that to my want of
reading, not to the truth of the cause, which diverse times is overthrown with
ill handling.

FINIS.

