A DECLARATION OF THE SENSE OF THE Archbishops and Bishops; now in and about
London, upon the Occasion of their Attendance in PARLIAMENT; Concerning the
Irregular and Scandalous Proceedings of certain Clergymen at the Execution of
Sir JOHN FRIEND and Sir WILLIAM PARKINS

Printed for John Everingham at the Star in Ludgate Street, 1696.

A DECLARATION OF THE SENSE OF THE Archbishops and Bishops, etc.

A DECLARATION OF THE Sense of the Archbishops, and Bishops, Now in and about
London, upon the Occasion of their Attendance in Parliament,
Concerning the Irregular and Scandalous Proceedings of certain Clergymen, at
the Execution of Sir JOHN FRIEND and Sir WILLIAM PARKINS.
WE the Archbishops and Bishops, now in and about London upon occasion of our
Attendance in Parliament, having seen a Printed Paper, Entitled, A true Copy
of the Papers delivered by Sir John Friend and Sir William Parkins to the
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, at Tyburn the place of Execution, April 3.
1696. And being also certainly informed of the most irregular behavior of Mr.
Cook, Mr. Collier, and Mr. Snatt, in pretending to Absolve the said Criminals
at their Execution, to the great scandal of the Church, and of our holy
Religion, have therefore thought our selves obliged to Declare our Sense of the
same, as here follows.

1. As to the Paper before mentioned, we cannot but observe, that in that part
to which Sir John Friend is Entitled, among many other things there delivered
as his private Opinion, (for which we must leave him to God) there are mingled
some things concerning the Church of England, to the great dishonor and
reproach of it. That venerable Name is, by the Author of that Paper,
appropriated to that part of our Church which has separated it self from the
Body; and more particularly, to a Faction of them who are so furiously bent
upon the restoring of the late King, that they seem not to regard by what means
it is to be effected. We have a sad instance of it in this very Person, who (as
was deposed at his Trial) was privy to the horrid Design of Assassination, and
yet neither discovered it, nor showed any dislike of it, but as he was afraid
it might ruin King James and his Trial p. 17.
Affairs; and was ready also, together with others of the same Christian
Principle (as the Author of his Paper is bold to call it,) to Act in
Conjunction with an Army of French Papists, for the Ruin of their Country, and
the Extirpation of that Religion which they themselves do profess.

2. As for Sir William Parkins, who also professed to die in the Communion of
the Church of England, We cannot think he meant any thing elseby it, than that
he adhered to the same violent Faction: being assured (as we are by very good
Information,) that both he and Sir John Friend had withdrawn themselves from
our Public Assemblies some time before their death. Which makes us the less
wonder to find in both their Papers so light, and even favorable, a mention of
that most Inhumane Design of Assassinating his Sacred Majesty: and especially
in that of Sir William Parkins, who, though he was publicly convicted of his
having engaged so many in that horrible Sin, yet after all could think to clear
himself of it with this wretched excuse: It Is true, I was privy to the Design
upon the Prince, but was not to Act in it. Blessed be God, there never was any
of our Church, that in any change of times could have this laid to his charge,
that he was so much as privy to a Design of Assassination.

Lastly, For those Clergymen that took upon them to absolve these Criminals at
the place of Execution, by laying, all three together, their hands upon their
heads, and publicly pronouncing a Form of Absolution; as their manner of doing
this was extremely insolent, and without Precedent, either in our Church, or
any other that we know of, so the thing it self was altogether irregular.

The Rubric in our Office of the Visitation of the sick, from whence they took
the words they then used, and upon which, if upon any thing in our Liturgy,
they must ground this their proceeding, gave them no Authority nor no Pretense
for the absolving these Persons; nay, as they managed the affair, they acted in
this Absolution far otherwise than is there directed.

That Rubric is concerning sick Persons, and it is there required, First, That
the sick person shall be moved to make a special confession of his Sins, if he
feel his conscience troubled with any weighty matter, and then, after such
confession, the Priest shall absolve him, if he humbly and heartily desire it.
But here they absolved, and that publicly, Persons condemned by Law for
Execrable Crimes, without so much as once moving them at that time to make a
special confession of their sins, at least for those Sins for which they were
condemned. And on the other side, here were persons Absolved that did not
humbly desire Absolution, as feeling any such weighty Matter to trouble their
Conscience; but on the contrary, in Sir John Freind's Paper it is declared that
he had a great deal of satisfaction in suffering for that cause, which he
firmly believed to be the Cause of God, and True Religion.

If these Ministers knew not the State of these Men's Souls before they gave
them Absolution, as it is manifest two of them, Mr. Snatt and Mr. Cook did not,
as to Sir William Parkins, (they having since declared that they had not spoke
with Sir William till they were at the place of Execution,) how could they,
without manifest Transgression of the Churches Order, as well as the profane
abuse of the Power Christ has left with his Ministers, absolve them from all
their Sins?

If they were acquainted with these Men's Sentiments declared in their Papers,
then they must look upon them, either as hardened Impenitents, or as Martyrs.

We are so charitable to believe that they would not absolve them under the
former Notion; for that had been, in effect, sealing them to Damnation: But if
they held these men to be Martyrs, then their absolving them in that manner was
a Justification of those grievous Crimes for which these men suffered, and an
open affront to the Laws both of Church and State.

Upon the Consideration of these Things, and for the doing of Right to our
Church, which may otherwise suffer, among such as are strangers to our
Constitution, by the evil Principles and Practices, both of the aforesaid
Criminals, and the Three Clergymen that assisted them, who all pretended to be
Members of the Church of England: We do declare, That we disown and detest all
such Principles and Practices; looking upon them as highly Schismatical and
Seditious; dangerous both to the Church and State, and contrary to the True
Doctrine and Spirit of the Christian Religion. And we also take this occasion
to warn and exhort all the People committed to our Charge, to beware of such
Seducers, and to avoid them; lest (as the Apostle St. Peter speaks) they be led
away with the error of the Wicked, and fall from their steadfast Adherence to
the Principles of the True Church of England, as it was established at the
blessed Reformation of Religion, and as by Gods especial Providence it
continues to this day.

April 10th. 1696. Tho. Cantuar. Jo. Ebor. H. London. N. Duresme. P.
Winchester. W. Cov. and Lich. Tho. Roffen. Sy. Eliens. Gil. Hereford. Jo.
Norwich. Ric. Peterb. Ed. Gloucester. Rob. Chichester. E. Asaph.


FINIS.

