monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen,
A PROCLAMATION Requiring all Seamen and Mariners to Render themselves to Their
Majesty's Service.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas diverse Seamen and Mariners have lately left their usual and ordinary
Places of Abode, and have removed themselves into some private and obscure
Places in the Inland Countries, endeavoring thereby to avoid the Search that
is now made for Men of that Calling and Condition, and to escape the Press that
is gone out for Their Majesty's present Service; Their Majesty's therefore, by
the Advice of Their Privy Council, have thought fit to Publish this Their Royal
Proclamation, and do hereby straightly Charge and Command all Seaman and Mariners
remaining in any County of England or Wales, and not Listed in Their Majesty's
Service, that they forthwith Render themselves unto the Principal Officers and
Commissioners of the Navy in London, or to the Commissioners of the Navy at
Portsmouth, or to the Mayor of Newcastle, or to the Mayor of Hull, or to the
Bailiffs of Yarmouth, or to Mr. John Addis at Plymouth, or to Robert Henley
Merchant at Bristol, or to Captain Greenhill at Leverpoole, in order to their
being received into Pay, and sent on Board such of Their Majesty's Ships as
shall be found most expedient for Their Majesty's Service: And if any of them
shall hereafter be found out or discovered, who have neglected to obey this
Their Majesty's Royal Command, they shall be Proceeded against with all
Severity. And their Majesty's do hereby Require all Mayors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs,
Justices of Peace, Constables and other Officers to whom it both or may
appertain, That they cause diligent Search to be made within all and every of
their Precincts, for the said Seamen and Mariners, and do Sieze and Secure the
Persons of such of them as shall there be found; And also all loose and unknown
Persons whatsoever, who may justly be suspected to be Seaman or Watermen, and
to cause them to be sent to the Principal Officers and Commissioners of Their
Majesty's Navy in London, or to such other of the Persons and Places aforesaid,
to which they may be most conveniently sent, in order to their further
Employment. And they are hereby further Required to take notice of, and
Certify to Their Majesty's in Council, the Names of all such Persons as shall
refuse or neglect to give Assistance in the Premises, or shall contribute to
the Concealing or Escape of any Seamen or Mariners, as aforesaid; And hereof
they are not to fail, as they will Answer the contrary at their Peril.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty seventh Day of February, 1689/90.
In the Second Year of Our Reign. God save the King William and Queen Mary.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1689/90.


