Gospel Truth Stated and Vindicated.

Wherein some of Dr. CRISP's Opinions Are Considered; AND THE OPPOSITE TRUTHS
ARE Plainly Stated and Confirmed.

BY DANIEL WILLIAMS.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey, 1692.

WE whose Names are subscribed, do judge that our Reverend Brother has, in all
that is material, fully and rightly stated the Truths and Errors mentioned as
such in the following Treatise: And do account he has in this Work done
considerable Service to the Church of Christ: Adding our Prayers, that these
Labors of his, may, as we hope they will, by the Blessing of God upon them, be
a Means for the reclaiming of those that have been missed into such dangerous
Opinions; and for the establishing those that waver in any of these Truths:

Wiliam Bates, Samuel Slater, John How, Abraham Hume, Vinc. Alsop, Nich.
Blakey, W. Lorimer, John Reynolds, Edw. Lawrence, John Showers, Rich. Mayo,
Nath. Tailor, Rich. Stretton, Tho. Kentish, John Quick, Nath. Oldfield.
Many more were ready to attest these Truths, but the haste of the Press
prevents their Subscription.



TO THE READER.
A Dislike of Contention has long restrained my engaging in this Work, tho often
solicited thereto by several worthy Ministers. Peace is the Blessing which I
cheerfully pursue; and is, with the Truth, what I propose in this very
Endeavor. I am convinced, after frequent Prayers, and serious Thoughts, That
the Revival of these Errors, must not only exclude that Ministry as Legal,
which is most apt in its Nature, and by Christ's Ordination, to Convert Souls,
and secure the Practical Power of Religion; but also renders Unity among
Christians a thing impossible. Every Sermon will be Matter of Debate, and
mutual Censures of the severest kind, are unavoidable; while one side justly
press the Terms of the Gospel, under its Promises and Threats, for which they
are accused as Enemies to Christ and Grace; and the other side ignorantly set
up the Name of Christ, and Free Grace, against the Government of Christ, and
the Rule of Judgment. I believe, many Abettors of these Mistakes, are honestly
zealous for the honor of Free Grace, but have not Light sufficient to see how
God has provided for this, in his rectoral Distribution of Benefits by a
Gospel-Rule. By this Pretense, Antinomianism so corrupted Germany; it bid fair
to overthrow Church and State in New England; and by its stroke at the Vitals
of Religion, it alarmed most of the Pulpits in England. Many of our ablest
Pens were engaged against these Errors; as Mr. Gataker, Mr. Rutherford,
Anthony Burgess, the Provincial Synod at London; with very many others, whose
Labors God was pleased to bless to the stopping of the Attempts of Dr. Crisp
(by Name opposed by the foresaid Divines) Saltmarsh, Den, Eaton, Hobson, etc.
To the grief of such as perceive the tendency of these Principles, we are
engaged in a new Opposition, or must betray the Truth as it is in Jesus. I
believe many Abettors of these Notions, have Grace to preserve their Minds and
Practices from their Influence: But they ought to consider, that the generality
of Mankind have no such Antidote; and themselves need not fortify their own
Temptations, nor lose the Defense which the Wisdom of God has provided against
remissness in Duty, and sinful Backslidings. Who can wonder at the Security of
Sinners, the mistaking the Motion of sensible Passions for Conversion, and the
general abatement of exact and humble walking, when so many affirm, Sins are
not to be feared, as doing any hurt, even when the most flagitious are
committed? Graces and Holiness cannot do us the least good; God has no more to
lay to the Charge of the wickedest Man, if he be elected, than he has to lay
to the Charge of a Saint in Glory. The Elect are not governed by Fear or Hope;
for the Laws of Christ have no Promises nor Threats to rule them by; nor are
they under the Impressions of Rewards or Punishments, as Motives to Duty, or
Preservatives against Sin, etc.

In this present Testimony to the Truth of the Gospel, I have studied
Plainness; and to that end often repeated the same things in my Concessions, to
prevent the Mistakes of the less Intelligent, though I could not think it fit
to insist a new upon all. To the best of my knowledge, I have in nothing
misrepresented. Dr. Crisp's Opinion, nor mistaken his sense: For most of them
he often studiously pleads: Of each I could multiply Proofs, and all of them,
be necessary from his Scheme, though not consistent with all his other
occasional Expressions. His Scheme is this; That by God's mere Electing Decree,
all Saving Blessings are by Divine Obligation made ours, and nothing more is
needful to our Title to these Blessings. That on the Cross, all the Sins of the
Elect were transferred to Christ, and ceased ever after to be theirs. That at
the first moment of Conception, a Title to all those decreed Blessings is
personally applied to the Elect, and they invested actually therein. Hence the
Elect have nothing to do, in order to an Interest in any of these Blessings;
nor ought they to intend the least good to themselves in what they do: Sin can
do them no harm, because it is none of theirs; nor can God afflict them for any
Sin. And all the rest of his Opinions follow in a Chain, to the dethroning of
Christ, enervating his Laws and Pleadings, obstructing the great Designs of
Redemption, opposing the very Scope of the Gospel, and the Ministry of Christ,
and his Prophets and Apostles. The Doctor had not entertained these Opinions,
if he had considered, that God's Electing Decree is no Legal Grant, nor a
Formal Promise to us: The Decree includes the Means and the End, willing the
first, in order to the last; and as it puts nothing in present being; so it
bars not God, as a Governor, to fix a Connection between Benefits and Duties
by his revealed Will: So if the Doctor had animadverted, That Christ's
Sufferings were the Foundation of our Pardon, but not Formally our Pardon; For
them our Sins are forgiven, whenever they be forgiven; without them Sin cannot
be forgiven, and they were endured, that the Sins of all the Elect, when
Believers, should be forgiven. But yet they are not forgiven immediately upon,
nor merely by his enduring those Sufferings; but there were, by Divine
Appointment to interpose, a Gospel-Promise of Pardon; the Work of the Spirit,
for a conformity to the Rule of the Promise in the Person to be pardoned, and a
judicial Act of Pardon by that Promise on the Person thus conformed to the Rule
thereof.

To clear this Point, Consider, 1. The Law is sometimes taken for the
Preceptive part of God's Will, with the Sanction of the Covenant of Works. In
this Covenant, Life was promised to sinless Obedience; and Death was threatened
against every Sin, without admitting Repentance to Forgiveness. Upon the Fall,
Life is impossible by the Law with this Sanction: And hence, to preach it to
Sinners as a way of Blessedness, is sinful and vain, and no Saving Benefit is
dispensed to any of us by this Rule. 2. The Gospel includes the Moral
Preceptive part of the first Law, with some additional Precepts, which suppose
our Apostate state; as Faith in an atoneing Savior, and Repentance for Sin:
These could not be enjoined as Duties on innocent Man, by a Rule of Happiness
and Misery; nor could they be necessary to his Right to Life, because they
would suppose him a Sinner. The Gospel is taken in a large sense, when I say it
includes all the Moral Precepts; but yet the Gospel does so, and they are the
Commands of Christ, as Redeemer, (to whom all Judgment is committed,) as well
as the Law of the Creator. 3. The Gospel has another Sanction to the
Preceptive part of the Law, than the Covenant of Works had. Though nothing be
abated in the Rule of Sin and Duty, yet Blessings are promised to lower degrees
of Duty; and a continuance in a state of Deuth, with a bar to the Blessing,
are not threatened against every degree of Sin, as the Covenant of Works did.
Can any doubt this to be the Grace of the Gospel-Promise? Does it promise Life
to all Men, however vile and impenitent they be? Or does it threaten Damnation,
or a Continuance of it, on any true, penitent, believing, godly Man, because he
is imperfect? This Change of the Sanction supposes the Death of Christ, and
his honoring the Law by his perfect Obedience; wherein God has provided for
his own Glory, while he promises Life, by Forgiveness, to imperfect Man; and
yet he insists on some degree of Obedience, to which of his mere Grace he
enableth us. This the Covenant of Redemption secures to the Elect, though the
Grant therein is pleadable only by Christ, as the stipulating Party for us; and
our personal Claim depends on the Gospel Covenant, whereof Christ is Mediator.
4. This Gospel-Sanction determines as certain a Rule of Happiness and Misery,
as the Law of Works did, though it be not the same: For while it promises
Pardon to all believing, repenting Sinners, and declares a bar to pardon to
the impenitent Rejecters of Christ, and Gospel Grace; it fixes true
Repentance, and Faith unfeigned, to be the Terms of Pardon: So when it
promises Heaven to the sincerely holy, persevering Believer; it fixes sincere
Holiness, and perseverance in Faith, as the Terms of possessing Heaven. Hence
the Use of Faith, Holiness, etc. to these Benefits, is not from their
Conformity to the Precept, but their Conformity to the Rule of the Promise: Our
applying Christ's Righteousness, and relying on it, would no more Justify us,
than our sincere Holiness would Save us, were it not for this Gospel-Promise,
That God will Justify, for Christ's sake, all such as believe. 5. Hence, by
Gospel Grace, there is a great difference between perfect Faith, and utter
Unbelief; between sincere Holiness, and formal Profaneness, or Wickedness: True
Love to God, and prevailing Enmity; imperfect spiritual Duties, and rebellious
Neglects, etc. By the Law of Works, nothing was Holiness, but what was
perfectly so, etc. But read the Bible, if thou doubtest whether there is not a
true Faith, Holiness, Love, etc. which be short of Perfection. 6. God, in the
dispensing of Gospel-promised Blessings, does judicially determine a Conformity
to this Rule of the Promise: When he forgives, he judicially declares a Man
has true Faith; when he admits into Heaven, he judicially declares a Man
sincerely Holy and Persevering. As upon a view of his Guests, he cast out him
that had not on the Wedding Garment, viz. True-uniting Faith; so he judicially
determined, That they who were not cast out, but admitted to share in the
Marriage Feast, viz. made Partakers of Union with Christ, and the Benefits
thereof, had True Faith, and not a mere Profession. As by keeping out the
foolish Virgins, for not having Oil in their Lamps, viz. the Spirit of Grace,
and persevering Holiness: so by admitting the wise Virgins, he judicially
declared they had a Spirit of Grace, and persevering Holiness. Can any think,
that Forgiving, Adopting, Glorifying, or the conveyance of every other promised
Benefit given on God's Terms, are not judicial Acts of God, as Rector? If so,
does he dispense these blindly and promiseuously, without any regard to our
being Believers, etc. or no? Or whether our Faith be true or no? Any one would
blush to affirm it. With respect to what is above declared, the Gospel is called
a Law of Faith, a Law of Liberty, etc. and it especially insists on that
sincerity of Grace and Holiness which the Rule of the Promise makes necessary
in its Description of the Person whom it makes Partaker of its included
Benefit. And the main of our Ministry consists in pressing Men to answer the
Rule of the Gospel-Promises; and dissuading Men from those things which the
Gospel threatens shall hinder their Interest in all, or any of its Benefits;
with an Aggravation of their Misery, if they be final Rejecters of its Grace.
We call Men to be reconeiled to God, upon which we know God will be at peace
with them: These things will help thy Conceptions, still remembering, that the
Merits of Christ are the cause of this Gospel-Ordination: His Righteousness
imputed, is the cause for which we are justified and saved, when we do answer
the Gospel-Rule. And I exclude not this Righteousness, when I affirm, That the
Righteousness of God, Phil. 3. 9. principally intends the Gospel-Holiness of a
Person justified by Christ's Righteousness; both which, by Faith in Christ, all
his Members shall be perfect in. The Grace of God is hereby stated as free as
is consistent with his Government, and Judicial Rectoral Distribution of
Rewards and Punishments; and none need the Riches of Grace more than I.

Reader, Note, That in this Book I still speak of the Adult, and not Infants.
When I say, The Difference is not; I state my own Concessions, and mean not
that the Doctor is in all these of my mind. Thou must expect to take up my full
sense, by a view of several Chapters, and not only one; because sundry Chapters
referr to the same Points, more or less: And forget not, That though the Doctor
often in his Book speaks to Men, as Believers; yet every thing is true of the
Elect, viz. They have as much a Title to all Saving Blessings, only they do not
know it. This was his Judgment. I have carefully avoided any Reflection on
Reverend Dr. Crisp, whom I believe a holy Man, and abstained exposing many
things according to the Advantage offered, if by any means this Book may become
useful to such as most need it. That the Father of Lights would lead us into
all Truth and Love, is the Prayer of thy Servant in the Gospel,

London, May 4. 1692. D. Williams.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 7. add 365. p. 5. l. 8. for ew r. we, p. 8. l. 15. for 289. r.
274. p. 10. l. 17. r. Propogation, p. 28. l. 4 for Chaist r. Christ, p. 38. l.
5. for was r. is, p 62. l. 30. blot in: put (;) p. 78. l. 4. blot out I am, p.
91. l. 10. add 616, 617, l. 15. for. 616. r. 609. p. 92. l. 5. for 618. r. 100,
101, p. 93. l. 14. r. ununited, 3. 98. l. 4. for Mr. r. Mrs. p. 101. l. 21.
remove (.) from freely, to work, p. 140. l 22. for way r. may p. 166. l. 8. for
its Instrument r. joint Agent, p. 182. l. 4. for mad r. made, p. 198 l. 26. for
is r. as, p, 214. l. 16. for hears r. hear, p. 208. l. 29. add to, p. 217. l.
20. for 1. r. 14. p. 234. l 27. r. Meditation, p. 236. l. 10. for with r. unto,
p. 66. l. 4. for Grant r. Grace.

GOSPEL TRUTH Stated and Vindicated.
CHAP. I. Of the State of the Elect before effectual Calling.
Truth. IT is certain from God's Decree of Election that the Elect shall in
time be justified, adopted, and saved in the way God has appointed; and the
whole meritorious Cause and Price of Justification, Adoption and Eternal Life,
were perfect, when Christ finished the Work of Satisfaction. Nevertheless, the
Elect remain Children of Wrath, and subject to Condemnation, till they are
effectually called by the Operation of the Spirit.

Error. The Elect are at no time of their Lives under the Wrath of God, nor
are they subject to Condemnation, if they should die before they believe; yea,
when they are under the Dominion of Sin, and in the Practice of the grossest
Villainies, they are as much the Sons of God, and Justified, as the very Saints
in Glory.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
The Doctor tells us, Page 363. 364. It is thought by some, that in case such a
Person should happen to die before God call him to Grace, and give to him to
believe, that Person had been damned; and that Elect Persons are in a damnable
Estate in the time they walk in excess of Riot, before they are called. Let me
speak freely to you, and tell you; that the Lord has no more to lay to the
Charge of an elect Person, yet in the height of Iniquity, and in the excess of
Riot, and committing all the Abominations that can be committed; I say even
then, when an elect Person runs such a Course, the Lord has no more to lay to
that Person's Charge, than God has to lay to the Charge of a Believer: Nay,
God has no more to lay to the Charge of such a Person, than he has to lay to
the Charge of a Saint triumphant in Glory. Page 368. The Elect of God, they are
the Heirs of God, and as they are Heirs, so the first Being of them puts them
into the Right of Inheritance, and there is no time but such a Person is a
Child of God. And this is a Principle he often asserts, and labors to prove, P.
354, 355, 365, 577, 578, 579.

But the Readers will object, Sure he means no more, than that the Elect are
sure to be justified and adopted, and that Christ has fully merited it for
them; but not that they are actually justified and adopted before they are
called. Answer: The Doctor frequently endeavors to prove, that we are actually
justified before we are born, before we are baptized, before we believe, before
we are converted, and reduces the Sum of his Thoughts, P. 374. in these
Words, But when did the Lord do this? Viz. Justify us. He answers, He did it
from Eternity, in respect of Obligation; but in respect of Execution, he did it
when Christ was on the Cross; and in respect of Application, he does it while
Children are in the Womb. And then shows, that they do mistake, who judge that
God applies the Pardon of Sin at the time of Conversion. In other Places, he
says, We are actually justified, etc.

Wherein the Difference is not.
The Difference is not, 1. Whether God has eternally decreed, That certain
Persons freely elected by him, shall certainly be justified and adopted. 2. Nor
whether these elect Persons are the Objects of God's Love of Good Will, even
while they are Sinners. 3. Nor whether God continues his gracious Purpose of
doing them good in his appointed, ways: notwithstanding their Provocations. 4.
Nor whether Christ has made full Atonement for Sin, and merited eternal Life
for the Elect, which shall be in God's time and way applied; and that he left
nothing to be done by us in a way of Atonement and Merit. 5. Nor whether there
be not a great Difference between an elect Sinner and others, as to what they
shall be in time. All these I affirm.

Wherein the real Difference. is.
1. Whether the Elect, while uncalled, are actually pardoned and adopted to
Life. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny. 2. Whether the Elect, while dead
in Sin and Unbelief, are Children of Wrath, condemned by the Law, and not
justi ed by the Promise. This I affirm, and the Doctor denies.

The Truth confirmed.
1. The Scriptures expressly declare the Elect, before they be effectually
called, to be Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Enemies. Col. 1. 21. Which were
not my People, and not Beloved. Romans 9. 25.

2. The Gospel bars all Unbelievers and dead Sinners from Pardon and Adoption,
and denounces the Continuance of Condemnation against them, limiting its
Benefits to such as believe. Joh. 3. 18. He that believes not is condemned.
Ver. 36. The Wrath of God abides on him. 1 Cor. 16. 22. And if any Man love
not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you,
but you are justified.

3. If it were not so, neither the Spirit nor the Word of God have any
Influence in the saving of Sinners, which so often they are affirmed to have.
This is plain; for these influence on our Persons in time, and therefore
suppose us in no State of Salvation before. See Tit. 3. 5. He saved us by the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Joh. 5. 34. These
things, I say, that you may be saved. 2 These. 2. 10. They received not the Love
of the Truth, that they might be saved. Jam. 1. 21. Receive the Word which is
able to save. But the want of the Gospel would be no Damage, if we be Heirs in
the Womb; we should be freed from Wrath if we never heard it.

4. Gospel Benefits imply that there is a time, when we are actually guilty and
miserable: There could be no Forgivenss, if (...) were not guilty, Romans 4. 7.
They were at Enmity, of whom the Apostle says, Now has he reconciled. Col. 2.
12. If Men were always Sons, they could not be said in time to be adopted, nor
to pass from Death to Life.

5. The Doctor may as well infer, We are sanctified, and possessed of Heaven
in the Womb, for God has elected us to these, as well as to Pardon, and
Christ merited these also.

Reader, Do thou not find God justifies none but whom he calls? Romans 8. 30.
Would there be such Joy in Heaven at the Conversion of a Sinner, Luke 15. 7,
10. if they be pardoned and safe before? How much is our Ministry or Concern
for Souls debased, if all that we can prevail with are actually pardoned? Who
can reconcile to this Notion the Pleadings of God with Sinners? He speaks to
them as wounded, undone, and miserable. Look to me and be saved, why will you
die? Turn to me and live, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Least they should be converted, and I
should heal them, and the like. These sound strange, if Matters are so
perfected before they be born.

Testimonies.
The Assembly at Westminster, Conf. chapter 10. a. 1. and the Congregational Elders
at the Savoy, Chap. 10. a. 1. are both fully of this Mind. All those whom God
has predestined to Life, he is pleased in the appointed and accepted time,
effectually to call by his Word and Spirit, out of that State of Sin and Death,
in which they are by Nature, to Grace and Salvation by Jesus Christ, by
enlightening their Minds, and taking away the Heart of Stone, etc. Both also Chapter
11. a. 4. say, God did from Eternity, decree to justify all the Elect, and
Christ did in the fullness of time die for their sins, and rise again for their
Justification; nevertheless they are not justified, until the Holy Spirit does
in due time actually apply Christ unto them. None that have read the Assembles
lesser Catechism, but will see that the time the Spirit applies Christ, is in
our effectual Calling. The Reverend Dr. Owen is as express, Treatise of
Justification, P. 305. Says he, Notwithstanding the full, plenary Satisfaction
of Christ, yet all Men continue equally to be born by Nature Children of Wrath,
and whilst they believe not, the Wrath of God abides on them, they are
obnoxious unto, and under the Curse of the Law.

See more of this Point in Chap. 11. and 12. wherein I speak of Union and
Justification.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
The Doctor mistakes the Nature of God's Decree, because a Decree ascertains a
thing shall in time be, therefore he thinks it gives a thing a present
subjective Being: Because Jacob was an elect Person, or the Object of Electing
Love in the Womb; therefore he was then actually a pardoned and adopted Person:
Because an eldest son is an Heir in the Womb; therefore an elect Person, who is
in time to be adopted, is an Heir in the Womb too: though the Scripture be
express, that it is they who receive Christ which only have Power to become the
Sons of God, Joh. 1. 12. and ye are the children of God by Faith. Gal. 3. 26.

CHAP. II. Of God's laying Sins on Christ.
Truth. THough our Sins were imputed to Christ with respect to the Guilt
thereof, so that he, by the Father's Appointment, and his own Consent, became
obliged, as Mediator, to bear the Punishment of our Iniquities; and he did
bear those Punishments to the full satisfaction of Justice, and to our actual
Remission when we believe; nevertheless, the Filth of our sins was not laid
upon Christ; nor can he be called the Transgressor, or was he, in God's
Account, the Blasphemer, Murderer, etc.

Error. God did not only impute the Guilt, and lay the Punishment of the sins
of the Elect upon Christ; but he laid all the very Sins of the Elect upon
Christ, and that, as to their real Filthiness and Loathsomeness; yea so, that
Christ was really the Blasphemer, Murderer, and Sinner, and so accounted by
the Father.

Proved, that this is Doctor Crisp 's Opinion.
The Doctor, p. 312. tells us, It Is Iniquity it self that the Lord laid upon
Christ; not only our Punishment, but our very Sin, etc. This Transaction of our
Sins to Christ, is a real Act; our Sins so became Christ's, that he stood the
Sinner in our stead, and we discharged. Obj. But he may mean no more than the
Punishment? A. No, he chooses as express Words as possible, to show it is the
Sin it self. P. 270. he says, It Is the Iniquity it self that the Lord has
laid upon Christ: I mean, it is the Fault of the Transgression it self, etc. To
speak more plainly; have thou been an Idolater, have thou been a Blasphemer,
have thou been a Murderer, an Adulterer, a Thief, a Liar or a Drunkard? If
thou have part in the Lord, all these Transgressions of thine, become actually
the Transgressions of Christ. P. 268. Nor are we so completely sinful, but
Christ, being made Sin, was as completely sinful as we, etc. and God himself
did account him among the number of Transgressors. P. 286. he spends time to
prove, that our very Sins were transacted on Christ; yea, some Sermons have
this Title, Sins transacted really on Christ. Obj. But may not he mean, only
that they were imputed as to the Guilt? A. No, he says, p. 436. the
Loathsomness, Abominableness, and Hatefulness of Rebellion, is laid upon
Christ's Back: He bears the Sin, as well as the Shame and Blame. He, p. 270,
271, 272, 273. 280, 281. endeavors to prove, it is the Sin opposed to Guilt;
and, For that Objection, That the Lord lays on Christ the Guilt and Punishment,
but not simply the Sin it self, (he says) for ought I see, it is a simple
Objection. Yea, p. 272. he affirms, That to say, that God did lay the Guilt of
Sin, but not the Sin it self, is contrary to Scripture. And, p. 286, 292.
denies an Imputation, that is not a real Transacting of the Sin: And, p. 289.
he represents this by these Similes; The bloody Coat of a Deer-stealer is
followed by the Blood hound; and stolen Goods taken by the Friend of the
Thief, and found with him, and not with the Theif. He says, p. 328. God makes
Christ as very a Sinner as the Creature himself was. P. 409. God lay upon him,
the Felony of Thieves, the Murders of Murderers, etc.

Wherein the Difference is not.
The Difference is not, 1. Whether Christ bare the Punishment of our Sins. 2.
Nor Whether Christ bare the Guilt of our Sins; which is that Respect of Sin to
the Threatening of the Law, whereby there is an Obligation to bear the
Punishment. 3. Nor whether Christ was esteemed by Men a Transgressor and
arraigned as such. 4. Nor whether, what Christ suffered, was not as effectual
to put away Sin, as if our very Sin had been transacted on him. All these I
affirm.

The real Difference.
The real Difference lies in these things, 1. Whether Sin it self, as to its
Filth and Fault, was transacted on Christ. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny.
2. Whether Christ was made and accounted by the Father, the very Transgressor,
the Adulterer, the Blasphemer, etc. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny.

The Truth confirmed.
1. To transact our very Sins on Christ, as opposed to Guilt is impossible; for
it would argue either a mistake in the divine Mind, to account him the
Committer of our Sins; or a propagator of our corrupt Qualities to him, which
is as impossible; and any other way to transact Sin on him, besides imputing
the Guilt, there is none.

2. It is needless to the ends for which our sins were laid on Christ. Sins
were laid on Christ, that he might make Atonement by suffering for them; and so
release us who had transgressed. Now, Christ, by submitting to the Guilt, as an
Obligation to punishment according to the Terms of the Covenant of Redemption,
was sufficient to this end, and all that was needful. All that endangered us,
was the Threatening of the Law; that which was destructive to the Offender, was
the Punishment included in that Threat. Hence Christ by the Father's
Appointment, obliging himself to suffer, and actually suffering what he was
obliged to; and this upon an Agreement, that, for his sufferings, we should be
released; where is the need of more? The obliquity of the Fact, as against the
Precept, shall not hurt, where the Sanction of the Law is answered; and he that
suffers as Sponsor for another, need not sustain in himself the Filthiness of
the Crime, to make him capable of giving Satisfaction, Genesis 44. 33. Philem. 18.

3. This Transacting of the Filthiness of our sins on Christ, is blasphemous.

He that took care his Body should not see Corruption, Act. 2. 3. would much
more abhor to take in our Pollution, to need (as the Doctor says) a breathing
it out. He was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners, Heb. 7.
26. It was condescension enough that he agreed to be treated as a Sinner; but
how odious is it to load him with Sin it self? To spit that in his Face, which
the worst of Men abused him with? and it would justify his Persecutors who
punished him, if that he was really the Person the Doctor's Principle
represents him.

4. Had he been accounted, by the Father, the very Transgressor, his atonement
had been unavailable to us. The Person esteemed a Sinner was incapable of
atoneing; he that must redeem us was to be the Just for the Unjust, 1 Pet. 3.
18. Whilst offering himself a Sacrifice, he must be accounted innocent and
blameless; an Offering without Spot, Heb. 9. 14. All the typical Sacrifices
were to be clean. Let none say he must have no sins of his own; for if the
Filthiness of our Sins is transferred on him, they are as much his own as if
they had been originally his; and the Doctor says, They made Christodious to
the Father; and more he had not been, if the Sin had been committed by himself.

5. Christ then suffered for his own Sins, and not for ours; this is plain: For
by the Doctor's Notion, they ceased to be our. Sins before he suffered, and
they became his own; for they were laid on him before he suffered for them;
yea, before he was obliged to suffer for them: This laying of Sins on him, was
that without which (the Doctor says, p. 294.) he could not justly be put to
suffer. But surely none can doubt, but it was the punishment of our sins was
laid on Christ, and not his own, Heb. 7. 27.

Testimonies.
Let us hear the Judgment of the Assembly. If you see their Confess. Chapter 8. a.
4. They enumerating the Instances of Christ's Humiliation, speak nothing of
this, though it was far the greatest, if it were true, as Doctor Crisp
observes, p. 380. And in the Larger Catechism, Q. How does Christ execute the
Office of a Priest? they answer, In his own Offering up himself, without Spot,
to God, to be a Reconciliation for the Sins of the People. Surely without Spot
is very opposite to his having all Sin and Filth. Doctor Owen's Tr. of Justif.
p. 284, 285, 287. He vindicates the Reformed from what he calls a horrid
Consequence, viz. That Christ was a Sinner, which was objected, p. 283. And he
tells us, that the Guilt of Sin is an external Respect of it; with respect of
the Sanction of the Law only, this is separable from sin, and this alone was
imputed to Christ. And he at large proves that this Imputation of Guilt to
Christ, is the meaning of Christ's being made Sin for us: He laid on him the
Iniquities of us all. And, p. 511. he says, The Imputation of Sin unto Christ,
did not carry along with it any of the Filth or Pollution of Sin to be
communicated to him by Transfusion, a thing impossible: So that no Denomination
can thence arise, which should include in it any respect to them; a Thought
hereof is impious, and dishonorable to the Son of God. And then he next
infers, that Christ could not be called an Idolater, Adulterer, etc. Reader,
thou may in other places find Doctor Owen as positive against Doctor Crisp in
this as Words can express.

The Ground of Doctor Crisp 's Mistake.
He seems to speak of Sin as a positive material thing, and does not
distinguish between God's laying our Sins on Christ as a Physical Act, and as a
Moral Act; and seems not to apprehend what the true Notion of imputing a thing
to another in Law in criminal Cases, is; hence because laying a material
Burden on a Shoulder, is putting that very Burden there, he thinks God took
our very* Sins and placed them on Christ: whereas God's laying our Sins on
Christ, is a moral Act of God, as a Rector; i. e. he agreed and appointed, that
Christ should in his Person stand obliged to bear the Punishment of our Sins,
that we might obtain Pardon; and that punishment was actually laid upon him,
and suffered by him. Hence also, because a man bound in a Bond for Money
becomes a Debtor; therefore he thinks because Christ suffered to save the
Idolater, or Blasphemer, therefore Christ must be the very Idolater and
Blasphemer; whereas Christ, paying our Debts was a Satisfaction for Criminals,
not a Payment of Money; And yet it is plain, that if I were bound for Money for
one, that by Drunkenness wastes his Estate, my being bound to pay the Money,
does not argue that I was the Drunkard, or must by the Creditors be so
accounted, when I make the Payment. Because Christ was made Sin, that is, an
Offering or Sacrifice for Sin; therefore he thinks our very sin was on him, and
he made filthy. To add no more, because Men wickedly arraigned him as a
Blasphemer therefore the Doctor thinks he was so indeed, and in God's Account.

CHAP. III. Of the Discharge of the Elect from Sins upon their being laid on
Christ.
Truth. THE Atonement made by Christ, by the Appointment of God, is that, for
which alone the Elect are pardoned, when it is applied to them. But the Elect
are not immediately pardoned upon Christ's being appointed to suffer for them,
nor as soon as the Atonement was made; nor is that Act of laying sins on Christ,
God's forgiving-Act, by which we are personally discharged.

Error. The very Act of God's laying Sins on Christ upon the Cross, is the
very actual Discharge of all the Elect from all their sins.

Proved that this is Doctor Crisp's Opinion.
This is so much the declared Opinion of the Doctor, that it runs, as a Line,
through all his Discourses; and is the foundation he builds most upon. P. 298.
I say, all the Weight, and all the Burden, and all that very Sin it self, is
long agone laid upon Christ; and that laying of it upon him, is a full
Discharge, and a general Release and Acquittance unto thee; that there is not
any one Sin now to be charged upon thee. See p. 375. 281, 285. and hence he
shows, that the Elect are justified before they do believe; otherwise, till
such Believing, the Person of the Elect does bear his own Transgression, and is
chargeable for his own Transgressions. p. 616, 617. See more Chapter 9.

Wherein the Difference is not.
The Difference is not, 1. Whether Christ made a full Atonement for sin. 2. Nor
whether that shall in time be applied to the Elect for their actual Remission
as the Effect of it. 3. Nor whether we be so far released thereupon, as that
God can demand no Atonement from any who shall submit to the Gospel-way of the
Application of it. 4. Nor whether the Law be answered, and God's Honor so
vindicated thereby, that the sins of Men cannot hinder an Offer and Promise of
Forgiveness, and Life. 5. Nor whether, when we are pardoned, the whole
meritorious Cause of Pardon be that Atonement; and what is required of Sinners
is only a Meetness to receive the Effects of it. 6. Nor whether this Atonement
was the only way of Forgiveness, which we can apprehend. All these I affirm.

The real Difference.
The real Difference is, 1. Whether the Elect were actually discharged of all
their sins at the time that Christ made Atonement. This the Doctor affirms; and
I deny. 2. Whether that very Act of God's laying Sins upon Christ, on the
Cross; be the Discharge of the Elect from all sin. This the Doctor affirms and
I deny.

The Truth confirmed.
The first point of Difference thou may find handled in Chap. 1, 9, 11, 12.
the last I do refer to in this Chap. viz. that the very Act of laying of Sin on
Christ upon the Cross, is not the actual immediate Discharge of the Elect from
sin.

1. It was not the Will or Purpose of God or Christ, that the laying of our
sins on Christ should be the immediate Discharge of the Elect. I suppose thou will grant, that if it was not the Will of God or Christ, that this should
discharge them; then it did not discharge them. And it is plain, God did not
will it should be so: For we have a full Account, that it is the Elect when he
is a Believer, that is to be discharged. Joh. 6. 40. This is the Will of him
that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may
have everlasting Life. The Decree it self adjusted this Order: 1 Pet. 1. 2.
Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification
of the Spirit unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of Christ. This is
further evidenced elsewhere; even in all such Places as be produced to prove
that Faith and Repentance is required to our actual Remission, and that declare
the Impenitent and Unbelieving to be unpardoned: For we cannot suppose, that
Christ's revealed Will in his Word is repugnant to his Purposes, when dying; or
that he should add other Requisites to the Pardon of the Elect, if they were
immediately pardoned on his Death.

2. This overthrows the whole Scheme so wisely contrived for the Distribution
of the Effects of his Death. Things are so adjusted that, forgiving the Elect,
should be an Effect of Christ's Kingly Office, as well as his Priestly Office:
He is exalted to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give Repentance, and Remission
of Sins, Acts 5. 31. The Holy Ghost is to influence in the Application of
Christ's Merits for Forgiveness, 1 Cor. 6. 11. But you are washed; but you are
sanctified, but you are justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. Hence the Design of the Gospel Ministry is to open men's
eyes, and turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan to God,
that they may receive Forgiveness of Sin, Act. 26. 18. It Is a Mercy received in
this Order, which is quite overturned, if the Elect be discharged when Christ
died.

3. By the opposite Error, the Elect would have been discharged, if Christ had
never risen again. For, if mere laying our Sins on Christ did acquit the Elect,
let Christ never have risen, we were rid of them, they ceased to be ours; and
so could not condemn us, by returning upon our Persons, though Christ had
continued dead; yea, his continuing dead had been the surest Release. Whereas
we are said to be begotten to a lively hope by Christ's resurrection, 1 Pet. 1.
3. and saved thereby, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

4. Yea, if taking sins off from the Elect, and laying them on Christ, was
their Discharge, they would be discharged before the sufferings and Death of
Christ: This appears; for they were laid on Christ before he suffered; and,
according to the Doctor's Scheme, were taken off us, to lay on Christ; and
their being laid on Christ, made the Sufferings of Christ to be just: From
which it must follow, that the Elect were eased of their Burden before Christ
suffered; yea it would be easily proved, they were released though he had not
suffered.

5. If this Error hold, the Gospel-Notion of Forgiveness by the Blood of
Christ, is destroyed. Forgiveness denotes the Person guilty; and it is a
judicial Act of God, as a Rector, acting by the Gospel-Rule; and this supposes
the full and perfect Atonement made by Christ, and the Grant made in the Virtue
thereof. But, in the Doctor's Opinion, the Person is never guilty; for sins
were laid on Christ before we were born, and therefore they were never upon us.
A judicial Act by a Rule, there is none; for the Gospel-grant of Pardon, is not
to the Elect, as elect; but as penitent Believers; neither is the Atonement of
Christ supposed to our Forgiveness: For the Doctor owneth, that our sins being
laid on Christ is before the making of the Atonement; and without our sins lay
on Christ, he could not justly be punished. So that, our Discharge being a
Transferring of sin from us to Christ, and this being done before Christ made
Atonement, we are discharged, not for the Atonement of Christ, nor by an Act of
Forgiveness for the sake of this Atonement. I need not add, that by this
Notion, Heathens may be in a pardoned state, and there is no need of the Gospel,
or Knowledge of Christ, to bring them out of a state of Wrath.

Testimonies.
Thou have read before, Chapter 1. How the Assembly, and the Elders at the Savoy
declare, We are not justified before the Spirit apply Christ to us in our
effectual Vocation. They both agree in Conf. chapter 8. a. 1. That God, from
Eternity, gave Christ a People to be his Seed, and to be by him in time
redeemed, called, justified, sanctified, and glorified. Here thou see
Redemption, and Justification are distinct things; and the Elect are, in Time,
called before they be justified. In the Larger Catechis. Q. What does God
require of us, that we may escape his Wrath and Curse due to us? The Assembly
answer, That we may escape Wrath, etc. He requires of us, Repentance toward
God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus, and the diligent Use of the outward
Means whereby Christ communicates to us the Benefits of his Mediation. Here
thou see, that, 1. We may be, for a time, without the Benefits of Christ's
Mediation. 2. That, notwithstanding his Mediation, we are under the Curse and
Wrath, as still due to us for sin till we repent and believe: For it is to
escape these, God requires Repentance and Faith. 3. It Is by Means attended to
and operating on us; that the Benefits of Christ's Mediation are communicated
for the Removal of the Curse and Wrath. What can be more fully spoken against
our being discharged when Christ suffered; yea or before we repent and believe?

The Synod of New England condemn this Speech, viz. To say, We are justified by
Faith, is an unsafe Speech: We must say we are justified by Christ; the Synod
tells us it is no unsafe Speech. But on the contrary, to say a Man is justified
before Faith, or without Faith, is unsafe, as contrary to the Language of the
Scripture, p. 17, 18. -- and they confute That as the 68. Error, viz. Faith
justifies an Unbeliever, that is, the Faith that is in Christ justifies me that
have no Faith in my self. p. 13. Doctor Owen of Justif. p. 306. says, But yet
the Act of God, in laying our sins on Christ, conveyed no actual Right and
Title to us unto what he did and suffered: They are not immediately thereon,
nor by virtue thereof ours, or esteemed ours; because God has appointed
somewhat else, not only antecedent thereunto, but as the Means of it, unto his
own Glory.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistakes.
Because it was God's Act to appoint Christ to suffer for our sins, that we
might in his Way and Time, be discharged; therefore he thinks we are
immediately discharged by that Act. Because Christ's Atonement is the sole
meritorious Cause of Forgiveness; therefore he thinks God suspends not
Forgiveness till he works any thing else in the Soul, which he has made
requisite to our being forgiven; though not as any meritorious cause. Because the
Scapegoat carried their sins into the Wilderness, who expressed their Faith
and Repentance, by laying on hands on it, and confessing sin; therefore the
sins of men are taken away by Christ, while they continue impenitent and
unbelieving.

CHAP. IV. Of the Elect's ceasing to be Sinners, from the time their Sins were
laid on Christ.
REader, I shall premise, 1. Men are sinners, or cease to be sinners, in
several distinct Respects: 1. As to the Filth and Obliquity of Sin; with
respect to this, they are more or less sinners, according to the degree of
their Innocence and Holiness. 2. With some, as to the Guilt of sin, which
refers to the Sanction of the Law against Offenders: With respect to this, the
Offenders be more or less sinners, as they are forgiven, or not forgiven. 3. As
to the Charge of the Fact, which was sinful, with respect to this neither
After-sanctification nor Pardon, will deliver a Transgressor from having been a
sinner; the Fact was his: The first and last denominate one a sinner most
properly: The second denominates a Man punishable, but not a sinner formally.

2. In the whole Scheme of the Doctor's Principles, it is the Elect, as elect,
who cease to be sinners: Therefore, when he speaks of a Believer, he does not
mean, he was a sinner before he believed; for he states the time to be when
Christ had our sins laid upon him, viz. on the Cross. Having explained the
Title of this Chapter, I proceed.

Truth. An elect Person cease not to be a sinner, upon the laying of our sins
upon Christ; that is, he remains a sinner, as to the Guilt, till he believes;
(if Adult.) He is a sinner, as to the Filth of sin, till he be sanctified. He
is a sinner, as to the charge of the sinful Fact he commits, and that even
after Pardon and Sanctification: Nevertheless, he is free from the Curse when
he is pardoned, and shall be purged from all the Filth of sin when he is
perfect in Holiness. And though Christ did bear the Punishment of our Iniquity;
yet it never was Christ's Iniquity, but ours.

Error. The Elect upon the Death of Christ, ceased to be sinners; and, ever
since their sins are none of their sins, but they are the sins of Christ.

Proved that this is Doctor Crisp 's Opinion.
The Doctor puts this Objection. p. 8. Must not he be reckoned to be a sinner
while he does sin? A. I answer, No: Though he does sin, yet he is not to be
reckoned a sinner; but his sins are reckoned to be taken away from him, etc. A
Man does sin against God; God reckons not his sin to be his; he reckons it
Christ's, therefore he cannot reckon it his. This he endeavors to prove p.
270. If thou have part in the Lord Christ, (which he thinks all the unbelieving
Elect have) all these Transgressions of thine, are become actually the
Transgressions of Christ, and so cease to be thine; and thou ceasest to be a
Transgressor, from that time they were laid upon Christ, to the last hour of
thy Life: So that now, thou art not an Idolater; thou art not a Thief, etc.
Thou art not a sinful Person, what sin soever thou committest, p. 271. So that,
if you would speak of a sinner, supposing that Person, of whom you speak, to be
a Member of Christ (i. e. Elect) you must not speak of what he manifests, but
of what Christ was.

Wherein the Difference is not.
The Difference is not, 1. Whether the pardoned Sinner shall be delivered from
Condemnation. 2. Nor whether God, for Christ's sake, will deal with a pardoned
Sinner, as if he had not been a Sinner. 3. Nor whether Forgiveness does take
away Sin, as to its Obligation to Punishment. 4. Nor whether the Atonement of
Christ, when it is applied in its full Effects, will perfectly remove all
Punishment, and purge away all Filth and Defilement from the Elect. Each of
these I affirm.

The real Difference.
1. Whether, because Christ obliged himself to bear the satisfactory Punishment
of our sins, did they therefore become the sins of Christ? This the Doctor
affirms, and I deny. Of which I have spoken, Chap. 2. 2. Whether our sins were
pardoned when Christ suffered on the Cross? This the Doctor affirms, and I
deny: Of this, see chapter 1. and 3. and 12. etc. 3. Whether even they that are
Members of Christ, yet if they do sin, are they Transgressors and Sinners; and
are the sins they commit, their sins? This the Doctor denies and I affirm.

The Truth proved.
One would think this needed no proof, unless it were a doubt, whether a
rational Subject, transgressing the Law of God, be a Transgressor; or that he
that does a sinful Fact is a doer of it; or whether it be his sinful Fact who
does act it: And yet the Point is included in these plain things. Need I add?
1. Christ teaches Believers to pray for the Pardon of Sins as their own Sins.
Forgive us our Sins, Luke 11. 4. It would be vain to object, they pray for the
Manife station of Pardon; for were it so; yet it is for our sins. It would sound
strange to pray, Forgive us the sins of Christ.

2. The Saints in Scripture, esteemed their sins to be their own sins, and
themselves sinners, when they committed sin, or found its motions: Though our
Iniquities testify against us, Jer. 14. 7. As for our Iniquities we know them,
Isa. 59. 12. Take away mine Iniquity, Job 7. 21. Lord pardon my Iniquity, Ps.
25. 11. Was it not his own sin that Peter wept for? And whose sin caused the
incestuous Man's sorrow? See 1 John 1. 9. Confess our Sins.

3. God reckons men's sins to be their own; he reproves them as theirs; he
forgave them as theirs, 1 John 2. 12. Jer. 33. 8. Surely, the few things which
God had against Thyatira, were the sins of that Church, Rev. 2. 20. Were they
not Laodiceans sins which God calls her to repent of? Rev. 3. 19. and whose sin
was that, which Paul wished might not be laid to their charge who deserted him?
2 Timothy 4. 16.

4. Mark what will follow hence: No elect members of a Church is justly
censured for offenses, and no Christian criminal should be punished; for they
are not the sinners; the sin is not theirs. A hundred such consequences
naturally proceed from this error, which fully tends to render sin and sinners
innocent: Not to say what Popery is in it; as if justification did remove the
filth of sin.

Testimonies.
Whatever I shall hereafter cite from the Assembly and Elders at the Savoy, to
prove that God fees Sin in Believers, and what Afflictions God brings on
Believers for sin, and the Necessity of renewed Pardon, will declare their full
consent, and each of these Heads prove the present Truth; of which, see Chap.
1. 6, 17. 18, 19.

The Synod of New England condemn this as a blasphemous Speech of their
Antinomians, If Christ will let me sin, let him look to it, upon his Honor be
it, P. 19. And also, That if I be Holy, I am never the better accepted of God;
if I be unholy, I am never the worse, etc. Dr. Owen of Justif. faith, P. 284.
To imagine such an Imputation of our sins to Christ, as that thereon they
should cease to be our sins, and become his absolutely, is to overthrow that
which is affirmed; for on that supposition Christ would not suffer for our
sins. And a few Lines after, he adds, No Non-imputation of sin, as unto
Punishment, can free the Person, in whom it is, from being formally a Sinner.

The Grounds of the Dr's. Mistake.
He thinks, because God removes our sins by Pardon, so as to acquit us from
Punishment; therefore our sins cease to be ours. Because a pardoned Person is
discharged from Condemnation; therefore he thinks, that Person is not to be
denominated a Sinner from the Violation of the Precept. Because Christ took
upon him to make satisfaction for sin; therefore he thinks no Filth can cleave
to the Offender, nor he be a Transgressor by the Offense.

I need not warn thee how the Doctor speaks of laying our sins on Christ, P.
339. and the actual forgiving them, as if they were the same thing; but they
differ, as is manifest in Chap. 3.

CHAP. V. Of the Time when our Sins were laid on Christ, and continued there.
Truth. THE Obligation of suffering for our Sins was upon Christ, from his
undertaking the Office of a Mediator, to the Moment wherein he finished his
satisfactory Atonement. The Punishment of our sins lay upon Christ, from the
first moment, to the last of his State of Humiliation.

Error. The Time when our sins were laid actually on Christ, was, when he was
nailed to the Cross, and God actually forsook him; and they continued on him
till his Resurrection.

Proved that this is the Dr's. Opinion.
He tells us, P. 356. Now there was a pitched time wherein God did serve
Execution actually upon him, and that was, when God did forsake this Son of
his, when he called him forth, and charged sin upon him. And, P. 357. Look upon
the Execution, or rather the serving of the Execution, that is, the actual
laying of Iniquity upon Christ; this Inniquity was laid upon him at that
instant, when he was upon the Cross, and God nailed the sins of Men to the
Cross of Christ, and from that time there was not one sin to be reckoned, etc.
360.

Wherein the Difference is not.
It is not whether God withdraws, and the Death of Christ were the very eminent
completing Parts of Christ's propitiatory Sufferings. This I affirm.

The Real Difference.
Whether our sins were not laid upon Christ (in a scripture Sense) before he
was upon the Cross; and whether, what he suffered before his Crucifixion, were
propitiatory Sufferings for our sins. This the Doctor's Assertion opposes, and
I affirm.

The Truth Confirmed.
Reader, Take with thee what has been said Chap. 2. that the Filth of sin was
not laid on Christ; and it remains, that what I am to prove, is either, 1. That
Christ was under an Obligation to bear the Punishment of sin before his
Crucifixion Or, 2. That he actually suffered some of the Punishment of sin
before his Crucifixion. And can there be a Necessity of saying much of either?
As to the First, Whatever proves a Covenant of Redemption, what ever Grant was
made of saving Benefits to any fallen Sinner, before the Death of Christ, in
trust of his executing what he had engaged; yea, all such Expressions, as I
come to do thy Will, Heb. 10. 57. For this cause I came unto this Hour, and the
like, do prove that he was bound to the bearing of Punishment as our Sponsor,
before he was on the Cross. As to the Second, I would only note, 1. That the
whole of his Humiliation was a degree of his suffering for sin, and so a part
of his Satisfaction. His being made lower than the Angels by being incarnate,
his Poverty, his Temptations, his Stoning, his Reproaches, his Whippings, his
Agony in the Garden, his Arraignment, his Condemnation* Buffettings, Spitting
on him, being crowned with Thorns, and many more; were they real Sufferings or
no? if they were Punishments, what were they for? except for sin: How could he
otherwise be subject to them any more than to Death it self? 2 The Effects and
Fruits of satisfactory Sufferings, are ascribed to several of his Sufferings,
besides his Crucifixion, 2 Cor. 8. 9. For your Sakes he became poor, that ye
through his Poverty might be rich. Isa. 53. 5. With his Stripes we are healed;
and sundry other places. Nay, to suppose any Degree of Suffering on Christ, and
not our Sins laid on Christ, even though in the Doctor's Sense, would overturn
the whole Christian Religion, and justify the Socinians.

Testimonies.
The Assemblies Lesser Catechism, Q. Wherein did Christ's Humiliation consist?
A. In his being Born, and that in a low Condition, made under the Law,
undergoing the Miseries of this Life, the Wrath of God, and the cursed Death of
the Cross; in being buried, and continuing under the Power of Death for a time.
Thou see Christ's Incarnation, or being Born, and several other things before
Christ's Crucifixion, are parts of his Humiliation.

The Ground of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because the hidings of God's Face, and especially the dying Sacrifice of
Christ, did so complete and finish the Work of Satisfaction as the principal
parts thereof, therefore he thinks our Sins were not laid on Christ till then.

CHAP. VI. Of God's Separation from, and Abhorrence of Christ, while our Sins
lay upon him.
Truth. THough God testified his threatened Indignation against Sin, in the
awful Sufferings of Christ's Soul and Body in his Agony, and suspended those
delightful Communications of the Divine Nature, to the Humane Nature of Christ,
as to their wonted Degrees; yet God was never separated from Christ, much less
during his Body's lying in the Grave; neither was the Father ever displeased
with Christ; and far less did he abhor him, because of the Filthiness of Sin
upon him.

Error. Christ was on the account of the Filthiness of Sins, while they lay
upon him, separated from God, odious to him, and even the Object of God's
Abhorrence, and this to the time of his Resurrection.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
He says, P. 294. Nay, from this I affirm, as Christ did bear our Iniquity, so
Christ for that Iniquity was separated from God, and God was here separated
from Christ, or else Christ spoke untruth. P. 295. The Doctor puts an
Objection, It may be this for saking was but for a little time. He says, To
this I answer, it was as long as Sin was upon him; had not Christ breathed out
the Sins of Men that were upon him, he had never seen God again; he having
taken Sin upon him, he must unload himself of Sin before he can be brought near
to God, etc. There was a Separation and Forsaking when Christ died but at his
Rising there was a Meeting again, a kind of renewing his Sonship. P. 408. It is
a higher Expression of Love, that Christ should bear the Sins of Men, than that
he should be given to die for Men, etc. Affliction is not contrary to the
Nature of God; God can smile upon Persons when they are under the greatest
Scorn, etc. But where the Lord does charge any Sin, the Lord has an Abhorrence
there. P. 379, 380. He shows, That Christ to be a Scorn; yea, for God to make
him suffer the most accursed Death of the Cross, is far less than to make him
sin, because all this may agree to the Nature of God; but Iniquity is the
hatefullest thing in the World to God; where Iniquity is found, a Toad is not
so odious nor ugly to Man, as that Person is in the Sight of God. P. 180. All
that Filthiness and Loathsomeness of our Nature, is put upon Christ; he stands,
as it were, the Abhorred of the Lord.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not whether the Soul of Christ endured the Effects of Gods Wrath
against sin, and was amazed thereat as well as at the Importance of the Work he
was engaged in, and the Enemies he was to encounter with, and the Sacrifice he
was to make, etc. 2. Nor whether the Divine Nature suspended for a while on the
Cross the delightful Communications of it self, as to the Degrees it was
accustomed to emit to the humane Nature of Christ. These with awe I freely
affirm.

The Real Difference:
1. Whether Christ was separated from God. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny.
2. Whether Christ was at any time under God's Abhorrency, or odious to him,
because under the Loathsomeness of Sin. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny;
yea, not without Detestation. 3. Whether Christ was thus on the account of the
Filthiness of Sin upon him, separated from, and under the Abhorrency of the
Father, during his lying in the Grave. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny it
of that time, and any other, or else it would be true for the whole time of his
Humiliation.

The Truth Confirmed.
1. This Separation was impossible, because of the Union between the Divine and
Humane Nature of Christ in one Person. This Union could not be dissolved, nor
could all Communications of Comfort or Strength from the Divine Nature be
interrupted while the Union remained. Yea, the Humane Nature of Christ had
never a personal Subsistence of its own, but was assumed by the eternal Word,
the second Person, of one Essence with the Father.

2. The Father had promised constant Supports to Christ, in the whole of his
Undertakings and Sufferings, and his comfortable Presence with him, Isa. 42. 1,
4, 6. Isa. 50. 7, 8, 9.

3. The Doctor, of all Men, had least reason to assert this Separation, when he
had so exceeded in telling us, P. 379. That the Divine Nature is a kind of Soul
to the Humanity, consisting of Soul and Body, and is the Form and Strength of
both, etc. The Godhead gives Life to Christ, and so all the Sufficiency to
bear Iniquity proceeds from the Divine Nature of Christ. And, P. 378. Should
Iniquity be laid on the Humane Nature, and the Divine Nature not support the
Humane Nature, it would have sunk under sin. Reader, is it not strange, that
after this, the Doctor should affirm a Separation, and that for all the time
when Iniquity was upon Christ?

4. The Lord Jesus could not be abhorred, or odious to God, for in him God was
always well pleased, Isa. 42. 1. Mat. 17. 5. He was now yielding the highest
Act of Obedience, and so there was at least no cause of Offense; yea, God loved
him for this, John 10. 17, 18. the Person of the Son was always Gods Delight,
from Eternity to Eternity, Prove. 8. 30. and could not but be so. Christ must
have been as odious to himself as to the Father, for he is of the same Holy
Essence.

Reader, How horrid a sound must it have to a Christian Ear, to say, A Christ
odious to God, abhorred by the Father, and that, because he was a loathsome, a
detestable, an abominable and filthy sinner for a time.

This Point carries that Aspect, that from Regards for the Doctor, I will not
insist on it* nor its necessary Consequences, and yet upon this depend many of
his Positions.

5. Christ could not be thus separated from, and be, as it were, the Abhorred
of the Lord, while his Body lay in the Grave, for then his Soul could not be in
Paradise, as it was when his Body was in the Grave, Luke 23. 43. Alas! how can
any bear to think, that (as the Doctor affirms) he never saw God's Face all
that while? Where was he? Yea, What tormenting Agitations of Soul must he be
under, even after Death, in the unseen State? The Papists indeed tell us he was
in Hell; but they assign Purposes more becoming Christ's being there, than the
Doctor's Position imports. It was the height of Hell, for Christ to be banished
from God's Face, and be under his very Wrath and Abhorrence all that time, and
his Mind tormented with the Filth of sin made his: He never would have been a
Savior on Terms so inconsistent with his Person. But the whole Notion is
contrary to Scripture, for under the greatest Abatements of Comfort, he owns
God's Presence and Relation: My God, My God, Matthew. 27. 46. and just upon his
loud Cry, he said, Father, into thy Hands I commit my Spirit; and having said
thus he gave up the Ghost, Luke 22. 46. Was there a Separation or Abhorrence,
when he thus addresseth himself to God, as his God, and his Father? Did he
never come near God all that while, when God received his Spirit, or rejected
his Prayer? which God never did reject: Joh. 11. 42. Me thou hear always.
See Ps. 69. 13, 14, 15, 17, 18. Ps. 22. 18, 19, 20, 24. Heb. 5. 7. He was heard
in that he feared, which refers to this time.

Testimonies.
The Opinion I oppose, is such, that I will only instance the Words of Doctor
Owen of Justif. P. 286. There was no reason why God should hate Christ for his
taking on him our Debt, and the Payment of it. And suppose a Person out of an
heroic Generosity of Mind, an (...) for another, so as to answer for him with
his Life. Would the most cruel Tyrant under Heaven, that should take away his
Life, in that case hate him. And then the Doctor shows here, and P. 287. the
Word Hate signifies either an Aversion or Detestation of Mind, or only a Will
of Punishment: In the first Sense, says he, there was no ground why God should
hate Christ on the Imputation of Guilt unto him; sin inherent renders the Soul
polluted, abominable, and the only Object of Divine Aversation: But Christ was
undefiled, etc.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
The Doctor does not distinguish between the Affects of Wrath, and the Effects
of Wrath. Because God forsook Christ, as to the usual Degrees of Comfort, he
thinks Christ was separated from God. Because he that is formally a sinner, is
odious to God; therefore he thinks Christ was odious to God, who had on him the
Punishment of sin, with the Guilt or Obligation to bear this Punishment by his
own Consent; neither of which have any thing of the Loathsomeness of sin. I
know not why he thinks Christ came not near God from the time of his Death, to
his Resurrection; unless because of his Conceit, that the Loathsomeness of sin
being on him, God could not bear the sight of him till he had sweat it out; a
Reason too horrid for me to say more to, and indeed inconsistent with the
Notion of a Mediator for the sins of others.

CHAP. VII. Of the Change of Person between Christ and the Elect, and their
being as Righteous as he.
Truth. THE Mediatorial Righteousness of Christ is so imputed to true
Believers, as that for the sake thereof they are pardoned and accepted unto
Life eternal, it being reckoned to them, and pleadable by them for these Uses,
as if they had personally done and suffered what Christ did as Mediator for
them, whereby they are delivered from the Curse, and no other Atonement nor
meriting Price of saving Benefits can be demanded from them. Nevertheless this
Mediatorial Righteousness is not subjectively in them; nor is there a Change of
Person betwixt them and Christ, neither are they as righteous as he but there
remain Spots and Blemishes in them, until Christ by his Spirit perfect that
Holiness begun in all true Believers; which he will effect, before he bring
them to Heaven.

Error. Every Believer (or elect Person) is as righteous as Christ, and there
is a perfect Change of Person and Condition betwixt Christ and the Elect; he
was what we are, and we are what he was, viz. perfectly holy, and without Spot
or Blemish.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
P. 270, 271. The Doctor says, Mark it well, Christ himself is not so
completely righteous, but we are as righteous as he; nor we so completely
sinful, but Christ became, being made sin, as completely sinful as we. Nay,
more, we are the same Righteousness, for we are made the Righteousness of God;
that very Sinfulness that we were, Christ is made that very Sinfulness before
God. So that here is a direct Change, Christ takes our Person and Condition,
and stands in our stead; we take Christ's Person and Condition, and stand in
his stead. What the Lord beheld Christ, that he beholds the Members of Christ
to be, etc. So that if you reckon well, you must always reckon your selves in
another Person, and that other in your Person. And, P. 180. God gives his Son
Christ, etc. God gives the Person of Christ to Men, as much as to say, God
gives Christ to stand in the room of Men, and Men stand in the room of Christ.
So that in giving Christ, God is pleased, as it were, to make a Change, and all
the Loveliness the Person of Christ has, that is put upon us, and we are as
lovely with him, even as the Son himself. And, P. 158. Here is a Person in
Blood in a loathsome Condition, but for all this, as loathsome as the Person is
in himself, and in his own Nature, yet here is Perfection of Beauty, etc. On
the account of this, he says, P. 428. We appear before God perfect in
Holiness. And, P. 419, 420. Christ draws up and exhales that Impurity which Men
live in, etc. and when Men are without Spot, and all fair, God falls in Love
with them, etc. The Church has no Blemish at all, no Imperfection. See more of
this in Chap. Of Union.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not whether the mediatioral Righteousness of Christ (habitual, active
and Passive) be a Righteousness sufficient to, and designed for the Salvation
of the Elect.

2. Nor whether our Justification, and all other Benefits, when we are made
Partakers of them, be the Fruits of this Righteousness, as the only meritorious
Cause of them.

3. Nor whether Christ's Sufferings and Obedience were so in our Stead, that
God cannot exact from us any other Atonement for Sin, or meriting Price of any
Gospel-blessings.

4. Nor whether Christ, by his Righteousness, merited for all the Elect, that
they should in his Time and Way be certainly Partakers of its saving Effects;
and did not only purchase a conditional Grant of those Effects, viz. That
Proposition, He that believes shall be saved.

5. Nor whether, besides these Effects being made ours, the very Righteousness
of Christ is imputed to true Believers, as what was always undertaken and
designed for their Salvation, and is now effectual to their actual Pardon and
Acceptance to Life: Yea, is pleadable by them as their Security, and is as
useful to their Happiness, as if themselves had done and suffered what Christ
did.

6. Nor whether Christ by his Righteousness merited and by his Spirit does
renew the Hearts of his Members, and will in time so communicate of his Grace
to them, as that they shall be perfectly holy, even without Spot and Blemish.

7. Nor whether the Spots and Blemishes remaining in a godly Man, do consist
with his justified State, and shall not cast him out of God's Favors. All
these I do affirm.

The real Difference.
The Difference lies in these Points, 1. Whether there be a Change of Person
between Christ and the Elect? yea, or betwixt Christ and Believers? This the
Doctor affirms, and I deny. 2. Whether the Mediatorial Righteousness of Christ
be subjectively in us? This the Doctor affirms, and I deny; though as it is in
Christ, I grant it is imputed to the saving Advantages of all his Seed as much
as if it were in themselves. 3. Whether we are as righteous as Christ, is a
proper or safe Speech? This the Doctor affirms, and I deny; though I yield,
that we are for the Sake of his Righteousness delivered from the Guilt of Sin,
and entitled to Life; yea, accepted with God against all excluding Bars. 4.
Whether because Christ is perfectly holy can we be said to be perfect in
Holiness upon the Account of any Imputation of his Holiness to us; or are we so
esteemed by God? This the Doctor affirms and I deny. 5. Whether the Elect
Believer, before he is perfectly holy, is wholly without Spot, Filth and
Blemish? This the Doctor affirms, and I deny; though I grant, that for the Sake
of Christ, these Spots, Blemishes and Filth shall not subject them to the Curse
and Wrath of God, nor forfeit saving Benefits.

The Truth Confirmed.
My designed Brevity prevents Enlargement on so many Points, and therefore I
shall only glance at each.

1. There is not a Change of Person betwixt Christ and the Elect: For Christ
was the Savior, and never ceased to be so: We are the Saved, and not the
Saviors. Christ was still the Redeemer, and never the Redeemed; we are the
Redeemed, and never the Redeemers. Christ was he, who by his own Merits
forgives us, but never was forgiven; we are forgiven, and never had Merits of
our own to forgive our selves, or others, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. It Is profane
Arrogance for us to pretend to his Prerogatives; and it is Blasphemy to debase
him among their Number, who were Enemies without Strength; and Sinners, for
whom he was the dying Sacrifice, Romans 5. 6, 8, 10. It Is enough, that he
reserving the Peculiars of a Redeemer, should agree to suffer for our Sins;
it is enough that we are pardoned, and adopted for his Sake, when we deserved
endless VVoe and are never capable of making the least Atonement.

2. The Mediatorial Righteousness of Christ is not subjectively in us. I do not
speak now of our inherent Righteousness, of which he is not only the Pattern,
but also is the Cause and Worker, Phil. 3. 9. The Discourse is only of that
Righteousness which belongs to the Person of Christ, on the Account of his
fulfilling the Law of his Mediation, and his Title to the Rewards promised to
him as Mediator, for fulfilling that Law, which he did to every Iota. This
Righteousness is accounted to be for us, and to deliver all the Elect, was the
end of all his Undertakings. Nevertheless, it is not subjectively in us,
because 1. It is inconsistent with the Nature of Gospel-Imputation. To impute
to one what is suffered by another, is to esteem the one undertaken for in the
Sufferings of the other, and to deal with him as if himself had suffered the
same things; yea, and had never deserved to suffer; but it is not to judge,
that he did in his own Person suffer, for that were false, and a Derogation to
the Honor of him who endured the Sufferings; especially, if he freely suffered
in another's Room, and for his Advantage, as our Lord did, Heb. 9. 15. Gal. 1.
4. Much less is Imputation an Infusion of Christ's Righteousness into us, or a
Putting it subjectively in us.

2. The Soul in all Actings of Faith on Christ's Righteousness, ought to look
at this Righteousness, as in Christ, and not in himself, who believes, 2 Pet.
1. 1. 1 John 2. 12. Would it not be strange Language? to say, I trust for new
Pardon or Comfort to the Righteousness that was once in Christ; but is now in
me: in me, is the meritorious Cause of my Pardon: In me, is the Fountain, to
which I must look for Washing and Healing; not as it is in Christ, to whom I
am united, but as it inheres in me as the immediate Subject of it. But the
Gospel directs to look to him and be saved, Isa. 45. 22. Faith owns the
Foundation of our Plea to be in Christ, from whom are derived to us that
Pardon, and Right to Life, which are the Effects of his Righteousness. For this
we are justified, for that Righteousness which is in Christ, we are acquitted
and adopted. The efficient Merit is in him, the Effect of the judicial
Absolution for that Merit is in us. The Righteousness is still in Christ, for
the Sake whereof we are absolved, or justified. God has, for Christ's Sake,
forgiven us, but not for the Sake of what is in our selves, Ephesians. 4. 32. Had not
he obeyed and suffered for us, we could not have been absolved for the Sake of
his Obedience and Sufferings: And now being absolved, or made righteous in a
Law Sense, we have as much Matter of glorying in him, as absolved, acquitted
Sinners can have: We are justified by his Righteousness, that is for that we
are forgiven; and also entitled to Life, which we had forfeited our selves; but
we are not made Innocent, nor so esteemed; we are not accounted them who made
the Atonement. We still take hold of (or acknowledge and approve, with
Reliance on and Submission to the Terms of its Application) of Christ's
Righteousness, that we by it may be forgiven; and this is our Blessedness, Romans
4. 7. and our Gospel-Righteousness, which all such refuse who reject redeeming
Love from a Conceit of their own Merits; or refuse the Terms of the Gospel,
which by the Promise do make us capable of being justified and saved for the
Merits of Christ. Yet these still remain, his Merits, though thus beneficial to
us in their Application, as the procuring Cause of all our Good.

3. If the Mediatorial Righteousness be subjectively in us, we must grant all
those Absurdities which the Enemies of Gospel-Imputation object, and the
Orthodox deny. If it be in us, then we may be as truly Intercessors as Christ,
and in the same Sense, viz. in the Virtue of Merits made personally ours. We
have a Righteousness in us which is able to save the World, and capable of
being imputed to their Justification. We need no Forgiveness, but are saved by
the Covenant of Works as claiming Life by its Sanction immediately, which is
inconsistent with all Remission; yea or Imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
which did no way consist in Forgiveness, but in a full Satisfaction. This would
denominate us Saviors from the Moment we were justified, if not before.
Whereas, we still need Pardon, and continue justified by the Efficacy of the
Righteousness of another, and must look to Christ as the only Subject of it all
our Days. Our justified State is a Continuance of the blessed Effects of he
Righteousness of Christ from first to last. That Cause is still productive of
Supplies, as our Guilt returns, or Necessities and Capacities renew or grow;
but our Redemption is ever in Christ, Romans 3. 24.

3. That we are as Righteous as Christ, is not a proper or safe Speech. It Is
true indeed, our Pardon and Acceptance is firm and lasting, and will no more
fail us, than the Righteousness of Christ will fail; it being the meritorious
Cause and Security thereof, and the Benefits can abate to none who answer the
Gospel-Rule of it is Application. But yet we are not as Righteous as Christ: We
are not so as to Sanctification; he being perfectly Holy, we being imperfectly
so, though really Holy. And it is to be noted, That Believers are said to be
Righteous in the common sense of the Scripture, on the account of
Sanctification, 1 John 3. 7. He that does righteousness, is righteous: And to
suppose the Elect to be as sanctified as Christ, even while they wallow in the
mire, is a strange Position. But suppose the Phrase refers to Justification,
yet it is not proper. For, 1. Christ is denominated Righteous, on the account
of what he personally did, and suffered: He derived not Righteousness from
another, but possessed it as Originally his own. He is eminently the Righteous,
1 John 2. 1. whereas we are reputed righteous for the sake of what Christ did,
and not for the merit of what we have done. Is it not unagreeable to hear a
redeemed Sinner say, I am as worthy as he that paid the Ransom? Or a pardoned
Worm say, I am as righteous as he who merited my Pardon? 2. Christ was so
Righteous, as to merit the Forgiveness of all his Seed: He is so Righteous, as
to make many Righteous, or safe from the Threat, and entitled to the Reward,
according to the Gospel-Rule: But we cannot justify one other Person by our
being righteous: We are not righteous enough to save a Brother, Psalm. 49. 7.

4. Though Christ be perfectly holy, yet his Holiness is not so imputed to us,
as that We are therefore perfectly holy. This is evident: For,

1. Holiness refers to Sanctification, and not to Justification.

2. Holiness is a Conformity to the Precept, as describing what is Sin and
Duty: But it refers not to the Sanction, which determines the Reward and
Punishment; and so to be Holy, and to be Righteous, are distinct Conceptions.
Having premised these, it follows,

3. That to be Perfect in Holiness, while we are in our own Persons Imperfect,
is impossible, ungrounded, and absurd.

1. It Is Impossible, being a Contradiction. To be perfectly Holy, and not
perfectly Holy at the same time, are inconsistent. If any doubt whether they
are imperfect in Holiness, they are little acquainted with the Law, or with
themselves.

2. It Is Ungrounded. I know that it will be objected, That it is so by
Imputation: But the Gospel knows no Imputation of this kind; we may as well
infer, That we are Omnipotent* and Omniscient, because Christ is so. I
understand that the Promise gives to the imperfectly holy, Impunity, and Right
to Life, on the account of Christ's Merits: But where has God said he will
esteem the Imperfect to be Perfect, as to what he declares them imperfect in?
Or has God ever said we are thus perfect? He may deal with a sincere Christian
(who is called Perfect, in comparison of others,) as if he were perfect; having
provided for his Justice and Honor in doing thus, by the Satisfaction of
Christ: But he cannot account him perfectly Holy. The very Union in Marriage,
does not transfer habitual Qualifications from Husband to Wife: Is a foolish
Wife perfectly wise, because her Husband is so? No, though she receives Benefit
by his Wisdom.

3. It Is Absurd. Our restored Holiness, is through the Operations of the
Spirit, and not by Transfusion. If the very Holiness of Christ's Person be in
us, it is his Increated Holiness, or Created: If his Increated, then we are
Gods, and not Men; for there is nothing Increated but God: If the Created
Holiness of Christ's Humane Nature be in us, it must depart from him, or cease
to be in him, as far as it is derived to us; for the same individual Quality
cannot be in two Subjects at once, though the same for Kind may be. If we are
as Holy as Christ, what hinders us to be entitled to the same degrees of Glory
and Honor as he? And all this being founded on the Change of Person between
Christ and us, we may well say we are Christ's, even every elect Person
severally: And if our perfect Holiness should be surmised from the Union
between Christ and Believers, that indeed would not be a change of Person, but
the making Christ and us one Natural Person. And then on the same grounds as we
can say we are as holy as Christ is, we may say we are as much Gods as Christ,
as Wise as Christ* as entitled to Worship as Christ; we do all that Christ
does in Heaven or Earth, and he does all as we Sinners do; we give what he
gives, and he receives what we receive; Distinction of Persons is gone, Christ
and we do nothing, and are nothing as distinct Persons. A thousand such things
are unavoidable Consequences.

4. Can this be reconciled to the scope of the Scriptures, wherein Believers
are called to grow up in Christ? Ephesians. 4. 15. To perfect Holiness, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
Grow in Grace? The defect of Holiness is bewailed by all the Saints, Wretched
man that I am! says the Apostle, Romans 7. 24. I press forward, etc. Phil 3. 12,
14. that is, Oh, that I were as holy as Christ designed to make me, and as I
shall be at the Resurrection! And the want and weakness of Holiness, is often
reproved by God, even in his own Children.

5. The Fifth Head to be proved, is, That Believers are not, as to Holiness,
without Spot, Blemish, etc. Experience may convince of this: But I pass it by,
as having occasion to speak to it in Chap. 16.

Testimonies.
The Assemlies Large Catec. puts this Question, What is the Communion in Grace
which the Members of the Invisible Church have with Christ? They Answer; In
their partaking of the Virtue of his Mediation in their Justification, Adoption
and Sanctification, and whatever in this life manifests their Union with him.
So that, in their Judgment, it is the Virtue of Christ's Mediation operates on
us, and not that the Mediatorial Righteousness is in us. The Elders at the
Savoy, c. 11. a. 1. say, Those whom God effectually Calls, he also freely
Justifies; not by infusing Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their
Sins, and by accounting and accepting their Persons as Righteous; not for any
thing wrought in them, or done by them, but for Christ's sake alone, etc.
Again, they add By imputing Christ's Active and Passive Obedience unto them.
The same say the Assemb. Conf. chapter 11. a. 1. Thou see it s Christ s
Righteousness is imputed for Pardon, and not infused. The Elders at the Savoy
inform us also, chapter 27. a 1. All Saints that are united to Christ, although
they are not thereby made One Person with him, have Fellowship in his Graces,
Sufferings and Glory, etc. and have Communion in each other's Gifts and Graces.
Thou find they judge we are not One Person with Christ by our Union; and
it is a Fellowship, for our good, we have by Christ's Graces, Glory and
Sufferings; but they are in him, as the Subject and not in us. And chapter 19. a.
6. they declare, The Law is useful to Believers, to show them the Corruption of
their Natures and Lives. It s plain then with them* we are not without Spot or
Blemish. The Assemb. Conf. chapter 32. a. 1. and the Elders at the Savoy, chapter 31.
a. 1. agree, That it is after Death our Souls are made perfect in Holiness.

One of the Speeches condemned by the New England Synod, was this; If Christ be
my Sanctification, what need I look to any thing else in my self to evidence my
Justification? To which they Answer; This Position is unsound, because it holds
forth Christ to be my Sanctification, so as that I need not look to any
inherent Holiness in my self; whereas Christ is said to be my Sanctification,
because he works Sanctification in us, p. 20. and p. 63. They observe it as
an Error, That Christ is our Sanctification, in the same sort as he is our
Justification. They elsewhere condemn such as made Christ the subject of our
Graces: Dr. Owen, of Justification, page 509, 510. disowns, That it can be said
we are as Righteous as Christ: And then asserts. To say we are as Righteous as
Christ, is to make Comparison between the Personal Righteousness of Christ, and
Our Personal Righteousness if the Comparison be of things of the same kind: But
this is foolish and impious; for notwithstanding our Personal Righteousness, we
are sinful; he knew no Sin: And if the Comparison be between Christ's Personal
Inherent Righteousness, and Righteousness imputed to us; Inhesion and
Imputation be things of diverse kinds, and thus it is fond, and of no
consequence: Christ was Actively Righteous, we are Passively so, etc. The
Righteousness of Christ, as it was his Personally, was the Righteousness of the
Son of God; in which respect it had in it self an infinite Perfection and
Value: But it is imputed to us only with respect to our Personal Want; not as
it was satisfactory for all but as our Souls stand in need of it, etc. From the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, it follows only, that those to whom
it is imputed, are redeemed and saved, not at all that they are Redeemers or
Saviors. And page 242, 243. Imputation is not the Transmission or Transfusion
of the Righteousness of another (viz. Christ) into them that are to be
Justified, that they should become perfectly and inherently Righteous thereby;
for it is impossible that the Righteousness of one should be transfused into
another, to become his subjectively and inherently. And the Doctor adds; That
the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us; as unto its Effects, has this
sound sense namely The Effects of it are made ours, by reason of that
Imputation: It is so imputed, so reckoned unto us of God, as that he really
communicates all the Effects of it unto us: See page 310, 311. What can be
spoken more oppositely to Dr. Crisp?

I might add Mr. Norton, of New England, who tells us, Orth. Evang. p. 305.
Though Christ obeyed the Law formally, yet it is not the formal working of
Obedience, or doing of the Command, but the good Virtue and Efficacy thereof
that is imputed to the Believer. What heaps of Testimonies could I produce? But
I confine my self to these few.

The Ground of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because Christ suffered in our stead that the fruit of his Suffering might be
our deliverance from suffering, and our being saved at last; therefore he
thinks there is a Change of Person. Because we are made the Righteousness of
God, that is, Partakers of Forgiveness, and a Right to Life, through Christ's
Atonement for us, which be Mercies so eminently the Contrivance and Gift of
God; therefore he thinks the very Mediatorial Righteousness of Christ is
subjectively in us. Because we are accepted with God, for Christ's sake;
therefore he thinks we have the perfect Cause of that Acceptance, viz. All
Loveliness upon our selves. Because the Church is now without spot, so as for
Christ's sake to be accepted, and not detested by God; and is, on the account
of the beginning's of God's Image, pleasing to Christ, and will hereafter be
perfectly sanctified, without the least blemish, or any such thing; therefore
he thinks it is now without Blemish or Imperfection. Because Christ's perfect
Righteousness is Security for our Pardon, and inviolable Right to Glory;
therefore he thinks we are as Righteous as he, as to Justification and
Sanctification too. Because Christ is made of God to us, Wisdom,
Sanctification, etc. therefore he thinks we are as Holy as he; whereas the
meaning of that place is, That Christ is appointed and given to enlighten,
renew and redeem us by his Merits, and by his Spirit: If this be not the sense
of it, we are as wise as Christ; for he is made to us wisdom.

Reader, Observe that the Doctor thinks all these great things are true of
every elect Person, whiles in his Blood, and unregenerate state, as much as of
any Believer, who indeed has the privilege to know it.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace.
THis being a Point of great Concern, I shall premise an Enquiry into some
Particulars, for explaining the Subject of this Chapter.

Q. 1. What is the Covenant of Grace?
A. 1. It is not the Covenant of Redemption between the Father and Spirit as
one Party, and the Eternal Word, the Lord Jesus, as the other Party. Were this
Covenant understood, I think many well-meaning People would be undeceived: In
that Covenant, all the causes of Man's Salvation are adjusted and secured; all
Satisfaction and Merit are on Christ, as his Undertaking; yea, it is provided
there, That the Elect shall obey the Terms of Life, and certainly possess
Salvation: Yea, as that Covenant was not made with the Elect, though for the
Elect; so they have nothing to do, as a Condition of this Covenant. And to this
all absolute Promises and Prophecies of Grace are reducible, they being a
Transcript hereof: This Dr. Owen makes to be a distinct Covenant from the
Covenant of Grace. See his Treatise of Justif. page 268, 269.

2. By Covenant of Grace, I mean, the way that God has ordained to apply to
Sinners that Salvation which is prepared by Christ, and which he will enable
the Elect to comply with.

Q. 2. What is intended by Condition?
A. I shall answer in the words of worthy Mr. Flavel, (Discourse of Errors,
page 248.) An Antecedent Condition signifies no more than an Act of ours; which
though it be neither perfect in every degree, nor in the least meritorious of
the Benefit conferred, nor performed in our own natural strength; yet,
according to the Constitution of the Covenant, it is required of us, in order
to the Blessings consequent thereupon, by virtue of the Promise: And
consequently, the Benefits and Mercies granted in this order, are and must be
suspended by the Donor, or Desposer of them, till it be performed; such a
Condition we affirm Faith to be.

Some call this a Consequent Condition; but they mean not Consequent to the
Benefit promised, but Consequent to Christ's undertaking to enable us to do it.
Reader, I would have thee note, 1. The Conditions do not merit the Blessings
promised. 2. The Conditions are not uncertain; for Christ has undertaken that
the Elect shall perform them. 3. They are performed by Grace, and not by
Natural Power. 4. They are performed by Men, and not by Christ, though it is by
Christ that any are enabled to perform them: It Is not Christ repents, or
believes in a Savior, but Men themselves. 5. It Is from God's Will in the
Promise, that they are made to be Conditions, he connected the Benefit and the
Duty; though he chose Conditions that were fit, yet their fitness would not
have availed to our interest in the Benefits, unless he had promised that they
should so avail: A penitent Believer had not been saved, but for the Promise,
though it is unlike a God to have saved any that were not such. 6. These
Conditions are our Duty by God's Command; and not less so, by being made Terms
of the Benefit in the Divine Grant. 7. The Covenant, though Conditional, is a
Disposition of Grace: There Is Grace in giving ability to perform the Condition,
as well as in bestowing the Benefits: God's enjoining one, in order to the
other, makes not the Benefit to be less of Grace; but it is a display of God's
Wisdom, in conferring the Benefit, suitably to the nature and state of Men in
this Life, whose Eternal Condition is not eternally decided, but are in a state
of Trial; yea, the Conditions are but a meetness to receive the Blessings. 8.
The reason why we use the word Condition, is, because it best suits with Man's
Relation to God, in his present dealings with us, as his Subjects in trial for
Eternity. Christ, as a Priest, has merited all; but as a King or a Priest upon
his Throne, he dispenceth all: He enjoins the Conditions, in order to the
Benefits; and makes the Benefits Motives to our Compliance with the Conditions:
He treats with Men as his Subjects, whom he will now Rule, and hereafter Judge.
Now what word is so proper to express the Duties as enjoined Means of Benefits,
like this word Conditions? The word Conditions, is of the same nature as Terms
of the Gospel. There be few Authors of Note, even of any Persuasion, but they
make use of this word in my sense; as Ames, Twiss, Rutherford, Hooker of
New England, Norton, Preston, Owen, Synod of New England, the Assembly of
Divines, etc. And I know none have reason to scruple it, except such as think
we are United to Christ, and Justified before we are Born. To such indeed all
such Terms are improper, because they deny God's dispensing of Saving Benefits
in a way of Government.

Q. 3. What is intended by the Benefits of the Covenant?
A. The good Things or Privileges promised to such as by Grace are enabled to
comply with the Terms of the Covenant, especially whatever is essential to our
felicity.

Q. 4. Wherein do the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, differ from
Conditions in the Covenant of Innocence, or Works, as vulgarly called? For both
lie in doingsomething, though not the same thing, nor to the same ends.
A. 1. The Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, are performed by the Grace of
Christ freely given to Sinners. The Conditions of the Covenant of Innocence,
were performed by a strength due to, and inherent in our innocent Nature.

2. The principal Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, express the guilt and
misery of them that perform them: Repentance owns our Filth and Guilt, and
Faith in a Redeemer expresses our sinful and lost State; neither of these
could have place in our legal Righteousness, as being utterly inconsistent with
an Innocent Condition: Nor can they have much room in Heaven, where we shall be
perfect; whereas the Terms of the Covenant of Works implied nothing but
Innocence and Happiness.

3. The Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, make us capable of no Happiness
except what Christ has bought and prepared for us; his Blood is the Price of
all: But the happiness granted to sinless Obedience, was immediately from the
Creator, and knew no Atonement or Mediator.

4. The Blessings promised on the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, are
merely of Grace: They be for another's sake, and not our own; they are given to
such as are condemned by the Covenant of Works, and that are still condemnable
by the Law for the Imperfection of the performed Gospel-Conditions; yea, it is
Forgiveness, which renders these Persons blessed, Romans 4. 7. whereas the
sinless Obedience of innocent Adam made the Reward to be of Debt, Romans 4. 4.
which we, as being happy by Pardon, must renounce.

5. The Use and Interest of Gospel-Conditions, is not from the conformity of
them to the Preceptive part of the Law, (though in a degree there be that,) but
from their Conformity to the Rule of the Grace of the Promise: The Promise of
Pardon through Christ, being to the penitent Believer, and no other; Repentance
and Faith become necessary and useful Conditions of this Pardon, by the Order
of God in that gracious Promise: But by the Covenant of Works, the mere Work
gave an Interest in the Reward, as it was Obedience to the Precept, by a
Sanction that had Goodness, but no such Grace in it.

On these accounts, I shall never fear that the Conditionality of the Covenant
of Grace should turn it into a Covenant of Works, till I see it proved, That
God can promise, and apply no Benefit purchased by Christ to a poor Sinner,
upon the Condition of any Action he commands, and freely enableth the Sinner to
perform: The Judgment-Day is past, and a State of Trial is over, whenever this
is proved.

These things I have premised, that, if possible, I may remove the Mistakes
which govern the Minds of some well-meaning people.

The Truth.
TRUTH: I shall express it in the words of the Assembly: The Grace of God is
manifested in the Second Covenant, in that he freely provideth, and offers to
Sinners a Mediator, and Life and Salvation by him; requiring Faith as the
Condition to interest them in him, promises and gives his holy Spirit to all
his Elect, to work in them that Faith, with all other saving Graces; and to
enable them unto all Obedience, as the Evidence of the Truth of their Faith and
Thankfulness to God, and as the way which he has appointed them to Salvation.
Large Catech. Quest. How is the Grace of God manifested in the Second Covenant?

1. Thou can not but observe, that the Assembly did judge, 1. That though God
has provided a Mediator for Sinners, yet they have no interest in him till
they believe. 2. That the Covenant is Conditional. They scruple not to call
Faith the Condition of our Interest in Christ, and of Salvation by him. 3. That
Christ and Salvation are offered to all Sinners on the same Condition, though
God effectually enable the Elect to obey the Condition.

ERROR. The Covenant of Grace has no Condition to be performed on Man's part,
though in the strength of Christ: Neither is Faith it self the Condition of
this Covenant; but all the saving Benefits of this Covenant, are actually ours
before we are born: Neither are we required so much as to believe that we may
come to have an Interest in the Covenant Benefits.

Proved that this is Doctor Crisp 's Opinion.
The Doctor spends more than a Sermon to prove this: And says, P. 81. There is
not any Condition in this Covenant. Mark what I say, I know I shall go against
the Strain of some, etc. P. 82. Observe, I pray you, and you shall plainly
perceive, that Man has no Tie upon him, to perform any thing whatsoever, on
his Part, as a Condition that must be observed on his Part; and there is not
one Bond or Obligation upon Man, to the fulfilling of the Covenant, or
partaking of the Benefits of it. P. 84. He puts this Objection, Though Works be
not the Condition of the Covenant, yet we hope you will yield Faith is the
Condition of the Covenant. He answers, I must needs tell you directly, that
Faith is not the Condition of the Covenant. But the Reader may suppose the
Doctor only means there be no meritorious Conditions. No, he excludes all
things wrought by Men, or in Men, as necessary to their Interest in the
Covenant Blessings: For he tells us, P. 81. That after we are in Covenant with
God, he will bestow these things upon us, as Effects of the Covenant. And P.
83. The Covenant in the actual Substance of it, is made good to a Man, before
he can do any thing, i. e. from Eternity, and in the Womb. Elsewhere he says,
Before our Eyes be opened, etc. P. 600. etc.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not whether God has promised, and Christ engaged in the Covenant of
Redemption, that the Elect shall believe, and possess Christ etc. This I
affirm. 2. Nor whether there be any Duty on Man's Part, as a Condition of
Christ's Undertaking, or of the Certainty of the Things undertaken in that
Covenant. This I deny. 3. Nor whether the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace
be performed in our own Strength, or be uncertain, as to the Elect. This I
deny. 4. Nor whether the Performance of the Conditions, move God to enact,
offer, or appoint this Covenant, whereby the Grace of Christ is applied. This I
deny, and add, That God enacted this Covenant before we were born and offers an
Interest in it on its proper Terms, to Men, when Sinners. 5. Nor whether the
Performance of the Conditions of the Covenant be a purchasing Price, or
meritorious of the Benefits promised on such Conditions. This I deny, for
Christ alone paid the Price, and it is the Covenant Promise gives the Interest
in the Benefits to such as perform the Conditions. 6. Nor whether the first
Grace, by which we are enabled to perform the Condition be absolutely given.
This I affirm, though that be dispensed ordinarily in a due use of Means, and
in a way discountenancing idleness, and fit Encouragement given to the Use of
Means 7. Nor whether all the Conditions of the Covenant be of the same Use, to
the same Purpose, or alike complete Terms of the principal Benefits. This I
deny; for Faith is supposed to all other Conditions, and by Faith we are united
to Christ, etc. 8. Nor whether, upon Performance of the Conditions, the
Covenant Grant become not as absolute, and the Right to the Benefit no longer
suspended. This I affirm, for the Promise conveys the title as soon as the
terms of the Grant are answered.

The real Difference.
1. Whether the Elect have an actual Interest in the saving Benefits of the
Covenant of Grace, while they live in Unbelief? This the Doctor affirms, and I
deny. Of which, see Chap. 10, 11, 12.

2. Whether God does not offer the saving Benefits of the Covenant upon
official Terms, as believe, and thou shall be saved? This I affirm, and the
Doctor denies.

3. Whether the beneficial Privileges of the Covenant be not suspended on Terms
of Duty? as, Does not God forbear to pardon us till we believe? This I affirm,
and the Doctor denies.

4. Whether God does engage to bestow the promised Benefits of the Covenant on
all such, who, through Grace perform the Conditions? This I affirm, and the
Doctor denies.

All may be reduced to this, Whether our believing Confent to the Covenant of
Grace, be absolutely necessary by God's Command and Promise to our Interest in
the saving Benefits of that Covenant? This the Doctor denies, and I affirm.

The Truth Confirmed.
1. Each of the Benefits of the Covenant are offered to Men on condition, and
not absolutely in relation to God, as his People is, so Lev. 26. 3, 12. If ye
walk in my Statutes, and keep my Commandments: I will walk among you, and will
be your God, and ye shall be my People. That this refers to the New Covenant
Relation, is plain, by 2 Cor. 6. 16. So is Union to Christ, with a Communion in
the Benefits proceeding therefrom. Mat. 22. 2, 3, 9, 10, 11. They must come to
the Wedding-Supper, or have no share in it: So is it of Pardon of Sin,
Acceptance to Life, Adoption and Salvation. Romans 10. 9. If thou shall confess
with thy Mouth the Lord Jelus, and shall believe in thine Heart, etc. thou
shall be saved. Romans 4. 25. To whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him,
that raised up Jesus our Lord. Gal. 3. 7. They which are of Faith, are the
Children of Abraham. See more of this in the Chapters of Union, Justification,
etc. And note, that it is Injustice to add new Terms of any of these Benefits,
if they be ours by the Covenant as absolute before.

2. If the Covenant be not conditional, as to the disposing of these Benefits,
it would follow, 1. That all to whom the Offers are made, have an Interest in
them, or it is not a serious Offer, no, nor a true Offer, as not containing a
real and mutual Connection between the Benefit and the Duty. 2. Faith it self is
no more necessary to our first Interest in these Benefits, than any other
Grace; nay, than Unbelief. Let no body object, it is a Sign, for so is any other
Grace; yea, so might be the Description of Paul by his Name, by his Abode; yea,
by his Sin; viz. A Persecutor: Paul the Persecutor, of such an Age and Place,
would serve as well to evidence him a justified Man, as his Faith. Abundance of
such Consequences, to the very overturning of the Gospel, and all Religion, are
unavoidable.

3. Men are said to enter into Covenant with God, Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 13. To make a
Covenant. Psalm. 50. 5. To keep Covenant. Psalm. 103. 18. To perform the
Covenant. 2 Chronicles. 34. 31. Take hold of the Covenant. Isa. 56. 46. To lie to
God in their Hearts, not being right with God, when they enter into Covenant
with him. Psalm. 78. 36, 37. They for sake the Covenant. Dan. 11. 30. Broken the
everlasting Covenant. Isa. 24. 5. See also Jer. 50. 5. Shall join themselves to
the Lord in a Covenant, not to be forgotten. Ezekiel. 20. 37. I will cause you to
pass under the Rod and will bring you into the Bond of the Covenant. All these
Expressions are convincing, that there is a Restipulation on Man's part; and
that it is a Covenant, with respect to that mutual Stipulation between God and
us. To suppose the Covenant to be the sole Act of God, and an Act that is merely
absolute, renders all these Phrases impertinent and impossible. Can we be said
to make or keep the Covenant which is only God's absolute Grant? It was his Act
to appoint this Covenant, and to enable us to make and keep it: It Is his Act to
restipulate on his Part; but to deny it to be conditional, as to the very
Benefits, is to make God to be the sole Party Covenanting, etc.

4. Consider the Seals of the Covenant, viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper; and
you will easily judge, that they do not Seal absolutely, but conditionally; if
absolutely, then every one that partake thereof are saved. If they Seal
conditionally, the Covenant must be conditional, for by them the Covenant is
renewed, and the Benefits exhibited according to the Tenure of the Covenant it
Self. They do not Seal to us, that we have the Grace to which the Benefit is
promised, but they seal the Benefits of the Covenant on supposition we have
that Grace. Hence 1 Pet. 3. 21. Baptism that saves us, is not the putting away
the Filth of the Flesh (i. e. outward Washing) but the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God, i. e. The upright Consent of the Heart to the Vow, and
Profession made in Baptism. If Men would consider that a mere elect Person,
though by Revelation known to be elect, yet whiles unregenerate, is not
entitled to the Lord's Supper; sure they cannot but infer, That this Person
has not an actual Interest in the Covenant, and all its Benefits, whiles he
continues so.

5. I might show, that Unbelief, and whatever are Sins contrary to the Terms of
the Covenant, are the only Hindrances to a Sinner's Interest in the Benefits
of the Covenant; and by these we are said to reject and refuse the Covenant.
The Scripture is full in this, it lays Men's want of Forgiveness on their
Unbelief, as the culpable Cause etc. It Is needless to show how this infers the
Covenant-Benefits are conditional.

6. The Gospel promise being the way which Christ appoints to dispense saving.
Benefits to Sinners, must have the same Rules with the Covenant of Grace. This
Gospel is his Testament, and the same with this Covenant; the Benefits are the
same, and the Covenant cannot be a disposition of these Benefits in a way
contrary to this Gospel; but this Gospel or Covenant tells us, 1. That there is
a Promise of the first G^a^^ made to Christ for the Elect, and by the Virtue of
that Promise, the Elect do consent to the Covenant. 2. This Gospel, or
Covenant, is the Means whereby that Faith is wrought. 3. This Gospel commands,
and by the Power of the Spirit, works that Faith, in order to saving Benefits;
which Benefits, it promises to such as do thus believe, and to no other. 4.
This Gospel, or Covenant invests Believers in those saving Benefits. 5. It
secures the Perseverance of Believers in that true Faith, and the necessary
Effects and Operations of it, and thereby secures those Benefits as
unforfeited. But Christ never bequeathed, or promised in the Gospel, a Pardon
or Salvation to the Unbelievers; nor the Continuance of that Pardon or
Salvation, but on Supposition, that this Faith perseveres; and if the Gospel
Promise say no such things, I am sure the Covenant did not.

7. The Account of the Covenant, which seems most for its Absoluteness, implies
this conditional Connection of the required Grace, and the promised Benefits,
Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33. Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 10. 16, 17. Jer. 32. 40. Ezra 11.
19, 20, etc. There be others, that referr to the Restoration of the Captivity.
I Will fix on that, Jer. 31. 31. I Will make a new Covenant with the House of
Israel, and the House of Judah. 33. After those days, I will put my Laws in
their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts, and I will be their God, and
they shall be my People; and they shall teach no more every Man his Neighbor,
and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me,
from the least of them to the greatest of them; for I will forgive their
Iniquities, and remember their Sins no more. This is quoted, Heb. 8. 10, 12.
and 10. 16, 17.

To understand this, we must consider, 1. Whom is this Covenant made with. 2.
What cannot be inferred from this Scheme of the Covenant.

1. Whom is this Covenant made with. It Is with the House of Judah and Israel,
not the Men in present being, but Men to be hereafter. It Is after those Days I
will make it: So that it was after the Mosaic Covenant was to expire, Ver. 32.
and it could not be the only Covenant of Grace, for that had its Being from the
Fall. And the sincere Israelites did not lose the Advantages of it by the
Mosaic Dispensation, as the Apostle Argues, Gal. 3. 17. The Point before us,
is to know who this Israel and Judah be. 1. They are either the natural Jews to
be alive in those Days which this Promise refers to. 2. Or true Believers, who
are inwardly Israel, Romans 9. 6.

1. If it terminate on the natural Jews; it is the strongest Text for the
Conversion of that People, and describes the Extent of it, viz. to all: The
Manner of it, viz. by an immediate Influence for the most part; and forgiving
their Iniquities, refers to their Sin, in crucifying Christ, for which that
Blindness came upon them, that is here removed. If you take it in this Sense,
yet here is a Law written in the Heart, which includes Faith, in order to God's
being their God, and the Remission of their Sins.

2. If true Believers, or they that are inwardly Israel, be meant, as Romans 2.
9. then it is plain, that there is Faith in all such who are the Parties with
whom God makes this Covenant: They are the Children of Abraham by Faith, Gal.
3. 7. and no Unbelievers are Israel in this Notion. If you take it thus, the
Text imports, Perseverance, great Sanctification, and high Improvements in
Holiness and Knowledge, great Nearness to, and Amity with God, etc. as the
Benefits secured, and reserved for the New-Testament-Times, and all these to
multitudes.

2. It cannot be inferred from this Scheme of the new Covenant, that (as the
Doctor would have it) God does not require any Duty as the Condition of the
Benefits which he promises to give; for here is Gods. Law written in the Heart,
before our Relation to him as his People, or the Pardon of Sins; and though
this Text includes the Effects and Materials of the Covenant, yet it does not
describe the whole Form of the Covenant; for in other Places, God requires the
new Heart as a Condition of Life. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Cast away from you all your
Transgressions, and make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, for why will you
die, O House of Israel? But turn and live, Jer. 7. 23. etc. Yea, our Ministry,
which is the Ministry of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. is to preach Faith and
Repentance for the Remission of Sin. We are to promise the Benefits of the
Covenant to all that submit to the Terms of it; and to declare, that all who
refuse the Terms, shall therefore be excluded from the Benefits, as you will see
Chap. 10, 11, 12, 21.

Testimonies.
You have already seen, that the Assembly say, the Covenant of Grace is
conditional, and Faith is a Condition of our Interest in Christ, and Salvation,
and these are offered to Sinners on that Condition. The Congregational Elders
at the Savoy, affirm as much, Chap. 7. a. 3. The Lord was pleased to make a
second Covenant commonly called the Covenant of Grace, wherein he freely offers
Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, requiring of them Faith in him, that they
may be saved. You see they think, there is in the Covenant an Offer of Life, if
Men will believe; and God requires Faith, that we may obtain this Life.

The New England Synod confutes Error 28. which was this, To affirm there must
be Faith on Man's Part to receive the Covenant, is to undermine Christ. This
the Synod say, is contrary to Mar. 16. 16. Error 38. was, That there can be no
closing with Christ in a Promise that has a Condition expressed. The Synod
say, this is erroneous, and contrary to Isa. 55. 1. Mat. 11. 28. Mar. 1. 5. and
adds, If the Gospel it self be laid down in a conditional Promise, if the
Apostles and Prophets laid hold on such Promises, to help to Union, then there
may be a true closing with Christ in a Promise, that has Qualfications and
Conditions expressed. So they brand, as Error 48. That conditional Promises
are legal. And Error 81. Where Faith is held forth by the Ministry, as the
Condition of the Covenant of Grace on Man's Part, etc. there is not sufficient
Bread. which the Synod thus confutes: This Position seems to deny Faith to be a
Condition at all, or at all active; and so, if Condition in this place signify
a Qualification in Man wrought by the Holy Ghost, without which, the Promises
do not belong to Men. This is contrary to Joh. 6. 48. Doctor Owen says, Treat.
of Justif. P. 264. That Christ undertook, that those who were to be taken into
this Covenant, should receive Grace, enabling them to comply with the Terms of
it, fulfill its Conditions, and yield the Obedience which God required therein.
How frequently does he assert, that our Interest in the Benefits of the
Covenant, depends on our answering the Terms of the Gospel? -- 270, 303, etc.
351. He informs us, A Covenant does not operate by mere Sovereignty, it becomes
not a Covenant without the Consent of them with whom it is made. Wherefore,
says he, no Benefit accrues unto any, or Freedom from the old Covenant by this
Constitution, unless he has actually complied with it, has chosen it, and is
interessed in it thereby. Mr. Norton, Orth. Evang. 172. affirms, That the
Gospel holds forth Salvation before Faith, indefinitely, not definitely;
Generally, not Particularly; Conditionally to every one, not Absolutely to any
one: Hence this indefinite Proposition, Whosoever believes, shall be saved;
contains a Command, and a singular or particular Conditional Promise, etc. He
often proves Faith to be the First Condition. See Turretin. Instit. Theol. pars
2. p. 203. where he proves the Covenant of Grace to be Conditional. How poor is
the number that denies it?

The Ground of the Doctor's Mistake.
He thinks every thing is a Price to buy a Benefit, which is a compliance with
the way God has ordained to bestow the Gift; whereas there is a buying without
Price, which is our Acceptance of Life upon the Terms of God's Offer, Isa. 55.
1. He thinks, because God has promised to Christ, That the Elect shall
believe; therefore God cannot make Faith a Condition of any other Blessing,
which he resolves to bestow in order after Faith. He thinks, because Christ is
given to be a Covenant, that is, he is appointed as a Surety, to see the great
Ends of the Covenant accomplished and secured; therefore there is nothing
required from Men, as the way of their Interest in the Benefits of the
Covenant, though under the influence of Christ. He thinks, because Christ is
appointed to work Faith, in order to Union, and other Benefits; therefore we
must have an actual Interest in Christ, and those Benefits, before this Faith
is wrought. He thinks, because all Grace after Union comes from Christ, as our
actual Head; therefore Christ by his Spirit can work no Grace in us, as our
designed Head. He thinks, because God sovereignly decreed what Benefits he
would bestow; therefore he has, as our Ruler, stated no rectoral Method of
bestowing those Benefits. Because the Covenant is everlasting, (as to future;)
therefore he judged there can be no Condition on Man's part; not remembering
that the Covenant secures our perseverance in performing those Conditions.

CHAP. IX. Of the Nature of Saving Faith.
TRUTH: I Shall express this in the words of the Assembly, and Congregational
Elders at the Savoy, (Confess. of Faith, chapter 14. a. 2. and Declarat. chapter 14. a.
2. of Saving Faith:) By this Grace, a Christian believes to be true whatever
is revealed in the Word, for the Authority of God speaking therein; and acts
differently upon that which each particular Passage thereof contains;
yielding Obedience to the Commands, Trembling at the Threatenings, and Embracing
the Promises of God, for this Life, and that which is to come: But the
principal Acts of Saving Faith, are Accepting, Receiving, and Resting upon
Christ alone, for Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life, by virtue of
the Covenant of Grace.

Reader! weigh this sound Account of Faith: Which if it were regarded, and no
Essential part of it excluded, when Faith is considered as a Condition of any
Gospel-Benefit; How much vain Disputes would be prevented, as well as Danger to
poor Souls? And one would think, no Man need prove, That it is not Saving
Faith, when any Essential part of it is wanting: And that it must be Saving
Faith when we mention Faith as the Condition, or Moral Instrument of any Saving
Benefit.

ERROR: Saving Faith is nothing but our Persuasion, or absolute Concluding
within our selves, That our Sins are pardoned, and that Christ is ours.

Proved that this is Doctor Crisp 's Opinion.
The Doctor tells us, page 493. The whole Essence of Faith, is nothing else but
the Echo of the Heart answering the foregoing Voice of the Spirit and Word of
Grace. Thy Sins are forgiven thee, says the Spirit and Word of Grace: My Sins
are forgiven me, says Faith. And the Soul that can assume thus from the Spirit
and Word of Grace, has the whole Essence of Believing. When the Doctor, page
107. puts a Man on examining his Faith, he has these words; How do I know I
believe in Christ? He Answers; Do I rest my Heart upon this Truth? Do I receive
it as a Truth, that I do believe? Or do I reject it, and will not receive it?
Then I do not believe. But if you sit down and rest upon this Truth, and
receive it, and do in reality believe it; then you may absolutely conclude,
Christ is yours. And page 296. If the Lord, I say again, give to any to believe
this Truth, That it is his Iniquity the Lord has laid on Christ; God himself
cannot charge one Sin on that Man. And page 158. he makes the difference
betwixt a strong and weak Believer to consist in the Degree of this Persuasion.
See more in chap. 10, 11.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not, whether Assurance be attainable in this Life, as the Effect of
Faith. 2. Nor whether a Sinner ought to apply, yea, does personally apply the
general Offers of Christ and Life, by his own Compliance with the Terms of the
Gospel: For upon a true Acceptance of a whole Christ, he is mine in virtue of
the Gospel Promise, which God will perform, in giving Christ and Life to all
that accept of him, as he is proposed for our Acceptance. 3. Nor whether a
convinced Sinner has at first a more especial regard to Christ's Priestly
Offices and Sufferings, as what are more sensibly fitted to his guilty State.
4. Nor whether every thing recorded in the Scriptures, must not be dwelt on
with the same regard, concern and assurance, as the Essentials of the Covenant
of Life. 5. Nor whether Faith contain in it a reliance on Christ, as the only
Savior; and on his Satisfaction and Merits, as what alone purchased our Pardon
and Acceptance; as well as it includes the realizing Assent to the Truth, and
unfeigned fiducial Consent to, and Acceptance of a whole Christ in all his
Offices. All these I affirm.

The real Difference.
1. Whether the whole Essence of Saving Faith, consists in an Inward Persuasion
or Assurance that our Sins are pardoned, and Christ is ours? This the Doctor
affirms, and I deny; yea, I deny that it is at all of the Essence of Saving
Faith.

2. Whether Saving Faith include not in its nature, that powerful efficacious
Assent to the Word, and fiducial consenting Acceptance of Christ, as Prophet,
Priest and King, with a Reliance on his Merits, and obediential Regards to God,
as the TRUTH abovementioned does express. This the Doctor denies, and I affirm.

The Truth confirmed.
1. Faith is not an Assurance, or Inward Persuasion, That Christ is ours, and
our Sins are pardoned. For,

1. Men may have this Persuasion, who do not savingly believe: They in Mat. 7.
22. had this, when they cried, Lord, Lord, open to us! Neither did the foolish
Virgins seem without it, Mal. 25. 1, 2. Yea, it is what the most profligate
Sinners grow secure by, to their own Destruction; and this upon the general
Word of Grace. 2. Many true Believers have not this Persuasion: let common
Experience be consulted. 3. Such as have had Assurance, do (by the Doctor's
Opinion) fall into the Sin of damning Unbelief, whenever they doubt their
Interest in Christ, and especially if they conclude that they have not this
Interest: A sad Doom on many pious Souls. 4. This Persuasion should suppose an
Interest in Christ, and does not give it: It Is a false Conclusion, That Christ
is mine, before he is so: And must the great term of Life be a Lie? We are to
examine our selves whether we be in the Faith, and so whether Christ be in us,
before we assure our selves that he is in us, 2 Cor. 13. 5. And where has God
made this Proposition, My Sins are laid upon Christ, to be the Object of Saving
Faith? This Proposition is not God, nor Christ, nor any part of the Scripture;
unless you suppose a General Redemption, and that to the actual Pardon of every
Sinner: And as the Word of Grace promises Pardon to none but a Believer; so
the Spirit speaks it to none but to the Believer, as a Believer.

2. Saving Faith includes the Essentials expressed in the abovementioned
Truth; as Assent, Trust, Consenting, Acceptance of Christ, Reliance, etc. This
appears:

1. Faith can be no less than the Soul's Answer to the Call of God, in our
effectual Vocation: And to this all those things are necessary, 2 Pet. 1. 3.

2. The Scriptures describe Saving Faith by all these Acts: It Is the Evidence
of things not seen and Substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11. 1. It Is a
Receiving of Christ, Joh. 1. 12. which must be as God gives him; and that is, a
Witness, a Leader and Commander of the People, Isa. 55. 4. and Acts 3. 26. to
bless us, in turning every one of you from his iniquity Romans 15. 12. In him
shall the Gentiles trust, Isa. 44. 5. One shall say, I am the Lord's; and
another shall subscribe with his Hand unto the Lord; which express consent.

3. Christ cannot be received as a Savior, nor as the Way of a Sinner to God,
if Faith include not these Great things: He is not a Savior, if you exclude
any of his Offices; and as an entire Savior we must receive him, Mat. 1. 21.
Can any Man receive him as a Prophet, and not believe and accept of his
Teachings? Can any receive him as a King, that refuses Subjection to his
Government? No; for, We will not have this man to reign over us, was the
Language of Unbelief, as well as Damning to those Unbelievers, Luke 19. 14, 27.
and the same word signifies Disobedient, and Unbelieving, (...) Romans 10. 21.
Can any Man come to Christ as a Priest, and not rely on his Sacrifice for
Pardon to be obtained by him? And the word tells us, we come to God by him, if
he be our Savior, Heb. 7. 25. But who can suppose that there is this, without
any dedication of our selves to God? etc. Oh, that Men were but wise enough to
know what it is to receive a Ruler, or a Teacher! What Peace would it cause!

4. A Faith without these Essentials, could never produce those great Effects
which are ascribed to Faith. How could it purify the Heart? Act. 15. 9. Be a
Shield against Temptations? Ephesians. 6. 16. Works by Love? Gal. 5. 6. Sanctifies
us? Act. 26. 18. By Faith we are risen with Christ, Col. 2. 12. Is a lower
Faith operative, as I am? Jam. 2. 17. Or can any call that which wants these, A
Principle of Obedience virtually including all Grace, to say nothing of the
unmeetness of a lower Faith to be the appointed Condition of Saving Benefits,
when it is the appointment of a Wise and Holy Governor?

5. An Enlightened, Regenerate Soul cannot act toward Christ (when he is first
presented to its view) below these Instances: It Is not a regenerate Heart that
admits Actings contrary to any of these; if it is a regenerate Heart, it will
discover it self in each of these, upon the offer of Christ as a Savior. Act.
9. 6. Lord, what will thou have me to do? etc. Sure a regenerate Principle
includes a Disposition to all these Acts; and the first view of Christ will
excite and attract them.

Testimonies.
You have seen the Judgment of the Assembly and Elders at the Savoy, in the
Truth above stated: Both also affirm, chapter 18. a. 3, 4. Infallible Assurance
does not so belong to the Essence of Faith, but that a true Believer may wait
long, and conflict with many Difficulties, before he be partaker of it. And the
Assemblies Large Catech. Quest. Are all Assured? etc. They Answer; Assurance
not being of the Essence of Faith, etc.

One of the Errors for which the Church of Boston, in New England, dealt with
Mr. H. was, That there is no Faith of God's Elect, but Assurance.

Dr. Owen, in his Treat. of Justification, p. 111, 112. denies that a full
Persuasion of the Forgiveness of our Sins; or, That what Christ did and
suffered as our Mediator, he did it for us in particular, or a particular
Application of especial Mercy unto our Souls, etc. are of the Essence of Faith,
though all that have true Faith will endeavor it.

The Ground of Dr. Crisp 's Mistake.
Because Faith is the Evidence of thingsunseen, (that is, it Assents to unseen
Realities;) therefore he thinks that our Faith is nothing but an Assent to our
particular Interest in Forgiveness. Because the Word of Grace promises
Justification to all true Believers; therefore an Assurance of my being
Justified, is Believing: Whereas I must first be a Believer in order to Pardon,
before I justly can or ought to believe that I am pardoned.

CHAP. X. Of the Free Offer of Christ to Sinners, and of Preparatory
Qualifications.
TRUTH. CHrist is freely offered to be a Head and Savior to the vilest
Sinners, who will knowingly assent to the Truth of the Gospel, and from a
Conviction of their Sin and Misery out of Christ, are humbled, and truly
willing to renounce all their Idols and Sins; denying their own carnal Self and
Merits, and accept of Christ as offered in the Gospel; relying on him alone for
Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life.

Reader, Observe, 1. Christ is freely offered to the vilest Sinners, for their
acceptance of him according to the Gospel. 2. He is not offered so, as if any
Sinner might have a Saving Interest in him, till they are willing to deny
themselves, renounce all Sins and Idols; and do accept of, and rely on him as a
full Savior, according to the Terms of the Gospel. There cannot be an
Acceptance of Christ, without a Renouncing of Sin and Idols, and Denying carnal
Self, and our own Merits, as Opposites to him: And on the other hand, to
renounce Sin and Idols, and deny our selves, will not avail us, without an
acceptance of Christ, and relianceon him. 3. I mention some things that are
antecedently necessary to our renouncing of Sin and Idols, and to our
acceptance of, and reliance on Christ; as Knowledge, Assent, Conviction of Sin
and Misery, and some Humblings of Soul, which must attend all true Convictions:
These are Preparatory Qualifications; not that an Interest in Christ always
follows these, but they dispose the Soul to a hearty acceptance of Christ, in
opposition to all rival Opposites, and are necessary thereto in some degree. 4.
The declared Design of the Offers of Christ to Sinners, is, That they may be
thus willing to accept of Christ, and so partake of an Interest in him.

ERROR. Christ is offered to Blasphemers, Murderers, and the worst of
Sinners; that they remaining ignorant, unconvinced, unhumbled, and resolved in
their purpose to continue such, they may be assured they have a full Interest
in Christ; and this by only concluding in their own Minds upon this Offer, That
Christ is theirs.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
I need give no Proof of it but this; That it is a declared Point, which he often
strives to prove, That all the Elect are actually united to Christ before they
Believe, yea, before they are Born; as you will see in the next Chapter. So that
all the design of these Offers, is only to manifest to Men, That Christ was
theirs before; as he tells us, p. 100. Is not Unbelief a Bar to have a part in
Christ? He Answers; It is a Bar to hinder the manifestation of Christ in the
Spirit; but it is not a Bar to hinder one from having a part in Christ.

Obj. But the Doctor seems to insist on Men's coming to Christ, and closing with
him; as p. 206. No Consideration in the world can so aggravate a Man's
Condition, would he make his condition as bad as the Devils themselves; yet if
there be but a Coming, there can be no Consideration, in the highest pitch of
sinfulness, for Christ to reject him. And p. 202. Whatever thou art, suppose a
Drunkard, a Whoremaster, a Swearer, a Blasphemer, a Madman in Iniquity;
could thou but Come to Christ, I say, Come, only Come, it is no matter if
there be no Alteration in the world in thee when thou do come to Christ.

A. 1. But Coming, or Believing, is no other, in the Doctor's Judgment, than an
Inward Persuasion or Concluding that Christ is ours: And this is not in order
to an Interest, but to our Knowing it.

P. 106. The Dr. says, I must tell you, There is no better way to know your
Portion in Christ, than upon the general tender of the Gospel, to conclude
absolutely, he is yours, etc. Say to your selves, (and let not this be
contradicted, seeing Christ has reached out himself to Sinners as Sinners,).
My part is as good as any Man's: Set down thy rest here; question it not, but
believe it, etc. Venture thy Soul upon it, without seeking for further
Security. But some will say, He does not belong to me. Why not to thee? he
belongs to Sinners, as Sinners; and if there be no worse than Sinfulness,
Rebellion and Enmity in thee, he belongs to thee, as well as to any in the
World.

A. 2. Not Believing, or not Coming to Christ, is nothing with the Doctor; but
not Concluding within one's self that Christ is mine.

Page 203. It would be welcome to them to be certainly satisfied that his Blood
is their Ransom, and that their Sins are blotted out thereby; but they dare not
yet close with Christ, they dare not set up their rest there, they dare not sit
down with any such Conclusion, but still there is something or other that
remains, that must be removed out of the way before they can make this certain
Conclusion, Christ is their Christ. Now my Errand is to this sort of People,
whose hearts tell them, If it could clearly appear, that without danger to
them, they may say Christ is their Salvation, and sit down with this, etc. but
they dare not, something or other is wanting, they dare not lay hold on Christ,
and it is Presumption for them to sit down satisfied that Christ is their
Christ. See p. 36, 44, 432, 490.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not, Whether there is in Christ a sufficiency of Merit and Grace to
save the worst of Sinners? 2. Nor, Whether Christ is offered to the worst
Sinners, if they will accept of him on the Terms of the Gospel? 3. Nor, Whether
the worst Sinners are often the Objects of God's Effectual Calling, in order to
an Interest in Christ? 4. Nor, Whether there may not be Knowledge, Assent,
Convictions, Humblings, and feigned Resolves, and yet a Soul fail of an
Interest in Christ, for want of true Conversion, though they are hopeful Signs?
All these I affirm. 5. Nor, Whether the degrees of Convictions and Humblings be
equal in all? This I deny. 6. Nor, Whether Preparatory Qualifications do merit
True Grace? Yea Or Faith or Repentance do merit an Interest in Christ? This I
deny, and say, That their whole Use depends on Christ's Ordination. 7. Nor,
Whether a Soul may neglect to accept of Christ as Prophet Priest and King,
because they feel not that degree of these Humblings and Convictions which they
desire and expect? This I deny. 8. Nor, Whether these Preparatory
Qualifications be the Work of the Spirit by Common Grace? This I affirm. 9.
Nor, Whether their immediate Influence be to prepare the Soul for a true
consenting Acceptance, which they are hereby less averse to, and more disposed
for? This I affirm; though Dr. Owen adds, No Man that wants these, is a Subject
capable of Justification. See Treat. of Justif. p. 109.

Wherein the real Difference is.
1. Whether Coming to Christ, is an Inward Persuasion that Christ is mine? This
the Doctor affirms, and I deny. Of which see Chap. IX. Of Saving Faith.

2. Whether Christ is offered to Sinners, with a design that they may conclude
they have a Saving Interest in him, before they are regenerated by the Spirit,
and savingly believe? This the Doctor affirms, and I deny.

3. Whether the Soul of a Sinner, as to its habitual Disposition and Purpose,
is under the reigning power of Enmity, Rebellion and Filthiness, till after it
has a Saving Interest in Christ? This the Doctor affirms, and I deny;
affirming this Disposition is altered in our Effectual Vocation; and there can
be no true Coming to Christ for Pardon, and especially for Sanctification,
without that purpose.

4. Whether some degrees of Convictions, and Humiliation of Soul, be necessary
Prerequisites to the Soul's true Acceptance of Christ for Pardon? This the
Doctor denies, and I affirm.

The Truth Confirmed.
The main Question is decided by what I have spoken of Saving Faith: For if
Coming be not this Persuasion, and Saving Faith be necessary to our Interest in
Christ, there remains little to prove. Of this last see chapter 11. Of Union, and
chapter 8. Only consider, That Christ cannot be offered to be ours on any lower
Terms than such as by which he actually becomes ours by the Gospel-Grant.

It remains then, that I briefly prove the Truth, as contained in the Third and
Fourth Questions.

1. The Soul of a Sinner, as to its habitual Disposition and Purpose, is not
under the reigning power of Enmity, Rebellion and Filthiness, till after it
has a Saving Interest in Christ. You see I speak not of Degrees of
Sanctification, nor Change of Practice; but of a Disposition of Heart, and
Purpose of Mind. This Truth appears,

1. Effectual Vocation makes this Change in the Habitual Disposition of the
Heart; and this Vocation is necessary to our Interest in Christ. The Elders at
the Savoy, and the Assembly, agree, Decl. and Conf. chapter 10. a. 1. That this
Call lies, in enlightening their Minds spiritually and savingly to understand
the things of God; taking away their Heart of Stone, and giving them an Heart
of Flesh; renewing their Wills, and by his Almighty Power determining them to
that which is good; effectually drawing them to Jesus Christ, yet so, as they
come most freely, being made willing by his Grace. And a. 2. Until being
quickened and renewed by the Holy Spirit, he is thereby enabled to answer this
Call, and embrace the Grace offered and conveyed in it.

Thou see what a great Change is made on the Heart and Mind by Effectual
Calling; and that our Answer to this Call, (which lies in a Consent answerable
to this Change in the Faculties) is the Means of our Interest in the offered
Grace; which is Christ, and his Benefits. It Is a Call to Life, see Joh. 5. 25.
The Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.
It Is a Call to Holiness, 1 These. 4. 7. Hence called a Holy Calling, 2 Timothy 1.
9. A Call to Light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. If any doubt whether our Vocation be a Means
to our Interest in Christ, see 1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, by whom you are
Called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord.

2. How inconsistent with Vocation, Regeneration, and Conversion, are Hearts of
such vile Disposition? Is this a Heavenly Calling? Heb. 3. 1. What would it
avail to make such a Calling sure? 2 Pet. 1. 10. Is this being Born not of the
Will of the Flesh, but of the Will of God? Joh. 1. 13. Does the new Birth, or
Circumcision of the Heart agree herewith?

3. That cannot be a true Faith, or Acceptance of Christ, which consists with
such vile Dispositions, and is void of a Purpose to be otherwise. Can he be
said to accept of Christ, who, as the Doctor says, Has a Knife in his Hand,
and Thoughts in his Heart to murder Christ, and that without so much as laying
down his Arms? P. 210. What is rejecting Christ, if this be not? What is
saying, We will not have him to reign over us? Do not we prefer our Lusts
before him? And can we thus marry him? Nay, What a carnal selfish thing is
Believing? a mere using Christ for our own Safety in our Abominations, which we
resolve shall rule over us, without one Desire to be rid of them.

2. Some Degrees of Convictions and Humiliations of Soul, are necessary
Prerequisites to the Soul's true Acceptance of Christ for Pardon. We find,
it is the Weary and heavy laden that Christ invites to come to him for Rest,
Mat. 11. 28. I came not to call the Righteous (that is, the Conceited and
Secure) but Sinners to Repentance, Luke 5. 31. 32.

The Converts recorded in the Word, found such a Work on them, those were
pricked in their Hearts, and cried, What shall we do? Act. 2. 37. The Jailer
felt the same humble Concern, Act. 16. 30. Paul knew what this Trembling was,
Act. 9. 6. So Zacheus and the Prodigal, Luke 15. 14, 15. Where the Word Even
begins to take Effect, the Man is convinced of all, and judged of all. The
Secrets of his Heart, are made manifest: falls down on his Face, etc. 1 Cor.
14. 24, 25. It Is a meet Order, that Man should in some degree pay this Homage
to God, and thus resent his Apostasy, to God's Glory whom he has provoked.
Yea, These are absolutely Necessary to bring a Man to be willing to close with
Christ. Were there no Weight, no Remorse, no Sense of Sin or Misery Christ
would not be regarded, much less complied with: Yea, to come to Christ, cannot
be an Act of the Will, it thus having a contrary Biass, and the practical
Judgment determining against it.

TESTIMONIES.
You have already heard the Sense of the Assembly and Elders at the Savoy. You
may see in Larg. Catech. Q. What is justifying Faith? They tell us, That the
Sinner is convinced of his Sin and Misery, who receives Christ. And in the
Directory for Visitation of the Sick, they are for propounding Christ and his
Merits to penitent Believers, and Endeavors are to be first used to humble the
Sick under the Sense of his Guilt, and the Wrath of God, etc.

Doctor Owen tells us, There is nothing in this whole Doctrine, that I will
more firmly adhere to, than the Necessity of Convictions, previous to true
Believing. Of Justif. P. 133. The Necessity of them; yea, Antecedency of them
to true Faith and Pardon, he proves P. 98 99. as also Displicency, Sorrow,
Fear, a Desire of Deliverance, with other necessary Effects of true
Convictions. P. 102, 103. And he tells us, The Belief of the Pardon of our own
Sins is not proposed to Men in the first Preaching of the Gospel, as that which
they are first to believe. And P. 140. Neither is it possible there should be
any Exercise of this Faith unto Justification, but where the Mind is prepared,
disposed, and determined unto universal Obedience.

Mr. Norton of New England proves at large, That there are certain preparatory
Works between the Carnal Rest of the Soul in the State of Sin, and effectual
Vocation; or Christ in his ordinary Dispensation of the Gospel, calls not
Sinners as Sinners, but Sinners, i. e. qualified Sinners, immediately to
believe. These are his own Words, which he proves, Orthod. Evang. from P. 129.
to 140.

The Ground of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because they that truly come to Christ, shall have an Interest in Christ;
therefore he thinks, whoever can persuade himself that he has an Interest in
Christ does come to him; because sometimes the worst Sinners are made the
Subjects of Preparatory Works, and of effectual Calling, as God's act on them;
therefore he thinks, that these Sinners are invited to conclude, they have an
Interest in Christ, before they do at all answer that Call. But his greatest
Cause of Mistake is, that he thinks the worst Sinners, if elect, have as much
Interest in Christ, as the greatest Saint. Therefore indeed they need no more
Faith than to know it, and that must be by a firm Persuasion that he is theirs,
because Christ calls Sinners to Repentance, therefore Christ is theirs while
impenitent.

CHAP. XI. Of Union with Christ before Faith.
Truth. EVery Man is without Christ, or not united to Christ, until he be
effectually called; but when by this Call the Spirit of God enclineth, and
enableth him willingly to accept of Christ, as a Head and Savior; a Man
becomes united to him, and Partaker of those Influences and Privileges which
are peculiar to the Members of the Lord Jesus.

Error. All the Elect are actually united to Christ, before they have the
Spirit of Christ, or at all believe in him, even before they are born; yea, and
against their Will.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
The Title of Sermon. 14. is, Christ is ours before we have gracious
Qualifications, P. 430. But sure the Doctor intends only to exclude Works and
not Faith. A. No, he tells us of dangerous Consequences that must follow on it,
if Persons are not united to Christ, and partake not of Justification before
they believe. And adds, There is not, I say, such a thing as an uniting, and
cementing or knitting Power in Faith, as that Faith does, or should become the
Instrument to unite a Soul to Christ, P. 6^^. Obj. But he may intend only to
exclude the Merit or Efficiency of Faith; but not the Presence of it, or the
Divine Ordination of it to that end. A. No, he denies the Presence of Faith; to
this end he spends much time, P. 614. etc. to prove, That Christ is ours before
we come to him, and that our not coming to Christ, does not import a State of
Disunion with Christ. And P. 104. He tells us* You may as soon conceive, that a
Man is able to see whiles he has no head, as think a Man can have spiritual
Eyes; whether the Eye of Faith to behold Christ, or the Eye of Mourning to
lament ones Wretchedness, before there be actually the Presence and Conjunction
of Christ, the Head, to such a Body. Obj. But must not the Spirit be given
before we are united to Christ. A. The Doctor says, We partake of the Spirit,
only by Virtue of this Union; which he attempts to prove from the too gross use
of the Metaphor of a Vine, P. 599. and sundry other Places. Obj. Sure he
means only this Union is decreed before Faith. A. To prevent this, his Words
are, P. ^^^. I do not mean as some do, that God did actually decree, that
Christ should be Christ unto such and such Persons, before he did put any
Qualifications into them. But I say farther, that God gives actual Possession
of this Christ, and this Christ takes Possession of that Person, before there
be any Qualification. Obj. When are the Elect united to Christ? A. The Doctor
tells you, Before they are born, P. 617. See P. 597, 609, 611, etc. Of coming
to Christ against your Wills: See the end of this Chapter.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not, whether God has decreed that all the Elect shall be united to
Christ.

2. Nor whether God has appointed, and Christ agreed in the Covenant of
Redemption, to be in time the Savior of the Elect; and that whatChrist did and
suffered, pursuant to that Covenant, was intended for the saving Good of the
Elect.

3. Nor whether all the Power, by which we believe, and the Spirit, who works
Faith in us, be purchased and given by Christ.

4. Nor whether Christ's giving us the Spirit of Grace, do begin this Union,
and the Spirit given in order to saving Operations, produces this Faith,
whereby the Union is consummated.

5. Nor whether Faith unites to Christ by Divine Ordination, and not by its own
Power or Merit, or as a Physical Act. All these I affirm.

The Real Difference.
1. Whether the Elect are actually united to Christ before they are born? This
the Doctor affirms, and I deny.

2. Whether the Elect are united to Christ till they are effectually called,
and truly believe? This the Doctor denies and I affirm.

The Truth Confirmed.
1. The Scriptures expressly affirm all uncalled, unregenerate Unbelievers, to
be united to Christ, and in a State of Separation from him. The believing
Ephesians were before Conversion, without Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12. Were they always
united to Christ, of whom Paul says, Romans 16. 7. They were in Christ before
me? Or was Paul himself always in Christ? Were not the Romans out of Christ,
while a wild Olive Tree, and until they were grafted into the true Olive Tree?
w ich they were upon their Conversion, Romans 11. 17, 19.

2. The Spirit of Christ, and Faith in him, are the things whereby God has
ordained us to be united with Christ; By one Spirit we are all baptized into
one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Christ dwells in our Hearts by Faith Ephesians. 3. 17.
on which account we are said to receive Christ, Col. 2. 8. And are Children of
God by Faith, Gal. 3. 26.

3. The want of this Union is denounced against all such as have not the
Spirit, and are Unbelievers, Romans 8. 9. If any Man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, i. e. Let the Man be elect or not, be the Man who he
will, if he has not the Spirit, he is not Christ's in this Union. And it is the
Design of that Parable, Mat. 22. 3. to 13. that they who accept not of the
Invitation, or do not sincerely and spiritually consent to Christ's Offer,
shall not be united to Christ, or partake of the Marriage Supper.

4. The necessary immediate Effects of Union are plainly wanting in all such as
have not the Spirit, and want Faith. He that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. Can any unbelieving Wretch pretend to have one Spirit
with Christ whiles his Inclinations, Purposes, and Carriage are so contrary?
Again, If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. q. d. Let
the Man be who he will, he is not united to Christ, if he be not a new
Creature. I hope none will doubt, he is no new Creature, who is carnal, who is
a Stranger to the New Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true
Holiness, Ephesians. 4 24. When the Scriptures describe any Person in Christ Jesus,
they tell us, they (at least in purpose) have crucified the Flesh with the
Affections thereof, Gal. 5. 24 and they walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit, Rom 8 1. It Is not they that have crucified the Flesh, are in Christ,
which some might say, would render it only a manifesting Sign of their In-being
in Christ; but these Texts do exclude all others from a present Share in this
Union. The like Places might be multiplied: As many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. If Christ be in you, the
Body is dead, because of Sin, etc. Rom 8 9, 10 But alas, these and the like are
not only wanting in Unbelievers; but the direct contrary thereto prevalently
reign in them, and each of these Contraries, do by a Gospel Rule subject Men to
those Miseries as are inconsistent with the Members of Christ: As If ye live
after the Flesh, ye shall die; to be carnally minded, is Death, etc. Romans 3. 8.
6, 14.

5. Union with Christ is determined to our effectual Calling: This is the Means
and Season of that Blessing; God is faithful, by whom ye are called into the
Fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 9. Hence the Instruments of our
Vocation are said to espouse us to Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. To beget them for him.
1 Cor. 4. 15. This Privilege is peculiar to Christ's regenerate Seed, and
impossible to any that are not so.

6. Unbelievers are not Members of the Catholic invisible Church, which is the
Body of Christ: By one Spirit you are all baptized into one Body, and have been
all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. There is a present effectual
Working in every Part of this Body, Ephesians. 4. 16. It Is by the Spirit's Operation
we are Parts of this Holy Temple, and fellow Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.
from 18. to 22. Every Member has a Measure of Faith and Grace, Romans 12. 3, 4,
5. None of these can be true of Men dead in Sin: Nor can they be Members of
Christ, that are not Members of his Body, 1 Cor. 12. 27.

7. Should they that are united to Christ, apostatize from Faith, they would
thereby forfeit and lose this Union. If any cease to be Believers they would
cease to be Members of Christ. This is the Scope of Joh. 15. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. If
a Man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered: Every
Branch in me that bears not Fruit, he takes away. And is it not apparent,
that Apostasy sinks a Man into no more Unbelief, than what prevailed before he
believed at all?

8. The opposite Error would reconcile what the Spirit of God declares
inconsistent. The Apostle in vain asks, What Concord has Christ with Belial?
or what Part has he that believes with an Infidel? and what Agreement has
the Temple of God with Idols, etc. 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16, 17. By this Opinion,
Christ and Belial can be, and dwell quietly in one Man for many Years; and he
that believes, and an Infidel, have the same part in the highest Privilege,
viz. Union with Christ. In Uncleanness, God receives all alike, and is their
Father, though they resolve against being Separate, Men can (though God says
they cannot) partake of the Table of the Lord, and of the Table of Devils, 1
Cor. 10. 21. For Union, and Communion with Christ be the Heart of the Benefits
included in partaking of the Lord's Table.

Reader, Weigh these things, and thou can hardly conceive, what Act of God an
Union before Faith can be ascribed to. It Is not to the Decree, for that only
resolves it shall be in future. It Is not to God's appointing, or Christ's
engaging to be a Mediator; for thereby he undertook in time to raise a Seed,
which, in the fullness of Time, God would gather in one in him, Ephesians. 1. 10. It Is
not in Christ's assuming the humane Nature, for that admits all Mankind to be
united to him, as well as the Elect. And what Mr Sterry and others talk of a
radical Union with Christ, as he is the top Branch, or the universal Spirit of
the Creation, in a Nature distinct from his Divine and Humane; it is fordid to
such who know of but two Natures in Christ; and if granted would not prove the
Doctor's Notion of actual Union.

TESTIMONIES.
The Assembly, Confess. Ca. 26. a. 1. and the Elders at the Savoy, Chap. 27. a.
1. affirm, That we are united to Jesus Christ by-his Spirit, and by Faith. A.
5. Only the Elders add, We are not thereby made one Person with Christ. The
Lesser Catechism has this Question, How does the Spirit apply to us the
Redemption purchased by Christ? A. By working Faith in us, and thereby uniting
us to Christ in our effectual Calling.

The New England Synod confute this as Error 37. We are completely united to
Christ before, or without any Faith wrought in us by the Spirit. They sum up
their Confutation of this in these Words, If there be no Dwelling of Christ in
us, no coming to him, no receiving him, no being married to him, before and
without Faith. But the former is true. Error 16. which Boston Church charged
Mr. Hutcheson with, was, That Union to Christ is not by Faith. Error 38. The
Synod Confutes, is, There can be no true closing with Christ in a Promise that
has a Condition expressed. Error 69. Though a Man can prove a gracious Work
in himself, and Christ to be the Author of it, if thereby he will prove Christ
to be his, this is but a sandy Foundation. He never read Doctor Owen, who did
not find him as express in this as any Man can be. Norton, Orthod. Evang. P.
291. Union in order of Nature, though not of Time, follows Vocation. P. 181.
Union, not without the Act of Faith. P. 222. It Is by the Spirit and Faith.

The Grounds of the Dr's. Mistake.
Because Christ is appointed, and given to raise a Body eternally elected
thereto; therefore he thinks, they are this Body before they be raised. Because
all After-Grace is from Christ as our actual Head; therefore he thinks, Christ
cannot, by his Spirit, work the first Grace, as our designed Head. Whereas the
Spirit makes us an Habitation to God, Ephesians. 2. 22. And it is a strange conceit,
that Christ can exert no Act of Power on a dead Soul, in order to Union, but
Men must infer that Union prior to it. Because the natural Body cannot see
without a Head; therefore Christ cannot convert a Sinner to bring him into his
mystical Body. One might better infer, the Head cannot see without the Body,
and the Body sees as much as the Head, and the Head sees no better than the
Body; and so conclude, Christ can see nothing, till every elect Person be a
Member, and every Member sees as well as Christ, and the dim Sight of every
Member, makes the Sight of Christ as blind as his. Because Christ received
Gifts for the Rebellious, that God might dwell among them; therefore God dwells
among them, before those Gifts operate, or be communicated to them. Whereas the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12. tells us, how these Gifts are the Means by which
the Elect are converted, and made Believers, and so come to partake of Union
with its peculiar Effects. Because, from the Parable of the Vine, the Gardener
puts the Graff into the Tree before there is Sap or Fruit; therefore he thinks a
Man is in Christ, before God puts him in Christ by the Spirit and Faith, which
is the only ingraffing the Word tells us of, besides external Church
Privileges, Romans 11. 17, 19. I may as well argue, a Member of Christ must
always do wicked Works, because the Graff bears always Fruit of its own Kind,
and not after the Kind of the Stock into which it is ingrafted. How sad is it
to strain and abuse Parables or Metaphors against the Scope of the Gospel,
because God condescends to explain some Truths thereby? as if all that belongs
to the Metaphor, teach and prove any Doctrine, because that one Point, for
which the Lord uses it, is illustrated thereby. What Work may soon be made
by fond People, if this be true? Because we are chosen in Christ from eternity;
that is, elected to obtain Life by him as Mediator; therefore we are one with
him before any uniting Bonds.

Reader, I forbear to represent the Nature of this Union as he seems to state
it, P. 104, 105, 648, 649, 615. hoping he meant better than many of his Words
do import; but for thy own Good, know, that upon believing we are made
Partakers of Gospel-Benefits; we are related to him for all the Advantages
which the Metaphors of this Union express. He loves, enricheth, and honors
us, as a Man does his Wife: He directs, rules, and quickens us, as a Head does
the Members: He ministers Grace for Fruit and Exercise, as the Root does to the
Branches. Yea, This Relation he will keep undissolved; and yet more, the very
Spirit that his Humane Nature received in Fullness, abides in, and works a
Conformity to the Life and Temper of Christ in all his Members; which at last
he will perfect to the utmost of our Capacity. But yet fancy not, that we are
deified with God, or christified with Christ, or one natural Person with him,
as if he had a superangelick Nature, which was a sort of a commen Soul, or that
our distinct Personality shall ever cease; with other Notions destructive of
God's Government, and of all Judgment. Beware of confounding God and the
Creature, or making Christ the Subject of our Graces, because he is the Author
of them.

Obj. But you said in the Error, that Men are said to receive Christ against
their Wills. A. The Doctor tells us, Our first receiving of Christ, is when
Christ comes by the Gift of the Father, to a Person while he is in the
Stubbornness of his own Heart, and the Father does force open the Spirit of
that Person, and pours in his Son in spite of the Receiver, P. 99. In P. 98.
It Is as a Physician pours Physic down the Patient's Throat, and so it works
against his Will. And tells us, P. 612. Our first coming to Christ, is as a
Coach is said to come to Town, when it is but drawn to Town.

I shall make no further Remark on this, than tell thee, the Doctor
distinguishes not between what we are abstracted from the Spirit's Influence,
and what we are by the Spirit's Influence. We are passive in effectual
Vocation, as that is God's Act on us; but even then no Violence is offered to
the Will, for the Mind dictates what it chooses freely Under this healing
Work and that passiveness, is not our coming to Christ; but by the Effect of
God's Act on the Mind and Will, we consent to the Call, and that is our first
coming, and thereby we receive Christ, and not before. He is not forced on us,
but accepted from a Light that commends, and a Will that desires him. Whereas
we come not a step, whiles we do refuse and reject him. Though I wonder why he
speaks of any first coming against our Wills, when his Principle is, that we
are united to Christ at latest, in the Moment of Conception in the Womb.

CHAP. XII. Of Justification by Faith, with a Digression about Repentance.
TRUTH. I Have spoken of Justifying Righteousness, chap. 7.

Though Faith be no way a Meritorious Cause of a Sinner's Justification, yet
God has promised to Justify all such as truly Believe; and requires Faith, as
an indispensible Qualification in all whom he will Justify for Christ's
Merits; declaring, That Unbelief shall not only hinder Men's knowing that they
are Justified, but that it is a bar to any Person's being Justified while he
continues an Unbeliever.

Reader, Note, 1. There is a Righteousness for which a Man is Justified: This
is only Christ's Righteousness: This is the Foundation of the Promise, and the
Merit of the Blessing promised: Nothing can add to it, or mingle with it; it is
sufficient, and alone sufficient to satisfy Justice, atone for Guilt, and
merit Acceptance and Life.

2. There Is to be considered, what the Condition of the Person is whom this
Mercy is promised to. He is one that has this Grace of true Faith, and exerts
it into Act. This Grace is also required and commanded as indispensibly
necessary to the Participation of Forgiveness. Christ's Righteousness shall not
be imputed to this use, unless we believe: And nothing shall hinder our Title
to this Benefit, if we do believe in Christ; for the Promise is inviolable. And
this Faith being a Conformity to the Rule of the Promise, some call it a
Subordinate Righteousness; not meaning any Righteousness for which Sin is
forgiven, for it is Christ's Righteousness alone for which God Justifies us; but
it is our answering that Rule by which Christ applies his Righteousness for our
Remission, and a Right to Life; and his Promise is the Ground of our Title.

Having premised these things for Explication of the Truth, I proceed.

ERROR. The whole use of Faith in Justification, is only to manifest that we
were Justified before; and Faith is no way necessary to bring a Sinner into a
Justified State, nor at all useful to that End.

Proved that this is the Dr's. Opinion.
The Doctor, p. 85. puts this Objection; Is not Believing required to the
Justification of the Ungodly? Answ. An ungodly Person, after he is Justified,
does Believe. But you will say, It is an Act of Christ by Faith. Ans. Then
Christ does not Justify alone, etc. Nay, I say more; Christ does Justify a
Person before he Believes, etc. He cannot believe that which is not; and if he
be not Justified before he Believes it, he believes that which is false; but
he is first Justified before he Believes, then he believes that he is
Justified. The Doctor then asks, But what does Faith serve for? He answers, It
serves for the Manifestation of that Justification which Christ put upon a
Person by himself alone. P. 86. We do not Believe, that we may be Justified,
but because we are Justified. P. 578. God does add never a tittle of Pardon it
self more to him that is a Believer, than to that Person not yet converted to
the Faith, etc. P. 597. I say, Faith, as it takes hold of Christ's
Righteousness, it does not bring this Righteousness of Christ to the Soul, but
does only declare the Presence of that Righteousness that was there even before
Faith was. He in that Page denies Faith to be so much as an Instrumental Cause
of Justification. In very many places he declares, We are not Virtually, but
Actually Justified before Faith. If thou ask when he thinks the Elect are
Justified. The Doctor tells us, It Is from Eternity, at Christ's death; and the
latest time, is, before we are born. See p. 101, 255, 361, 362, 616, etc. See
more, chapter 1, 2, 3, 11.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not: Whether Faith, or any Grace, be a jot of the meriting
Righteousness for which we are Justified? 2. Nor, Whether Faith, or any Grace,
add any thing to the Value of Christ's Merits? These I deny; yea, I add, That
if Christ's Righteousness could be applied for Pardon to the vilest Sinner
before he Believes, it would Justify him; but God has declared it shall not
be applied to Unbelievers. 3. Nor, Whether we are Justified the same moment as
we truly Believe in Christ, and the Blessing is not suspended for any time
longer? This I affirm, because God Justifies us by the Promise, as his
Instrument; and this Promise declares that he will Justify him that Believes:
It Is a Christ truly Believed in, does Justify us; and a Christ so Believed on,
cannot but Justify us. 4. Nor, Whether an elect Person once Justified, shall
by Christ's care be kept in a Justified state? 5. Nor, Whether God has
decreed, That the Elect shall certainly Believe, and so be Justified? 6. Nor,
Whether True Faith be an Infallible Sign of Justification? These four last I do
affirm.

Wherein the Real Difference is.
1. Whether we are Justified before we Believe? This the Doctor affirms, and I
deny. 2. Whether the Use of Faith in Justification be only to manifest our
Justification, which we personally had before? This the Doctor affirms, and I
deny; and add, That Faith Justifies us by receiving Christ, and therein answers
the Ordination of God, who has promised to Justify the Believer by the
Application of Christ's Righteousness in this gracious Effect of it upon the
guilty Soul.

The Truth Confirmed.
What I have said, chap. 1. Of the State of the Elect; and chap. 11. Of the
Necessity of Faith to Union with Christ; and chap. 3, 4, 10. render Enlargement
needless: Yet I shall add,

1. We are Justified by Faith, is the common Language of the Holy Ghost, Romans
5. 1. Gal. 2. 16, etc. What is it to be Justified by Faith, if we are Justified
before Faith? It contributes to our being Justified, or words express nothing
in a case of the highest moment. Romans 3 20. God justifies the Circumcision by
Faith and the Heathen through Faith: Must not Faith be at least present? It Is
impossible to exert an Act by a Thing, when that Thing is not.

2. Faith is enjoined as an indispensible Means of Justification by Christ, and
complied with by All Converts to that End. Act. 16. 30. Believe, and thou shall
be saved. Romans 10. 9, 10. If thou believe with thine heart, thou shall be
saved; for with the heart man believes to righteousness, (not to Assurance
only.) To be Justified, was a Benefit which Paul, and the other Converts, had
an Eye to in Believing. Gal. 2. 16. We have believed, That we may be justified
by the faith of Christ. The Blessing of Justification is limited to a Believer,
and extended to such by such conditional and indefinite Clauses as these: Romans
4. 23, 24. To us it shall be imputed (for Righteousness) if we Believe on him
that raised up Christ from the dead. Act. 10. 43. Whosoever Believes in him,
shall receive Remission of Sins. What a gross Notion would it create, That
Faith should be required by God, in order to a Benefit, and this Faith acted by
the guidance of the Spirit, as a Means to partake of that Benefit, and this
Benefit proposed and limited to all under an express respect to that Faith; and
yet that Benefit is ours before Faith has a Being?

3. The Gospel denounces and declares All Condemned, till they do Believe: It
declares they are so, and denounces they shall be so: Joh. 3. 36. He that
believes not on the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on
him. And ver. 18. He that believes on him, is not condemned; but he that
believes not, is condemned already. Here Is the Case of all Men by the Fall;
They are Condemned, and under Wrath. Here Is the way of Relief; A Christ
believed on: And they that believe, their Condemnation is reversed. Here Is the
Case of every Man that believes not; Wrath abides on him: The Condemning
Sentence remains, and Men are distributed into Condemned, or Justified; and
this as Believers, or Unbelievers. Oh! that any can think, all this Wrath that
abides, is no more than want of an Assurance that we are Justified! Sure it is
more danger! Joh. 8. 24. If you believe not, you shall die in your sins. Mark
16. 18. He that believes not, shall be damned. Then they must be liable to
Damnation whilst in Unbelief, or they could not be Damned for Unbelief. To be
Condemned and Justified are Opposites; at once none can be both: Nor can God
Justify a Man whom he then and still Condemns.

4. Unbelief is the cause why Men are barred from Justi^^cation, and remain
obnoxious to Misery. Joh. 5. 40. Ye will not come to me, that ye may have life.
What undid the Jews? Heb. 3. 18, 19. They could not enter, because of Unbelief.
And chapter 4, 6, 7. And if Unbelief did not obstruct Life, and a Right to it; the
Apostle would oddly infer, chapter 4. ver. 1, 2, 3. Let us therefore fear, lest a
Promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come
short of it, etc. for we which have believed, do enter into rest.

How easily might I argue this Point, from the Nature of Justification, as it is
a judicial Act of God, by a Gospel-Rule supposing Christ's Satisfaction? As
also, from the immediate Effects of Justification, which are all suspended as
to Unbelievers: God in all his Carriage not executing the Justifying Sentence
on them, but the contrary; he leaves them many years Slaves to Sin and Satan,
void of his Spirit, admitting them to no Communion with him, rejecting their
Prayers, barring them from his Table, suffering them to blaspheme and dishonor
him; he suffers them to remain Curses and Plagues to other Souls, etc. Does God
deal thus with the Justified? What short of Hell is the Execution of the Curse,
if these be not?

Reader, I leave it to thy self to judge, whether all these things make Faith
of no more use, than to show us the goodness of our state; which we were as
much possessed of before, only we did not know it? Is that all the change on
believing, which such great Expressions import? Is our being now washed and
justified, 1 Cor. 6. 11. no more than we now know it? Is Assurance all the
motive we can honestly use with Sinners to believe? Or the want of it, all the
Danger we have to threaten them with, to any beneficial purpose, against their
abiding in Unbelief?

TESTIMONIES.
You have already heard the Assembly, and the Congr. of Elders at the Savoy,
Confess. chap. 11. a. 4. saying, The Elect are not Justified, until the Holy
Spirit does in due time actually apply Christ to them. See chapter 1. Of the State
of the Elect: Where I cited this; Lesser Catech. Q. What Benefits do they that
are effectually called, partake of in this Life? A. They that are effectually
called, partake of Justification, Adoption, etc. You see that the Assembly do
suppose our Calling, to our being Justified; and Justification is a Benefit
flowing from it. In the next Answer, they tell us, We are Justified by
receiving Christ's Righteousness by Faith alone. So not before Faith.

The New England Synod, p. 18. thus confute that Speech of the Antinomians;
viz. To say we are Justified by Faith, is an unsafe Speech; we must say, We are
Justified by Christ. The Synod fully prove this is false; and add, To say a Man
is Justified before Faith, or without Faith, is unsafe, as contrary to the
language of the Scripture.

Dr. Owen, in his Treat. of Justif. p. 299. says, It must be remembered, that
we require Evangelical Faith, in order of Nature antecedently unto our
Justification, by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto us; which
also is the Condition of the Continuation of it. This is as plain as can be,
and this he often proves. p. 306, etc.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because God Justifies the Ungodly, that is, the Man who the moment before he
believed to Justification was ungodly; yea, and who still remains ungodly in
the Eye of the Law of Works, needing daily Forgiveness by Grace; therefore God
Justifies him who continues wholly ungodly fifty years after. Because Christ
alone Justifies, as he whose Satisfaction and Merits are the only Righteousness
for which we are Justified; therefore he thinks there is nothing else present
in our Justification, not considering that God Justifies, the Spirit Justifies,
the Gospel-Promise Justifies, in senses distinct from Christ: And so does
Faith, though not as what meriteth, yet as what the Promise requires in all
whom God will Justify for the sake of Christ's Merits. Because it is Christ,
the Object of Faith, Justifies; therefore Faith in that Object is not requisite
to Justification; though it is as plain as the Word of God can speak, it is a
Christ believed on which Justifies: It Is not Faith, without a Christ, can do
it; and Christ, without Faith, will not do it; but on our Believing, he will
not fail to do it. Because we must, in order to Assurance of Pardon, believe
our Sins are actually pardoned; therefore our actual Pardon is the Object of
the Faith by which we obtain Pardon; and so he sets our Pardon, instead of God,
Christ, and the Gospel-Promises, which are the Scripture Objects of Justifying
Faith. Because Faith is the Evidence of Invisible Realities still remaining
Invisible; therefore it is whole Use is, to manifest our Pardon before our
Pardon has a Being.

Object. The Doctor lays great stress on Ezekiel. 16. 6, etc. and very often
builds this and other of his Opinions upon it.

Answ. He does so, and without the least Ground. For,

1. That Chapter does not describe the Dealings of God with a particular Soul,
in order to Salvation; but with Israel, as a Political Body, in a peculiar
Covenant. It shows how mean and idolatrous their Original was; how graciously
God singled them out, and dignified them above the rest of the World by many
Privileges; and among the rest, by making a Covenant of Peculiarity with them.
But this Covenant is not the Covenant of Eternal Life: For ver. 59. it was a
Covenant they broke: And ver. 61, 62. it is called Thy Covenant, as opposed to
My Covenant. Dare any Man say that all the Jews were Washed, Quickened,
Justified? etc. Yet each of these were true of the whole Body in this Chapter.
See what a Character is given of their Temper and Carriage, after all this is
said of them; and sure it cannot agree to a Justified Soul, or a Soul decked
with Grace: See from ver. 14. to ver. 23. And had the Doctor considered this
Chapter, he would find most of his Opinions baffled, on the same grounds as he
thinks a Verse or two can serve him. Ver. 3, 4, 8. In the day they were born,
they were unwashed, unloved, out of the Covenant. Where is Justification, etc.
from Eternity, or from the time of Conception? Ver. 23. When after they were
washed, and in Covenant, God denounces, Woe, woe unto thee! for their
wickedness. May not Wrath then be preached to an elect Person? Ver. 27, 38, 43.
I Will judge thee, and give thee blood in fury, and recompense thy ways upon thy
head. Does Sin do a Believer no harm? Is there no displeasure in God against
the Elect for Sin? When God says, Thou have fretted me, etc. when, v. 58. thou
have born thy lewdness, and thy abominations; can it be true, That no Elect
Person bears his own Sin? Nor ought he to charge himself therewith? Or does not
God charge him with it?

2. Admit that the Birth of a Child was a resemblance of Israel's first
becoming God's Vovenant People, in Abraham, or at Mount Sinai; and admit that
this People's becoming the Lord's, were an Exemplar of every elect Person's
Recovery; yet all that can be inferred is, That an Elect Person is vile,
miserable and guilty, when God comes effectually to call him. When thou were in
thy blood, I said unto thee, Live. But what is this to Justification before
Faith? Does God quicken a Soul before he wash it? and does not that Soul
believe? What Life can there be that excludes Faith? A quickened Soul believes
as soon as quickened; and the Text shows you, that it is quickened before it is
washed.

A Digression concerning the Necessity of Repentance to Forgiveness.
The Doctor judging we are Justified before we Believe; it is no wonder he tells
us, we are forgiven before we confess sin, p. 255, etc. or repent. But my
business in this Digression, is with Men of more Orthodox Principles, who yet
seem to be doubtful in this Point: I shall therefore state the Point between
these.

Wherein the difference is not.
1. It is not: Whether Faith or Repentance be any part of the Meriting
Righteousness for which we are Justified? 2. Nor, Whether the Habits of Faith
and Repentance be wrought at the same time, and included in the Regenerating
Principle? 3. Nor, Whether Convictions of a lost State, and some degree of
Humblings and Sorrow, are necessary to drive a Soul to Christ? 4. Nor, Whether
there must be an Assenting Act of Faith, before there be any Exercise of
Repentance under the power of the Word; which must be believed in some degree,
before it operate to these effects? 5. Nor, Whether ingenuous Sorrow for Sin,
in the sense of actual Pardon, be after that Pardon? 6. Nor, Whether
Repentance, as it consists in Fruits meet for it, as External Reformation, a
Fruitful Life, and the like, must follow Pardon; it being against the Tenor of
the Promise, that Forgiveness should be suspended so long after a Man believes,
and repents with his heart? 7. Nor, Whether Justification be equally ascribed
to Faith and Repentance? For we are said to be Justified by Faith; which
imports, that Repentance is but a disposing Condition; and Faith the receiving
Condition: Repentance without Faith is unavailable, as Faith without Repentance
is impossible: Faith seems to complete all, and in a manner comprehend all.
These things Orthodox Divines are agreed in.

The seeming Difference.
Whether a sincere purpose of Heart, to turn from Sin and Idols to God, be
absolutely necessary to Forgiveness of Sin?

The other parts of Repentance are excluded out of the Question, by what you
have read before. And this is that part of it which the word lays a great
stress on; from hence Repentance is called (...), Mat. 2. 8, etc. A change of
mind, or purpose. And Conversion refers to this, as the principal part of it.

Proved that Repentance, as it lies in a sincere purpose to turn from Sin and
Idols to God, is necessary to Forgiveness.
1. The Repentance God so commands, in order to Forgiveness, can include no
less than this, Act. 3. 19. Repent, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out: And Act. 2. 38. Repent, and be baptized in the name of Christ, for
the remission of sins. To preach Repentance and Remission, is Christ's Charge
to his Ministers, Luke 24. 47. And none can doubt, that before the Person of
the Messiah became the disputed Truth in the World, the chief Subject of God's
message to Men, was a Call to Repentance.

2. Repentance is a Grace to which Pardon is promised; and upon the working of
it, Forgiveness is given: And Impenitency continues Guilt wherever it reigns.
How much of the Bible must I transcribe, if I quote all places that prove
these? Ez. 18. 30. Act. 3. 19. Act. 26. 18. To turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of
sin, etc. Mark 1. 4. And preach the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of
sins. Luke 13. 3. Except you repent, you shall all perish. Christ was exalted,
to give Repentance, and Remission of Sins, Act. 5. 31. Nay the Sin against the
Holy Ghost is unpardonable; because it is impossible to bring the Committer of
it to repentance, Heb. 6. 16. Are all these things consistent with Pardon
before Repentance? Can I be subject to perish and pardoned at once? Can God
command Repentanee, under a Promise of Pardon, and yet suppose I must be
pardoned before? Is the turning of the Heart from the power of Satan to God,
urged and directed to this end, that I may receive forgiveness, and none follow
my turning, but all be before it?

3. There Is no Saving Faith that includes not this purpose in it: Can I
fiducially consent to Christ, and not intend to leave my wickedness? Dr. Owen
well proves, That Justifying Faith cannot be, without a purpose of heart to
obey God in all things. (Treat. of Justif. p. 40.) And adds Neither is it
possible that there should be any exercise of this Faith, but where the Mind is
prepared, disposed and determined unto universal Obedience. See the Assemblies
and Elders Account of Saving Faith, chapter 9.

4. Without this Purpose, we do not accept of Christ as the Way to God. It
would be strange, that the great Term of Life should terminate in Christ, who
is the Means, without any respect to God, who is the End: Whereas Christ is
able to save such as come to God by him, Heb. 7. 25. and others he will not
save, Act. 20. 21. God was not thus over-looked when Paul testified Repentance
toward God, and Faith toward Christ. And indeed, without this purpose, the
Soul never answers God's Call; and so must be Pardoned before effectually
Called.

5. We cannot receive Christ as King, without this Repentance of Heart. To
receive him as King, is to renounce all Usurpers, and resolve Obedience to his
Will: And we must receive him as King, or Lord, or it is not the Christ we so
receive: Col. 2. 6. As you have received Christ Jesus, the Lord. God gives him,
a Leader and Commander, Isa. 55. 4. And so must we take him, or never hope for
Forgiveness by him.

6. Without this purpose of Heart, no Man accepts of Christ for Sanctification.
The Assembly and Elders at the Savoy, tell us, Conf. chap. 14. a. 2. That
Saving Faith accepts of Christ for Sanctification. I am sure, God gives Christ
to bless you, in turning every one of you from his iniquities, Act. 3. 26. And
can that Soul believe to Forgiveness, that thus receives him not? Or can any
one thus receive him, who intends not to turn from Sin to Holiness?

7. A resolved purpose to continue in Sin and Rebellion against God, is
Damning, let Men pretend what they please. I hope I need not prove, but one of
these Purposes must have place in every Heart, when it is dealing with Christ
about Salvation. And I think I have proved, That a Resolution to continue
Rebels, will bar any Man from a possessing of Christ. See chap. 10.

8. It Is not to be allowed, that it should not be necessary to renounce our
Sins with our Hearts, in order to Pardon; when it is necessary to renounce our
own Merits, or Righteousness. Is the one opposite to Christ, and is not the
other so? Will one make us backward to accept of Christ, and will not the other
do the same? Is the one inconsistent with a true Approbation of a Savior? The
other is no less: For Christ is to save from the Power of Sin, as well as the
Guilt; and he that submits not to him with a desire of both, duly accepts him
for neither.

I might further evidence this from the necessary fitness of Repentance for
Pardon. It is very unsuitable to the Nature and Government of God to pardon a
Sinner that resolves to rebel, and not to return: This seems too low a
Provision for his Honor, etc. Nay, it would render our Faith a mere selfish
thing; and all our Compliance, to be a mere concern for our own Impunity;
whiles Sin is still resolved, and God's Dominion rejected, and Christ's Design
of restoring the Image of God, slighted and opposed. It were easy to show,
that Repentance and Faith are so near to, and inclusive of each other, that one
is put for the other; and the Call to one, is a Call to each.

The Judgment of others.
The Assemb. Confess. chapter 16. a. 3. say, Although Repentance be not to be rested
in, as any Satisfaction for Sin, or any Cause of the Pardon thereof, which is
the act of God's Free Grace in Christ; yet it is of such necessity to all
Sinners, that none may expect Pardon without it. You see, though they justly
exclude the Merit and Causality of Repentance; yet they affirm, and by many
Texts prove the Necessity of it to Pardon; and forbid any Expectation of Pardon
without it. And in their Directory of the Visitation of the Sick, they advise a
seasonable propounding of Christ and his Merits, for a Door of Hope; but it is
to none but to every penitent Believer.

The Elders at the Savoy tell us, chapter 15. a. 5. There is no Sin so great, that
shall bring Damnation on them who truly repent; which makes the constant
Preaching of Repentance necessary.

Dr. Owen tells us, That before the first Act of Justifying Faith, there be
Convictions, Shame, Fear, Sorrow, and other afflictive Passions; and hereon a
Resolution does ensue, utterly to abstain from Sin, with sincere Endeavors to
that purpose, etc. Treat. of Justif. p. 299. he tells us, That without this in
the order of the Gospel, an Interest in it, (i. e. Christ's Righteousness,) is
not to be attained, etc. And again; Justifying Faith includes in its Nature
the entire Principle of Evangelical Repentance; so that it is utterly
impossible that a Man should be a true Believer, and not at the same instant of
time be truly Penitent: And therefore are they so frequently joined in
Scripture, as one simultaneous Duty: Yea, the Call of the Gospel unto
Repentance, is a Call to Faith, acting it self by Repentance, etc. And then
tells us, The First Act of Faith respecting the Grace of God in Christ, is not
conceived in order of time to precede its actings in Self-displicency, Godly
Sorrow, and Universal Conversion from Sin to God. See p. 300, 301. These things
Dr. Owen asserts, though he ascribes no Causality of Pardon to Repentance:
Which will offend none who deny any Grace in Man to be a Cause of Forgiveness;
among whom I own my self. See Mr. Anthony Burgess's Reasons for the Necessity
of Repentance to Forgiveness, True Doct. of Justif. lib. 1. p 157.

Thus I have done with this Debate; which lies (I hope) more in words than some
unthinking Men imagine: And the generality of Divines affirm as I do.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Necessity and Benefit of Holiness, Obedience, and good
Works, with Perseverance therein.
REader, Note, that whatever is spoken in this Chapter of any Act of Grace,
except penitent believing, refers not to the Forgiveness of Sin, or the
Sinner's Admission into a justified State. The Benefits I here treat of, are,
the not Forfeiture of Pardon, the Possession of Heaven, and some other
particular Blessings, as increase of Peace, returns of Prayer, Joy, etc.

Truth. Though neither Holiness, sincere Obedience, or good Works, do make any
Atonement for Sin; or are in the least the meritorious Righteousness whereby
Salvation is caused; or for which this, or any Blessing becomes due to us as of
Debt; yet as the Spirit of Christ freely works all Holiness in the Soul, and
enableth us to sincere Obedience and good Works; so the Lord Jesus has of
Grace, and for his own Merits, promised to bring to Heaven, such as are
partakers of true Holiness, perform this sincere Obedience, and do these good
Works perseveringly, and appoints these as the Way and Means of a Believer's
obtaining Salvation, and several other Blessings; requiring these as
indispensible Duties and Qualifications of all such whom he will so save and
bless, and excluding all that want or neglect them, or live under the Power of
what is contrary thereto, viz. Profaneness, Rebellion, and utter Unfruitfulness.

Error. Men have nothing to do in order to Salvation, nor is Sanctification a
jot the way of any Person to Heaven, nor can the Graces or Duties of Believers;
no, nor Faith it self, do them the least Good, or prevent the least Evil; nor
are they of any Use to their Peace or Comfort; yea, though Christ be
explicitly owned, and they be done in the Strength of the Spirit of God: And a
Believer ought not to think he is more pleasing to God by any Grace he acts,
or Good he does; nor may Men expect any Good to a Nation, by the Humiliation,
earnest Prayer, or Reformation of a People.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
P. 41, 42. The Doctor tells us, Seeing all things are settled by Christ for us
of free Gift, all we do is for Christ himself. I say, that we do, we do for
Christ, not for our selves. If we do it for our selves, we do but labor in
vain; if a Man will run a hundred Miles for Money, if that Money be proffered
to him before he step out of his House, at his Door, his Journey is in vain,
seeing he might have had it before he stepped out of Door, etc. Christ comes and
brings Justification, loving Kindness and Salvation; he lays them down,
presents them, delivers them to the Heart; when we are ungodly, he enters into
Covenant, that we should become his: What needs then all this Travel for Life
and Salvation, seeing it is here already? But seeing we get nothing by it, etc.
Obj. But sure the Doctor intends only, That nothing we do can merit, but not
that they are not required as the requisite Means and Way to obtain these
Blessings. A. The Doctor satisfies us, he intends the last as well as the
first, P. 45. 46. I will note one thing, before I go on, to make clear this
thing. It is a received Conceit among many Persons, that our Obedience is the
Way to Heaven; and though it be not, say they, the Cause of our Reign, yet it
is the Way to the Kingdom, etc. This he disapproves, saying, I must tell you,
all this Sanctification of Life, is not a jot the Way of that justified Person
unto Heaven, etc. The Truth is, since Redemption is managed by Christ, the Lord
has pointed out other Ends and Purposes for our Obedience, than Salvation.
Salvation is not the end of any good Work we do. P. 151, 152. he puts this
Objection, We had as good sit still. He that works all day, and gets nothing
more than he had in the Morning, he had as good sit still and do nothing. He
answers, Let me tell you, the Prevention of Evil, if there be reality of Evil
in it; and the obtaining of Good, if there be reality of Good, Peace of
Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, Pardon of Sin, the Infallibility of
Miscarriage, the Light of God's Countenance: All these, I say, which you aim
at, are abundantly provided for you, and established firmly on you, by the mere
Grace of God in Christ, before you do perform any thing whatsoever. To what
purpose do Men propose Ends to themselves, which Ends are accomplished before
their Proposition? And to what purpose then do we propose to our selves, the
gaining of that to our selves in our Labor and Industry, that is already
become ours before we do a jot? etc. Must they now labor to gain these things,
as if it were referred to their well or evil Walking; that as they shall walk
so they shall speed? etc. The Lord does nothing in his People upon Conditions
in his People, etc. The Lord intends not, that by our Obedience, we shall gain
something, which in case of our Failing, we shall miscarry of, etc. That they
are to do, they are not to do with any Eye to their own Advantage, that being
already perfectly completed to their Hands, before they do any thing; but
simply with an Eye to glorify God, and to serve their Generation, and therein
to serve the Lord, etc. When you do yield Obedience to God, you go to Prayer,
and fall to Fasting, to Weeping, and Mourning, and Self-denial, Keeping the
Sabbath, Dealing righteously, etc. What is it you aim at in all this? that God
may do you good, that God may be gracious, that God may speak Peace to your
Spirits; then it follows, that Life is that in your Eye that puts you on that
which you do, etc. This is the Righteousness of the Law. P. 13. Let Subduing of
Sin alone for Peace. P. 73. While you labor to get by Duties, you provoke God
as much as in you lies. Obj. But though Holiness or Obedience do not profit us,
as to saving Good; may they not bring us some Good or other? Ans. The Doctor
tells us, No; P. 150. I must tell you, there is not any Duty you perform, when
you have attained the highest Pitch, that has any Prevalency and Availableness
to produce, to bring forth any, though the least Good to your selves. I say it
again, there is nothing you can do, from whence you ought to expect any Gain to
your selves by doing it. The Doctor speaks the same as to the Uselessness of
Reformation to a Kingdom. P. 235, 236. But if a Soul get under full sail,
filled with a stiff Gale of the Spirit, when Floods of Meltings flow from it,
if they can cry mightily, and be somewhat exact in observing practical
righteous Means, to mourn and pray lustily, being helped by the Spirit therein;
then such Exercises will do Wonders; hereby Persons shall get Pardon, settle
Spiritual, Civil, and Natural Healings, with National; such Courses, some will
think will turn away Gods Wrath, etc. But he tells us in that Page, though
these be done by Persons being in Christ, though thus assisted by Christ's
Spirit, though Christ be explicitly owned as the Author of such Assistance,
the Righteousness so assisted has no efficacy at all, to obtain any thing of
the Lord, etc. So P. 425, 426, 124, 125, 24. His common Phrase is, We must not
work for Life, but from Life. Obj. But we may suppose the Doctor says this
only of external Duties, but not of the Actings of Grace. Answ. No, I could
show you how he says the same of all Graces; but it is enough to instance in
that of Faith. P. 326. That is the proper Work that God has given to
Believing, not to effect any thing to the Good of a Man, but only to be the
Witness of that Good to the Spirit of a Man, and so give light to that which
was hidden before. Obj. But is not God pleased with us the more for Grace, etc.
A. The Doctor informs us, P. 429. If you have more Ability than others in
doing, let it not come into your Thoughts, as an Inducement to think better of
your selves, as if you were more accepted of God, or pleasing in his Sight.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not whether God has decreed that the Elect shall be holy and
obedient, and so partake of saving Blessings. 2. Nor whether every Work will
fail to save a Christless Unbeliever. 3. Nor whether Christ has paid the Price
of Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal Blessings. 4. Nor whether the essential
Blessings of the Gospel become the Inheritance of a Believer, as soon as he is
united to Christ. 5. Nor whether it is from the Influence of the Spirit, that we
are Holy, Obedient, and enabled to every good Work. 6. Nor whether it is for
the Sake of Christ's Merits and Incense, and of Free Grace, that any Grace of
Duty of ours is rewarded, or becomes the Means of any Benefit: Each of these I
do affirm. 7. Nor whether an Holiness, internal or external, any Obedience,
Work or Duty, do at all merit the Promise, or is the meritorious Cause, or
Righteousness, for which any promised Mercy is bestowed. This I deny, and own
that all is of Gift, though given in an Order suitable to our Condition, as
Subjects in a State of Trial. 8. Nor whether the Law be a Rule of Duty. This
the Doctor affirms, as I also do; though he denies any Threatening or Promise to
back God's Law, as to the Elect. 9. Nor whether the Elect ought to be Holy, and
will be Holy. This the Doctor owns; but he places it wholly on the Decree, and
Christ's Care; denying that God has required it as indispensibly necessary to
our inheriting any Blessing promised to the Elect, and judges Christ has done
all for us, and injoyneth nothing on us to do, in order to any good thing. 10.
Nor whether a penitent Believer shall be saved, if he die before he has time
for further Obedience. This I affirm.

The Real Difference.
1. Whether Faith and Repentance be indispensibly required of us, that we may
be justified for the Sake of Christ's Righteousness. This I affirm, and the
Doctor denies. Of which I have treated Chap. 12. 2. Whether Holiness, and
sincere Obedience and Perseverance are the way to Heaven, and are required of
the Elect as the Conditions of their obtaining Salvation; or is Heaven promised
to them, if they persevere in Holiness, and sincere Obedience, and the Loss of
Heaven threatened, in case they continue wicked and disobedient; or after Grace
turn Apostates. This the Doctor denies, and I affirm. 3. Whether the good
Works of a Believer are rewardable of Grace for Christ's Sake. This I affirm,
and the Doctor denies. 4. Whether by the Gospel, as a Rule of Judgment, whoever
is unholy, utterly disobedient, and altogether wilfully neglective of good
Works, shall be condemned. This I affirm, and the Doctor denies. 5. Whether God
has promised several Blessings (distinct from mere eternal Life) to the
Exercise of several Graces, and Performance of sundry Duties; as more Grace to
the Improvement of less, gracious Returns to fervent Prayer, Peace of
Conscience to a lively Frame and exact walking; his Presence to a conscientious
Attendance on Ordinances, diverting threatened Judgments on Repentance and
Reformation, filling the Hungry with good things, etc. This the Doctor denies,
and I affirm. 6. Whether upon the Acting of such Graces, and upright Performing
such Duties, a Christian may not in the Virtue of such Promises, expect such
Blessings, and fear the Neglect thereof as a Bar thereto. This the Doctor
denies, and I affirm. Yet allowing, that God may sometimes exert his
Sovereignty in giving some Blessings to a Believer, not answering these Rules;
and a while suspend them from the disposed Soul, to try his Patience; or if the
Blessing be of a lower Nature, he may exchange it into a greater. But yet this
I affirm, is the stated Rule of our Expectations and Fears, and the ordinary
Method of God's Dealings with Men. 7. Whether God is not more pleased with a
Man in the Exercise of Grace and Holiness, than when he neglects them, and does
the contrary. This I affirm, and the Doctor denies.

The Truth confirmed.
The Points are too many to admit Enlargement, and most of them carry that
Evidence, that the whole Scope of the Bible must be forgotten, when they are
denied. Can two or three wrested Texts overturn the constant Language of the
Scriptures? And is it not strange, that all Religion, and the Humane Nature it
self in a State of Trial, should be so fully struck at, from a gross Conceit,
that the infinite God cannot foresee, and purpose Events, unless it must null
his Government over reasonable Subjects, and prevent his Distribution of
Rewards and Punishments by a stated Rule? What a Reflection is it on the Divine
Wisdom, and the glorious Platform of the Redeemer's Work and Kingdom, that he
cannot purchase Benefits for Sinners, unless he forbear to use them as Motives
to Obedience? Yea, The whole of his serious Pleadings with Men, must be a
Mockery, rather than he must be allowed to bestow his Blessings in a rectoral
way. He shall merit nothing as a Priest, if he dispense it as a King, nor be
esteemed to enable Sinners to act, if he appoint them any thing to do, in order
to a Reward.

Having occasion to mention some Words, which I would prevent thy Mistake of,
know, that by Holiness, I mean the inward Renovation, and Devotedness of the
Soul to God, with the Expression thereof in holy Actings. By Good Works, I mean
all the inward Actings of Grace in a sincere Conformity to the Will of God, as
our loving God, our fearing God, trusting in Christ, godly Purposes and
Resolves, etc. These are good Works, called internal. There be also external
good Works, as Praying, Hearing, exact Walking, Alms-deeds, and any other Act
of Obedience directed by the Word, proceeding from Faith, and a renewed
Principle, and intended to glorify God and save our Souls. By Doing, the same
Actings are intended, and so loving God is Doing; yea, Believing in Christ is
Doing; it is an Action on our Part, even when it accepts of Christ; though it
is by Divine Ordination made the effectual Means of Receiving, or partaking of
a promised Christ.

Having premised these things, I shall proceed to the Proof of the Truth, which
is comprehended under these Heads.

1. Sinners have much to do, in order to Salvation. There be few Leaves in the
Bible but argue this: It Is the Scope of all the Revelations of God to Men since
the Fall. It Is true, we have nothing to do in a way of Atonement or Purchase;
but it is as true, we have much to do in order to our Participation of what
Christ has purchased: We must repent, that our Sins may be blotted out, Act,
3. 19. We must believe, that we may be saved, etc. Our Lord is express, if you
know these things, happy are you if you do them, Joh. 13. 17. All
Gospel-discoveries are made known for the Obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 26. And
Christ will take Vengeance on all them who obey not the Gospel; neither Christ
nor Gospel will secure them, 2 These. 1. 8. The Revelations of God to Men, are
not a bare Description of Duty and Benefits, but an Injunction of Duty in a
Connection with Benefits, Romans 10. 9. If thou confess with thy Mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe with thy Heart, thou shall be saved. 2. I could show,
there is no one saving Benefit granted to a Sinner, but on supposition of his
Doing: See much of this Chap. 8. 10, 11, 12. and Chapter 21, 22. Christ never
intended the Application of his Merits for our Privileges, without ordering
them as Motives to Duty on our Part. 3. The Influences of the Spirit of God,
and God's Institutions, have no Causality in our Salvation, if Men have nothing
to do in order to be saved. It Is plain, that Salvation is ascribed to the
Spirit, and also to the Means of Grace: Neither of them are the Atonement or
Price of Salvation, therefore they must save as they operate on the Soul in
order to its Actings, Romans 1. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 21. And this must be, as it
answers the way appointed for our Participation of Life. 4. On what account is
it said, that we believe to the saving of our Souls? Heb. 10. 39. and
Repentance to Salvation is the Expression of the Spirit of God, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
What Sense can be affixed to these and the like Phrases, as they are opposed to
their Contraries as destructive, if Men do nothing toward their Salvation? See
Jam. 2. 14. Can Faith save him: Yea, and I may ask, 5. What means the Holy
Ghost, when he says, In so doing, thou shall save thy self, and them that hear
thee? 1 Timothy 4. 16. Sure the Argument is not strong, if it be true, we can do
nothing for Salvation. 6. The Destruction of Sinners, under the Gospel, is
still laid on not Doing; they are condemned by the Law, but they remain
condemned, and their Ruin is fixed (and so they are twice dead) for want of
doing somewhat. Ye will not come to me, that you might have Life, Joh. 5. 40.
How often is the Ruin of Souls laid on not Turning, not Repenting? etc. 7. If
Men have nothing to do for Salvation, then Christ has no Rule to judge them
who lived under the Gospel. I hope none will say, the judicial Sentence will
pass on Men as elected, or not elected. Does it agree to the Proceedings of
that Tribunal at that Day, to say, Thou shall be damned, because thou were not
elected? Is this the Account the Scripture gives? Does it not proceed on the
Difference in Men's Carriage and Tempers? See the Parable of the Talents: They
who improved their Talents were saved; he that hid it in a Napkin, was
therefore damned, Mat. 25. 21, 24, 28. Consider any Description of the last
Day, and you will find, God saves and damns with a Respect to Men's Neglects and
Compliance with his Gospel. 8. I could easily demonstrate, that if Men have
nothing to do in order to Salvation, the Ministry of Christ and his Apostles,
the Ministry most apt and most blessed to Souls to this very day, is all a
Vanity and Falsehood; they are cold Pleadings with Sinners, that are not backed
with Life and Death: Remove saving Benefits, and undoing Dangers, from being
Arguments to Compliance with the Will of Christ; and any Man may read the
Success of such a Ministry, and to use these Arguments to persuade Men to
repent and believe, if we have nothing to do for Heaven, is a manifest Falsehood
and Trifling. It Is awful to consider, how inconsistent some Men's Application is
with their Doctrine; though it is well their Uses to the Unconverted have so
much Truth in them.

2. True Holiness, sincere Obedience, or good Works, and Perseverance, are the
Way to Heaven, and so necessary to the Salvation of a Believer, that without
them he cannot be saved, and continuing in them he shall be saved.

This might be evidenced by many Reasons, 1. It is not saving Faith which is
not operative to these Effects. It cease to be true, whenever it wholly fails
of purifying the Heart, and working by Love. Many affirm, That all Graces are
seminally in Faith as in their Principle. Such must grant, that as Faith
justifies us at first in receiving, and relying on Christ; so it continues to
justify us by continuing those Acts, and exerting it self in those other
Operations, which are essential to its Nature. And thus some expound Jam. 2.
20, 24. 2. Obedience, good Works, and Perseverance, preserve us from those
contrary Evils, which do subject Men to Condemnation: I keep my Body under,
least by any Means, when I have preached to* others, I my self be a castaway, 1
Cor. 9. 27. I shall add to this in some following Heads. 3. The
Gospel-Constitution does by its Promises and Threatenings make Persevering
Holiness, Obedience, or Good Works the necessary way to Heaven. These are not
only a Natural, but a Moral meetness for Heaven. That this Point may be clear,
I shall, 1. Show that the Gospel-Constitution contains Promises and
Threatenings, which affect all of us, as a Rule of Happiness and Misery; it is so
to the Elect; yea, Believers, as well as others. 2. That by this Constitution,
Persevering Holiness, Sincere Obedience, or Good Works, are necessary to
Salvation.

1. The Gospel-Constitution contains Promises and Threatenings, which affect all
of us, as a Rule of Happiness and Misery: By these God governs Men; and Men's
Hopes or Fears should be directed by these, as their Rule. Dr. Crisp not
observing this, has run into those Mistakes which open a door to all
Licentiousness, though he intended it not: His whole Scheme implies, That
Christ does not distribute Blessings or Punishments by any Rule that referrs to
the Actings of Men. I have proved the contrary, chap. 8, etc. For if the
Covenant of Grace be Conditional, and Faith and Repentance are Necessary to
Forgiveness, etc. the Substance of this must be granted. But I add a few
Reasons more.

1. Most of the Promises and Threatenings in the Bible, that referr to the State
of Souls, are Evangelical Promises and Threats: They are not the Sanction of
the Law of Innocence, but of Gospel Grace. Who can doubt this, if they
consider, 1. That the Covenant of Innocence promised Life to nothing below
sinless and perfect Obedience. 2. The Threatenings of the Covenant of Innocence
admitted no Repentance, or After-Relief to the Guilty: They did fix the Curse
irrevocably, in case of any Transgression. 3. No Overture of Life, or Door of
Hope, or Argument to Conversion with Hopes of Acceptance, could be framed out
of those legal Threats or Promises to any Man that is a Sinner. Turn ye, Turn
ye; why will you die? was not the Language of that Covenant: No, if a Man is
once a Sinner, the Law could speak no lower than this, Thou art undone, whether
thou turn or no. Things being thus, I would entreat thee to consider all the
Calls of God in Christ to Men since the Fall: Weigh the Promises and Threats
wherewith God strengthens those Calls: See if any one of the Calls to Faith,
or Repentance, or Holiness, thus backed with Promises and Threats, be not
Evangelical. 1. Does God, in those Calls, promise Life to nothing below
sinless, perfect Obedience? Or does he threaten Eternal Death, in those Calls,
against whatever is short of perfect Obedience? 2. Do the Threats annexed to
those Calls, exclude all after-Repentance? See Ezekiel. 18. 21. Is that Gospel or
no; But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, etc.
he shall surely live; his transgressions shall not be mentioned? 3. Are not
these Calls, with the Promises and Threats directed to Sinners, for their
Conversion and Recovery? Is it not to Sinners God speaks in them? and is it not
for their healing and Salvation? Are not the Promises an Offer of Relief? Are
not the Threatenings intended to awe and warn Sinners against Refusal of these
Offers? They be not uttered, to bind the Curse; but to deliver from it, by
urging our Compliance with the Commands of a Redeemer: To day if you will hear
his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, etc. Heb. 3. 7, 8.
and 4. 7. Every Threatening used by God as an Argument to Conversion, is a
Gospel-Threatning.

2. What kind of Government can Men assign to Christ, if there be no Sanction
to his Precepts? Dr. Crisp often tells us, That the Sanction of the Law of Works
is removed; the Curse is gone, as to the Elect. This is true, if he mean, that
sinless Obedience is not now the Way of Life; and that all below it, shall not
bind Death upon us so as to hinder our Relief by the Gospel. But what then,
has the Redeemer no Promises and Threatenings to rule Men by? And is their
Obedience or Disobedience an indifferent thing, as to their Happiness or
Misery? Must he save all, or damn all, or else be a Respecter of Persons in his
judicial Distributions? Is this the Language of God to Sinners since the Fall?
Did Christ preach at this rate, when on Earth? Or does he so speak now from
Heaven, Heb. 12. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they
escaped not, who refused him that spoke on earth; much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven? Heb. 2. 3. How
shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvatian, which at first began to be
spoken by the Lord? etc. Our Lord assures us, Men's Sins are aggravated, and
their Damnation grows greater, by a Rejection of his Call to Sinners, through
Impenitence and Unbelief. Joh. 8. 24. Ye shall die in your sins. Heb. 10. 29.
Of how much sorer punishment, etc. It Is a precarious Dominion that Christ
exercises, if he has neither Rewards nor Punishments to induce Men's regards
to his Authority. Read the Scriptures, or wait the Judgment-day, and you will
find it otherwise.

3. How unsuitable is it to the present state of Mankind, that Christ should
govern us without Promises and Threatenings? He is a King, and we are his
Subjects. And we are, 1. Subjects in a state of Trial for another World. 2. We
have great remains of Sin within us, and Temptations without us. 3. We have
still in our Nature Hope and Fear; which are the things which all the methods
of Christ's Government suppose, and are suited to: Each of these would furnish
me with Arguments beyond all rational Contradiction, for the Proof of this
Point; whereas the opposite Error implies, That either Men are Machines, or
Brutes, or Infants at best; or else the Judgment-day is past already: Yea, how
vain are the Expostulations, Warnings, Reproofs and Encouragements which the
Word is filled with? The Divine Being, and all the Methods of Grace, are
strangely exposed by Conceits so sordid. He calls us to fear, lest we should
seem to come short of the Promise, Heb. 4. 1. Be not high-minded, but fear,
Romans 11. 20. Work out your salvation with trembling, Phil. 2. 12. He that
ploweth, should plow in hope, 1 Cor. 9. 10. We are saved by hope, etc. Romans 8.
24. What are all these, if our state be in no suspense as to what we shall be
or do?

4. I hope I need not prove that these Gospel-Promises and Threatenings are the
Rule by which Christ deals with Men: To doubt it, would infer a heavier
Charge than any good Man would sustain: It Is enough to calm us, that he says,
Be not deceived, God is not mocked; that which a man sows, that shall he
reap, Gal. 6. 7. This is spoken to Believers, and true of the Redeemed.

II. By this Gospel-Constitution, persevering Holiness, sincere Obedience, or
good Works, are Necessary to Salvation. He that made Faith necessary to
Justification, has made Obedience necessary to Salvation: He has as well
promised Heaven to the Godly Man, as Pardon to the Believer: And our
perseverance in Holiness and Obedience, is as truly our Way to Glory as the
Scriptures can describe it: Nothing of these merit Heaven; but he that merited
Heaven, has peremptorily appointed these to bring us thither: Heb. 6. 10, 11,
12. For, God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of love, etc.
And we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope, to the end that ye be not sloathful, but followers of them
who through faith and patience inherit the promises. Every word is forcible to
argue this Truth: But I shall offer a few things more.

1. Christ in the Gospel declares, they shall miss of Heaven, and eternally
perish, who are Apostates, Ungodly, Disobedient, and Unprofitable; and that,
for being such. This Doom is not the Doom of the Law of Innocence; for it is
not denounced against every Backsliding, but Apostasy: It Is not against every
Imperfect degree of Godliness, but Ungodliness: It Is not against every Defect
of Obedience, but Disobedience: It Is not against every Neglect of Fruitfulness,
but such Unprofitableness as argues. a dead and barren state. Reader! art thou
so unskilful in the Word, as not to remember, If any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him: But we are not of them that draw back unto
perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of their souls? Heb. 10. 38,
39. Is this a Threatening, or not? Will not Christ deal with Men according to
it? Is it not true of all Persons? Do not say the elect Believer will not fall
away: I think the same; but yet is it the less true, that even he shall perish
if he fall away? Nay,. Does not God by these Threats contribute to keep him
from Apostasy? Ask thy self, Is not this Threatening such as should govern our
Expectations, if we should turn Apostates? So Heb. 12. 14. Without holiness, no
man shall see the Lord. This is used as an Argument to persuade us to follow
Holiness; and can you suppose it argues at a lower rate than this? Be Holy, or
you shall never see God's Face: Unholiness will keep you from God's Presence.
Consider such places as, For these things the wrath of God comes on the
children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5. 6. If you live after the flesh, you shall
die, Romans 8. 13.

2. Salvation is promised to Perseverance, True Holiness, Sincere Obedience, or
Good Works: And the Accomplishment of these Promises to these, is called an Act
of Righteousness. These are Gospel-Promises; because Salvation is promised on
Terms so below Perfection. The Texts are innumerable that include these
Promises. Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown
of life. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight; I have kept the faith;
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge will give me in that day. Romans 18. 3. If you mortify the
deeds of the flesh by the spirit, you shall live. Heb. 6. 10. God is not
unrighteous, to forget your labor of love, etc. 2 These. 1. 6, 7. The
Righteousness refers to the Truth of the Promise, not the Proportion of the
Work.

Obj. These describe the Men whom God will save. Ans. True; but not as mere
Natural Signs, but as Moral instituted Signs: They are Qualifications which God
appoints as Pre-requisites to the Blessings: They are not Meritorious, but they
are made by the Promise Necessary to our partaking of these Gifts and the
Neglect of them, would exclude our Interest in the Blessing.

Obj. These are Concomitants of them th^^ shall be saved. Ans. The same Answer
tha^ is given to the last, will serve to this And I add They are not instead of
Christ; they cannot add to what is proper to a Christ; nor will they suffice
without Faith, or an Interest in Christ, or without Pardon. But they still
signify more than such Concomitants as some esteem them: They are not like the
Place of one's Birth, or our Names, or ou^ Parents, or Death, etc. All which
are Concomitants of a Man that is saved; but the^ are Characters designed by
the Promise; the^^ are things without which the Gospel-Rule will exclude Men
from Heaven, and condemn Men into Hell, let their Pretenses be what they will.
Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are that that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter in; for without are dogs. Mat. 5. 20.
Except you^ righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes, etc.

3. Consider the respect to Glory which ou^ Good Works have in
Scripture-dialect. They are as Seed to the Harvest, Gal. 6. 7, 8, 9. As (...)
Way to one's proposed place, Ephesians. 2. 10. As Means to an End, Mat. 5. 8. As Work
to one's Wages, Mat. 20. 1, 7. Foundation to (...) Building, 1 Timothy 6. 19, etc.
The Gospel declares no less a Connection between Good Works and Glory, though
they merit nothing.

4. God declares the Obedience and Works of Believers, as rewardable of Grace,
through Christ. They shall walk with me in white; for they are worthy, Rev. 3.
4. Great is your Reward in Heaven, Mat. 5. 12. If I do this willingly, I have a
Reward, 1 Cor. 9. 17. Col. 3. 24. Rev. 22. 12. Come ye blessed of my Father,
etc. For I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, etc. Mat. 25. 34, 35. It Is true,
it is a Reward from the Benignity of a Father, not from the Dignity of the Work:
It Is from the Ordination of the Promise which is owing to the Merits of a
Christ, and not any Claim of the Performance. And so tender is God of the
Honor of his Goodness herein, that the Second Article of our Creed must be;
That he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6.

5. By perseverance in these Exercises, we are to work out our Salvation, Phil.
2. 12. We lay hold of Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. Lay up a treasure in heaven, Luke
12. 33. We run the race for the prize, 1 Cor. 9. 24. We fight for the Crown,
etc. And is it as good sit still, as to be doing thus, for to help us
Heavenward?

Reader, Lay these things to heart, and can thou account persevering Holiness
and Obedience useless things? Are they so indifferent to Happiness as the
Doctor represents them? How much of the Bible must be expunged ere his Opinion
deserves credit? Though I know our corrupt part too well likes a Dispensation
from striving to enter in at the strait Gate.

III. The Third thing I should prove, is, That many other Blessings besides
mere Eternal Life, are promised to the Exercise of several Graces, and
Performance of Duties. This is so easy a Task, that I would leave it to the
most ignorant but to read the Bible with his own Eyes. What mean such places,
The effectual, fervent Prayer of a righteous man avails much? Jam. 5. 16.
Will no Prayer, or cold Prayer, avail as much? If these things be in you, and
abound, they make you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the
knowledge of Christ? 2 Pet. 1. 8. Will the want, or scanty degrees of Grace,
do the same? So 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure, etc. for so an entrance shall be administered to you abundantly
into the everlasting kingdom of Christ. May one be assured without diligence?
Or shall we enter Heaven with the same full sail, though we be negligent and
unassured? 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully; he
that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly. But then shall we reap as
liberally, if we sow not at all, or sow sparingly? Where shall I stop, when
the Scriptures are so full of Instances? And sure I need not prove that
Repentance, and earnest Prayer, contribute to preserve a Nation, when God so
many times urges these to this end; when he has promised and performed
Deliverance hereupon; when he complains so often, that he must destroy for want
of these; and lays the Destruction of places always on neglect of these Jer.
18. 7, 8, 9, 10. Isa. 1. 5, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. It Is the same with Churches:
see the 2d. and 3d. Chap. of the Revelations.

IV. Men should govern their Expectations and Fears, according to the
Conformity of their Hearts, and Behavior to the Rule of the Promise. It Is
Unbelief, not to expect the Good promised, when we answer the Condition of it.
It Is obstinate Hardness and Security, not to expect the threatened Evil, when we
are guilty of the Sin or Neglect threatened. There Is no grounded Hopes or Fears
but this way; all else are Enthusiastic. The End of God, in these Declarations
of his Will, are not otherwise complied with: God often condemns all Hopes, as
vain, that are not thus regulated; and by this Rule the Servants of God
governed themselves. I need not cite Texts for things so plain.

V. God is better pleased with his People in the exercise of Grace and
Holiness, than when they neglect these, and do the contrary. What Notions have
Men of God, of Grace, and Sin, that they should need Proof for this? Is it not
by the Exercise of Grace and Holiness that we approve our selves to God? 2 Timothy
2. 15* Is it not, With such Sacrifices God is well-pleased? Heb. 13. 16. Was it
not by his Faith, and Divine Walk, that Enoch pleased God? Heb. 11. 5. What
means the Apostle, You have received of us how you ought to walk, and to
please God? 1 These. 4. 1. The Saint's Charity is called, An Odor of a sweet
smell; a Sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God. We are charged to walk
worthy of the Lord, to all pleasing, Col. 1. 10. Of the Obedience of Children,
he says, This is well-pleasing to the Lord. What great things of this Nature
are spoken of Prayer, Praises, and other Good Works? Whereas God is fretted,
grieved, vexed; provoked to anger and abhorrence by our Sins and Neglects. How
can we apprehend, that God is as well pleased with us, when testifying our
Enmity, as our Love? when rejecting his Authority, as doing his Will? Are the
Fruits of the Spirit alike to him, as the Fruits of the Flesh? And can the
Image of the Devil render us as grateful as his own Image, and the Life of his
Son?

Obj. It Is for Christ's Incense these are accepted. Ans. But Christ's Incense
will not be applied to our Sins, but to our Graces and Duties; and that shows
they are more pleasing to God than our Sins be. And again, They are these
Graces and Duties which are accepted for the sake of Christ: His Incense will
not be denied to them; and thereby they are well-pleasing to the Lord, and tend
to render us so. Davenant, de Justitia Actuali, and Others, say much more.

VI. The Holiness, Graces, Perseverance, Obedience, and Good Works of
Believers, do them much Good, and are profitable to them. Read over what I have
proved at large, and can thou doubt whether they benefit us, when they are
the Way to Heaven, the Means of Happiness? etc. A wise Man may be profitable
to himself, though not to God, Job 22. 2. Godliness is profitable to all
things; having the promises of this life, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.
8. These Things are profitable to Men, Tit. 3. 8. Not only to other Men, but
principally to our selves. Though I have all Faith, if I have not Charity, I am
nothing; and whatever else I suffer, yet without this it profits me nothing,
1 Cor. 13. 2, 3. Circumcision, or Uncircumcision is nothing, but keeping the
Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19. Sure that is something; In keeping these
there is great Reward, Psalm. 19. 11. Glory Honor and Peace to every one that
does good; to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, for there is no respect
of Persons with God, Romans 2. 10, 11. Nehemiah and Hezekiah pleaded a false
Plea, if it were true, there is nothing to be gotten. The Care of Saints to
adapt their Actings to the Rule of the Promise, is a very needless thing: So
run, that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. If a Man strive for Masteries, yet is he
not crowned, except he strive lawfully, 1 Timothy 2. 5. The Galatians must be but
little moved when told, Chapter 3, 4. Are ye so foolish, etc. Have ye suffered so
many things in vain? for all is in vain. Is Peace of Conscience nothing? Is
inward Rejoicing nothing? Yet, how Paul came by these he tells you, 2 Cor. 1.
12. For our Rejoicing is this, The Testimony of our Conscience, that in
Simplicity, and godly Sincerity, not with Fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, we have had our Conversation in the World.

His Directions for inward Joy and Peace you have, Gal. 6. 4. Let every Man
prove his own Work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone. I shall
not trouble thee with Reasons, to prove that Grace, Holiness, and Obedience are
useful to prevent Evil. I leave it to thy Experience, if thou art a good Man,
and referr it to what thou will feel hereafter, i thou art a bad Man. If there
were no more these do prevent Sin, which in Chap. 17. I hope to prove is not so
innocent as to do us no harm.

Reader, To sum up all, I appeal to thee, 1. Whether God does require any more
of any Sinners for Salvation, than that they believe in Christ, repent of Sin,
persevere in true Holiness, sincere Obedience, or good Works internal and
external; and if we do so, can we perish? has not Christ provided all else?
and does not the Promise secure Life upon doing these? 2. If any Sinner believe
not, and repent not, has Christ ever promised to save him? Will any decree, or
the Merits of Christ secure him? Again, if any penitent Believer shall
apostatize, prove ungodly, and unfruitful, hate God, or neglect to love God and
his Neighbor wholly, etc. Shall this Man be saved? Has not Christ determined
the contrary? Will his first Faith save him? A Resolution of these two things,
according to the very Scope of the Word, will decide the Main of this
Controversy. These assert the Rule of Christ's rectoral Distributions, and the
Decree comes not in opposition to the Methods of his Government, by which we
are to govern our Hopes and Fears.

TESTIMONIES.
The Assembly, Confess. Chap. 19. a. 6. and the Elders at the Savoy declare,
Chap. 19. a. 6. The Promises (of the Law) in like manner show them God's
Approbation of Obedience, and what Blessings they may expect upon the
Performance thereof; although not as due to them by the Law, as a Covenant of
Works; so a Man's doing, and refraining from Evil, because the Law encourages
to the one, and deterreth from the other, is no Evidence of his being under the
Law, and not under Grace. Both the Assembly and the Elders say, Chap. 15. a. 6.
The Persons of Believers being accepted through Christ, their good Works also
are accepted in him, not as though they were in this Life wholly unblameable,
and unreprovable in his Sight; but he looking upon them in his Son, is pleased
to accept, and reward that which is sincere, although accompanied with many
Imperfections. Both also tell us, Chap. 18. a. 2. That the Promises are made to
Graces. The Elders, Chap. 15. a. 2. say, That Believers Sinning, are renewed
through Repentance to Salvation. Of the Necessity and Benefit of Faith, I have
given their Judgment before: The Assembly and Elders, Chap. 1. a. 7. tell us,
Those things which are necessary to be known, believed, and observed for
Salvation, are clearly propounded.

The Assembly's Large Catechism, Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a
King? A. (Among other things, they say) In rewarding their Obedience, and
correcting them for their Sins. Q. How is the Grace of God manifested in the
second Covenant? A. (Among other things) Requiring Faith, as the Condition of
their Interest in him, etc. Giving his Spirit to his Elect, etc. to enable them
unto all holy Obedience, as the Evidence of the Truth of their Faith, and as
the Way which he has appointed them to Salvation. Q. What has God required,
that we may escape the Wrath and Curse, etc. A. That we may escape the Wrath
and Curse of God, etc. He requires of us Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus, and the diligent Use of the Means, etc. You see they
think Obedience and Good Works are rewardable; that the Exercise of Graces do
us much Good; that Obedience is the Way to Salvation; that we have much to do,
and that to escape the Wrath and Curse. I shall transcribe part of the
New England Synod's Confutation of that Speech of the Antimonians. If I am
Holy, I am never the better accepted of God. If I be unholy, I am never the
worse: This I am sure of, be that elected me, must save me. To this the Synod
answer, This Expression imports, that though a Man's Conversation be never so
holy and gracious, yet he can expect never the more Manifestation of Gods
Kindness and Love to him. Contrary to P. 50. ult. and Joh. 14. 21. It implies,
That though a Man's Conversation be never so vile, yet he needs not fear, nor
expect any Expression of God's Displeasure and Anger to break forth against
him, contrary to 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. And in a Word, it imports, That God neither
loved Righteousness, nor hated Sin; and did take no Delight in the Obedience of
his People: Contrary to Psalm. 45. 6, 7. and 147. etc. It Is true, the Foundation
of Election remains sure; but it is as true, that whom he chooses, he
purposes to bring to Salvation through Sanctification of he Spirit, 2 These. 2.
13, 14. The 19th. Error of Mr. H. All Commands in the Word are Law, and are
not a Way of Life. Error 43. the Synod Confutes is, The Spirit acts most in
the Saints, when they endeavor least. Error 48. Conditional Promises are
legal. Error 50. It Is Poverty of Spirit, when we have Grace, yet to see we
have none in our selves.

Doctor Owen, Of Justif. P. 222. We grant that, 1. God does indispensibly
require of him (a justified Person) personal Obedience, which may be called his
Evangelical Righteousness. 2. That God does approve of, and accept in Christ,
his Righteousness so performed. 3. That hereby that Faith whereby we are
justified, is evidenced, proved, manifested in the Sight of God and Men. 4.
That this Righteousness is pleadable unto an Acquitment against any Charge from
Satan, the World, or our own Consciences. 5. That upon it, we shall be declared
righteous at the last Day; and without it, none shall be. And if any shall
think meet, from hence to conclude unto an Evangelical Justification, or call
God's Acceptance of our Righteousness by that Name, I shall by no means contend
with them. Wherever this Enquiry is made not, etc. but how a Man that
professes Evangelical Faith in Christ shall be tried, judged, and whereon, as
such, he shall be justified: We grant, that it is, and must be by his own
personal, sincere Obedience. P. 156. It is commonly said, Faith and new
Obedience are the Condition of the new Covenant, etc. If no more be intended,
but that God, in, and by the new Covenant, does indispensibly require these
things of us, in order to his own Glory, and our full Enjoyment of all the
Benefits of it; it is unquestionably true. P. 158. our whole Obedience, through
his gracious Appointment, has a rewardable Condecency, with respect unto
eternal Life. P. 207. These Duties are so far necessary unto the Continuation
of our Justification, as that a justified State cannot consist with the Sins
and Vices that are opposite unto them. So the Apostle affirms, If we live after
the Flesh, we shall die. P. 208. If this be that which is intended in this
Position, That our own Obedience and good Works are the Condition of the
Continuation of our Justification; namely, that God does indispensibly require
good Works and Obedience in all that are justified; so that a justified State
is inconsistent with the Neglect of them, it is readily granted.

The Ground of Doctor Crisp 's Mistake.
He thinks, because God eternally intended us all Benefits in the way he
determined, therefore he appoints nothing to Men, as the Means of partaking of
those Benefits. Whereas this way, Christ himself may as well be excluded by the
Decrees, he not being the Cause of Election, but the Means of effecting it, and
all Endeavors for Life, Health, Estates, etc. may be as well prevented; for
God has determined how long we shall live, how rich we shall be, etc. Because
a Sinner can obtain nothing by virtue of the Covenant of Works; therefore, what
a Believer does, can avail nothing by the Grace of the new Covenant. Because
Christ has merited all things as a Priest, with a Right and Purpose to bestow
them on the Elect, therefore he can fix on no way to bestow them on his elect
Subjects, as Motives to obey him as a King. Because he has delivered us from
the legal Rule of Misery and Happiness; therefore he has no Promises or
Threats to govern us by in this State of Trial. Because Christ is the only Way
of Atonement and Purchase; therefore there can be no other way of his own
ordaining, to obtain the Effects of his Purchase. Because we can merit nothing
as of debt for doing, therefore we can of Grace receive no Benefit by doing,
though God does promise it. Because we can do nothing for Life, with a Thought
of buying it, therefore we may do nothing for Life, as the End that moves us in
the Use of indispensibly required Means. Because God, of his Mercy, saves us at
last, therefore he shall not, in the mean while, duly govern us, in order to
Salvation. Because we cannot merit Pardon, therefore God can order no Grace or
Duty to be, through Christ, rewardable with any other Blessing.

CHAP. XIV. Of intending our Souls Good by Duties we perform.
TRUTH. THough we ought to intend God's Glory as our supreme End in all our
Duties, and design therein the Expressing our Love and Gratitude to God for his
Benefits, with a great Regard to public Good: Yet we also lawfully may, and
ought to strive after Grace, grow in it, and perform holy Duties and Services;
with an Eye to, and Concern for our own spiritual and eternal Advantage.

ERROR. No Man ought to propose to himself any Advantage, by any Religious
Duty he performs. nor ought he in the least intend the Profit of his own
Soul, by any Christian Endeavors; it being vain and unlawful to do any thing
with an Eye to our spiritual or eternal Good, though in subordination to God's
Glory in Christ.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
What I have recited of the Doctor's in the last Chapter, will spare much
Labor here. I will add a few Words, P. 150. There is nothing you can do, from
whence you ought to expect any Gain unto your selves, etc. Christ has redeemed
us, that we should not henceforth live to our selves, but to him that died for
us, etc. The Scripture is plentiful in this, that no Believer, for whom Christ
died, should have the least Thought in his Heart of promoting or advancing
himself, or any End of his own, by doing what he does. Obj. But sure he intends
only to exclude a Design of Meriting, or setting up our own Profit in
opposition to God's Glory. A. No: He intends to forbid our intending our own
Good, though in subordination to Gods Glory, and the laying no stress of
meriting. For he says, People may think here is a mavelous Discouragement to
Persons, to do what God calls them to do, when they shall have nothing for it.
I Answer, When there is a Spirit of Ingenuity, they shall be as industrious to
glorify God, and to do good to Men, as if they did it for themselves. They
shall do as much for Good already bestowed, as if they were to procure it by
their own Doing. Now you cannot suppose, Men can merit God's Glory by what they
do: And he argues, that it is dis-ingenuous and vain, to intend our own Good at
all. Says he, There is no Discouragement, because you cannot propound to your
selves any possible Gain; but whatever is a Spur, or Encouragement to Duty, is
already freely and graciously provided to your Hand, etc. When you fall on
Humiliation, Prayer, and Selfdenial, What do you look for? etc. Says one, I
get this by it, Prevention of many great Evils hanging over my Head, Another
says, Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, Assurance of Pardon of Sin;
these things would I get by attending on Ordinances, by serving God Day and
Night, in that way he calls me out unto. I tell you plainly, there is none of
all these things that conduce a jot toward the obtaining of any of these Ends
you propose to your selves. P. 149. The World is grown to a miserable pass,
that Obedience, Zeal, and Seeking after God, must be of no use at all, except a
Man himself be a Gainer by his Obedience, etc. I say, except you will fall upon
the Performance of Duties for the common Good and Benefit, without having any
such Conceits, as what shall accrue to you thereby, you are not Persons yet
come to have that common Spirit, and dead to the old Spirit, as becomes
Christians. P. 425. When you labor by Prayer, and seeking the Lord, to prevail
with God to take away his Displeasure, etc. and to procure such Good, etc. you
serve not God now, you serve your selves, etc.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not whether we should principally aim at God's Glory in all we do. 2.
Nor whether we should aim at a public Good with great Concern. 3. Nor whether
Gratitude to God deserves our utmost Service, and Love to him, should influence
our Aims and Labors. 4. Nor whether we ought to renounce every Thought of
purchasing from God, any Benefit for what we do. 5. Nor whether Carnal
Selfishness, or seeking Pleasures, Riches, Honor, etc. above spiritual and
eternal Good, be the undoing Sin of the World. All these I affirm.

Wherein the Real Difference is.
1. Whether the spiritual Improving, and saving our Souls, may be a Motive with
us to our Religious Duties and Endeavors. This the Doctor denies and I affirm.
2. Whether our Souls Advantage be not so joined with God's Glory, that we ought
to intend them both, as the Scope of our Life and Labors.

The Truth Confirmed.
1. I have in the last Chapter, proved that our Graces and Duties do benefit
us, and God has appointed them to this End, that thereby we may obtain those
Benefits; if so, we then despise God's Ordination, in not intending our
obtaining the Benefits, when we act those Graces and Duties; and we obey his
Will in doing them for that end.

2. All Promises and Threats in the Word, directed as Motives to Obedience are
foolish, if we must not intend our own Good by our Obedience. How are they
Arguments with the Will, to persuade from our own Advantage? if we must not aim
at that Advantage in doing the Duty, I am persuaded to thereby: When Christ
says, Come to me and I will give you Rest, Mat. 11. 28. Must not I intend that
Rest in coming to him? God says, Turn to me and live, Ezekiel. 18. 32. Must not I
turn to him for Life, or frustrate his Use of that Argument? The Devil will
soon prevail with us to sinful Neglects, if he can thus enervate all the
Pleadings of God with Men. The best Helps which God has contrived for our
Holiness and Diligence, are rendered vain, if we must have no Eye to the
Advantages he has promised to our Duties and Obedience. How should a Crown of
Glory engage Ministers to Faithfulness, if they must not aim at it in their
Labor, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 4. What Influence have such Pleas? If we suffer, we shall
also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us, 1 Timothy 2. 12. What
Encouragement is it to suffer, if I must not suffer with an Eye to that
reigning? The very Substance of the Bible proves this Point, Col. 3. 34, 25. 1 Timothy 4. 16, etc.

3. The Spirit of God approves of holy Men's regard to their own Advantage.
Heb. 11. 26. Moses had respect to the Recompense of Reward. And this is given
as the very Cause why he esteemed the Reproach of Christ above the Treasures of
Egypt: For he had Respect, etc. Paul governed himself by these Regards: For if
I do this willingly, I have a Reward. They do it to obtain a corruptible Crown,
but we an incoruptible, 1 Cor. 9. 17, 24. That is, they are temperate, who
strive for an earthly Crown; we are temperate and diligent to obtain an eternal
Crown, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17. For which cause we faint not, etc. for our light
Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory. Were all Doing for Life, and an Eye to gain by
Service, such a legal and wicked thing, as some represent it, sure the blessed
Jesus would have admonished his Disciples, and not answer them as he does, Mat.
19. 27, 28, 29. Then answered Peter, and said unto him, behold we have forsaken
all, and followed thee; What shall we have therefore? And Jesus said unto them,
verily, etc. Ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel, etc.

4. The Doctor's Argument from the Vanity of proposing our own Gain by Labor
and Duties, because all is fixed and given already; is to make the Decree an
effectual Means to overthrow the Government of Christ, and brand all his Offers
to Sinners with Weakness and Falsehood. Should not poor Sinners pray as they
can, abstain from Sin, consider and apply the Word with an Eye to Conversion?
Why does God call them to this? Should not they wait and strive to believe and
repent, with an Eye to Forgiveness and escaping Wrath? Why else should God
encourage them with an Offer of these upon such Terms; and tell the
Unbelievers, that they refuse these Mercies by new Forfeitures? But by the
Doctor's Scheme, the Elect may be idle, and the Non-elect do best when they
despair; for there is no Connection between these Benefits, and these Graces or
Duties. And so the Non-elect are in the same Case with Devils, there being no
serious Offer to them; nay, their Case is worse than Devils, for these Offers
are made to them for no other Design, but to increase their Condemnation. Nay,
every Sin of their's, is the Sin against the Holy Ghost; that is, every Sin is
alike, the Unpardonable Sin, and not only that Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost. To say no more, Christ has no Rule of distributive Justice, but his own
eternal Purpose, and Men's Regards to his promised Benefits, are all forbidden,
even when our Respect to them, is that which subserves his Government, and is
supposed in all the Methods of it.

5. And why should we intend the Glory of God, the Service of Christ, or the
Good of others? Are not these as determined as our own Good? Has not God fixed
and secured his own Glory? Does Christ need our services more than our selves?
Shall any other Persons receive more Good than God has already given and
provided for them? Why should we intend these in our Duties, more than our own
Profit? the very same Reason excuses from all, and so we ought to intend
nothing at all. I could show, had I Room, that we cannot sincerely aim at our
Souls good, but we therein aim at God's Glory. Nor does God ever require us to
intend his Glory, but in a Concurrence with an Eye to our own Salvation.

TESTIMONIES.
You have seen in the last Chapter, the Assembly's and Congregational Elders
Judgment; and that we are not the less under Grace, for being encouraged to do
good by the Promises, etc. The Case is so plain, that I shall only give the
Judgment of the greater part of those Reverend Divines whose Names are set in
the Front of Dr. Crisp's Works, and interpreted by the VVeak to a contrary
purpose than what they intended. These Divines, in the Preface to Mr. Flavel's
Book against Antinomianism, (which they approve of) inform us; That to say,
Salvation is not the End of any Good Work we do; or, We are to act from Life,
and not for Life; were to abandon the Humane Nature; it were to teach us to
violate the great Precepts of the Gospel; it supposes one bound to do more for
the Salvation of others, than our own; 'twere to make all the Threatenings of
Eternal Death, and Promises of Eternal Life we find in the Gospel of our
blessed Lord, useless, as Motives to shun the one, or obtain the other: It
makes the Scripture-Characters and Commendation of the most Eminent Saints, a
Fault. Had I seen this sooner, it might have spared some of my Reasons.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because we ought not to do any thing from Carnal Self-love, therefore we ought
to do nothing from Rational and Spiritual Self-love. Because Christ redeemed
us, that we may not live to our selves as our own Lords; therefore we must not,
in obeying him, regard the Rewards he promises us, as he is our Lord. Because
we must aim at God's Glory above all; therefore we must not at all intend our
own happiness in the enjoyment of this God. Because we must aim at the good of
others; therefore we must not aim at our own good. Because we should obey God
from Gratitude and Love; therefore we should not obey him from any Hope, or
filial Fear. Because God has engaged to give Life and Happiness to the Elect,
when they have finished their warfare and work; therefore they must not intend
the obtaining that happiness, in any part of that work or warfare.

CHAP. XV. Of the way to attain Assurance.
TRUTH. THe ordinary way whereby a Man attaineth a well-grounded Assurance, is
not by immediate objective Revelation; or an inward Voice saying, Thy Sins are
forgiven thee: But when the Believer is examining his Heart and Life by the
Word, the holy Spirit enlightens the Mind there to discern Faith, and Love, and
such other Qualifications which the Gospel declares to be infallible Signs of
Regeneration: And he adds such power to the Testimony of Conscience, for the
Truth and In-being of these Graces, as begets in the Soul a joyful sense of its
reconciled State; and some comfortable freedom from those Fears which accompany
a doubting Christian; and according to the Evidence of these Graces, Assurance
is ordinarily strong or weak.

ERROR: Assurance is not attained by the Evidence of Scripture-Marks or Signs
of Grace, or by the Spirits discovering to us that he has wrought in our
Hearts any holy Qualifications: But Assurance comes only by an inward Voice of
the Spirit, saying, Thy Sins are forgiven thee; and our believing thereupon
that our Sins are forgiven.

Proved that this is Doctor Crisp's Opinion.
P. 491. Would you know that the Lord has laid your Iniquities on Christ; you
must know it thus: 1. Is there a Voice behind thee, or within thee, saying
particularly to thee in thy self, Thy Sins are forgiven thee? Do thou see
this Voice agree with the Word of Grace? that is, Do thou see it held out to
most vile and wretched Creatures as thou can be; and upon this Revelation of
the Mind of the Lord by his Spirit, according to that Word, does the Lord give
thee to receive that Testimony of the Spirit, to sit down with it, as satisfied
that upon this thou make full reckoning, thou have propriety in this
particularly to thy self? If thou do receive that Testimony according to that
Word, here is thy Evidence, Thou have thy Propriety and Portion in this. On
this Point the Doctor spends much time. Sermon. 15. is to prove, That Love to the
Brethren, Universal Obedience, Sincerity, and Singleness of Heart, and all
other inherent Qualifications, are not Signs by which we should judge our
state. Sermon. 16. he calls the Revealing Evidence of the Spirit, and endeavors
to prove this Immediate Revelation. P. 473. he puts this Objection, We will not
deny but it is the Voice of the Spirit will satisfy the Case: But suppose I
hear such a Voice? etc. Here is the doubt; If the Word it self did bear witness
to this particular Voice of the Spirit, then could I be satisfied this were the
Voice of the Spirit of God that speaks; but if the Word do not bear witness to
this Voice, etc. I dare not trust it. He Answers; This Voice is always
according to the Word. But, P. 475. he tells us; The Word according to which
the Spirit of the Lord speaks, when he speaks Peace to his People, is the Word
of Grace: And that Word of Grace, is no more but this; God was in Christ,
reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them:
This is the Word of Grace, according to which it speaks, reconciling the World
to himself; even the World, when Men are no otherwise but merely Men of the
World.

Reader, Thou see that the Spirit's Voice according to the Word, is no more
than according to the general Account, That Christ came to save Sinners: And so
if any Sinner have this inward Voice, that Voice is according to the Word,
whether he be a regenerate Person or no.

The Doctor in this Page, and Page 476. shows, That if this Voice be according
to this general Rule, we must not try it by any thing else, or question it. And
adds, As for Example; There is the Voice of the Word of Grace, we are justified
freely by his Grace; and there is this Voice in the Spirit of Man, telling him
according to this word, That his Sins are forgiven him. How shall I know (says
he) that this Voice is the Voice of the Spirit of God? For Answer, let me ask
but this Question; Is there any thing in the world of better credit than the
Spirit himself? And, P. 474. Beware that you make not the credit of the Voice
of the Spirit to depend upon the Word.

Obj. But he seems to allow Faith to give Assurance. But I Ans. he tells us, p.
491. Not as a Revealing Evidence, nor as an effecting Evidence; but it is a
Receiving Evidence; or it is an Evidence, as it does receive that Testimony
which the Spirit holds out, etc. Faith does take possession of that which the
Spirit reveals and manifests to a Person, etc. It clears the Title to us*
though good in it self before, etc. And, P. 493. Faith is the Echo of the
Heart, to the Voice of the Spirit. The Doctor's meaning is, That Faith does not
evidence our Pardon, as it is a Grace wrought in the Soul by the Spirit, or as
a holy Qualification; but only as it does assent to, and rest in this inward
Voice.

Obj. But he seems to own that Sanctification is some Evidence? A. He tells us
how, P. 482. viz. When the Testimony of the Spirit is received by Faith, and
the Soul sits down satisfied with that Testimony of the Lord; then also the
gifts of God's Spirit do bear witness together with the Spirit of the Lord, and
the Faith of a Believer. You see there must be Assurance first, and then these
do witness after; not to guide our Hopes, but over and above. See P. 100.
There Is no better way to know your Portion in Christ, than on the general
tender of the Gospel, to conclude absolutely he is yours.

Wherein the difference is not.
1. It is not: Whether the Spirit witnesses by his miraculous Operations to
Christ, and the Gospel; which is a Truth, and the meaning of many of the Texts
which the Doctor produces. 2. Nor, Whether the Spirit, as a Worker of Grace in
the Heart, be an Earnest of Glory, and Witness to our State. 3. Nor, Whether
the Spirit witnesses by and with the Conscience, in the Manifestation of our
Graces for Assurance. 4. Nor, Whether the Spirit of God may, in some
extraordinary Cases, give an immediate Testimony by a Voice or some equivalent
Impressions. But then there is the Truth of Grace in the Heart, though it was
doubted before; and nothing utterly inconsistent with true Grace, either is in
the Heart, nor then appears to the Conscience. All these I affirm.

The real Difference.
1. Whether none attain Assurance but by the inward Voice of the Spirit
pronouncing the actual Forgiveness of their Sins, without manifesting their
true Grace and Sanctification. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny. 2. Whether
the usual way of attaining Assurance, is by the Conscience upon trial
discerning and concluding, through the help of the Spirit, that a Man has
those Graces or Signs which describe a Man blessed and pardoned, according to
the Gospel. This I affirm, and the Doctor denies.

The Truth confirmed.
1. This is the way which God appoints to attain Assurance. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Examine your selves, whether you be in the Faith; prove your own selves; know
ye not that Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? Here we are to try:
What Is our great Enquiry to be about? Are we in the Faith? which may respect
Faith inherent, or the Doctrine of Faith professed. He concludes, they must
infer Christ is in them, except they had vile Hearts; or were Men, as to the
frame of their Hearts, unapproved by God. For so (...) imports, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure. How was this to be
done? By adding Grace to Grace; abounding therein, and carefully looking that
these things be in you. See from ver. 5. to 11.

2. This is the way whereby the Scripture-Saints were assured: They concluded
their Justification by Sanctification; and a State of Peace by the Truth of
Grace. 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we
love the brethren. Ver. 9. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and
shall assure our hearts before him. How was this? See Ver. 18. Let us not love
in word, neither in tongue; but in deed, and in truth: and hereby we know, etc.
Thus David, Paul, and other Saints, concluded the safety of their state.

3. Conscience is bound to condemn every Man in whom the contrary to these
Graces do appear; yea, where it is evident that they are wholly wanting. It Is
otherwise a seared Conscience, 2 Timothy 4. 2. It is not the Candle of the Lord in
Man. Now there can be no Assurance where the Conscience condemns; as the
Apostle argues, 1 John 3. 19, 20, 21.

4. The Spirit witnesses with our Spirit, (...), Romans 8. 16. It does not
witness before our Spirit does witness: It is not a separate Testimony from our
Spirits, but it concurs with our Spirit as its Instrument: Our Spirits witness
in the light of the Spirit; as 1 Cor. 9. 1. My Conscience bearing me witness in
the Holy Ghost.

5. A Testimony of the Spirit giving an Evidence of Pardon, without any
Evidence of Grace, is not according to the Word of Grace; for the Word of Grace
never declares any Sinners are pardoned, but believing, penitent Sinners. It
is not as mere Sinners the Word pardons; for it flatly condemns, and leaves
Guilt on all impenitent Unbelievers; as I have proved, chap. 8. 12. Therefore
if there should be a Voice, a true Voice of God carrying it is own Evidence,
saying, Thy Sins are forgiven; it does at the same time, and by the same Voice,
witness to the truth of our Grace; because he forgives no other, according to
the Word of the Gospel. And if the Spirit should say to an impenitent Soul,
Thou art pardoned, while such; it is no Promise in the Gospel, nor according to
it; but a new Promise, and not to be tried by the Word; and the Writers
thereof having had more of the Spirit, than any now can pretend to, it is
dangerous to rest on that Voice which will not bear the Trial by the Word, etc.

6. To have the ordinary way of Assurance to be as it is stated by the opposite
Error, has very dangerous Consequences. Most Saints must quit their Hopes and
Assurance; for they never had this Voice, though they have greater stamps of
the Spirit, than any I ever knew pretend to this: It makes all Examination
useless and vain: It overturneth one of the great Uses God has assigned to the
work of his Grace on the Heart: It makes Assurance impossible without this
miraculous Voice; which can hardly carry its Evidence to a Soul that has no
Grace at all: It Is a way too far Enthusiastic to be allowed in so stated a
Case: It gives the Devil a great advantage against Sinners to live in Sin; and
against honest People, if once they find cause to question this Voice: Yea, it
sets up the Spirit against it self, if any can boast of Assurance by this
Voice, when their State is justly challengeable by the Gospel, as wanting all
sight of Gospel-Marks.

TESTIMONIES.
The Assembly, in Confess. chapter 18. a. 2. say, It Is an Infallible Assurance of
Faith, founded upon the Divine Truth of the Promises of Salvation, the inward
Evidences of those Graces unto which these Promises are made; the Testimony of
the Spirit of Adoption witnessing with our Spirits, that we are the Children of
God. And, a. 3. they tell us, A Believer being enabled by the Spirit, may,
without extraordinary Revelation, in the right use of ordinary Means, attain
thereunto: And therefore it is the Duty of every one, to give all diligence to
make his Calling and Election sure, that thereby his heart may be enlarged in
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, etc. as say the Cong. Elders, chap. 18. a. 3.
See a. 4. Both show how Assurance may be revived from the Graces in the Heart.

The Synod of New England often confute the contrary Error; which it seems was
one that sadly troubled them. Error 44. No create^ Work can be a manifest Sign
of God's Love. Error 47. The Seal of the Spirit is limited only to the
immediate witness of the Spirit; nor does ever witness to any Work of Grace, or
Conclusion by a Syllogism. Error 67. A Man cannot evidence his Justification
by his Sanctification, but he must needs build upon his Sanctification, and
trust to it. Error 72. It Is a Souldamning Error, to make Sanctification an
Evidence of Justification. Error 77. Sanctification is so far from evidencing
a good State, th^^ it darkens it rather; and a Man may more clearly see Christ
when he sees no Sanctification, than when he does: The darker my
Sanctification is, the brighter is my Justification. The Synod show at large
how each of these are contrary to the Scriptures: And one (...) the evil
Speeches they confute, p. 19. I may know I am Christ's: Not because I do
crucif^^ the Lusts of the Flesh, but believe in Christ that crucified my Lusts
for me. See Error 63, 69.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because the Spirit of God is a Comforter; therefore he cannot comfort us, by
helping us to see the Work of his Grace, in order to Joy in his Blessings.
Because the Spirit was to convince the World of Christ's Righteousness, as what
alone could procure Life; therefore he tells Men that they have an Interest in
it, without showing them any change on their Hearts. Because he was to take of
Christ's Fullness, and show it to his Disciples; therefore he immediately speaks
peace to the hearts of such as are, or at least appear his resolved Enemies.
Because by the Spirit of Adoption, we cry, Abba, Father; therefore we need not
find any love to God, to know that we are his Children. Because the Spirit
witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God; therefore he
witnesses alone, without so much as revealing to our Spirits, that we have the
temper of Children: Whereas there are many great Effects of the Spirit manifest
on the Souls of them to whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 11, 12, 14, 15, 16.
And the design of the place, is more to express our Dignity, and free Access to
God, under a Gospel-state, than mere Assurance of Forgiveness. Because a
Natural Man cannot perceive the Riches of the Promise, and the Spirit enableth
a Spiritual Man, by his Teachings, to perceive the nature of them; therefore by
an immediate Voice he discovers to the Natural Man his Propriety in them, even
while he is and appears Natural. Because there is Imperfection in the Graces of
a Saint; therefore he cannot see the Sincerity of them by the help of the
Spirit, without an immediate Voice.

CHAP. XVI. Of God's seeing Sin in Believers, and their Guilt by it, etc.
TRUTH. THe Sins of Believers have the Loathsomness of Sin adhering to them;
which God sees, and accounts the Committers guilty thereby: And they ought
to charge themselves therewith, so as to stir up themselves to Repentance, and
renew their Actings of Faith on Christ for Forgiveness. Nevertheless, they
ought not thereby to fear their being out of a Justified State, further than
their Falls give them just cause of suspecting that Sin has dominion over
them; and that their first believing on Christ, was not sincere.

ERROR. God sees no Sin in Believers, though he see the Fact; neither does he
charge them with any Sin; nor ought they to charge themselves with any Sin, nor
be at all sad for them; nor confess, repent, or do any thing as a Means of
their Pardon; no, nor in order to assuring themselves of Pardon, even when they
commit Murder, Adultery, or the grossest Wickedness.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
Reader, Note, That the Doctor speaks most of this concerning a Person as
Elect; though he uses the word Believer sometimes, because he alone knows that
he is Elect, by believing it P. 436 Though such Persons do act Rebellion, yet
the loathsomness, and abominableness, and hatefulness of this Rebellion, is
laid on the back of Christ; he bears the Sin, as well as the Blame and Shame,
etc. And that is the only reason why God can dwell with those Persons that do
act the thing; because all the filthiness of it, is transacted from them, on
the back of Christ. He puts an Objection; How should God know every sin the
Believer does commit, and yet God not remember them? He Answers, after many
words; Though God remembers the things thou have done, yet he does not remember
them as thine, etc. for he remembers perfectly they are none of thine; and when
he passed them over to Christ, they ceased to be thine any longer. P. 364. The
Lord has not one sin to charge upon an Elect Person, from the first moment of
Conception, to the last moment of Life; no, nor Original Sin is not to be laid
upon him, the Lord has laid it on Christ already. P. 365. Every Elect Vessel
of God, from the first instant of his being, is as pure in the Eyes of God from
the charge of Sin, as he shall be in Glory. P. 298. It Is the voice of a lying
Spirit in your Hearts, that says, That you that are Believers, have yet sin
wasting your Consciences, and lying as a burden too heavy for you to bear.
etc. Obj. Was not David a Justif^^^ Person, and did not he bear his own sin? My
sins are gone over my head, etc. After several things, he Answers; I must tell
you, all that David speaks here, he speaks from himself; and all that David
speaks from himself, was not truth, etc. David might mistake, that God should
charge his sin upon him, etc. P. 213. In a word, Before a Believer does confess
his sin, he may be as certain of the pardon of it, as after Confession: I say,
there is as much ground to be confident of the Pardon of Sin to a Believer, as
soon as ever he has committed it, though he has not made a solemn Act of
Confession, as to believe it after he has performed all the Humiliation in the
World, etc. A Believer may be assured of Pardon, as soon as he commits any Sin:
(The Sins he speaks of, are Adultery and Murder.) P. 215. But you will say,
All the Promises of Pardon do run with this Proviso, In case Men humble
themselves; In case Men do this and that, then Pardon is theirs, but otherwise
it is none of theirs? Take heed of such Doctrine. P. 52. There is nothing but
Joy and Gladness. Obj. But some will say, Believers find it otherwise; there is
not such joy and gladness, but they are often oppressed with sadness, and
heaviness of Spirit. I Answer; There is not one Fit of Sadness in any Believer
whatsoever, but he is out of the way, Christ, etc. I say the Soul is first
satisfied of Forgiveness of Sins, before there is that real, kindly mourning in
those that are Believers. P. 15. God does no longer stand offended nor
displeased, though a Believer, after he is a Believer, do sin often. And it is
no wonder; for he says a few lines after, Except God will be offended where
there is no cause to be offended, (which is Blasphemy to speak,) he will not be
offended with Believers: For I say he has no cause to be offended with a
Believer; because he does not find the sin of the Believer, to be his own sin,
but he finds it to be the Sin of Christ. See more, p. 413, 416, 418, 419, 425,
etc.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not: Whether a Believer does by new Sins fall from a Justified
state. 2. Nor, whether God does upon new Crimes judicially charge the Christian
with those Sins he had pardoned before, though he may present to his view some
former Sins for his further humblings. 3. Nor, whether a Believer ought to
question his Justified state, upon any Sins that do not give just Suspicion
that Sin has dominion over him, or his Faith was not true. 4. Nor, whether any
past Sins, and Sins present at his first believing, be unpardoned. 5. Nor,
whether renewed Acts of Faith, Humiliation, Repentance, Fasting, or
Reformation, do merit Pardon. 6. Nor, whether a Principle of Life given at our
first Conversion, will finally fail to exert it self in due Humblings for
repeated Enormities, and in holy Resolves. 7. Nor, whether the same degrees of
Humblings be necessary for all Crimes, and in all Persons, and in all Times. 8.
Nor, whether any gross Miscarriage should cause a Saint to condemn all past
Experience, and conclude his Graces to be Counterfeit. Each of these I deny. 9.
Nor, whether a Sense of Pardon ought not to affect and melt the Heart? 10. Nor
whether some true Penitents may not sometimes be too much dejected and
overwhelmed with Sorrow for Sin? 11. Nor whether a general Exercise of Faith
and Repentance do not answer the Gospel-Rule of Forgiveness, as to Sins of
Ignorance, Infirmity, and Surprise? These three last I affirm.

The Real Differences.
1. Whether an Elect Sinner be at any time a guilty Person in God's Esteem?
This the Doctor denies, and I affirm; I have proved in Chap. 1, 3. 7, 12. 2.
Whether the Remains of Sin defile us? This I affirm, and the Doctor denies
against all Protestants, who prove it of Original Sin against the Papists. 3.
Whether a justified Person, falling into gross Enormities, is defiled thereby,
and contracts Guilt upon himself thereby? This the Doctor denies and I do
affirm. 4. Whether God esteems the repeated Abominations of Believers, not to
be their own Crimes, and they not to be the Sinners, but they are Christ's
Sins? This the Doctor affirms, and I deny; which I have cleared, Chap. 3. and
4. and 7. 5. Whether a justified Person, upon new Provocations, is charged by
God, and ought to charge himself as guilty and defiled, so as in God's
appointed way, to repent, believe, renew his Covenant, and be earnest with God
for Forgiveness? This the Doctor denies, and I afirm. 6. Whether all Sins past,
present and to come, are actually pardoned at once? This the Doctor affirms,
and I deny. 7. Whether God has required new Exercises of Faith and Repentance
for their actual Pardon? This the Doctor denies, and I affirm. 8. Whether a
Believer ought to be as assured of the Forgiveness of his repeated
Provocations, just when he has committed them, and before he has humbled
himself, renewed Actings of Faith on Christ, repeated his Covenant, and prayed
for Pardon for Christ's Sake, as after he has thus done? This the Doctor
affirms, and I deny.

The Truth Confirmed.
I have said so much, Chap. 3. 4, 8, 10, 12, 13. that tends to clear this
Point, that I shall single out now only the Substance of what was least
insisted on.

1. God does see and charge a Believer with his new Enormities, as his Sins,
and not Christ's: 2 Samuel 12. 9. Why have thou despised the Commandment of the
Lord, to do this Evil in his Sight? It was an Evil, it was in God's Sight, it is
charged by God on David: Psalm. 90. 8. Thou have set our Iniquities before thee.
I hope Moses was not mistaken. All God's Reproofs of his People for Sin, all
his Calls to Reformation from Sin, all his Declarations against them as
polluted by Sin, are so many Arguments to prove this; yea, all his Threats, all
his Anger, all his Corrections witness hereto. Sure all these are not the
Effects of Christ's Sins.

2. A Believer ought to charge himself with his own Sins. God commands this in
all the Calls to Confession, Humiliation, etc. Does not Paul reprove the
Corinthians for neglecting this? Did you ever find a Saint in Scripture still
refuse to own his Guiltiness before God, upon his Falling into Sin: Against
thee have I sinned, and done Evil in thy Sight, Psalm. 51. 4. I have sinned,
against Heaven, and before thee, Luke 15. 21. Read Ezra's, Nehemiah's and
Daniel's Confessions.

3. New Transgressions need renewed Pardon, and all Sins are not pardoned at
once. To say nothing, how impossible it is, I believe Christ would never teach
his own People to pray daily for Pardon, if they did not need it, and it could
not be repeated, Mat. 6. 12. Forgive us our Debts. How often do we find the
Servants of God renew their Prayers for Remission? They often beg God would blot
out Sin as a Debt, Psalm. 51. 9. Wash it away as a Stain, remit it as a Fault,
remember it not as a Crime binding to Punishment, the Church complains we have
rebelled, and thou have not pardoned, Lam. 3. 42. So Job 7. 21.

4. Humiliation, Confession, Sorrow of Heart, new Resolutions, and looking to
Christ for Healing, are the Duties of Saints upon new Faults, and the Work God
has appointed them, in order to his repeated Acts of Forgiveness; though these
do not forgive us, yet it is this way God declares he will forgive, Jer. 36. 3.
It may be, the House of Judah will hear, etc. and return every one from his
evil Way, that I may forgive their Iniquity and their Sin. 1 John 1. 9. If we
confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins. The Apostle
includes himself, and calls the best a Liar that disowns his Sins, and thinks
he needs no Pardon; Confession is what should be repeated as Sin returns, and
this so qualifies for Pardon according to the Promise, that Forgiveness upon it
is an Act of Faithfulness in God: 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we would judge our selves,
we should not be judged: Which the Apostle speaks to Believers guilty of undue
Approaches to the Lord's Table. Read the Scriptures, and will thou not find
Saints repenting, and acting Faith in order to Pardon, and God pressing them
thereto for that very purpose, and continuing a Controversy with them, while
these are neglected? If a Man were thrice stung, must not he thrice look to the
brazen Serpent for Healing? See Solomon's Prayer in a Type of Christ's
Intercession, as it respected the Temple; there thou will find who were
pardoned, 1 Kings 8. 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 48, 49.

5. Believers ought to be more assured of Pardon, and joyful after renewed Acts
of Repentance and Faith; then as soon as they have grossly sinned, and before
these Acts. It Is otherwise against that wise Order which God has stated for a
due Reverence to him, and for Caution to Man, who is so prone to offend: Number.
12. 14. If her Father had spit in her Face, should she not be ashamed seven
days? Let her be shut out of the Camp seven Days. The People of God have had
those sad Fits which the Doctor condemns, and when Sin greatly breaks out, they
do well become them. Paul calls the contrary Frame under Guilt, a being puffed
up, and Calls to Mourning, 1 Cor. 5. 2. and commends their Carefulness,
Indignation, Fear, Zeal, Revenge and godly Sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 8, 9, 11. And till
there was much of this in the incestuous Person, he was not restored: And
indeed, considering God remits or binds in Heaven, according to what his Church
does justly on Earth; either the Pardon of the not repenting Offender is
suspended, or Censures are vain, Need I give you David's Experience? Psalm. 32.
3, 5. When I kept Silence, my Bones waxed old, through my roaring all the Day
long; for Day and Night thy Hand was heavy upon me: I acknowleged my Sin unto
thee; I said, I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. Here Is great Darkness and Trouble before
Confession; here is Forgiveness upon it, and it is the Iniquity of his Sin is
pardoned, not the Action separated from its Filthiness: And V. 6. This Practice
of his was to be a teaching Instance to all Saints in the like Case, For this
shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, etc.

TESTIMONIES.
The Assembly, and Congregational Elders, Chap, 11. a. 5. do both declare, God
does continue to forgive the Sins of those that are justified, and although
they can never fall from the State of Justification, yet they may by their Sins
fall under God's fatherly Displeasure, and in that Condition they have not
usually the Light of his Countenance restored to them, until they humble
themselves, confess their Sins, beg Pardon, and renew their Faith and
Repentance. And Chap. 15. a. 6. As every Man is bound to make private
Confession of his Sins to God, praying for the Pardon thereof, upon which, and
the forsaking thereof, he shall find Mercy, etc. The Provincial Synod of
London, P. 16. Condemn this as one of Doctor Crisp's Errors: The Lord has not
one Sin to charge upon any elect Person, etc. Another Error is, If a Man know
himself to be in a State of Grace, though he be drunk, or commit Murder, God
sees no Sin in him. The New England Synod confute this as Error 64. A man must
take no notice of his Sin, nor of his Repentance for it. Doctor Owen, Of
Justif. P. 202, 203, 205, 207. at large asserts, That Sins are not actually
pardoned before they are committed; that there is Guilt contracted by new Sins;
that the Conscience of a Believer is pressed, and he is humbled, and required
to repent, and must renew Acts of Faith for the Pardon of new Sins. New England
Synod condemns that as Error 20. To call in question, whether God be my dear
Father upon the Commission of heinous Sins, as (Murder, Incest, etc.) does
prove a Man to be in the Covenant of Works.

The Ground of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because our Sins were laid on Christ, that God might, to his Glory, forgive
them in his appointed way; therefore they are actually forgiven before God
forgives them in that way, or that way be complied with. Because God does blot
out, and wash thoroughly away, and not remember the pardoned Sins of penitent
Believers; therefore he does wash, blot out, and not remember the unpardoned
Sins of impenitent Persons; whereas there is not one of those, to whom these
Promises are made, but God has charged Sin upon them before. Because God
commands Israel, Isa. 1. to wash and make themselves clean by Repentance;
therefore we are clean without it. Because God can have no Communion with a
Sinner out of Christ; therefore he can have no Communion with an imperfect
Believer, in a Christ.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Hurt that Sin may do to Believers.
TRUTH. It Is true of Believers, that if Sin should have Dominion over them,
they would thereby be subject to Condemnation. And though the Grace of God will
prevent the Dominion of Sin in every elect Believer, and so keep them from
eternal Death; yet true Believers may by Sin bring great hurt upon themselves
in Soul and Body, which they ought to fear, and they may expect a share in
National Judgments, according as they have contributed to common Guilt.

ERROR. The grossest Sins that Believers can commit, cannot do them the least
harm; neither ought they to fear the least hurt by their own Sins, nor by
National Sins; yea, though themselves have had a hand therein.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
P. 510, 511. They need not be afraid of their Sins, they that have God for
their God; there is no Sin that ever they commit, can possibly do them any
hurt: Therefore, as their Sins cannot hurt them, so there is no cause of Fear
in their Sins committed, etc. There is not one Sin, nor all the Sins together
of any Believer, can possibly do that Believer any real hurt. This he attempts
to prove from Romans 7. Some will be ready to say, here is a Fear of Sin: Oh
wretched Man, that I am! Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? But
give me leave to tell you, that the Apostle in this Chapter, as I conceive,
does personate a scrupulous Spirit, and does not speak out his present Case,
etc. Obj. Sure the Doctor only means, that Sin shall not damn them. A. Hear
him putting this Case: You will say no Condemnation in Hell; but yet as there
are Remainders of Sin in God's own People, so there will some Evil or other
fall upon the Commission of Sin. He sums up his Answer thus: Now Sin is
condemned to the Believer, it can do no hurt at all to him. P. 513. Sins are
but Scare-crows and Bug-bears to fright ignorant Children; but Men of Insight
and Understanding, see they are counterfeit things, etc, they are to know for
certain, it is but a mad thing, there is no Fear from the Sins of Believers,
all the Terror and Fearfulness of Sin, Christ himself has drunk it, etc. Sin
is dead, and there is no more Terror in it, than is in a dead Lion. P. 515. He
shows, that the Sins of the Nation cannot hurt God's People, though they had a
hand in them. P. 429. Are you sinful in respect of the Prevalency of
Corruption? Let it not come into your Thoughts that you are worse than others,
or less than others. P. 522. So often as Men fear Affliction from Sin committed,
so often do they slander the Grace of God. See P. 429, 413, 510, 562, 559.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not, Whether God will preserve elect Believers from eternal
Condemnation, by keeping them from the Dominion of Sin? 2. Nor whether a
justified Person be freed from the Curse of the Law, or the Sanction of the Law
of Works. 3. Nor whether a Believer should fear his eternal Condemnation no
farther than his Sins bring his Sincerity in question, or lead to Security or
Apostasy. 4. Nor whether God may in Sovereign Mercy, spare to execute those
Rebukes, National or Personal, which a godly Man's Sins may expose him to. 5.
Nor whether God may, and can, overruled the Sin of a Believer afterward to his
Benefit. All these I affi^m. 6. Nor whether the Afflictions of the Godly be the
Execution of the damnatory Curse of the Law, or any Satisfaction or Atonement
for Sin? This I deny, and add, that Christ alone satisfied Justice.

The real Difference.
1. Whether, according to the Gospel-rule, if a Believer should yield up
himself to the Dominion of Sin, he should perish? This I affirm, and the Doctor
denies, against plain Texts directed to Believers; as Romans 8. 13. 2. Whether a
Believer, falling into such Sins, as Idolatry, Murder, etc. ought not to awe
his Soul against Security, with lively thoughts of Damnation; and if he
continue long herein, ought not he to suspect the State of his Soul, as in
danger of Hell? This I affirm, and the Doctor denies; and thereby he renders
the Gospel-threatnings, as urged by the Spirit on the Hearts of Believers, to
be all foolish. 3. Whether Christ is at liberty sharply to afflict a justified
Person for provoking Sins, though he be secured against Soul-destroying
Judgments? This I affirm, and the Doctor denies. 4. Whether a Believer,
falling into great Sins, ought to fear God's present Rebukes for such Sins?
This I affirm, and the Doctor denies. 5. Whether great Offenses be a real hurt
to a Believer, and often brings on him much present harm. This I affirm, and the
Doctor denies. The Case of National Sins is concluded as these be, and I have
elsewhere spoken to.

The Truth Confirmed.
The principal Point to be proved, is, That Sins do a Believer hurt; this will
convince us of the rest, for as it brings hurt, it is the Object of Fear in all
that wisely resent things. And as any threatened Affliction is caused by it, it
argues a Power reserved in Christ so to threaten and afflict: both which I have
proved, Chap. 13. One would think a little Labor will serve to prove a Point,
which the Feeling and Experience of all Men plead for; yet take a Hint of those
Heads of Arguments which might be improved.

1. Sin it self is a great hurt to any Man guilty of it, or pestered with it:
It Is so called, Jer. 8. 11. Its a Wound, or we need no Healing; it is a
Defilement, or we need no Washing; it is a Crime, or what is Forgiveness? it is a
going astray, or where is the Use of Returning? it is a Weakness, or Strengthening
after it were needless. Is that no harm, which is a Blemish to our Natures, the
Disease of our Souls, the Disorder of our State, in reference to God and our
selves, as depending on him. If Sin be no harm, why should we pray against it?
Why does God so warn us still against it? Why does Grace so oppose it? Why does
the Spirit strive against it? Wherefore do we praise God for preventing it? On
what Account has God made it the Duty of Magistrates and Parents to punish for
it? and of Ministers to censure the Transgressors? If it is become so innocent
in his People, Why does Christ complain so often of it? Why should the Doctor
tell us, we should fear it before we commit it, though not after? Why should
Saints desire Heaven to be rid of Sin? Can that be a small Mischief, that
dishonors God, reproacheth the Name of Christ, grieves the Spirit, pleases
the Devil, offends the Good, hardens the Wicked, puts the tender Heart on
Mourning for it in it self, yea, in others? Psalm. 119. 136. If Sin be no hurt,
Grace and Holiness, as the Contraries to it, are not Good; nothing is a
Blessing, as a Prevention of it. Where shall I stop? Yet each of these refer to
the Sins of God's own People, and some of them more affect their Sins, than the
Sins of other Men.

2. There Is great Hurt befalls God's People for committing Sin. Does not God
hide his Face? the Spirit abate its Influences? Is not the Conscience often
seared? the Heart often less capable of Impressions by the Word? the Soul
straightened in Duty? great Decays in Grace and Vigor, too often never recovered
this side the Grave? Many are rendered incapable of Service by Reproach for Sin,
or by Poverty, Diseases, etc. Who has not found by Sin, what he must call
Hurt? What Pains, Loss of Friends, Ruin on Estates, Blasts on Undertakings?
Are Wars, Plagues, Fire, Removal of Ordinances, Famine, cursed Relations, etc.
no Hurt? Sure so many will not be proselyted to this Opinion, as to
Transubstantiation. But what can. be offered for it? Obj. God will order all
this for the good of a Believer; therefore none of these hurt him. 1. A. I do
not know where God has promised, ThatSin shall do us good, and in its Nature
it has no aptness to Good, and the best Good it can do, is to prevent it self.
Romans 8. 28. says, All things shall work together for good, etc. But it speaks
of Sufferings for Christ, not Sins against him; and though God should
over-master it to some Concurrence for Good, yet it were a greater Mercy to
receive that same Good by other Means. 2. A. Though Sins, or corrective
Afflictions may be ruled to do us good, yet that does not hinder, but that they
do us hurt. This may be evinced, not only because it were a greater Mercy to
have that Good another way, which, but for Sin, we should not miss of: But also
1. Whatever God threatens to inflict, that thereby he may dissuade from Sin,
must needs be a Hurt or Damage. It is not a Threatening, if it include no harm,
and it is a Reproach to our God in his Government to think otherwise. What
confounding of Promises and Threats would it infer? Does not God intend to awe
Men with some Hurt, when he says, Rev. 2. 5. Remember, etc. or I will remove
thy Candlestick out of its Place; and was this no hurt when it befell them? I
might instance a thousand Places of this kind.

2. Saints, with God's Approbation, bewail and deprecate Sins, and Punishments
for Sins, as a real Hurt. Why have thou hardened our Hearts from thy Fear, etc.
Isa. 63. 17. For the Hurt of the Daughter of my People, I am black,
astonishment has taken hold on me, Jer. 8. 21. The Book of Lamentations,
Haman's, David's Moans are forgotten. Read Paul's Complaints of himself and
others.

3. God himself accounts these things to hurt his People, for he calls it
Patience and Long-suffering in him, to forbear inflicting them. He often declares
his Pity of his People, when under them, and a ceasing to Pity, when he
inflicts them, Isa. 63. 9. Joel 2. 8. Jer. 13 4. The Removal of these he
declares to be an Act of Mercy and Goodness. Read the Prophets, and you will find
what Terms he gives these: viz. Wounding, Smiting, Spoiling, etc. He often
testifies against Insensibleness of these, as evil and afflictive things, and
threatens to increase them, to beget a duer sense of Sin and Judgments. Sure I
need not add, That Mercies opposite to these are Blessings, and promised as
such; all the good in Repentance argues the Hurt we get by Sin, and by the
Effects of it. If these things will not prove Sin brings hurt, we must declare
Patience in Saints to be no Grace, or find a new Description of what is a Hurt
in this World. The Doctor indeed calls us to this when Sin is made so
innocent, and present with-holdings of more Grace from us is a Mercy; as he
affirms, P. 541. Let me add, that by Sin, a Saint's degrees of Glory may be
diminished in another World; for sowing sparingly, he shall reap sparingly,
and he therefore that shall break one of the least of these Commandments, and
shall teach Men so, he shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.
19. That Is unprofitable for you, Heb. 13. 17.

TESTIMONIES.
The Assembly, and Cong. Elders, chap. 19. a. 6 tell us, The Threatenings of the
Law are of use to the Regenerate, to show what even their Sins deserve, and
what Afflictions in this Life they may expect for them, although freed from the
Curse threatened in the Law. Chap. 18. a. 4 True Believers may have the
Assurance of Salvation diverse ways shaken and diminished, etc. by falling into
some special Sin, which wounds the Conscience, and grieveth the Spirit, by
some vehement Temptation, by God's withdrawing the Light of his Countenance.
Chap. 17. a. 3. Saints may fall into grievous Sins, and for a time continue
therein; whereby they incurr God's Displeasure, and grieve his Holy Spirit;
come to be deprived of some measure of their Graces and Comforts; have their
Hearts hardened, and their Consciences wounded; hurt and scandalize others, and
bring temporal Judgments on themselves.

Turretin, tells us, Instit. Theol. par. 2. p. 650. That a Believer falling
into gross Crimes, incurreth the Fatherly Indignation of God, loses a present
Meetness for Glory, contracts damning Guilt: So that if he remain Impenitent in
that State, he ought to conclude himself liable to Death, and certain to
perish, except he return.

Do not Divines generally conclude, That if David had not repented of his gross
Sins he fell into, he had perished? Dr. Owen as much discovers the hurt of Sins
to Believers, as most Men do. See Mr. A. Burgess, of Justification, lib. 1.
from 240. to 245.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because there is no Eternal Condemnation lies against a Believer; therefore
there is no penal Present Affliction upon a Believer: Whereas there is much hurt
below Hell; and and that it is not Hell that follows the Sin of a Believer, is
not from the Innocence of Sin, but the Grace of God that brings him to
Repentance, and Faith in Christ for Remission. Because all Sufferings for
Christ work for Good; therefore all Sins against Christ can do no Harm. But
allow that Sins, and Sufferings for Sin, were included, then thus it reasons;
Because God can and does overruled these to some good at last; therefore they
do no harm in the mean while, nor in any degree. Because a Believer is freed
from the damning Curse of the Law; therefore no Gospel-Threatning of Christ can
reach him. Because some good Men are some times humbled and awakened by Sin, as
it is an Evil; therefore to them it is not an Evil.

CHAP. XVIII. Of God's Displeasure for Sin* in the Afflictions of his People.
TRUTH. THough God is not so angry with his People for their Sins, as to cast
them out of his Covenant-Favour; yet by their Sins he is so displeased, as for
them to correct his Children, though he speaks Instructions by his Rebukes.

ERROR. None of the Afflictions of Believers have in them the least of God's
Displeasure against their Persons, for their Sins.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
He affirms, P. 15. Except God will be offended where there is no cause to be
offended, he will not be offended with Believers: For, I say, he has no cause
to be offended with the Believer; because he does not find the Sin of the
Believer to be his own Sin, but he finds it the Sin of Christ. P. 19, 10. But
are not the Afflictions of Believers, for their Sins? I answer, No: Afflictions
are unto Believers from Sin, not for Sin; that is, God does not intend to
punish them, as now laying on them the desert of their Sin, for that is laid
upon Christ; but he does afflict them, to preserve them from sin, etc. So God
afflicting a Believer, has no respect unto sin, as if he did afflict for sin,
etc. I say, in respect of the sins committed, which he thus suspects, there is
not the least drop of the Displeasure of God, nor the fruit of such Displeasure
comes near him. Which he endeavors to prove. The like you will often find, P. 170.
At that instant God brings Afflictions on thee, he does not remember any Sin of
thine, they are not in his Thoughts. P. 561. Christ being chastized for our
sins, there is nothing but peace belongs to us, etc. P. 559. If we tell
Believers, etc. Except they perform such and such Duties; Except they walk thus
and thus Holily, and do these and these good Works, they shall come under
Wrath; at least, God will be Angry with them; What do we in this but abuse the
Scriptures? We undo all that Christ has done, we injure Believers, we tell God
Lies to his Face.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not: Whether God cease to love a Believer when he sins. 2. Nor,
whether the Afflictions that befall a Believer, proceed from the Vindictive
Justice of God, as an Enemy. These I deny. 3. Nor, whether God can bless the
sorest Judgments for Sins, to the future good of a Believer. This I affirm;
though were it not for our Sins, God would effect that Good a milder way: And I
doubt whether every good Man may be said to get profit by all sorts of
Affliction; for every degree of Good is not equivalent to the Hurt; and
sometimes God punishes Sin with Sin. 4. Nor, whether some sensible Calamities
may fall on a good Man; not so much in a way of Rebuke for Sin, as to try his
Graces, prevent Sin, or bring Glory to God by a Testimony to the Truth. This I
affirm: Yet I believe the very Martyrs did not so glory in the joyful Cause of
their Sufferings, as always to neglect an humble Reflection on what Sin of
theirs might then Justify God, as a hidden cause of their Hardships.

The Real Difference.
1. Whether God be at all displeased with Believers, for their Abominations.
This I affirm, and the Doctor denies. 2. Whether God at any time or by any
Afflictions, expresses his Displeasure against his People for their Sins. This
I affirm, and the Doctor denies.

The Truth Confirmed.
Reader, Know that there is none of all this but Dr. Crisp means it of the
Unconverted Elect: For their Sins are on Christ, and off from themselves as
much as Believers. Their Sins do them no hurt; nor is God angry with them,
though God says he is angry with the wicked every day.

But let us consider the Points, as they referr to Believers.

1. I affirm, God is displeased with Believers, for their Abominations. If he
is displeased at all with them, it must be for their Sins: And that he is
displeased; yea, and chat for Sin, he often affirms it; he forces his People to
own it, and they with bitterness bemoan and acknowledge it. Psalm. 60. 1, 3. O
God, thou have cast us off! thou have been displeased! O turn thy self to us
again! Thou have showed thy people hard things! thou have made us drink the
wine of astonishment! 2. Sam. 11. 27. That David had done, displeased the Lord.
And you may read how he threatened and punished him. Was not his Anger kindled
against Moses? Exodus 4. 14. Against his People? Isa. 5. 25. and 12. 11. Moses
says, The Lord was angry with me, Deuteronomy. 4. 21. The Lord was very angry with
Aaron, Deuteronomy. 9. 21. Christ was often displeased with his Disciples. How often is
God's Anger said to be provoked by his People, and kindled against them? He is
said to turn away from his fierce anger: Is it not his Anger against them,
which is but for a moment, and to be turned away? I hope the Doctor would own,
that it never cease against Sin it self. Nay his very Fury and Wrath be often
mentioned against his own Servants. Read the Sixteenth of Ezekiel; a Verse or
two whereof is so abused by the Doctor, Thou have fretted me in all these
things, etc. Cannot good Men grieve the Holy Ghost? What does the Church
intend, when she says I ll bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him? Mic. 7. 9.

2. God does by many Afflictions express his Displeasure against his People for
their Sins. I have in the last Chapter proved, that Sins do hurt a Believer;
and all there spoken, proves this, as far as the Hand of God is in our Rebukes.
Besides those things, Consider, God is often said to rebuke and chastize his
People for Sin: They are not the less Chastisements of a Father, if at present
grievous, though afterward they bring forth the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness. The Great Promise of the Covenant does not prevent this. Psalm.
89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. If his children for sake my law, etc. then will I visit
their transgressions with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless,
my loving kindness will not I utterly take from them, etc. Are not these
Stripes for Sin? Are not these Stripes Corrections? Yea, and so much from God's
Displeasure, that it is but a not utterly that God will not take away his
Loving Kindness; and that it rises no higher, is for the Covenant sake How often
does God tell us, that he punishes his Church, because of their Sins
committed; and gives this as the Therefore? What is God's visiting the
transgressions of his people? Was it for an innocent thing that Christ rebuked
Peter? Mark 8. 33. And was it not for luke-warmness that he rebuked and
chastned those Laodiceans whom he loved? Rev. 3. 19. Was not that for Sin,
which you find, 1 Cor. 11. 30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among
you, and many sleep? What means God, when he says he will be Sanctified in his
offending Children? He cannot hide his Face for Sin, nor abate his gracious
Influences for Sin, and not show Displeasure for Sin against the Offenders whom
he so deserts. How wickedly have most pious Persons been employed, while they
have humbly owned their Sins to be the cause of God's Withdraws and
Corrections, if what I assert be not a Truth? And how strange such Texts, You
only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, and therefore I will punish
you for your Iniquities, Amos 3. 2. Now who dare tell God Lies to his Face? etc.

TESTIMONIES.
You have seen the Assembly and Elders in the Savoy, positively assert this
Truth in my last Chapter, which again consult. And large Catech. Q How does
Christ execute the Office of a King? Ans. (among other things) I Rewarding
their Obedience, and Correcting (his People) for their Sins. The Provincial
Synod of London, p. 16. recite, as one of the dangerous Errors of that day,
That God does not chastize any of his Children for Sin; nor is it for the Sins
of God's People the Land is punished.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because God laid on our Sins on Christ, to make Atonement for the Forgiveness
of the Elect, when they repent; therefore God cannot be offended with the Elect
for them, before they repent. Because God does not hate the Believer, as an
unreconciled God, when he sins; therefore he is not at all displeased with him,
because of the grossest Sins. Because the Refiner is not angry with his Gold
(which never could offend him) when he casts it into the Fire; therefore a holy
God is no way angry with rational Offenders, when he corrects them for their
Reformation. Because God will not hate a Believer, so as to damn him; therefore
he cannot be angry with his People, so as Fatherly to chastize them. Because
God afflicts from Sin; therefore he does not also afflict for Sin; as if he
could not rebuke for what is past, if he resolve not against their amendment
for time to come. It seems also that the Doctor was led into his Opinion, by
not considering, that Anger or Displeasure be not Passions in God but a Will of
Correcting; and are denominated from the kinds and degrees of Corrections.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Beauty of sincere Holiness.
TRUTH. THough the present sincere Holiness of Believers be not perfect,
according to the Precepts of the Word; nor Valuable by the Sanction of the Law
of Innocence; nor any Atonement for our Defects; and we still need Forgiveness,
and the Merits of Christ, for Acceptance thereof; yet as far as it prevails,
it is lovely in it self, and pleasing to God; and is not dung or filth.

ERROR. The greatest Holiness in Believers, though wrought in them by the Holy
Ghost, is mere Dung, Rottenness and Filthiness, as in them.

Proved that this is Doctor Crisp 's Opinion.
P. 232. Know, that the motions and assistance of the Spirit be pure, holy, and
without scum in the Spring, to wit, it self; yet by that time these Motions and
Assistances have passed through the channels of our Hearts, and been mixed with
our manifold Corruptions in doing, even the whole Work becomes polluted and
filthy; our filthiness alters the property of the pure motions of Christ's
Spirit, etc. As one drop of Poison injected into the rarest Cordial, makes the
whole, and every drop of the whole, Mortal; so that, except the best of our
Works can pass through us, without the least touch or mixture of any Defect or
Pollution, it cannot but be Dung, etc. And whereas it may seem harsh, that even
what is the Spirit's, must be involved within that which is a Man's own, under
the general Notion of Dung; Know, that it once being mixed with our filth,
cease to be the Spirit's, and becomes our own: It was the Spirit's when
injected; but our Flesh being like the Viper's Stomach, turns the wholsomest
Food into Poison; or like an ulcerous Tumor, that turns the purest Spirits,
and soundest Flesh, into rottenness. And some of this ulcerous Flesh remains in
the best Saints on Earth, and mingles it self in the best service, and so turns
the whole into its own nature. P. 414. All our Righteousness are filthy, full
of menstruosity, the highest kind of filthiness.

Do not say he means, that our gracious Actings are too imperfect to be the
Righteousness for which we are Justified: No, he must intend more; for that
would not make them Dung, or Rottenness, and cease to be the Spirit's; it would
only argue they are Imperfect, etc. He has abundance of such terms to make
Holiness vile, as before he said much to render Sin innocent to the Elect.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not: Whether the Holiness, or best Acts of a Saint, be such, or so
perfect, as to atone for his Sin, or procure a state of Pardon. 2. Nor, whether
our Holiness can make us accepted with God, without Christ. 3. Nor, whether the
holiest Action of the holiest Saint is such, as not to need forgiveness. 4.
Nor, whether by the Sanction of the Law of Innocence, Sincere Holiness could be
accounted Holiness. All these I deny; and the last, because nothing but perfect
conformity to the Precept was Holiness; whereas the Gospel Grace makes a great
difference between True Holiness, though Imperfect, and what is formally
Wickedness; between sincere Love and Enmity; sincere Faith, and utter Unbelief.

The real Difference.
1. Whether the sincere Holiness of a Believer's Heart and Actions be really
Dung and Rottenness. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny; yet I own, we should
so esteem it is compared with Christ, as meritorious of Justification. 2.
Whether sincere Holiness, as far as it prevails in our Hearts and Actings, be
truly lovely in it self, and pleasing to God, according to the Grace of the
Gospel, and is not Dung. This I affirm, and the Doctor denies.

The Truth confirmed.
Consider, That whatever is spoken of Holiness in any mere Man on Earth, since
the Fall, is spoken of Sincere Holiness; for Perfect Holiness none had. I have
room but to expostulate this Matter. Is that Dung, which is the effect of
Regeneration in the Soul and Actings? Is that Dung, which is so often honored
with the Name of the Spirit it self, and called the Spirit of Love, Prayer?
etc. I not that more lovely, which is called the Divine Nature? 2 Pet. 1. 4.
How aimable must that be, which is the New Man after God's Image? Ephesians. 4. 24.
The New Heart? Ezekiel. 18. 31. The Law of God in the Heart, and the Grace of God?
Are those Works Dung, to which we are created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10. and
enabled by the Spirit? Or is that Filthiness, which renders Saints the
Excellent of the Earth? Psalm. 16. 3. The Imitators of Christ? Was not this it
for which Caleb was said to have another Spirit? And upon account whereof we
must love the Godly, as begotten of God? Is it not pleasing to God, to which he
has made so many Promises; for which he so commends Moses, David, and all the
Saints; calling such a peculiar People? etc. It Is no small thing with which
Christ is so pleased in his Spouse; as you see in the Song of Solomon. Can that
be Dung, which is a Meetness for Glory, an Honor to God, and Credit to
Religion? How can it be acceptable to God, through Christ, if it be Filthiness,
and changed into the Nature of our Flesh and Corruption? Wickedness will never
be accepted with God for Christ's sake, though imperfect Goodness shall. Read
what is spoken of Sincerity, Uprightness, etc. and see, will it agree to what is
mortal Poison? What a reproach is it to Christ, to call his Life in us, and the
Beginning of Glory, by this Title? Nay, to make his Triumphs in us so low, as
that all he has improved his Members to, is mere Filthiness? It Is well if the
Scriptures can escape clean, if all the Works of the Spirit are thus debased
when they pass through Men. But I less wonder that Doctor Crisp should speak
thus of the Righteousness of Saints, as in them; when he is so positive, that
the Enemies of Christ may have Sincerity and Singleness of Heart toward God,
and a constant Purpose and Inclination of Heart to the whole Will of God; and
reach the very Practice of the Will of God in universal Obedience: And that
therefore none of these are a sure Sign of an Interest in Christ. See p. 450,
451, 452.

TESTIMONIES.
Read what the Assembly and Elders at the Savoy say of Effectual Vocation,
Sanctification, and Good Works, chap. 10, 13, 16. And so of Faith and
Repentance. The New England Synod confute, as Error 36. All the Activity of a
Believer, is to act to Sin. And Error 35. The Efficacy of Christ's Death, is
to kill all Activity of Graces in his Members, that he might act all in all.
Read Dr. Owen's Treatise of Holiness annexed to that of the Spirit.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because our Goodness extends not to God, for his profit; therefore he regards
it no more than Dung and Filthiness. Because we are, after all our Obedience,
unprofitable Servants to God, and less profitable Servants than we should be;
therefore our Holiness is as unpleasing to him as Dung. Because God abhorred
the New Moons and Sabbaths of the Hypocrites; therefore he loathes the sincere
Obedience of the Upright. Obj. Does not Israel say, Isa. 64. 6. All our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags? Ans. But that is spoken of Persons, and not
of real Holiness. It Is the same as Mic. 7. 4. The best of them is a Bryar. And
Isa. 1. 6. From the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, we are
putrefying Sores: Corruption had invaded the very Priests, and the generality
of the best Professors, who seemed the most righteous. And that the sense of
the place refers to Persons, see the Verse before; Thou meetest him that
rejoices, and works righteousness, etc. Behold thou art wroth; for we have
sinned. q. d. Were we Workers of Righteousness, thou would meet us, and we
should rejoice: But because we are not so, but have sinned, thou art wroth. See
ver. 7. There is none that calls on thy Name, that stirs up himself to
take hold on thee. q. d. We are all remiss, the best of us are as Prayerless.
See the 6th. ver. it self; We are all as unclean things; our Righteousnesses
are as filthy Rags; we all fade as a Leaf. q. d. There Is a general Apostasy and
Degeneracy among us: But allow that it were spoken of Righteousness as a
Quality; will it follow, that because the dead Shadow of Righteousness, in so
backsliding and defiled a People, was Rags, that therefore the lively Actings
of Grace, through the Influence of the Spirit, must be menstruous Clothes or
Rags?

Obj. The Apostle says, Phil. 3. 8. For whom I have suffered the Loss of all
things, and do count them Dung, that I may win Christ, and be found, etc.

1. A. If this Place speaks of Gospel-righteousness, as his own things which he
counted Dung, it does not prove that Holiness is Dung; all it can infer, is,
that in Comparison with winning Christ, it was esteemed as Dung. And who must
not own, that compared with gaining Christ, the best thing in us is vile; yea,
compared with his Righteousness: But yet it may not be vile in itself; asRivals
with Christ we must hate Father and Mother. But does it follow, that Father or
Mother are hateful, absolutely considered? No, We are bound to love them, when
not compared with Christ. I need add no more in answerto the Doctor's Reason;
but though I own the imputed Righteousness of Christ for our Justification, yet
I think to ground it on this Place, is a Damage to the Truth; and therefore I
add, 2. A. Gospel-holiness or Righteousness is not here intended by Dung. The
(...) was that Dogs-meat which he renounced, and left to those Dogs (which Term
they gave the Gentiles) V. 2. to glory in. Who were those he calls Dogs? They
were the Concision (alluding to Baal's Priests) or the Jews that rejected
Christ, by an Opinion of more Excellency in Jewish Observations, and an Abuse
of the Mosaic Frame. What were the Things he counted Dung? I answer, They
were the Jewish Privileges, and that conceited Christless Righteousness, which
he once valued, as those Dogs at present did. But it was not that
Gospel-holiness, which by the Grace of Christ, he was now Partaker of. Obj. How
do both these appear? I answer plainly, from the whole Scope of the Chapter. 1.
They were his Christless Privileges and Righteousness which he called Dung. For
1. his Discourse is a Warning against the Jewish Perverters and Opposers of the
Gospel. Ver. 2. Beware of Dogs, beware of Evil Workers, beware of the
Concision. 2. He states a Comparison, wherein he opposes them, and includes a
great Part of Gospelholiness in that Opposition. Ver. 3. For we are the
Circumcision, which Worship God in the Spirit, viz. not carnally, and with
beggarly Elements, as they do; and rejoice in Christ Jesus: q. d. We feel a
true and solid Joy in, and by Christ, whom they refusing to accept of, are
without; yea, and are tormented with Guilt and Fears, for their way make not
the Comers to it perfect. And have no Confidence in the Flesh: That is, in
being the natural Seed of Abraham by descent, and not his Spiritual Seed by
Faith, as Romans 9. 7, 8. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they
all Children, etc. That is, they which are the Children of the Flesh, these are
not the Children of God, etc. Or else in being Partakers of the Jewish
Privileges; as Gal. 6. 12. as many as desire to make a fair show in the Flesh,
they constrain you to be Circumcised; of this Number were these, whom the
Apostle warns the Christians against; but now by the Gospel, we are brought
to place our Hopes in greater and surer things. 3. He enumerates these Jewish
Pretensions, which he had as much right to glory in, as these boasting Enemies.
Ver. 4, 5, 6. He was a Jew by Birth, and not a mere Proselyte; circumcised as
soon as any, of the strictest Sect, as fiery zealous against Christ as they,
and as ceremonious as the best, touching the Righteousness which is in the Law
blameless: He intends not Sinless-Obedience, nor Gospel-Sincerity; but a Life
not to be blamed by the Rule of the Jewish Pedagogie, i. e. in the Judgment of
strict Observers. 4. Of these he professes a Renunciation, when converted to
Christ. Ver. 7. But what things were gain to me: That is, these that I reckoned
as much upon, as they now do, I counted loss for Christ; when he met me by the
way, and led me to a truer Judgment of him and my self, I soon preferred him
his Grace, his Benefits, and Instruction before all these. And Ver. 8. Yea,
doubtless, etc. That is, I have no Suspicion of my Choice, and am still of the
same Mind; they are still with me vain things, of no value, compared with that
I have since known, and experienced in and by Christ; yea, for him, without
repining; I have not only quitted those Jewish things, but I have suffered the
loss of all things: viz. my Name, my Friends, my Estate, my Ease, and Life it
self, in a fixed Purpose, and do count them but Dung, that I may win Christ.
What these Jews do so boast of, and the World so esteem, even all are to me but
Dogs-meat, etc. that I may but fully possess Christ, and the full Effects of
his Undertakings in perfect Peace, Holiness and Glory, somewhat of which are
already begun in me.

2. It was not Gospel-holiness which he counted Dung or Loss, For, 1. This was
not his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, as opposed to that which is by
the Faith of Christ. Nay, This is by the Faith of Christ; our Hearts are
purified by Faith, Act. 15. 9. In Christ we are created thereto, and by him it
is wrought through Faith in all his Members, who are all in him; and in this
Union to him, I desire to continue, and share in the fuller Effects of. 2. This
Holiness, instead of renouncing, or suffering the Loss of it, he earnestly
presses after, and expects to obtain; this is the Scope of Ver. 10, 11, 12,
13, 14. that I may know him, viz. perfectly in his Person and Influences; and
the Power of his Resurrection, i. e. in a perfect Newness of Heart and Life;
and be conformable to his Death; i. e. wholly mortified and dead to Sin: If by
any means I might attain to the Resurrection of the Dead? that is, be as holy,
and happy, as then I shall be, which is without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such
thing. If I may apprehend that for which I am apprehended of Christ; i. e. be
as holy and happy as he designed to make me, when he seized me in my first
Conversion, reaching forth unto those things that are before; that cannot be
imputed Righteousness, for this he had in his first Justification; but it is
that perfect Holiness and Glory, which he expected in Christ hereafter. And
this is the Mark for the Price of the high Calling of God in Christ; viz. What
God intended in his Act, when he called me in Christ; and what I had in my Eye,
when I consented to that Call, as the encouraging Reward. Now is not Holiness a
great part of all these? and instead of renouncing it, he tells us he is for
it, by any means, I follow after, reaching forth, I press toward; which was
all needless, as to what he had already. 3. He bewails and owns the Weakness
and Imperfection of this Righteousness at present, though he was pressing after
it. Ver. 12. Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect.
Ver. 13. I count not my self to have apprehended, forgetting the things which
are behind. Can this be true of imputed Righteousness? Was not that attained at
first? Is not that perfect when first justified? Or would Paul forget this,
though his small Degrees of Holiness past, he might so forget, as that lesser
Degrees should not hinder his Pursuit after more?

Obj. But, Ver. 8. Paul speaks in the present Tense; I do count all things
loss, and therefore it was not his former Jewish Privileges. A. It was his
present Act toward an Object past. q. d. I even now still account them all
vain; yea, and it may extend to all present secular Advantages also, as Life,
Honor, and Estate, etc. q. d. I value nothing as a crucified Christ, that I
may fully know and enjoy him as a living Member in Eternity it self. But I hope
none can think, that his winning Christ is either a first Interest in Christ,
or the Imputation of his Righteousness for Justification; for this he with
Comfort knew he already had, and was not now to win by Perseverance, and
growing Vigor. Far less can any think, that he accounts Holiness Dung; for
what more he desired of Christ, was in order to perfect the Holiness begun
already by Christ in him; and had he lost that which was already begun, he had
vainly expected a further Participation of Christ for Holiness or Joy. This
Righteousness, which is of God by Faith, is that eminent Holiness he waited
for, and if he could be found in Christ by an abiding Union he knew he should
arrive at.

CHAP. XX. Of Gospel-Preaching.
TRUTH. GOspel-Preaching, is when the Messengers of Christ do publish to fallen
Sinners, the good News of Salvation by Christ, to be obtained in the way which
he has appointed in his Word, freely offering Salvation on his Terms,
earnestly persuading, and commanding Men in the Name of Christ, to comply with
those Terms, as ever they would escape the Misery they are under, and possess
the Benefits he has purchased; directing all to look to him for Strength, and
acknowledge him as the only Mediator, and his Obedience and Sufferings, as the
sole Atonement for Sin, and meriting Cause of all Blessings; instructing them
in all revealed Truth, and by Gospel Motives, urging them to obey the whole
Will of God, as a Rule of Duty, but especially to be sincere and upright,
pressing after Perfection.

ERROR. Gospel-Preaching, is to teach Men they were as much pardoned, and as
acceptable to God, always, as when they are regenerate; and while they were
ungodly, they had the same Interest in God and Christ, as when they believe;
neither can Sin any way hinder their Salvation, or their Peace; nor have they
any thing to do to further either of them, Christ having done all for them, and
given himself to them, before any holy Qualification or Endeavor.

Proved that this is Dr. Crisp 's Opinion.
Page 159. The more the Light and Glory of he Gospel shines in the true
Intention of God tohis People, the more should they have Joy and Gladness. Why
may not then a Believer say, The Lord has been bountiful to me, God has done
every thing in Christ, and taken away all things that can disturb my Peace and
Comfort? P. 186. Here is first Deliverance, then Service is the Fruit of
Deliverance, not Deliverance the Fruit of Service. The Tenor of the Law runs
thus, First do, then live: The Gospel says, First live, then do, etc. Do not
think God gives Christ upon Condition. P. 554. Man will be mincing of this
Truth, and tell you, if you will keep close to God, and if you refrain from
Sin, especially from gross Sins, God will love you, and then you may apply
these and these Promises unto your selves; but God speaks plainly, before they
had done Good or Evil, Jacob have I loved; the Grace of God is passed over to
Men, as they are ungodly, etc. This is the Grace of God revealed, and he has
exhibited it thus freely to Men: Has the Lord given us Commission to preach
this Gospel? P. 124. The Freeman of Christ has this Freedom; Christ does all
his Work for him, as well as in him, etc. Christ does all for them, that God
requires to be done: See more in the next Chapter. But most of these Heads I
have proved to be his Opinion in several Chapters at large.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not whether we must reveal Christ in his Person, Natures, Offices,
Sufferings, Intercession, and whatever describes his Glory, Suitableness, Use,
etc. 2. Nor that we must teach that Christ has purchased all saving Benefits,
and that Men must look to him as the Author of Salvation, and Giver of that
Grace whereby we obey the Terms of Life. 3. Nor that we must declare the free
Grace of God in giving his Son for us, and his Spirit to call us, and all
Benefits we do receive on our Obedience to that Call. 4. Nor that we must
describe Salvation in all the Parts of it, for the Comfort of Saints, and
Persuading of Sinners. 5. Nor that we must make Offers of Christ and his
Benefits to the worst of Sinners on Gospel-Terms; assuring them, nothing shall
hinder their happiness by him, but their refusal to accept of him in all his
Offices. 6. Nor whether we should inform them, that God has elected a certain
Number, whose Obedience to the Terms of Life, our Lord has undertaken for, and
so the Gospel shall not be in vain to all. But yet, that the Case of no Hearer
is made so desperate by this Election of some, as that if he do repent and
believe, he shall not be saved, for God will judge all of us by his revealed
Will, and not by his Decrees. 7. Nor, That we must teach the best Man to
renounce all the Grace he has, and Good he performs, as if being the least
Atonement for Sin, or least Purchase of Life, or any Addition of Merit to a
Christ, or sharing in what is peculiar to him. All these I affirm.

The Real Difference.
1. Whether the Gospel requires any Grace or Duty, in order to our actual
Interest in saving Benefits? This the Doctor denies, and I affirm, and have
proved in several Chapters. 2. Whether it is Gospel-Preaching, to tell Men that
they had the same Interest in Christ; Pardon and Life, while most wicked, as
any godly Man has, and that their Happiness does not at all depend on what
Grace they act, or sin they commit? This the Doctor affirms, and I deny; being
assured, whoever preaches thus, opposes the Gospel of Christ, and the plain
Truth; as I have proved at large, Chap. 1. 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15. 3.
Whether Christ does do all for a Believer, that God requires of a Believer?
This the Doctor affirms, and I deny; though I grant, he works all in us, or
enables us to do what God requires. 4. Whether the main Scope of
Gospel-preaching is in Christ's Name, to persuade, and with Authority require,
Sinners to seek, and act those Graces which saving Benefits are promised to;
assuring them of Salvation, if they comply, and declaring that it is impossible
they can be saved; yea, that their Condemnation shall be aggravated, if they
refuse? This I affirm, and the Doctor Denies.

The Truth Confirmed.
1. Christ does not do all for a Believer as well as in him. He does not repent
for us, nor obey the Gospel Terms for us, nor accept of, or rely on himself as
a Savior for us. He never is said to do so, we are enabled and required to do
these as our own personal Acts, or perish. It is impossible Christ should do
these things, as being inconsistent with his Person. Can he change his Mind,
come to himself, and turn to God whom he had left, alter his Purposes, and
reform his Life? all which are included in Repenting Christ will save none,
merely as Christ, but as Christ believed on; Joh. 6. 52, 53, 54. Except ye eat
the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. Whosoever
eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life. But, can Christ thus
eat his own Flesh? Does he mean, If I be not thus fed on by Men, they shall
dye? That is, If I do not feed on my self. Christ will be saved for them, while
themselves are damned, who trust to let Christ believe for them, whiles they
continue in Unbelief. He does all for us which belongs to him as Redeemer; but
we must do all in his Strength, which he requires of the Redeemed.

2. Gospel-preaching is what I have described, and because the most Exception
will lie against what I have said of the Conditional Proposals of Benefits on
Terms of Duty, I shall prove that it is Gospel-preaching to call Men to believe
and repent; and tell them, if they do so, God will, for Christ's Sake, forgive
them; if they do not so, their Sin will remain. And also to persuade them, to
love, fear, and obey God in true Holiness, when in a State of Pardon, and
profess the Faith: And if they persevere in doing so, they shall be saved by
Christ, and if they do the contrary, they shall be miserable.

I have proved that these are Gospel Truths, and therefore to preach them, is
to preach the Gospel. Some one part of the Gospel, being Gospel, does not argue
that other Parts are not so too. But I shall annex a few more Reasons.

1. Thus Christ and his Apostles appointed the Gospel to be preached. That the
Spirit of Christ thus directed the Prophets in the Old Testament to preach,
none can deny that use to read the Bible. Christ on Earth prescribed this way;
Mar. 16. 15. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the World, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature; he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved;
but he that believes not shall be damned. And as this Grace, under this
Sanction of Life and Death was to be urged, so it is added, Mat. 28. 20.
Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you. Among
which, no doubt, is included what he told the Apostles, when first
commissioned; Mat. 10. 14, 15. Whosoever shall not receive you, and hear your
Words, when you depart out of that House, or City, shake off the Dust off your
Feet: Verily, It shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah in
that Day of Judgment, than for that City. Ver. 32, 33. Whosoever shall Confess
me before Men, him will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven. But
whosoever shall deny me before Men, him will I also deny before my Father which
is in Heaven. Ver. 37. He that has loved Father or Mother more than me, is not
worthy of me. 38. He that takes not his Cross and follows me, is not worthy
of me. 41. He That receives a righteous Man, in the Name of a righteous Man,
shall receive a righteous Man's Reward. These are part of Christ's Speech to
his Apostles, when he first sent them to preach; and so from Heaven he taught
Paul to preach, Act. 26. 18. See how Paul instructs Timothy to preach. 1. He
enumerates very many Duties, which he was to urge and exhort. 2. He frequently
requires him to back these Exhortations with Promises, in case of Obedience,
and Threatenings in case of Disobedience. I shall instance a few, 1 Timothy 4. 8,
9. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the Promises of this Life,
and that which is to come: This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all
Acceptance. What are the Promises of the Life to come to Godliness? Yea,
though it is now with some no true Saying. Ver. 16. Take heed to thy self and
thy Doctrine, for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that
hears thee. Here Is pressing to doing with a Promise of Life. 1 Timothy 6. 6, 9.
Godliness with Content, is great Gain. But they that will be Rich, fall into
Temptation, and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown
Men in Destruction and Perdition. Ver. 17. 18. Charge, etc. that they do Good,
willing to Communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good Foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal Life. 2 Timothy 2. 11,
12. It is a faithful Saying, for if we be dead with him, we shall also live
with him, if we suffer, we shall also regin with him; if we deny him, he will
also deny us. Can any Man think, we ought not to plead with Men, and Preach as
Christ and his Spirit charge us? Or would he appoint us to preach what is not
his own Will or Gospel?

2. In this manner did Christ and his Apostles preach the Gospel. Read Christ's
Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 5. Are not Graces urged by promised Blessings, and
denounced Threatenings? the first none can doubt, the last is as evident. Ver.
13. Good for nothing, but to be cast out. 19. Least in the Kingdom of Heaven.
Ver. 20. Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Ver. 22. In
danger of Hellfire. 26. Thou shall not come out thence. 30. If thy Right Eye
offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee, for it is profitable for thee
that one of thy Members should perish, and not that thy whole Body should be
cast into Hell. See the Parable of the Seed, of the Talents, Virgins, Marriage
Supper. Was it not he that declared, He that believes not, the Wrath of God
abides on him. If you believe not, you shall dye in your Sins. If you repent
not, you shall all likewise perish. Vain World! that think they can out-preach
Christ, or that theirs is Gospel, which obstructs the very things that his
Ministry was designed to. He that knew the Scheme of Truths, used his
Satisfaction as the great Motive to Obedience; but not as what made it needless
in its own place. The Apostles obeyed and imitated Christ. The first Sermon of
Peter includes this, Act. 2. 38. 40. Repent and be baptized every one of you,
for the Remission of Sins, etc. for the Promise is to you, and to your
Children, and as many as the Lord shall call. And with many other Words did he
testify, and exhort, saying, Save your selves from this untoward Generation.
Read his Epistles, and see how he moves by Threatenings and Promises, and
preaches Duties. The Apostle Paul gives the Sum of his Ministry to the
Ephesians, etc. Act. 20. 21. Testifying both to the Jews and Greeks, repentance
toward God, and faith toward the Lord Jesus. ver. 26, 27. I am pure from the
blood of all men; for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of
God. It Is he that says, If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be an
Anathema, Maranatha. What a man sows, that shall he reap, He will come in
flaming fire, to take vengeance on all that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel. What he says of FreeGrace, and Christ's Righteousness, in Opposition
to Man's Merits, does not clash with what he says of the Necessity of Graces
and Duties, as the required Terms of such Blessings as God promises to them.
The Apostle James is as express as can be; read his Epistle and Doubt; and it
seems to be written against some Libertines, who perverted the Doctrine of
Grace delivered by Paul: And Peter expressly speaks of these Men's wresting Paul's
Epistles in this very Point; as I could fully prove, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Read the
Epistle of Jude, and he agrees with the rest in arguing for Holiness, from
Threats and Promises.

3. When the Gospel is said to be preached, you will find that then Graces and
Duties were preached under a Gospel Sanction. Act. 15. 7. The Gentiles by my
mouth should hear the word of the Gospel. What this was, see Act. 10. from ver.
34. to 44. Of a truth I perceive that God is no Respecter of Persons; but in
every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with
him. The Word which God sent unto the Children of Israel, Preaching Peace by
Jesus Christ, (He is Lord of all, etc.) he commanded us to preach unto the
People,; and to testify, That it is he which was ordained of God to be Judge
of Quick and Dead: To him gave all the Prophets witness, That through his Name
whoever believes in him, shall have remission of sins. Rev. 14. 6, 7. I saw
another Angel in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach
unto them, etc. saying with a loud Voice, Fear God, and give glory to him, for
the hour of his indignation is come; and worship him that made Heaven and
Earth. So Act. 147, 15, 17. There they preached the Gospel. See their Call to
turn to God from Idols, as part of it.

4. The nature of the Gospel requires that the Ministry should include these
things, and it be preached in this manner. It Is the Gospel of the Kingdom, Luke
9. 60. It Is the Law of Christ, to whom all Judgment is committed. Gal. 6. 2.
The Law of Liberty: The Law of Faith, etc. The great design of it, is, to
destroy Satan's Empire, and recover lost Sinners to God. To this end, it
reveals, that Salvation is to be had in Christ, if we come to God by him,
though we be lost in our selves. And it is the Call of God in Christ, to come
to him, and hear him: Nay, it is the Charge of Christ, who is, for dying, made
Lord both of the dead and living. Now can any think, that many Duties must not
be parts of the Gospel, as well as Believing? Or, That Christ has not
Arguments from Benefits and Dangers, from Promises and Threats, to strengthen
his Charge? The Preceptive part of the whole Law is in his hand, and there is
Authority in all his Injunctions and Calls: Else what means Obeying the Gospel,
Subjection to the Gospel, Disobeying the Gospel? Obeyed the Truth, Obedience of
Faith? and many such Expressions. And that there be Gospel-Threats and Promises
annexed to his Precepts, I have fully proved. And I could easily show, that the
Substance of all Obedience, is said to be Obedience to the Law, Truth, and Word
of Christ. If things be so, can we think that we preach not the Gospel, when we
preach Duties? Or that we preach not the Gospel, when we urge Obedience to
these Duties from Gospel-Promises and Threats? As if all Christ's Commands were
mere Counsels. It Is no Preaching with Authority, if we omit this: It Is no
answering the Eng of Gospel, if we wave this: There Is no aptitude in the
Ministry to draw Christ, without this. The Apostle gives us another Specimen,
Col. 1. 28. whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every Man perfect in Christ. What Is Snatching Men,
as Brands out of the Burning? Compelling to come in? etc. What Pleas do the
Apostles use? Romans 12. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12, 14, etc.

5. They do not preach the Gospel of Christ at all, who preach contrary to the
scope of this Truth; no, nor they duly, who neglect to Preach according to it.
Christ never sent such News to Sinners, That they were always Pardoned and
Adopted; and they need only believe it, to know that it is so: He never told
them, That they have nothing to do to the Participation of Saving Benefits; he
has Believed for them, and Repented for them, etc. Woe to them that will live
as believing this! Christ knew how to support the Honor of his Grace, without
overturning his Throne. To Preach at this rate, may excite the Affections of
some; but, without a Miracle, will never Convert a Soul; and it needs an
Antidote which, I hope, some of the Upholders of it have. It Is the same with
the Language of the Tempter, the Arguings of the Flesh, and the Conceits of
presumptuous Sinners. Could they that knocked at the door, Mat. 7. 21. be kept
out? Or the five foolish Virgins be excluded, who went out to meet the
Bridegroom, if this be true? Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come,
will be the Language of the Spirit to the Impenitent. Mat. 3. 7. He is my
Brother (says Christ,) that does the Will of my Father. Mark 3. 35. If any man
teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness; he is proud,
knowing nothing, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4. He that talks of preaching Christ,
without preaching his Laws, his Title to rule us, his Offers, his Method of
Grace, and his Motives to urge Men; profaneth and plays with that sacred Name.

TESTIMONIES.
The Assembly and Elders at the Savoy have given us their Thoughts in what I
have cited of the Conditionality of the Covenant; the Necessity of Faith to
Union with Christ; and Justification, Free Offers of Christ to Sinners, and
Necessity of Holiness. Consult the places. See Large Catech. Q. What does God
require of us, that we may escape his Wrath and Curse? A. He Requires of us,
Repentance toward God, Faith toward our Lord Jesus, and diligent Use of the
Outward Means, etc. The Elders at the Savoy, Declar. chapter 20. a. 3. The
Revelation of the Gospel unto Sinners, made in diverse times, and by sundry
parts, with the Addition of Promises and Precepts for the Obedience required
thereto, etc. But I cannot enlarge, or I could show how Doctor Owen pleads for
this Gospel-Ordination, and shows there be Threats and Promises therein. See
what the New England Synod say on the former Heads: They cite, Error 33. To
act by Virtue, or in Obedience to a Command, is legal. They thus confute it; So
is it also Evangelical: The Mystery of the Gospel is said to be revealed for
the Obedience of Faith, (...) 16. 25. The Lord is Author of Eter^^^ ^alvation
to all that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. etc. The 29th. Error of Mrs. H. was, That
such Exhortations as these, Work out your Salvation with Fear; Make your
Calling and Election sure, are spoken to such as are under the Covenant of
Works. Mr. Norton, Orth, Evang. p. 211. Believers obey the Gospel perfectly,
with the Perfection of Parts: The Gospel is the Law in Christ: The Rule of
Righteousness is the same in the Law, and in the Gospel, though the Manner and
End of Obeying are changed. P. 105. The Obedience of good Men is rewarded by
the Promise annexed to the Precept. See what all these say, in the Chap. of the
Conditionality of the Govenant.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because Christ's Sufferings procured Salvation and assure it to such as Obey
the Gospel; therefore the Gospel enjoyneth nothing to be Obeyed. Because the
Law enjoined Doing, as the perfect Righteousness for which Life was a Debt;
therefore the Gospel requires nothing to be done, as the Means of Partaking of
that Salvation which is merited by Christ. Because it is legal to Preach the
Sanction of the Law of Innocence; therefore it is not Gospel, to press the
Gospel-Sanction. The Reverend Mr. Cole affirms, There Is Law enough in the
Gospel: The Gospel holds, forth the Danger and Remedy too. See his Treat. of
Regen. p. 101. Had Doctor Crisp noted this Truth, many Mistakes had been
prevented.

CHAP. XXI. Of Legal Preaching.
BEfore I proceed, let me inform thee, That Legal Preaching has an uncertain
Sound.

1. If by Legal, is meant the Precepts and Revelations of God in Christ, for
the Conversion and Government of lost Man, under Gospel-Threats and Promises;
then to be Legal Preachers, (as Preachers of this Law,) we account our Duty and
Honor: All the Prophets, even Isaiah himself; yea, Christ, and his Apostles,
were all Legal Preachers. The Law, in this sense, is that which Converts,
Comforts, Heals, Saves, etc, Whatever is spoken in Praise of the Word, of
the Truth, of the Commandments of God and Christ, are spoken of the Law, in
this sense: And it is the same with the Gospel, as I have proved, chap. 20. And
they are Enemies to Christ and Souls, that disdain to be such Legal Preachers.
2. But there is a Legal Preaching which is opposed to the Gospel; and this
indeed is a Crime; the word being used as a Reproach, this must be intended, if
Men understand what they speak of: And to that, this Chapter refers.

TRUTH. Legal Preaching, is to Preach the Law as a Covenant of Innocence, or
Works; or to Preach the Mosaic or Jewish-Covenant of Peculiarity: But it is
not Legal Preaching, to require and persuade to Faith, Holiness or Duties, by
Promises and Threatenings, according to the Grace of the Gospel, and direct Men
to fear and hope accordingly.

ERROR. Legal Preaching, is to call People to act any Grace, or do any Duty,
as a required Means of Salvation, or inward Peace; or to threaten them with
Death, or any Affliction, to cause Fear, if they commit the grossest Sins, and
backsside, and fall away; or to promise them any Blessing, upon their Obedience
to the Commandments of Christ; or urge the Threatenings, to persuade Sinners to
believe and repent.

Proved that this is Doctor Crisp's Opinion.
P. 616. If Persons are not united to Christ, and do not partake of
Justification before they do believe, etc. then mark what will follow, That
there will be bringing to life again the Covenant of Works, etc. Obj. How does
this follow? I Answer; Thus you must of necessity press upon your selves these
Terms, or such like; I must do, that I may have Life in Christ; I must believe,
there is no Life till I do believe. Now if their be Believing first, then there
is Doing before Living. P. 561, 562. This likewise batters to the ground that
way of urging Men to holiness which some hold forth, That if Men do not these
and these good Works, and leave these and these Sins, then they must come under
the wrath of God, etc. The Love of God constrains the Faithful, and not the
Fear of Wrath; a sense of being delivered from it, not a fear of Wrath to come.
P. 559, 560. Obj. Some will say, The Preaching of the Terrors of the Law, and
the Wrath of God, and Damnation, and Hellfire unto Men, is a safer way to take
Men off from Sin, than to preach Gracc and Forgiveness beforehand, etc. A. I
say, If we preach Wrath and Damnation, we must either make them believe they
lyc under the Wrath, and that Wrath shall come; or we must make them believe,
that though there be Wrath, yet it shall not fall upon them: Now, if we tell
them of Wrath and Damnation, and say they are secure from them, and they belong
not to them; to what purpose do we tell them of Wrath? we had as good hold our
tongues, etc. And he shows how it is bringing back the Covenant of Works, to
tell them, that God will be angry with them if they commit Sin, or do not such
and such Duties.

Wherein the Difference is not.
1. It is not: Whether it is Legal Preaching, to preach Duties or Holiness; as
if Men must perfectly believe and obey, or they shall unavoidably perish. 2.
Nor, That it is Legal Preaching, to denounce Wrath and Hell as Miseries from
which there is no relief by Christ, in the way of the Gospel. 3. Nor, That it
is Legal Preaching, to press Men to Faith, Repentance, and other Duties, as if
they were to be performed in their own strength, without the Grace of Christ,
and Influences of the Spirit. 4. Nor, That it is Legal Preaching, to promise
Salvation to any Action, if the Performer thereof be Unregenerate, Unbelieving,
and Impenitent. 5. Nor, That it is too much Legal Preaching, to be always
pressing the Duties of the Law of Nature, but to neglect Preaching Faith in
Christ, and Repentance, Regeneration, etc. and so to neglect to make the
Person, Offices, Sufferings and Intercession of Christ; as also our Relation to
him, and Dependence on him as Mediator, with other Gospel-Mysteries known to
their Hearers. 6. Nor, That it is Legal Preaching, to preach that our Faith
Holiness, or Good Works, stand in the same place now, as Perfect Obedience did
under the Law, viz. To render the Reward to be of Debt, or be the Meritorious
Righteousness for which we are Justified. 7. Or, That it is Legal to preach,
that our best Obedience does not deserve Wrath by the Law, as a Rule of Misery
and Happiness: Or, That it does not need Forgiveness, or is any Supplement of
Christ's Righteousness; yea, or to neglect to call Men to renounce all in
themselves, as any Atonement for Sin, or Cause of Pardon; and to look to Christ
as the only Propitiation, Purchaser of all our Blessings, and Cause of the
Acceptance of our Persons and Performances. 8. Nor, That it is Legal Preaching,
to omit to urge Men to Obedience by Gospel Motives; as, what Christ Suffered,
the Love of God in him, the Benefits afforded by him, the Helps he vouchsafes,
the Relations he admits us to, and the like. 9. Nor, That it is Legal, to show
Men their Misery and Sinfulness, and not to inform them of the Gospelway of
Salvation, 10. Nor, That it is too Legal, to neglect to improve holy Souls to
an ingenuous Obedience, from Love to God, as well as a holy Fear. 11. Nor that
it is Legal, to encourage such Fear as imports a Life of Torment destructive to
our Hopes and Joy: Or, as if every Miscarriage should over-turn Assurance,
though the dominion of Sin be not justly suspected. 12. Nor that it is Legal
Preaching, to assert Judaism, or the Mosaic Pedagogie; viz. to press
Circumcision, Sacrifices, a Covenant of Peculiarity, Jewish Priesthood,
Sabbath, or an Abuse of the Law, in Opposition to Christ our Savior, who is
the End of all Types, etc. All these I affirm. These indeed make up that
Preaching of the Law which is opposed to Christ, to Grace, and to the Gospel.

The real Difference.
1. Whether it is Legal Preaching, to require People to Repent and Believe, that
their Iniquities may be forgiven for Christ's sake. This I deny, and the Doctor
affirms against the scope of the Gospel; as I have proved, chap. 8. 10, 12, 20,
etc. 2. Whether it be Legal Preaching, to press Holiness, and Gospel Obedience,
as necessary to the Salvation of a Justified Person. This the Doctor affirms,
and I deny, upon Reasons given, chap. 8. 13. 17. 3. Whether it be Legal, to
threaten such Penalties as are short of Damnation, against such Offenses as are
consistent with Sincerity, and yet avoidable by serious care and diligence.
This the Doctor affirms, and I deny; for which see chap. 13, etc. 4. Whether it
be Legal, to preach Wrath and Damnation against prevailing Infidelity,
Impenitency, Ungodliness, Enmity against God, Profaneness, Apostasy, and utter
neglect of Good Works; so that Wrath be urged as a motive to Acceptance of
Christ, and sincere Subjection to him; and the Gospel-way of escaping these, be
discovered, and persuaded to. This the Doctor affirms, and I deny; being well
assured that Christ and his Apostles preached thus; and these Threatenings of
God used since the Fall, are otherwise vain; as I have proved, chap. 13, 10,
etc. 5. Whether it is Legal Preaching, to excite good Men to an holy Fear of
threatened Evils, as far as they find just Cause to suspect the Dominion of Sin,
or Danger of Apostasy, or the Power of Carnal Security. This the Doctor
affirms, and I deny.

The Truth Confirmed.
Consult the 20th. Chap. and those beforementioned, and thou will find, that
what the Doctor calls Legal Preaching, is the Tenor of the Gospel, and the
Truth according to Jesus: It Is what the Assembly affirm to be the Grace of the
New Covenant, and not the Covenant of Works: It Is the method appointed to
recover apostate Sinners, and not to govern innocent Man. I have nothing left
to do, except to vindicate, That it is the Will of God, that we should excite a
holy Fear of threatened Evils; and this in good Men as well as bad, during their
Pilgrimage.

Obj. The Doctor allows a Fear of Reveverence toward God, from the infinite
distance between him and Creatures. A. He does so, but it is no more than will
be in Heaven it self. And therefore I add, that we ought to preach so, as to
beget a fear of Caution, and from the due Sense of Danger; not indeed so as to
extinguish just Hopes or Joy, not to exclude Love, or introduce a Spirit of
Bondage, or tormenting Amazement; but to prevent Security, and awaken
Diligence, till our Danger is past, and our Warfare be accomplished. For.

1. Such Fear is our Duty by Gospel-Precept; Heb. 4. 1. Let us therefore fear,
least a Promise being left us of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem
to come short of it. It Is an Evil is to be feared here, and Sense of Danger
awakens it. See Ver. 11. Least any Man fall after the same Example of Unbelief.
Mar. 13. 5. Take heed, least any Man deceive you. This Duty is annexed, when
the Safety and Comfort of our present State is most represented; Heb. 12. 15.
Looking diligently, least any Man fail of the Grace of God. And when he had
finished the peculiar Liberties of the New Testament-Time, he adds, Ver. 25.
See that you refuse not him that speaks, for if they escaped not, who refused
him that spoke from Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him that speaks from Heaven. Ver. 28, 29. Whereby we may serve God
acceptably, with Reverence and Godly Fear; for our God is a consuming Fire.
Here is Awe impressed by Danger; much more shall not we escape, if, etc. say
not the Saints shall not turn away, for yet here is an Awful Threat if he do,
and his Fear is the Means here intended to keep him from turning away: Phil. 2.
12. Work out your Salvation with Trembling and with Fear. Romans 11. 20. Be not
high-minded, but fear. Joh. 5. 14. Sin no more, least a worse thing do befall
thee.

2. Without this Fear in sense of Danger, many of the great Duties of Religion
are excluded. What Is a Tender Heart, but a Heart impressed by a Mixture of Fear
and Love? Who is Contrite? but he that trembles at my Word? Isa. 66. 2. Are
not taking heed, solicitous Cares, and holy Watchfulness, great Duties? But if
you exclude Fear of Danger, are these possible? Nay, When God calls us to
these, he does it by representing Danger as what is to be dreaded, and thereby
begetting Fear. Mar. 13. 5, 35, 36. Take heed, least any Man deceive you, for
many shall come in my Name, etc. Watch ye therefore, etc. least coming
suddenly, he find you sleeping. Luke 21. 34, 35, 36. Take heed to your selves,
least at any time your Hearts be overcharged, etc. and so that Day come upon
you unawares, for as a Snare it shall come, etc; Watch ye therefore, and pray
always, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that shall
come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. Heb. 3. 12. 13. Take heed,
least there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the
living God, etc. Least any of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin.
Romans 11. 21. If God spared not the natural Branches, take heed, least he spare
not thee. Jam. 5. 9. Grudge not one against another, least ye be condemned;
behold the Judge stands before the Door. Are not all these intended to beget
Fear? Are not the Motives from things that must strike an awe of Danger? The
Lord argues to a Fear of Apostasy, Unpreparedness, being rejected at Christ's
coming, being cut off and condemned; and God is represented, not only as great
above us, but as our Judge, as a consuming Fire.

3. This Fear is entertained by, and approved of in the best Men. 1 Cor. 9. 27.
I keep my Body under, least that by any means, when I have preached to others,
I my self should be a Castaway. Was here no Fear in Sense of Danger? Noah,
moved with Fear, prepared an Ark, Heb. 11. 7. David tells us, Psalm. 119, 120.
My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, I am afraid of thy Judgments. Prove. 28.
13. Happy is he that fears always. It was the want of this that is branded in
the Virgins; They all slumbered and slept. Habakkuck's Tremblings and Faith
were consistent, Chap. 3. 16, 17.

4. This fear is absolutely necessary to Saints in their Pilgrimage. What Men
should we be, if Fear were extinct? What would our Remains of Corruption, our
great Snares, Heaps of earthly Diversions, while eternal things are invisible,
reduce us to without Fear? Would Back-sliders recover themselves without fear?
or Men in Difficulties hold out? God knew our Frame, when he says, 1 Pet. 1.
17. And if you call upon the Father, who without respect of Persons, judges
accordingly every Man's Work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear.
This Text ill agrees with the Doctor's Notion: We have no Work to do for
Eternity, as if the Judgment-Day were past; away with Fear of Wrath or Danger,
as if we were in Heaven already. Good Men may fancy an ingenuous Life of Love
exclusive of all Fear, in this World; but though they could be safe and
vigorous thereby, it follows not that all other good Men can, and we must
preach the Mind of Christ to them. But I fear they know not, or observe not
their own Hearts, who pretend to this, and if they fall into many gross Sins
and Neglects, and keep up to this Rule, God calls them to fear their State. 2
Pet. 3. 17. Seeing you know these things, beware lest you also being led away
with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own Stedfastness. He will most
safely walk in Love, and maintain Assurance, that is, in awe, as his Sins grow
strong, and his Graces decline. I might show that all God's Threats are
despised, if without this Fear; yea, his being our future Judge is slighted,
his wise Methods of Government are dis-regarded, and one great help to our
Salvation lost, by opposing this Fear. Fear him that can cast Soul and Body
into Hell, is Christ's Charge, Luke 12. 5. And if thou do that which is Evil,
be afraid, Romans 13. 4. And if we must fear the Magistrate as the Minister of
God's Wrath here, much more eternal Wrath; if we sin our selves into such
Symptoms as the Gospel declares a Danger of eternal Damnation by; for though
the Gospel does not say as the Law, that all Sinners shall be damned; yet it
says, that all impenitent Sinners shall be damned. And this we are bound to
preach, and not gratify the Devil to the Ruin of Souls. But they are in
danger who are above this kind of Preaching; and Security, Libertinism, and
Stops to the Conversion of Sinners, will prevail as this Preaching grows
unfashionable. Nay, let me hear a Man of this Opinion preach a few Sermons, and
I Will demonstrate he will give the Lie to his own Principle, by urging Fear by
some Arguments from Danger; or he will expose himself to the Contempt of all,
whenever he disswades from Sin.

TESTIMONIES.
I have recited so much belonging to this Head, Chap. 1, 8, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17,
19, 20. that I need only add to the last Chapter. New England Synod condemns,
as Error 32. After the Revelation of the Spirit, neither Devil nor Sin can
make the Soul to doubt Error 48. Condional Promises are legal. Error 52. It Is
legal to say, we act in the Strength of Christ. Error 56. A Man is not
effectually converted till he has full Assurance. Error 57. To take delight
in the holy Service of God, is to go a whoring from God. Error 59. A Man may
not be exhorted to any Duty, because he has no power to do it. Error 70.
Frequency, or length of holy Duties, or Trouble of Conscience for the Neglect
thereof, are all Signs of one under a Covenant of Works Error 68. Faith
justifies an Unbeliever, that is, that Faith that is in Christ, justifies me
that have no Faith in my self. Error 76. The Devil and Nature may be the cause
of a gracious Work. All these that Synod confutes, as also that Speech, if
Christ will let me sin, let him look to it, upon his Honor be it. With these
Notions, so exclusive of Fear and Care were they pestered. Doctor Owen, Of
Justif. P. 52. assures us, he had written very much of the Nature and Use of
Threatenings under the Gospel, and the Fear that ought to be ingenerated by them
in the Hearts of Men.

The Grounds of the Doctor's Mistake.
Because the Law of Works made Life to be of Debt for perfect doing; therefore
its legal to call Men to do what Christ commands, in order to any Benefit,
which he promises by the Grace of the New Covenant to bestow on such as shall
so obey him. Because it is legal to denounce Wrath as unavoidable, therefore
it is legal to denounce Wrath that it may be avoided. Because God is not angry
with his People for Sin, when he has forgiven them it upon Repentance;
therefore they should not be called to fear his Anger, as a disswasive from
Sin, or Motive to Repentance when they have sinned. Because we cannot say the
Elect shall at last be damned, being that God will bring them to Faith and
Repentance, that they may be saved; therefore it is legal to tell them, they
shall be damned unless they believe and repent, though Christ often tells them
so. Because the Believer is not in a state of Wrath; therefore it is Legal to
warn him against Apostasy, from the Terror of that Wrath which Apostasy would
bring him under: And Note, Reader, That all awful Expressions against Apostasy,
are especially directed to true Believers. Because we should not destroy the
Hope or Joy of an humble, watchful Christian; therefore it is legal to allarm
and awaken the drowsy, careless, backsliding Christian.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Exalting of Christ's
I Do observe, that the Pretense for these Opinions, is, That they exalt
Christ, and Free Grace. Under this shadow Antinomianism set up in Germany. This
was the great Cry in England above fifty years since. The Synod of New England
expose this as one of the Speeches of them whom they call Autinomian: Here is a
great stir about Graces, and looking to Hearts; but give me Christ: I seek not
for Graces, but for Christ: I seek not for Promises, but for Christ: I seek not
for Sanctification, but for Christ: Tell not me of Mediation and Duties, but
tell me of Christ. P. 19. Dr. Crisp very often bears upon this Point, as if all
he said were to advance Christ and Grace: I shall therefore enquire, Whether
the Opinions of Dr. Crisp, or the Truths I have stated, do most exalt Christ
and Free Grace.

It were enough to say, That I have proved his Opinions to be Errors; and what
I have laid down, to be Truths: Then Christ is more exalted by these Truths. He
needs no Lies to advance his Praise, and knew how to provide the best for his
own Glory, by what he has revealed. But for farther Evidence, I shall insert,

1. How Christ is said to be exalted, according to the Gospel. It is not what
we fancy, will Exalt him; but what he declares conducive to his Praise, that he
will accept for Glory: He that will not allow Men to worship him in a way they
think most devout, but binds them to his own Rule, to exceed which, is
Superstitious; will less venture his Glory to our ignorant Methods, whereby we
are apt to diminish his real Glory, when we conceit he is exalted. It Is an
Honor becoming his Person and Offices, which is his Honor, and not what seems
dazzling to our blind Affections. His Divine Glory cannot be added to, but only
declared: It Is only the Glory of Christ, as Mediator, that I shall speak of. As
to this, Christ is exalted, when every Knee bows to him, Phil. 1. 11. When
made a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance, and remission of sin, Act. 2.
23. When his Kingdom is enlarged, Ifa. 49. 4, 5, 6. When his People are
filled with the fruits of Rightcousness, Phil. 1. 11. When their Grace is
perfected, 2 These. 1. 11, 12. When they suffer and act vigorously for him,
Phil. 1. 20. When we own his Priestly and Kingly Office; relying on the first,
as that whereby Satisfaction is made, and all the Blessings for Sinners
purchased; yielding to the Kingly Office, as that whereby he applies the
Effects of his Merits, Zech. 6. 13. When we submit to the Word, as it brings
every Thought into subjection (...) Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Are guided by his
Teachings, Ephesians. 2. 20. We are the Glory of Christ, when we labor in his
Work, and walk worthy of his Name, 2 Cor. 8. 23. He is all in all, when Jews
and Gentiles put on the New Man, which is created after him in righteousness,
and true holiness, etc. Col. 3. 11, 12. When we live and die to him, as our
Supreme Lord; and submit all our Actings to his Glory, as our End, Romans 14 11,
12. These places express, that Christ is hereby Exalted; consult them, and thou will find it so.

2. The Truths I have stated, do tend to the Exaltation of Christ in this
manner; and none can doubt but they lead to his Glory, as he is King. All that
can be objected, is, Whether I do exalt him enough, as Priest? To which, I say,
I have spoken as the Word directs; and I am willing to own any thing that lays
Man low, and exalts Christ as the only Atonement, the only Purchaser of all our
Blessings, the only Procurer of our Acceptance, the Author and Finisher of all
Grace: Nothing can add to his Satisfaction or Fullness; Pardon, Peace, Life, all
are the Effects of his sole Merits: We must do all in his Name, act in his
Strength, daily live on him for all Supplies, and look to him for Acceptance;
without whose Incense, the best Man, and the best Action, were an Abomination.
What I contend for, is, his Government, so wisely contrived to apply his
Blessings to Men in a state of Trial.

3. The Opinions of Doctor Crisp, as opposed to these Truths, cannot exalt
Christ; yea, by the above Description, every one of them cast a Reproach upon
Christ. I Will ask thee, Is Christ exalted, when he is made the very Blasphemer,
and loaded with the filth of Sin, and thereby odious to God till he sweat it
out P. 51, etc. Is he exalted, in making Sin so Innocent to the Elect, when
they commit it, that though they do the Fact, yet the filthy Form of it is not
theirs, but Christ's; and therefore they are not defiled thereby, but are as
holy as Christ, as lovely as Christ, even when they Murder? etc. Is Man
debased, and Christ exalted, when there is a Change of Person between Christ
and them; we as Righteous as Christ, and he as Loathsome as we; and we should
not charge our selves with Sin, when the greatest Enormities are committed? Is
Christ exalted as King, when all his Commands are made mere Counsels? He is a
King, but has neither Promises nor Threats annexed to his Laws: He has no
Right to Chastize for Sin: He offers Blessings on Terms, pleads earnestly,
sends his Spirits and Ministers to strive; but all this while, his Spirit nor
Word do nothing to save us; our Compliance with his Calls, yields no Benefit;
our Rejection of them, puts no Hindrance; our grossest Villainies should not be
bewailed, in order to Pardon; nor himself believed in to that end. Our Sins can
do us no harm at all; nor is Holiness, though so often urged by him, a jot of our
way to Heaven? Is Christ exalted as a Head, that has actual Members often sixty
years Slaves to the Devils, Enemies to himself, and Life, and People, without
his Spirit, or a Line of his Image; and public Curses? etc. Is he honored as
Mediator, that Men are invested in all his Covenant-Blessings, washed and
adopted, before they so much as own that God to whom he is a Way, or renounce
his Enemy the Devil, or confess their Sin, purpose any amendment, see their
need of him, or desire to fear or love him; yea, do resolve the contrary? Is
Christ exalted as a holy Redeemer, by being represented so intent on our mere
Impunity, as to contrive so little for our Holiness; he repents and believes
for us, and requires no such things from us as a Means of Benefits; the
Holiness he here improves the best to, is but Dung and Filthiness; though he
pretends to encourage, expostulate and reprove; yet indeed he governs his Elect
as Brutes, neither Hope nor Fear must influence them; he has no Rule to Judge
them, but the Decree of Election; though he warns us so often of the Solemnities
of the Last Day. No Man must intend his own good, in any Duty he performs;
though he speaks so much of his Reward, yet they have no respect at all to what
we do, they will be as much ours for the greatest neglects. The Comforts of
Assurance it self depends on no Signs of Renovation; but concluding in our
selves upon an inward Voice, that our Sins are pardoned, and this, all that
Faith which the Gospel speaks so much of. How many more might I instance which
represent Christ inglorious, and reflect on the Truth, Wisdom, Holiness and
Justice, of his nature? The Platform of his Government, the Divineness of his
Purposes in Redemption, and the Substance and Scope of his Word and Gospel.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Honor of the Free Grace of God.
I Shall briefly consider whether Dr. Crisp's Opinion, or the described Truths,
do most exalt the Free Grace of God. To this end I shall touch on these Heads.

1. We must be sure it is the Free Grace of God we speak of: This is the Love,
Mercy and Benignity of God to Sinners. To conceive aright of this, Note, That
it is not every thing that Man can fancy, to be Free, or Grace, or Free Grace;
that is, the Free Grace of God: No, it must be a Grace free, becoming the
Nature of God, suitable to all his other holy Perfections, consistent with his
Dominions, executing it self in the Way and Instances appointed by his
Wisdom; limited to the Objects, both for Number and Qualifications, as
described by his Word; and serving all it is glorious Purposes of Redemption.
This is the Free Grace of God: The Grace of God in Truth, Col. 1. 6. The true
Grace of God, which Peter had at large described, 1 Pet. 5. 12. This Grace
consists with an Atonement made by Christ; with the Threatenings denounced in
the Gospel; with the Ruin of all unbelieving, apostate, ungodly Sinners; with
God's peremptorily insisting on Gospel-Terms, in the Distribution of Benefits;
or else it would clash with his Word, etc. It Is not less the Free Grace of
God, because it is not so free as we may dream it is: As some do fancy, it
would have been more Free Grace, if he had not exacted a Dying-Sacrifice; or if
it had alike extended to all sinful Men, as well as some; or included Devils,
as well as Men; or made the Elect perfectly holy and happy as soon as born,
excluding all Labor, Pain, Sin and Sorrow. But we see such Free Grace is not
the Free Grace of God; though it seems more Free, or more Grace, to vain
Surmisers, it is not Free as, if it dispensed Privileges by no certain Rule;
and that God is as free to forgive and save the Impenitent, as the Penitent.

2. What I have stated as Truth, does acknowledge and exalt this Free Grace of
God. I have affirmed, and would admit the fullest Expressions to testify, that
in these is the Free Grace of God in Truth. Of mere Grace he elected some
certain Sinners to Life, upon no moving, foreseen Condition; but yet to obtain
it through Sanctification of the Spirit to Obedience, and sprinkling of the
Blood of Jesus. Of mere Love to Sinners, no way deserving it, he gave his Son
to die for them; who also undertook to bring all the Elect to Salvation, in the
way appointed between the Father and him: He, without any thing in Man to
deserve it, gave his Gospel; and thereby offers, in the virtue of his Son's
Blood, Pardon, and Eternal Life, to every one that will repent, and truly
believe; and no penitent, persevering Believer shall miss of Life by a failure
of this Promise: He freely and of mere Grace bestows Faith and Repentance; yea,
gives his Spirit to create these, and any other good Work, in worthless, vile
Sinners: And though he will not forgive any that finally refuse to believe and
repent, nor save any ungodly, barren, apostate Man; yet Pardon and Life are his
free-Gift, and no Grace or Duty merits them, they being no more than the
required Conditions or Means of our partaking them, as the Gifts of God,
through Christ; and so hereby he honors his own Government, and no way
indulgeth the boastings of Men.

3. The Opinions of Dr. Crisp, as they differ from these Truths, do not exalt
the Free Grace of God: His Notions may seem more to represent an unlimited
Grace as blind, and so more suitable to wicked, foolish Men: But it is not
agreeable to the holy Nature, nor just or wise Government, or the revealed Will
of God; but greatly reflects on God's Grace, beyond what I will mention. Is it
the honor of God's Grace, that all the Graces of the Spirit should be needless
to promised Benefits, when he promises those Benefits to them? Is it the Grace
of an holy God, not to esteem a Man filthy by the greatest Abominations, and
yet abhor his own Image in his Saints, as Dung? Is it the Free Grace of God,
to account an Elect Person, in the height of his Wickedness, as pure and as
lovely as a Saint in Glory; and yet withold his Spirit from him many years?
Is it the Grace of God, to leave his Precepts without any Sanction, when he
removed the Curse of the Law? Never to express any displeasure, when most
provoked; yea, when he does correct? To have no regard to Good or Evil in Men,
in his judicial Distributions? To leave Men so Imperfect in a World of
Temptations, and State of Trial, free from all fear of Caution, and to have
nothing in them to influence their Perseverance and Holiness, except a
Principle of Gratitude, though their Love be weak? Can it be the Grace of God,
that his Subjects must have no Eye to his Rewards or Threats; fear none of his
Displeasure when they offend; be confident of the Pardon of the worst Offenses,
before they confess a Fault; never fear a Rebuke for, or Hurt in or by any Sin;
yea, condemn any trouble on that account, though he blame the contrary, and his
Spirit causes these Relentings? Is it the Free Grace of our God, which renders
him a Respecter of Persons in his judicial Acts, as the Ruler and Judge of the
World, because he bestows Grace as an Act of Sovereignty? It cannot be his
Free Grace, who has so wisely contrived the Kingdom of his Grace, that he
prevents Idleness and Neglect in Men, as well as Boasting; that he makes the
Sinner speechless, for being his own Undoer, by wilfully refusing Christ, as
well as he secures the acknowledgment of his Free Mercy by all that are saved.
Can that Grace be his, which nullifies all his Threats, weakens the Authority
of all his Commands, turns all his Pleadings with Men into empty Words; nay,
direct Fallacies? Is it the Grace of God that overturns the stated Order
wherein Grace exerts it self, becoming all the Perfections of God? God's Grace
first calls, and therein unites us to Christ; first quickens, then dignifies;
first gives Faith, then Forgives, etc. But by the Doctor's Opinion, this Order
is in^erted; all Privileges are applied to the Sinner, before Grace has made
any Change on the Sinner. It Is not the Grace of God, which ^ets up his Decree
in Opposition to his revealed Will, Acquits whom he declares Condemned,
Enervates the Ministry, Seareth the Conscience, Encourages Spiritual Sloth,
Discourageth Obedience, Reproacheth God^iness, gives Advantage to the Tempter,
Destroys the Rule of Judgment, and Opposes the general, and plain scope of the
Scripture, the Experience of Saints, and the Nature of Man, as Rational, as
well as his Relation to God, as a Subject, in the way to an Eternal State. It
cannot be God's Free Grace, which renders Men as safe for Eternity, if they
never heard the Gospel, as by hearing of it; for if they be united to Christ,
and pardoned in the Womb, they need the Gospel only for Assurance, but not for
Title; to change their Apprehensions, but not their State. How many more (and
some grosser) Objections might be offered against that being the Free Grace of
God, which Dr. Crisp and his Followers speak of as Free Grace? I desire to
live, adoring the Riches of that Grace, that freely elected to Grace and Glory
in Christ (as the great Means of accomplishing this Purpose) so many apostate
Sinners; that freely offers Life to the worst Enemies, on Gospel-Terms, with so
much help, as leaves the Blood of the Impenitent on their own Heads; that
freely bestows the Spirit, to work the Dead and Ungodly to an Obedience to the
Terms of the Gospel; that freely gives, by the Promise for Christ's sake,
Pardon to the penitent Believer; and such amazing Dignity to such as he
enableth to persevere in Faith and Holiness, as the Rule of the Promise does
require. This Grace I adore, and own the best to merit nothing to forfeit all;
yea, to deserve Hell by the Law of Works: And I do renounce all that Saints
have, or do, as any Atonement for Sin, or Purchasing Price of the least
Benefit, much less of Salvation. But yet I disown any Free Grace to be the Free
Grace of God which overturns his Benefits from being Motives to Duty; denies
the total neglect of Duties, with their contrary Evils from being a Bar to our
Interest in those Benefits which by the Gospel he promises to those Duties;
and requires those Duties, in order to this Rectoral Distribution of Blessings,
it being wisely provided for in the Dispensation of this Grace, that he may
Rule and Judge us according to his Relation to us, and according to our
rational Nature, in a state of Trial, for a future Condition.

READER, There are other Mistakes of Doctor Crisp's, which I might instance;
as, his Notion of the Nature of our Union with Christ, as if we were One
Natural Person with him: His Difinition of the New Creature, as if it stood
only in our New Relation to Christ. P. 90. The strange difference he makes
between the way of Salvation before Christ's time, and since. P. 254, 255, 256,
258. Their Sins were pardoned, on Condition of Doing, not given for all Sins at
once; much Dust left, and they were subject to Lashes for Sin; but now the
Covenant is contrary in all these respects. How contrary to the Sense of the
Assembly and Elders at the Savoy, chapter 11. a. 6. The Justification of Believers
under the Old Testament, was in all these respects one and the same with the
Justification of Believers under the New Testament. He forgets that most of his
Proofs be fetched from the Old Testament, as Ezekiel. 16, etc. Jacob loved in the
Womb, etc. and seems not to distinguish the Covenant of Grace, and that of
Peculiarity. But these, with other Errors, I pass by,

THE APPENDIX.
I Shall here repeat what I delivered in Pinners-Hall-Lecture, which some
Persons seemed greatly to resent; and I leave it to any impartial Man to judge,
from what I have described as Dr. Crisp's Opinion, whether I charged Men of his
Persuasion with Falsehood.

After I had fully acquitted Men of my Judgment, from Pelagianism, Socinianism,
and Arminianism, which the Antinomians accuse us of; I added, with these Men,
It Is not enough that we hold, That we were from Eternity elected to Grace and
Glory; unless we add, That we were actually United to Christ, and Justified
from Eternity, and in the Womb. It Is not enough, that we say, Christ did, in
the Covenant of Redemption, undertake to save the Elect in his appointed way
and time; unless we add, That there is no other Covenant for the Application of
Christ's Benefits; wherein God requires Faith and Repentance, as the
indispensible Means of our Pardon. It is not enough, that we own, That Christ
absolutely Redeemed the Elect, so as to purchase Saving Graces, as well as
Benefits, to be infallibly theirs; unless we add, That all others are in state
of Devils; as having no real Offers of Life on Gospel-Terms; nor is their
Salvation possible, if they will repent and believe: It will not please them,
that we affirm, The Punishment of our Sins; yea, the Guilt of them, as an
Obligation to Punishment, were laid upon Christ, our Sponsor; unless we add,
That our Sins themselves in their blot and filthiness, were also transacted on
Christ. It is not enough, that we own, That the Righteousness of Christ avails
us as much as if it were personally our own; yea, was always intended for us,
and is so imputed to us, as to be the Foundation of, and Security for our
Pardon and Right to Life; and no Atonement for Sin, or purchasing Price of
Life, can be demanded from us; unless we also add, That God esteemed us to have
done and suffered, what Christ did and suffered. It suffices not, that we say,
That we are Justified only by Christ's Merits, as the sole procuring Cause, or
Righteousness for which we are Justified: unless we deny, That Faith and
Repentance are the indispensibly required Conditions or Qualifications of those
Persons to whom the Merits of Christ are applied for Justification. It will not
serve, that we assert, That Justifying Faith, must be a Reliance on Christ, as
Priest, and sole Atonement: unless we deny, That Faith must be also a fiducial
Acceptance of a whole Savior; i. e. of Christ, as Prophet, Priest and King.
It Is not enough, that we say, We are upon Repenting and Believing, put into a
Justified state, hefore any other Work: unless we add, That our Obedience to
particular Precepts do not benefit us; and that God does not judicially approve
of our sincere Actings, as according to the Rule of the Gospel-Promises of
those Benefits. It is not enough, that we say, The absolute Promises are made
to Christ, for the be nefit of the Elect, and pleadable by him; unless we deny,
That the Gospel is an authoritative Command on Men to Believe, and that under
the Gospel-Sanction of Life and Death: So that he that believes, stall be
saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned. It will not please, that we
say, That Christ purchased all Grace for us, and by his Spirit works all
Grace in us; unless we add, That he Believed, Repented, and did all for us, so
as we have nothing to do in order to Salvation. It Is not sufficient, that we
own, The Grace by which we do any Duty, is from Christ; and the Good promised
to any Duty, is for the sake of Christ: unless we deny the ordained Connection
betwixt that Duty and that Benefit. They say, We set up Man's Righteousness, if
we tell Men that they must be holy, and do good, and take comfort therein, as
an Evidence of Grace, and of their Title to Christ, and as answering the Rule
of the Gospel-Promises, though we assert, They must be Members of Christ, and
accepted through him; or they cannot partake of any Saving Benefits thereby. It
is not right, that we say, God sees no Sin in Believers, so as to cast them out
of Covenant, nor out of a Justified-state, for it; unless we add, That God sees
no Sin at all in them, as theirs, when they most offend. It Is not enough, that
we affirm, That Sin committed, shall not eventually damn a Believer, because he
shall by the Spirit be brought to Repentance; unless we add, God is never angry
with Believers for Sin; nor ever corrects them, as guilty of it. With these we
are Legal Preachers, if we urge Faith and Repentance in order to Pardon, though
we declare that Faith and Repentance are the Gifts of Christ; and Pardon is not
the Effect of these Graces, but of the Promise in the virtue of Christ's Blood,
or of his Blood applied for Forgiveness by the Promise. We are Legal Preachers,
if we persuade to Holiness, as the way of Salvation by the Ordination of
Christ; though we affirm, that it is no way out of Christ; nor but with a
respect to Christ, for whom it is accepted, as what answers the Rule of the
Gospel-Promise. How are we decried as Legal, if we urge Threatenings, though as
Motives to close with Christ, and to walk in him* Which being used to this end,
and the threatened Evil being avoidable on Gospel-Terms, and pressed on fallen
Man for his recovery; they are Gospel, and not Legal Threatenings. It Is not
enough, That we assert and press Assurance; unless we affirm, That Justifying
Faith, is nothing but Assurance. It Is not enough, we say, That we need the
Spirit, to discover to us our inherent Grace, and to assist Conscience in it is
Sentence, That Grace is inherent; unless we add, That we must not try our
State, and conclude of it by Gospel-Marks of Sanctification; but depend on an
inward Voice of the Spirit, saying, Thy Sins are forgiven; which we must
believe, if it agree but to the general Word, viz. Christ came to save Sinners;
and believing this is all that Saving Faith the Gospel speaks of. Herein I
have, in part, described the state of the Case between them and us. It Is true,
there are some small Differences among the Orthodox, in Wording some of these
things: But shall we hereby give Advantage to such Errors as overturn the
Gospel and Dominion of Christ, under the abused Pretext of Exalting Christ, and
Free Grace? Bear with this, which for the sake of Christ, and dying Religion, I
have ventured to declare: not for the Irritation of any, but the Edification of
all, especially some mistaken, well-meaning People. Conscience binds me not to
palliate, though I foresee Reproach from some, who would do well to remember
the Caution the Spirit of God thought needful to such as boasted of a Faith
without Works, and still it appears too pertinent; If any man among you seem to
be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this
man's rereligion is vain, Jam. 2. 26.

SOME General Heads.
THE Elect are Children of Wrath, till effectually called, Page 4 The filth of
Sin not transacted on Christ, p. 10 The Act of laying Sins on Christ, is not
the discharge of the Elect, p. 17 Men's Sins their own, and not Christ's Sins,
p. 25 Our Sins laid on Christ, before he was nailed to the Cross, p. 29 Christ
not abhorred by the Father, p. 33 No change of Person between Christ and the
Elect, p. 41 Christ's Mediatorial Righteousness not subjectively in us, and how
imputed, p. 42 Believers not as Holy as Christ, p. 46 The Covenant of Grace
explained, and what a Condition is, p. 53, 57. The Covenant of Grace
Conditional, p. 63 Faith not a Persuasion that my Sins are pardoned, etc. p. 75
Prevailing Enmity, a Hindrance to our present Interest in Christ, p. 85 The
Elect not united to Christ without Faith, p. 93 What Union with Christ is, p.
100 Justification not before Faith, p. 105 Repentance necessary to Pardon, p.
114 Sinners have much to do to be saved, p. 129 The Gospel has Threats and
Promises, p. 133 Holiness and Good Works necessary to Salvation, p. 139 They
are profitable, and God pleased, etc p. 142, 143, 144 Our own Good should be
intended, p. 155 Assurance by Gospel-Marks, and not by an inward Voice, p. 165
God Charge Sin on Men, and they should repent for repeated Pardon, p. 175 Sin
may hurt Believers, p. 184 God afflicts for Sin, p. 192 Sincere Holiness not
Dung, p. 199, 102 Christ does not repent, etc. for us. p. 211 Conditional
Proposals of Benefit on terms of Duty, Gospel-Preaching, p. 213 To excite Fear
in sense of Danger, not Legal Preaching. p. 228 Christ more Exalted by the
former Truths, than by Dr. Crisp's Opinions, p. 235 The Free Grace of God not
honored by Doctor Crisp, though more Freeness be asserted by him, than by
these Truths, p. 239 Part of a Sermon at Pinner's-Hall, Anno 1691. The Edition
of Dr. Crisp's Works I refer to, is the last, Anno 1690.
FINIS.

