'O ANTIPISTOS.

The Great ANTICHRIST REVEALED, Before this time, never discovered.

AND, Proved to be neither Pope, nor Turk, nor any Single Person, nor the
Succession of any one Monarch, or Tyrant in any Policy;

BUT A collected pack, or multitude of Hypocritical, Heretical, Blasphemous,
and most scandalous wicked men, that have fulfilled all the Prophesies of the
Scriptures, which have forespoken of the coming of the great Antichrist; and
especially, have united and combined themselves together by a solemn League and
Covenant to slay the two witnesses of God; Moses and Aaron, as Christ
interprets them; (They have Moses and the Prophets Luke 16.29.) that is, The
supreme Magistrate of the Commonwealth, and the chief Pastors and Governors of
the Church of Christ.

And the Christian world is requested to judge,

Whether the Assembly of Presbyterians consulting at Westminster, Together with
the Independents, Anabaptists, and Lay-Preachers, be not the false Prophet, and
the mystical soul of that great Antichrist; And Whether the prevalent Faction
of the long Parliament, (termed of late the Rump Parl.) and their Adherents,
that killed the two witnesses of Jesus Christ, 1. Charles the first, King of
Great Britain, and in him, civilly, all his Magistrates; 2. William Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury, and civilly all the suppressed Bishops and silenced
Preachers of these 3 kingdoms;
be not the gross and visible body of the same Antichrist.
By Gr. Williams, L. Bishop of Ossory.

Impii homines, qui dum volunt esse mali, nolunt esse veritatem, qua
condemnantur mali.

August. Me, me, adsum qui feci, in me convertite ferrum.

Virg. Jehovae Liberatori. London, Printed at the charge of the Author, 1660.

A strong faith fenced with a golden helmet,
Need not fear the beast his hatchet,
But his wicked deeds will ring,
And show the praises of the King,
Whom the cruel beast has killed,
And all the Prophesies fulfilled,
Of our blessed Savior Christ,
Touching the accursed Antichrist.
The Authors Protestation.
I Call God to be my witness, and heaven and earth to testify against me, if
I aim at any thing, or desire any thing, by the publishing of these books, but
the glory of God, the true service of Jesus Christ, and the good, the peace,
and the happiness of the Church of Christ, and the people of these Kingdoms,
without envy to any man's good, or hatred to any man's person, or the ambition
and desire of any place, profit or preferment; for that, I thank God, I have
learned, in any state to be contented, Et contemnere contemni.

The Authors Prayers, which Morning and Evening, he uses to say to Almighty
God, and to his Savior, Jesus Christ. The Authors first address to Almighty
God.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
O Eternal, Almighty Lord God, our good God, sweet Savior Jesus Christ, Holy
and blessed Spirit, glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon us most miserable sinners, have mercy upon us most miserable sinners: O
Lord God pardon and forgive us all our sins; those great and many sins, that we
have most hainously committed against thy divine Majesty; Lord enter not into
judgment with us thy servants, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight; and
deal not not with us according to the multitude of our transgressions, but
according to the multitude of thy mercies and compassion do away our offenses,
and give us thy grace that ever hereafter we may serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life; make us truly thankful unto thee for
all those mercies and favors, and loving kindnesses, that thou have
continually so graciously, and so mercifully bestowed upon us; for thou have
created us after thine own image, thou have redeemed us with the precious blood
of thy dear Son Jesus Christ; and thou have called us and sanctified us in some
measure, with the graces of thy most blessed Spirit; thou have delivered us out
of all our troubles, from all dangers, and from the hands of all that hate us,
from the snare whereunto we were fallen, and from those dangerous Sea-voyages,
wherein we had utterly perished, if thou had not most mercifully preserved
us: thou have given us means and maintenance whereby we were enabled to serve
thee, and thou have restored the same to us again, when we had utterly lost it;
thou have given us faith to believe in thy Son Jesus Christ, hope to attain to
eternal life, love and charity both toward thee and our neighbors for thy
sake, repentance for our former sins, and a resolution ever hereafter to lead a
holy and a godly life; thou have blessed us in all our ways, prospered all our
journeys, delivered us from all evil, helped us in all our necessities,
preserved us in health, and restored thy servants to life, when they were at
the point of death; for all which, and for all other thy mercies and loving
kindnesses, both spiritual and temporal, we heartily praise thy glorious name,
and magnify thee with all our souls; we honor thee, we bless thee, we praise
thee, we thank thee, and we will magnify thee for the same for ever and ever.
And we do most humbly beseech thee, of thy goodness, O Lord, to continue still
thy loving kindness toward us, and to preserve us still from all evil and
mischief, from all sin, from the crafts and assaults of the devil, from thy
wrath, and from everlasting damnaation; save and defend us from shame,
reproach, and discredit in this world, from violent and sudden death, and from
the malice and hatred of all our enemies; O let them never prevail against us,
let them never have the upper hand over us, and let them not say, There, there,
so would we have it; neither let them say, We have devoured them: but, be thou
with us, be our helper and defender, be our shield, and our buckler, be our
strong Tower, whereunto we may always resort, and we will not fear what man
can do unto us: We pray thee also, good God, give me wisdom and understanding;
O Lord I beseech thee, give me wisdom and understanding, memory, boldness, and
utterance; help and assist me at all times, and in all places, to preach thy
holy word for the glory of thy name, and the benefit of thy people. And as thou
have helped and assisted me the last time, and all other times heretofore, for
which I do heartily praise and thank thy glorious name; so I do most humbly
beseech thee to help and assist me the next time, and at all other times
hereafter, that I may set forth thy praise and glory: bless O Lord, the holy
Catholic Church, bless and preserve thy servant Charles, that is our lawful
King; and all the servants of Jesus Christ, that are with him; comfort them now
after the time thou have chastised them, and for the years, wherein they have
suffered adversity; give them patience to endure whatsoever thou layest upon
them, and in thy good time deliver them out of all their troubles; and restore
them to their just rights again; As for their enemies cloth them with shame
and confusion; And for those that trouble them, and wrong them, open their eyes,
that they may see their own most odious, and most abominable sins, touch their
hearts with the finger of thy holy Spirit, that they may be truly penitent and
sorrowful for all their wicked ways, and that they may turn unto thee with
weeping, fasting, and prayer. And though we be a sinful nation, a nation laden
with iniquity, corrupt children, and the seed of evil doers, yet do not thou
cast us off from being thine inheritance; Let not thy wrath burn like fire, and
let not thine anger continue from Generation to Generation, but be thou pleased
and reconciled with us in the death and passion of Jesus Christ, and for his
sake be thou merciful unto us, and forgive us all our sins, and give us thy
grace, that ever hereafter we may serve thee in holiness and righteousesse all
the days of our life; make us more and more thankful unto thee for all those
favors and mercies, and loving kindnesses, that thou have continually so
graciously, and so mercifully bestowed upon us; increase our faith more and
more, stir up our hope, and kindle our charity both toward thee and our
neighbors for thy sake; give us true repentance for our former sins, and a
constant resolution ever hereafter to lead a holy and an upright life. Grant us
that means and maintenance whereby we may be enabled to serve thee; not too
much, lest we be too proud, and so forget thee, nor too little, lest we should
want, and so despair of thy mercy: but of thy goodness grant us that
competencie and sufficiency, whereby we may be enabled to serve thee, and not
be chargeable, but rather helpful unto others. Bless O Lord my family, my
wife and children, and all that belong unto me; Bless the two Universities, of
Cambridge and Oxford: And bless likewise the Tribe of Levi, the Ministers of
the Gospel, that do continually wait at thine Altar, and especially those
reverend Bishops, that are yet alive in these dominions: and thou that art the
Judge of all the world, be a just and a righteous Judge, betwixt us and them,
that have taken away the reward of our labors, and have hindered us to
discharge our duties, and caused us, that have sat in scarlet, to embrace
dunghils; we do acknowledge and confess, that we have most worthily deserved
all the miseries that are come upon us, and much more, if thou should deal
with us according to our deserts, and punish us according to the multitude of
our sins. But we know, Lord, that thou desire not the death of a sinner,
thou take no pleasure in the destruction of the living, but rather that they
should turn from their wicked ways and live; and if thou, Lord, should be
extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it? when as the best
of us all is not able to answer Thee one of a thousand; and therefore we do
most humbly and most earnestly beseech thee, not to deal with us according to
our deserts, nor to punish us according to the multitude of our sins; but
according to the multitude of thy mercies, to do away our offenses, and to give
us thy grace, that ever hereafter we may serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. Make an end of this wasting division
that is amongst us, free us from these dangers, and deliver us from these
troubles; O let not our enemies still prevail to triumph over us, and to
trample us under feet, as mire and clay in the streets, but let the light of
thy countenance shine on us, let thine ears hear our prayers, let our cry come
unto thee, and let thine eyes behold our miseries, and our troubles, which we
suffer at the hands of them that hate us: And as thou did deliver the
Israelites thy people from the oppressions of the Egyptians; so deliver us, O
Lord our God, out of all our troubles and afflictions, and let not our sins
hinder thy mercics toward us, but be thou gracious and merciful unto us, to
pardon and to forgive all our sins, and to make speed to save us, to make haste
to help us; because we have none in heaven nor in earth, to make our complaint
unto, but only unto thee, O God; and therefore we do most humbly, and most
earnestly beseech thee to be our good God, gracious and merciful unto us; to
pardon, and to forgive us all our sins, to deliver us out of all our troubles,
and to restore every man to his full and perfect right again. So shall we
praise and glorify thee, O Lord; we shall honor and magnify thee in the great
congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with thee O Father, and
thee O blessed Spirit, three persons and one immortal, invisible, indivisible,
and only one wise God, be given and ascribed from the botof our hearts, as is
most due unto thee, all possible thanks, praise, power, might, majesty,
dominion, and glory, both now and evermore, world without end. Amen.

O eternal God, Son of God, Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the
world, I pray thee take away my sins, and call them not to remembrance to lay
the punishment thereof either upon me, or upon any other for my sake; but be
thou gracious and merciful unto me, to pardon and forgive me all my sins, and
to give me thy grace, that I may lead all my life according to thy most holy
and blessed will. And now Lord, I do most humbly and earnestly beseech thee to
accept this morning sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, which I offer unto
thy divine majesty, from the bottom of my heart, for all those mercies,
favors, and loving kindness, both spiritual and temporal, which thou have
showed unto me from the hour of my birth to this very day; and aspecially for
these favors, that thou have delivered me from all dangers, both by Sea and
Land, and have brought me hither safe, to give thanks and praise unto thy holy
name: thou have also freed me from the fiery purgatory, from the Laborinth of
Lawsuits, and thou have finished my business according to my desire, and far
better then I could expect; thou have helped and assisted me to preach thy
word, unto thy people, and have granted me their love and favor for the same.

O Lord my God, I do thank thee with all my heart, and praise thee with all my
soul, for these, as for all other thy mercies that thou have showed unto me;
and if it be thy blessed will, to grant me that favor, which I desire of thee,
that I may not offend thee; I shall thank thee while I live, and praise thee
while I breath; but let thy will be done, and not mine; for mine is frail, and
thou know what is best, which I do not; and therefore I humbly beseech tee
to give me thy grace, that whatsoever thou do, I may wholly submit my self
to thy blessed will, and praise thee for the same while I live: And for mine
endeavors to explain those mysteries, which thou have revealed unto thy
servant John, I do most humbly, and most earnestly entreat thee, to inspire me
with thy blessed Spirit, and enlighten me with thy grace, that I may truly
understand them, and rightly explain them unto thy people; and if thou see it
for thy glory, and the benefit of thy Church, I pray thee help and assist me,
strengthen and enable me to finish the same, and to publish them unto the
world; or, if thou see it not for thy glory and the benefit of thy Church; I
beseech thee, let them be like the unntmely fruit of a woman, that perishes
before it sees the Sun; because I desire nothing hereby, neither praise nor
profit, but only to discharge my duty to the uttermost of mine ability, for
the setting forth of thy praise and glory, and the benefit of thy Church and
people, by reducing those that are in error unto the true faith, and the right
service of thee, O God, and confirming those that are in the right; to continue
constant therein unto the end. And to this end, I beseech thee to restore our
King and Governor, and all the exiled persons that are with him, unto their
places and dignities again; that they may be the instruments whereby thy
service may be rectified, thy people truly instructed, and thy name religiously
glorified; by the acknowledgement of thy justice, in our punishment for our
transgressions, thy great mercy and goodness in relieving and helping us in
our necessities, and thine infinite power, wisdom, and goodness in
suppressing our enemies, and delivering us out of their hands, that we might
serve thee without fear in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life. Hear us O Lord our God, and grant these our requests unto us, and
whatsoever else thou know to be requisite and necessary for us for Jesus
Christ his sake, and dispose of me to do all things according to thy most holy
and blessed will; so shall I praise and glorify thee for ever and ever. Amen.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty,
MY present mean condition bids me to lay my hand upon my mouth, to stop my
speech to so high a Majesty; but my place and calling charge me to tell you,
what you have best reason to know, how the long Parliament have put your most
religious and renowned Father, of ever blessed memory, to death, the first and
chiefest of the two witnesses of Jesus Christ, which, as the Angel says, the
beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, should kill; And now,
according to his promise, God has raised this first witness in your Majesty,
to stretch forth your royal hand to the other witness; and as Christ said unto
S. Peter, Tu conversus, confirma fratres, so, your Majesty being risen, it is
our undoubted hope you will put life into the other slain witness of Jesus
Christ; and like another good Josias, purge the Church from all false Priests,
and restore the Episcopal government to its pristine luster, for the building
of Gods Church; And the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, and walked
with your Majesty in all your travels, will dwell with you, and bless you, and
preserve you from all dangers; for he tells us plainly that he will honor them
that honor him, and they that honor not him, shall be lightly regarded.

And therefore I could wish, that all the Monarchs of the world, would consider
David's entrance into his kingdom, and Jeroboams entrance into his kingdom; how
like one another almost, they were in all things; for

1. 1 Samuel 16.
David is said to be the son of Jesse, none as I conceive of the prime Princes
of Israel; 1 Reg 11.26.
and Jeroboam is said to be the son of Nebat, and to be a mighty man of valor,
and of an eminent place in King Solomon's Court.

2. 1 Samuel 16.13.
The Prophet Samuel told David that he should be King; 2 Reg. 11.31.
and the Prophet Ahijah told Jeroboam, that God would make him King.

3. 1 Chronicles. 17.23.
The Lord told David that he would build him an house and settle the throne on
his seed; 2 Reg. 11.38.
and the Lord told Jeroboam, that if he would walk in his ways, he would build
him a sure house, and would be with him, and would give Israel unto him.

4. 1 Samuel 13.14.
The kingdom was transferred unto David for the disobedience of Saul, 1 Reg.
11.12.
and the kingdom was conferred upon Jeroboam for the sin of Solomon.

5. 2 Samuel 4.7.
David took away the kingdom from Ishbosheth the son of Saul; and Jeroboam took
away his kingdom from Rehoboam the son of Solomon. 2 Reg. 12.20.


6. David was elected and chosen to be their King, by all the tribes of Israel
in Hebron; 2 Samuel 5.1. and 1 Chronicles. 11.1.
and Jeroboam was elected and chosen to be their King, by all the ten tribes of
Israel; and the Prophet forbad Rehoboam and all Juda to war against Jeroboam
for their revolt, 1 Reg 21.20. v. ^4.
because this thing was from the Lord.

7. 2 Samuel 17.8.
David was a mighty man of war, and so was Jeroboam a mighty man of valor. 1
Reg. 11.28.

But you may observe this difference betwixt David and Jeroboam, that David had
many wives and concubines, which we do not read that Jeroboam had; and David
committed more personal and particular sins, as his adultry, and the murdering
of Urias, and the numbering of Israel, and his rash judgment against honest
Mephibosheth, then we find in all the 22. years reign of Jeroboam

And yet David has this Elogie and commendation, to be a man according to Gods
own heart, and God has settled and established his kingdom, and his throne to
him and his seed for ever; but Jeroboam is said to have made Israel to sin, and
the Prophet told his wife, that the Lord would bring evil upon the house of
Jeroboam, and would take away the remnant of his house, as a man takes away
the dung, till it be all gone. 1 Reg. 14.10.

And what is the reason of all this, that David, who seemed to be more vicious,
and tainted with more sins then Jeroboam was, should notwithstanding be so
perpetually blessed, and the other so severely and so suddenly punished?

It may be answered, that although David had, as well as other men, many humane
frailties, wherein it cannot be said, he was according to Gods own heart; yet
his principal care was, and his heart was wholly set, to see the true God
rightly honored, and his service to be duly and truly performed, as you may
find how zealous he was to bring the Ark of God, and to set it in his place, in
the midst of his Tabernacle that he had pitched for it, and to offer
burnt-offerings, and peaceofferings, before the Lord, and how desirous did he
show himself to build God a Temple? and notwithstanding all his great affairs,
and his many and mighty wars, and abundance of troubles; how he composed his
Psalms, and directed them to the chief Musicians, Asaph, Altaschith, Jeduthun,
and the rest; and ordered the Priests and Levites to discharge the service of
God and of the Tabernacle, according as the Lord had commanded the same to be
observed by his servant Moses. So careful was he at all times, and before all
things, to have the service of God rightly and duly performed; And therefore,
herein he is said to be a man according to Gods own heart, and God blessed him,
and established him and his seed in his throne for ever.

But Jeroboam, though perhaps he was freer, and more abstemious from many other
sins, then either David himself, or many other men were; and it may be, a very
just moral man; yet, when he came into his kingdom; he wholly neglected to see
the Lords service truly executed, and out of a politic conceit, as he
conceived, to secure himself and his posterity in his newly gotten power and
authority, he cast out the Priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron, that were
the lawful Governors, and the true servers of God, and gathered together a
company of novices and young fellows, the lowest and basest of the people,
that were not of the sons of Aaron, and that for some small preferment, would
both say and do, whatsoever he pleased, and serve, what god soever he
commanded, and with what service soever he liked, he made them Priests of his
high places, to offer sacrifices to his golden gods: And therefore is he said
to make Israel to sin, and God soon rooted him and his posterity out of that
kingdom, that God had given unto him.

And so he can do with all those Kings and Monarchs, whatsoever they be, that
by their timorous conniving with Sects, or a popular favoring either the
greater part, or the stronger side, do think it the most politic course, to be
securely established, and so suffer the service of God, to be either neglected,
or perverted, and the faithful Governors of his Church, to be suppressed,
through the impetuous importunity of aspiring emulators, or the clamorous
desire of ignorant vulgars; whereas the best policy in the world, to preserve
them is, to be men of courage, to uphold the true service of God; this
fortitude being a virtue most necessary both for the Prince and the Preacher,
quia timiditas eorum, est calamitas multorum, because their fear will become
the fall of many; when the one dares not say the truth, and the other will not
do what is just, or will do what is unjust, for very fear: whereas the
upholding of Gods right service, is able to uphold them against all opponents.

And therefore, that the true service of God might be preserved, uncorrupted,
and unchanged, by all Kings and Monarchs, which is the chiefest thing that God
requires at their hands, and is the principal thing that can preserve them in
their Majesty, and perpetuate the same unto their posterity, it is most
requisite, they should be very careful in the choice of their spiritual
teachers and guides, to direct them for the preservation of the true worship of
God; for we know the Arian Bishops made Constantius an Arian Emperor, and the
Priests of Baal made Ahab and Jezabell, so zealously affected to the service of
Baal, and so the Popish Priests make Papists, and the Run-a-gadoes out of the
Church do, when they return, make Sects and Factions in the Church; and
therefore, as it had been good for Ahab, if he would have hearkened to Elias,
and Micaiah, as he did to the Priests of Baal, and good for Constantius, if he
had as well favored the Orthodox, as he did the Heterodox, and Arian Bishops;
so it will be good, and the best course to guide all Kings, Monarchs, and
Governors of the people, for the settling of the true service of God, to give
ear unto, and to countenance those, who are appointed by God, to direct them in
Gods service, rather then to any others; for the grave and reverend Governors
of the Church, are like the discreet Counselors of King Solomon, and will
advise them not to listen, nor to rely so much upon the directions of any
novices, which may prove like the counsel of those young favorites of Rehoboam.

Thus I have freely expressed my mind to your Majesty, so plain, that he which
runs may read it, and reading it, may easily understand it; and I humbly
beseech you to bear with my plain dealing; for, though it behooves not us to
polupragmatize in things that are beyond our line, and without the compass of
our calling, and to intermeddle with the civil Government; yet, as John the
Baptist told Herod of his duty to God, so it behooves us, with the spirit of
Elias, to inform our Kings and our Governors, how they should uphold Gods
service; or if we neglect the same, for fear of their displeasure, we shall
make our selves liable to the displeasure of God Almighty; and so, as Lucian
says, (...), shunning the smoke of man's anger, we shall fall into the fire of
Gods fury, or as Job says, timentes pruinam, opprimemur a nive that is, as
Saint Gregory moralizeth it, by fearing the frost of man's hatred, which we
might tread under our feet, we shall be oppressed and swallowed up with the
snow of Gods vengeance that falls down from heaven upon our heads, and we
cannot avoid it.

And therefore, as Saint Clemens says, quae vobis expedire novimus, tacere non
possumus; we must needs tell you what we conceive makes for your happiness; so
I humbly beseech your Majesty to raise the slain witnesses, which the cruel
beast has killed, and to redress in Gods service, what the long Parliament
did amiss, and so God will bless you and yours, which is the daily prayer of

Your Majesty's most Humble, Faithful, and most dutiful Subject, Gr. Ossory.

To the High, and most Honorable COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
The humble address of Gruffith Williams, L. Bishop of Ossory.
May it please your Honors,
THe Spirit of God long ago has foretold it, out of his grrat love unto his
Church, what sad accidents, and heavy disasters, should fall upon her for the
times to come, even to the end of the world; and amongst all the rest of her
crosses, that she must unavoydably undergo; this is none of the leaft, if it
be not of greatest importance, that the beast which ascends out of the
bottomless pit, which is interpreted to be the man of sin, and the child of
perdition, as Saint Paul calls him, that is, the Great Antichrist, should
kill the two witnesses of Jesus Christ; that is,

1. The Monarchy, or supreme Monarch, that has the sovereign Majesty, and the
supremest power, to rule the people, and to place other subordinate Magistrates
and officers under him, for the execution of justice in all the parts of his
dominions.

2. The Hierarchy or Episcopal government of Gods Church, which is as
requisite for the Church, as the Monarchy is for the Commonwealth; for the
Church of Christ is said to be Gods vineyard, and the vineyard must be well
fenced, or, if the hedge be broken down, all the wild beasts of the Forest will
destroy the vine; so must the Church be well fenced and guarded, by wise,
discreet and careful Governors, (which are as the fence and hedges,) that by
their spiritual Courts and censures, do keep out all Sectaries, and heretics,
and all errrours and heresies, and false doctrine, from the Vineyard of God,
which is the Church of Christ.

And if these hedges and fences of Gods Church, the Bishops and Governors
thereof, be broken down, their Court suppressed, and themselves nullified and
annihilated, as that long Parliament did, it is as impossible, to keep out
Sects, Heretics, and false Prophets from the Church, as it is to keep the
civil state, and commonwealth in peace, and to have justice and equity duly
preserved among all men, without the civil Magistrates, and their Courts of
justice: for as these protect the innocent, and punish the Malesactors, with
the powerful sword of justice; so must the Bishops and Governors of the
Church, which are best able to judge of divine questions, defend the truth,
and, as Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, so must they
by their censures, whip all those Sectaries and Heteticks, that will not other
wise by fair means be driven, out of Gods Church; because, as Saint Bernard
says, qui nolunt duci, debent trahi.

And it is not unknown to any, that has taken notice of the transac ions of
these times, how that long, lasting, and intended to be an endless everlasting
Parliament, has killed our most heroical, religious, and renowned King, the
most constant Martyr, and the first and chiefest of the two witnesses of Jesus
Christ, and also Doctor William Laud Archbishop of Cantcrbury, and suppressed
all the Bishops, that were the other witness of Christ.

But our good God has promised, that he would resuscitate and revive the slain
and slaughtered Witnesses, and restore them to the Church, and their charge
again; Revel. 11.11, 12. And now you see, how the wise and great God, whose
ways are in the seas, his paths in the great waters, and his footsteps are
not known, has by unlikely, unprobable, and almost, in man's judgment,
impossible ways, through the many many transmutations of things, and
alterations of governments, brought his own purposes to this pass, to make you
the instruments, to effect his will, to perform his promise, and to be that
Cloud, in which, and by which, the two slain Witnesses shall ascend to heaven;
chapt. 11. verse 12. and has given you power and authority, and enabled you to
do the same.

And now, most honorable, and most renowned Patriots, you have most justly,
most religiously, and most gloriously, to your everlasting praise, revived the
first and chief Witness of Jesus Christ, and restored the government of these
nations to be Monarchical, that does most resemble God himself, which is the
sole Monarch of all the world, and is the government that the most nations of
all the world has ever used, and especially this kingdom, since the first
peopling of it; and you have put the Crown upon His head, to whom your wisdoms
knew, It justly belonged, which was the only way to bring Peace, and to make
these kingdoms happy.

It rests, that the other Witness of Christ be revived, and the Government
of the Church be restored, as it has been ever fince the Apostles time, to be
Episcopal; and so to raise the Bishops, and other Ministers, their dependants
(that, as yet, lie unburied in the streets of the great City) to their pristine
dignity, to their offices, their authority, and their former estates; for their
inabling to discharge their duties in the government of God's Church, they
having suffered wrongs and indignities enough already. And I hope your wisdoms
will direct you, to let the Ark of God be carried upon the Levite's shoulders,
as the Lord commands, and suffer the worship and service of God to be used,
as it was in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, and
confirmed by all the Acts of Parliaments, and royal edicts in their times; and
not to suffer the depravers of Gods honor, and disturbers of the Peace of the
Church, out of any singularity or sinister end, either to suppress the same,
or any ways to alter it, or any part of it, unless your wisdoms do appoint a
full and lawful Synod, congregated after the usual manner of this Church, to
confider what is fit, if any thing be found fitting to be added, diminished, or
altered therein; for this care of Gods service, to uphold the same in its
integrity and purity, is the only thing that will bring a blessing, and
continue the happiness of this, or any other nation: and they are to do the
same, to whom God has committed the government of his Church, and the teaching
of his people.

And because of the multiplicity of Sects, and diversity of opinions that have
sprung in this our Church since the killing of the witnesses, and that the
faith of Christ is to be persuaded, by the word of God, and not forced by the
sword of man; I humbly beseech you, to grant such toleration, as your wisdoms
shall think fitting, to such weak and tender consciences, as cannot, on the
sudden, comply with us in our service to God, until that by a friendly
conference, painful preaching, and writing of learned books, we captivate
their understanding, and bring them so to the truth, and true faith of Christ,
and service of God; and not by rigid ways; and too severe censures and
punishments, to compel them, either to be hypocrites in our Church, or
Apostates, to run out of our Church. For I would not have the people of God to
be driven, hurried, and harrased, like as we drive wild beasts, but to be led
gently, and eafily, like sheep; Leni spiritu, non dura manu, by an inward sweet
influence, and not by any outward violence.

And here I humbly beseech your Honors to give me leave to tell you; what I am
not suffered to be silent, videlicet, that to take away the Lands and
possessions of men, that never rebelled, nor offered any violence, nor the
least wrong, to any of our Protestant people in Ireland, but relieved them, and
hindered others as much as they could, to abuse them, and yet to dispossess,
and to cast them out of their inheritances, because they were Papists, and
professed themselves Roman Catholics (as the long Parliament, and their
subordinate instruments in Ireland have done, to the utter ruin of many
ancient families, both of British and English extract) is not only, as I
conceive, most unjust, but also contrary to all Christianity, and far enough
from humanity it self.

When the Apostle bids us, to honor all men, that is, because they are men, be
they of what religion soever they please, their different sense should not make
us to destroy them, so long as they live peaceably amongst us, as you know the
Sodomites permitted Lot, that professed not their religion, and the severe
Pharisees suffered both the Sadduces and Essaei, to enjoy both their lands and
their estates, without troubling them for their religion; and would you make
the Christian religion more unjust, and worse then these? Sure none would do
that, but the great Antichrist, that would hinder all, to think well of the
religion of Christ.

Therefore I hope your wisdoms and justice will be so far from confirming any
injustice done by that long Parliament, or their under-agents, either to these
displanted Irish, or ejected Clergy, or any others, that you will christianly
redress, what they have so unjustly done amiss: lest the continuance of these
crying wrongs here on earth, do pull down upon us all the flying vengeance of
God, Vivat Rex, currat lex, fiat justitia and ruat mundus.
from heaven. Because the good God is just, and loves justice, hating all
oppressions and wrongs; and therefore, as I would not belie the Father of lies,
so I would not do any injustice to the very devils; and let no sinister aspect
bend you from the straight rule of justice, and if you will not redress the
too much wrong that we have suffered already, I beseech you confirm them not by
any new laws, to make your selves partakers of their sins, and to make us
still to cry, with the souls under the Altar, how long Lord, holy and true,
but let us have the benefit of our old laws, that were justly made, and if you
will not nullify all the acts that are without our late Kings assent, or
perhaps cannot do it, because so many of that long Parliament, are members of
this present Parliament, contrary to the desires of many, yet let the justice
of our old laws still continue; and we shall still continue our prayers to
God, that he may still continue his blessings both to you and yours, which is
and shall be, the daily prayers of

Your most humble, and faithful Orator, to serve you; Gr. Ossory.

Gentle and Christian READER.
THis book, as very many can bear witness, was fully finished above two years
agone, in the time of Oliver the usurper, and I was very ready then to undergo
the danger that should ensue the publishing thereof, and was as earnest to have
it printed; but either because some of the things prophesied of (as the
reviving of the witnesses) were not, as then, fulfilled; or because of some
fears which my friends conceived from the Governors that then ruled, I could
not by any means, get it to pass through the press; but now, all the
prophesies that are any where in the holy Scripture mentioned, concerning the
coming, and the proceedings of the Antichrist, being fully and cleerlie
fulfilled, and come to pass, as I have showed in this book, save only one
part of the last prophecy, touching the resuscitation of the last witness,
which some suppose to be unfulfilled, and the Presbyterians hope, will never
be, as we explain it, and we conceive it done, or as good as done already,
when, (as Christ said to Saint Peter, and tu conversus, confirma fratres) so
Gods prime and principal witness, being so gloriously risen, to the joy of all
hearts; he will do, as Christ wills him; stretch forth his royal hand, as
Christ did to Saint Peter, to pull the other witness, out of those waves, that
were so ready to swallow them up, and set them to the stern of the ship again;
and then, as Solomon says, spes impiorum peribit.

Therefore as I have been at all the pains in composing it, so I resolved by
Gods assistance, and only for the service of Gods Church, to undergo any cost,
to the uttermost of my ability, to publish it unto the world; and to bear all
the blame, aspersions or punishment, that either friend or foe, public or
private, can lay upon me for the same; for I call heaven and earth to witness,
that I have long studied, and seriously meditated upon the sense and meaning of
the Holy Ghost, in those places of the Scriptures, that foretold us of the
coming of the great and egregious Antichrist; and I have often prayed, and most
earnestly and heartily desired of my God, to grant me the true and right
understanding thereof; as, who he should be; where he should rise; what feats
and Tragedies he should effect; how long he should continue; by what means he
might be discovered; and how he should be subdued, and at last utterly
destroyed; and I believe God has now granted my request; and that I have
rightly and most truly explained those holy Scriptures, that speak of him; And
if the presbyterians can give me satisfaction, that I am mistaken herein; I
shall very willingly recant, and be most heartily sorry for mine error; but if
they be not able to demonstrate my mistakings, as, I assure my self, the beast
with all his power, and the false Prophet with all his skill, and putting all
their heads together, shall never be able to do) then I entreat them, not to be
like the Galathians, to become mine enemies, for speaking the truth; but to
consider well what they do, because God will not be mocked, and it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God; for my witness is in heaven,
that I bear not any malice, or any the least ill will, to any one of all the
Presbyterians, or to any other of the members of the long Parliament, or their
adherents; neither wrote I these things, out of any excessive sense, that I
ever conceived of any injury, that was done unto my self, nor especially for
any hope of profit or preferment, when a Presbyterian told me, The publishing
of this treatise would be my ruin; but Paupertas, orbitas, and senectus, the
no loss of Lordships, the no infants to cry after me, and the years of man's
life, which are threescore years and ten, being already past in me long ago,
and I being very ready and willing, for causes heretofore showed, to under go
what death soever it shall please God to impose upon me, In the Epistle to the
Reader before the seven golden candlesticks.
either on a block, or a gibbet, or a pillow, so it be for the discharging of
my duty: it is not a pin matter, for a good conscience, which of these he must
abide: Quia nec nobis ignominiosum est pati, quod passus est Christus, nec
illis gloriosum est facere, quod fecit Judas vel Pilatus; For seeing my Savior
and my King were so served, why should I think much to be so likewise used?
and therefore his threatenings could not frighten me from divulging the same
unto the world; and that for these four special ends.

1. To do my best endeavor to bring the members of the beast, and the false
Prophet, with their adherents, to repentance, and to forsake the courses that
heretofore they have most wickedly walked in.

2. To dissuade all others from adhering to them, or approving of their unjust
proceedings.

3. To persuade the godly servants of Jesus Christ, that have suffered so much,
and such indignities at the hands of the beast, and his assassinates, to
continue constant in their former resolutions, and not to be dejected, for any
adversity, or to approve and affect the prosperity of the beast, and to embrace
the doctrine of the false Prophet.

4. That as our predecessors recorded the truth of those things, that happened
in their times to us, which otherwise we should never have known; so likewise
we should deliver the truth of what we have seen done in our time to our
posterity, that the sad condition of the Church, and especially of the
witnesses of Jesus Christ, in these days of the Antichrist, might be made
known to after-ages; that as John's disciples said to Christ, so the disciples
of Christ might demand in like manner of the Antichrist, Art thou he that
should come, or shall we look for another? and I suppose none can give a better
answer, then what our Savior gave to the Jews in the like case; The works
that I do, testify of me; so the works that these men of our time have dones,
shall testify unto all posterities what they are; for as Demodocus said of the
Milesians, that they were no fools but they did the same things that fools
do, so if these men of our time say, they are not the Antichrist; yet I believe
the world sees they did, and still do the very same things, that the holy men
of God prophesied the great Antichrist should do; And this is all that I do,
and no more, in this whole book.

1. To show you out of the holy Scripture, of the old and new Testament, what
the great Antichrist should do, when he should come into the world.

2. To set down what is seen done by the men of our time, the prevalent faction
of the long Parliament, and their adherents, together with the Presbyterians,
Independants, and Lay-preachers; to continue their names and their memories to
the generatons that are to come, which is all that shall be left of them, when
they have left their pomp behind them, and shall carry nothing with them but
the deeds that they have done; And as Queen Hester said, so say I; if for this
I perish, I perish; yet the truth is great and will prevail, and continue true,
when the greatest tyrants shall be reduced to dust and ashes. And in the
Interim, I do profess, that I neither fear the sharpest sword of the bloodiest
tyrant, nor the most virulent tongues, or malicious pens of the most railing
Rabsheca; quia nec melior si laudaverint, nec deterior si vituperaverint,
because the praise of men makes me not one jot better, nor the aspersions and
dispraise of enemies one title worse then I am; and my conscience tells me,
that I have so lived, Ut nec pudet vivere, nec piget mori, as that I am neither
ashamed to live, nor afraid to die.

And if any man shall blame me for any acrimonie or bitterness that he finds
in this book, I call God to record, that it proceeded not as I said before, out
of any excessive sense that I ever conceived of any particular injury that was
done unto my self, when as I found my friends favorable enough to me, and
granting me more then I expected from them; nor out of any hatred or malice to
any one of all the Presbyterians, Independants, or Lay-preachers, or to any
other of all the long Parliament men; when as very many of them were my best
Patrons, and my singular good friends, that offered me great preferments, which
I would have accepted, if my conscience had not utterly disliked of their
ways; but whatsoever gall or vinegar has distilled from my pen, it proceeded
only out of the vehemency of the zeal, which I bear to the true service of
God, and the love that I had to the piety and goodness of our good King, and
especially the extreme hatred, that I conceived against the injustice,
impieties, and evil doings of the men anatomized in this book; for my faith is,
that although heretofore, many particular tyrant, heretic and wicked man,
might be noted out of Histories, that perhaps might be worse, and more
detestable then any one of these men here meant; yet that such a pack, such a
society, and such a multitude of wicked heretics, tyrants, and malefactors,
that combined, and were like sworn brethren, to effect such un-heard-of
mischiefs, injustice, and impieties, as they have done, the sun, in above 5000.
years revolution, never saw the like, except that wicked council, which
condemned the Son of God to death.

And therefore, seeing we are fallen into such times, wherein, Nec vitia
nostra, nec eorum remedia far possumus, I may justly say, -- quis iniqui Tam
patiens orbis, tam ferreus, ut teneat se, etc?

Who can hold his tongue at the sight of such doings?

And old Chaucer says,

The words must be of kin unto the deeds. And the wisest Writers do loath to
trim up vices in Virtue's raiment; and we that are rude, know not how to call
a spade otherwise then a spade, Rudes sunt populi Macedonum, and Scapham vocant
Scapham.
as King Philip of Macedon, answered a Traitor, whom he had pardoned, and
complained that the people called him a Traitor. And though I earnestly desired
to be moderate in my expressions, yet the height of that wickedness, which I
found acted, could not otherwise, with all my rhetoric, be set forth in any
fairer terms unto my Readers.

O 'Annichristo: The GREAT ANTICHRIST REVEALED, Before this time not Discovered.
CHAP. I. To what end Christ foretells the Afflictions and Persecutions of his
Church; that her greatest Persecution should be in the time of the great
Antichrist: and of the strange Persecution, and extreme Cruelty, Oppression and
Injustice, that have been lately acted against Gods servants in these parts,
and in our days by the Ministers of the Antichrist.
OUR blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, out of his great and infinite love
to his Church, forertels her of the many troubles, afflictions and persecutions
that his best servants, and her chiefest members should find and must undergo
here in this world, To what end Christ foretells the persecutions of his Church.
amongst the sons of men, to this end, that she might earnestly pray to God, he
would be pleased, either to avert them from her, or to strengthen her with
patience, most constantly to endure them; and still to keep her garments clean,
and her conscience undefiled in the midst of this froward and crooked
generation. Eusebius. Eccles. Histor. l. 4. c. 5. and l. 5. c. 1.
And after this prediction of our Savior Christ, St. Luke in the Acts of the
Apostles, and Eusebius, Socrates, and others in their Ecclesiastical Histories
have left it recorded to all Posterities, what direful Torments the poor
harmless Christians have endured in the first ten grievous Persecutions, under
Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, Decius, and others, Heathen Tyrants, that were so
cruel and so tyrannical to the Saints and Servants of God, that most good men
and religious minds cannot read their Sufferings without weeping, nor remember
them without pity; For, Claud. in Ruff. lib. 1.
-- Quis prodere tanta relatu
Funera, quis caedes posset deflere nefandas?


It is not credible for Infidels that know not the Gospel, to believe so many
slaughters, and such exquisite Tortures, as the Christians endured, when as
alii flammis exusti, alii ferro perempti, alii patibulo cruciati; or that they
can be looked upon by any humanity with dry eyes.

And yet Isidorus tells us, August de civ. Dei, l. 20. c. 8. Cyrillus catech.
15. and Hypolit. Orat. de fine seculi. The time of the greatest persecution.
and so does S. Aug. S. Cyril, and Hyppolitus the holy Martyr, in his Oration
de consummatione mundi, that in the time of the Antichrist, which would be
toward the end of the world, and not long before the Coming of Christ to
Judgment, the Synagogue of Satan and the worldly Senate, or Citizens of this
world, should more furiously rage, and more cruelly persecute the true Church
of Christ, and the most Faithful Servants of God, than ever was done in the
Primitive Times.

And besides the accession of above 5000 years experience unto Satan's natural
and inbred sagacity and sharpness of knowledge and understanding, to find out
new ways and subtiller devices to afflict Gods Servants, they render this
Reason for their Assertion; because that, The reason of the foresaid assertion.
as the Scripture testifies, Satan was to be bound and fettered, as a dog in a
chain, for 1000 years; that is after the end and determination of the first 10
great Persecutions, and the Persecutions of the Goths and Vandals, and the
other Arian Kings, that were no less Persecutors and Tormentors of the Orthodox
Fathers, and the Professors of the Faith of one Substance, which is the right
Catholic Faith, than the Heathen Tyrants were of the Faithful Christians: In
all which time of 1000 years, Satan's 1000. years binding how understood.
that is, either the full and determinate number of 1000 years, as some
Expositors would have it, or else a very long season, and much about the time
of 1000 years, though not precisely such a term, as others would have it, the
Malice of Satan was so locked up and chained, and his Power so abridged, that
he could not destroy as many, nor persecute the Saints so much as he desired,
and would have effected, si potuisset quantum vellet; had he been suffered to
do what he would.

But when his 1000 years Imprisonment should be expired, and he loosned out of
his Chains, and more Liberty granted to him, then his inveterate spite and his
revengeful Malice for his former Imprisonment, would devise the Means and find
out the ways to vex and persecute the Servants of God, and the Witnesses of
Jesus Christ, more than ever he had done before, in any of the former
Persecutions.

And truly I think, Francisc. Junius and Tilenus ad Bellarm. l. 3. c. 7. de
Romans Pontif. and Bal^us de Antich. cap. 6.
that although Satan was not fully loosned and set at liberty till now of late;
yet whosoever reads Thuanus, Tilenus, and Chamier, and the Book of the
Martyrs of our English Church, written by Mr. Fox, and other Authors, that have
written the History of these two last Centuries, and does rightly consider the
Sufferings and Massacres of those Christians, that they within the Compass of
those years, have undergone, in France, Germany, Spain, Italy, and other places
round about; and that only for their Religion, and not for any worldly
Dominion, which was the Sufferings of the People in former ages, Dr Abbots in
his brief description of the world, page 141.
in the time of the first 4 Monarchies; and is still the condition both of the
Jews and Christians within the Territories of the Turk, that tolerateth any
Sect, and permits all Religions and all Nations, to live peaceably and
quiet, throughout his whole Dominion, so they yield themselves subject to his
Rule, and pay to him their allotted Contribution; and meddle not with the
Mohammedan Laws and Superstition; he must ingeniously confess the Truth of this
Assertion, and the unquestionable Certainty of this Prophetical Prediction of
Isidorus, and the other Fathers aforenamed; videlicet, that the sorest Troubles
and the greatest Persecution of all, that Satan raised or shall stir up
against the Christians, as they are Christians, has been, is, and will be
that, which he has, and still does prosecute, and will persevere to do it, by
the Ministers and Ministry of his prime General, and his dearly beloved Son of
Perdition, the great Antichrist.

And if according to the Counsel of Moses and Job, Deuteronomy. 4.32. etc. 32. v. 7.
Job 8.8. Sr Walter Rawleigh in his Preface to the History of the world, and M.
Fox in his book of Martyrs.
we ask the days of old, and enquire of our Fathers that were before us, what
they suffered, and how they were handled heretofore, either in France, Italy,
Spain or Germany; or else, nearer home, where the Truth may be sooner found and
better known of us, in Ingland, and that, under K. Hen. 8. and Q. Mary, the two
greatest Persecutors of Gods Servants, for their Religion, that our Chronicles
do mention; and compare their sufferings in the just and even Balance of an
impartial judgment, with that Oppression, Persecution, Injustice and cruelty,
and that joined with such subtilty and a pretense of Piety, as cannot by my
dull Pen be expressed; which, for the space of 14 or 15 years, has been acted
and continued here in this Island of Great Britain, against Loyal Subjects,
none can deny, and Faithful Christians, as we hope God will bear witness; and
that only for their Loyalty unto their King, and their Piety toward God, in
the constant retaining of the true Faith, wherein they were baptized and
Christened, and a good Conscience, wherein they lived; we shall find the
Cruelties of those two forenamed Princes, to be favorable and great mercies;
and all the Favors and Mercies of our new and now pretended Saints, toward
the true Ministers of Christ, and the Faithful Servants of God, to be the
greatest Cruelties that ever were recorded in any History, and I think, such
Injustice and so great, as was never heard of in any Nation: For,

1. When King Hen. the 8. became sacrilegious, 1. The Persecution of the Clergy
and wrongs done in K. Hen. the eighth's time.
I have no other term for his Doings, to rob the Church, and to take away the
Lands and Possessions of the Abbeys, and the Priories, he did the same with the
leave and consent of many, if not of most of the chief Abbots and Priors, whom,
with other rewards and compensations, he had allured thereunto; and volenti non
fit injuria; and so, though they ought not to have consented to such an impious
Act, to be Partakers in his Sacrilege; yet the injury that was done unto
themselves, cannot be deemed so great, because they were consenting; and those
honester men, How K. Henry the 8 provided for the Abbots and Priors.
whom he could not persuade with other better Preferments, to yield their
consent to his desire, to pass away their Patrimony, he took that course and
care for them, that they should be very competently provided for, some one way,
and some another way, and many of them with Pensions out of his own Exchequer,
that they might not want what was necessary for them, while they lived; And as
I am credibly informed, Mr. John Pymme, a most Noted and Notorious Member of
the Long Parliament, when he was in that Office, has paid the Pension, allotted
to one of them that lived to these our own times: And this kind of proceeding
cannot be thought so great a Persecution, or so grievous an Oppression of them,
or so odious an Impiety in the King, especially if you consider the Lazy life
and little good that many of them did, and the single condition of these men,
that lived without Wives, without Children, without Families.

But the Long Parliament, How the long Parl. dealt with all Bishops, Deans and
Prebends.
without the least color of the Consent of any one of all our Bishops, Deans
or Prebends, but altogether against their wills, and against the will of the
King, that should have a Vote in every Act, and a Negative Passage, as we
conceive, has taken all, even from all and every one of them, that had, for
the most part Wives and Children and Servants, and allowed them not one
Halfpenny out of all the great Means they took from them, to relieve
themselves and their Families; but let them live as they will and as they can,
dig, or beg, or starve and die, when they can live no longer; and so I my self
have seen many worthy Divines, and some Reverend Bishops in great want and
misery: And this was worse dealing than the Pirate, that took me at Sea, dealt
with me, when he took away all my Money, and yet gave me as much as might well
carry me home to my House. And

2. In Q. Mary's time, 2. The Persecution of the Protestants in Qu. Mari^s time.
when our Godly Bishops and other Grave Doctors were burned, and many good
Protestants imprisoned and persecuted for their Religion and the Profession of
the true Faith of Christ, by the Instruments of the Dragon, the old enemy of
mankind; yet then they were cited to the Courts of Justice, they had Articles
exhibited against them, they had time allotted them for to answer, and all the
Proceedings against them, passed on, as against all others, in forma Juris,
according to the Law. And they had neither suffered nor been deprived, if they
had recanted, Some of the Lay Protestants, I presume, from their Ignorance and
want of understanding of the School-terms and Scholerlike distinctions, wherein
their Adversaries were most Skilful; and although the Constancy of these Pious
Martyrs, and the Resolution of those, whose Zeal to the Protestant Religion,
and Desire of Reformation, and perhaps Ambition to be Martyrs, transported
them, it may be in some things beyond their Knowledge, have moved them rather
to suffer themselves to be deprived of their estates, and to suffer death, than
to deny their Faith, which the more Learned sort knew, and the other
good-meaning men believed to be the true Faith of Gods Elect: yet the death
that was imposed on them, and the punishment that they suffered, The Martyrs in
Q. Mary's days far more fairly dealt withal than we are.
was not, if you consider all circumstances, especially the extent of the
persecution, and the fewness of the persons suffering, in comparison of the
sufferers in these times, near so bitter and so bad, nor any ways so cruel and
so insufferable, as this most inhumane dealing, which has been used, and the
punishment that was inflicted, so extensively and universally upon all the
Reverend Bishops, Deans, Prebends, and abundance more of most Learned Divines
and other Loyal Subjects and good Christians of these Kingdoms, by the subtle
tormentors and new tyrants of these days; For seeing as the Poet truly says,

Dulce mori miseris, -- To die is sweet, and a favor to them that are in
misery, either through want, sickness, sorrows, or the like insufferable
disasters; and as another says, Morsque minus poenae, quam mora mortis habet,
Death is a lesser punishment, than to be always, as we are, at the door of
death, and still in fear, Job 7.15. Ecclesiasticus 41.2.
and expecting when death shall come to attache us; which is the very same in
effect, that both holy Job, which had most reason to know it, and the Son of
Syrach, that so well understood the state of our mortanty, do testify unto us;
for both of them do affirm, that an honorable death is far better than a
miserable life, and will sooner be chosen by any Heroic and Noble mind;
therefore Claudian demands, Nonne mori satius, Claudian.
vitae quans far pudorem? Who would not choose rather to die, than to endure
shame, and be in contempt and disgrace while he lives, as they must needs be,
that from the height of honor, are tumbled down to the lowest pit of
Confusion, to become the scorn of the vilest in the world, which the Long
Parliament has made us to be.

Therefore it is apparent to all the world, at least to all understanding men,
that those Martyrs were in a far better condition, and used by those Tyrants
after a far better manner than our Ministers and others were, Their Committee
men were told they were ill affected; that was enough. Sed, si satis accusasse.
quis innocens?
by the now pretended Saints; they were more justly proceeded against, more
fairly handled, and less cruelly dealt withal, than our men are, the poor
Christians that have been utterly undone by the Long Parliament: For I speak by
the Experience of some that I knew my self to be thus handled and thus dealt
withal, before ever they were called in question, or charged with any crime, or
accused for any fault, or have leave to answer for themselves, or be suffered
to speak one word in their own behalf, and for the relief and support of their
Wives and Families, to be adjudged, yea and oftentimes contrary to their own
Articles and Engagements to be deprived of all their Means, their Lands and
their Livings and all that they had, to be taken from them: And because they
had done nothing worthy of death or of bonds, Act. 23.29.
they shall not have the honor, I speak of many that were thus used, either to
be imprisoned, where it is likely that some good men would relieve them, or to
be put to death, whereby they should have had an end of their miseries, and
enjoy the Glory of Martyrdom; but to make their Tyranny to exceed all cruelty,
and the miseries of the distressed and ejected persons the more miserable, when
their enemies, as the Prophet says, whom they ever honored as friends, chased
them sore like a Bird without cause, Lament. 3.52.
and they that did feed delicately, even with Kings Dishes, Cap. 4. v. 5.
must now lie desolate in the streets; and they that sat in their Robes of
Scarlet, even with the best Lords in the Kingdom, must now embrace Dung-hils;
and when the Parliament are told of the unjust and cruel proceedings of their
Committee men, yet that must not be regarded, not their injustice so much as
questioned; because they are not to consider now, quid sit honestum, but quid
utile; what is just and honest, but what is availeable, be it never so vile and
so wicked, to further their design; and if they did not uphold and countenance
these their Instruments, and not check them, their own Projects might be
obstructed.

And therefore, The seeming mercies of tyrants most cruel.
as Tiberius and other Fox-like cruel Tigers, worse than the bloody Nero, would
never put them to a present death, whom they hated most, but said, they loved
them not so well, as to take away their life; and therefore in a seeming favor
and mercy, they suffered them to enjoy some space and liberty; but it was in
extreme cruelty and malice, to make them the more miserable, by thus inflicting
upon them a daily death; So the subtle Tiberians of these times, have dealt
with Gods Servants, to prolong their miseries, and to make their lives more
grievous than any death could be unto them, cosque sibi-ipsis graves ponere;
And as one says, to set themselves to be the heaviest burdens and the greatest
Maladies, that possibly could be, unto themselves; when as all men may be
assured of that truth, What it is to be most miserable.
quod miserrimum est fuisse foelicem; nothing can be more miserable than to
have been most happy, and then to fall into the depth of infelicity; for what
other thing is this, but to make themselves to become the lingering Executioners
of themselves? Which is a death worse than any other death, even by the
Testimony of the holy Prophet: For they that are slain with the sword, says
he, are better than they that are slain with hunger, Lament. 4.9.
because these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruit of the field.

And that nothing might be wanting to fill up the measure of this part, The
persecution of the Church under the long Parliament, how great and how general
it was.
of the iniquity of that Long Parliament, and to make their cruelty most cruel,
and the persecution of Gods Servants most bitter; because the more general, and
the more extensive and spreading the mischief is, the more it prevents the
persecuted persons of all shelter, and deprives them of all Relief and Comfort;
this course must be taken, not with a few of the choicest men of this or that
Calling, as Capita rerum, which might be thought to be the Heads of any
disorder, after the manner that the Severest of the best Generals in war use to
do, when they decimate the Mutinous in their Army to be punished, ut poena ad
paucos, metus ad omnes; that the punishment of some few, might strike a
terror, and cause amendment in them all; How well the Parliament was
acquainted with all Church-Ministers.
but they must deal more universally, with all the most Reverend Bishops, all
the worthy Deanes, Sub-Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Priors,
Chancellors, Chauntors, Sub-Chauntors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers, Succentors,
Sacrists, Prebends, Canons, Canon-Residents and non-residents, Petty-Canons,
Chorals, Vicars-Chorals, Choristers, Old Vicars or New: These be the very words
of their Act; they were so well acquainted with all the Particulars of the
Church Officers, that as Jehu dealt with the Idolatrous Priests of Baal, so
they might deal with the Faithful Messengers of Jesus Christ, and suffer not
one of them all to escape, but they must all down in Ingland and Wales, yea, in
Scotland and in Ireland, in all these Three Kingdoms; and you may be sure, if
their power could reach, neither Bishop, Dean nor Prebend, nor any one of all
that depended on them, should remain in Italy, France, Spain, or any other part
of all the Christian world, they must all down, and down with them, even to the
ground; and then being cast down, -- Montes insuper altos
Imposuit -- They must lay weight enough upon them all, that
they may be never able to rise up again, until they rise in Judgment against
them: The long Parliament deal with Christ's servants, as the Jews dealt with
Christ.
For as the Jews, when they had laid Christ in his Grave, were afraid he would
rise again, and therefore laid a huge Stone upon the door of the Sepulcher, and
hired the Watchmen to keep him down; so these men, their Scholars, for fear
that the foresaid Servants of Christ might rise again, must sell all their
Lands and Possessions, and put them into the hands of Captains and Colonels,
and other men of Arms, that with the edge of the Sword, should keep them bare
enough, and naked of all support, if ever they should chance to arise: Good
God, says a Father, Si Diabolus nocere posset, quantum vellet, aliquis
justorum non remaneret: If the Devil had power to destroy as many as he would,
and as he desires, there should not remain any one righteous man upon the face
of the earth.

And yet this is not all that the prevalent Faction of the long Parliament have
destroyed and extirpated out of house and home; for to these aforementioned
Churchmen, whom the Devil spited most of all, you may add the Catalogue of
such Heads and Fellows of Colleges, and other Learned and Religious Gentlemen,
of the famous University of Cambridge, as have been plundered, that is, robbed,
ejected, imprisoned and banished, only for their constancy in the True Religion
and right Service of God, and their Loyalty and Faithfulness to their Lawful
King: And the like Catalogue of the Heads and Fellows of the other Famous
University of Oxford, The great and large extent of the late Persecution of the
Parl.
besides the great number of Grave Doctors and other Learned Divines in and
about the City of London, and throughout these Three Kingdoms, that have been
deprived of all their Means and Livelihoods, and many of them most barbarously
killed: Of all which, you may see such a number, as is scarce credible, yet
nothing more than is true, in a little Book printed at Oxford, in Anno 1647:
and entitled Mercurius Rusticus and Querela Cantabrigiensis: A-Book worthy to
be read of all that desire to know the Extent and to understand the Greatness
of the late persecution of the Christians under the Long Parliament; how
Gangraena-like it spread it self beyond Decius or Dioclesians Tyranny, and
almost, in these parts, like Adams sin, that went over all, so did their
Persecution run over all the most Faithful Sons of the Church, and the Loyal
Subjects of these Kingdoms.

And I would faign know, what Busiris or Phalaris, Dionysian, Dioclesian or
Nero, or John Vasilowic, the great Russian Tyrant, or what other Tyrant of the
world has ever undone so many worthy men, without once questioning them for
any fault, or charging them with any Crime, that they had done; or who did ever
attempt to destroy so many, only for being ill affected to their evil deeds?

But now, The unparalled Persecution and cruelty of the prevalent Faction of
the long Parl.
being thus afflicted, destitute and deprived of all their Means, how shall all
these, these thousands of most worthy men live? These men that were not brought
up to work, and used not to dig, and are ashamed to beg, and therefore without
a great measure of Gods Grace, to support them, and to sanctify their
Afflictions, they might fall into desperate conditions? They will answer, as
one of them did to me, and like as the High Priests, the Crucifiers of our
Master Christ, answered Judas, What is that to us? Let them live how they list,
or let them perish; and sic periere ruinae, and so, for them, they shall all
utterly perish.

And therefore I may well demand, what Tyrant did ever live since the day that
God created the Heavens, What King, What Pope, What Hildebrand That is Gregory
the 7th. that was one of the worst Popes of Rome.
, What Hel-brand, What Turk, What Jew, What Man, What Devil, would besuch an
Apollyon, as to cut off, not all the necks of the Heathenish Romans, with that
bloody Emperor, who wished that they all had but unum Collum, one neck, that so
he might chop it off uno ictu, with one blow, but all those good Christians and
the Faithful Servants of God uno halitu, with one Vote, one Breath and one Act,
which was an Axe indeed, and was laid to the root of every Tree, that bare the
good fruit of Faith and Obedience in these Kingdoms?

Surely, I think none could have devised such a Plot, so full of mischief, so
far beyond the Sicilian Vespers, and Gunpowder Treason, and so void of
Humanity, and stuffed up with all cruelty and abominable Impiety (especially if
you consider the large extent and the evil Consequents thereof) except the
infernal Apollyon, the great Destroyer of Christianity, and the Hellish
Misanthropos, that labors continually to root out all the Christian Faith
and the true Service of God out of the world, did unmoveably reside in their
hearts, to prompt them and to spur them on unto the same; or else that
Beelzebub, the chief of the Devils, would send a pack of his Prime Captains and
best Instruments out of Hell, to root out all the true Servants of Jesus Christ.

For if you compare this our last persecution and afflictions under the Long
Parliament, with the former Persecutions of the Heathen Tyrants, or the Arian
Kings, which they brought upon the Church, you shall find,

1. That there was but one Nero, one Dioclesian, one Constantius, and one
Julian in all the world, at one time, to persecute the Christians that were
spread over all the world; but here amongst us, we suppose to have, I know not
how many hundred Dioclesians and Julians together, at one time, in one City, to
vex and persecute the Christians of one poor little Island.

2. The Forme^ Tyrants persecuted them for their Disloyalty, as they alleged,
unto their Emperors and Governors, which was most false, as appears by the
Apologies of Tertullian, Minutius Foelix, and others: But we were persecuted
for being Faithful and Loyal unto our King, and to our Governors; as all the
Kingdom knows.

CHAP. II. That neither the Pope nor the Turk is the great Antichrist; that the
Antichrist when he should come into the world, should arise out of the Truest
and Purest Reformed Church on Earth; which was the Church of Ingland, in King
Charles his time, being fully reformed of those Errors and Abuses that should
creep, and had crept into the Church, which other Reformed Churches had not so
perfectly purged: And wherefore they did it not, and could not do it.
THE serious consideration of the former things, What moved the Author to enter
upon this discourse of the great Antichrist.
and the sad condition of the Distressed, Persecuted Members of Christ, and the
Testimony of the foresaid Authors, touching the Persecution, that should happen
in the time of the Great Antichrist, which I conceived to be now so visibly
seen, and so universally spread through the Subtilty and Cruelty of the
Prevalent Faction of the Long Parliament, have moved me to settle my Thoughts
upon the search of those Texts of Holy Scripture, wherein the holy Prophets and
the blessed Apostles had treated, and foretold us of the coming of the Great
Antichrist, and the sufferings of the Saints and true Servants of God in his
time, and under his unjust and cruel Government; and to pray to God most
earnestly and constantly night and day, for the help of his Grace and
assistance of his Holy Spirit, to guide me to the true and right understanding
thereof: And then, by reading the best Authors that I could find, to explain
those obscure Mysteries and to further me to undertake the same, I found and
saw,

I. Many good and probable Arguments produced by Luther, Calvin, Beza, 1. That
many learned Authors do hold the Pope or Papacy to be the Antichrist. Balaeus
de vit. Pontif. l. 3. Jun. in Apocal. cap. 12. Thomson in the arraignment of
Antichrist. page 90, and 91. Brightman in Apoc. Downam de Antichristo. l. 10.
c. 3. and 4. and Thomson page 77.
Junius, Chytraeus, Tilenus, Maresius, and our own Countrymen, Powel, Whitaker,
Brightmen, Downam, Thomsom, Mede and others, very Learned Protestants, and
worthy men, to prove that either the Tyrannical State and Polity of the Papacy
is that Great Antichrist, as some would have it; or else Series Paparum the
Succession of Popes, from Boniface the 3d, in Phocas his time, that usurping
Emperor, who got to the Imperial Throne by the Murder of his own Master
Mauritius, and his Wife, and his Brother, and his Children, and gave to the
Pope the Preheminency and the Title of Universal Bishop, about the year 605, as
Balaeus says: Or from Boniface the 8th, that seduced and imprisoned his
Predecessor Celestine the 5th, about the year 1294, as Junius says: Or else
from Vitellianus the Musical Pope, about the year 666, as Thomson says, to
this present Pope, is that (...), the great Antichrist spoken of by St. Paul in
2 These. 2.8. and by St. John in Revel. 13.1. And that Rome is the place of his
abode and the proper Seat of him, as Brightman, Downham, Thomson, and many
others do unanimously affirm, and is, according to the Saying of St. John, in
Revel. 17.18. meant by St. Peter, where he says, The Church that is at
Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you, 1 Pet. 5.3. and is so
interpreted by many of the Ancient Fathers, to signify the City of Rome in
that place, as Papias apud Eusebius, l. 2.15. Tertul. adversus Judaeos. S. Hieron.
in Esaiam. c. 47. August. de Civit. Dei. l. 18. c. 22. Oros: Synchron. l. 2. c.
3. and l. 7. c. 2. And diverse others of our late Writers.

And their Reasons (to reduce them as brief as I can to certain heads) that
induce them to believe the Popes and Papacy to be the Antichrist, The reasons
why the Pope is believed to to be the Antichrist.
are of two sorts; 1. Their Blasphemies, Heresies and Impieries against God. 2.
Their Tyranny, Cruelty and Iniquity against man.


1. The Popes Impiety against God, is seen by their undermining, 1. The Popes
impiety against God.
crossing and corrupting all the Articles of our Creed, and by a high
transgressing of all the Ten Commandments of the Moral Law, as Thomson very
orderly and largely sets down; and more especially, Thomson in his arreign.
p. 96. I. W. page 8.9, 10. and Deinc. Mares. de Antichristo. p. 101. M. Mede in
the apost of the last times.
their Blasphemies, either by their own mouths and proper assertions, or by
their giving privilege, countenance and approof to the Blasphemies of their
Minions and Flatterers, which are plentifully set down by J.W. the Author of
Roma ruina finalis, in Anno 1666. And their Idolatry; when Pope Marcellinus
sacrificed to the Idols of the Painims; and all of them in worshipping their
breaden God in the Mass, and their Mahuzzims or Deastri, their Saints departed,
and their Relics, as Mr. Mede shows in his Learned Treatise of the Apostasy
of the last times, and his Apocalyptick Key.

2. The Popes iniquity toward man. Vid. Mares^um page 140.
Their Injustice and Iniquity against man is evidenced by their Pride in their
exalting and lifting up themselves above all that is called god; that is, above
Kings and Princes; as Gregory the 3. excommunicated the Emperor Leo
Iconomachus: Zachary the 1st deposed Childerick the lawful King of France, to
set up Pipin in his room: Leo the 3. created Charles the Great to be the
Emperor. Anastasius durst presume to excommunicate the Emperor Anastatius
Grandfather to Justinian, about 490. Martin 1. performed the like censure
against Constantius the Emperor about 650; but he was therefore brought by
Theodorus Calliopa unto the Emperor in Chains, and banished into Pontus, where
he died: And Gregory the 7th. formerly called Hildebrand, about 1080.
out-matched all the rest of his Predecessors in pride and boldness, by
compelling the Emperor Henry the 4th. to come barefooted, in an humble manner
to him, to give satisfaction unto his Holiness, or else to be deprived of his
Kingdom. Alexander the 3. trod upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, and as he was setting his foot upon his neck, he abused that place
of Scripture which says, super Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis; by applying
it to justify this his Luciferian Pride and Tyranny: Volater. l. 22.
Anthropolog. in Alex. 3. Roger Hov^don annal. page 2. sub Richard. 1. And it is
recorded that Alexander 6. poisoned Gemes the great Turks brother, that was
committed to his trust Hildebrand hired one to kill the Emp. John the 13. and
committed incest with his two fifters. The 31 Article of the Confession of the
Synod of Gappe.
And Adrian the 4th. made the said Emperor to hold his stirrup while he got
upon his Palfrey; And Celestine the 3. was so insolent, as to put the Crown
upon the head of Henry the 6th. and of the Empress, with his foot, and pushing
it off again in like manner, to say, I have power to make and to unmake
Emperors at my pleasure; a Pride surpassing the pride of Lucifer, Prince of
pride, and Diameter-wise opponent to the Humility of Christ: And as the Pride
of these Popes puffed up their hearts to swell above all earthly Powers, so the
Injustice and Cruelty of the Roman Bishops and that Hierarchy, were no whit
less toward their Inferiors, as appears by the unjust and barbarous burning
of John Hus and Hierom of Prague, and the rest of those bloody Massacres that
were acted in France, by the Popes Procurements and Assassinats, and in Belgia,
by the Duke de Alva, that was the Popes prime Instrument of Cruelty against the
Protestants.

And therefore according to the judgment of the said Writers, the Synod of
Gappe in France, that was held in Anno 1064. in the 31 Article of their
Confession, says, Cum vero Episcopus Romanus, erecta sibi in orb Christiano
Monarchia, sibi arroget Principatum in omnes Ecclesias and Pastores; usque adeo
inflatus, ut deum ipsum se appellet, Can. satis. Did. 96. lib. 1. Sacrar.
Cerem. cap. de Benedic. ensis. velit adorari. Council. Lateran. ult. Sess. 1, 3,
9, 10. Ipse sibi tribuat omnem potestatem in Coelo and in Terra, Res
Ecclesiasticas ad libitum componat, condat Articulos Fidei, Authoritatem
Scripturae velit pendere a sua, eamque ad libitum interpretetur, animarum
mercaturam exerceat, liberet adstrictos votis and juramentis, novos Dei cultus
instituat; and quod ad civilia attinet, legitimam Magistratuum authoritatem
conculcet, dans, adimens, and transferens Regna, credimus and asserimus eum
esse verum illum and germanum Antichristum, filium perditionis, praedictum in
Dei verbo, Zachar. 11.16, 17. 1 John 4.3. Apoc. 13.2, etc. Meretricem
Purpuratam, Apoc. 17.1. insidentem septem monitbus, in magna civitate, Apoc.
17.9. obtinentem Regnum in Reges terrae, Apoc. 17.18. and expectamus donec
Deus, prout promisit and jam coepit, eum fractum and victum spiritu oris sui,
tandem deleat fulgore adventus sui, 2 These. 2.8.

And this Article Tilenus analizeth, Tilenus exegis. page 45. Aphor. 165.
and prosecuteth the same at large, to prove the Pope to be, as they say, the
great Antichrist: And I will not at this time examine the truth and validity
either of this proposition or assumption, though I might very well deny them
both, as well the one as the other. But I confess that these things which the
Synod charge the Popes withal, being true, are transcendent sins; and
questionless the great enormities of the Roman Hierarchy and Papacy, especially
of the Court of Rome, confronting the Kingdom of Christ, and corrupting the
true service of God, do infallibly evince, that the Pope is an Antichrist, and
the Church of Rome blemished with much Antichristianisme; for every one that
oppugneth Christ, and opposes himself against his Kingdom, his Word, and his
Doctrine, can be none other than an Antichrist; and so was Simon Magus, Elimas,
Menander, Ebion, Cerinthus, and other Heriticks, that sprang up in the Apostles
times; and of whom; and the like, 1 John 2.18. It is confessed, that the Pope
is an Antichrist, but not the great transcendent Antichrist.
S. John says, And now there are many Antichrists; each one of them an
Antichrist: and such indeed are all, Antichrists, more or less, according as
their opposition is more or less, unto Christ, his Church, and his Gospel; and
no doubt but the Pope, and Papacy oppugneth Christ, corrupts his truth, and
oppresses his Church, in very many things: and therefore he cannot be denied
to be an Antichrist, and one of them that are great Antichrists.

But though these things do sufficiently prove the Pope and Papacy to be an
Antichrist, and a very great Antichrist too; yet they come too short to prove
him to be the great, eminent, egregious, transcendent, and especially designed
Antichrist, which the Scripture says should come before the end of the world;
and I never saw yet any Arguments, alleged by the best of the aforesaid
Authors, B. Montague in his apello Caesarem. page 143.
that was sufficient to evince him to be the same, nor indeed, as Bishop
Montague says, That I could not sufficiently answer, at leastwise to mine own
satisfaction, to hinder my belief therein.

And though the Synod of Gappe and Mr. Powel, and some other rigid Puritans of
Ingland, transported with the height of their zeal to a prejudicate opinion
against the Pope, do put it amongst the Articles of their Faith, to believe him
and his Hierarchy to be that great, transcendent Antichrist; yet I am sure,
that, The Church of Ingland has not determined the Pope to be the great
Antichrist.
neither learned Zanchius, nor Grynaeus, nor Faius, nor any of the most
learned, and more moderate Divines of Ingland, do think him to be the same;
neither is it the Doctrine of our Church; when as no Synod of ours has
resolved it, nor any one of all our Convocations assented to it, as learned and
reverend B. Montague well observes.

And although S. Peter calls Rome, as it was then in his time, Ethnic,
idolatrous, and full of confusion, Babylon; yet, quia de cet Scripturam proprie
accipere, How the Scriptures ought to be expounded.
ubi non cogit fides ad tropos descedere; because it ought to be an infalible
Rule, which all Divines should immutably observe, That the holy Scripture is to
be taken, and expounded properly, where the Analogy of Faith does not compel us
to recede unto Tropes and figures, as here it does, when S. Peter wrote this
Epistle; but not so when Rome became all Christian, and was rather Jerusalem
then Babylon; And because I see Bellarmines Arguments to prove the Pope not to
be that great and long expected Antichrist, unsufficiently answered, The main
Reasons why we cannot believe the Pope to be the great Antichrist.
and the answers unsatisfactory to many men, notwithstanding all the endeavors
of Bishop Downham, and others of our best learned men, to do the same; and
especially because that, although many of the marks, signs, and actions of the
great Antichrist may be rightly applicable, and properly belonging to the Pope;
yet, seeing none can be truly said to be that very Antichrist, but he that shall
have all the marks, tokens, and characters of that Antichrist, and shall by his
actions fulfill all the Prophesies, and Predictions that are foretold us in the
Scripture, the great Antichrist should do; and all the marks and actions
foretold us of that great Antichrist, are no ways applicable to the Pope, nor
fulfilled by the Pope, as in the prosecution and sequel of this Discourse, I
shall make it as clear as the light, to any impartial man, that is not
peevishly transported, and obstinately wedded, to his own groundless opinion;
and for many other reasons, that in the explication of those Scriptures that
speak of him, I shall hereafter set down unto you, all the men in the world
shall never make me believe, that the Pope, E. H. de Antic. page 81. 2. That
many other learned men do believe the Turk to be the great Antichrist.
or succession of Popes or popish state, and Polity, is that great enormous
Antichrist, that should come into the world, or that the city of Rome is, or
must be the proper seat and throne of that Antichrist: and so E.H. in his
Treatise, de Antichristi, Page 81. says these very same words that I do.

2. As the foresaid Authors concluded the Pope and Papacy, to be that great
Antichrist, so many other learned men, and great Divines, finding the
invalidity of the former men's Arguments, and the insufficiency of their
reasons, to confirm their Opinion, and to justify their allegation, to prove
the Pope to be Antichrist, have thought the Turk to be the same, that should
come into the world, to destroy the flock of Christ, and they do judge
Constantinople to be that Babylon, which is prophesied and spoken of in the
Revelation, to be the seat, and throne of that bloody beast, ever since Mahomet
the 2. took the City of Constantinople, and turned the great and famous Church
of San-sophia, in anno 1455. to be for the service of the false Prophet
Mahomet, Mahomet, who he was.
that was the son of Abdalla, a Merchant in Mecca, of Arabia, and was born
post-humus, in anno 571. as the Lord Verulam collecteth. And that learned
Bishop Montague sets down 10 special reasons, that might prove his
Successor, and upholder of his Blasphemies, the great Turk, and his wicked,
tyrannical state and Polity, directing all his Laws and Practices ex diametro,
to oppose the state and Kingdom of Christ, and to oppress his servants, to
constitute, and to be that great Antichrist, rather, and far more likely than
the Pope; as to abbreviate the same unto you.

B. Montague his 10 Reasons to prove the Turk Antichrist
1. In his Apostasy, whether you understand it from the Doctrine and Gospel of
Christ, or from the Romans Empire; for both himself, and all his Sectaries have
relapsed from Christ, and Apostatized from the Profession of his name; and have
received the mark and stamp of the Beast; and he is much more interessed in the
Romans Empire than the Pope is, or then any of the Popes that ever was.

deceiving signs and wonders, from the first Mahomet to the present Turk, the
stories are most manifest, how he and all his, took that course to deceive the
people, and to make himself to be believed, and to be esteemed a (...), some
great one, like Simon Magus; the which thing secundum literam, and (...), was
never personally verified in any Pope of Rome to this day, as it was in that
false prophet, who is amongst all his followers accounted the great power of
God, and their Savior, to these very times.

number of the beast, whether you take it from the time of his rising, as
Thomson, and some others think it should be understood, or for the proper name
of the man that should be the Antichrist, it is more agreeable to that false
Prophet, than to the Pope, or it may be, to any of all the Popes that have
been; for Mahomet's rising against Christ, to obscure the true light of his
Gospel, was in the sixth Century, as diverse Authors do affirm; and Jerusalem
was taken by Homar, his Successor, about the year 666. and the name of Mahomet,
written in Greek, the Language in which S. John wrote his Revelation, The name
of Mahomet contains the number of 666.
does make up the just number of 666. as 40. 1. 70. 40. 5. 300. 10. 200. m a o
m e t i which is in all just 666. as well as (...), which is so much insisted
upon by them, that make the Pope to be the Antichrist.

Eastern Languages, that the word Turca, which is the name of the chief Prince
of Gog and Magog, does signify the same thing that Apollion and Abaddon does,
which is a Destroyer, and is a name ascribed to the King of those Locusts,
Revelat. 9.11.
that came out of the bottomless pit, and are interpreted by the best Authors
to be the Arrabians, that were the prime Subjects, and the first setters up of
Mahomet, that great Impostor.

Mahometans, in these days, and the Saracens of old, are the grand professed
enemies of the Christians, qua tales, as they are Christians, and do call
themselves Musulmans, that is, the right believers, which I confess the Pope
and Papists likewise do, as indeed the Arians, Donatists, and all other
Heretics did.

false Prophet, Mahomet, though he made a great show of Sanctity and a strict
holy life, as all such Deceivers do; yet personally, as a private man, he was a
man of sin, given up to all Licentiousness; and in his Alcoran tolerating all
prostitutions, unto his Sectaries; and promising unto them a Paradise of all
carnal pleasures after death, which as yet no Pope, that we read of, ever did.

Mahomet, and his heir and successor the Turk, literally exalts himself above
Christ, above all the holy Prophets and Apostles of Christ, and above all the
Kings and Monarchs of the earth, and as St. Paul says, (...), above all that
is called God, and styles himself the Lord of Lords, and the God of the earth,
that has the power and right to dispose all the things of this world at his
pleasure, as it is to be seen in diverse of the Letters of Solomon, Amurath, and
others: And his Alchoran, which is but a tyrotarichon, an hotch-potch of lies
and fables, patched together by his Jew-Scribe, and the Nestorian Sergius, of
Jewish, paganish, Manichaean, and Arian Heresies, and Superstition, he
commended, as received from his friend, and old familiar acquaintance, the
Angel Gabriel, to his followers, above the Law of Moses, and above the Gospel
of Jesus Christ: and he promised his carnal Paradise to all the observers
thereof, and threatened eternal torments to all the despisers of it; and I
think, no Pope exceeded this impiety.

Heir and Successor of Mahomet, the Turk, is and has been a long time
possessed of Jerusalem, the Temple of God, and the land of Promise, ever since
Homar took it; except some few years that the French held it from him, after
that, in the Holly War, Godfrey of Bulloigne took it; and because that Mahomet
was circumcised, and the Turk, and all his followers in like manner, the Jews
flocked unto this Conqueror, when he wan the holy City, as unto their Messiah,
and advancing his Enterprise, they paid him Tribute, and assisted him in all
his impiety, and proceedings against the Christians, which they never did, in
the like manner, to any Pope whatsoever.

thus taken and possessed the holy City, he now sits (...), in the Temple or
Church of God, take the Church in what sense you will, materially, formally, or
figuratively: for he was buried in the Church of God at Meca, and they make
Pilgrimages to his Sepulcher, and adore his relics to this very day: and
Homar his Successor, having taken Jerusalem, templum acquisivit, quod Solomon
extruxerat, ad blasphemiae suae oratorium constituendum: he made the Temple
which Solomon first built, and afterward Zorobabel, and Herod, exceedingly
beautified, to be the oratory of his blasphemy, says Theophanes; and
Sophronius, then Patriarch of Jerusalem cried out, in veritate, ista est
abominatio desolationis, stans in loco sancto; in very truth, that is the
abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel and our Savior, standing in the
holy place; and afterward, when Mahomet the great took Constantinople, he made
his Palace in the great cathedral Church of san Sophia, and made the Bishops
house, and the Priests lodgings, his seraglia, to this very day.

And if you take the (...), the Church, or Temple for the living Temples of
God, and the faithful servants of Christ, he sits upon them, and against
them more than the Pope ever did; for he has brought into confusion many many
Christian Churches, and Congregations, in Syria, Palestina, Egypt, Persia,
Armenia, Arabia, Africa, Grecia, Thracia, and Asia the less, and in many other
Countries besides; whose candles he has put out, and removed their
candlesticks out of their places; and instead of the Gospel of Christ, he has
taught them to blaspheme his name; and has set the mark of the beast upon
those that were the servants of Christ, by circumcising them in their flesh,
and renouncing their former Baptism, which is the mark and badg of the lamb;
and those, that will not thus renounce their Savior Christ, though he
suffers them to live quietly, so long as they pay him their allotted
Contribution, as I showed to you before: Yet he does extremely tyrannize over
them in those taxes and contributions; and especially in that barbarous tribute
of the Christians children, which every third year are to be taken away from
their Parents, from their Religion, and from their God, to become the
worshippers of Mahomet, and to be his seraglian Eunuchs.

Constantinople, which is new Rome, and so termed by the old Writers, ever
since Constantine made it the Imperial throne of the Roman Emperors, and is now
made a greater Babylon, and fuller of confusion than ever old Rome was since
Constantines time.

And surely, in my judgment, these Reasons do sufficiently and demonstratively
evince, that the great Turk is a great, and a very great Antichrist: and indeed
a far greater Antichrist than the Pope, or any Pope that has yet been, take
the very worst of them.

3. 3. Others conceive, that out of the Turkish and Pepish polity, conjoined
together, the Antichrist shall arise.
Some other Divines there be, that think it is probable and most likely, the
Mohammedan Religion, and the Turkish State, that profess and uphold the Religion
of that false Prophet, may be conjoined in association with the Pope and
Papacy, to constitute and make up the great and transcendent Antichrist, that
shall most virulently oppose the State and Kingdom of Christ, and oppress the
true servants of God; for though these two states of the Turk and Pope, be
opposite, ad invicem, one against the other, in temporalibus, in respect of
their temporal Rule and Government; yet they may both combine and be alike, in
oppugning the truth of Christ, and corrupting his true service, though
differently, respectu mediorum, in respect of the ways and means that either
of them does it; B. Montague in his apello Caesarem.
as the Turk directly, and the Pope obliquely; the Turk, vi aperta, by fire and
sword, and the Pope fraud and insidiis, by fraud and deceit; and yet both of
them respectu finis, to aim at the same end, to uphold their own wicked state
and polity, by opposing the Gospel, and suppressing the Kingdom of Christ.

And for my part, I shall never be any Advocate to plead for either of them,
neither would I have any man to imagine, that I would ever seem to diminish or
lessen, much less then, The Author excuses neither the Turk nor the Pope.
to excuse the wickedness and impieties either of Turk or Pope; the Christian
world knows, that either of them, and both of them are bad enough; each of
them an Antichrist, and a very great Antichrist, the best of them, that has
much opposed the Kingdom of Christ, and blemished the true service of God with
many errors, Heresies, and superstitions.

Yet, as I said of the Pope, so I say of the Turk, that I cannot believe him to
be that great and egregious Antichrist, which the Scripture (...) speaks of;
because I cannot see him fitted and filled with all the marks, signs, and
actions of that Antichrist, Why he believes neither the Pope nor Turk to be
the great Antichrist.
to the full; so as no acception can be taken against the proof thereof in any
point; or, because I cannot find, nor can it be found by any other, that all
and every one of the marks, and Characters, and all the actions, that are
foretold by the Prophets and Apostles, should be done and seen in the great
Antichrist, are fully seen to be done and fulfilled either in the Pope, or in
the Turk; but that there are many particular things and acts foretold us should
be done by that Antichrist, that can no ways be found in them, nor done by
them, or fulfilled in either of them, as hereafter, in this Treatise, I shall
more fully declare the Particulars that are unful filled by them, and the marks
and Characters of that great Antichrist, that are no ways applicable to either
of them.

And so, Zanchius miscel. lib. 3. Lambert in apoc. Andren^ tort. torti.
Montagu. appello Caes. page 159.
as I said before, the more moderate Divines, and for learning, not inferior
to the best, as Zanchius, Lambert, Andrews, Montague, and many more, are of the
same opinion, and do believe, that neither the Pope, nor the Turk, is that
great transcendent Antichrist, but do conceive, that out of these two estates,
polity, and Government, different in the means, the one from the other, but
agreeing in the end to oppose the Kingdom of Christ; or else, out of some
other estate, polity rule and Government, in many things like to these, and in
some things unlike to either of them, but in some respects far worse than the
worst of both the other, the great enormous Antichrist, that singular,
notorious Antichrist, prophesied of in the holy Scripture, shall arise and
come, and in fraudulent malicious craftiness, and execrable wickedness, shall,
through heretical impostures and lying miracles, go beyond all others, against
the honor of Christ, and the service of God, and do more mischief unto his
servants, than any other that ever lived in the world, The doings of the great
Antichrist more odious to God, and more destructive to his church than the acts
either of Pope or Turk.
and so shall do such feats and acts, as, in some respects, are more odious and
detestable in the fight of God, and more pernicious and destructive, both to
the bodies and souls of men, than are the doings either of the Pope or Turk.

And therefore, seeing we find so many of the most learned men varying in
their opinions and judgments about the Antichrist, and the concomitants of
that great beast, spoken of in Revel. 13. and about the Prophesies and
mysteries of the holy Scriptures, that do concern that man of sin; because the
secrets of the spirit of God are like the deep ocean, not easily wadeable, but
as St. Gregory faith, deep enough for the greatest Elephant to swim, that is,
surpassing the Reach of the quickest wit, The Scripture like the deep ocean sea.
and no ways intelligible, unless they be revealed by the same Spirit: And
because the Prophesies that are contingent and to come, are not perspicuous,
and cannot be well explained by the best expositors, before we see them
fulfilled; Prophesies not well understood until they be fulfilled, and
therefore Patrum and Doctorum (...) venia non insectatione dignos censemus.
but as Riddles are never perceived, what they be, or what they mean, until
they are unfolded, but are clear enough when they are explained; so Prophesies
are hidden, until they be fulfilled, but perspicuous and plain enough to them
that will look and search after them, when they are accomplished and already
past: In respect whereof, Irenaeus says most truly, that certius and sine
periculo est, expectare usque ad impletionem Prophetiae, quam temere divinare;
it is a surer and a safer course, without danger, to expect and wait for the
fulfilling of a Prophecy, than rashly and presumptuously to go about to
explain it before we see it fulfilled.

And therefore I do not so much wonder, that many of the Fathers, and the other
Learned men aforementioned, have erred, which by seeing some things come to pass,
that the Apostles said should be done and happen in the time of the Antichrist,
did presently apply them, some to the Pope, and others to the Turk, and
concluded them to be the Great undoubted Antichrist; because they did
anticipate, and made such a Conclusion, before many other things of the
Prophesies, touching the Acts, Marks and Characters of the Antichrist, were
fulfilled and made manifest unto the Church.

But I hope I may the more freely pass with less censure, to set down, what I
and others that are of my mind, do conceive concerning the Great transcendent
Antichrist, when I shall only treat in this Discourse and set before you these
three Points;

1. What the Scriptures say, by what way the Great Antichrist should come, The
three special things that the Author does in this book.
where he should be seated, and what he should do, when he comes.

2. To enquire of the diligent Searchers of things, and to demand by way of
satisfaction, and not of resolution, of the unpartial Observers of the Affairs,
Passages and Transactions of our times, whether the things and doings that they
have seen acted, and done in our days, be not answerable, and in every point
suitable and correspondent to the Prophesies and Predictions of the Acts and
Doings of the Great Antichrist?

3. If by paralleling the Acts and Doings of the Great Antichrist that he
should do, with the Actions that they have seen done in our time, they find,
The best way to judge of the Antichrist.
that no Garment was ever more fitted to any man's Body, nor any line straighter
to the Rule, than are the Acts, Doings and Proceedings of these times, from the
Year 1640, and so forward, correspondent and answerable to all the Prophesies
of the Scripture, that are left unto us by the Prophets and Apostles of Christ,
concerning the Doings and Proceedings of the Great Antichrist; then I leave it
to the discreet and judicious Reader, to determine and judge, whether the Great
Antichrist be already come, and who he is; and I know no better way to judge of
it, than this; For

As our Savior Christ, when the Disciples of John asked him, Matthew. 11.4.
whether he was the Christ, or should they look for another? He gave them none
other Answer, but go, tell John what you do hear and see, the blind receive
their sight, the lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead
are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached unto them; the which
things were Prophesied, Isa. 55.6. and chapter 61.1, etc.
that they should be done by the Messiah when he came into the world: And again
he says, Opera quae ego facio, testantur de me, The Works that I do, do bear
witness of me, whether I be the Christ or not: So say I to them that would
know, whether the Great Antichrist be come or not, or whether they shall look
for another? and in another place? How to know whether the Antichrist be come
or not.
Consider well what you hear and see, whether the things, and all the things,
that were prophesied should be done by the great Antichrist, were not all acted
and done modo and forma, as they were fore-shewed, here in Ingland, even in
these our days or not? And then judge your selves, whether he be come or not;
and who he is, and where seated: For I shall do no more, but show you, what was
prophesied of the Antichrist, that he should do; and demand, if you have not
seen and heard of all those things that he should do, acted and done in these
our days here in these Dominions.

That the Antichrist shall arise out of the truest and purest Church on earth,
which was the Church of Ingland, in King Charles his time. First Then I say,
That the Antichrist shall arise out of the true Chur.
that it is agreed upon of all sides, not only by Bellarmine, and the rest of
the Popish writers, but also by the most learned of our Protestant Divines,
that the Scriptures testify, how that as the Darnels grow from, and among the
Wheat, so the Antichrist and his Adherents shall spring out of the true Church
of Christ, even when it is the true Church: So that Ineed not to stand long to
confirm this Point; for as Christ by his spiritual Fishermen catches Souls in
the Devils Pond, that is, the world, and feeds them in his own, that is, the
Church; so the Devil goes about with his Net, and by his Instruments, to catch
men in Christ his Pond, that is, the Congregation of Saints and true Servers of
God, and then carries them to swim in the Dead Sea of eternal misery.

And so E. H. E. H. de Antichristo p. 80.
confesses and consents rightly with me, that it is an undeniable truth,
that the Antichrist must and shall arise in the midst of the Purest Church in
the world, even when it is and remains, that is, in respect of very many of
her Members, pure: and then, as Christ turned the cold water into sweet wine,
so will the Devil, by the Ministry of the Antichrist, turn the Pure Wine of
Gods Word into bitter Water, and the sweet milk of Gods Truth into a sower and
stinking Puddle of all Errors, Dan. 7.25.
Heresies and Blasphemies: For in Dan. 7.25. Which many Divines hold to be a
Prediction of the coming of the Great Antichrist, and I yield him to be therein
typically prophesied of: Antiochus the type of the Antichrist.
It is said of Antiochus Epiphanes, which was the greatest enemy and the
cruellest persecutor that ever the Church of the Jews had, and was indeed a
very lively Type and the most perfect Pattern of the Antichrist, that he should
wear out the Saints of God, and change their Laws and Customs, and abolish
the times of their Sabbaths, their Feasts and their Circumcision; and as
Tremellius says, Tremell. in Dan. 7.25.
Legem ipsam Dei, Juraque omnia nefarie convellere, most wickedly to pluck
asunder and tear the very Law of God and to trample all Rights underfeet; and
so the Antichrist, that is there typified by Antiochus, should do the like unto
the Christians: Which does sufficiently show, that he must appear and reign in
the Purest Church on earth; for so the Church of the Jews was then, in the
Reign of Antiochus; and because, there be the best Saints, and they have the
best Laws and Customs, even those, which Christ himself and his Apostles have
prescribed unto them, and which therefore the Antichrist goes about to change,
and by all means labors with all his might to destroy.

And thus Bellarmine produces argumentum ad hominem, and argues against the
Protestants, by an argument taken from our selves and from our own assertion,
to prove that the Pope cannot be the Antichrist; because it is yielded of all
sides, that the Antichrist must arise out of the truest Church, Bellar. de Romans
Pontif. l. 3. c. 13.
and must reign and rage in the same; therefore if the Pope be the Antichrist,
the Church of Rome must needs be acknowledged and confessed to be, and not that
it was, but still is, the true Church, yea, and the truest Church of Christ,
and both the Calvinists and the Lutherans are out of the true Church, because
of the schism and separation that they made from the Roman Church: The which
Argument I see not well answered, though Bishop Downam and others attempted to
do it, to this very day; And St. Aug. speaking of the Antichrist, sitting in
the Temple of God, says, they understand it right, qui putant etiam Latin
dici, sicut in Graeco est, non in templo Dei, sed in templum Dei sedeat,
tanquam sit ipsetemplum Dei, S. Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 20. c. 19.
quod est Ecclesia; sicut dicimus, sedet in amicum, id est, velut amicus; vel
si quid aliud isto locutionis genere dici solet; which think, it may be spoken
in Latin, as it is in the Greek, he sits not in the temple of God, but for
the temple of God, as if he were the temple of God, which is, the Church of
God, as we say, he sits for our friend, that is, as our friend.

Whereby you may see, St. Aug. understands that the Great Antichrist would
pretend to be the only great friend of the true Church, and so in the true
Church, and not out of it, and consequently not to be the Turk in any wise,
that pretends not to serve Christ; nor the Pope, if we deny the Church of
Rome to be the true Church of Christ; and therefore we may conclude with
Bellarmine, Bp Downam de Antichrist. lib: 10. cap. 3. and 4.
that the Pope cannot be said to be the Great Antichrist, nor Rome the proper
Seat of the Antichrist, as Downam, Thomson, and others would have it to be;
because as I said before, the Antichrist must arise in the midst of the truest
and purest Church of Christ, which we utterly deny Rome to be; For the Apostle
says, 2 Theff. 2.
the man of Sin and the child of Perdition, which all Interpreters do expound
to be the Antichrist, shall sit in the temple of God, which as, the greatest of
the School-Doctors, Aquinas says, Aquin. in loc. and so Tilenus Exegesis. 74.
page 21.
must not be understood of the Jewish Temple at Jerusalem, that has been
destroyed, and shall never be re-edified, as some of the best Jewish Rabbines
do believe; but as S. Chrysostom and the Greek Scholiast. page 333. and Gorhan,
and many others do understand it of the true Church of God, The Antichrist
rises and reigns where God dwells.
where the Gospel of Christ by his Faithful Bishops and Painful Ministers is
truly preached, the Sacraments duly administered, and the Flock of Christ
rightly Governed and instructed to serve God as they ought to do, there the
Antichrist will seat himself, and there Satan will assist him, to overthrow the
Bishops, to persecure the true Ministers, to neglect and nullify the holy
Sacraments, to corrupt the Truth of the Gospel; and to ruin that Church which
Christ thus builds: For it is observed, that the Apostle uses in this place
the word (...), dwell, or to inhabit; God dwells in the best Saints and where
they dwell.
because that is the House or place where God resideth, that is, among his
Saints and in his Saints, as God himself does testify unto his People, that
will truly serve him.

And therefore Constantinople, where the Turk resideth, and has made the
Chancel of San Sophia, where the High Altar and the Patriarchal Throne stood,
to be a Turkish Moschy, whither the Grand Signior goes to the Blasphemous
Ceremonies of their False Prophet; and the City of Rome, where the Pope
sits, and has apostatized from the true Faith in many Points, and corrupted
the Gospel of Christ, at leastwise, with many Superstitions, cannot be said to
be that (...) where God resideth, and the Antichrist sits as god, to destroy
it; but it must be that Church, wherein God in the most Special manner dwells
and delights in it; and that is in the Purest Church that can be found on
earth, in respect of all the outward things that do constitute the same; for
you must know, that the Church is to be considered two manner of ways,

1. Respectu divinae illius (...), and so God only knows his Church, The
Church considered two ways.
and who are the Members thereof, as the Apostle shows.

2. In respect of that Discipline, Rule and (...), which is apparent to our
eyes, and consists chiefly in these four special things. Four things do
constitute a true outward visible Church


1. In the Prayers of the Saints.

2. The Preaching of the Gospel.

3. The Administration of the Sacraments. And

4. Obedience to the Discipline of the Lawful Governors; And that Church which
in these respects is the truest and purest, is that (...), the Temple and House
of God, where he dwells, and which the Devil, by his dear Servant the
Antichrist, labors by all means to overthrow.

Constantinople was (...), the true Church and dwelling place of God, and so
was Rome, when her Faith was published throughout the whole world; Romans 1.
and so both continued until the Antichrist suppressed the Truth, and seated
himself therein.

To this usual Objection I answer,

all sides, and by all Interpreters, old and new, Papists and Protestants, that
the Great Antichrist should come toward the end of the world, 1. That the
Antichrist should come toward the end of the world. 1 Timothy 4.1.
and in the last Period of the (...), last times, as the Scriptures testify
the same most evidently; for though the Mystery of him and his iniquity began
by those Heretics, that sprang up in the Apostles time; yet was not he to be
revealed in his strength and fullness until the last and latter end of times:
and therefore not any ways like to come and to appear so many Hundred years
agone, as they prescribe, which make either the Turk or the Pope to be the
Antichrist.

2. 2. That God suffers not the enemies of his Church to tyrannize long.
I say, that God being so good and so gracious a God, especially to his Church
and true Servants, will not always be chiding, neither will he shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure; but as the Poet says, Nocte pluit tota,
redeunt spectacula mane. Which in the Prophets words, I may express, that
although heaviness may endure for a night, yet joy comes in the morning; and
he may be sure of it; because God himself tells his Church, that for a moment
in mine anger have I forsaken thee, but with everlasting compassion will I have
pity upon thee; and so accordingly, he suffered not Antiochus that was the most
lively type of the Antichrist that is in all the Scripture, to rage against the
Church of the Jews, for all their wickedness, any longer than Three years and a
half; neither did he suffer the Captivity of his People in Babylon, for their
great sins recorded, 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15, 16. to last any longer than 70 years;
nor the Children of Israel to be oppressed by Pharaoh, for the wrong they had
done to their Brother Joseph, any more, after the Death of Joseph, than about
200 years, as Helvicus collecteth, which is the longest time that I find God
seems to sleep, and to forget the Afflictions of his Church: And therefore I
cannot sufficiently wonder, that Mr. Mede, Maresius, Tilenus, the Gappe Synod,
and others of the Divines aforenamed, should imagine that God would be so
regardless, so unmindful, and so severe (though in Justice, we confess, he
might be much more severe) unto the Christian Church, Note this well.
as to suffer the Great Antichrist, the greatest and the cruellest enemy unto
his Church, that ever the world bred, to reign and rage against his Saints and
Servants, for so many hundred of years, as the Pope and Turk have now ruled,
since they conceive them to be the Antichrist, and the Great Antichrist that
should be so signally revealed.

3. 3. That the Antichrist was to arise, not out of a true planted Church, but
out of a truly reformed Church.
I say, that it is manifest, the Antichrist should arise, not out of a true
converted Church from Paganism and the serving of their Idols to Christianity,
as both Constantinople and all the rest of the Eastern Churches were, when
Mahomet corrupted them; and also Rome, and the Western Churches, when the Pope
replenished them with his Superstitions; but the Antichrist was to spring and
to appear out of the true and purely Reformed Church, after it should be purged
and cleansed from all Heresies, Errors and Superstitions.

For it was prophesied and fore-shewed by the Apostle St. That it was foretold
us, seducers and false prophets should come into the Church. Acts 20.29, and
30. 1 Pet. 2.1.
Paul, that after his departure Seducers, Corrupters of Gods Word, and false
Prophets should creep into the Church, and introduce many damnable Doctrines
amongst Gods people, to poison the Souls of the Flock of Christ: And St. Peter
likewise foretells us, that there should come False Teachers into the Church,
who should privily bring in damnable Heresies: And so we find that not only
Ebion and Cerinthus, two Heretical Jews, and after them, Arius, Pelagius,
Manichaeus, Nestorius, Entyches, and the like, brought in most wicked Errors,
and Heresies, that did most palpably and grossly infest and trouble the Church
of God, and therefore were the sooner perceived, and the easier prevented and
confuted by the Grave and Godly Fathers; but also the Church of Rome, the Popes
and their Parasites, have privily, that is, insensibly and unperceived by the
very Doctors of the Church, brought in many strange Doctrines, and thereby
corrupted in many things the true Faith of Christ, and defiled the Church of
God with many most Pernicious Errors, as specially, in forbidding the Priests
to marry, commanding us to abstain from Meats, besides many other Superstitions
and Points of less moment, and most of all, in that strange Metaphysical and
incredible Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the consequents of that
Doctrine, in the Idolatrous adoration of the consecrated Host, and other very
frivolous Superstitions, which have brought much Misery, and have been most
Pernicious unto the Church of Christ. That a reformation of the abuses in Gods
service was foreshewed.


And after that the Field of Gods Church should be thus overgrown with Tares,
and with Thorns and Thistles, the same Apostle shows, that God would look
upon his Church, and there should come a Reformation, and he would raise
Reformers, to root out those erroneous weeds and Bastard Plants, and to
prescribe a form of Godliness, or a set form of Gods Worship, whereby the
Church of Christ and Servants of God should be guided and directed how to serve
God aright in the true Faith of Jesus Christ: And these Reformers of the
foresaid Errors, and Prescribers of that set form of Gods Service, and
Teachers of the People, to worship God according to that form of wholesome
Doctrine, are styled by St. Paul, as they were indeed, good men, and the good
Ministers of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 4.6. 1 Timothy 4.6. Hypocritical proud Saints
the worst of all sinners.


And because the Devil can never rest quiet, but when we strive to be best,
then will he labor and strive to make us worst of all, and to become proud
Saints, that are more odious in the sight of God, than the greatest sinners,
when they be humbled for their sins, as our Savior testifies, the same
quick-sighted Argos being illuminated by the Divine light of Gods Holy Spirit,
says, there should spring up a company of Hypocritical Professors, that would
be proud and boasting of their knowledge, though it were never so erroneous,
and proud of their Godliness, though they were never so great worldlings and
Hypocritical Dissemblers: And these E. H. rightly terms, the black guard of
the Antichrist; and he counts eighteen Troops, or as I think, he might have
rather said eighteen Legions of them.

1. Self-Lovers, which is the Root of all Mischief. That abundance of
hypocritical professors, no less then 18 troops or legions, should under the
pretense of Religion, corrupt Gods service, and destroy his servants. 2 Timothy
3.2, 3, 4 E. H. de Antichristo. p. 145.


2. Covetous men, that long for the Lands and Livings both of King and Priest.

3. Boasters, of what great things they would do.

4. Proud men, of their strength, of their Knowledge, and of their Goodness and
Holiness.

5. Blasphemers, of God, of the King, and of the Saints of God.

6. Disobedient to Parents, especially to their Spiritual Parents, the Bishops
and the Church.

7. Unthankful men, to those that have best deserved and done them most good.

8. Unholy men, without any spark of true Holiness or Religion in them.

9. Without natural Affection, to their Kins-folk and those of their own flesh
and blood.

10. Truce Breakers, without any regard of their Oaths, Promises or Articles of
Agreement.

11. False Accusers, and Make-bates, by charging men with those things that
they never knew.

12. Incontinent, and given over to all uncleanness and all fleshly lusts.

13. Fierce, and cruel men, thirsting after the Lives and blood of those whom
they hate, and nothing satisfying them but their death.

14. Despisers, and so haters of those that are good.

15. Traitors, that is, Betrayers of their King, of their Governors, and of
their Friends.

16. Heady, that is, obstinate and wilful men, that will have nothing done nor
said, but what they themselves think good.

17. High-minded men, and such as from a low estate and mean extract, aimed at
great matters, and aspired to high places, to be Knights, Lords, and Princes.

18. Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God, whatsoever Pretense they
made, of their love to God, yet indeed their own Pleasure was and is their god,
and their main end is for their own good.

And all these eighteen Troops, which the Apostle cloatheth in the same Livery,
that is, a pretended form or show of Godliness, and a Directory to seem more
zealous in Religion, and to bear a greater love and care of Gods Honor, than
all others; but should, notwithstanding all their Pretenses, their Zeal and
their Saintship, deny the Power and virtue of the right and true Form of
Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. and thereby, 2 Timothy 3.5.
says the Apostle, they shall turn the Grace of God into wantonness, that is,
turn the true Service of God into vain jangling, and a foolish senceless
prating; and so probably prove themselves to be just like Jannes and Jambres,
that resisted Moses, who was their chief Governor, and King in Jeshuron; and
like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that, as the Prophet says, angered Moses in
their Tents, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord; Psalm. 106.16.
and so despised, rebelled, and would have destroyed both the Civil Magistrate,
and the Ecclesiastical Governors of Gods Church, which Offices themselves
desired and aimed at, and would have obtained, if God by his fearful Judgment
had not prevented them.

And according to these Prophesies and Predictions, That all the aforesaid
things came to pass according as they were foreshewed.
and the like;

1. Of Deceivers and Corrupters of Gods Truth.

2. Of a Faithful Reformation of all in-crept Errors and Abuses. And

3. Of a Faithless Apostasy and Rebellion against the Reformers of the same,
and the Defenders of Gods Service, by a company of Hypocritical Zealots, we
find by the successes, says one, and I think very right, that all these things
happened just as they were fore-shewed by the Apostle, as in other places, so
likewise in this our Church of Ingland: For after that the Pope and the Church
of Rome had fallen away from some Points of the true Faith, Arise Evans in his
voice from Heaven, p. 18, and 19.
and had privily, as I showed before, brought in diverse Errors, Abuses and
Superstitions, which defiled the Purity, and blemished the Beauty of our
Church, as of many other particular Churches besides, Martyn Luther steps up,
and falls out with the Pope, for and about the Sale of his Indulgences, by his
Factor Tercelius, whom the Pope then employed for that business; and then he
bitterly inveigheth against his Holiness for this, and the other Corruptions of
the German Church, that were no less, as they said, than centum gravamina, a
hundred grievances, Fasciculus rerum extendarum. King Hen. the 8. writes
against Luther.
which were presented to Pope Adrian the 6th. with an earnest desire of a
speedy redress, as you may find it in fasciculo rerum expetendarum: Hereupon
King Henry the 8. it may be in Requital of the Popes favor, that granted him a
dispensation to marry his Brothers Wife, writes a Book against Luther, and
therein blames him very much for apostatizing and starting aside from his
Mother, the Church of Rome, and contrary to his Faith, and Oath, and all good
manners, so eagerly to oppose, and so bitterly to rail against his holy Father
the Pope; and so to the uttermost of his Learning, that was both an
understanding, wise and Learned King, he defends the Faith together with the
Corruptions of the Roman Church; or rather maintains the Errors and
Superstitions of that Church, together with so much of the true Faith, as the
Pope and the Church of Rome did then profess; King Hen. 8. his double
recompense for his book against Luther. 1. Recompense
and for this Royal Engagement of the King against Luther, the King receives a
double Recompense.

1. The one from Luther, his great Antagonist.

2. The other from the Pope, his dear Client. For

1. Luther in the heat of his Fury, and the height of his German spirit,
railes as much against the King, (and calls him, as I read it in his own Book,
and not out of any other Transcriber, asinissimus Rex, an unseemly term, as I
conceive, for a poor Monk to give to so great a King, and as I said, none of
the meanest Clerks,) as he had formerly done against the Pope; which bitter
Invectives against a Father in the Church, and the Patriarch of all the Western
Churches, Tilenus exeges. page 29. Aphor. 104. and p. 20.
as the Primitive Counsels term him, and qui in ordine primus fuit inter
Patriarchas, and primum ordine in Apostolorum collegio eum esse, non inviti
concedimus, says Tilenus, and such uncivil behavior toward Kings, Luther
blamed for his too much bitterness and unseemly terms. Matthew. 11.29.
that are the Lords Anointed, be they what they will, when I read, not upon the
credit of others, but in his own Tractates, as I thought very well of many
things, that he wrote, so I should have thought much better of all the rest,
but that I conceived so much bitterness, mingled with such a measure of Gall
and Vinegar, as dropped from his Pen, not against the sins, but against the
Persons of men, could not be distilled from the spirit of God, which is a
Spirit of Meekness and Lowliness, as our Savior testifies; But

2. 2. Recompense.
The Pope, for this Scholastic Defense of the Faith of the Roman Church, by
the King, (which the Pope himself should have done by his Pen, and desired the
King to have assisted him by his Sword,) gives to him, and to his Successors,
the Kings of Ingland, the just, good and honorable Title of Defender of the
Faith; that is, the True and Christian Faith, or the Faith of Gods Elect, which
was pretended to be then in Rome, and is now defended by the King.

And though King Henry obtained this Eulogy, this Title and this Authority upon
a wrong ground, because he defended a wrong Faith; yet as Jacob got the
blessing, upon an untrue suggestion, that he was his father Isaac's eldest son,
even his firstborn Esau; but being once gotten, he still retained it: So did
the King, Genes. 27.19.
when he fell out with the Pope, and fell from the Pope about his divorce from
Queen Katherine, which the Pope, upon good grounds would not admit, still
retain that Title, How the Faith was defended in Ingland.
and especially the truth and substance of that Title, and maintained the same,
as a King, with his sword, which he had gained, as a Priest, with his pen; and
so did his son, and his Successor after him, Edward the 6th continue a royal
defender of the true faith; and when Queen Mary would have remitted the Title,
and permitted the faith to be undefended, and the truth to be corrupted in this
Kingdom, the witnesses of Christ his Gospel, the holy Martyrs of our Church, (
Cranmer, Latymer, Ridley, 3 reverend Bishops, and the rest of those holy
Champions) stood up, and defended the same unto death, with the sheding of
their blood, and the loss of their dearest lives.

And after Queen Mary's time, Q. Elizabeth, like another Deborah, with the
advice and assistance of all the godly Bishops, and the best of all the Divines
in her Kingdom, concluded and set forth the Articles of our Church, and that
perfect form of Godliness, the Liturgy, and book of common prayer, and service
of God, which they composed with a free liberty from her majesty at home, and
without any fear either of Pope, or any other foreign Authority abroad; And
this faith concluded and expressed in our 39 Articles, to which all Ministers
subscribed, and this uniformity of Gods worship thus purged from all abuses,
errors, and Superstitions, and so perfectly composed by all those holy men, for
the honor and service of God, was fully authorized by the Queen, and all the
Parliaments, that were convened, and held in her time, to be observed, without
any omission or alteration, in all Churches; as you may see by the Act prefixed
before the Book of common Prayer: And afterward it was continued and preserved
by that wise and learned King, K. James; and above all, and more strictly than
all, by that ever blessed King, and glorious Martyr of Jesus Christ, Charles
the 1. that defended the true faith, and this true form of serving God, against
all opposers, both the superstitious Papists, and the apostate Puritanes and
Separatists, even to the loss of his life;

And I presume, all good Protestants will yield unto me, and I am persuaded,
That the Church of Ingland in King Charles his reign was the purest Church on
earth.
that the Pope and his Cardinals, if they would speak according to their
consciences, could not deny, but that the Church of Ingland, as it was purged
from Idolatry, and Superstition, and established in such purity of Doctrine,
and excellency of Discipline, in the reign of King Edward the 6th, and
especially in Queen Elisabeths time, and so continued in the reign of King
James, and King Charles, was the truest and the purest Church (unless they did
except their own Church) that way-fared, and was militant here on earth, where
the faith of Gods elect might infallibly be found, the service of God was
rightly observed, and was the (...), the Temple, the House, and the Church,
which he has purchased, and wherein he dwells. And

So E. H. truly confesses, that amongst all the reformed Churches, E. H. in
his Preface to the Reader.
the Church of Ingland has always been esteemed the purest, as being most
conformable to primitive purity, and the word of God, both in Doctrine and
Discipline. B. Montague in apello Caesarem c. 5. p. 47, 48.
And this appears even from the pens of the heads of other reformed Churches;
as Bucer Melancthon, Calvin, Camerarius, Beza, Zanchius, Molinaeus, Casaubon,
Sergevil, Saravia, and others, who, many of them confess in plain words, and
all by consequence conclude, that the Church of Ingland, of any particular
national Church in the world, comes nearest to the apostolic rule; for though
all the Churches, that protested against the superstitious tenants, and errors
of the council of Trent, and the Church of Rome, have borne the name of
reformed Churches; yet neither all, nor any of them all are indeed well and
perfectly reformed; when as many of them are corrupt in many points of
Doctrine, as I could show you amongst the Calvinists, and especially the
Lutheran Churches, that maintain that foul error of the ubiquity of the
humanity of Christ, their consubstantiation of his body in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and their many mistakes about the communication of the Properties
of both his natures, as Danaeus shows most excellently against Chemnitius;
and most of them are deficient in the rule of primitive Government; not any one
of them indeed, following the Apostles Discipline.

And the reason of their deficiency is, The reason of the deficiency of the
Reformation of the other reformed Churches.
because that in the French and German Churches, and the Churches beyond the
Seas, the Reformers of them, by reason of the innumerable number of their
potent enemies, and the civil broils and diffentions, that were then in those
parts, and especially the want of a King in Israel, that is, a supreme Monarch,
in some of those places, over the people, which made way for every one of the
vulgar sort, to do, as we read in the Book of Judges, what seemed right in his
own eyes, Judges 21.25.
were constrained to do, what they might, and not what they would have done;
what could be effected, and not what they desired to be performed.

But the Church of Ingland, not by popular, or any one particular man's
reformation, as John Knox, that furious puritan, did in the Church of
Scotland, but by a national Synod of all the Bishops and best Divines, called
by the King, and confirmed by the King, Peers, and Commons of the whole
Kingdom, reformed her self; not as other Churches did, tumultuarily, but with
a great deal of advice, diligence and deliberation, that so it might be
effected, as the Apostles left it, as the sacred rule required, and as it was
premonstrated it should be performed, and weeded from all the dross, the tares,
and the darnells, that should spring to choke the pure wheat.

And therefore, seeing the Church of Ingland, until these late times, was the
truest, and the purest reformed Church on earth, it is conceived, and I do
believe it, that the (...), the great Antichrist should arise, not out of Rome,
that has corrupted many truths, and superadded many errors and Superstitions
upon the fundamentalls of our Religion, and is as yet unreformed; nor out of
Constantinople, which has likewise apostatized from the true faith of Christ,
and does still continue unreturned to Christ, from their false Prophet; nor out
of Jerusalem, as some men do most fondly dream; but out of this Church, this
very Church of great Britain.

For as heretofore, Speed, l. 6. cap. 45. Camden britan. page 74. Eusebius. in
vita Constant. Zechar. 10.11.
this Island of great Britain brought forth Constantine, the son of Helen, the
daughter of King Coylus, which was the best instrument that ever the Church of
Christ had, to further, and to honor the Christian Religion, as Eusebius
shows the same at large. And as according to the Septuagint, the Prophet
says, (...), he has passed through the narrow sea with affliction; and the
pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the scepter of Egypt shall depart
away; which may signify, that Christ has first of all purged this Church,
that lies within the narrow seas, and has made the purest Reformation here,
that was made in any place, by the afflictions and sufferings of the aforenamed
Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, and has thereby brought down the pride of the
Pope, and of the Roman Church, that were then as powerful as the Assyrians
were when the Prophet wrote the same, and has driven away his usurpation, and
freed us from his tyranny, as the Israelies were delivered from the bondage of
the Egyptians; so the devil, bearing an inveterate hate and infinite malice
against this Island, more than against any other place, The 2. special Reasons
why the devil bears a greater malice to this Island, more than to any other
place.
for these two grand services, that it did to God, 1. The toleration of the
Christians, to profess their faith in peace, and the Plantation of the Church
of Christ, to increase and multiply by the means of Constantine; And 2. The
Reformation of this Church, better then any other Church, by the means of those
holy Martyrs, and godly Bishops that did the same, he was fully resolved to be
revenged upon this Church of Great Britain:

Therefore, as not long after Constantines times, he stirred up the Picts, the
Scots, the Danes, and the Saxons, to punish, plague, and tyrannize over the
poor Britains, as it appears by the lamentable address that they made unto
the Romans, for their aid, and help against their enemies, for the first good
service they had done to the honor of God; How the devil revengeth the good
service that this Island did to Christ.
so immediately, after that those godly Reformers of this Church had rooted out
those evil weeds of Errors and Superstition, that the Devil had planted
therein, he stirred up Penry, Martin Marprelate, Cartwright, Broughton, and
diverse others, (that in Q. Maryes days fled beyond seas, to save their lives,
and there sucked that transmarine poison, that infected both their own and many
other men's souls,) to make invectives against our Church, far worse, and more
bitter, than all the Actions that Cicero did against Verres, or his Philippicks
against M. Antonius, to revenge the second good service that this Island had
done to Christ.

And these that were reasonable good Scholars, but fiery, mad and furious men,
did, through their violent proceedings, get so many Proselites, and Disciples
after them, that, as S. Bernard says of the former Heretics, in a very short
space, numeri eorum multiplicati sunt super numerum, they increased like the
rats of Egypt, that do super-faetare, beget young ones before they be delivered
of their old brood; And this grand host of his Instruments the Devil persuaded,
and egged them forward to prosecure their enterprise, and never to give over
and desist, until they should effect these 3 things. The three especial things
that the devil persuaded his instruments to effect.


1. Unking the Kingdom, and make it like the Israelites after the time of the
Judges, that every man might do what seemed right in his own eyes.

2. Unbishop the flock of Christ, that the foxes, wolves, and other savage
beasts, the Heretics and Scismaticks, might destroy them, at their pleasure;
and so

3. To unchurch this formerly pure and famous Church of great Britain, and to
cause it totally to apostatize from the true faith of Gods elect, to be
divorced from Christ, and to be no ways answerable to the usual and right
definition of a true visible Church, to which the infidels and unbelievers,
being converted, might be incorporated;

And then, after that they had more than desperately opposed their King, and
risen up against the pious Defender of the true faith, he persuaded them, that
if he would not consent, to defile that faith, to abolish the right form of
Gods worship, to corrupt the Christian Religion, and to destroy the witnesses
of Christ, the governors and upholders of Gods truth, in this so well reformed
Church, with fire and sword to war against him, and never leave, until they
should bring him to a bitter death, and a glorious martyrdom; and after that
they had like Jannes and Jambres withstood their Governors, and cashiered their
Bishops, and suppressed the Articles and Liturgy of the Church, he persuaded them
to fill the same Church with damnable Heresies, not privily, as the Apostle
says the former Heretics would do, but most openly, How Satan persuaded his
instruments to fill the Church with all impiety and villainy.
in the sight of the sun; and at last, as our Savior says out of Daniel, to
bring the abomination of desolation, that is, such abominable blasphemies,
heresies, errors, and absurd opinions among the people, and such wicked deeds,
of perjury, oppression, pride, lasciviousness, and the like corruptions of Gods
true service, that do more highly provoke the wrath of God, than all the sins
of ignorance, negligence, or infirmity, and cause him to bring utter ruin and
desolation upon any Kingdom, to stand in the holy place; that is, in the
Churches, Chapels, and all other consecrated, and holy places, that were
dedicated for the true service of God, and for the people of God, that did
formerly truly and holily serve the Lord in those places; And this the Devil
did to this end, videlicet, That so, the Kingdom being without a King, the
flock of Christ without Pastors, and the Church of Christ without her
Discipline, and true Doctrine, he might raise that cruel beast, which S. John
saw rising out of the sea, from these narrow seas, and bring up the great
Antichrist out of this pure Church of great Britain, to root out the true
service of God, to be the plague of his servants, and the death of his saints,
and to be fully revenged on this Island, for the twofold displeasure it had done
to him before.

Now, whether Satan has, by his Instruments, done all this or not, I leave it
to the wise and judicial impartial Reader, to determine it; only I find, that
Mr. Alexander Rose, in his animadversions against Mr Hobbs his Leviathan. p 18
Alexander Ross says, the Instruments of Satan brought such abominable
blasphemies, heresies, errors and absurd opinions among the people, more in
these few years, than were all the time hitherto, since christianity was
embraced; which is a shreud suspicion, if not an infallible proof, that the
great Antichrist is come amongst us.

CHAP. III. That the Antichrist is no single Person, but a Collected Multitude
of men; Who those men might be; Of the Grand Apostasy, whereof the Apostle
speaks, that made way, and opened the Door wide, for the Antichrist to enter
in; That it is neither the Apostasy of the Prime Heretics, nor of the East
Churches, nor of the Roman Church; but of some purely Reformed Particular
Church, supposed to be, and demanded if it be not the Church of Great Britain.
BUT here it is a great Question among the Learned, Whether the Antichrist be
one sing le Person, or else a multitude of men, either succeeding one another,
or coll^cted together.
whether this Great Antichrist be one single and singular Person; or a certain
Polity, Kingdom, or Multitude of men? Hyperius says, Est multitudo aliqua, and
diversi sibi invicem succedentes, qui unum quodammodo Antichristi vastum corpus
efficient; It is a multitude of men, succeeding one another, which after a sort
do all make up the vast Body of the Antichrist; and so says Tilenus, and all
those that would have the Pope to be the Antichrist: Brightman says, the
Antichrist must be understood to be a wicked Kingdom, Rule or Dominion, which
he affirms to be, not the Kingdom of Ingland, which in his time indeed could
not be; but the Papacy, the Roman Hierarchy, and the Rule and Dominion of the
Pope, Tilenus exeg. de Antichristo, p. 9. Achor is, 66.
in Italy, France, Spain, or wheresoever his Jurisdiction reaches; and Mr.
Mede, Mr. Potter, and others are of the same judgment, and do take the
Antichrist to signify the Papal State and Kingdom; and so Bishop Downam,
Thomson, Shelden, and many more, do say, he can be no single and one singular
Person, but a multitude of men, which many of the best Authors do conceive, to
be made up of single Persons succeeding one another, as Hyperius says; and
they can be none other, as they suppose, than Series Paparum, the whole Classie
of the Popes.

On the other side, E. H. de Antichristo, p. 82.
E. H. does constantly and confidently affirm, that not only the restrictive
Article (...) prefixed to each one of his Names and Titles, as (...), and the
like, but also the things attributed to him, and likewise the time of his
continuance, and many other particular Circumstances and reasons do evince,
Bellarm. de Romano Pontifice, l. 3. c. 2. Montagu appello Caesarem, P. 148.
that the Great Antichrist can be but one single, singular and individual
Person; and so Cardinal Bellarm. though he confesses, that sometimes this name
of Antichrist is taken communiter, for any wicked Opposer of Christ and his
Kingdom, as Bishop Montagu likewise says, and as it is most true; yet he
averreth, that where the Apostle prefixeth the Article, (...), it signifies
none, or no more than one only single and singular Person; because as
Epiphanius says, Articuli Graeci contr ahunt significationem ad unam rem
certam, the Greek Articles do contract and tie the signification to one certain
thing, Epiphan. Haeresi, 9. quae est Samaritanorum. John 5.43.
as (...) signifies any man in common, but (...) notes this or that singular
man.

And the Cardinal would needs prove him to be, but a singular and single
Person; because our Savior says, I came in my Fathers name, and you receive
me not, (...), but if another shall come in his own name, him you will receive;
but indeed here is a Fallacy, says Thomson, (...); for though (...) be the
Singular number, yet the Grammarians tell us, that (...), the word (...), which
signifies another, as well as (...), notes the second of any two, but (...)
intimates any one of many; and so our Savior means not here to single out
any one only opponent to him; Acts 5.35 36. Eusch. l. 4. c 6. Dr Abbats de
Antichristo.
but he speaks of any one indefinitely, whether Theudas, or Judas of Galilee,
whom Gamaliel mentions, or Barchochebas, of whom Eusebius. speaks, or any
other false Impostor whatsoever.

And therefore it is well observed by Dr. Abbats, that what our Savior
speaks here, in the singular number, indefinitely, of any one, he delivers
the same thing expressly in the Plural number, when he says, Many shall come in
my Name, Matthew. 24.5.
saying I am Christ, and shall deceive many, though our Savior does not in
this Chapter, speak of the Great Antichrist, but of those false Prophets that
should come and deceive the Jews; and so likewise (...) does not determinate
any one single Person, nor mean here the Great Antichrist, but indefinitely
signifies, that the Jews, which refused to receive Christ, would receive, as
they did, any other false Christ, that came in his own Name; which is the very
Exposition of Maldonat: Maldonat. in Johan. c. 5.43.
and yet the truth is, that as Ecclesia Credentium, corpus cum Capite, the
whole Church of the Faithful, the Body with the Head, is said to be, and is but
one Christ; as where our Savior says, no man ascends up to Heaven, (...),
but he that came down from Heaven, the Son of man, which is in Heaven; John
3.13.
where I hope the Article (...), twice prefixed, does not so sinifie the Person
of Christ, as to exclude the rest of his Faithful Servants, his Members from
ascending thither; but this (...), Son of man signifies Christ mystically
understood, that is, That Christ the head, and the Church his members are
termed Christ.
whole Christ, the Head and all his Members; and so taken, none ascends, but
he that descended; though as St. Bernard says, aliter ascendit quam descendit,
he ascends otherwise than he desended; for he descended naked, only in his
Divinity, but he ascends clothed with our Humanity; and he descended only as
the Head of his Church, but he ascends with all his Members and his whole
Body, that is, his Church, which together with the Head, do make but one Son of
man, and one Christ; for so Christ says unto Saul, Why persecutest thou me?
because, in good propriety of speech, Acts 9 4.
that may often be well spoken of the whole, and so understood, which is truly
proper to any one part, as, I am ill, when my Head only aketh, or they have put
me into the stocks, when my feet alone were set therein: And so in Gal. 3.16.
Gal. 3.16.
By Christ is understood, the whole Church of Christ, united unto Christ, as to
her Head: And so likewise, when the Dragon is said to stand before the Woman,
that when she was delivered, he might devour her Child; the Child, says
Junius, Junius in Annot. in Apoc. 12.
signifies Christum, quem vocant mysticum, id est, totum, ex Persona Christi,
velut capite, and ex corpore cum capite, per spiritum adunato, constantem; that
is whole Christ, which they call mystical Christ, consisting of the Person of
Christ, as the Head, and of the Body, as is the Church, united unto the Head,
by the spirit; and so (says he) the appellation of Christ is taken, in 1 Cor.
12.12. Where the Apostle says, as the Body is one, 1 Cor. 12.12.
and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body, being many, are
but one Body, so also is Christ.

And I say, That the great Antichrist is a collected multitude of most wicked
men, and an Armageddon; which being compounded of cherem and gedud, fignifieth
exercitus maledictus, an accursed Army.
that as thus Christ our Savior and the whole Company of the Godly and
Faithful Christians, are termed Christ; so likewise Ecclesia Malignantium, the
Congregation of the wicked, and (as Primasius calls them) the whole Body of the
Devil, which are all the Company of wicked Reprobates and ungodly men, are in
the singular number, sometimes termed the City of Babylon, sometimes the Beast,
sometimes the great whore and Jezabel, the painted Harlot, as if they were all
but one woman, and one spouse of their Head and Husband, the Devil; sometimes
the Synagogue of Satan, where they meet and combine themselves to serve and to
worship him; and sometimes the Antichrist, that is, the adversary and opposer of
Christ, and the man of sin, as if they all were but one man; because they all
do either reject or neglect Christ, and refusing to believe his Words and to
obey his Voice, by submitting themselves to his Ordinances, they do all of
them, as one Army, and one grand enemy fight against him, and his Servants
under the Banner of his Capital enemy, the Devil.

And as this coetus impiorum, the whole Multitude of these wicked Reprobares,
is, by venerable Beda, termed the Beast, and the Antichrist; and the whole
Assembly of the Lying Prophets, and all the rest of the fawning, flattering and
dissembling Preachers of the Beast, are in the singular number, and with the
Restrictive Article, Junius in Annotat. in Apoc. cap. 13.11.
(...), termed and said to be, (...), the false Prophet, as Junius testifies;
so specially the pessima pars hujus coetus, the worst pack, the vilest
confederates, Senatus consultus, the great Synedrion, the supreme Council and
the highest Court, of greatest Authority in the Kingdom, and the Synagogue of
Satan, which is the Representative and Synechdochically the Mystical Body of
the present dispersed multitude, and the main sum of the Antichristian
company, is, and may more rightly be termed the Beast, and the Antichrist, or
the man of sin and Child of Perdition, as if they were all but one man.

And the reason, The reason why a multitude of men is termed one man. Acts
4.32. Revel. 17.13.
why the whole conglutinate Pack, and united Senate of wicked men, are spoken
of, in the singular number, quasi unus homo, as if they were all but one man,
is, because they all have but one Head, that is, the Devil; and as all the
Believers are said to have but one heart, and one Soul, that is, to serve
Christ; so the holy Ghost says, these wicked Senators and Members of the
Beast, have but one mind, that is, one will, one course, one end, and one main
scope and desire, to destroy the Truth, to overthrow the Church of Christ, to
wear out his Servants, and to root out the right Service of God, and all Piety
from off the earth.

And as for their unanimous proceedings against Christ and his Church, That the
worst pack of all the present wicked reprobates, when it comes, is termed the
Antichrist. 1 Samuel 10.23.
they are spoken of, as if they were but one man; so for their transcendent
Impiety, their egregious (...) wickedness, their unparalleld plots, and
exceeding all former Presidents in their abominations, they are most especially
and properly styled the Beast that ascends out of the Bottomless Pit, the man
of sin, and the Antichrist, that is, the great Adversary of Jesus Christ;
because that, as Saul was higher by the head and shoulders, than all the rest
of the People, so the wicked company of this collected and united Troop of the
Servants of Satan, is, quasi unus e december millibus, such a transcendently
abominable Senate, as that you cannot find the like and such another among ten
Thousands; when as all the Precedent Heretics, all former Tyrants, and all the
subtle, cruel and bloody Persecutors of all ages, were but Fools and Dwarfes
or Pigmies, in respect of this crafty Fox and great Golias, that does so
Giant-like defy the whole Army of Christ, and so Nimrod-like tyrannise, and so
Julian-like persecute all the Faithful Worshippers of God.

And thus the Geneva notes, The Geneva Annotat. on 2 Thessalonians. 2.
do understand the man of sin, to signify, the Body of the Tyrants and
persecuting Church; and the Parliaments Ministers in their Answer to his
Majesty's first Paper, P. 180. in the Isle of Wight, do confess, that a number
of Persons are, in the Mysterious and Prophetic Writings, expressed in
Singulars, as the Letters or Epistles that are directed to Collective or
Representative Bodies, use to be written and directed to one, when as they are
intended and are meant to all the whole Body in the Meeting assembled; and in
Page 235, they say, that many Ministers, making up one Presbytery, is
represented by one Angel, as I say hereafter, they are, August. de civ. Dei. l.
20. c. 19.
by that one Beast, in Rev. 13.11. And St. Aug. speaking of the Antichrist,
sitting in the Temple of God, says, Nonnulli, non ipsum Principem, sed
universum quodammodo corpus ejus, id est, ad eum pertinentem hominum
multitudinem, simul cum ipso suo Principe, hoc loco, intelligi Antichristum
volunt; Some will have in this place, understood by the Antichrist, not the
Prince himself, but his whole Body in a certain manner, Mr Mede in clavi Apoc.
page 65. Dr Hammond in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Magdeburg. cent. 1. l. 2 c. 4. coll. 435.
Calvin. in 1 John c. 2.
that is, the multitude of men, that belong unto him, together with their
Prince and prime Leader himself: And Mr. Mede says, the Beast, in REv. 13.1.
does signify a Company of men, composed of a certain order of Members, like as
a Beast, and not one man alone: And Dr. Hammond conceives the man of sin, which
we conceive to be the Antichrist, to signify not any one singular Person, but
the Grand Captain of all Impostors, together with all the whole Sect of
Gnostics and Idolaters, that follow him: And the Magdiburgenses, and Calvin,
and Beza, and most of our Protestant Divines, do understand the Beast and the
Antichrist to signify more than one particular man.

Yet I cannot yield, that the Antichrist, should signify, as they conceive, a
multitude of Particular and singular men, succeeding one another in the same
Throne of Impiety, as many Kings do succeed one another in one and the self
same Kingdom; because herein I see as many Improbabilities and Disagreements
with the Scriptures, to take the Antichrist for the Series and Succession
either of Popes or of any other the like Person, Turk or Tyrant, as I see
Incongruities and Errors in taking him for one single and singular Person;
when as the Succession of any such Person, that is, of any one single Person
succeeding the like wicked Impe, that preceded him, cannot be correspondent to
all those particular places of Scriptures, that are properly to be applied to
the Antichrist; nor any one of all the series, i.e. not any one of all that
succeeded one another, did or could act all those transcendent enormities, that
are singularly to be effected, that is, to be done by the singular person of
the Antichrist, or with respect to an unity of the agent, at the very time of
their acting, and within the compass of the time allotted, and prescribed to
the Antichrist for the doing thereof; is to instance a few things out of many,
to make war with the witnesses, and to kill them, which no one Pope or Turk
ever did, and to make war with the saints, and to overcome them, which one
single person, be he what and whom you will, of all the series and classy
either of Pepes or Turks, could never do.

And therefore questionless, these men must yield, that the Antichrist
signifies not any one single person in the series, and succession of Popes,
but the Prince or prime leader with his followers, and so it must signify a
multitude together, Who are to be understood by the Antichrist.
and not any one singly and alone; And so it comes to what I say, that the
beast, and the Anitchrist does betoken a collected multitude of wicked men,
army or Senate, whereof one may be the ringleader; and this multitude, knit and
combined together is, and will be the worst pack, and the most wicked, totius
coetus diaboli, of all the servants and soldiers of the devil; and they are
like the choicest Legion or regiment of Caesar's veteran soldiers unto the
dragon, his lifeguard, and a confederacy of the prophanest hypocrites, and
corruptest wicked men, that ever assembled, and continued to consult, and act
together, since their elder brother, the Synedrion and council of the Jews,
condemned Christ himself; John 5.43.
such another pack or company of men as killed Christ, I take the Antichrist to
be; for they were (...), one and the first great adversary of Christ, and this
confederate pack is the (...), the other, which Bellarmin speaks of.

And the restrictive Article, (...), to each one of his names, as (...), and
the like, does not so infallibly evince, that he must be one single person,
(which, as I showed you, could not effect and do all that the Antichrist does)
as E. H. thinks, Epiphan. quo supra haer^s. 9.
and the cardinal endeavors to prove, as it does most certainly contract the
signification, as Epiphanius says, huic coetui, huic senatui, vel huic
Ecclesiae malignentium, to this singular pack, this very Senate, this peculiar
and particular company and association of wicked men, that do consist of many
single persons, whereof, as in all other confederation, one may be the prime
and principal leader in all exploits. Eudaem. p. 151.


For it is observable, that, as Eudaemon truly admits, the article (...)
does give a double limitation, the one to design the nature only, the other to
limit the universal nature, to this or that particular of that nature, yet so
as it may agree to any other of the same kind; and thus the Greek article
(...) or (...) or (...) designeth and compriseth, not only the head, but also
every particular member of the beast; and so, they do indeed tie the
signification, ad unam rem certam, to some one certain thing, as I say, that
(...) and (...) signifies here, this one pack, knot, company and society of
men, and every particular member, head and tail, of that association, and none
other.

And it is more agreeable to all reason, that (...) the Antichrist, That united
malice and a confederate power do always the greatest mischief,
should rather design this very society and collected pick and multitude of
men, than this or that single man; because we all know, by experience daily
seen, that united malice, and confederate power, do always the strangest
villainies; and we find it in the devil himself, that although he be the Prince
of darkness, and has alone a very great and powerful malice, yet even he,
without fellows, raging about, cannot do nigh so much mischief, as he does in
conjunction with more associates; and therefore, when he has any great and
notable villainy to effect, as to subvert kingdoms, to ruin Churches, to
suppress Gods true service, and to destroy the prime and chiefest servants of
Christ, ^e associates himself with many hands and heads, and says unto them,
venite, come my dear friends, and le^us join our wits and powers together to do
such and such acts, as will well produce so much pleasure and profit both unto
me and you, and I shall reward you very liberally besides.

And we find it also, that, in such an association of wicked instruments, and
the combination both of infernal and terrestrial malice, where the devil is the
devicerr and councellor, and men the actors, and the more men do unite
themselves to produce the mischief, God permits a great deal of mischiefs
and villainies, more abundantly to be done, both to the Church and state, both
to private and public persons, than he usually does, to any single malice; as
he suffers more slaughters to be done by a multitude of blood-thirsty men,
than he does by any single, though never so bloody a tyrant; and more roberies
by a company of robbers, than by any one of the greatest thieves.

And therefore we do confidently avouch, that the great Antichrist is a great
company of men collected together, and combined together in association, by a
solemn League and Covenant, to do such and such feats and facts, as shall prove
the greatest prejudice, mischiefs and villainies to Christ and his servants,
that ever were done, since the crucifying of the Son of God; That the great
Antichrist is like a great oak that has many boughs and branches.
And so the great Antichrist is like a great and a might oak-tree, consisting
of many many boughs and branches; of whom we may justly say, as the Poet does
of the like case, -- uno avulso, non deficit alter
Tartareus ramus; --
when one branch of that tree, or one member of that corporation decays,
another presently, as bad or worse, springs up, and succeeds in the place
thereof; and so you see who is meant by, and to be understood by the great
Antichrist.

association, and collected multitude of such wicked men, so trascendently
wicked above all others?

And I find many men answering this Question, Who should be that collected
company?
as our Savior answered the Jews, when they questioned him, and asked of him,
by what authority he did those things; by demanding of them, Whether the
baptism of John was from heaven or of men? so do they answer this question, by
demanding the question, whether it may not be conceived, that the Assembly of
Presbyterians, consulting at Westminster, together with the Independent and
lay-Preachers, are not, as it were, the soul, that moves, guides, and
directs to all actions; and the prevalent faction of that long Parliament,
that beheaded their King, and suppressed their Bishops, be not, as it were, the
body and organical instrument, that produced and effected all the acts of that
great Antichrist, the man of sin, and the child of perdition, that was to come
into the world? For you must observe, that as a man consists of body and
soul, so the man of sin, the great Antichrist, must be confessed to consists of
body and soul; and as sometimes the mystical body of Christ, that is, the
church, is termed Christ, as in Act. 9.4. and sometimes the head alone is
called Christ; A necessary Observation.
as Christ has also once suffered, 1 Pet. 3.18. and thus Christ is most
usually taken; and sometimes the head and the body joined together, by the
Spirit, is called Christ, as Galat. 3.16. and 1 Cor. 12.12. So the Antichrist,
and the beast, sometimes signifies all the pack, knot, or company that are, as
it were, the body of the beast and of the Antichrist, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
sometimes it is put for the visible head, Revelat. 11.2. and Chapter 13.5.
or most polypragmatical actor of that company, the General of that army, the
Speaker of that Senate, and the ringleader of all that association: as in
Revel. 11.7. and sometimes it signifies both the head and the body of the
beast, as Revel. 13.6, 7, 8. and so likewise the beast and the Antichrist is
sometimes put to signify only the soul, as it were, of the Antichrist; and
sometimes it is put for that pack, which is, as it were, the body of the
Antichrist; and sometimes it signifies both the body and soul of the
Antichrist;

And if you would rightly understand the actions, and the things that are
spoken of the Antichrist and the beast in general, you must distinguish, in
particular, of the acts that are applicable and ascribed unto him, as they are
in respect of these several significations, and several agents; because many
things are done by the head of the army, or the ringleader of a company, alone,
and are only applicable to him alone, and to none else; other things are done
by the body alone, and are applicable only to the body, though they could not
be effected by the body without a head; and other things are so done, that they
are applicable, and may be ascribed to be done, both by the body and the head;
and as the acts and operations of the body and the soul are different and must
be thus rightly distinguished, if you would understand the proper acts and
operations of each of them: so are the acts and operations, that are ascribed
to the Antichrist, different, How the actions of the Antichrist are to be
considered, if we would rightly understand them.
and must be rightly applied to the proper agents, either in respect of his
head or members, or in respect of his body or soul, if you would truly and
rightly understand them; because that, as I said before, the man of sin
consists both of body and soul, that is, an assembly of Divines, which are as
the soul of the beast, and are called the false Prophet, and a pack, or company
of most wicked laics, that are as the body of the beast, and are most commonly
termed the Antichrist; because they are the more visible, and the instrumental
agents of all or most of the impieties and wickednesses that are committed;

And the not observing of these distinctions and proper application of the
acts, and things done, to the right agents, when as in the general, they are
produced by such mystical and compound agents, has caused many men to err in
their Exposition^, and to misapply the acts and doings of the Antichrist; but
being thus distinguished, and all the acts and operations of the Antichrist
rightly understood, and properly applied to the right agents, head or members,
body or soul, it is further demanded; The desire of satisfaction in this
Question moves the demand of the former question.
Whether all the notes, arguments, acts, sayings, and testimonies of the
Scriptures, which the penmen of Gods word have set down, as the marks, badges,
fignes and tokens, whereby the saints and true servants of Christ might know
the Antichrist, when he came into the world, that they might avoid him, (which
cannot all be found applicable and fulfilled, either in the Pope or Turk, or in
the series and succession of either of them, or any single tyrant whatsoever,)
are not all, and every one of them most properly, and punctually found suitable
and agreeable in all things, and in every point, with the acts, sayings, doings
and proceedings of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and the swarm of
Independants, and lay-preachers, and the prevalent faction of that long
Parliament, that have agreed to slay the witnesses of Gods truth?

Neither do they mean in this Question, or think it requisite, that the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and the prevalent members of that long
Parliament, should do all, and fulfill every point, that is prophesied should
be done, and fulfilled by the Antichrist, themselves; but that all and every
thing should be acted, and fulfilled by them, and by those, that were their
confederates, and assisted and adkered to them, as being the members of the
beast, though not of the Assembly, nor of the Parliament; Neither do they
comprehend, nor understand all the members of the Parliament, in this Question,
but as I say the prevalent party only. For you must know, that it is certain,
without question, that as a righteous Lot was in Sodom among those wicked
Citizens, and a godly Joseph among the idolatrous Egyptians, and many good
Christians in bloody Nero's Court; That many good and godly men were in the
long Parliament.
so many good and godly men were members of that very Parliament, that we call
the long Parliament, and did no more consent, nor like of those wicked actions,
and proceedings of the rest, than Nicodemus and Gamaliel did approve of the
wickedness of the high Priests, and the rest of the Council, that condemned
Christ to death; therefore you must conceive, that under the name of that long
Parliament, they the demand the question before specified, do understand only
the prevalent faction of that Parliament, which, like a violent stream, have
carried things, and either through their subtlety, or by the absence of some of
the members of the House, in a thin Assembly, have out-voted the rest of the
more honest and sober men in every wicked vote; and so, wheresoever I speak of
that Parliament, without adding the prevalent faction, as sometimes in many
writings totum denominatur a part praestantiori, the woole takes his
denomination from the better part, and sometimes a part minus praestantiori,
from the worser and viler part; so here, in this Discourse, the whole is named
from the worser part, as being indeed in the absence of the resr, Who are to be
understood, and whom the Author means, under the name of the long Paliament.
the major part; and I mean only the prevalent party, and partial faction of
that Parliament, clergy and laity, and their disciples, abettors and adherents,
wheresoever dispersed over all Ingland, Scotland, and Ireland; for otherwise,
if you speak of the long Parliament in general, as it consisted of King, Lords,
and Commons, or of the 2 Houses of Lords and Commons, as complete, and not
partially taken, or subtly circumventing one another, I honor that
Parliament, and do approve of all their acts and Ordinances, that they have so
made; and therefore wheresoever I name that Parliament, without adding the
prevalent faction, as sometimes for brevity sake I may omit, I desire my Reader
to remember, that I mean only those, and that party of whom it is demanded,
Whether they have not all, and every one of the notes and marks of the great
Antichrift, and have done all the things, and fulfilled all the Prophesies,
that should be fulfilled and done by the Antichrist.

And because the event of things are the best commentaries upon Prophesies, The
Events of things are the best Comments upon Prophesies.
if so it be apparent, that all the things, sayings and doings that are
prophesied, and foretold should be done by the great Antichrist, are all
manifestly seen to be done, and fulfilled in them, and by them, aforenamed, and
by their confederates and adherents; I know not how to give satisfaction to
them that demand this question: or how to deny them to be the Antichrist; and
to acquit them from that suspicion.

But I will leave the answer of these demands, and resolution of those
Questions to be de ermined by those unpartial Judges, that are quicker sighted
than I am: and I will proceed, not to foretell any thing, but to explain unto
you what the Prophets have foretold us should come to pass, and should be done
in the time, and by the members of the great Antichrist; and for the
application of those Prophesies, as fulfilled in these days, and by these men,
I leave it to the better observers of the transactions of our time, whether
they can rightly do so, or not.

And first, That Apostasy or rebellion is the door through which the
Antichrist enters into the Church.
I find the Apostle telling us, that the door, and breach, or gap whereby the
Antichrist shall have way to enter into the Church, and sheepfold of Christ, to
destroy his flock, will be apostasy, or rebellion; for when the Thessalonians
had heard, that such a great egregious Antichrist should come, and thereupon
did presently expect him, and then thought the day of Christ his coming to
judgment should instantly follow; because they had heard, that his coming
should be, toward the end of the world, and but a little before the day of
Christ his coming; the holy Apostle, to rectify their misapprehension, of what
they had heard, and to explain the truth and time of both their comings, says,
the day of Christ shall not come, (...), quin venerit defectio prius, until
there be first a failing, or falling away, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
as Beza translates it; or, nisi venerit prius rebellio, unless there comes a
rebellion first, as the Syriac has it; and, as very many of the best
Interpreters say, the word (...) signifies; because every rebellion is a
falling away from what we should be.

And this rebellion is conceived by some Authors, to be that, which the people
made in Rome against Nero; and by others it is thought to be that, which the
Jews made against Florus, or that which the grand rebel Barchochebas made
against Rufus, in the time of the Emperor Adrian, who did therefore
sufficiently chastise the Jews for their apostasy and revolt; and others of no
small esteem, do understand it of the ruin of the Roman Empire, and the
Provinces revolt from the Roman Empire, under the Turk, and other apostate
Governors of the Provinces, as Niger, Albinus, and the rest, that proved false
against their Emperors; but Mr. Calvin, which is ever held the best textuary,
B. Hall in his Revelation unrevealed. Ensebius, l. 4. c. 6.
even since the Apostles time, as B. Hall says, wonders that so many learned
men, as understood these words of the Apostasy, or rebellion of those
revolters from the Roman Empire, should so far mistake the Apostles meaning,
nisi quod cum errasset unus, turmatim alii, sine judicio, sequuti sunt eum;
unles sit be, that when one has erred, others, without judgment, or any
further search for the truth, have followed him; which is an usual fault, and a
great fault, amongst many writers, where they see one run, they are often
ready, like sheep, without reason, to follow after him.

And yet I wonder not so much herein, as Mr. Calvin does; because the Apostle
might well mean; The rebellion against the Magistrate does ever precede a
recession from the faith and Gods service.
both the apostasy and rebellion from the temporal Monarchy of Rome, as the
type or Prodromos, and also from the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, which is the
Church, as Estius, Anselmus, and very many more of our best Protestant writers
do interpret it; because commonly, they that rebel against the one, will never
stick at the other, but when they kick against the Magistrate, they will
presently spurn against the Priest, and God requires obedience to be observed
toward the civil Magistrate, as well as to the spiritual Minister: neither
shall you ever find, that any departed from his true and obliged obedience to
his lawful Governor, but he presently apostatized, and made a recession from
the true service of God; as when Jeroboan^ rebelled, and made a recession from
his obedience to his King, he presently made a defection from the true God, and
a discession from his worship to serve his golden calves; and when the
Satrapasses, and Tetrarchs of the Provinces rebelled against the Roman
Emperors, they presently fell away from the Church, and instead of Christ took
Mahomet for their Prophet; and the Jews tell us plainly, we have no King, or
will have no King, because we feared not the Lord, to show unto us, Hosea 10.3.
that a discession from Gods service does ever accompany the rebellion from the
civil Government, and the rebellion against our Governors is the forerunner
of our discession, from the true service of God and the faith of Christ:
because that our Governors, which have the charge, to see that the true faith
and right service of God be preserved, do, while they are obeyed, hinder this
Apostasy and falling away from Gods service; but when they are resisted, and
the bond of our obedience to them broken, there is no stop of this apostasy,
but that every one may be of what faith, and do what service he pleases, and
as he pleases, unto God.

And therefore, I take this apostasy and rebellion that the Apostle speaks
of here, What apostasy or rebellion is here meant by the Apostle.
to be chiefly meant for a civil rebellion against the supreme Magistrate, as
he is custos utriusque tabulae, the defender of the faith, and preserver of
Gods public service, and a spiritual opposition, or withstanding of our
spiritual Governors, and the discipline of Christ his Church; and so a falling
from the true Doctrine, and the faith of Christ, which is the end of that
progression, and last step of this apostafie, that begins in our disobedience
and rebellion against Moses and Aaron, and ends with our discession from God
and Gods service; for thus S. Paul says, the Spirit speaks evidently, that
in the later times, (...), 1 Timothy 4.1.
some shall depart from the faith: and so, in Acts 21.21. it is said, they
heard of thee, quod (...), that thou teach a defection or discession from
Moses: that is, from the laws and Ordinances of Moses: and so Theodoret
calls this apostasy (...), a secession and departure from God, which is the
last step and period of our rebellion against the King or civil Magistrate.

And this falling away from God, and from Gods service, must be of such men, as
formerly have made show to be the true subjects unto their Governors, and the
Professors of the Gospel of Christ, and the obedient children of his Church;
because apostasy or rebellion is a falling away off and from that, which we
either were or seemed to be before: as subjects, that pretend obedience, and
not strangers of another kingdom, are said to rebel against their Governors,
This Apostafie is of such as have professed the Gospel.
which strangers never acknowledged to be their Governors; but as Julian was
termed the Apostata; because that, during all the time of his Predecessor
Constantius, he professed himself a Christian, and afterward, when he himself
came to be the Emperor, he renounced the faith of Christ, fell into the
Heathenish idolatry, and persecuted all the best Christians: and therefore this
Apostasy cannot be ascribed to Caius Caligula, as some think; because that he,
being bred up in Idolatry, cannot be said to depart from the worship of the
true God, which he never professed: nor can it indeed be ascribed to any manner
of men, The Turks and Papists cannot be guilty of this Apostasy.
but to such as have receded and departed from that faith and service of God
which they professed, or seemed to profess before; and therefore also, the
Turks, that are bred in the Mohammedan Religion, and the Papists that are misled
up in idolatry and superstition, cannot be guilty of this apostasy, nor be
said to apostatize, and to depart from the true faith and service of God;
because they never had it, nor professed it; for, how can he be said to depart
from the truth, that never knew nor understood the truth? or how can any man be
said to depart and recede from London, that never was in London? therefore it
is most certain, that this apostasy is a discession and departure from that
true faith and service of God, professed or seemed to profess before. E. H. de
apostas. page 36. cornel. ^lapide in loc.


And whereas E. H. and some others say, that this Apostasy whereof the Arostle
speaks here, 2 These. 2.3. must be understood of an universal and a general
Apostasy, and universalis defectis, as Cornelius a lapide terms it, an
universel falling away, that is, of all the particular national Churches in the
world, both the Western and the Eastern Churches; because the Apostle speaks
indefinitely, and limiteth not the apostasy to this or that particular Church.

great and so learned a Clerk as Cornel. a lapide is, that, as here the Apostle
intends not to speak of the Antichrists in general, when as then, Eusebius l.
3. c. 7. and l. 4. c. 14. Apoc. c. 2. Clemens Alexand Stromat. lib. 3.
in his time, there were many Antichrists, as St. John shows; such as were
the Ebionites, Cerinthians, Marcionites, Nicholaitans, and the like; but he
speaks of an (...), a particular Antichrist, that should be an Antichrist
(...), and a more eminent, egregious Antichrist than all other precedent or
subsequent Antichrists whatsoever, were, or should be; so he means here by
this Apostasy, not every petty apostasy, or single Heresy, or any small and
little stubbornness of some particular Churches, that should fall away, and
rebel against their Governors and Teachers, and so make a defection from some
Points of the true Faith, or corrupt the Profession and Faith of Christ by
their evil Manners and wicked Conversations; as in St. Paul's time, the Church
of Corinth did; by denying the Resurrection, profaning the Lords Supper, and
suffering the incestuous Corinthian to communicate amongst them; which was no
small apostasy: And in St. John's time, the Churches of Asia did not much less
than the Church of Corinth fall away from the Truth; but the Apostle would have
us to understand, that the Day of the Lord shall not come, (...), until there
shall come, that falling, or the falling away first; that is, such and so
great, so eminent and so full a falling away, and so foul a rebellion against
their Governors, and from the Faith of Christ and the true Service of God, as
the like rebellion and falling away from the Truth, and specially from the
right worshipping of God, was never known before in any Church, Greek or
Latin, Eastern or Western Church, nor ever shall the like be seen after it,
until the day of Christ his coming.

And this the Particle (...), That the Apostle ^peaketh of some particular
eminent rebellion and apostasy of some particular well reformed Church, and
not of a general apostasy of the Catholic Church, against which the gates of
Hell shall never prevail, Mat. 16.18.
set before (...), does sufficiently show unto us, that as (...) does de^gn and
particularize some great transcendent Antichrist, so (...) does show a
particular, and a most egregious, foul and enormous Apostasy; and so the
meaning of the Apostle in few words seems to be this; that before the day of
the Lord, that is the great day of Judgment, there shall arise a grand
rebellion against the Governors of the people, and against the Pastors and
Discipline of the Church, and a huge apostasy, defection and falling away from
the true Faith of Christ, and especially from the form of wholesome Doctrine, and
the right worship, and usually accustomed and received Service of God: And
then, when you see such an unnatural rebellion, as the like was scarce ever
known, if ever; and such a corruption of the true Doctrine of Christ, and
opposition to the chief Governors of the Church, as the like was never seen in
any age, nor found in any other Church, nor read in any History; the whole
Church of Christ, and all the Servants of God, then in being, may know for
certain, that an exceeding great Antichrist, greater than any of all the other
former Antichrists, that were seen before, will arise in that Church, which
formerly was the best and purest Reformed Church of all other Reformed
Churches, though now it does recede and thus apostatize from the Faith of
Christ, and her own former purity: And after the Coming and appearance of that
Great Antichrist, and the Tragical Acts that he shall do, within a while and
some short space, best known to God, how long or how soon, Christ will come to
Judgment, to make a final end of the Antichrist, and to deliver his Servants
out of all their troubles, And this Author wrote a Book entitled The Grand
Rebellion.
that they shall suffer by the Means and procurement of the Antichrist.

And so first the grand Rebellion will show it self, and the great Apostasy
will appear; then the great Antichrist will come and settle himself in the
Church of Christ, and he shall be revealed and made known, not to all men, no
more than Christ was, when he came into the world, but to as many as the Spirit
of God shall enlighten and open the eyes of their understanding to take notice
of him, that they may avoid him, and not be seduced by him, E. H. de
Antichristo, c. 6. page 101.
to follow his pernicious ways, as E. H. has most truly declared: And then,
as the Apostle says, the Day of the Lord will come, and we may certainly
expect it, and believe it will not be long before he comes.

Grand Rebellion and huge apostasy has happened and appeared? And it is
answered,

That the apostasy here spoken of, cannot be, 1. The apostafie of the prime
grand Heretics.
1. That this apostasy here spoken of, cannot be meant of the apostasy of the
prime grand Heretics: For though the Nicolaitans, the Ebionites and the
Cerinthians, in the time of St. John, and afterward, the Montanists,
Valentinians, Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and the succeeding Heretics,
Manichaeans, Pelagians, Donatists, and all the other Brood of the prime
Heretics, fell into many most fearful errors, and so rebelled against their
Governors, and drew many Disciples after them, to make a defection from the
true Faith, and have by their apostasy and subtilty corrupted whole Churches
and Congregations of Christ; yet, that their backsliding and apostasy cannot
be said to be this (...), the grand Rebellion, and the special great falling
away from the Faith, which the Apostle here speaks of; because their
apostasy was not so general, and so extensive from the most and the chiefest
points of Faith, as this is; but each Heretic and each Sect of those
Heretics, started aside from some particular point of the true Catholic and
Christian Faith: as Arius denied the Divinity of Christ; Nestorius made Christ
to subsist of two Persons; and Eutiches on the other side to confute him,
confounded the true Properties of both Natures; Manichaeus would have God to be
the Author of evil, or that there be two Gods; the one good, and the author of
all goodness; and the other evil, and the author of all the evil that is;
Pelagius taught the too large extent of man's Free Will; All the prime grand
Heretics far better than our present Presbyterians.
and others with the Stoics, ascribed all events to a fatal necessary; and so
the rest of those Heresiarchs, defiled themselves, and their Churches with some
particular error, or with some very few at the most; and yet still they
retained the rest and the most points of the true Faith, and especially the
settled Form of Gods Service, and defired always to be in the Commnion, and to
keep the unity of the Catholic Church; and they ever observed the right
Government and Discipline of the Church; (none of all the Heretics until
Aerius, nor, after he was therefore condemned for an Heretic, as Epiphan.
shows, any other Heretic, (till this last Century, produced a Brood of
Aerius Proselites) were ever found to deny the Episcopal Government of the
same) and they all generally retained the established Creeds and Articles of
wholesome Doctrine, Lyturgies, Catechismes, and the right manner of the Worship
of God, with that reverence and devotion, as he ought to be worshipped, though
they started aside, and apostatized from some particular points of the
Foundation of the Catholic Faith. And

2. 2. Nor the apostasy of the Eastern Churches.
The like may be said of all the Asiatick and Affrican Churches that succeeded
them, and were many of them corrupted by those grand Heretics, that they
professed the Creeds, observed the Lyturgies, and reverenced their Governors,
as the Apostle enjoyneth, and receded only like their Leaders, from some few
Points of the true Faith; and therefore the grand apostasy here spoken of,
cannot be fastened nor applied to any of them. And

3. As the Eastern Churches are free from this apostasy, so the Church of Rome,
3. Nor the apostasy of the Church of Rome.
and all the rest of her subordinate Western Churches, though they have
corrupted the Doctrine of Christ with many Errors, Ceremony; and
Superstitions, yet because they retain the main Heads, the true Scriptures, the
Catholic Creeds, and the gross sum of the Christian Religion, though mingled
with many erroneous accessions, and is therefore rightly compared to a field of
goodly Wheat, but very full of Tares and Darnels, cannot be said to be guilty
of this grand Rebellion and apostasy.

foul as those of the foresaid Heretics, and the additions, which they
agglutinate unto the Truth, as a bad super-structure upon a good Foundation,
cannot be liable to this transcendent apostasy; when as all the errors of the
Church of Rome, are rather Superstitions and additions of more Articles, than
ever the Apostles left, or the Primitive Church professed, to the true Faith
and Catholic Creeds, than a defection, or discession and departure from the
Faith; and therefore that Church cannot be guilty of this apostasy and
departure from the Faith, but rather of creating a new Faith, and new Articles
of Faith, which God never requires us to believe.

Rome, of France, Spain, and other Churches under the Popish Jurisdiction, did
never profess all the Articles of our faith in the true and right sense, as
they ought to be believed and interpreted; but they were born, nursed; and
nusled in the errors and Superstitions that they are in continually; and how
can they be said to recede and depart from the faith, and from the truth, that
never knew them, nor professed them? and therefore seeing they never were in the
true faith, they can no ways be said to be guilty of this apostasy from the
faith.

E. H. does, and many others with him) that, when after Constantines time, E.
H. in the Preface of his book, de Autic.
the Church began to be wealthy, and as the envious said, venenum intravit in
Ecclesiam, poison, that is, the poison of riches, honors, and authority,
especially after Ph^cas his time, that gave unto the Pope the title of
universal Bishop, entered into the Church, and among the Clergy; then the Monks
brought tapers into the Church, and they induced the trisagium, that is, sancte
Deus, sancte fortis, sancte immortalis, which as the Monks say was first
uttered by an Angel in the Cathedral Church of Canstantinople: and about the
year 605. Boniface the 8. usurpeth the Title of Universal Bishop: and after
that, the Churches became Sanctuaries for malefactors, holy days were
appointed, Priests were forbidden to marry, Latine-service was enjoined, the
Lyturgies were augmented, the Pax was commanded to be kissed, Images were
adored, the Saints were invocated and prayed unto, which Mr Mede says, is the
Doctrine of Demons, that makes the Apostasy which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Vestiments, and other Church Utensils were consecrated, Mr Mede,
in his Apostasy of the latter times.
the Emperors and other civil powers were shouldered out by the Pope and
Church, Indulgences were sold, and abundance more of such absurdities were
brought into the Church: And when the godly Christians petitioned unto his
Holiness, the Pope, The manifold Errors of the Church of Rome confirmed by the
Council of Tre^t.
for a reformation of these abuses, did not the Council of Trent confirm them?
Did it not, in their first meeting, Sess. 3. decree, that the vulgar
Translation, that has some errors, and much rude Latin in it, should be
authentical in all places? and Sess. 4. That original sin is so taken away by
Baptism, that concupiscence, or lust, in renatis, the regenerate, is no sin,
until they give consent unto it? and Ses. 5. That there remains in us a
freedom of man's will to good, which being excited and stirred up by grace,
concurs with grace to do the good we do? and Sess. 7. That seven Sacraments
were to be received? Vide etiam Ti^^num exegesis de Antichristo. page ^5. and
d^inceps.
And then, at their second meeting in Bononia, Sess. 2. did they not establish
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation? And Sess. 3. have they not made Penance,
and extreme Unction two Gospel-sacraments, or Sacramenta novae legis, as they
term them? And 9 years after, at their third meeting, Sess. 5. have they not
empowered the Pope to mutilate the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, or Lords
Supper, and to take away the cup from the Laiety? and Sess. 6. have they not
concluded the whole Mass to be a propitiatory Sacrifice both for the quick and
the dead? and Sess. 8. Did they not give full power unto the Church, to
dispense with Gods Law in Levit. 18. concerning Marriages? And at their last
Sess. Have they not confirmed the Doctrine of Purgatory, invocation of Saints,
worshipping of images, giving of Indulgences, and preservation of Relics?

And was there, ever since Christ his time, or could there be a greater, and a
more general extensive apostasy and departure from the truth, and true faith
than this, where the Pope and his Faction have thus prevailed against the
Protestants, to put out the light of truth, to corrupt the Gospel of Christ,
and to defile the service of God in this manner?

great and bitter charge against the Church of Rome, I answer, That some men
are so addicted to this Church, that they see nothing to be evil in her, but
all truth, and all to be embraced without question; and others are so
transported with passion, such hatred unto the Pope, and such a prejudicate
opinion of that Church, that they think nothing good in her, and nothing to be
followed, that she holds; so that they are willingly ready to reject the
Gospel, as they do all Prayers and service the Papists use to God, because they
are approved by the Church of Rome: it is an Argument sufficient, to cast away
all the service of God, all good works, and all the acts of Pie^y and Charity,
if they be but once persuaded they are Popery.

For my part, The Authors resolution touching the Roman Church
I do unfeignedly from my heart profess my self a true and right Protestant,
and an obedient Son of the Church of Ingland, as it was reformed, and the 39
Articles of our faith approved, and confirmed in Q. Elizabeth's time, and so
continued in King James and King Charles his time, until the Beast, that
ascends from the bottomeless pit, I may mean the Devil, endeavored to remove
our candlestick, and to put out the light of Israel: And for the Church of
Rome, I do perfectly and thoroughly hate and renounce all the errors and
Superstitions of it; and for her truths, and good things that she holds and
does, I do heartily love and embrace them, and will therein join the right hand
of fellowship, and desire communion with them; as a man, that will not refuse a
pearl, because it was taken up from a dunghill: but for the aforesaid things
and points that E.H. and others speak of, and object against her; I believe
some of them may in some sense be justified, some others not altogether so
offensive, as a groundless ha^red against Popery makes them seem to be, to such
as Martial speaks of, Non anto te, Sabide, nec possum dicere quare, I love thee
not o Sabidus: but why I cannot tell thee; only this I can tell, that I do not
love thee.

Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.
I love thee not, but why to tell thee, I cannot:
Yet this I can tell for truth, I love thee not.
And for most of them, I confess they are either enormous, or superstitious, or
some way or other justly offensive to Gods people, and do sufficiently prove,
that the Church of Rome has apostatized, and receded from many points of the
true Doctrine of Christ, that her self had formerly professed, especially when
S. Mr. Mede, in his Apostasy of the later times. Plato in cratilo, Apuleius de
deo Socratis, and Plutarchus, de defect, oracul.
Paul wrote unto her: and, as that learned and worthy Divine Mr. Mede has
fully showed, how that Church has backslided in worshipping Mahuzzims,
invocating of Saints, and adoring of their Images and relics; so I confess the
same to be a foul and mighty error, and a great abuse of Gods service in them;
and not much inferior or less fault, than the Gentiles adoring of their Deastri
or Daemones, which was the deifying of their deceased Heroes, such as Hercules,
Romulus, Numa Pompilius, and the like, were; as Plato, Apuleius, Plutarch, and
others testify the Heathens did.

Though notwithstanding, I am so far from blaming S. Basil, S. Chrysostom,
Fortunatus, S. Gregory, S. Hilary, James Bishop of Nisibis, Eucherius,
Theodoret, and others, that Mr. Mede charge to have done, too undiscreetly,
(to say no more) for so much commending the holy Martyrs, and calling them
walls, and fortresses, and as Gregory Nyssen terms them, (...), Guardians, and
Protectors of those Cities, and places where those Martyrs were interred; Mr.
Mede's crimination of the Fathers answered.
that I do exceedingly approve their discretion, and commend their wisdom and
piety herein; because those times were times of Persecutions, and Christianity
sought by the enemy of mankind, and his Instruments, to be expunged and rooted
out of the world; and therefore to encourage all the Christians to be constant
in their Profession unto their death, it was requisite to use all the Eulogies
and praises that might well and rightly be given, especially in the funeral
Orations of the Martyrs, unto those holy men, that had so manfully fought the
good fight of faith, and so christianly died for the defense of the Gospel of
Christ; when as the contrary would have been a great disheartening of the weak
Christians, but these Eulogies a spur to inflame them, to all readiness to
undergo the like Martyrdom, rather than to start aside from their Christian
profession. Neither do I see how those Eulogies and praises that these Fathers
gave unto the Martyrs, are any ways contrary to the truth of our faith, or the
Word of God; because we know, that, as the Prophet says, Psalm. 116.15.
right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints; and no doubt
but he has some love and care of their dead bodies, to preserve them from that
spirit of malice, and contempt that the Devil and his wicked assassinates bear
against them; and therefore as he preserved all that were in the ship for S.
Paul's sake, Act. 27.24.
so he may be pleased to preserve others his servants with the preservation he
extends, and would have showed to the bodies of his Saints, and especially of
his holy Martyrs, the which he would have no ways to be abused, as the Prophet
shows, and does exceedingly complain of them, that give the dead bodies of
Gods servants to be meat unto the fowls of the air, Psalm. 79.2.
and the flesh of his Saints to the beasts of the field, as now I have seen it
in many places, how the hogs are rooting in their graves, and the dogs gnawing
the bones of Gods servants.

That the aforesaid Errors make not this Apostasy.
And I say that, although the Roman Church has failed in the Premises, and
erred in the points aforenamed; yet all that does not make this grand
apostasy, which the Apostle here speaks of:

Roman Church, we find no rebellion against their Governors; but qui ducunt
eam seducunt eam, the leaders of that Church deceive the Church, and so her
apostasy is not so odious, but the more excusable, and the less abominable in
the sight of God.

these Errors and Superstitions aforenamed, and the like, have only defaced,
but not nullified; bespotted and polluted, but not destroyed that Church, which
is now like unto a false woman that has played the whore, but is not divorced,
nor run away from her husband; That the Church of Rome holds all the
foundation and preservation of the Christian Religion.
for so long as they profess to believe, as the three authentic Creeds, that
is, the Apostles Creed, the Nicene Creed, and the Athanasian Creed, teach us;
and use the Lords Prayer, and publish the ten Commandments, and receive the
two Gospel Sacraments, that is, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and retain the
wholesome form, and reverent manner of Divine worship, and service of God, with
the rightly authorized, and lawfully called Pastors and Governors, and a
dutiful submission to the established Discipline of the Church; which things
are both the foundation and preservation of the Christian Religion; and which,
they say, are all observed and performed in the Roman Church; I believe no good
Christian can deny her to be a true Church, though not a pure Church of God;
because that while the foundation remains sure and undigged up, all
superstructures of wood, hay, stubble, does not evert and overthrow the whole
edifice, but is rather a going beyond, Eccl. 7.16, 17.
than a going back, from the faith of Christ, like the being too righteous, and
not too wicked, as Solomon speaks, that is, the being too precise, and making
more sins than ever the Law of God made, and not too profane, and so
exceeding in the works of supererrogation and observing many other commandments
of men, besides the commandments of God; Mr Mede, P. 612.
just as the precise Pharisees required the people to do in the time of Christ:
and Mr. Mede resolves Mr. Hartlib, that the Roman Church has not erred in the
fundamental Articles of the Faith, but in the assumentis, which they added unto
the foundation: so likewise D. Crakenthorp, B. Hall, and most of our best
Divines are of the same mind.

And therefore questionless the Church of Rome cannot be guilty of this grand
rebellion and Apostasy here spoken of. And

4. 4. Nor the falling away of the Protestants from the Church of Rome.
As the African and Afiatick Churches of the East, under the Greek Patriarchs,
and the Europaean Churches of the West, under the Pope of Rome, are not liable
to this grand Apostasy; so neither can the Church of Rome, nor any other
Master of that Church say, and say truly, that the falling away of Luther,
Calvin, Beza, and the rest of the Protestants and protestant Churches from the
Roman errors and superstitions, and from their obedience to that Church, can be
this falling away, and apostasy here spoken of; because we with them, and they
with us, do hold and profess the same 3 authentic Creeds, that do contain the
sum and substance of our Christian Faith; and are agreeing in all, or at least
in most of the essential and fundamental points of the Christian Religion; and
the differences betwixt us in the most points, that are of moment, are not so
capital, but that, for the most part, a charitable construction, and a right
distinction might well and fairly reconcile most of them, especially as they
are held by the best Interpreters of the Scripture in that Church, and by the
most temperate and soberest Divines of our Church; because as the Apostle
says, charity is kind, and (...), charity is not rash, that is, in her
judgment, no more than in her actions, 1 Cor. 13.
but bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, and endures
all things: and the want of this divine grace of Charity makes those faults,
that are indeed but mole-hils, to appear like mountains; and this want of
charity is too too common a fault, both among the popish and the Protestant
writers, which does make the breach wider, and the differences to seem far
greater, and far worse than indeed they are; which made me often to pray, that
God would send more love betwixt us, and suffer not the devil to send so much
misprision and distaste betwixt us, as there is.

freed from being liable to this apostasy, the question is, What Church can be
said to be found guilty of it? What Church is guilty of this Apostasy.
and instead of answering it, it is now demanded, If this now present Church of
great Britain be not liable to this charge, of a grand Rebellion and apostasy,
such as the Apostle speaks of, that is, such a rebellion as Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram stirred up against Moses and Aaron, and such a discession and
falling away from the true faith, and the right service of God, which they
formerly professed, as neither leaves the fundamentals of Christian Religion
undigged up or unshaken, nor the appearance of a true visible Church among the
people?

For, that all the people of Ingland were very faithful and loyal Subjects,
and most respectively obedient unto their Governors, both their Kings and their
Bishops, That the people of Ingland were good subjects, true believers, and
right worshippers of God.
during all the reign of Q. Elizabeth, King James, and many years of King
Charles, as any Nation under heaven, I think, I do verily believe, no man can
justly deny.

So likewise, that all the subordinate Clergy did ex animo subscribe, and
unfainedly profess to uphold and maintain the 39 Articles of the Church of
Ingland, and the established Discipline thereof, and did accordingly, for well
nigh a century of years, use to teach the people, to believe that Doctrine, and
to observe that discipline, as the true Christian Faith, and the right
Government, that Christ and his Apostles, for the preservation of that faith,
has left unto his Church; and also, that the people and Congregations,
throughout all this Kingdom, had the true faith preached unto them, and the
right service of God, the 3 authentic Creeds repeated, the Lords Prayer used,
the 10 Commandments published, the 2 blessed Sacraments administered, and all
the other prayers and service of God, that the Governors of Gods Church
prescribed, were observed, practiced, and professed by them: I am very sure and
consident hereof, and I believe no man will gainsay the same.

And therefore this Church had, and did profess the true faith, and Doctrine of
Christ, and did use to serve God rightly, and to be obedient to their
Governors, both Magistrates and Ministers for many years, according to the form
prescribed unto them: And you may remember how you read in Revel. 6.9. that the
souls, which S. John saw under the altar, and cried to God, to avenge their
blood on them that dwell on the earth, are said to be slain for the word of
God, and for the testimony which they held, and why I pray you does the holy
Ghost make such a distinction betwixt the word of God, and the testimony which
they held, but to show unto us, that these souls had collected out of the
Bible, which contains all the word of God, the chiefest heads and points that
are to be known, believed, and practiced for the true worship of God, and their
own Salvation, and so compiled an abstract of Gods word, into another book,
which is here called their testimony; and that is, the communion Book, or Book
of Common Prayer, and public service of God, which is sometimes called the
Book of life, Revel. 22.19. and chapter 20.21:
as Revel. 20.12. and Revel. 22.19. where you may observe how mention is there
made of 2 special Books, and the one is termed the book of this prophecy,
which is the word of God; and the other is termed the book of life, because the
sum and the substance of all that is in the Bible, which is the word of God,
and which is necessary to attain unto Eternal life, is contained in this book,
of their testimony, for which book and the constant practice of Gods service,
according to this book, as well as for the other book of the word of God, those
faithful souls were slain: and it is well known, the Presby^erians caused the
Parliament to destroy us, for the testimony that we held of these Books; but
the Answer, that God gives unto these slaughtered souls, may serve for a
sufficient comfort unto us: yet this gives occasion to demand,

Whether the prevalent faction of the long Parliament, and their adherents, the
Sectaries of these 3 Kingdoms have not hereby resisted their Governors, whom
formerly they had so religiously observed, and rebelled, warred, killed, and
beheaded both Moses and Aaron, that is, the supreme Magistrate, and the chief
Priest, I leave it for my Reader to determine.

And, whether the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and all their followers
and Adherents, contrary to their former oaths, practices, and profession, have
not generally apostatized, and totally relapsed, and fallen away from the most
essential, and most material points of our Christian Religion, and from all the
right service of God, which themselves formerly taught and observed, and have
led their Congregations after them to the same apostasy? let the observers of
our new teachers, what Doctrines are now taught, and what service is now used
in every Church, judge hereof. For I read it in Arise Evans, Arise Evans, in his
Voice from heaven. page 15.
that you may easily find it, every foolish man gets up into the Pulpit, and
pours out his folly: and so now the false Christ's, and false Prophets do
appear: for the Independent says, here is Christ; the Presbyterian says, lo,
here is Christ; but the Anabaptist says, no, he is not amongst you, but here
is Christ with us: 1 Cor. 1.13.
and so all the other Sectaries cry, and have, as the Apostle says, divided
Christ: And you may consider what Tilenus says, Vetus Ecclesia, primis
temporibus, solo Apostolorum, quod vocant, symbolo, ex sacris literis excerpto,
contenta erat; The ancient Church, in the first times, was contented only with
that faith, which they call the Aposties Creed, that is taken out of the holy
Srciptures; this was the faith of the Christians in the Apostles time, and this
was the sun and the substance, and the abstract of all the whole Scripture, for
so much as concerned the saving faith; and this faith, contained in this Creed,
is the Faith of Gods elect, and sufficient to save all the elect people of God;
though afterward, for the suppression of those Heretics, that sprang up to
corrupt the same, formulam illam per novas formulas, ex iisdem sacris litteris
collectas, luculentius and copiosius explicuerunt episcopi; The Bishops, (and
he says not the Presbyters) did more fully, and more clearly, out of the same
sacred Scriptures, explain that form of faith by other new forms, as the point
in question, Tilenus, exegesis page 57. aphoris. 169.
and controverted by the Heretics did require: as First in the Council of
Nice: then in the Constantinopolitan: after in the Ephesine: and at length in
the Chalcedon Council.

And the whole Catholic Church, and all the particular Churches of God, the
Greek Church, and the Latin Church, and every other particular national Church
of the world, have ever professed to observe, and to retain this form of faith,
thus left to us by the Apostles, and thus explained by the reverend and godly
Bishops in these Councills, and never to discede from the same.

And yet now, That our new Preachers have and do recede from the true faith,
and the right service of God.
I would have all wise men to consider, whether the Presbyterians,
Independants, and all the brood of our new and lay-Preachers have not moved and
preswaded the long Parliament, to suppress the Governors of the Church, and to
lay aside the ancient Discipline and Government thereof? and have they not
themselves abandoned and cast off, not only the Apostles Creed, and the other 2
authentic Creeds, so that you shall seldom or never hear any one of all three
repeated by the Minister, to any of their Congregations, but also the Lords
prayer, the 10 Commandments, and all the whole former service of God, which
was formerly used in the Church, and is now wholly neglected, and seldom or
never used to be read, and practiced to be done, by these men unto the people?
which in diverse Parishes have not had the holy Sacraments in many years
administered unto them, Et non ignota cano.

And the Reason hereof is, What Pope did ever cast away the whole public
service of God?
as I conceive it, because the service book, as we term it, that is, the Book
of common Prayer, that contains these 3 Creeds, and the Lords Prayer, and the
Decalogue, and the form of the Administration of the Sacraments, and all the
other Prayers, that are the principal and most essential parts of Gods public
service, is so straightly prohibited and rejected. And the Disciples of these new
masters, and the Adherents of that long Parliament, tore the Bibles, threw down
the fonts, The enormities that were done by the disciples of the Presbyterians.
cast away all crosses, spoiled all pictures, profaned the Churches, and did
many other sacrilegious and outrageous things, whereby (as many men conceived)
the whole reformation of this Church is nullified, and the apostasy, that is
here spoken of by the the Apostle, is fully come to pass and accomplished: and
they pray, that there may never come to any national Church, (as they hope,
there shall not come) a greater apostasy and falling away, both from the truth
of faith, and the service of God, than this is, whereof the like, as many good
men and great Scholars do believe, has never been hitherto, by the worst, and
the most dangerous Sect of Heretics.

Because, the Church being, as the Scripture testifies, acies crdinata,
Bellarm. de Ecclesia milit. cap. 2.
like an army that is well ordered under their lawful Commanders: Or as
Bellarm. says, Coetus hominum ejusdem christianae fidei professione
colligatus, sub regimine legitimorum Pastorum, ac pracipue unius Christi in
terris Vicarii Romani Pontificis: In stead of which last Sentence, I say, sub
legitime regimine, or regimine legitimorum Pastorum, And they are no lawful
Pasters, nor Ministers of Gods Church, that have not their lawful Ordination.
and go no further; that is, a Company of men gathered together, and professing
the same Christian Faith, under the rule and government of their lawful
Governors; the true and lawful Government being dissolved, and the Governors
suppressed, and the Symboles of our Faith rejected, the true Doctrines
corrupted, and the right Service of God cast away, and the like enormities,
that are used, do eradicate the foundation, and not only pollute, but also
destroy and unchurch the Church of Christ, and make it not to be, as it should
be, visible here on earth; and do provoke the Lord to leave his Habitation, and
to remove our Candlestick to another place.

For you may remember what the Prophet Zechary says, I took unto me two
staves, Zech. 11.7.
the one, I called Beauty, the other I called Bands, and I fed the Flock; this
flock is the Church of God, and the two staves are the Doctrine and the
Discipline of the Church; the Doctrine is the Beauty, and the Discipline is the
Bands and preservation thereof; and therefore, when the Discipline is rejected
and rebelled against, the Doctrine must needs then be corrupted with Heresies
and Errors, and the service of God neglected and profaned: For, as a Garden or
Vineyard, which the Church of God is, Esa. 5.
cannot be kept undestroyed from the wild boar, and the beasts of the field,
without their fence; so no more can the beauty of the Church, the service of
God, nor indeed the Church herself be preserved, without her bands, which are
the Laws, Canons, and Discipline of the Church; and therefore the Devil
instigateth all his instruments, to break these bands asunder, and to cast away
the cords from them. Psalm 2.3.


And so you may remember, we presently found, that when the Bishops, the
Governors of our Church, that preserved the Discipline, which was the fence and
the hedge of Christ his vineyard, to keep out the foxes, that is, the Heretics
and Schismatics out of the Church, and the hoops of Gods barrel, to keep in
the wine, Judges 9.13.
that cheareth God and man, that is, the true Doctrines of faith, and the right
service of God, were thrown down, nay, thrown away, and the Government of this
our Church dissolved by that long Parliament, (which never happened to the
Church of Rome,) then instantly the beauty of this Church, which formerly, for
learning, Doctrine, Cant. 2.1.
and Discipline, was the flower of all the Churches in Christendom, as the
rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the valies, became quite defaced; and the
Church her self became Lo-ammi; her whole usual service was rejected, the
service book, Hos. 1.9.
that was the rule of Gods worship, broken all to pieces, and straightly
prohibited to be used, the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Decalogue seldom or never
repeated, the fundamental points of our faith either corrupted, or omitted to
be taught, and all sorts of damnable longburied Heresies, were revived,
preached, and printed in every place; whereby our well-reformed, and lately
glorious Church became, like an Army routed, a barrel unhooped, and a vineyard
unfenced, and then filled with all corruptions both of life and doctrine, to
make way for the man of sin, as John Baptist did to Christ, to enter in.

And to show the enormities of these times, more plainly, I will, out of their
own mouth, and from their own books, quote unto you what a Presbyterian, Tho.
Hall, in his Book, entitled The pulpit guarded, in E^ist. dedicat. Domino
Jo^nr. Trap, pastoride Bello-vado.
as I conceive him to be, says, Vetus est illa oratoris quarela; proveniebant
oratores novi, stulti adolescentuli; pr^veniunt hac nostra tempestate, non
oratores, sed aratores novi, stulti fabri ferrarii, aerarii, lignarii, rastris
quam rostris aptiores: pistores nunc pastores, textores and tonsores, sutores
and sartores, coquinarii and cupedinarii, milites and mulieres, puelluli and
puelluiae, etc. necnon quamplurimi alii ejusdem furfuris, quos vulgo vocamus,
Gifted brethren, hem, lingua utendum est belluina, ne belluae is it a nos
dilacerent: and whom, I pray you, does this man mean should be the beast, and
these beasts that he speaks of, and is afraid to betorn in pieces by them?
unless he means those locusts that assisted and adhered to the long Parliament?
but Mr Hall, to make good his charge, sets down the names of their Preachers in
margin, as Paul Hobson, a Tailor; and Rice, a Tinker; and Lamb, a
Soap-boyler; and Symmes, a Shoemaker; and Oats, a Weaver; and Web, a Soldier;
and Heath, a Coller-maker; and Field, the bodies-maker; and Green, a
Felt-maker; and Potter, the Smith; and Spencer, a Coachman; and Durance, the
Wash-ball-maker; and Debner the Cooper, that can neither write nor read;
besides many women-preachers: and he quoteth Edwards, Edwards, in his
gangraena, part. 2. page 81.
another Presbyterian, in his Gangraena, part. 2. page 81, and 88. and in the 1
page of his Book he names Lawrence Williams, a Naylor, public Preacher; Tho.
Hind, a Plowright, public Preacher; Tho. Palmer, a Baker, Preacher; Sergeant
Oaks, a Weaver, Preacher; and Humfrey Rogers, lately a Bakers boy, public
Preacher: and how many more such Preachers might he have found, if he had
further searched into Ingland and Ireland; so many, as I think, would fill a
Volume, of no small size: And if these brave Preachers be not the
false-Prophet, and the Preachers of the Antichrist, I know not who shall be the
Prophets of Christ: so my good Presbyterian, ex tuo ere, out of thine own
mouth, and from your own books, I believe it is apparent, that these men
sprung, from the proceedings of the long Parliament, and the Adherents of it,
and chapter 19.20.
are the false Prophet spoken of in the Revelat. 16.13. and the second Beast
that the Apostle saw arising out of the earth, and is as the soul, and the very
life of the Antichrist; and of which Prophet the same Tho. Hall says, All
their Preachers, women, boys, or men,
From Master Calamy to Mistress Venne,
Are perfect Popes in their own Parish grown,
For to out-goe the story of Pope Joan;
Their women preach too, and are like to be
The whores of Babylon as much as she.


And all the preaching of these men, and these women Preachers, is but a
tyrotarichon, and hotch-potch of all errors, Heresies, and Blaspemies, as
Alexander Ross in his Animadversions upon Mr Hobbs his Leviathan, and Edwards,
in his Hell broke loose, and his Gangraena, do partly show unto you, what
stuff they bring, and what manner of men they are; how blind, and how
ignorant, and yet, how impudent they be; for, who so bold as blind bayard? A
Story showing how an impudent preaching Trooper affronted and disturbed a
reverend and learned Bishop in his Sermon.


And here, I must crave leave to tell you a story, and some doings belonging to
this business, quorum pars magna fui, and an eyewitness of the same my self:
Not long ago, a grave and a reverend Bishop, that had been a Doctor of
Divinity, admitted in Cambridg, Oxford, and Dublin, of above 40 years standing,
and well known for his learning and abilities in many Kingdoms, traveling
from Ireland toward London, came on the Saturday night to a Gentleman's house
of good quality, and his special good friend; which, then told the Bishop, how
they had, for their Parson, and Preacher, a man, that, as they were informed,
had been a Trooper in the Parliaments Army, and he only preached unto them, and
received their Tithes, but did neither baptize their children, not bury their
dead, nor deliver the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, nor let them have any
other service of God, but to preach, or expound some Chapter; and thus they had
been for 7 or 8 years, without any of these things, but what they procured by
some of their neighbor Ministers; and he desired the Bishop, that he would
bestow a Sermon upon the Parishioners on the morrow, which was the Lords day;
the Bishop answered, that he loved not, that any man should intrude himself
into another man's charge; but if they would send unto their Preacher, and he
gave way to it, he would willingly preach the next day; which the Gentleman did
that night, and the Preacher was contented the Bishop should have the place;
but when the Bishop had done his Prayer, and read his Text, in Nehem. 8.2, and
3. and divided the same, and had past over the 1 part, that the Preacher was
Ezra the priest, and thereupon showed, That none should prefume to intrude
themselves to do the public Offices of Gods service in the Church of God, but
they that were lawfully called, as was Aaron; and then had entered upon the 2.
part, the place, were Ezra preached, which was in the street before the
watergate; and thereupon showed, that either in the time of plague, or war, or
persecution, or sailing at sea, or demolition of Gods Temple, as now the Temple
of Solomon was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, and was not as yet fully
re-edifyed, or the like just occasion, the Preacher might pray and preach, as
Christ and his Apostles did, in any place; but when neither of these, nor any
other exigent like unto these, did require it, he said, the Church, that was
appointed and consecrated, as Solomon did the Temple, for Gods public service,
was the fittest, and the enjoined place for the Preacher to preach and pray,
and the people to come to hear, and to do the service of God: and, as he was
amplifying this point, the more at large, because, on that very day, the
Preacher had moved the Parishioners, according to a brief from the Lord
Protector, to a liberal contribution, toward the repairing of a famous
neighbor Church, that was ruined by the wars, the Preacher steps out of his
seat among the people, and opening his book, said, The Bishop preached lies,
and false Doctrine unto them, which he would prove to be so, and read a place
of Scripture, that was nothing at all against the Bishops Doctrine; and after
he had, for a good space, stood in confuting the Bishop, and the Bishop silent
all that while, and had made an end of his confutation; the Bishop demanded, if
he would now give him leave quietly to go on, and to make an end of his Sermon;
the Parson and his Disciples answered, he had preached false Doctrine, and lies
enough already, and therefore he must come down, and proceed no further; which
the Bishop presently did; and the Parson got up into the pulpit; but thereupon
the Gentlemen and the Parishioners on the one side, and the Parsons Proselites
and Disciples on the other side, rose up in a tumult, and very bitterly
out-bearding, and chiding one another, so that the Bishop was mightily afraid,
they would have gone together by the ears, and have done some great mischief,
and had much ado for a very great while, to persuade them, and to entreat them
for Gods sake on all sides to be quiet. And this tumult ended; the Gentlemen,
and the better sort of the Parishioners, that were much offended, and grieved
for this affront that was done unto the Bishop, resolved to prefer a Bill of
indictment against the Parson, and his Disciples, at the Quarter Sessions,
which was on that week; and so they went to the Clerk of the Peace, and drew a
bill, preferred it to the bench, and had 3 or 4 witnesses sworn, to prove the
disturbance of the Preacher in his Sermon; but one of the Justices of the
Peace, upon the bench, that is a Presbyterian and the son of a Presbyterian,
understanding that the Preacher disturbed was a Bishop, called the Prosecutor
of the Bill, and told him, he could do nothing in that bill, which he should
have rather preferred against the Bishop for preaching, than against the Parson
and his followers for disturbing him; because the Bishops are all prohibited,
and must not preach; and therefore advised him, to take up his Bill; and the
other Justices wished him to follow his advice: and so after all their pains
and cost, he did; because he wisely foresaw it was but vain, contra stimulum
calcitrare, to swim against the stream: Yet afterward, in the General
Sessions, held for the County of Denbigh, the Grand Jury, consisting of 24 good
Gentlemen, indicted the preaching trooper, for disturbing the Bishop in his
Sermon: but the Judge, after he had thundered his threatenings against some of
the Jury, and pleaded for the Trooper, as if he had been his Advocate, quasht
the indictment: a very good Judge, and is not he a member of the beast? yet the
Bishop would question him in another place but for fear of meeting such another
Judge. And I would very fain know, when such a thing was done, or suffered to be
done in the Church of Rome, and that with the approbation of the Governors of
that Country?

But to proceed, and to show unto you the enormities and Apostasy of the men
in these times, a little more plain: Revel. 13.16. Revelat. 14.1.
as the servants of the Antichrist are said to bear the mark, and the name of
the beast in their foreheads, or in their right hand; so the servants of Christ
are said to have the name of the Lamb, and of his father, written in their
foreheads; and that is, the vow and promise, wherewith they have bound
themselves in their baptism, to serve the Lamb, as their Lord and General,
Canstitut. Apost, l. 12. c. 6.
and never to backslide from him, to the service of Satan, and to follow his
pomps and devices, and the lusts of our own flesh;

For, as S. Chrysostom, and others of the Fathers do witness, this was the
practice, and the ancient custom in most Churches, that every one which gave
himself to Christ, to be baptized, and to receive his badg, and mark in his
forehead, should profess, and say, (...). Chrysostom. ad populum Antio. Hom. 22.
August. in Joan. tract 6. and contra. lit. petil.
that is, I do renounce Satan, and all his works, and all his pomps, and all
his worship; and after he had made this Profession, he should receive the
Sacrament of Baptism, as the seal of the Lord, and the mark and name of the
Lamb, and of his Father in his forehead; the which mark S. Augustine calls
the royal mark, and the mark of the Redeemer, wherein the Christians so much
gloryed and rejoiced in;

And, as Epiphanius says, that those Jews, which ran after the Idol-service,
and to that end, Joseph. antiq. l. 12. c. 6. Epiphan. de ponder. and mensur.
Tertul. de spect. c. 4. Origin, de spect. execrat. l. 8. c. 59. and Aug. in
Joh. tract. 7.
by the Art of Chyrurgery blotted out their circumcision, and praeputium per
attractionem patiebantur, as Josephus witnesses, many of them used to do; they
did it, ad dei ipsius abnegationem, and patrum characteris abolitionem, to the
denial of God himself, and for the abolishing of the mark and character of
their forefathers; so Tertul. Isidore, Origin, and S. August. tell us, that
they have lost the Mark of Christ, and have blotted out the seal of the Lamb,
and cast away his name, which have received the mark of the devil, and are
become revolters or apostata's from the Christian faith, which renounce their
baptism, and covet that, which they profess to renounce in their Baptism.

And I know none of all the old Heretics, backsliders, and apostate Churches,
or persons any where, whether you look into the Greek Church, or the Roman
Church, or any other national Church in all the Christian world, (not the
Donatists, which came nearest, excepted,) that used this ancient form of
renouncing Satan and his pomps, and adhering to Christ, and receiving his seal,
and his mark in their foreheads, and did afterward so execrate and abhor that
form, refuse the mark, and renounce the very seal, the Sacrament of their
baptism, and receive the mark of the beast, and follow after the works of the
devil, the pomps of the world, and the lusts of their own flesh, as many in the
long Parliament, many Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, and other
Sectaries, and adherents to the long Parliament have done; or especially any
heretics, or apostata's in this Church, that have made their apostasy wider,
and more general than these men have done.

For you may observe, that although T. Cartwright, and Penry, and the frantic
Parker, that indicted the innocent sign of the cross, which the primitive
Christians commonly used, to show, that they were not ashamed of their
crucified Savior, of felony, adultery, murder, and all other sins of the
Decalogue, and some other particular Calvinists, their Proselites, did, in
their puritanical zeal, start aside from the discipline, and some points of the
Doctrine of this our Reformed Church, as especially that Article of Christ his
discension into Hell; yet all the Clergy, and the whole Church were never
comprised within this apostasy, neither did they so generally consent, unto it,
and adhere unto these Masters; but the Assembly of Presbyterians at
Westminster, concluded all the Clergy, and all the other people, by their
binding Directory and Determinations, that were comfirmed by the Parliament,
and required them strictly to recede from all the whole established form of
Gods worship, and to follow their Directory, and manner of praying, preaching,
and other service of God, which is conceived to be more destructive to the true
Christian faith, and more derogatory to the honor of the just God, then were
any of the Heresies of the greatest Heresiarchs; as is partly manifested
against their Doctrine, B. Montague, in his apel. Caesar.
by B. Montague, in his appello Caesarem, and by Dr. Stearne, in his medela
animi, and in Dr. Tailors vindication of Gods attributes, against the desperate
and most dangerous Doctrines of this false Prophet, the Prebsbyterians,
Independants, and Anapabtists, and their Disciples, that, by the aforesaid
means, 2 Samuel 3.39.
are now so multiplied, that as David said of the sons of Zervia, so may we
say, of them; the sword is not able to suppress them, but they must have places
of credit, and Titles of honor conferred upon them, for fear of further
inconveniences:

And therefore, Jerem. 3.22.
as the Lord says, that backsliding Israel has justified her self more than
treacherous Judah; so have these men given way to the Roman Church, to justify
her self more than the now English Church; because these men did not purge our
Lyturgy, and weed the errors and faults, that they pretended to be found in our
service Book, but did wholly reject it, and cast it quite away, and never
brought any other in the room thereof: And the Roman Church can never be taxed
with the like proceedings, when as they often mended their Missalls, and
Breviaries, but never quite exploded any of them; and the Reformers of our
Church did the like, which is indeed a reformation; and the other a rejection
of Gods worship.

And if these things do not make up the grand rebellion, and the huge Apostasy,
that the Apostle here speaks of, I only wonder at it, and leave it to better
Judges than I am, to determine it.

CHAP. IV. Of the Literal and Mystical Babylon: That Rome is a Babylon: That
neither the great Babylon in Assyria, nor old Rome, nor Constantinople, which
was called new Rome, is that Babylon spoken of Rev. 17. and where the
Antichrist seateth himself, but that is to be mystically and not literally
understood, for some City of confusion: and what the Prophet Daniel intimates
the Antichrist should do, by the doings of Antiochus, that was the most lively
type of the great Antichrist, in his rebellion against his Superiors, and his
persecution of Gods People, the Jews.
2. THE Antichrist well perceiving the Apostasy, 2. That the Antichrist will
set up his throne in the City of Babylon.
the relapse and falling away of the true and purest Reformed National Church,
from her Lawful Government, and from the true Faith of Christ, and the right
Service of God, by her rebellion both against the civil Magistrates and the
spiritual Pastors thereof, begins to show himself; and finding the door so wide
opened, enters upon the stage, and will establish his Court and set up his
Throne and principal Seat of his Residence, as the Scripture shows in the
City of Babylon. Jer. 50.14.
And therefore the Prophet Jeremy says, Put your selves in array against
Babylon round about, all ye that bend the Bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows;
cap. 51.8.
for she has sinned against the Lord: And all the children of God are charged
not to go to Babylon, but to get out of her, because she came in remembrance
before God: Rev. 18.4. etc. 16.19. etc. 18.5. etc. 14.8. etc. 18.3.
And he determined to destroy her, and to give unto her the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath; for that her sins have reached unto Heaven; and she
has made all Nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her Fornication.

But here the question is, what Place or what City, is to be understood by this
great and glorious proud City of Babylon, which is so sinful, and from which we
are commanded to flee away, and to fight against her.

For the better understanding of which point, what Place is specially meant by
this Babylon spoken of Rev. 17. Babylon taken two manner of ways.
you must remember that the Scripture speaks of a twofold Babylon, or of
Babylon two manner of ways, that is, 1. Literally. 2. Mystically.


And 1. For the Literal Babylon.1. We find two Great Cities specially of this
Name; the one in Egypt, 1. Literally. 1. The Assyrian Babylon not to be
understood here. Justin l. 1. Herodot. l. 1.
the other in Chalde: That of Egypt, was the lesser, and less famous than the
other, which was the Greater, and far the more glorious City; whereof the Poet
says, Atque superba foret Babylon spolianda Trophaeis
Ausoniis; --
Which was not that Babylon, which is in Egypt; but that ancient and famous
Babylon, which Nimrod founded, Ninus enlarged, Semiramis walled about,
Nebuchadnezzar amplified, Nitocris beautified and enriched, and Cyrus reduced
to his obedience: For this Old Babylon, the Metropolis of Assyria, That the
Assyrian Babylon excelled all other Cities in four respects.
and the Seat of the Assyrian Emperors for many years, might for Four special
things,

That is, 1. For Strength and Bigness, 2. For commodious Situation, 3. For the
pregnant wits of her Inhabitants, 4. For the puissance and the might of her
Kings,
compare with any one City in all the world: For,

1. After the death of Nimrod and his Son Ninus, her chief Foundress, 1. For
strength Coelius Rhodigin. antiquit. l^ct. l. 8. c. 12.
Semiramis, the Wife of Ninus, that was a Woman of more than Masculine Wit and
Courage, whose Garb of wrapping her head in Lawn, after the death of her
Husband, the Persians imitate to this very day, did first surround this City
with walls of 32 foot thick, and 50 cubits high, betwixt the Turrets, the
Towers being raised 10 cubits higher; Plin. l. 8. c. 26.
and in compass, the walls were 355 Stadia; and every Stadium being 139 Paces:
Or according to Plinie's description of it, the breadth of the wall was 50
foot, Julius Solinus, c. 69.
and the height of it 200, each foot containing 3 fingers breadth more than
our ordinary measure; and in circuit it was 60000 paces; so big, that
Aristotle thought it might have an equal dimension with all Peloponesus;
because that when it was first taken by Cyrus, the furthest part of the City,
knew not in three days after, what had happened.

2. 2. For situation.
For the Situation of this City, the great and famous River Euphrates, that
was of a stadium broad, brought his Channel through the midst of it; and it was
so arched over, and adorned with such beautiful pensil Gardens, that it seemed
afar off, to be like a wood upon the top of a mountain; and the Lands about
this City, were so exceeding fruitful, that the ground commonly produced 200
for one, and sometimes more, Genesis 10.9. etc. 11.2.
as Caelius and Curtius write; for Nimrod that was the mightiest hunter living,
would have the finest and the best place, that could be found, even the very
Plain of Shennar.

3, For the Wits and Ingenuity of her Breed, her wisdom and her knowledge were
such and so great, Es. 47.10.
that, as Esayas testifies, they caused her to fall, and to say with the Poet,
Ingenio perii, qui miser ipse meo! Mine own too much wit has undone me: For
this City had the honor to produce the first Teachers of Astronomy, and they
were so expert therein, that neither the Indian Gymnosophists, nor the Egyptian
Priests and Magicians were any ways comparable unto them, as you may observe
it out of Daniel, c. 2. v. 2, and 4, and 10. And this City likewise bred the
first Inventers of that curious Art of working with needles, those rare and
specious works, Josh. 7.21.
that were done of diverse colors, which enticed Achan the Israelite, to hide
the gay and goodly Babylonish Garment.

4. For the Puissance of her Kings and Princes, she outwent all other Cities
whatsoever: Nimrod (called Belus by the Gentiles, but indeed his Father) that
was Noah's Granchilds Son, being the first and the stoutest man then on earth;
then Belus, Nimrods Son, whom the Gentiles honored as a god, in after times;
and after him Ninus, that built the great City of Nineveh; then his Wife, the
Mirror of all women, Semiramis; afterward, omitting all those Eighteen Kings,
which Berosus names, and Twenty more, that Sleidan sets down,
Phul-Belochus, that swayed the Scepter 48 years, 2 Reg 15.19.
and Philazzar, whom the Holy Scripture names Phul-Assur, that reigned 23
years; and Salmanazar, that reigned 10 years, and subdued all Phoenicia, The
Monarchs of Assyria that reigned in this Chaldean Babylon.
excepting Tyrus, and carried away the King of Israel, and the Ten Tribes
Captives into Media; and Sennacherib, that for reviling God and the good King
Hezekiah, by a railing Rabsheca, was forced to return home with dishonor, and
then slain by his own Sons in the Temple of his Idols, after he had reigned
seven years; and Esar-haddon, whom Josephus calls Asaracoldus, reigned Eleven
years: Esa. 39.1.
and Berodac, whom Esayas calls Ben-Merodac, that after the revolution of
Twelve years, translated the Kingdom to the Assyrians, and reigned afterward
Eighteen years: And Nebuchadnezzar, that said, Is not this great Babylon, that
I have built, that is, so great and so glorious as now it is, for the House of
the Kingdom, and for the Glory of my Majesty? Dan. 4.30.
And then Belshazzar his Son, whom Darius did succeed: And many other famous
Kings and Princes reigned and ruled in and over this Great and Glorious City of
Babylon, more than we read to have done over any one other City of the world.

And therefore this City, in these and many other respects, was the most
resplendent of all the known Cities of the whole Universe, and is, in that
respect, termed by the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 13.9.
and said to be the Glory of Kingdoms.

But it is yielded of all sides, that this Literal, Chaldean Babylon is no
where meant to be the Seat of the Great Antichrist, that must arise in and out
of the true Church of Christ; and seat himself in a greater, and a more
Mystical Babylon: And therefore

II. Babylon mystically understood, which must be so understood to be the Seat
of the Antichrist, is taken two ways: 2. Mystically understood two manner of
ways.
1. Generally, for the whole world of Wickedness. 2. Particularly, for some
special Place of this world.


By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered thee, O
Sion: And again, O Daughter of Babylon wasted with misery, yea, happy shall he
be that rewards thee, as thou have served us, Ps. 137.1. and ult.
and blessed shall he be, that takes thy children, and throws them against
the stones: Though literally and in the first sense, they are to be understood
of the Chaldean Babylon, yet mystically they are to be taken for this wicked
world, which is the City of Satan, and the Metropolis of his Empire: For
although God be the King of all the earth, both by the right of Creation and
Preservation, yet Satan is said to be the King of this Babylon, by the unjust
Title of usurpation; and therefore he is called the Prince of this world, that
rules in the hearts of the children of Disobedience.

And this world is resembled, compared, and does symbolize Babylon in very very
many things, but especially in these five respects; The world resembled to
Babylon in five respects.
Propter 1. Amaenitatem, Pleasantness. 2. Cacitatem, Blindness. 3.
Celsitudinem, Height of Spirit. 4. Confusionem, All kind of Disorder and
Confusion. 5. Iniquitatem, The Multiplicity of all kind of Iniquity. For,


Babylon was the delight of the Nations, and a most sweet and pleasant place,
as I showed to you before; even so the world, ab ornatu dicitur (...), is so
called by the Grecians, from the beauty of it: Quid enim mundo praestantius,
For what can be more excellent and pleasanter than this world? says Lucius
Apuleius.

Assyrian Babylon was full of blind^ess and ignorance: Jer. 59.17.
For as the Prophet says, Every man was brutish in his knowledge; so is the
world, as our Savior shows, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, whom the world cannot receive, quia non videt eum, nec scit
eum, because it sees him not, John 14.17.
and knows him not; for though the light shined in darkness, yet the darkness
comprehended it not, and though the Ministers of Christ do preach the Truth
daily unto the world, yet the children of this world are still drowned in
Darkness, and will not receive the knowledge of the Truth that they might be
saved. John 1.5.


Assyrian Ba^ylon was full of Pride, so high and so haughty, that they would
build a Tower which should reach to Heaven: And the Prophet says of her, Jer.
50.29.
She has been proud against the Lord, against the Holy One of Israel: And so
is the world full of Pride. Maxima quaeque domus servis est plena superbis: Not
a great House, but has a great deal of Pride, and proud Servants in it, says
the Poet.

Assyrian Babylon was full of all Disorder and Confusion, the Labourer would be
a Director and a Master-worker, the Mason would play the Carpenter, and the
Carpenter would be the Joyner, and so none was contented with his own station,
not any man dutiful in his own Place, but when the Masters called for Bricks,
the Servants brought them Clay, when they desired Bread, they gave them Stones;
and therefore it was called Babel; because of this disorderly confusion: Even
so it is in this world, no man is contented with his own state, none dutiful in
his place, and none satisfied with his own condition; but as the Poet says,
Optat ephippia bos niger, optat arare Caballus. The Ox would bear the saddle,
and the Horse would draw the Plow.

Babylon in Chaldea was full of Sins, for she has sinned against the Lord,
says the Prophet: So the whole world lies in wickedness, says the Apostle:
And all that is in the world, Jer. 50.14. John 2.16.
is either concupiscence of the eyes, or concupiscence of the flesh, or Pride
of life.

Haectria pro trino numine mundus habet. Particularly, Many other Cities and
Kingdoms of this world are, and may, in this Mystical sense, be rightly styled
Babylon.

And that either, Two ways.
1. (...), Respectively, secundum quid. For so, 2. (...), Eminently, exceeding
all the rest: For so,


1 Pet 5.13.
The City of Rome is called Babylon, by the Apostle, and is acknowledged by the
Rhemists, and the Fathers and Jesuits before cited, to be understood in that
place of S. Peter, 1 Pet. 5, 13; and I think none can well deny it to be the
Symbol, similitude and resemblance of the Chaldean Babylon, Rome resembled to
the Chaldean Babylon in two respects. 1. In respect of her excellencies.
Terrarum Dea gentiumq. Roma cui ^^nl par nihil secundum, says Martial.
in two special respects;

1. In respect of the Excellencies,

2. In respect of the Impieties thereof: For,

1. As Babylon excelled all other Cities for strength and bigness, commodious
situation, pregnant wits and puissant Kings; so the City of Rome, was strong
and big enough, sited in Italy, the very Garden of Europe, and upon the famous
River Tiber, not much inferior to Euphrates, and for the Pregnant wits of the
Romans, I presume, their Poets, Orators and Lawyers might well compare with
Athens or Babylon, or any other City of the world, and as the Assyrian Empire
continued for above a 1000 ^e^rs from Nimrod to Belshazzar; so the Roman
Emperors have ruled from Julius Caesar, to this very day, above sixteen hundred
years: And we may well say, that what other excellency soever was in Babylon,
the same might be found in Rome.

2. In respect of her impieties and iniquities.
2. As the City of Rome does thus parallel Babylon in her excellencies, so the
Church of Rome does equalize or exceed the City of Babylon in all Impieties:
For to make this plain, the sins of Babylon were of two sorts: 1. Against God.
2. Against Man. And


1. Against God three ways.
Her sins against God, were principally three;

1. Ignorance, that she knew not God: For every man was brutish by his
Knowledge.

2. Jer. 51.17. c. 50.29, and 38.
Pride, that she contemned God: For she has been proud against the Lord, says
the Prophet.

3. Idolatry, in worshipping those that were not gods: For it is the Land of
Graven Images, to show their Idolatry, and they are mad upon their Idols, says
our Prophet, Dan in the story of Bell and the Dragon.
and those Idols were Bell and Succoth-Benoth, 2 Reg. 17.20. These were the
sins of Babylon which Jeremy notes; and to these Esaias adds Sorcery and
Enchantments, c. 47. v. 9, 12, 13.

And in all these things the Church of Rome may shake hands with the City of
Babylon. For,

1. The Ignorance of the Roman Church.
1. Though as Babylon abounded in many Arts, and was excellent in all humane
Learning, when they had their Astronomers, Magicians, and many other Sects of
Learned men, that while their Empire flourished, did likewise flourish in all
Learning; and from hence Learning first proceeded unto the Greeks, as
afterward it spread it self from the Greeks unto the Romans: And this the
Prophet Esaias plainly acknowledges, Esaias 47 10.
when he says, Thy wisdom and thy knowledge O Babylon, have caused thee to
rebel: And yet as the Prophet Jeremy notes, She was most brutish in the true
knowledge of God: So in the Church of Rome, I confess they are Scholars, and
Scholars great enough in all Arts and Sciences, and they that deny the same, do
either bewray their own Ignorance of their works, or their partial judgment of
their worth; c. 47. v. 9, 12, 13.
and therefore I will never deny the truth and their due; they are for the most
part, great Scholars, good Artists, expert Linguists, and politic Statesmen:
And no marvel, because they have better helps and means to attain unto these
things, than any other Scholars have, in any other parts of Christendom: Yet,
in the knowledge of many points, of the greatest moment, and mysteries of the
Divine Verity, they come short of their poorer Brethren: And no wonder neither;
because, as it is in Job, God takes the wise in their own craftiness, Job 5.13.
and the counsel of the froward he carries headlong: And as Christ says. He
hides these things from the wise and prudent, and reveals them unto Babes;
when as the Apostle says, Mat. 11.25. 1 Cor. 1.27, 29.
God chooses the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and the
weak things, to confound things that are mighty, that no flesh should glory in
his presence. And therefore let no man wonder, that they are great Scholars and
very learned men, and yet overwhelmed in great errors: For so Arius, Pelagius,
and diverse others were great Scholars, and yet great Heretics: And so
doctissimus Patrum Tertullianus, ingenisissimus Origines, Tertullian was the
most Learned of the Fathers of his time; Euscbius.
and as Eusebius. writes of him, Origin the wittiest and most excellent; and yet
both of them were tainted with foul Errors, condemned since for foul Heresies:
For the truth is, that non ni si ex magnis ingeniis magni errores; great
errors could never be so insensibly engendered, and so probably defended,
without great Learning and good wits.

2. For the Pride of the Church of Rome, I will not stand so much upon that, 2.
The Pride of the Church of Rome. Esa. 47.5, 7, 8.
whereby, as Babylon of old exalted her self above all her sister-Cities, and
said, I shall be a Lady for ever, I am and none else beside me, I shall not sit
as a Widow, neither shall I know the loss of children: So the Church of Rome
does arrogate unto her self, the prime Title, and exalt her self above all
other Churches of the world: Though this be so great a sin, that St. Gregory
says, quicunque desiderat primatum in terris inveniet confusionem in coelis;
Seeing our Savior exhorts him, Mat. 20.27. Jer. 50.29.
that would be chief of all, to become the Servant of all: But I will insist
upon that Pride of hers, whereby, as Babel exalted her self in Pride against
God, so this Church does lift up her self against God, and spurn against the
Grace of Christ; and that, as in many other Points, so especially in these Four
principal Points. The pride of the Roman Church against God in four points.
1. Of Free Will. 2. Of Justification. 3. Of Satisfaction. 4. Of Merits and the
works of supererrogation. For,


1. Though our Savior tells us, sine me nil potestis facere, without me, 1. In
the Doctrine of freewill.
you can do nothing, that is, nothing that is good; no, not to think a good
thought, says the Apostle: For as St. Bernard says, Homo in Paradyso male
utens suo arbitrio, perdidit se and arbitrium; man in Paradise, abusing his
free will, lost himself and his will; that is, to do any good that can be
acceptable to God: And therefore the Apostle says, that God works in us
both, velle and agere, as well to will good, as to do good: Philip. 2.13.
And St. August. says, nolentem prevenit, ut velit, volentem subsequitur, ne
frustra velit; he prepares and preventeth the unwilling mind, to make him
willing, and he follows it being willing, to do the good, that he may not
will in vain: How God enclineth our wills to will good.
And yet, we deny not, but man has freedom of will, to will the things that he
wills; for the will is always free, and not compelled, else should it be no
will: And therefore when God moves us to will that which is good, he does it
not by forcing or compelling our will to will such and such things, but
proponendo bonitatem and suavitatem Objecti; by laying the Objects of good
before the eyes of our understanding, and then, inclinando voluntatem, by
inclining our minds, and enticing our wills to yield and to embrace that good;
and that, by a kind of a sweet influence and secret persuasion, in our
apprehending the sweetness of the Object, and no compulsion at all; but even as
we pray in our Lyturgy, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep
this Law: But to say, that a man can will good of himself, without this help of
the Grace of Christ, we do utterly deny; because all the cogitations of man's
heart are prone to evil continually: And the Apostle says, that we were dead
in trespasses and sins: Genesis 6.5. Col. 2.13. Aug. de cord and gratia.
And if we were dead in sin, then sure we must needs be without any life of
Goodness in us: And therefore we say with St. Aug. to will any thing freely, is
the work of nature, to will evil, is the work of corruption, but to will well,
and that which is good, is the work of Christ and of his Grace.

And yet the Church of Rome ascribes so much power to the will of man, that
Bellarmine says, Bellar. l. 6. c. ult. de great.
our conversation is in the power of our free will; and that before all Grace,
we have free will, even in the works of Piety, and may by this our will,
leviores quasque titillationes superare, overcome all the slighter motions of
sin, and dispose our selves to receive Grace, Scotus 2. d. 28. Durand. 16. q. 4.
as Aquinas and Suarez say; yea, and to keep Gods Commandments, as Scotus and
Durandus do affirm.

And what is this, but in a humane Pride, to rob God of his Glory, due to him
for the Grace of Christ, and to give it to the freedom of our will? to lessen
the bounty of Christ, and the goodness of his Grace toward us, and to magnify
the goodness of our selves toward him? At hoc piarum mentum est, ut nihil boni
sibi tribuant; But it is the part of every good man to ascribe no good unto
himself, but with St. Paul, to confess, all good to be due to the Grace of
Christ; because as St. James says, Every good and perfect gift is from above,
James 1.17.
and comes down from the Father of Lights: And therefore we say with Sr.
Bernard, that aliud est velle, and aliua est velle bonum; it is one thing to
will, and that we have from our selves, and it is another thing to will that
which is good, and this we have from the Grace of Christ, and thanks be unto
him for his Grace.

2. 2. In the Doctrine of our Justification.
For our Justification: The Apostle proves by many arguments, that we are
freely justified by the Faith of Jesus Christ, and that it proceeds merely of
Grace, and not of works, lest any man should boast, if it had been of works:
And therefore St. Ambrose says, Romans 3.24. etc. 4.16. etc. 5.1. and Gal. 2.16.
non gloriabor quia justus sum, sed quia redemptus sum, non quia vacuus sum
peccato, sed quia remissa sunt peccata; I will neither glory nor rejoice, that
I am just, but because I am redeemed, not because I am free from sin, but
because my sins are forgiven me: And St. Aug. says, that credendo in Christum,
justificantur homines, men are justified by believing in Christ: And so not
only these men, and all the Classie of the Fathers, St. Basil, Nazianzen and
the rest of that age, but also the godliest sort of the Church of Rome, as
Aquinas, Cassander and Arius Montanus do ingeruously confess, that Faith is
reputed for righteousness, to every one that believes in Jesus Christ, and
that we cannot be justified by our own works or merits, but only by the Faith
of Jesus Christ.

And yet the Council of Trent does anathematize all them that teach and defend
this Truth; Council triden. Sess. 6. c. 7.
and it affirms, that the formal cause of our justification, is our own
inherent righteousness; and so Bellarmine and the whole Schools of Jesuits do
eagerly defend the same Tenent.

But it may be some will say, this point might easily be reconciled; because
that, as they affirm, we are justified by our good works; So we teach, that we
cannot be justified without good works: For though sola fides justificat, Faith
alone does justify us, yet we say, that fides nunquant est solitaria, Faith
never goes alone, but is always accompanied with all good works: And
therefore the difference betwixt us, is but in name and explication, seeing
what they call inherent righteousness, we call Sanctification; and we preach
the necessity of good works for Sanctification, as much and as earnestly as
they do for justification: And therefore all this strife and stir about this
point, may seem to be but a (...), a mere strife about words, and nothing else,
when as both sides do agree about the Substance and the necessity of good works.

Alas Beloved, decipimur specie recti, we do many times think that to be of
great moment, which is indeed but of little consequence; and many times we
judge that to be of nothing worth, which in very deed is most material; So many
men think this point of difference to be but of small account; but I am of Mr.
Calvin's mind herein, The difference betwixt our tenent and the Church of Rome
explained.
that this point of all others, is one of the most importance, and our
difference herein to be very great; for they make our good works to be causas
essicientes, the precedent causes of our justification, and we make them to be
fructus assequentes, the subsequent fruits and effects of our justification:
and so, they ascribe to man, the greatest part of the Salvation of man, when
they ascribe justification to the inherent works of man; for what is inherent
in us, must needs be ours; and therefore, if we be justified, as they say, by
our inherent righteousness, it must needs follow, that we do justify our
selves; and so we do arrogate more unto our selves, than we do ascribe unto the
Grace of God: For si hominem te fecit Deus, and justum tu te facis, melius
aliquid facis quam fecit Deus; quia melius est, justum esse quam hominem esse;
if God made thee a man, and thou by thy good works make thy self a just man,
thou make something better than God makes; because it is better to be a just
man, than to be a man; But we ascribe nothing to our selves, but all to our
Savior Christ, when we say with the Apostle, that we are justified freely by
his blood: Romans 5.9.
And so we make our justification perfect, because it is Christ's; and our
Sanctification we acknowledge to be imperfect, because it is ours, for that it
is done by us, though by the help and assistance of the Grace and Spirit of
Christ.

And therefore you see the difference to be so great, as it is to say, Christ
justifies us by his righteousness, made ours by Faith, and to say, we justify
our selves, or are justified by our own inherent righteousness or good works:
the former we reach, to the praise of God and glory of Christ, and that no man
should boast of any thing that is in himself: and the latter the Church of Rome
stiffly defends, to the praise, as we conceive, of themselves, and that they
might boast in the Lord, as Bellarmine says, and so exalt themselves herein,
like Babylon, in pride, against the Lord, as we say.

3. In the point of Satisfaction, they are as injurious to Christ, 3. In the
point of Satisfaction.
as in the other point of our Justification: For, though our blessed Savior,
Jesus Christ, by the shedding of his most precious blood and the suffering of
the most bitter and accursed death of the Cross, has made there, by his own
oblation of himself once offered, a full, The excellent confession of our
Church herein.
perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction, for the sins of
the whole world; as our Church does most Christianly confess in our Lyturgy:
Yet the Council of Trent does affirm, that by this satisfaction of Christ, made
upon the Altar of his Cross, the fault is only pardoned, but the punishment is
not remitted, until that by our own Penance and other sufferings, it be fully
satisfied for: But because this seems too reproachful to the Justice of God,
to remit the fault, and yet to inflict the punishment, which would be nothing
else but a mere mockery, as if a King should say to a Traitor, I will forgive
thee thy Treason, but thy Head must be cut off for a punishment; therefore the
Learned Cardinal, wiser than the rest, Bellar. l. 1. c. 4. de indulgentiis,
distinguishes betwixt the temporary and the eternal punishment of our sins:
and he yields the eternal punishment to be fully satisfied for, by Christ, but
the temporary punishment, he says, must be discharged and satisfied for, by
our selves, that is, by our penance and other sufferings and satisfaction.

But I answer, that if this were true, then must it needs impeach that (...),
the great propitiatory Sacrifice, which Christ has offered for our sins, of
some great imperfection; because it was but in part, and for a part, and not
for all; and we must needs thereby conclude, that either Christ could not
discharge us from these temporal punishments, or else, could, and would not do
it; but to say either of these, is most injurious unto Christ: For, to say, he
could not do it, denies his Power, that is Almighty; and to say, he would not
do it, is to deprave his Goodness, who is goodness it self: And indeed, this
dimidiatory satisfaction were to cross the very Rules of reason, that he which
had done so much for us, John 1.18. Phil. 2.7.
as to descend from the Bosom of his Father, to take upon him (...), the form
of a Servant, and to suffer the most bitter death of the Cross, to make
satisfaction for our sins, and to deliver us from eternal vengeance and the
wrath of God, would be unwilling to satisfy his Father for our temporal
punishment, especially, when it would cost him no more to satisfy for all,
than for part of all; nay, when as the satisfaction made by Christ, is of far
more worth, than the Justice of God could require for all the punishments we
had or could deserve; quia modicam guttam sanguinis Christi propter unionem
hypostaticam, pro redemptione totius mundi sufficisse necesse est; because it
must needs be, that the least drop of Christ his blood, by reason of the
hypostatical union, of the manhood of Christ with the Godhead, should be
sufficient to make satisfaction to the wrath of God, and to procure the
redemption of the whole world, as St. Clemens says: and therefore this
partition of satisfaction is both false and frivolous.

But you will object, that God pardoned the guilt of David's sin, and yet he
inflicted a punishment upon him for his fault, and so he did and does upon many
others of his chosen Saints and dearest Children.

I Answer, and confess that many times after the offense is remitted, we see
punishments inflicted upon the Offender; Why God inflicteth punishment after
the fault is remitted.
but we say, that is not to satisfy the Justice of God for that sin, for which
Christ has fully satisfied, but to amend us, and to confirm us unto God, that
is, not to make satisfaction unto God for the sns that are past, but to be for
a prevention unto us against all other sins, that are to come, and would
otherwise be acted by us.

And this is the end for which we persuade men to fast and pray, and to perform
all the exercises of true Penance, to show the fruits and truth of their
repentance for their sins past and offending God, and to declare the
willingness of their minds to do any Service, and to undergo any labor, and
patiently to suffer any cross or disaster, that might any ways be available
for the prevention of all sins to come.

But to say that any penance or punishment imposed by the Priest, or
voluntarily assumed by our selves, should any way satisfy Gods wrath for our
sins committed against him, we do utterly deny and detest, as a most derogatory
Doctrine to the all-sufficient satisfaction of Christ.

And the truth of this Doctrine sufficiently shows, No need of Purgatory.
that there is no need, and there can be no place nor use of any Purgatory, to
make satisfaction for sins after this life.

4. 4. In the Doctrine of Merits.
In their Doctrine of Merit, they exceed in Pride, above all the rest: For
though our Savior tells us, that when we have done all what we can, we are but
unprofitable Servants, and far short of what we should be; And the Apostle
plainly says, that by Grace we are saved through Faith, Ephesians. 2.8,9.
and that, not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any
man should boast, And the Holy Fathers are plentiful in the justifying of this
point, and teach, quod sufficit ad meritum scire, quod non sufficient merita,
that it suffices us to know, that no merits can avail us any thing, to merit
any thing at the hands of God, but the Merits of Jesus Christ, as St. Bernard
says.

Yet such is the Pride of these men, that some of them do say, a just man's work
is of value worthy of Heaven, and that absque ullo respectu meriti Christi,
without any respect to the merits of Christ, as I read it alleged, Suarez.
was not ashamed to write: Nay more, they teach that men are able not only for
to merit, but also to supererrogate; that is, to merit for themselves and for
others likewise, when they do more service unto God, than God commands them
to do, and do more good works, than God requires at their hands. Mat. 25.9.
I remember the five wise Virgins would not impart with one jot of their Oil
unto their Fellows, lest they should want the same themselves; but these men
think they have enough both for themselves and others: And therefore, because
they would have nothing lost, they have invented that gainful Doctrine of
Indulgences and pardons, whereby they transfer the surplusage and remainder of
the merits of those Saints, which have supererrogated, and have done more good
works than will serve their own turn, or that God requires at their hands,
unto those, The Doctrine of Merits and Supererrogation very beneficial to the
Church of Rome.
that want them, and can pay them for them: the which point of their Doctrine,
I dare say, is no Gospel, but a very profitable Kitchin-Divinity.

And so you see how they derogate all from Christ, and ascribe all this unto
themselves: And as Constantine says of Acetius, do erigere sibi scalas, set up
Ladders of their own framing, to climb alone to Heaven, without the help of
their Savior, or but with a very little of his help: And what is this, but as
the Poet says turgescere fastu, to swell with pride, and to become insolent
against the Lord, against the Holy One of Israel, as the Prophet speaks of
Babylon? For our Savior says, if any man will be his Disciple, he must
forsake all, and deny himself and follow him; but these men will neither deny
their own errors, nor forsake their own Pride to rely on their Savior Christ.

3. As the Chaldean Babylon was full of Idolatry, the Land of Graven Images,
The Idola(...) the Roman Church. Jer 50.
th^^ was mad upon their Idols, as the Prophet peaketh, so is the City and
Church of Rome: Of whom we may justly say with Baptista Mant.

Fama est AEgyptum coluisse animalia quaedam
Et pro numinibus mult as habuisse ferarum.
Ista superstitio minor est quam nostra, ferarum
Hic aras habet omne genus; contraria certe
Natuae res, atque Deo.
And this Idolatry of the Roman Church we affirm to be committed two ways, In
two Respects. 1. Respect, two ways.
and and in two special respects.

1. In giving the true honor and worship of God to faise Gods

2. In worshipping the true God with false worship. (...) For,

1. They give the Divine Worship, 1. Giving the true Worship of God to false
gods.
which they themselves confess to be only due to the true God, unto the
Creatures. (...) As,

1. To the consecrated Bread of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper here on
earth: (...) And

2. To the Saints and Angels that are in Heaven.

1. When the Priest has consecrated the Bread, he lifts it up above his head,
1. To the consecrated bread.
and says three times, that one of the most comfortable Sentences in all the
whole Book of God, and ever proper and peculiar to Christ alone, O the Lamb of
God, which takes away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us; and then
immediately all the people fall down and prostrate themselves unto that Wafer
Cake, as unto the everliving God: And what greater and more palpable Idolatry
can there be, than to worship Bread, in stead of God? Indeed the Heathens
adored Ceres, that they say, first invented the sowing of Corn, for a Goddess,
but they counted her the lowest of all their Goddesses, and her Daughter
Proserpina, they feigned to be married to Pluto the King of Hell, the fittest
place for such Goddesses: But these men adore, not the makers and authors of
bread, but the bread it self, and count that bread to be the true and living
God: and therefore seeing their Idolatry is the greater, let them take heed
lest their judgment shall be the severer, and that they shall not, with
Proserpina, be either Kings or Queens, or have any Dignity in Hell, but with
the rest of the wicked Idolaters, shall be slaves of Hell, if they repent not,
for evermore.

But these men, to salve this sore, and to quit themselves from this high
charge of Idolatry, do say, they worship not any bread, either hallowed or
unhallowed, but the Body of Christ, which is the blessed God for ever and ever:
For after the Priest has consecrated the bread, and said, this is my Body, it
is no more bread, but it is changed and transubstan iated into the very true
and natural body of Christ, according to the words of Christ himself, this is
my Body; So, as the water was no more water, Mat. 26.^6. John 2.9.
after Christ had changed the same into wine, the bread is no more bread, after
the Priest transubstantiates the same into the Body of Christ; and therefore
they commit no Idolatry nor offense by this their adoration of the Host, Why
the Body of Christ is to be worshipped.
which is now become the true Body of Christ; because the Body of Christ,
though not as it is a Creature, and the Son of Mary, yet as it is
hypostatically united to the Son of God, and is a nature of that Person, which
is the true God by nature, is to be worshipped and adored.

I answer, that if they could well prove the former point, that the consecrated
bread is transubstantiated into the body of Christ, we would willingly, as we
do, readily yield unto the latter, as I showed unto you, how the body of Christ
is to be worshipped: But for the truth of their Transubstantiation of the
Sacramental bread into the body of Christ, it rests to be discussed.

We read in St. John, that the Word was made flesh, John 1.14. Gal. 4.4.
and so flesh was united unto the Word: And St. Paul says, the Son of God was
made of a woman, and so the seed of the Woman was made the Son of God; but we
never read it in all the Scripture. ture, The first Inventers of
transubstant^ation.
that the Son of God was made of bread, nor that bread was made the Son of God;
For it was those Antichristian Popes, Leo, Nicholas, Innocentius and Honorius,
that were the first Fathers, which begat this new Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; and the Council of Lateran, not much above 400 years ago,
was the first Council that confirmed and gave life unto the same.

But how far this new devised Doctrine of theirs, The falsehood of the Doctrine
of transubstantiation showed three ways.
is from the old received Faith of the Church, and from the Divine Truth of
God, I shall briefly show unto you.

1. From the Holy Scriptures.

2. From the Ancient Fathers.

3. From pure and sound reason. And a threefold cord is not easily broken; For

1. Christ told his Disciples, 1. From the Scriptures. John 14.3. and v. 28.
Mark 16.19. Acts 7.56. Acts 9.4. Acts 3.21.
before his passion, that he must leave the world, and go to his Father, as he
was man: And St. Mark says, that after his resurrection, he was taken up into
Heaven, and sits on the right had of God: And so Saint Stephen saw him in
heaven, standing on the right hand of God; and Saint Paul heard him from
Heaven, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And St. Peter says, that
the Heavens must receive or contain or hold him, until the times of restitution
of all things: that is, until the last day, the day of Judgment. How then can
he be corporally present here on earth, and be still residing in Heaven? But to
make the Point more clear; John 6.53.
our Savior says, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
Blood, ye have no life in you: that is, none can attain unto eternal life, but
only those that do eat the flesh of the Son of man and do drink his blood; but
all the Patriarchs, Fathers and Prophets of the Old Testament, and all those
Christians that are baptized and die before they receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, The Fathers of the old Testament could not eat the natural flesh
of Christ.
could not, nor cannot eat the very natural flesh of the Son of man: For as
yet, in the time of the Fathers of the Old Testament, he had not assumed his
Body; and therefore, either all those Fathers can have no life; or else our
Savior means it of a spiritual eating of his flesh, by the mouth of Faith,
and not of any carnal eating of him by the mouth of our Bodies.

But to deny eternal life to these Fathers, is most absurd and injurious unto
them; therefore our Saviors meaning must needs be granted to be of a spiritual
eating of his flesh; and no thanks to grant it: For the Apostle proves it,
saying, that they did ali eat the same spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.
and they did all drink the same spiritual drink, that is, as we do now; for
they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ,
whose flesh they did thus spiritually eat, that so they might have eternal
life: And St. Aug. in Johan. tract. 26.
Aug. expounds it in the same manner, saying, visibilem cibum, hoc est, Manna,
spiritualiter intellexerunt, spiritualiter esurierunt, spiritualiter
gustaverunt, they understood that visible meat, that is, the Manna,
spiritually, they hungered after it, spiritually, and they did eat the same
spiritually.

And of all Christian Children and others that are baptized, and die before
they receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the same Father says, nulli
est aliquatenus ambigendum, tunc unumquemque fidelium corporis and sanguinis
Domini participem fieri, quando in baptismate efficitur membrum Christi, Aug de
Symbol. fidei ad catech. to. 9.
no man ought any way to doubt, but that every one is then made partaker of the
body and blood of our Lord, when by Baptism he is made a member of Christ:
Therefore the words of Christ are not to be understood of any oral eating of
his flesh, or drinking of his blood.

2. 2. From the Fathers.
The whole stream of the first Fathers of the Christian Church are against this
newfound Doctrine of Transubstantiation of the bread into the flesh of Christ,
and of the wine into his blood, and for the spiritual eating of the flesh of
Christ and the spiritual drinking of his blood: For Origin says, si secundum
literam sequaris id quod dictum est, Origin. in Levit. hem. 7.
nisi manducaveritis carnem filii hominis, non habebitis vitam in vobis, litera
illa occidit, if you follow the letter of that which is said, except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man, ye have no life in you, that letter kills; for it is
the Spirit that gives life, the flesh profits nothing: Theoder. Dialog. 7.
And Theodoret says, Christus naturam panis non mutat; Christ changes not the
nature of the bread: So Tertullian contra Marcionem, l. 4. August. contra
Adamant. Manich. to. 6. c. 12. and in epist. 221. Cyprian. de coena Domini.
Hesichius in Levit. l. 3. c. 2: Amb. de Sacrament. l. 1. c. 5. Chrysostom. in Johan.
Tract. 25, and 26. And all the rest that write of this Point, are of the sam^
mind, and do expound it in the same manner.

And so many of the Popish Writers themselves do either ingenuously confess, or
else tacitly yield unto this very truth; for Pope Gelasius says, non desinit
esse substantia vel natura panis and vini, the substance or nature of the bread
and wine does not cease to be: and Roffensis yields, that the very presence
of Christ's body, in the Masie, Fisher, Bishop of Roches. cont. Capt. Babylon.
Tonst. de Euch. l. 1. Page 65. Ar. Mont. in Luc. 22.
cannot be proved by any place of Scripture; and therefore sure we need not
believe it for any truth; and Tonstall confesses, it was no heresy to deny
the Doctrire of Transubstantiation before the Council of Lateran: And Arias
Montanus, upon the words of our Savior, this is my body, says, it is no more,
but, my body is sacramentally contained in this Sacrament: and this we do all
affirm, and accursed be he that denies it: for we say, with Clemens
Alexandrinus, that, duplex est sanguis Domini, alter carnalis, quo redempti
sumus, alter spiritualis, quo scilicet unctisumus, and so the fiesh, or body of
Christ, is understood to be, 1. Carnally, or corporally, in heaven. 2.
Mystically, and spiritually in the Sacrament.
and in the first sense none did or can eat him; but, in the second sense all
the godly men have, and do, and will eat him, and drink him; nam hoc est bibere
Jesu sanguinem, incorruptionis domini participem esse; for this is to eat the
flesr of Christ, and to drink the blood of Jesus, to be partakets of the
incorruption of our Lord; as S. Clemens, says, and as S. August. August. in
Johan.
says, credere in Christum est manducarc panem vivum, to believe in Christ, is
to eat the bread of life, which is the flesh of Christ.

3. Reason it self disproveth, 3. From reason. 1. Reason. John 3.9.
and is fully against this their doctrine of Transubstantiation. For,

1. If the bread, upon the pronouncing of those words, this is my body, be
turned into the flesh of Christ; then the Apostles did eat his body, and yet
saw it whole and entire before their faces; and if so, it is a wonder, that
they did not, with Nicodemus, ask him, how can these things be? for, I am sure
they asked him many questions of less moment, and easier to be understood, than
this great and high point of the transubstantiating of the bread, to become his
flesh.

bread be changed to flesh, and the wine into the blood of Christ, and we eat
and drink the same; then it is carried through our mawes, and passes through
the draught, or it is turned to our nutriment, which notwithstanding must at
last, together with us, see corruption; but that is contrary to the saying of
David, that God will not suffer his holy one, no, not his mortified, much less
his glorified body to see corruption; Psalm. 16.10.


bread be turned to flesh, and the wine into blood, then the dogs and mice may
eat, with reverence be it spoken, the most glorious body of the Son of God; and
poison may be mingled with the most precious blood of Christ; as we read one of
the Emperors was poisoned in receiving the Sacrament; but it is most absurd to
say, that the blood of Christ should poison any man.

body of Christ does sit in heaven, and does lie under the accidents of the
bread; then either he took no true body of the blessed virgin; or now, after
his afcention he has put away all truth of a natural body; for a true natural
body cannot subsist without its quantity and quality: Casman. in his Chiolog.
part. 2. page 13. Scalliger in Cardan. Every true body must be in a place. Aug.
ad Dard. Epist. 57.
and every quantity must be measured and bounded by place alone; quia numerica
unitas corporis finiti non potest subsistere sine continuitate; as Julius
Scaliger says, and therefore, if you take away locallity from a body, you must
take away quantity, and trinarum dimensionum terminos, and the bounds of the
threefold dimensions, longitude, latitude and profundity; and so you make a
body to be no body, and take away the finiteness and definition of a body,
says the same Scaliger; and so S. Augustine says, toll spatia locorum
corporibus nusquam erunt, and quia nusquam erunt, non erunt; If you take away
the spaces of places from bodies; they can be no where; and what is no where is
not at all: and therefore, by this rule, which is most certain, the opinion of
Aquinas and Lombard, who do affirm that the very body of Christ is there in the
bread, sed non ut in loco, non qualitative, aut quantitative; but not as in a
place, not with quality or quantity, is utterly false, and overthrown; for
that, as I said before, every true body must have quantity, and every quantity
must have place.

But to this Bellarmine answers, Bellar. de cuchar. l. 3. c. 4. page 297.
that it follows not, that a true natural quantative body cannot be in two
places at once; quia ad esse circumscriptive in loce nihil requiritur, nisi ut
locatum sit commensur atum suo loco, and non ut non sit alibi, in alio loco;
because to the being circumscriptive in a place, there is no more required, but
that the thing placed should be fitted and measured according to his place, and
not that it should not be elsewhere, in another place; and therefore the acute
Cardinal, Bellarmine, and all the whole School of Jesuits, say, that the body
of Christ though it be commeasured, bounded and fitted to the place, wherein it
is placed, yet may the same body be elsewhere in another place: And to confirm
this, that may be alleged, which Tursellian says, Credat Judaeus appella non
ego.
that one Xavier was seen at the self same time in two several places, both in
a ship, and in a boat, far distant from that ship; and Bellarmine relates the
like story of S. Anthony of Padua, as, that he was seen preaching in a Town of
Italy, and at the same time, he was seen in another place.

For Tursellian's instance, Plautus Amph. Thom. in ma. l. 1. d. 32. q. 1. r. 1.
of the locall^y of Angels.
I say, not only with Plautus, tune id dicere audes, verbere, quod nemo unquam
hemo vidit, nec potest fieri, tempore uno homo idem duobus ut locis simul sit;
But I will also say with Aquinas, that by the same reason, that he might be in
2 places, he might be in a thousand places at once: and therefore if Xavier was
in one place, it must needs be the Devil that was in the other place (by such
impossible things, and improbable fictions,) to delude the credulous people;
and to Bellarmines reasoning; I answer, The absurdities of Bellarmine's reason.
that the absurdities of his reasons do quite overthrow the possibility of his
Doctrine; because that, for the same body to be circumscribed in one place, and
yet to be at the same time in a 1000 places; and for one place to fit, bounden,
and commensurate a body, the which very body, notwithstanding is in 10 thousand
several and far distant places at the same time; it overthrows and nullifyeth
not only the humanity of our savior Christ, but also the order of things, and
the very principles of nature, and it exceeds the bounds of all sense and
reason.

reply against this, and say, that we must not conceive of divine things by the
rule of humane reason, when as so, we should never believe the world to be made
of nothing, or that a virgin should bear a son; for subtle Philosophy does many
times pervert pure divinity, and Aristotle seduced many a Doctor, and caused
Aetius to become Arius, Socrat. l. 2. c. 28.
says Socrates; and that may be true according to the rules and Principles of
Philosophy, which cannot be true in Divinity, which made Paul bid us, beware
least any man spoil us through philosophy, Colos. 2.8. and therefore we must
seek to attain to the knowledge of those things, not by the reach of reason, but
by the rule of faith, which Philo calls fidem oculatam, so well sighted,
that, as the eagles eye, being aloft in the clouds, can notwithstanding epsy,
sub frutice leporem, and sub fluctibus piscem, under the shrubs a hare, and
under the waves a fish; so quick-sighted faith, here on earth, can,
notwithstanding sore up into the deep things of God in heaven, and can most
perfectly see those things, and believe those mysteries, which humane sense and
reason can no ways perceive, nor possibly reach unto them.

We believe not these things, not because we know not how they can be done; but
because we do know they cannot be done.
I answer with S. August. that we easily yield, and do undoubtedly believe,
Deum posse multa, qua nos intelligere non possumus, that God can do many things
which we can not understand; as to create things of nothing, to make the sun to
stand still, to cause the fire not to burn, and the water not to drown, to
assume our nature into the unity of his person, to be born of a virgin, to
raise up himself from the grave, to ascend to heaven, and many other such
things we believe by faith, though we cannot search and find out the reasons
thereof, especially in all the books of nature; but we cannot yield, nor
believe that those things may or can be done, which we understand and know, and
can bring many Reasons to prove, that they cannot be done; as for the same
thing to be and not to be; when as all the Schools do affirm, Deum
contradictoria efficere non posse; God cannot do contradictories, as, he cannot
lie, because he is truth: and he cannot die, because he is always, and
eternally life; and therefore, though we grant, he can make creatures of
nothing, and reduce all creatures into nothing, and change the nature of any
one thing into another thing, as Lots wife into a pillar of salt, of these
stones to raise up children unto Abraham, to turn Moses rod into a serpent, and
water into wine; and, Ovid. in his Metamorphosts.
if he pleased to Metamorphose all those transformations that Ovid writes of;
yet, that he can make any one thing, to be two distinct things at once, and
still to remain one, as to make Moses rod, to be both a rod and a serpent at
once, and to be still a rod, and yet a serpent; the same one numerical thing,
to be bread and flesh, wine and water, ston^s and the children of Abraham, at
the self same time, we utterly deny, and can no ways grant it; because such
things are mere contradictions, and do overthrow the truth of God,

And therefore, that Christ should sit in heaven, and be the bread that we eat
in the Sacrament here on earth, that he should be visibly there, and invisibly
here, and that he should be one and many, continued and discontinued, entire in
one place, and at the self same time entire in 10 thousand places, and such
like, we cannot believe; because these things are not only contrary to all
reason, but do also exceed all faith: and therefore in all sayings of the holy
Scripture, that do seem to contrary one another, we must find out such
expositions of either place, as, that neither of them do overthrow the truth of
the other, nor yet be contrary to the analogy of the faith.

And this shows, that the Church of Rome, adoring the consecrated bread in
the Eucharist with divine worship, commits palpable idolatry; like unto
Babylon, by giving the true worship of God to that which is no God: and so,

2. They give the same divine worship of the true God unto the Saints and
Angels, 2. To the saints and Angels.
that are no God; for though that by their Doctrine and distinction, (...), and
(...) and (...), they would clear themselves from this idolatry; yet, if they
will erect temples, observe days, and make prayers for the honor of the Saints
and Angels, thereby to be helped and relieved by them, all the streams of
Tiber can never wash away their Tdolatry; because, as Prosper says, the
dedication of Temples and Altars, and Prayers, and the like, are proper and
peculiar parts of Gods divine worship.

2. 2. In worshipping the true God with false worship.
As the Roman Church gives the true worship of God to those things that are
not God; so, by their superstitions and many foolish inventions of their
will worship, they worship the true God with false worship, such as he neither
commands, nor is pleased with them, and which, to ease my Reader, I must pass
over.

2. The Sins of Babylon against man, were especially of 2 sorts; 1.
Covetousness, from whence proceeded their fraud and deceit, which the Prophet
sets down, c. 51. v. 13. 2. Cruelty, which diminished and destroyed the
children of God, and caused them to be scattered like sheep, and to be driven
away: and so truly the iniquity of the Church of Rome is every way equal, if
not exceeding the iniquity of Babylon, and resembles the same, as in many other
things, so especially,
in respect 1. Of their Confusion, and division among themselves. For, Rome
resembling Babylon in three Respects. 1. Their Division.
1. Of their Covetousness and collusion against all. For, 3. Of their Injuries,
and oppression of the best men. For,


1. Though they brag much of their unity, and say, this is a special Argument
to prove them to be the true Church of Christ, which is a vision of peace, and
like unto Jerusalem, that was a city in unity within it self, according as it
was before prophesied of it, that God should keep the sheep, and servants of
Christ secretly, within his Tabernacle, from the provoking of all men, and from
the strife of tongues; when as yet every unity, or rather confederacy, is not
the Character, and true note of Caristianity; Psalm. 2.2.
for the Kings of the earth stood up, and Principes convenerunt in unum; and
the Rulers took counsel tegether against the Lord, and against his anointed;
and all cried, crucisie him, Mat. 27.22. Exodus 32.1. Act. 19.34.
crucify him; and all agreed to make the golden calf, and all the whole
multitude said, great is Diana of the Ephesians: and all covenanted and
conspired against -- And no marvel; for if Satan should be divided against
Satan, his Kingdom could not stand; and therefore we say with S. Augustine,
that, sicut est Dei una Ecclesia, sic est Diaboli ^na Babylon; as God has one
Church, so the Devil has one Babylon.

Yet, if we look into the Church of Rome, we shall find, that, howsoever, in
things that may concern the preservation of their hierarchy, they hold
together; yet, in many other things there is such oppositions, contentions, and
consusions amongst them, as will plainly show them to be a Babylon; and that,
as the Poet says in another case, so we may say, of them; Scinditur incertus
studia in contraria clerus. For we find their Councills, Popes, and Orders,
crossing, thwarting, and contradicting each other, as,

1. 1. The contradictions of the Councils.
The First Council of Nice allowed the communion under both kinds, unto the
people; But the Council of Constance, and the Council of Basil, and that
Council of Trent have forbidden to give the cup unto the Laity. So the third
Council of Carthage accursed him that would call himself universal Bishop; but
the Council of Trent curses all them, that will not acknowledge the Bishop of
Rome to be so. And the great ecumenical Council of Constantinople condemned
all Images, from the divine Worship; but the second Council of Nice allowed
them, and then again the Council of Frankfort accurseth that Nicene Council,
and accounts it flat idolatry to worship them, or God by them.

2. 2. The contradictions of the Popes.
Their Popes do follow the same steps; for Stephan the 6. abrogated all his
Predecessors Decrees; but Formosus took up his body, after his burial, for it,
and cut off two of his fingers, and then buried his body again; and the next
succeeding Popes Theodorus the 2. Ex Polychron.
Romanus, and John the 10. confirmed all the Acts of Formosus; but Sergius
disannulled them all again, and took up Formosus his body, and threw the same
into Tiber.

3. 3. The contradictions of their Orders.
The Oppositions among their Orders is never a whit less, than betwixt their
Popes; for, the difference betwixt the Dominicans and the Franciscans, about
the conception of the blessed Virgin Mary, (the Dominicans holding, that she
was conceived in original sin, and the Franciscans denying the same) was so
great, and their fury was so hot, Anno 1476.
against each other, that Pope Xistus the 4. joining with the Franciscans,
burned 4 of the Dominicans for defending that truth.

Neither are their Schools free from this fault; for the Scotists, Ochamists,
and Thomists could never be reconciled, Erasmus, in loc. contr. Laton. Alphoas.
l. 1. c. 6. Genchrard. in Chron.
until the Thomists got the conquest; and at this day, the Seculars and the
Jesuits can never agree; nor the Jesuits, that are indeed the better learned,
accord well among themselves; for Alphonsus de Castro, and his Adherents do
hold the Council above the Pope, but Card. Bellarm. and all his Scholars do
hold the contrary; and it is observed by Genebrard, that there were 20 several
Sects and Schisms amongst the Romanists at the same time; and others have
collected 80 several different Opinions amongst them, about that one only point
of the Eucharist.

And I could yet further enlarge this point, how they do not all agree in the
Doctrine of our Justification, nor in many other points beside; nor indeed any
one of them long with himself; quia oportet mendacem esse memorem, because the
teacher of errors and false Doctrine had need to have a good memory, and ea
falsitatis atque erroris est natura, ut nemine repugnante, a seipsa tandem
juguletur, and that is the nature of Error and falsehood, that a length it will
overthrow it self, though there were no man to speak against it; and therefore
we find Bellarmine himself confuting and contradicting himself in many places,
as our learned Bishop Morton has most excellently observed; but I stood too
long on this point already.

2. 2. The collusion of the Roman Church.
There Collusion is, and especially in former times, was such, that they did
not only deceive one another, but almost all the world besides, Presbyter
amplectens faeminam, presumitur benedicendi causa fecisse: and old Lyra says,
fit aliquando in Ecclesia dei maxima deceptio, in fictis miraculis, a
sacerdotibus, the greatest decepts and cosenage shall happen sometimes in the
Church of God by the false and feigned miracles, that shall be done by the
Priests; and so indeed, as our Presbyters do now, so their Priests and Jesuits,
by their feigned sanctity, false miracles, and subtle insinuations into the
hearts and bosoms of the vulgar people, seduxerunt gentes, have seduced them,
and made them drunk with the wine of their abominations and abominable
flatteries.

3. 3. The oppression of the Romanists.
For their oppression, vexation, and cruelty toward the servants of God, it
exceeded all humanity; and the Chaldean Babylon must not compare with them
herein; for they did not only vex the children of God, and lay heavy yokes upon
their necks, which was all that Babylon did unto the Israelites, but they did
also persecute the best Protestants with sword, fire and faggot, burning them,
as they did John Hus and Hierom of Prague, and take their bones out of their
Graves; if they cannot lay hands on them alive, as they did the bones of Bucer
and Phagius, in the time of Queen Mary. Scaeva sic in manes manibus arma
dabant; And so they warred: Amos 2.1.
And as the King of Moab burned the bones of the King of Edom, so they raged
against the very Ghosts of the Saints.

And therefore, if we had nothing else to say against them but this, their
cruelty against the Saints and Servants of Christ, yet this alone is a
sufficient argument to prove their City and Church a Babylon, and themselves
rather Citizens of Babylon, than Members of the Church of Christ; for as he
that was born after the flesh, Galat. 4.29.
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now, says the
Apostle: The Church of Christ does never persecute, but does always suffer
Persecution; for Christian Religion is to be maintained, enlarged and defended,
non occidendo sed monendo, non saevitia, sed patientia, not by killing, but by
monishing, not by cruelty, but by patience; nam si sanguine and tormentis
religionem defendere velis, jam non defendetur, Lact. l. 1. c. 19. Religion not
to be planted by the sword.
sed polluetur, says Lactantius: For if thou would defend Religion with
shedding of blood and inflicting torments, it is not defended, but polluted;
and thou do defile it and spoil it, in seeking to maintain it.

And this is plainly seen by the example of Christ himself, who neither
instituted his Kingdom by any foreible means, nor would have himfelf defended
by any outward power of the sword, but bids S. Peter to put up his sword
into his sheath; Matthew. 26.52.
and he shows the reason of it unto the Governor, because his Kingdom is not
of this world, nor like unto the Kingdoms of this world; for they are enlarged
and defended by force of Arms and by the sword; Romans 10.14.
but the Kingdom of Christ is increased and continued by the reading and the
preaching of the word; and Faith comes ex auditu, non ex metu, by hearing, not
by threatening, ex dono Dei, non ex imperio hominum; from the Gift of God, and
not by the Command of any man.

And therefore S. Bernard says, that suadenda fides, non cogenda; Faith is to
be persuaded and not compelled: And S. Paul says, 2 Cor. 10.4. Damasc. 3.
sent. c. 32.
that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but spiritual: And Damascene
says, that the Gospel was preached throughout all the world without weapon,
armor or Battle, by a few naked, poor, afflicted men; and if men believed,
they saved their souls; if not, the Apostles were to take none other revenge,
but to shake off the dust of their feet to be a witness against them, that
refused their Doctrine.

Romanists against this, do answer for themselves and say, that our Savior
bids his Servants to go to the high ways, and compel the people to come into
his Wedding, that his House might be full. Luke 14.23.


compel, does not always imply a forcible compulsion, but a continual
persuasion, and an undeniable entreaty and importunity; until our request be
granted; for so the two Disciples going to Emmans, Luke 24.29.
are said to have compelled or constrained Jesus to stay with them, that is, by
their importunity, and not by any forcible way: And so we are to compel all
men, by entreating them with continual importunity, to believe in Christ, and
by him to be reconciled unto God, and by captivating their understanding to the
obedience of Christ, which is the best compulsion in the world.

2. I say, that we are in some sense to compel them, that is, quoad media, to
the nieanes of Faith, though not to the Faith it self; to come into the House,
but not to eat; to come into the Church, but not to believe; because this men
may do, but the other God alone must do: And therefore we say with S. Aug.
against the Donatists, that in this sense, Kings within their Kingdoms, and
every man within his House, is to compel and to cause his Children and Servants
and all that are under his Jurisdiction, to come into the Church, to hear the
Word of God, and to make every one to perform the outward service of God, at
least in show, so far as man can judge; for so the Commandment is, that thou
shall keep holy the Sabbath Day, and shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy
Son and thy Daughter, thy Manservant and thy Maidservant, Exodus 20.
and the Stranger that is within thy Gate.

But the Church of Rome would compel us to believe what they believe, and to
profess, that we believe whatsoever their Church professes; and this their
compulsion is with no light hand, as appears by their Inquisition, and the
French Massacre: And yet they will answer, that they compel no man to believe,
but only punish those that do err and revolt from their Belief.

I confess, that some of the Learned do affirm, haereses spirituali gladio
jugulatas esse, that Heresies and apostasies are to be punished only with the
spiritual sword, and not with the temporal sword of the Civil Magistrate;
because our Savior said unto his Disciples, John 6.66, 67.
after he saw many departing from him, nunquid and vos vultis abire? and will
you go away likewise? As if he said, I hold you not, use your own judgment, and
he that will depart, let him depart, he may go for me. And therefore St. Paul
does but excommunicate and deliver such men unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5.3, 5.
that they might learn not to blaspheme; to show unto us, that there should be
no bloodshed nor temporal punishment for the Faith, in the Church of Christ:

But for the better clearing of this point, A twosold consideration to be had
about the suppression and punishing of Schismatics Heretics and Apostata's.
1. Of the time 1. When the Members and true Professors are but few. Mat. 13.30.
of compelling men to Christianity and to believe, I say, that great wisdom and
discretion is to be adhibited in this case of men's consciences, and that a
double consideration is to be had herein. 1. Of the Time, when these Offenders
do appear in the Church. 2. Of the Persons, who they be that do thus offend.
For,


1. There is a time, when such Offenders, Heretics or Apostata's should be
spared, and there is a time, when they should be punished and not spared: For,

1. In the Infancy of the Church, that is of any Church, when the true orthodox
Christians are but few, and it may be fewer than the Herericks and Apostata's,
it is not the safest way to be too severe and rigid against these men; but in a
Christian policy, rather to give some scope to these men's Consciences, and so
to suffer the Tares to grow with the wheat, as our Savior speaks;

1. Because they are not able, being few, or fewer, to struggle against many.
And I know no reason why the Roman Catholics should not be tolerated as well
and as soon as Anabaptists and other worser Schismatics. That these times do
require some toleration of Religion. 2. When the true Professors are many.


2. Because their unseasonable severity and rigidness toward these Offenders
might be a means to raise other enemies against them, whereby more wheat
should perish, than Tares should be destroyed; and perhaps hinder those that
are in aequilibrio, and as yet unsettled, to embrace the Truth and that
Profession wherein they see, so little mediocrity and so much severity used.
And truly, in these very times, wherein the true Professors are so few, and the
Sectaries so many, I suppose this gentleness, moderation and some scope of
Christian Liberty ought to be given, until, by the goodness of God, and a
painful preaching of the truth, we shall reduce them to the full and perfect
embracing thereof. But,

2. When any Church is established, the Magistrates settled, and the true
Professors many and plentiful; then all such offenders are to be corrected, and
not permitted to corrupt others, and to seduce the weaker sort of the true
Professors; or otherwise the Christian and civil Magistrate cannot be free from
sin, if he suffer such offenders to go free from punishment; for if he punish
Theevery, and spare Idolatry, the Rebels and Runagadoes from him, and not the
Revolters from Christ, how shall he answer this to God?

And therefore King Asa gathered both Judah and Benjamin and all the strangers
from Ephraim, 2 Chronicles. 15.8, 13.
Manasses and Symeon, and did enact with them, that whosoever would not turn
from his Idols and his Idolatrous ways, to seek the Lord God, should be slain:
Exodus 32.^7.
And Moses caused them to be put unto the sword that had worshipped the Golden
Calf: And Jehu did put all those Priests unto the sword, that had forsaken the
Lord to worship Baal: 2 Reg. 10.25.
And so should every Christian Magistrate do the like, when he sees the time
serves that he may and can do it: For, -- immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum, ne pars syncer a trahatur;
The Rule of nature tells us, that the scab'd sheep must be separated from the
Flock, lest she infect the sound ones; and so must Heretics and Schismatics
from the flock of Christ: but a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, and one
lewd fellow may spoil many, and one subtle Heretic or Schismatic may seduce
many of the simple people; and therefore, I would they were cut off from you,
that trouble you, says the Apostle.

II. As a wise consideration must be had, of the time, when and how this
rooting out of the weeds may be done, 2. Of the persons.
so the like consideration must be had of the Persons that do offend and are
themselves led out of the way. For,

1. Some are private, 1. Tacit Offenders.
quiet and peaceable men, that tacitly keep their errors and misbeliefs unto
themselves, and so do no great hurt, but only unto themselves. And,

2. Some are more active and do corrupt others, and speak of wicked blasphemy,
2. Active Offenders.
as the Psalmist speaks; and to the first, we should be more indulgent; but
on the Second, we should inflict the severer punishment.

3. Some do err and revolt of infirmity, 3. Offenders through infirmity.
for fear of imprisonment or loss of their means and livelihood; as St. Peter
denied his Master, for fear of what the High Priests might do unto him; and
many honest men now do many things that otherwise they would not do, for fear
of the present Power; and should these be presently punished or cut off for
their slips and slidings? God forbid: I remember Epiphanius writes, that in
the reign of Dioclesian and Maxim. which was a time of great persecution,
diverse Christians were imprisoned, of whom some were martyred, some revolted,
and some were still detained in durance; and these that still were imprisoned,
disputed amongst themselves, whether those that had revolted, through the
violence of the Persecution, should be received into the Church again, or not,
when God eased them of that Persecution; and Peter Bishop of Alexandria,
misericordia motus, moved with pity (says Epiphanius) said, he would refuse
none immediately upon the confession of their repentance; but Meletius Bishop of
Thebais, said, Epiphan. l. 2. to. 2. p. 321.
he would receive none, except that by a long Trial and a manifest proof of
their amendment, they showed the fruits of their true repentance: Where, you
see, they dispute of the receiving of them that fall through fear, but not of
their sudden cutting off from all favor; because of their amendment there is
so great hope, and Peter in my judgment had the better end of the staff, for
those that fell through Infirmity and fear. But,

4. There be some that revolt and start aside for novelty and of wantonness, 4.
Offenders through malice, obstinacy and wantonness.
and it may be of malice, and are obstinate in their errors; and herein
Meletius was in the right, that they should not be so easily pardoned nor so
gently dealt withal, that thus err, relapse and forsake the true Service of
their God: For if we punish a woman that through wantonness, adulterates and
breaks faith with her Husband, shall we not severely punish them that do thus
start aside from God? Yes surely, such men must be severely censured and
punished, and not pardoned, until, as Meletius says, they do fully show the
fruits of their repentance.

And so you see this point, how far we may compel men to the Faith, discussed;
and how the Weapons of Gods Church are spiritual; and that the City of God does
never exercise any cruelty upon any one, nor any temporal punishment for
spiritual points, save only in some particular cases of mere necessity and of
great moment, as I showed before, and that also on those that were her
children, and not on strangers, that never were within the Pale of the Church.

But the Church of Rome compels all men to submit to her, The outward civil
and teniporal persecution of the Roman Church.
more with the outward sword of the Magistrate, than with Aarons Rod and the
spiritual censure of the Word of God; and that likewise without any respect of
Persons, and without all show of Clemency, as witnesses their cruelties
against the poor Indians, their Massacres in France, their Inquisition in
Spain, and those unmerciful persecutions here, in Ingland, in the days of
Queen Mary, and their new-devised plot of the Gunpowder Treason.

And therefore, though we had none other Argument, yet this their usual cruelty
against their Brethren and good Christians, might serve for a sufficient
testimony to prove the Church of Rome to be none of the best Saints of God, but
the Citizens of Babylon: For it is an infallible truth, that Heresy, apostasy
and cruelty are ever joined and combined together; and whereas mercy and
clemency do compass about the true Servants of Christ, severity and cruelty do
fill the hearts of the Heretics, Schismatics and Apostata's.

And so we read that the cruelty of the Arians against the orthodox, was more
than barbarous; The usual cruclties of heretics and apostata's
nam damnis gravissimis efficiebant Ecclesiam, armati diversis telis, they
infested and afflicted the Church with most grievous damages, being armed with
several weapons, says Eusebius: And Novatus exceeded all the rest; for he
would neither give bread unto his Father, when he was ready to be starved, nor
burial unto his Corpse, when he was dead; but to show the height of his impiety
and cruelty, he spurned his own Wife out of doors, when she was great with
child, and so killed his own child in her belly: And Possidonius relates the
like cruelties in the Circumcelliones, Socrat. l. 2. c. 21 and 30. Cypr. l. 2.
epist. 8. Chrysostom. operis impert. ho. 19.
which were a most savage Sect in the time of S. Augustine, and therefore could
not be any good Members of the Church of Christ; nam quem videris sanguine
gandentem, Lupus est, says S. Chrysostom: For whomsoever thou see rejoicing
and taking his delight in blood, is a Wolf, and no sheep; quia caedi,
Christianorum proprium est, caedere autem Christianos, Pilati and Caiphae
officia sunt: because it is proper and a common thing, for Christians to be
beaten: but to beat Christians, is the property and the office of Pilate and
Caiphas, says Athanasius, ad solitariam vitam agentes.

And yet, touching the Church of Rome, lest that in seeking to reform your
judgment, I should wrong your Charity, you must distinguish betwixt the Church
of God in Rome, and the Church of Rome: For as Satan has his Synagogue in the
midst of Gods Church, so God has his Church and his Elect in medio inimicorum,
in the midst of their enemies, as a righteous Lot among the wicked Sodomites,
Israel in Egypt, and Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego in Nebuchadnezzars
Court, and many Thousands in Israel, that bowed not their knees to Baal, when
notwithstanding the rest of the Israelites ran a whoring after their own
inventions: So we assure our selves, there may be, and there are, many
thousands in Rome and of the Romish Church, that retaining the Foundation of
their Faith, according to their knowledge, do adhere to the Roman Church, as
many did in Israel follow Absolon, with a simple heart and good meaning: 2 Chronicles. 15.17.
And so as the Lord said of King Asa, that, although he had not taken away the
High Places out of Israel, yet his heart was perfect all his days: It may be,
that although they cannot, through their Ignorance, or dare not, through Fear,
or be not able, through their mean estate and poor condition, excutere
phaleras, and to cast off the Romish Garments, as blind Bartymaeus did his
Cloak, yet may their hearts be sound and perfect toward Christ and his Church:
and to reject these from the Communion of Saints, were no better than a proud
cruelty, or at least, a defect of Christian Charity.

And therefore we adhere to these in love and pity, and deem them as our
Brethren in Christ Jesus: But for the rest, that are the wilful and obstinate
Abettors of the Romish Idolatry and impiety, we will not only follow the
counsel of our Lord and Master, and of his blessed Prophets and Apostles, to
get out of this Babylon, and to separate our selves from amongst them, and to
have nothing to do with their stool of wickedness; Jer. 50.14.
but we will also do as our God commands us by his Prophet Jeremy, lay siege
against it and spare no arrows, because she has sinned against tho Lord.

And thus I have showed unto you, that (...), respectively, yea, and in many
respects, that Rome and the Church of Rome, is a Babylon, a City of Confusion,
and the Popish Hierarchy full of many iniquities and impieties: And I have been
the more large and ample in this Point, to let the world see, how falsely and
unjustly the Presbyterians, Puritans and their Adherents, have and do throw
their scandalous imputations and aspersions upon my self, and the rest of our
Reverend Bishops, for being Papists, and Popish, and Popishly affected, when as
indeed all wise men know, that none propagated and defended the Gospel of
Christ and the true Protestant Religion, and impugned the Romish Babylon, and
showed, confuted, and here with us, Bishop Bilson. Bishop Baclow. Bish.
Montagu. Bish. Abbats.
suppressed the Superstitions, Heresies and Idolatries of the Church of Rome,
better and more learnedly, than Bishop Jewel, Bishop Babington, Bishop Horn,
Bishop Andrews, Bishop Downam, Bishop Usher, Bishop Prideaux, Bishop Hall,
Bishop Morton, Bishop White, Bishop Laud, and the rest of our Reverend
Bishops: And on the other side, the Presbyterians and Puritans, that hated and
opposed our Bishops, though they railed against the Pope and Popery, and
stuffed their Sermons with Invectives against them, yet, through their
Ignorance, for want of Learning, have insensibly against their own wills,
dispersed and taught many Popish points, and the flat Errors of the Romish
Church unto their Auditors, who, as the blind do swallow many a fly, so do
their simple Proselites suck those poisonous Tenets, which are thus insensibly
by their ignorant Teachers infused into them.

But to return, you see Rome and the Church of Rome is a mystical Babylon: And
yet, 2. The City of Rome not to be understood, to be the Seat of the Antichrist
and the Babylon spoken of in Rev. c. 17. 1 Pet. 5.3.


2. As the Chaldean City of Babylon cannot be said to be the Babylon that is
spoken of in Revel. 17. and the proper peculiar Seat of the Antichrist; so no
more can the Italian City of Rome be said to be the same: And though that after
the eclipsing of that great Assyrian Babylon, first by Cyrus the Persian, then
by Alexander the Grecian, that was here poisoned by Thessalus, with poison in
a horse hoof, and after that exhausted and almost unpeopled by Seleucus; Rome
was for the splendour, strength and dominion thereof, termed Babylon, and for
her Pride, Idolatry and confusion in the service of her Idol Gods, is so styled
by S. Peter; and is acknowledged by the Fathers afore-cited, and by most of the
Learned Jesuits, that confess the Assyrian Babylon to be the Type and figure of
the Italian Rome, and to be so understood by the Apostle in that place. Yet I
say; it cannot be meant by any place of Scripture, to be the Seat and Throne of
the great Antichrist, and the Babylon spoken of in Rev. 17. For though Martial
says, Terrarum Dea, gentiumque Roma
Cui par est nihil, and nihil secundum:
And Though Rome be sometimes signified by this name of Babylon, as I said
before, and is therefore interpreted, by all those that would have the Pope to
be the Antichrist, to be that great City, and that great Babylon spoken of in
Rev. 17. And Ovid says imperii Roma deumque locus l. 1. trist. eleg. 4.
Athenaeus l. 1. Tacitus Annal, lib. 4.
and elsewhere in that Book: And I confess, it is often called (...), that
great City; yet not simply, in respect of the quantity or circuit thereof, when
we read of many Cities that were bigger than it; but in respect of the Power
and Authority, that her Consuls and Emperors had over all other Cities and
Dominions, in which sense, she is said by Athenaeus, to be (...) and (...), an
Heavenly City: and by Julius frontinus, she is said to be Domina and Regina
orbis terrarum, the Lady and Queen of the world, which made the Smyrnenses to
erect a Temple, and dedicate the same to the City of Rome, as to a Goddess: Yet
I say, this is not that great City, nor that Babylon which is to be understood
in Rev. 17. and is to be the Seat of the great Antichrist, 3. The City of
Constantinople cannot be the Seat of the Antichrist.
that must have a greater room than the great City of Rome. And,

3. As neither Babylon in Assyria, nor the mystical Babylon of Rome, can be
said to be that Babylon, the Seat of the Antichrist, so no more can the City of
Constantinople, which is known to be called New Rome, be understood to be his
Throne, and the Babylon there spoken of: For though Constantine, the Founder of
this City, Bish. Montagu in his apello Caesar^m. Constantinus apud Thraces qua
Bosphorus aequor thracius ^^xinus.
granted unto it, in both slates of Church and Commonwealth, (...), every way
equalized Privileges with the Old Rome, as having Senators, and one of the
yearly Consuls, and being the Imperial City, and seared upon seven Hills, as
well as Old Rome, and is therefore called by Nicetus, (...), and by Paulus
Diaconus, urbs septicollis, the City of seven hills, and being likewise in a
fore-land, or Land-straight, where two seas meet, Aegaeumingurgacat undis,
constituit sedem Imperii, latiumque relinquit Christo.

Bizantium oppidum maritimum inter Pontum Euxinum and propontidem orientalibus
Thraciae. finibus situm est.

4. No one City of the world is to be understood by this Babylon.

What place is meant by this Babylon. Eccles. 9.14. Luke 12.32.


and therefore the only seat in the world for an Imperial City, far more
convenient than old Rome; yet I say, she cannot be understood to be the
peculiar place or City, that the Apostle here means by that Babylon, where
the great Antichrist must locally reside and set up his domineering Throne and
Court therein.

4. As none of these aforesaid great Cities can be understood by that Babylon,
which is to be the Seat and Residence of the Antichrist, so no more indeed can
any one City of the world, how great and how powerful soever she were, be
properly and literally said to be the Throne or residing place of the
Antichrist, or the Babylon, that is meant in Rev. 17. and some other Places of
the Holy Scripture, from which we are commanded to go out, lest we should be
partakers of her Plagues: For they do nimium haerere cortici, too much adhere
and stick to the Letter and outward bark of the Text, that do so expound it:
Whereas the meaning of the Holy Ghost is more mystical and spiritually to be
understood, for the great and spacious confused City of this world; that as the
Church of Christ is Civitas Dei, the City of God, whereof S. Aug. wrote 22
Books, which he styled, de Civitate Dei; and is typified and signified in many
places of the holy Scripture, by Jerusalem, the City of peace, that is at
unity within it self; and by that little City, that has but few men within it,
when as our Savior says, his flock is but (...), a little flock, which a
little City would well contain; so the Synagogue of Satan, Ecclesia
malignantium, the congregation of the wicked, is indeed (...), that very great
City, that sits like a Queen, to tyrannize over Gods Servants, and is no less
than the whole world, and can be no less to contain the whole Army of Satan,
when as caetus impiorum, the congregation of the ungodly, is a mighty
multitude, and therefore must have a great and a very large City to inhabit:
And because the Citizens of this world, are as the Citizens of Jerusalem were,
when Titus besieged it, at odds among themselves, and yet agreeing to rob and
slay all the good and godly men that were amongst them, until Titus for their
wickedness, had destroyed them all: And as the builders of Old Babylon were,
when God confounded their Language, of several minds and dispositions, so that
when the one called for a stone, the other brought him clay, and when he called
for Mortar, he brought him Bricks, until at last, they brought both their work
and themselves unto confusion; so are the Citizens of this great Metropolis, of
several desires and ambitions; the one hunting after wealth, the other after
honors, another filled with malice, and aims at nothing more than revenge,
and yet all of them agree to persecute the poor helpless man, to kick against
their Governors, to despise their Teachers, and to rob their Brethren, until
they do confound all things, both the Servants and Service of God, and at last,
themselves, by an utter ruin and a most fearful confusion; therefore their
city is termed Babylon.

And so I say, that neither of the three forenamed Cities, nor any other one
material City of the world, can be here in the Apostles sense, understood by
this great City of Babylon, but rather that City, whereof the Fellow, of whom
the Philosopher demanded, what Countryman he was? answered, that he was Civis
hujus mundi, The Reasons of the foresaid Exposition.
a Citizen of the great City of this world: And this I say, for these special
Reasons;

the Kings of the Earth and all Nations drunk with the wine of her Fornication,
as this City of Babylon is said to have done: For neither old Rome corrupted
all Nations with her heathenish and Idolatrous Service of her many gods, nor
new Rome has spread her Mohammedan Religion over all the parts of the earth,
nor especially the Pope defiled all the Regions of Christendom, much less then
all Nations, with his Superstitions: But the great City of this world, I may
freely speak it, without a figure, has bewitched, intoxicated and made all the
Nations of earth drunk with the sweet wine of the vanities and pleasures
thereof, none can deny it, quia totus mundus in maligno positus.

all that had ships in the Sea, that is, all the Merchants that traded to bring
commodities from one Nation to another, were not all made rich by either of the
three forenamed Cities, or by any other one City of the world whatsoever; as
the Holy Ghost says, they were all made rich by this Babylon; but all the
Merchants that had ships, and were at any time, or, in any place made rich,
were enriched by the great City of this world.

Babylon, that is here in the Revelation meant, is said to have killed the holy
Apostles and Prophets of God, and though S. Peter, and S. Revelat. c. 18. 20.
Paul are recorded to have been killed at Rome, yet neither Rome, nor
Constantinople, nor the Assyrian, nor the Egyptian Babylon, nor any other one
City of the world did ever see any, or if any, certasnly not many of those holy
Prophets, that God sent unto the Israelites, and were killed, not by any of the
foresaid Cities, but by the Jews, and in Jerusalem, and by the Citizens of this
world; that have indeed killed all the holy Apostles, and Prophets, that were
killed, and do still continue, Ribera, in Apoc. 18.20.
to kill the best servants of Jesus Christ, even as our Savior foretells us,
in the world, not in Rome, nor in Constantinople, but in the world, you shall
have tribulation, because, the world hates you, as it hated me before you; and
therefore Ribera demands rightly, quem apostolum, aut quem Prophetam
persecuta est Ecclesia Romana, seu Roma papalis, ut Sancti debeant laetare de
ejus paenis? which of all the Apostles, or of all the Prophets did the Church
of Rome, since Rome became Christian, persecute and kill, Revel. 18.24.
that the Saints should rejoce at her Punishments?

Babylon, which is there meant, was found, the blood of Prophets, and of
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth; mark this, of all that were
slain upon the earth; and tell me, how this can be refered to any one City of
the world, but only to the great City of this world? and so is literally true,
without Trope or figure; and why should we run to figures, when the sense is
true in the letter?

many other particulars, that you may find in the 17 and 18 Chapters of the
Revelation, and elsewhere in the Scriptures, ascribed to this great City of
Babylon, which, without tropes and figures, and many other shifts, can no ways
be referred or applied, either to old Rome, or new Rome, or to any other one
city whatsoever, but may properly without stretching, or any violence offered
unto the Text, be applied to the great City of this world.

And therefore by this Babylon, that is spoken of in Revel. 17. and elsewhere,
and said to be the seat of the Antichrist, I conceive, that we are to
understand, not Rome, as J.W. and all the rest that make the Pope to be the
Antichrist, (and would rather bring the Holy Ghost to mean, as they think, then
submit themselves to his meaning,) Genes. 11.9.
do interpret it; but the great city of this world, that is, in all things
agreeable to every particular thing, that is spoken of this great Babylon; for,
as that place and city was chiefly called Babylon, that is, confusion; because,
as Moses shows, God confounded the Languages of those grand rebels, that
endeavored in that City, 1 John 2.15. 1 John. 17.9.
to scale the walls of Heavens, and, as it were to desie God himself; so this
world is just like unto the same, the receptacle of all confusion and
disorders: and it is one of the three capital enemies of mankind, that we
profess in our Baptism to renounce, and that we are charged not to love, but
still to fly from the baits, and the deceipts thereof; and, John 5.19.
for which our Savior, that prayed for his enemies which crucified him,
denies his prayer, saying, I pray not for the world, because God hates all
those, that work wickedness, and S. John says, the whole world, all of it,
lies in wickedness, and will not be raised from it; and besides, God is the
God of order; and the whole world is out of order, the very babel of all
confusion; The great Antichrist shall rise in such a place, as shall be like
Babylon, when first it was called Babel. Genes. 11.79.
and confusion is the mother that brings forth the Antichrist into the
Church, and it is the nurse that fostereth, cherishes, upholdeth, and
protecteth him against Christ, and against his Church.

But though the world in General is that great city, whith is meant Revel. 17.
and elsewhere in that book, and wherein the great Antichrist will settle
himself; yet must he rise and spring in some place, City, or Kingdom of the
world, that is not as Rome, or Constantinople, a Babylon, (...), respectively,
but (...), simply, and transcendently, like as the Chaldean Babylon was, and in
all things resembling her, when first she was called Babel, the City of
Confusion; and that was, when all the Inhabitants thereof were without any
settled, just, and lawful Governors, or Government among them, but were as the
children of Israel were in the later time of the Judges, Judge. ult. and Ver.
ult.
when there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in
his own eyes; and so they did now in Babel; they understood not one another,
they obeyed not one another, but when the Master or Governor required one
thing, they did another, and when they called for bricks, they brought them
straw; and so forth.

And what Kingdom, Rome not like Babylon, when first it was called Babel.
City, or Church, is, or has been thus, like Babel, without any settled, just,
and lawful Government, or Governors, I will not determine; but I am sure Rome
has her Governors, and the Church of Rome her settled, strict, and well
observed Orders and Laws, which none dares disobey, nor do, what is right in
his own eyes, nor preach what Doctrines he please unto the people.

But in what Kingdom, City, or Commonwealth soever we see no settled, just,
and lawful Government, but the Governors, like pegs driving out one another,
and settling first one kind of Government, then another of greater power
comes, and changes that Government, then a third, then a fourth, and so
forth; and the Commonwealth stands, like a windmill, upon the top of a hill,
that must turn with every wind, and submit it self to every Government that is
most prevalent, and where you see the Church without Rulers, without order, and
without Law, but every Presbyter does what he pleases; and serves God with
what service his own fancy likes best; I believe that City, Kingdom, and
Church, does in all things parallel the first Chaldean Babel, and must be, if
any place be, the very seat of the Antichrist, and so (...) simply, most
eminently, and transcendently a Babylon, and the fittest place for the
Antichrist to reside.

And so the Antichrist, having learnt his lesson, divide and impera, i.e. by
confusion and division, and setting the Father against the Son, and the
Daughter against the Mother, the subject against his King, and the King against
the subject, the people against their Pastors, and their Pastors against the
people, and so of all the rest, he will settle and inthrone himself, in that
imperial seat of his rule and authority, where there is most confusion, and
where there is no settled, just, and lawful Government; and this is that
Babylon, thus mystically expressed by the Holy Ghost, and thus clearly
explained unto you, where the Antichrist shall rule, and reign, and rage over
Gods people, even in that place of the world, and in that street of this Great
City, where there is most division and confusion both in the Church and
Commonwealth; this confusion being his chiefest consolation, and the
furtherance of his progression, and, which, as the Poet says, -- Turbabit
faedera mundi, will soon bring the world out of order, and to be ruled as he
lists.

And now the question is demanded, Whether in any other place of all the world,
you can find more divisions and confusions, and a more unstable, unjust, and
unsettled Government, both in Church and Commonwealth, then you may find in
these Churches, and Common wealths, and formerly the Kingdoms of Ingland,
Scotland, and Ireland? for though that in this Babylon, this place, that is so
full of disorders and confusion, Where discord reigns, in realm or town, The
wicked win the chief renown. Plutarchus, in vita Niceas, page 547.
you may find many zealous and religious men, that do fear God, and mourn for
the sin of the Antichrist, and abhor all his wicked ways; yet it is demanded,
if ever there were more faction in Jerusalem, in the time of their last siege,
more Sects in Amsterdam, more malice in Rome in the time of the proscription,
or more corruption, in the time of the Pope, and more division among the
Reubenites, and confusion in great Babylon, in the land of Shinar, than may be
found, now, in this relapsed Church, and among the people of these Dominions,

And for the diversity of Sects, multiplicity of opinions, and the manifold
confusions in the Church, it is demanded, if the errors and heresies of the
Sectaries, Presbyters, Independents, and lay-Preachers are, not only published,
printed, and permitted, but also cathedrally and autoritatively, if not
maintained, yet countenanced or connived at, at the least? And if here, in the
field of Gods Church, and out of this Babylonish chair, you may not find any
error or heresy that has been formerly invented, and broached by the grand
Heretics, and confuted by the Fathers of the Church, now again, in some place
or other, and by some Sect or other, resuscitated, and refined unto the people?
and whether you may not uncontroulably choose any Religion, and be of any Sect,
either Antinomian, Anabaptist, Arian, Aerian, Brownist, Barrowist, Dipper, The
manifold divisions, corruptions and confusions that are now conceived to be in
the Churches of these Dominions.
Donatist, Cradokist, Cerinthian, Catharist, Ebyonist, Eutychian, Familist,
Gnostick, Hugonite, Hussite, Jesuit, Libertine, Lollard, Marcionist, Manichean,
Montanist, Millenary, Nestorian, Nicholaitan, Origenist, Petagian, Puritan,
Quaker, Ranter, Sadduce, Socinian, Seeker, Tritheist, Valentinian, Winterist,
or if you will, Atheist, or Adamite, or Independent: From all these, and from
all other Se^^ ^^d or new, and have liberty of Conscience to profess, and be of
what Sect you (...) so you profess to believe in Jesus Christ, (as all the very
worst heretics did, and (...)) and so you take the Oath of abjuration, and
renounce popery and (...), which are the only men, as I see, that although they
do believe in Jesus Christ, as well, if not better than any of the foresaid
Heretics, are excluded from this benefit, and excepted from this liberty of
conscience, to serve God, as seems good in every man's eyes?

And though all these Sects differ one from another, and are in confusion, The
common and joint practice of all the Sectaries.
and execrating one another; yet all of them do agree, to dissociate themselves
from the true Professors of the primitive Christianity, to tear the Apocriphal
Books out of our Bibles, to cast away the service Book, and to cashier the
Articles of our Church, and the Book of Homilies; they are no Saints, if they
do not this.

But for the resolution of the foresaid Questions, though I could say much
therein; Yet I will only refer the same to what you may read in a little
Treatise, entitled Hell broke loose, that so, as it seems, the Antichrist
might come forth, out of the bottomless pit, as S. John says he should do; and
to a book of Mr. Edwards, entitled Gangraena, which is set out at large, and
three times printed, where you may find very orderly, and methodically set
down, such a ferrago, and hodg-podg of Heresies, and such a multitude of most
horrible blasphemies, so odious, and so hideous, Mr. Alexander Ross in his
animadversions upon Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan, shows how the Leviathan
blasphemeth. 1. God. 1 Error.
that my hairs do stand, and my heart does tremble at the thought of them, and
my soul is very much afraid to name them, least thereby the Devil should entice
some wicked men, that as yet know them not, to embrace them, and likewise to
another book of Mr. Alexander Ross against Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan, which Mr.
Ross says, is like that beast in the Revelation, cap. 13. (and that is the
Antichrist) which opened his mouth into blasphemy, against God and his
Tabernacle, and against them that dwell in Heaven.

1. Against God himself, and that many ways, as specially,

1. In saying that God made the world by nature, and so by consequence, of
necessity, according to the course of nature; whereas indeed he did it
voluntarily and freely, and might have chosen whether he would have created any
thing or nothing; for he being liberrimum agens, a most free and no ways
necessitate agent, whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and in
earth, and in the Sea and in all deep places, says the Prophet.

Three Persons of the Trinity, the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, to be
rather Names, than Substances, which is contrary to our very Creeds, and the
Faith that we do profess.

only to personate God the Son, as if he were not so indeed, but takes upon him
only that Office, Place and Title: Whereas in very truth, Christ by reason of
the Hypostatical union of his Manhood to the Godhead, is rightly said to be, as
he is, the Son of God.

Manichees, to be the author of sin, and so unjust, if he punishes us for
doing that, whereof himself is the author; when as the Scriptures tell us
plainly, he hates all those that work vanity, vide Hab. 1.13 1 John 1.5.
much more them that work wickedness, and that he is of pure eyes, neither
shall any evil dwell in his sight, he being that light in whom is no darkness
at all, and that perfect order in whom is no Ataxie or disorder at all.



2. Against Gods Tabernacle, that is his Church, 2. The Tabernacle.
by laboring to overthrow her Faith, her Knowledge, her Miracles and her
Ordinances.

3. 3. The Angels and the blessed souls of the Saints.
Against them that dwell in Heaven, that is, the Angels and separated Souls of
the Saints, in making the one but Fancies and dreams, that are indeed created
substances, of a pure spiritual being; and the other mortal, and not capable of
any other happiness, than what is earthly, which is the greatest discouragement
that can be, to all Christians, 1 Cor. 15.19.
and would make them, if this were true, of all men the most miserable, and
would be the very poison of all Piety and virtue.

And besides all this, he says, that the said Hobbes in his Leviathan
affirms, that Faith is not by inspiration or infusion, but (...) and
industry; that to believe in God, is not to trust in Gods Person, (...) confess
the Doctrine of the Scripture; that our Belief is in the Church; The manifold
errors, heresies and blasphemies that Ross collecteth out of the Leviathan.
that they ^^e not Devils, but mad men, that confessed Christ in the Gospel;
that Covetousness, Ambition and Injustice, with Power, able to uphold them, are
honorable: that wicked Tyrants and good Princes are all one, and no such
difference betwixt them; that a man may sin against his Conscience, that is, do
the things, which his own Conscience tells him he should not do; that men should
not render a reason or an account of their Faith; that Kings and Princes are
not subject to their own Laws: that private men have no propriety in their own
Goods: that our natural reason is the Word of God: that divine dreams cannot
win our Belief: that it was but a wind, and not the holy Spirit of God, that
moved on the waters in the Creation: Genesis 1.2.
that the Dove which lighted on Christ in his Baptism, and the fiery Tongues
which sat upon the Apostles in the day of Pentecost, may be called Angels:
that Christ has no spiritual Kingdom here upon earth: that Christ did not cast
out Devils, Mat. 3.16. Acts 2.3.
but only cured Madness: that Satan did not enter into Judas: that we may
dissemble in matters of Religion: and that we may disobey both Christ and his
Apostles without sin.

Such, Job 41.20.
and much more like stuff and smoke, says Ross, does this Leviathan send out
of his Nostrils, as out of a boiling Cauldron: and herein contrary to all
truth, and without shame, he raked up the Opinions, and vomited forth the
Blasphemies of the old heretics, and chiefly of the Anthropomorphites,
Sabellians, Nestorians, Sadduceans, Alexander Ross in the Epistle to the
Reader, before his animadversions.
Arabeans, Taceans, or Euchratites, Manichaeans, Mahometans, and others the
like wicked Heretics: All which Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies, the said
Rosse has observed, and quoted the very Chapters where they were to be found
and seen in the said Leviathan, and has in his animadversions most religiously
and learnedly, like a good Servant of Christ, confuted the same, to whom I
refer my Reader to be more fully satisfied in every point.

And so the Reverend Bishop Hall has somewhat showed, the Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, Bishop Hall in his revelation unrevealed.
Absurdities, and Confusions, that sprang amongst us, and these Sectaries have
brought into this Church of Christ. And so likewise, no doubt, but many other
Divines have observed and confuted the Blasphemy; of these Beasts, that have
so divided the seamless Coat of Christ, and brought such a confusion into his
Church.

And letting pass the multiplicity of errors, dissentions and absurd
conclusions, that have now lately crept into these Dominions, about the
Government of the Comm^^wealth, when some would have it a Monarchy, others no
Monarchy, some desire it to be Aristocratical, others Democratical, and others
Anarchical, no Government at all: If all the foresaid errors, and all other
sorts of heresies and blasphemies be not the undeniable marks and notes, and
the Causers of the greatest confusion and division, that can be among
Christians, in the Faith and Doctrine, that they do profess; and if every
Parish Priest in order, or without order, becoming absolute, like a Pope, in
every Congregation, without any subordination to superior Governors, as the
Independent, Anabaptists, and Lay Preachers would have it, does not breed the
greatest confusion that can be, in the Discipline and Government of the Church;
I leave it to any wise man to determine it, and to judge, whether the Popes
Traditions or the Turks Alcoran, or the Jews fabulous Targum can bring more
Sects and divisions, and cause greater confusion among the people, than these
Sectaries and Heretics have scattered and produced in our Church?

Presbyterian will object against me, for making the Region of division and
confusion to be that great City of Babylon, that is spoken of in the
Revelation; and is the place and City where the Antichrist shall enthrone
himself, and say to me, as S. Bernard does in the like case, to Abaylardus,
that answered him, quod omnes Patres sic, ego autem non sic; that although all
the Fathers thought so, as S. Bernard said, yet he thought not so; and
therefore that I must with Acet^erigere mihi scalam, set up a Ladder for my
self alone to ascend and climb up to the high top of this great Mystery, the
understanding of what place is meant by this Babylon: Author Romae ruinae
finalis Anno 1666
when as most of the Expositors of this Point and Place, both old and new,
Papists and Protestants, (as you may see them produced in heaps, by the author
of Romae ruina finalis, Anno Domini, 1666. which is dedicated, inclitissimo D.
O. Protectori) do by Babylon, there spoken of, literally understand, the City
of Rome, and no other place, but Rome; and I expound it not so, grammatically
as they do, for any special place or City, but altogether mystically, for the
great City of this world, and especially, for that part of the world, where
most errors, heresies, divisions and confusions are spread and do infest both
the Church and Commonwealth: And why should I think to be believed before all
the rest? Or what revelation have I had, to understand it better than they did?
Respon.


To this I answer, 1. That the Particulars of the Person, time, place and other
adjuncts of the great Antichrist are tendered unto us every where in the
Scriptures, as Prophesies, and as Mysteries, sealed up, obscure, and not
manifested, nor to be understood, many times, by the Prophets themselves, until
they be fulfilled, and are made known by evident and plain event, which as I
said before, is the best exposition upon all Prophesies.

And therefore as Bishop Morton says in excuse of the Fathers, concerning
their erring in this very case of the Antichrist, the ignorance or mistaking of
those things, Bishop Montagu in his apello Caes. c. 5. p. 146.
which cannot possibly be understood, before the time of their accomplishment,
in the last days, can no ways be held prejudicial to the wisdom and judgment
of the Fathers of former times, nor the receding from them can be said to be a
fault or presumption in us, when we see things otherwise fulfilled than they
thought: Tilenus exeges. de Antichristo. 73. p. 21.
because as Tilenus says very well, aliud est latentem Antichristum non posse
agnoscere, aliud revelatum nolle adspicere, it is one thing not to know the
Antichrist, while he lies hid, before he comes into the world, or to know the
place or time of his coming, before he comes; for so neither the Fathers of
old, nor the Protestants of latter years, though never so learned, could
rightly and infallibly discern, either who he was, or at what time, and in what
place he should arise, until they saw him; and it is another thing, to refuse
to know him, or to take notice both of him, and of the place where he is, when
he plainly appears, and is made manifest to as many as are willing to take
notice of him.

Dr. Hackwill, in his Preface to his Book of Gods Providence.
2. I say with Dr. Hakewel, that sometimes an error, and mistaking of a point
has been conceived, and delivered by some man of note and worth, both for
learning and judgment; and then the same error has by the succeeding Scholars
been generally im^taced, and received for a truth, sine judicio, as Mr. Calvin
says, in the like case, an^ without further search, or discussion into the
nature and ground of the matter; and in such a case, we ought to accept and
follow a late and newly delivered truth, and recede from the old and ancient
error, though never so generally embraced by the former Authors, rather than to
continue in a generally received error; because, truth, whenever, and by
whomsoever discovered, is to be received, and preferred before error, how
anciently, or how generally soever it has been delivered; 3. The Antichrist
will accomplish, and fulfill all the Prophesies, and do all the things that are
foretold us should be done by the Antichrist.
and that being but an insipid speech, to say, mallem cum Socrate errare, quam
cum aliis vere sentire.

3. The Antichrist, having seen the rebellion, and apostasy of the Church, and
now growing strong by the division and confusion that is both in the Church,
and State wherein he inthroneth himself, as in the seat of his Majesty; he
begins to play his part, to act all the wickedness, and to fulfill all the
Prophesies that the spirit of God foretold his Church, should be accomplished
by the Antichrist; that so, as he tells them of the signs of his approach to
judgment, that they might know his coming to be near, so by the signs and
Marks of the Antichrist, and fulfilling of all the Prophesies, that concerned
him, the Saints, and servants of God might take notice of him, as much as
possibly they can, to avoid him.

But here I would have it observed, that, when I say, that all and every thing
prophesied in the Scripture, How and in what sense all things are done, and all
Prophesies of the Antichrist are fullfilled by the long Parliament.
of the old and new Testament, that the great Antichrist should do, are now
conceived to be done and fulfilled, in and by the prevalent faction of the long
Parliament, termed the rump Parliament, and their adherents, and the Assembly
of Presbyterians, Independants, and Lay-Preachers, and their Proselites; it is
not meant, that the rump Parliament should fulfill all and every thing
Prophesied concerning the Antichrist; or that the Presbyterians should do the
same themselves; but that all and every thing prophesied of, is now fulfilled,
and acted by some of them, or of their adherents; not that all and every one of
them fulfilled all things, but that all things were fulfilled, in and by some
of them; as, all the wickedness, that is done by an Army, is not done by every
wicked man in the Army, but one commits murder, another rape, another theft,
and so forth; so it is in the evils prophesied to be done by the Antichrist;
every one of his members commits not every evil, and fulfills every Prophecy,
but one part or member of him kills the witnesses, another blasphemeth, and
another changes the times, and so forth; and thus we find all things, and all
Prophesies, now in our days, fulfilled and acted, that were never so fulfilled
and acted before, The prophesies that concern the Antichrist are of 2 sorts.
as I have showed in this book.

And these Prophesies which are left unto us concerning this great Antichrist,
are of two special sorts: 1. Typically, delivered in the old Testament, 2. More
plainly, though mystically too, expressed in the new Testament.


1. 1. Of the old testament. 1. the prophesy of Zechary. 11.16, 17.
The most pregnant place of the old Testament, that by the Divines of the Gappe
Synod, and others, is ascribed, to foreshew the coming of the Antichrist, is
found in the 11 Chapter of the Prophecy of Zechariah, the 16 and 17 Verses,
where the Lord says, Lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, which shall
not visit those that be cut off; neither shall seek the young one, nor heal
that that is broken, nor feed that that stands; but he shall eat the flesh of
the fat, and tear their claws in pieces; woe to the idoll-shepherd that leaves
the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye; his arm
shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened: a most
considerable place to describe the great Antichrist, 4. things observable in
this Prophecy. 1. His Raiser. Verse 1. the cause, v. 3. and 5.
and his coming among the flock of Christ; and therefore I shall desire you,
for the better understanding thereof, to observe these four Particulars that I
find set down by this our Prophet;

1. His Raiser, that brings him forth, and that is the Lord God; For lo, I will
raise up a shepherd in the land, Verse 16. and the reason why he raised him is
set down Ver. 3. and 5.

2. 2. the time.
The time, when God raised him, and that is, after the breaking of the 2
staves, beauty and bands, spoken of Ver. 7.

3. 3. the titles. Ver. 15, and 17. 4. the judgment. v. 17.
The Titles, names, and epithetes that God himself bestows upon him, thereby
to show unto us, all his qualities, and his doings, Ver. 15. and 17.

4. The Judgment that shall fall upon him, both for his foolishness, and his
wickedness, Verse 17.

But, Act 8.34.
as the Eunuch said unto Philip, of whom speaks the Prophet this? so, before
we can well understand these points, we must with the Eunuch demand, whom does
the Prophet mean by this foolish and idol shepherd? Who is meant by this
foolish Shepherd.


And I answer, That by this foolish and idol Shepherd we are to understand,

1. Primarily, not any one single shepherd, but chorus pseudo-Prophetarum, the
whole company of false Prophets, that lived about the time of our Savior
Christ.

2. The whole multitude of false Teachers, that should be the false Prophet of
the great Antichrist, which toward the end of the world should appear, and
play their part, to vex the Church, and to persecute the servants of Jesus
Christ; for so all the Divines in the National Synod of Gappe, Synodo Gappen.
Artic. 31. 2 These. 2.
1604. in the 31 Article of their Confession do apply this Prophecy, and Text
of the foolish Idol shepherd, to denotate and show unto us the great
Antichrist, which S. Paul calls (...), the man of the sin, and the child of
Perdition.

And so I take the False Prophets, and wicked shepherds that were about the
time of Christ, to be the Type of the false Prophets of the Antichrist, and
those wicked Shepherds that are the Antichristian Preachers, and both to be
understood here by this foolish and idol-shepherd. And I told you,

1. That the raiser, and sender of this idol-shepherd unto his people, The
Raiser of this Shepherd.
is God himself; for, as he gives Kings, both good and bad, the good out of
his love, and the bad out of his anger against any Nation, as the Prophet
testifies of Saul, Hosea 13.11.
of whom the Lord says, I gave them a king in mine anger, that is, against the
people, that were weary of their good and mild Government under Samuel, and I
took him away in my wrath, that is, against himself, for his disobedience, 1 Samuel 15.23.
and transgressions of my Commandments; so he sends shepherds unto his flock,
and Prophets unto his people, both good and bad; the good, out of his love, and
the bad out of his anger, against his people; for, as Christ said unto Pilate,
Thou could have no power at all, John 19.11.
except it were given thee from above: So the false Prophets, and this
idol-shepherd could not rise, if the Lord had not raised them; and therefore,
-- Hi hi non sine numine divum,
Eveniunt. --


These men could not come if God made not way for them.

But would you know the reason, why the Lord raised this idol-shepherd, and
these false Prophets amongst his people; look into the 3. verse, and you shall
find it twofold;

1. The voice of the howling of the shepherds, for the spoiling of their glory;
that is, Why the Lord raises these Idol-shepherds Verse 3.
the cry of the good shepherds, and faithful Pastors of Gods Church, for
their contempt, their rejection and suppression: for, as the Apostle says,
that, because men receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie,
that they all might be damned, who believe not the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
Luke 13.34.
but have pleasure in unrighteousness: so, because the people rejected the true
shepherds, and as our Savior says, killed the Prophets, and stoned them that
were sent unto them; for Zachary was stoned with stones, by the command of King
Joas, in the Court of the House of the Lord; Micheas was thrown down by king
Joram, to break his neck, because he had rebuked him for the sins of his
Father; Amos was very often persecuted by Amasias, and his son struck him with
a club, on the temple; of his head, Dorotheus de vitis Prophetarum.
and so killed him; Isaias was sawed asunder in two parts, under King Manasses;
Jeremy was stoned by the people, at Taphnis, in the land of Egypt; Ezekiel
judged the two Tribes of Dan and Gad, in Babylon, and because he reproved them
for their wickedness, one of them slew him: Urias the son of Simei was killed
by Joachim, Jeremy 26.23.
and his carcass thrown where the common sort of people were buried; and so
the rest of Gods faithful Prophets were rejected, persecuted, and suppressed.
Therefore the just God, as a just reward of this unjust dealing with the true
shepherds, raises up the foolish, and the idol-shepherds; and, as he faith by
the Prophet Michah, if a man walk with the wind, and lie falsely, he shall be
the Prophet of this people, Ver. 13.

The 2. Reason that moved the Lord to raise up these idol-Shepherds, is said to
be the roaring of the young Lions, Micah 2. Verse 11.
which I take to be the harsh and thundering threatenings of the new-sprung,
domineering Lords, against the old faithful shepherds, to cause the people to
reject them, and to adhere unto their young Teachers; because it is said, v. 5.
Verse 5.
that their possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty, but think
they do very well herein; and they that thus sell the people, say, blessed be
the Lord, for I am rich, that is in Gods favor; and their own shepherds, that
is, their new young shepherds pity them not, but think that they are in a far
better condition, then ever they were before; Therefore the Lord says, I will
not feed you, and I will no more pity you, Ver. 6. (that is, Verse. 6.
you that are thus seduced, by your Possessors, the young roaring Lions,) and
your new Teachers, that are the Chaplains of those Lions, but, that that dies,
let it die, and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off, and let the rest
eat every one the flesh of another, Verse 9.
Verse. 9.

And yet such is the great love of God, and his pity toward his elect, that
he old shepherds, and his true Prophets, to feed the flock of the slaughter,
Ver. 4. Ver. 7. or, those that are despised, and, as it were appointed for the
Slaughter by the young roaring Lions, The two staves of the true and old
Preachers. Verse. 7.
and the foolish new shepherds.

And therefore the true Prophets and good old shepherds, do take unto them 2
staves, the one they call beauty, and the other they call hands, and they feed
the flock, that is, the poor of the flock, that are willing to be fed by them.

So you see the raiser of this foolish and idol-shepherd; and the reason why he
raises him; 2. Time when the foolish idol shephere is raised;
then,

2. For the time, when God raises him, you may observe, that it is after the
breaking of the Prophets 2 staves, beauty and bands, and

1. The staff of Beauty signifies the true Doctrine of the Church, and the
faithful exposition and teaching of the law of God; and

2. The staff of bands, is the good discipline, and the right Government of the
people, that binds them together in the unity of Faith, and perfect charity
among themselves, and hinders them to straggle, and to fall out into diverse
Sects and factions.

beauty was cut in sunder; that is, when the true exposition of the Law of
Moses, and the true Prophets, was corrupted by the false glosses of their new
Teachers, When Christ was bought and sold. Verse 12. This was fulfilled by the
long Parliament. Verse 14.
that were the Scribes, Pharisees, and Sadduces, then presently their King,
their Priest, their Prophet, and their good shepherd Jesus Christ was bought
and sold by them, for they weighed for his price 30 pieces of silver; a goodly
price that he was prized at of them; for I heard of some, that, when the staff
of beauty was broken, and the truth of Gods word corrupted by false teachers,
sold a far Meaner Man for a far greater price.

And was not our King bought and sold, and murdered, when our staff of beauty
was broken to pieces? and were not our Bishops suppressed, when our staff of
Bands was chopped asunder by the beast, and the false Prophet? Iet my Reader
judge.

But when their King, and their Good Shepherd is thus bought and sold, then
presently the other staff, When the foolish shepherd rises. Verse 15. What is
the Instrument of the foolish Shepherd. Verse 16.
even Bands, that is the Discipline and Government of the Church is cut
asunder; and when both these staves are broken, then the foolish shepherd with
his instrument is to guide and to feed the flock; for so the Lord now says
unto the Prophet, take unto thee yet the instrument of a foolish shepherd.

And what is the Instrument of a foolish shepherd, I cannot guess it to be any
other than his Pipe, wherein he takes great delight, to be always piping and
prating unto his flock, thinking that his piping is a sufficient discharge of
his whole duty; and so wholly neglects the Office of a good shepherd, which
is set down, v. 16.

And therefore, as the children that sit in the Market place, and call one to
another, Luke 7.32. The practice of the foolish and new Shepherds.
saying, we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; so we may say, that
these foolish shepherds do pipe all day unto the people, and yet the people
dance not after them; because they lead not the dance, they do nothing but
pipe, or as our Savior tells us, they say, and do not; and therefore their
piping is no better than vain jangling.

So you see the time when God raises this foolish and Idol Shepherd, when the
staff of Beauty is broken, the good shepherd is bought and sold, and the
staff of Bands cut asunder, and the Instrument of a foolish shepherd is used
in stead thereof: For Lo, then says the Lord, I will raise up a shepherd in
the Land, which shall not visit those that be cut off, etc. And so,

3. 3. The styles and titles of the new raised shepherds.
This shepherd is set forth and showed unto us by a double notion, or a twofold
name and title.

1. Of a Foolish shepherd. 2. Of an Idol shepherd.
And the name of a shepherd may be applied as well to the temporal Magistrate,
as to the spiritual Priest, for to God himself, that was and is the King of
Kings, the Prophet says, Hear O thou shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest
Joseph like a sheep, show thy self; and Christ, that is our Priest, says, I am
the good shepherd; and David says, thou leadest thy people like sheep by the
hands of Moses and Aaron, Psalm. 80.1. John 10.11. Psalm. 77.20.
so Moses and Aaron were the shepherds of these sheep; and so Homer calls
Agamemnon (...), the shepherd of the people.

But the shepherd here spoken of, is characterized by the name and notion, 1.
Foolish. Mat. 23.19, and 17.


1. Of a Foolish shepherd, as Christ styles the Scribes and Pharifees, Fools
and blind; because they perverted and abused the holy Scriptures, by their
false glosses and interpretation, and unjust application thereof; and fools
indeed, Quae major est insania qu^m pro momenta^ca delectatione perd re aeterna
gaudia, and nosmet ipsos obligare ad aete^na supplicia, Aug.
when for the love of some worldly preferment, or for fear of the loss of some
worldly honor, they leave the right way of serving Christ, to serve the
Antichrist: For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul? Or what benefit is it to be glorious for a moment, and to be
miserable for ever and ever? And therefore well may the False Prophets be
termed foolish shepherds. And,

2. This foolish shepherd is termed an Idol shepherd; and that, as I conceive,
in two respects: 1. In respect of the little or no good that he does. 2. In
respect of the great honor that he expects, and the much evil that he
effects. For,
1 Cor. 8.4. Vide Hab. 2.18. 1. The no good that they do. Psalm. 115.4.5, 6.7.
V. 16.


1. As St. Paul says, that an Idol is nothing in the world, and does no good
in the world; for as the Prophet David says, The Idols of the Heathen are but
silver and Gold, even the work of men's hands, they have mouths and speak not,
eyes have they, and see not, they have ears, and hear not, noses have they, and
smell not; they have hands, and handle not, feet have they, and walk not,
neither speak they through their throat; even so the Idol shepherd does no good
in the world, but wholly neglects his duty, as the Lord shows, v. 16. As,

1. He shall not visit those that be cut off, that is, 1. So the Presbyterians
and Independents do.
he will not labor to bring men unto Christ, but he will rather drive them
away from Christ, and rather provoke the erroneous, than recall them, rather
thrust them out of his Church, than receive them into his Congregation.

2. He shall not seek the young ones, that is, to take the little children, the
Infants, 2. So the Anabaptists do.
and to incorporate them into the Body of Christ; but he will suffer the poor
innocent Babes to perish, for ought that he will do for them; though Christ
bids us to suffer little children to come unto him, and forbid them not.

3. He shall not heal that that is broken; that is, he will not receive any
Offenders, 3. So the Presbyterians and Independants do.
that are broken through the temptation of Satan, and the frailty of their own
fiesh, to be members of his Church, and admitted to his flock; but though
Christ, that is the good shepherd, calls all those that are broken and weary
and heavy laden, to come unto him, and promises both to heal them and to ease
them, and refuses none, no, not Judas himself, while he professed himself to
belong unto him, and to do him service; yet this Idol shepherd is so coy, and
so supercilious, that he will not receive nor heal that that is broken by sin,
and broken for his sins: for he must have no trash in his net, no Chafe on his
floor, nor any Tares in the field of his Church; such a holy Saint is this Idol
shepherd. 4. So our new Preachers shake the true old protestants


4. He shall not feed that that stands still, that is, he will not confirm
them that are in the right, but rather shake them and amuse them, than
strengthen and assist them, to proceed in the true service of God: So you see
the little or no good, that the Idol shepherd does unto his flock: And yet, 2.
The great honor that they expect.


2. As the Idol requires all the honor and all the service that may be, even
the Worship that belongs to God; whereupon the Idol service is termed
Idole-latria, that is, the divine worship given unto the Idol; and whatsoever
the God of Heaven does, the Idolaters ascribe it to be done by their Idols; for
so the children of Israel, say of their Golden Calves, these be thy gods that
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and therefore as the Prophet Habakkuk
says, c. 2.19. They deck and adorn their Idols with Gold and Pearls and
Precious stones, and think nothing too much or too dear that they bestow upon
it; as it appears by those great and inestimable gifts that Croesus sent to
that Idol god of Delphos, and to the other of Amphiaraus, Herodot. lib. 1. clio.
particularized by Herodotus: Even so the Idol shepherd looks for such
respect and service to be done unto him, such honor, such Salarie and such
preferment as cannot be thought too much for his desert; and therefore the Lord
says, that he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their Claws in pieces;
that is, he shall enrich himself with the substance of the wealthy, and those
that feed him not, he will vex and exceedingly torment, because he seeks not
you, but yours, and aims not at the honor of God, but makes a god of his
belly. That this is fulfilled in the Long Parliament.


And that the Pope did this heretofore, it is fully laid to his charge by all
them that make him to be the Antichrist: Whether he does so now or no, I know
not: but I am sure, the Long Parliament did eat the flesh of the fat, and tear
their claws in pieces; for they devoured the Livings and the Lands of the
King, of the Bishops, of the Deans and Chapters, and I know not of how many
Earls, Lords, Knights and worthy Gentlemen of these Kingdoms, 4. The judgment
of the Idol shepherd. So the right eye, i.e. the understanding of divine things
shall be taken from the Antichrist, though his left eye shall be quick-sighted
enough in all worldly things.
and tore their claws, i. e. their strength and power all to pieces; I think I
may say this without question.

4. The Lord denounces the Judgment of this Foolish Idol shepherd, saying, Woe
to the Idol shepherd, that leaves the flock; and much more woe to him that thus
spoileth the flock; the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye,
his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

And so it fell out accordingly to this Idol shepherd, the Scribes and
Pharisees, and the rest of the false Prophets of the Jews; for though they
thought themselves safe, and had done all things well, when they had broken the
two staves of Beauty and Bands, and had bought and sold their King, Priest and
Prophet, and had put to death the true Bishop of their souls, Jesus Christ;
yet the just God, that is slow to anger, (and of great patience, and was
formerly forty years grieved with this generation, when their Fathers tempted
him, proved him, and saw his works; (forty years after this direful tragedy,
And so this Beast, for doing as the Jews did, kill his King and his Bishop; let
him fear the like judgment as the Jews had.
executes this very judgment upon this Idol shepherd, as Josephus ben Gorion,
and Josephus the Son of Mathathias, 1.7. de Bello Judaico, sets down the
same at large; and in his 18th. Book of Antiquit. he confesses the same to be
for their malice against their King Jesus Christ, and the killing of the holy
Apostle St. James, that was Bishop of Jerusalem.

And this much shall serve to be spoken of the foolish Idol shepherd of the
Jews, that the Lord raised in the time of Christ, and was the Type of the great
Antichrist, who in all the foresaid particulars did, or will imitate this his
Predecessor, so far as the type does agree with the thing typified.

So that I need not spend any longer time, to tell you what the Prophet shows
the great Antichrist, that is here expressed under the title of the Idol
shepherd, should do, when the Lord should raise him, and for our sins send him
amongst his flock; because you have heard many points of his lewd and foolish
pranks already, in the doings of his type, that was the Idol shepherd of the
Jews, that the Lord raised for their sins, in the time of Christ.

And you may see, The a Staves never broken in any Church till now in the
Church of Ingland.
as I said before, how this Prophecy is now, and never till now, fulfilled,
since the type in the time of Christ; for,

1. As Christ, the king of the Jews, was bought and sold, and crucified, when
the staff of beauty was broken, so Charles, our King, was bought and sold, and
beheaded, when the true Doctrine of faith, and true obedience to our Governors,
were corrupted, and this staff of beauty broken all to pieces.

2. The time that the Antichrist should rise. The Antichrist must be those new
raised Preachers, that do cohere with this foolish and id^l shepherd of the
Jews.
As when the staff of bands was broken, the Lord raised this foolish and idol
Shepherd among the Jews; so when our Bishops and Governors were suppressed, and
their Discipline, which is the staff of bands, was broken, all Sects increased,
all errors and heresies appeared, and the great Antichrist manifested himself
unto the world, and did as he is here typified, by the doings of this foolish
and idol shepherd.

But now, that which is more considerable to be understood, is to know, who is,
or should be, the great eminent and transcendent Antichrist, that is here
typified by this Idol-shepherd:

I know, the Divines of Gappe, and the most of our Presbyterians, are as sure,
as Gabriel Powel was, that believed i^, as he believed the Apostles Creed, that
the Pope is that great Antichrist; and therefore, when other matters fail them,
they fill their Sermons with exclamations against the Pope, and deal with him,
as the Collier did with the Major of London, when he came to High-gate; and yet
I am as sure, that they are altogether mistaken in their faith, and knowledge
herein: for, though the Pope should be, The Pope is an idol-shepherd, yet not
meant here, tipified by this idol-shepherd.
as he is, an Antichrist, and a foolish Idol-shepherd, as many others of our
Presbyterians be, and does imitate this Idol-shepherd of the Jews, in all or
most of the foresaid particulars, as the little, or no good that he does, to
the flock of Christ, and the great honor and service that he expects from all
the Kings and Princes of the earth; yet there are many other signal Characters,
notes, and acts of the great Antichrist, expressed in other places of the holy
Scripture, which are no ways coherent, and applicable to the Pope, which I
could show unto you, but that, nunc non est narrandi tempus.

But then you will demand of me, Who is that Antichrist, if the Pope be not the
Antichrist?

I answer, that, as S. Augustine says, satius est dicere, quid not sit Deus,
Yet by Gods help I shall hereafter tell you whom I take him to be.
quam quid sit Deus: for God is not the Sun, he is not the Moon, he is no
created substance, and I err not in any of these answers; so I say, tutius est
dicere, quis non est Antichristus, quam quis est Antichristus: and he is not
the Pope I am sure of it; but I am sure he is a foolish, and an idol shepherd,
whosoever he be, yet not the Pope; because these have not as yet happened unto
the Pope, for that his strength and power are not clean taken away, though much
diminished, neither is the knowledge and Doctrine of the Roman Church utterly
or totally perverted, and the truth of Christian Religion quite extinguished,
nor yet the right way of serving God wholly corrupted, as I showed unto you
before; but whether the power and strength of the Long Parliament be not
mouldred away from a mountain to a molehill, and themselves vanish away like
smoke, let those members that are yet unnihilated, answer it; or if they be not
yet come to nothing, how long they are like to continue, let my Reader judge.

2. The next testimony of the Old Testament, 2. The prophecy of Daniel, under
the person of Antiochus.
that is said to have any reference to the Antichrist and his doings, is found
in the Prophecy of Daniel: But St. Paul tells us, that to the Jews and Fathers
under the Law, omnia in figura contingebant illis, all things happened and fell
out to them in types and figures; and most of those types and figures that were
delivered unto them, reached no further than Christ, which was the true
substance, and to be understood in and by those shadows; and so for the
Antichrist, I sind no Prophecy concerning him in all the Book of Daniel, but
as he is typified in the person of Antiochus Epiphanes; and you know, that as
Theologia Symbolica non est argumentativa, symbolick divinity will not hold
argument, so types and figures non currunt quatuor pedibus, do not hold
correspondency in all things, but only in such particulars, whereunto they are
applied; and therein, you shall find how the Antichrist is typified and
declared unto us in the person and by the doings of Antiochus. For,

The Prophet Daniel, describing the four Beasts, Dan. 7.
that typified and signified the four great Monarchies of the world; the
Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian and the Roman, and the little horn that
sprang up among the other ten horns, says the 10 horns are interpreted by the
Holy Ghost, to be ten Kings, that is, says Tremellius, 1. The 10 horns in Dan.
7. who they are.
Seleucus Nicanor. 2. Antiochus Soter. 3. Antiochus Theos. 4. Seleucus
Callinichus. 5. Callinicus being expelled, Ptolomeus Evergetes. 6. Ptolomeus
expelled, Seleucus Ceraunus. 7. Antiochus magnus, that was surnamed Hyerax, the
Hawk, for his speedy expedition of the greatest affairs, and was the Father of
Seleucus Philopater, and of Antiochus Epiphanes. 8. This Antiochus magnus being
ejected, Ptolomaeus Philopater. 9. This Ptolomaeus Philopater being ejected by
Antiochus magnus and his Sons, Seleucus Philopater. 10. This Seleucus being
killed, Antiochus Epiphanes, that was the little horn, that sprang up among the
ten horns, and was not another horn besides the ten horns, but cornu ultimum,
the last of the ten horns, and was at his first beginning but a very little
horn indeed, that had no right at all unto the Kingdom, and is the most lively
type of the Antichrist, that is to be found in all the Scriptures, both in
respect of his entrance into his Dominion, and of his dealings with the Jewish
Church, just as the Antichrist should enter into his rule, and deal with the
Church of the Christians. And the Prophet tells us of this Antiochus, and under
his person, of the Antichrist, That,

1. 1. The things that Daniel says Antiochus should do.
As you see how he comes to his power and dominion by the suppression and
destruction of others the lawful Kings, so should the Antichrist do; and we
know many of the Popes came to that dignity and authority, by the ejection and
destruction of other Popes, as the Histories do sufficiently declare unto us;
but whether the Long Parliament came to their rule and dominion by the
expulsion and destruction of their lawful King, I leave it for my Reader to
judge. And,

2. 2. An opposer of Monarchy, and very successful. Dan. 7.24.
The Prophet tells us that Antiochus shall be diverse from the first Kings, that
is, as some Interpreters do expound it, he shall be a grand enemy of regal
Government and Kingly Majesty, so will the Antichrist, ex diametro, contradict
and oppose the Monarchical Government, which the Pope never did, but upholdeth
the same to the uttermost; and you know, who turned the Regal Government of
these Kingdoms to a Commonwealth; or as Montanus reads that place, ipse erit
major prioribus, he shall be greater than the former Kings, that is, in his
successes, in his victories, in his reve^ues, in his taxes, in his absolute
authority, and in his esteem among his Neighbour-Kings and Princes; so was
Antiochus, so the Antichrist will be: So is not the Pope, when as many former
Popes were greater than this is, in all the foresaid respects; but whether the
Long Parliament laid greater taxes upon the people, and had more victories and
better successes in their proceedings, than many other former Kings, 3. An
overthrower of three Kings or Kingdoms.
let them be their own Judges.

3. The Prophet says, this little horn, that is, this Antiochus Epiphanes,
tres reges humiliabit, shall bring to the ground, or humble three Kings, as
Montanus reads it; Or, tres reges deprimet, he shall depress and overthrow or
subdue three Kings, as Tremellius translates it: For he drove out of Syria, 1.
Ptolomaeus Philopater. 2. His own eldest Brother Seleucus. And 3. Demetrius,
the Son of Seleucus, to whom the right of the Kingdom did appertain: So the
Antichrist shall overthrow three Kings, says Cornelius a Lapide: And I did not
read, that any of the Popes have done so yet; but I know who is said, to have
suppressed tres reges in uno rege, and to have subdued three Kingdoms, as some
do expound these words, and may well be the mystical meaning of this Prophecy.
4. A great blasphemer.


4. The Prophet goes on, and says, he shall speak great words against the
most High, that is, says Tremellius, blasphemus erit in Deum, he shall utter
such blasphemies against the most high God, as the Jews could not endure to
hear them: So the Antichrist should do, says the Evangelist, Rev. 13.6. And so
no doubt but many Popes have done: Rev. 13.6.
I will excuse none of them; and I have showed to you before, and shall yet
show to you hereafter, what intolerable blasphemies have been broached and are
published in many places by the Sectaries, adherents and offspring of that
Long Parliament; which may therefore, very well, go hand in hand with
Antiochus, and with the Antichrist, whosoever he be.

5. 5. A destroyer of the Saints and Servants of God. 2 Ma^h. 7.
The Prophet says, that this Antiochus Sanctos excelsorum deteret, as
Tremellius reads it, i.e. says he, contumeliosissimus and atrocissimus
Tyrannus erit in populum Dei; he shall be the bitterest and the cruellest
Tyrant that ever was, far worse than Pharaoh, against the people of God: And so
the Books of the Maccabees, and especially the cruel butchering and torturing
of the Mother and her seven Children, only, because they would not eat swines
flesh, which the Law of God forbad them to do, do sufficiently declare, that
neither the Egyptian Pharaoh, Dan. 7.25.
nor the Chaldean Nebuchadnezzar, nor any other foreign or domestic enemy,
was ever so bloody and so cruel unto the Jews, as this Assyrian Antiochus was:
and our Bibles read it, he shall wear out the Saints of the most High; and so
the Antichrist shall do: And our Histories tell us, the Popes have worn out,
and been the death and destruction of many of the Servants of God, this cannot
be denied; and it grieves me much to think, and it would grieve me much more,
to set down a Catalogue, of what, and how many worthy, noble and faithful
Servants of Christ, have been worn out of these three Kingdoms, within these
few years, 6. A changer of the Laws and of the times.
by whom, and by what means, you know: And I fear, that when God makes
inquisition for blood, the Long Parliament will not be found guiltless.

6. The Holy Ghost informed Daniel, that the little Horn, which at the first,
was but little indeed, and then did succrescere, grow so great by the
suppression of the three Kings, and the accession of three Kingdoms, should
think to change the times and the Laws; and so we find that Antiochus did use
all possible endeavors, to abolish the times of the Jewish Sabbaths, and
feasts, and their circumcision, and legem ipsam Dei, ju^aque omnia nefarie
convellere, and to overthrow the very law of God, and tear in pieces all humane
rights most wickedly, says Tremelius: Tremel. in loc.
and so the Antichrist would endeavor to do the like, to put down all the
festival times, and the holy days of the Christians, and to change all the
Laws and Customs, that they had learned and observed, even from the Apostles
time: And I am sure the Pope is not guilty of this sin of the Antichrist; for
he is so far from putting down their feasts and holy days, See the History of
Independency, and there you shall find, how the Author of that Book shewe^^,
how that long Parliament proceeded contrary to all Laws, part. 3. A Book fit
for the understanding of this point.
that he multiplied the same, and added unto their primitive feasts a great
many more holidaies than were needful, or indeed fitting to be observed; But I
pray you tell me, what horn did ever change so many Laws and Customs, both of
the Church, and of the Kingdom, as the long Parliament has done? for, has it
not trodden under foot, not one nor two, but all the ecclesiastical Laws and
Canons of the Church? and has it not very often transgressed, and in many
things nullified our Magna Charta, the great Charter, and the fundamental Laws
of this Kingdom, that for so many hundred years were confirmed to our
forefathers, and Predecessors, by I know not how many Parliaments, I am sure
above 30 at least?

And for the times, I would fain know, if any good Christian heart can look
upon these times without bleeding, or hold his eyes without weeping? for the
greatest love, and favor that ever God showed to mankind, was the giving of
his own natural, coessential, and coeternal Son, to be made of a woman, and
made under the Law, to redeem us from the curse of the Law, and from sin,
death, hell, and Satan; when a greater good than this, the omnipotent God
himself could not do for us; for, what could God give better than God himself?
but, as the Apostle says, because God could swear by no greater, he swear by
himself; so, when he could give no better, he gave himself; Heb. 6.13.
and therefore S. Ambrose says, plus, Domine Jesu, debeo tuis incuriis, quod
sum redemptus, quam tuis operibus, quod sum creatus; O sweet Jesus Christ, I ow
thee more love, and thanks, and service, for thy care, and pains, and
sufferings, by which I am redeemed, than for thy work, whereby I was created;
because that in my creation, dedit me mihi deus, God gave me unto my self; but
in my Redemption, dedit se mihi deus, The greatest good that ever God did for
mankind.
God gave himself unto me, and because, in the creation of me and all things
else, dixit, and facta sunt, he did but speak the word, and they were made, he
commanded, and they stood fast, but in the accomplishment of our Redemption,
multa dixit, magna fecit, and dira tulit, he spoke many gracious words, he did
many wonderful works, and he suffered many execrable and intolerable things.

Therefore, as God commanded the Israelites, Why the Jews were commanded by God
to keep their Feasts.
in remembrance of their deliverance out of Epypt, That was but the type of
this our deliverance from the bondage of sin, and Satan, to keep the feast of
Passover; and in remembrance of the reception of the Law, on Mount Sinai,
which was an inferior favor, and less than our receiving of the Gospel, to
observe the feast of Pentecost; and in remembrance of their wandering, 40 years
in the wilderness, and their feeding there all that while with the Manna, that
came down from heaven, which, notwithstanding, is no ways comparable, to our
feeding with the Word of God, and the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ, which is God himself; to keep the feast of tabernacles; and
whosoever neglected to keep these feasts, and to observe these times, that soul
should be cut off from Israel, that is, from among the people of God, as an
ungrateful person, unworthy of the favor of God; And as Mardocheus and Queen
Hester commands all the Jews to keep the feast of Purim, that was to be kept
upon the 14 and 15 days of the Month Adar, which is answerable to our
February, Hest. 9.23, 24.
throughout all their generations for ever, for days of rejoicing and
Thanksgiving for their deliverance from the malicious plot, and wicked design
of proud Haman; the which feast was observed by Christ himself; John 10.22. The
Geneva notes, on John 10. and 22.
and as in like manner Judas Machabaeus enjoined the feast of dedication to be
observed upon the 25th day of the Month Casteu, which is our November, for a
thankful remembrance of the like benefit; which was the casting out of
Antiochus his Garrison from Jerusalem, so that, the Apostles, and their
immediate Successors, the Bishops and Fathers of the Church, and all the other
succeeding Governors of Gods people, considering that the Jews temporal favors
aforenamed, were but types of our favors, and shadows of those substances,
that we have, and so, no ways near so comparable to the benefits that we
receive by the birth, circumcision, resurrection, and ascension of Christ, and
the gifts, that is, the Apostles, the Teachers and Governors of Gods Church,
furnished with the gifts of the Holy Ghost, that Christ sent unto them, on the
day of Pentecost, 50 days after his ascension into heaven; by which favors,
and great blessings, we obtain a deliverance, not from a small temporal
bondage, as that of the Israelites was under Pharaoh, (far less then the
bondage of many good Christians in these days under the Turk) or from such an
enemy, as was Haman or Antiochus; but from sin, death, hell, Satan, and eternal
damnation, have in their own persons observed, and enjoined all other
Christians to observe, That is, Christmas, New years day Easter day, Holy
thursday Whitsunday, and the rest.
the feast of Christ's Nativity, and of his circumcision, resurrection, and
ascension, and the other days prescribed by them, as days of rejoicing, and
meeting together in the Church, to praise God, and to thank him for those great
and inestimable favors and benefits, that he has conferred upon us, and we
received, as upon those days: and I may demand, What Pope was ever so wicked,
and committed such, and so horrible a sin, as to profane these holy times, in
so high a measure, as Antiochus-like, to command them to be profaned, and to
punish those that would observe them; as the adherents of that Parliament did?
if I knew him, I should verily believe him to be the great Antichrist.

But as the Prophet David complains of the Jews, that they kept not the
Covenant of God, and would not walk in his law, but soon forgate what he had
done, and the wonderful works that he had showed for them; Psalm. 78.12.
so we may justly complain of all those, the spawn and offspring of the
Presbyterian assembly, and adherents of that long Parliament, that not only
forget the due observation of these holy times, but also forbid, and inhibit,
and, in many places reprove, correct, and punish their Christian brethren, for
their religious observation of these good days, and the performance of these
holy duties, which they owe to God for his great blessings. Yet I hope, that
with all their subtlety and authority, that vote them down, they shall never be
able to suppress them, no more than Antiochus was, to abolish the Jewish
feasts; because the holy Ghost says, the little horn, that was the type of the
Antichrist, when he came to be great, Daniel 7.25.
and to the height of his power, did but think to change the times, and was not
able to change them; because the godly Jews observed all their festival times,
and holy days, notwithstanding all the inhibition of Antiochus to the
contrary, and all the tortures that they endured for observing them; So I hope
all good Christians, and true Saints will observe these their feasts, and holy
days, and upon no terms, either of fear, flattery, or gain, omit, on these
times, to do their service, and holy duties unto God; nor show themselves less
thankful to God for the true substance, than the Jews were for the types and
shadows of that substance.

But I remember Sanders, Sanders in demonst. Ansel. in Apoc. c. 7. ex Irenaeo.
l. 5. and Hypolit. in orat. de fine seculi. Genesis 49.17. Jerem. 8.16. Bellar. de
Romans Pontif. l. 3. c. 12.
Anselmus, and some others, out of Irenaeus and Hippolitus, do think, that the
Antichrist shall be a Jew, of the Tribe of Dan; because old Jacob says, Dan
shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse
heels, so that his rider shall fall backward; and the Prophet Jeremy says, the
snorting of his horses was heard from Dan; and especially, because that the
Angel in the Revelat. c. 7. where 12 thousand are sealed out of every Tribe of
Jacob, leaves out the Tribe of Dan, for that the Antichrist, as these men
suppose, should arise from that Tribe; and Bellarmine says, it is very
probable, the Antichrist shall be a Jew.

And whether these men, that refuse and forbid the observance of the festival
times and days of Christ, be Danites or no, I cannot tell; but I am sure, they
are like Jews, not only in the Jewish, precise, and ceremonious observation of
the Sabbath, that was to be sanctified, for the remembrance of our creation,
and the profanation of these holy Christian feasts, that we keep for the
remembrance of our redemption, but also in many other things, that do
obliterate and blot out the memorial of the greatest benefits, that Christ has
done for us, and the chiefest points of our Christian Religion. Therefore, if
the promoting of Judaism, and the suppressing of the adiutaments and helps to
understand and to preserve the main heads of Christianity, be a note and
property of the Antichrist, let our Assembly of Presbyterians, and the members
of that long Parliament with their adherents, that think to change these times,
take heed they be not found to be the Antich.

object against the observation of these Feasts, and especially of Christmas,
that they know not on what day of the month he was born; and therefore why
should they observe the 25th. day of December for the day of his Nativity? Or
if it be true, that he was born on that day, yet they have no Precept in all
the Scripture that they should cease from their vocation, and keep that for an
holy day.

first part of this Objection I shall but briefly answer, by demanding of thee,
To the first part of the Objection.
Why do thou, with all other Churches in Christendom, observe the year of our
Lords Incarnation, when the Angel saluted Mary, and the Word beg^n his
Incarnation in the womb of the blessed Virgin, to begin on the 25th. day of
March; if thou doubtest that he was not born on the 25th. of December? Do
thou think she went either more or less time with her Child, than the usual and
natural time of other women? And therefore if thou will change the day of his
birth, change the day of his Incarnation in the womb of his mother, and let
the year of our Lord, in all our deeds and writings be altered and begin on
another day, which thou know to be a surer time of his Incarnation than the
25th. day of March; for why should all our evidences be false and erroneous? Or
if thou, my good Presbyterian, do not think the 25th. of December to be the
day of his Nativity, why do thou not inform us, for certain, on what day of
the month he was born, that we may not neglect the duty, because we are not
sure of the day? But you think it a sufficient excuse, wholly to neglect the
duty, because you doubt of the day: And yet it might be a sufficient reason, to
satisfy any reasonable man, (besides that John Baptist, who was born on the
24th. of June, that then was the longest day in the year, and just six months
before the birth of Christ, as the Angel informed Mary, tells us plainly, that
according to the days of their birth, Christ must increase and he must
decrease;) that the whole Church of God have unanimously observed this day
constantly for the day of Christ his birth; and why should thou think, that
Christ would all this while suffer his Church to be deceived herein, or that
thou should be wiser than the whole Church has been for so many Ages
together?

To the second part of the Objection.
To the second part of thine Objection; that thou have no Precept in Scripture
to observe this day, I confess it; and how many things do thou, not only in
natural business: and ordinary affairs, but also in and about the Service of
God, that thou have no Precept for them in all the Scriptures? For where have
thou any Precept, to keep the first day of the week for the Sabbath? To receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, once every month? To preach twice every
Lords day? To build a Church in such and such a place? To make the Sermon so
long as thou do? The People to meet in Church twice a day and no more? And
the Service to be on such hours, and no other? And the like? For, though God
accepts of no (...), Will Worship, but will have the substance of his Service
to be, as himself prescribes: Yet, will thou have God to set thee down every
particular circumstance and punctilio in and about his Service? Has he not
left Teachers and Governors over his Church, and given them both a power to
do, and a Command, that all things should be done in Order, and as they should
be done in the Church of God? And if Christ has left this power with his
Apostles and their Successors, the Governors of his Church, to set all things
in Order, touching his Service, in respect of the times, places and manner, and
they have ordered it, from the beginning, that this 25th. day of December
should be kept holy for the remembrance of the blessed birth of Christ, and the
whole Church have ever since observed the same, Why should thou deny this
power unto them, and disobey their Order? Or who, but the Antichrist, would
speak against the same, And he, that would have thee, as well to reject Christ
himself, as to neglect the day of his Nativity?

Thus you see how illustrious Antiochus (for so Epiphanes signifies, though he
was indeed, as the Holy Ghost testifies, Dan. 11.25.
a vile person) does antecede the Saint-like Antichrist in all vile actions;
and I could proceed further in the parallel, and especially in the time of
their continuance and their judgment, which do immediately follow, ver. 26.
but that I had rather pass before my Book does swell too big, from the types
and the shadows that the Prophets show us, unto the plainer testimonies of the
New Testament and the Apostles of Christ, that do so signally demonstrate, and
so punctually paint out the Antichrist, that the true Saints and Servants of
Christ, which desire to know him, and would not be overawed with terrors, nor
over-joyed with flatteries and great promises, nor yet blinded with worldly
love, might well and easily understand, who he is, when they see him, to have
come into the World, that so, they might flee from him and not be seduced by
him; for though that these things which Daniel speaks of the little horn, which
was Antiochus, may, in some sense, be applied, by way of Analogy, as the type,
to the doings and proceedings of the Antichrist; Yet I think rather that all
Daniels Prophesies, and their relations, should more properly, and in their
first aspect be confined to the Jewish Church, and their extent to the death of
Christ, the destruction of that Temple, and the dissolution of the polity of
that people, than reach any further, to express the state and the accidents
that should befall unto the Gospel Church, that were designed for the Apostles
to express; and especially, because that, as we say of Similitudes, so it may
be said of Types and Symbolical Divinity, they do not universally in all points
hold parallel, nec sunt argumentativa, as the Schools do speak, and as I said
before, neither are they for sound proofs; therefore I will proceed to the
plainer and fuller description of the Antichrist by the testimonies of the New
Testament.

CHAP. V. Of the special particular sin, that is the proper sin, and peculiar
only to the Antichrist, and to none else; and the sin that is most destructive
to Mankind, and most hateful unto God; and what is meant by the Antichrist his
exalting himself above all that is called God, and that is worshipped; and of
his sitting in the Temple of God, as God.
2. HAving waded through the Enigmata's of the Prophets, we are come to the
transparent evidences of the New Testament, that do foretell us of the coming
of the Antichrist, who, as he should fulfill the Prophecy of Zecharie, by
following the steps and doings of that foolish and Idol-shepherd, and likewise
the Prophecy of Daniel, by his imitation of the wicked acts of Antiochus; so
he shall accomplish all the Prophesies of the New Testament that do concern
him; and shall do all the impieties and the tragical acts, that the Penmen of
that Testament do foretell us, that he should do.

And all the evident and unquestionable Predictions, that we find set down
concerning him, are set down only in three several places, and by three special
Instruments of the Holy Ghost; that is, St. Paul the Apostle, St. John the
Evangelist, and he that goes under the Title of John the Divine, Joh. 10.43.
which was indeed St. John the Apostle; for that place of St. John, alleged by
Bellarmine, does not mean the Antichrist, but any other false Christ's, such as
Judas Galilaeus, or Theudas, or Barchochebas, or the like, that should come as
a Christ in his own name, as I showed to you before; and the Predictions of
Christ, in the 24th. of S. Matthew, are not properly to be referred to the
Antichrist, but to those false Christ's that should come to deceive the Jews,
and those false Prophets and Pseudo-Apostles, the Preachers of the Antichrist,
that should come toward the end of the World, to seduce and to deceive the
people; and therefore I shall only pass over the places of these three
describers of him; and the first place that properly concerns the coming of
the Antichrist is in 2 These. 2.3. where S. Paul describing him, as he was the
best Scholar, and more learned in the Arts and Languages than any of all the
Apostles, so he does more signally and evidently show him than any other; he
sets him forth as a City upon an hill, that all men may see it, and makes him
so visible and so intelligible, by that palpable mark and proper note and
badge, that be fasteneth on him, 1. What S. Paul foretells us of the Antichrist.
that he might easily be known, when men do behold that mark, and observe that
note and badge which the Apostle lays upon him; for he says, he will be an
egregious sinner, that is a sinner (...), an extraordinary sinner, and
transcendent, above all other sinners; and therefore the Apostle terms him,
(...), that man of sin, as if he were all made of sin: That is, peccator ille
sceleratissimus, that most wicked sinner, and more wicked than any other, 1.
That he should be an egregious finner.
says Tirinus; totaliter peccatis deditus; that is, wholly given over to sin,
as having his heart and his hands eminently sinful, as our Learned Zanchius
says; for as Christ is melior omnibus sanctis, better and holier than all the
Saints; so the Antichrist will be pejor omnibus malis, worse than any of all
the wicked men, says Aquinas; insigniter scelestus, notably wicked, says
Maresius; worse than Ahab, that sold himself to work wickedness. And Cornelius
a Lapide faith, the tricks and fallacies of the Antichrist to get Proselites
and followers after him, The sixfold art of the Anchrist.
to effect his wickednesses are sixfold: 1. A feigned and dissembled Sanctity,
to be well thought of by all men. 2. Smoothness of Language and fair speeches,
to gain love and favor. 3. Wit and Eloquence, to persuade men to aid and to
assist him. 4. Large promises and great gifts, to win them unto him. 5. Signs
and wonders, all pretended to be done from God, to draw men to a good belief of
all his actions.


And if all these cannot serve the turn, to make men to become his adherents
and assistants; then,

6. Terrors and torments must do the deed; and it is demanded, If this sixfold
Art was not most exquisite in the Presbyterians and the prevalent faction of
the long Parliament? But to go on, to show you the sins of the Antichrist,
Aretius, as E. H. quoteth him, does thus paint him out, saying, Invadet
imperium Antichristus, ac dominabitur titulo justae possessionis, ac verae
pietatis; sed ubi revelari caeperit public, his notis or nabitur, quas
Apostolus hic ei tribuit, videlicet, homo peccati, filius perditionis: Upon
which words of Aretius E. H. does thus paraphrase, E.H. De Antichristo pagina
78.
that the Antichrist is called the man of sin; because he is the Protector and
Patron of many gross sins; he rollerates Idolatry and Rebellion; he invadeth
Kingdoms, and under pretense of setting up Piety, and promoting Saintship, he
takes possession of the Throne; (as if he were the right heir thereof) and none
is so great a Saint as he, if you will believe his words, or the flaettering
Titles of his Followers, that adorn him with most goodly Eulogies; but when he
shall begin to appear publicly, that is, to be revealed, as the Apostle says,
and to be made known by his marks and sins unto the Saints, he shall have none
other ornaments to put on, that is, from those Servants of God, to whom only he
shall be revealed, but what the Scripture gives him, that is, the man of sin,
and the Son of perdition: (which is the Title of Judas, that betrayed his
Master, his King and his Savior;) and what we read in the Revelation, Rev. 11.
the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, which will make war with
Gods Witnesses, that is, the Magistrates, and the Governors of Gods Church,
the faithful Pastors and Preachers of his Word, and will overcome them and kill
them, and of whom the Holy Ghost principally says, Rev. 22.11.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy let him be
filthy still, and never go about to strive to make him clean; because, it is
but lost labor, Aethiopum lavare, to wash a Blackmoore, to make him white: And
so it is to seek to amend that man of sin, and all his wicked followers, that
think themselves better and more righteous than all others; and therefore, as
our Savior says, that the Publicans and harlots shall go into the Kingdom of
heaven, (that is, be sooner converted) before the High Priests and the
Pharisees, that think themselves to be the only Saints, and the bringers of
others into heaven; so the Drunkards, Swearers, Whore-mongers, Sabbathbreakers,
Robbers, and the like lewd livers and profane persons, may be sooner converted
and brought to repentance, than this hypocritical Saint, and those Saintlike
sinners, that think themselves most wise, and more holy than all others, and
from this confidence, do act all the Villainies, Cruelties, and abominable
Impieties against the Service of God, and do such intolerable injuries to the
Servants of Christ as that greater cannot be devised.

Thus you see, how this man of sin is described unto you by these Learned men,
for a most notorious transcendent sinner; but all this while, it is not agreed
upon of all sides, whom the Apostle means in this place by this man of sin;
that should be such an extraordinary sinner; for Dr. Hammond and some others
would have us hereby to understand Simon Magus; because that Justinus,
Irenaeus, and some other Authors do avouch, there was a Statue erected unto
him, and an Altar, with this Inscription, Simoni sancto deo; to Simon the holy
God: But the truth is, that Justinus, being a Grecian, and not so well versed
in the Roman Antiquities mistook the Inscription, Varro lib. 4.
which was Semoni Sanco Deo, to Semo Sancus the God: for so Varro, that was
most skilful in the Roman Histories, says, Inter Deos Romanorum, non obscurus
fuit Deus Semo, qui and Sancus appellabatur: Among the Gods of the Romans, the
God Semo, which was also called Sancus, was none of the obscurest or meanest
God; and accordingly Ovid says: Ovid. fast. lib. 6.
Quaerebam nonas, Maresius p. 79. Caracotta. p. 25.
Sanco fidione dicarem, or referrem.
An tibi Semo pater? tu mihi Sancus ait.
Or as some Copies have it, Tu mihi Sancus eris.
And therefore, others, as the Commentator upon this place, conceived to be
Hugo Grotius, perceiving this mistake of the Greek Interpreters, does
understand Caius Caligula to be this man of sin: Sueton. c. 10.
of whom Suetonius says, Nec Servum meliorem ullum nec deteriorem Dominum
fuisse: There could not be a better Servant, or Subject, than he was, and a
worser Lord or Master could not be found: So that he was brought forth, as it
seems, Ut ostenderet, quid summa vitia in summa fortuna possent, that in him
might be seen, what the greatest vice; or the most vicious men might do in the
highest fortune, as Seneca writes of him unto Albinus. And it is true, that
Caligula was insigniter scalestus, Hyppolitus in Orat de sins seculi.
Caracotta. page 6. and deinceps.
a most notorious wicked Emperor, yet not meant here by the Apostle under the
Title of the man of sin, as Maresius and Caracotta prove at large, and do show,
that the best of all Interpreters both Old and New do assent, that the Apostle
means the Antichrist, that should come into the World a little before the End
of the World, and not any of these Antichrists that came so soon as the
Apostles time.

But though we cannot, digito demonstr are and dicier, hic est, name the man,
and say, This is he: Yet, from Daniels explication of the acts of Antiochus,
and from these Comments and Paraphrase of the aforesaid Divines upon the words
of S. Paul, you may, as Moses did from Mount Nebo, view the Land of the
Canaanites, behold some of the sins of the Antichrist, and thereby have a
shrewd guess who he is: For that collected multitude, and pack of wicked men,
which, as I showed to you, must be understood by the Antichrist, The doings of
the great Antichrist.
shall, as you have heard, oppose the Kingly Government, protect Rebels,
Heretics and Blasphemers, tyrannize most lawlesly over Gods Servants, usurp
the supreme Authority, change the Laws, the Times and the good Customs of the
Saints and People of God, subdue three Kings, or Kingdoms, suppress the
Governors of Gods Church, and the Preachers of his Word: and do all this, and
the like feats, upon pretense of Zeal, to propagate the Gospel, for the honor
of God, and the service of his Son Jesus Christ, even as Christ has formerly
told us, by his Apostles and Prophets, that the Antichrist would do.

And if you have observed any collected multitude, to have done these things,
you may know what to judge, though you may not say what you think.

And though these demoxstrations are very plain, A special thing to be observed
by most Commentators.
yet methinks I do observe somewhat in this description of the Antichrist by S.
Paul, that I find not observed by any of the Interpreters, that I have read:
save what is briefly touched by E. H. in Page 76. De Antichristo. For the
Apostle in this Character of the Antichrist, seems to set such an astarisme,
or, as it were, a dash with his pen, whereby he should be made most palpable
unto our hands, and most visible unto our eyes, if we would but diligently
observe it, we should not miss to know who he were: For,

1. The Apostle, speaking of the wickedness of this Antichrist, speaks in the
singular number, and calls him, (...), and not (...), the man of sin, and not
the man of sins; the which expression, (besides the Hebraisme, that signifies,
he should be a very sinful man, as the child of death, signifies one that is
destined and condemned to death) does most certainly give us to understand,
that the Apostle means, that the Antichrist should commit some singular
peculiar sin, that should only and properly be the sin of the Antichrist, and
of none else: And therefore,

2. To enforce the particularity of his sin, his proper and peculiar sin, That
as, (...), notes and designeth thi^ proper and particular Antichrist, so
(...), designeth the proper, peculiar and particular sin of the Antichrist.
Epiphan. heresi. 9.
the Apostle does not simply say, that he should be (...), the man of sin, but
with the Article of a special designation both of the man, and of the sin, that
you might take notice as well of the one, as of the other, he says, he should
be (...), the man of the sin, or, the man of that sin, by which sin he may
undoubtedly and apparently, as by a proper badg and character, be known to be
that great Antichrist, that should come into the world, when as he only
commits that sin, which none but he did ever commit the like; for as (...),
signify God, King, and man, that is, any one of them, indefinitely; but (...),
and (...), do determinately note forth unto us this particular person of God,
or King, or man; because, as I said before, out of Epiphanius, the Greek
Articles contrahunt significationem ad rem certam, leave not the thing they
spoke of, like an individuum vagum, but do tie the signification to a proper
and a certain thing; so (...) signifies any one sin, whetsoever; but (...)
notes, and points out, this very particular sin; and not another.

And therefore, they that would know who is the Antichrist, 2 special things to
be inquired after.
must consider and inquire diligently after these 2 special things.

1. What sin is that, which is the formalis ratio, that gives esse, 1. What is
the peculiar sin of the Antichrist.
the very being unto the Antichrist, and by which sin, he may be undoubtedly
known to be the Antichrist; and without the committing of that sin, no sinner,
be he never so great, or tainted, with never so many sins, can properly be said
to be this great Antichrist;

2. If we can find the sin, that makes the great Antichrist, we are in the
next place to enquire and search, whom we can find, if we can find any, 2.
Who has committed that sin.
that have committed that sin; and when we have found the sin, and who has
committed that sin, if we can find them, we have found out the great
Antichrist, that is spoken of by the Prophets, and has been long expected, and
much feared by the Church; for, as John Baptist says of Christ, I knew him
not, but he that sent me to baptize with water, John 1.33.
said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on
him, the same is he, which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, and is the Messiah,
and the Christ: so whosoever co^^itteth this proper and peculiar unusual sin,
the sin of the Antichrist only, the same is he; because the Antichrist only is
the man of that sin, that is, which only commits that sin, and none else but
the Antichrist commits it.

1. Then we are to ask, and seek, and to search disigently, to know what sin is
the proper and peculiar sin of the Antichrist: and I shall, with the help of
Gods holy Spirit, do my best to find it out: and I am sure this sin of the
Antichrist is like the Antichrist himself, a most notorious, eminent, and
transcendent sin, unheard of among the Heathens, unknown in the world, and
uncommitted by any other sinner, That all sins are not equal.
until committed by the Antichrist; and a sin when it is committed, so
perspicuous to all men's eyes, as is the beacon upon a hill, so destructive unto
mankind, so odious, so abominable, and so hateful in the fight of God, as
that no other sin whatsoever, is altogether so destructive unto mankind, or so
hateful unto God, as is this sin of the Antichrist; for it is a paradox among
the Philosophers, and much more among the Divines, to say, that all fins are
equal, when as, this sin of the Antichrist is more detestable in the sight of
God, than any other sin whatsoever, as I hope to make it very plain unto you,
before I have done the canvassing of this beast.

And what sin may that be, which is so transcendent, so destructive unto man,
1. Oservation
and so odious unto God, as none more?

May it not be the sin against the Holy Ghost? which is, a known, wilful,
malicious, What sin is the peculiar sin of the Antichrist,
total, and final Apostasy from the formerly professed truth of the Gospel, and
faith of Christ, and a perpetual persecuting of the same, impenitently unto the
end, with a most obstinate refusal of all grace, and a despair of all pardon
from God: Surely this must needs be a most heinous sin, and I believe the most
hurtful and destructive to the sinner that commits it of all sins; because, as
our Savior says, it shall never be forgiven him, either in this world, 1. Not
the sin against the Holy Ghost. 1. Reason.
or in the world to come: yet I am persuaded, this is not the sin, that is most
destructive to mankind, and most hateful unto God, or, that is the proper sin
of the great Antichrist;

1. Because many others, besides the Antichrist, have, in all likelihood,
committed this sin, and the sinners, as may be feared, and are suspected for
such, as was Julian, Spira, and the like, are registered unto us in good Authors.

2. 2. Reason.
Because they that commit this sin, are altogether so unknown unto us to be
such sinners, that it is too great a presumption for any man to say, such a man
has committed the sin against the holy Ghost: and therefore, we can but fear,
and are not certain, that either Julian the Apostata, or the despairing Spira,
have sinned the sin against the holy Ghost; and therefore this sin is not the
sin whereby the Antichrist may be known; his badge and character must be more
perspicuous: And

2. 2. Not the sin of Idolatry.
What shall we think of Idolatry, which is, either the taking of that which is
no God for the true God, and the giving of the service and honor of the true
God to those false Gods, which are but Idols of stocks or stones, that, as the
Apostle says, are nothing, and therefore deserve no service, nor any honor in
the world; or else, the giving of a false worship of our own invention, unto
the true and everliving God? without question this is a very heinous sin, In
the 2 Com. Exodus 20.
and such idolaters are rightly termed the haters of God, and no doubt but very
hateful unto God, as himself professes in several places: yet this sin, which
was not known in the world, usque dum Ninus parentis Beli idolum erigit,
Rubenus, de idolatr. l. 1. c. 3.
for 2000 years together, is not, as I believe, the sin that is most hateful
unto God, or most destructive unto mankind, or the proper and peculiar sin of
the Antichrist; because thousands are guilty of this sin, and most of us more
or less are offenders in this point, when as some make gold to be their God,
and others make a God of their belly, and the like.

3. What say we then, to Infidelity, which is the sin of the Atheist, that
believes not in God, Psalm. 14.1.
but, as the Prophet witnesses, says in his heart, there is no God, and
imagines, that, as Claudian says, -- Incerto fluerent mortalia casu, All
mortal things fall out by chance? I Answer, that this sin of Diagoras, that is
said, to be such a fool, as to deny, there was a God, and of the like fools,
and profane Atheists, is a most fearful sin, and most damnable to them that
foster it, and no doubt but harbored continually in the heart of the
Antichrist, or else he would never be such an adversary unto Christ, 3. Not the
sin of Infidelity, or of Blasphemy.
and so fearless of his God: yet I say, that this sin is neither the sin that
is most destructive to man, and most hateful unto God, nor the proper and
peculiar sin of the Antichrist, that is here meant by the Apostle.

this sin, which, as the Prophet shewesh, lurketh in the heart of the sool,
cannot be so easily discerned by us, but is only known to God; And

this sin were the proper and peculiar sin of the Antichrist, we should have
more than 10 thousand Antichrists in the world; and the very like may be said
of the sin of Blasphemy, and of many other fearful sins.

But, But the highest and the worst kind of degree of man killing, or murder.
which is,
passing over all these, and all the rest of the most abominable and fearful
sins, that may be all accumulated in the Antichrist, and yet are not the proper
sin of the Antichrist, whereby he may be known to be the Antichrist; I say that
his proper and peculiar sin, that is, palpable, visible, and sensible to us
all, and is most destructive to mankind, and therefore most hateful unto God,
is the worst and highest degree of manslaughter, or the malicious killing, and
unjust murdering of such an innocent person after so vile a manner, and for so
base an end, as that a worser and a fouller taking away of man's life could not
be committed: this is the sin, that I conceive to be that sin, whereof the
Apostle says; 1. Most destructive to mankind.
the Antichrist shall be (...), the man of the sin; For,

1. It is apparent, that the greatest mischief that one man can do unto
another, is to take away his life, as Cain did Abels life, with bloody hands;
for, though he should take away all my goods; yet I may get more, as Job did,
after all was taken from him; if I be slandered, and falsely accused, as Joseph
and Susanna were; yet with Joseph and Susanna I may recover my reputation
again; if I be cast into prison, yet at last with Manasses I may be set at
liberty; and so if I be banished my Country, yet with the Israelites I may live
to return out of captivity; but when I am killed, and my life is taken from me,
there is no hope of recovery, quia ab inferis nullaredemptio; there is no
return from the grave; this is a wound that cannot be cured, and a mischief
that cannot be paralleld; for now I can neither serve God, for who will give
him thanks in the pit, nor help my friends, nor do any good unto my self; Numb.
35.33.
and therefore the Lord says, that blood defiles the land, and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood, that is thus unjustly shed, but by the blood
of him, or them that have shed it.

2. It will appear unto you, how odious, and how abominable, any, 2. Most
odious unto God.
the least unjust killing of a man is in the sight of God, if you consider what
you may find in the 3. Book, and the 2. Chapter of the true Church, It is a
sin.
where the hainousness of this sin is treated of at large, as, to abreviate the
sum thereof, that it is

1. A sin against nature, which many other sins are not; 1. Against nature.
because every creature loves his like, and saevis inter se convenit ursis; and
as the naturalist says, serpens serpentem non laedit, one serpent will not
sting another, neither will the very Devils kill one another.

2. It is a sin against reason, which says, that every man should do to
another, 2. Against reason.
as he would have done to himself, and no otherwise.

3. It is a beastly sin, quia ferina rabies est sanguine and vulnere laetari,
3. A beastly sin.
it is a point of savage cruelty to delight our selves with the wounds and
blood of others, says Seneca.

4. It is a devilish sin, and a sin of the Devil, who, 4. A devilish sin.
though he be not termed an adulterer, or idolater, or a covetous person, nor
enticed men to these sins, for many years, as, not to idolatry, until Ninus
set up the image of his father Nimrod, Rubenus, de idolatr. l. 1. c. 3.
as some say, otherwise called Belus, by the Gentiles, or of Belus the son of
Nimrod, as others say, for an idol to be worshipped, well nigh 2000 years after
man was made; yet our savior says, he was a murderer from the beginning; John
8.44.
because it was he that murdered our first parents, and made them liable unto
death in paradise, and it was he that taught Cain to kill his own brother Abel.

5. It is, not only one, but it is also the first, and the greatest one of
those crying sins, 5. The greatest of the 4 crying sins. Revel. 6.9, 10.
that are only so called in the Scriptures, because they do continually cry
and call for vengeance against the transgressors, and say with the souls of
them, that were slain for the word of God, How long, O Lord, holy and true,
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? for
the other three crying sins, that is, Sodomy, oppression, and detaining of our
servants wages, they are but parts and parcels of this great crying sin of
murder; because that in Sodomy, that seed is spilt, which might have been the
matter and substance of the humane flesh and blood; and by the other two, that
is, oppression, and wages detained from the laborers, the life of the
oppressed and poor laboring man, is made to languish, and to be shortened by
little and little, for want of means; because the life of man, and the means to
maintain that life, are like ens and bonum, voces convertibiles, equivalent;
and therefore the wise man says, The bread of the needy is their life, he that
defraudeth them thereof is a man of blood; but in murder, and the killing of a
man, root and branch, and all the tree, seed and fruit, is wholly destroyed,
and cut down all at once.

6. It is a sin, which produces that irregularity, 6. An irregular sin.
that although the sinners should truly repent, and have their sins pardoned
by God, which is but seldom seen, that they do; yet they cannot promoveri, be
advanced, or proceed on in Gods favor, and be so acceptable in Gods service,
and for to do him service, 1 Chronicles. 28.3.
as any other sinners may be, upon their repentance; as it appears plainly,
by what the Lord says unto David, that otherwise was a man according to Gods
own heart, and had heartily repented, and made 7 paenitential Psalms, for his
murder; thou shall not build an house for my name, because thou have been a man
of war, and have shed blood, not only the blood of Urias, but also very likely
the blood of others, that were innocent in the wars, as Soldiers use to do,
many times, slay the righteous with the wicked.

7. 7. A sin worse than Adams sin. Genesis 4.11, 12.
The odiousness of this sin is seen, by the punishment that the most just God
imposed on this sin: For when Cain slew his Brother, the Lored said unto him,
the voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me, that is, the voice of the
bloods of thy Brother, for so it is in the Original, that thou have spilt, that
is of all the blood and progeny that should have sprung from Abel, to have
replenished the earth, if thou had not spilt it, does most justly require,
that I should take vengeance on thee; therefore, thou art cursed from the
earth: And this his curse was so great, and of so large extent, that it reached
to the very earth that bare him up: and therefore the Lord adds, when thou
tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strongth, a
fugitive and a vagabond shall thou be in the earth: the which seems to be a far
heavier sentence inflicted upon him, so killing his brother, then that which
was imposed upon Adam, for offending Gods own Majesty, though there was a
straight charge and a Commandment, sub poena, The punishment of Cains murder
heavier than the punishment of Adams sin.
given to Adam, that he should not eat of the forbidden tree, lest he die; and
as yet, no precept given, to forbid the shedding of man's blood; For,

1. God does not say to Adam, thou art cursed for thy sin, but cursed is the
ground for thy sake; but unto Cain he says, thou ar^ cursed from the ground,
as if he had said, the curse shall not fall to the ground, but it shall light
upon thine own head.

2. He does nor say to Adam, when thou tillest the ground, it shall not yield
her strength unto thee, but thorns and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee,
that is, naturally, and of it self, which if thou had not sinned, would of it
self have brought thee, all sweet and pleasant fruits, shall now bring thee
nothing else but weeds and noysom flowers; but unto Cain he says, when thou
tillest the ground and manurest it, and usest all the art and skill that thou
can, to make it fruitful, yet it shall not yield her strength unto thee; so
that the unfruitfulness of a well tilled and well manured ground is the
punishment of Cains murder, and an additional curse, to that, which was
formerly imposed upon Adam.

3. He does not say to Adam, that he should be a vagabond, and have no
resting place upon the earth, Genesis 3.19.
but that he should eat his bread in the sweat of his face, until he should
return to the earth; but unto Cain he says, a Fugitive and a Vagabond shall
thou be in the earth: And therefore Cain, that knew well enough his Fathers
censure before, and now hearing his own sentence, so far exceeding his Fathers
punishment, cries out, Genesis 4.13.
my punishment is greater than I can bear.

And yet it is no marvel, that the punishment of this sin of murder should seem
greater than the punishment of Adams sin, or indeed of any other sin
whatsoever; for in nature, Why the punishment of this sin is so great.
let reason show you, who does offend you most, he that disobeyeth your voice
and breaks your Command, or he that seeks by all that he can, to take away your
life? And in Adams sin, and so in all other sins, that are but the
transgressing of Gods Command, there seems to be a leaving of the Being of God,
or the suffering of God still to be a God; as in the great sin of Idolatry,
though we make an Idol, which is a thing that has no being in the world, as
St. Paul says, to be our God, and fall down and worship that no being, with
that worship, which belongs to the true God; yet we do not thereby seek to
annihilate and to destroy the Being of the true God, we only rob him of his
honor, but we seek not to take away his life, we leave him still to be a God,
though we serve him not: But in the murdering or killing of a man, we do what
lies in us, to destroy and to bring to nothing the very Essence and being of
God; because we deface and destroy the Image of God, when as God himself is
invisible and inaccessible, and in nothing of all the things that he made, so
plainly and so exemplanly to be seen of us, as in the face of man: and
therefore of all the creatures and of all the things that are, man alone is
said to be principally the image of God, and in that respect, chiefly, to be
respected and cherished, and not to be murdered or killed; because that, in the
Image of God, God made man.

And therefore he that kills man, does, to the uttermost of his best
endeavor, his very best to kill God; because he destroys his Image, when he
can do nothing else, nor come at any thing else of God, but his Image: And if
as our adversaries do say, the service done to a dead Image, which is no where
commanded by God to be done, does presently redound ad prototypon, to the
Person represented by the Image: Then certainly we may be much surer, that the
defacing of Gods lively Image, that is man, whom God does so earnestly command
us to love, and so straightly prohibit us to hate, must needs be a disgracing
of God himself: and all the injuries and contempts that are done to this Image,
do presently redound to the very Person of God: And the City of Thessalonica,
besides many others, can well testify how severely the Emperors punished the
abuse, that was done to their Statua's or Images, when they deemed all the
dishonor that was offered unto their Images, to be as Treasons committed
against themselves.

8. And lastly, This sin of murder and killing of a man, 8. This sin robs
God of his temple.
not only defaceth the Image of God, but also robs God of his Temple, which
is sacrilege, and thrusts God out of his House, and makes none account of,
but trampleth under his feet that creature, which God did so highly esteem of,
and purchased at so high a rate, as with his own blood, and with no less than
his own death. And in a word, this unjust and malicious shedding of man's blood,
to death, is so odious, so heinous, and every way so horrible a sin in the
sight of God, as that it is impossible for me, had I the tongue of men and
Angels, to express the vileness and the exceeding heinousness of the same. The
only commandment that God gave immediately after the flood. Genesis 9.5.


And therefore God, to show unto us, how hateful this sin is in his sight, does
immediately after the Flood, give this great and straight Commandment, and the
only Commandment that he gives, to all the Sons of Noah, to abstain from
shedding of man's blood, and he does so pathetically, and with such terrible
threatenings, express the punishment of the Transgressors, as I know not the
like of any other sin in all the Scriptures, saying, surely, that you need not
doubt of it, at the hand of every beast will I require it; and though the
beasts be void of reason, or understand not what they do, yet will I not hold
them guiltless, if they shed man's blood: See Exodus 21.28. Genesis 9.5. See Number,
35. and Lev. 24. and Mat. 26.
and therefore much rather and far sooner at the hand of man, and at the hand
of every man's brother will I require the life of man: And for the due
observance of this strict account to be made, for the taking away of man's life,
he appointed Kings, and gave them authority to appoint Magistrates under them,
to take care and to see that whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man should his
blood be shed, that this sin might never escape unpunished. The reason why God
does so highly hate man killing.


And the reason why God is so severe in the punishment of this sin of
man-killing, is here rendered, and ought to be well considered, videlicet, for
that in the Image of God made he man; and so whosoever kills a man, except it
be whom the Law of God and the Law of the Land requires to be killed, is
guilty of destroying the Image of God: and God cannot endure, to have his own
lively Image, which himself has made, and no Painter nor Angel could make the
like, to be defaced: And therefore also, when God gave his Laws to us on Mount
Sinai, the first Commandment of all that do concern our duty toward man, after
the duty that we owe to our Parents, that bring us into the world, and do bring
us up, and feed us, when we could not feed our selves, is, Thou shall not kill.

And truly in these respects, and for the foresaid Reasons, I, for mine own
part, The Authors mind about killing men.
do so far hate and detest to kill any man, (except it be for such a necessity,
as compels me, to save mine own life, rather to kill him, that maliciously
seeks my life, than suffer my self to be killed) that I had rather do any
servile work for my food, for a penny a day to buy bread, than to receive the
greatest Salary, honor and preferment, that the world could confer upon me for
killing men: Greg. and habetur 23. q. 8. S. in mortem:
And Ibelieve St. Gregory was not of any other mind than I am, or not far from
this mind, when he said, Si in mortem Longobardorum me miscere voluissem, hodie
Longobardorum gens nec regem nec ducem haberet: sed quia Deum timeo, in mortem
cujuslibet hominis me miscere formido: that is, If I might have my will, to be
the death of the Longobards, or if I would have them dead, the whole Nation of
the Longobards should have neither King nor Captain at this day: but because I
fear God, I will not wish the death of any man, but I tremble for fear of being
the death of any man: And he that fears God, will certainly with St. Gregory,
be very much afraid to join himself to any man's death, but will study by all
means, vacuas caedis habere manus, to keep his hands clean from all blood,
especially the blood of Innocents.

And so you see, how unnatural, how unreasonable, how devilish, now beastly,
how heinous, how inexplicable, and how hateful and detestable in the sight of
God is the murdering and killing of a man, That every kind of murder or
mankilling is not the sin of the Antichrist.
which is the Image of God. And,

Yet you must know, that not the simple and single murdering or killing of a
man, is the sin of the Antichrist; for if that were his sin, we should have
10000 Antichrists; and therefore it could not be his proper and peculiar sin,
when that sin is committed by so many; but his sin is such a murder, and such a
killing and slaughtering of a man or men, as comes to the (...), the very
height and highest top of this mischief, so high as none other man committed
the like murder: For this sin of murder and manslaughter, is like a huge and
mighty tree, that has many boughs and branches, or rather like a long Ladder
that has many staves, before you can come to the top of it; and the highest
degree of this mischief, the uppermost staff in this Ladder, and the worst
kind of all the many many kinds of murders and man-killing, is the proper and
peculiar sin of the Antichrist, which since the death of Christ, never any man,
nor any degree of men committed, but the Antichrist.

And therefore, that we may more perfectly see, and the more plainly understand
the sin of the Antichrist, we must untwist the Cable and unfold the
multiplicity of this many-headed Monster, Two kinds of hom cide or man killing
1. Lawful.
the murdering and slaughtering of a man. And,

First of all, we must remember, that this man-killing or shedding of humane
blood is distributed into two several species.

1. The one lawful, and required by God himself to be done, as of those that
maliciously kill any man, or those that prove Traitors, Idolaters, or any such
high transgressors of the Law of God, or of the Kingdom or Commonwealth, that
enjoin such penalties upon such obstinate and great Offenders, as will not
submit themselves to observe the Law: And this kind of man-killing comes not
within the sphere and compass of my discourse, neither is it the sin of the
Antichrist, nor any ways, if rightly done, distastful, but most acceptable in
the sight of God.

2. The other kind of man-killing, 2. Unlawful three ways.
is that, which is altogether unlawful and most odious in the sight of God and
all good men: And this kind of man-killing may be done three manner of ways,
that is, 1. With the Heart, and this is very bad. 2. With the Tongue, and this
is far worse. 3. With the Hand, and this is the worst of all.


1. We may kill our neighbor, 1. With the heart.
in our heart and with our heart, four special ways. 1. By Desire. 2. By
Anger. 3. By Envy. 4. By Hatred.
For,

1. Psalm. 5.6.
The Prophet says, the Lord abhors the blood-thirsty and deceitful man,
that is, the Lord hates him, that desires and longs after a man's death, as
he that is thirsty, desires drink: and I fear that too too many are guilty in
this kind, the Lord rectify our desires.

2. Our Savior says, Mat. 5.22.
Whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause, he shall be in danger of
the judgment; and therefore we should study to suporess our anger, which is
furor brevis, and does rest in the bosom of fools, says the wise man.

3. The Apostle speaking of the wickedness of the Gentiles, says, They were
full of envy, Romans 1.29. Sap. 14.4.
murder, debate: And the wise man says, alius alium per invidiam occidit; one
man slays another through envy; as Cain through envy slew his own Brother
Abel: and the Jews through envy crucified our Savior Christ, and therefore
periere, quia maluerunt invidere quam credere, Cyprian in sermon de livore. 1
John 3.15.
they perished says St. Cyprian, because they chose rather to ervy him, than
to believe in him.

4. St. John says, that whosoever hates his brother is a manslayer; and the
Lord says, thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart: For as he that
looks on a woman to Just after her, has committed adultery in his heart, so
he that hates his brother, has killed him in his heart.

2. The Tongue kills many men, and kills them many ways; yea, 2. With the
Tongue. Jam. 3.6, 7.
plures lingua quam gladio periere, the Tongue has slain more than the Sword;
for as S. James says, the tongue is a fire, and a world of wickedness, it is
an unruly evil, full of deadly poison; and the Son of Syrach says, It has
destroyed many that were at peace.

And the Tongue, besides those that it kills by bearing false witness against
them, Eccles. 28.13.
as the men of Belial did against Naboth, and the Jews against Christ, kills
men two special ways.

1. By Flattery. 2. By Detraction. And,

1. S. Augustine says, that Plus nocet lingua adulatoris, quam gladius
persecutoris; the Tongue of the Flatterer does more mischief than the Sword of
the persecuter; and Antisthenes was wont to say, It was better for a man to
fall (...), among Ravens, than (...), among Flatterers, that do fasten men in
their faults.

2. The Prophet says, Viri detractores fuerunt in te, ad effundendum
sanguinem, Ezekiel. 22.9.
In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood; and Job, saying to his
friends, that slandered his integrity, Why do you persecute me as God, and are
not satisfied with my flesh? Does intimate thereby, that Detractors and
Slanderers are like cruel Canibals that eat men's flesh and drink their blood;
Nam qui aliena detractione pascitur, procul dubio alienis carnibus saturatur,
for without doubt, says S. Gregory, whosoever delights himself with
detraction and the slandering of his neighbors, does feed and satisfy himself
with man's flesh.

And these murders and killing of men with the heart and with the tongue are
but steps, stairs and progresses, to the murder of the hand: For first we begin
to distaste, and to dislike the man; then we grow angry with him for some thing
that displeases us; and if he has any virtue, or good part in him, or any
honorable place, or preferment, or any love and good opinion from the people,
then presently we envy him, and then hate him, and so hate him more and more;
The steps progress and ascent of this sin of mankilling,
and now the Tongue will begin to play his part; and though in his presence it
will flatter him, whom the heart detesteth; yet in his absence it will lay
loads of scandalous imputations upon his person and upon his actions, even as
Absolon did upon the government of his own father, King David; and Maion
against the Government of William the King of Sicily, and abundance of such
varlets, as I could name, have done the like, against the Government of some
other Kings and most excellent men.

And when those bloodthirsty men have proceeded thus far, to envy his
happiness, and to hate his person, as Cain hated Abel, and the way is thus made
by scandalous aspersions and false imputations to make him odious and distasted
among the people, 3. With the hand.
there wants nothing but the stroke of the hand to effect the tragical murder
and killing of that man, whom they desire to destroy, be he King, Priest, or
Prophet; for so Zimri killed his King and his Master Ela; So Phocas slew his
Master, Diodorus Siculus. lib. 11.
the Emperor Mauritius; So the Servants of King Amon slew their King and their
Master; So Artabanus Captain of his Guard killed his own King and his Master
Xerxes, after he had retired out of Greece; So Brutus and Cassius with their
Associates killed Julius Caesar; and so many more such wicked Servants have, by
the foresaid steps, ascended to the slaughtering of their Kings and Masters, to
teach the way for others, that would not be without presidents, to do the like.

But here likewise we must well observe, that there are many kinds, and degrees
and ways of this bloody sin, which is the actual killing of a man; and
therefore we must look over those degrees and ways of murder, and the several
kinds of this man-killing, before we can find out the worst of them, which is
the proper and peculiar sin of the Antichrist, and which is most hateful unto
God: for the bloodthirsty murderer brings his design to pass by killing whom
he hates, Murderers do actually kill men two ways.
Either 1. With his own hands: Or, 2. By the aid, means and performance of some
others:
For

1. Some are so impatient, and the fire of their malice is so hot, 1. By their
own hands. Isa. 37.38.
that they must presently be the death of their brother with their own hands,
whenever, or wheresoever they find him, with the first opportunity: So Cain
killed Abel; So Joab killed Amasa; So Adramelech and Sharezzer killed their own
father Sennacherib; So Brutus and Cassius killed Caesar; So Antoninus killed
his own brother Geta in his Mothers lap; and so did many thousands more kill
and murder their Neighbors with their own hands.

2. 2. By others.
Others are so crafty and so witty, as they suppose, to find a way to effect
their own wicked end, that, to blind the World, and to evade the Sword of
justice, and, as they think, to escape the hand and judgment of God, they will
keep their own hands free from blood, and wash the same with Pilate, from the
blood of the innocent person whom they intend to destroy: But yet they will,
for all this, do as Pilate did, deliver Christ unto the Soldiers, to be
crucified; so will they be the men, that are the chief murderers of him: And
that two ways.
And that Either 1. Secretly by their Assassins, and those bloody butchers,
whom they procure to be their Instruments, to bring whom they hate, to an
untimely death. Or, 2. Publicly, by a Court of justice, which is to pronounce
judgment against Malefactors, that ought to be put to death by the Laws of God
and Man, and which Courts they procure to condemn, whom they hate, upon false
suggestions, though the party be never so innocent.


The first way Richard the Third procured the death of his two innocent
Nephews, 1. Secretly.
the Sons of Edward the fourth; and Edward the Second came unto his death the
same way, though it is not so well known who procured it; and so King David did
the like, by causing Joab to be the death of Urias, whom he ought rather to
have rewarded, than to have murdered him; and so do all they that procure their
wicked Instruments, to poison those whom they hate, as the Earl of Sommerset
procured the Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Francis Eleway, to poison Sir Thomas
Overbury. And such secret contrivings of their intentions, are very fine shifts
for Murderers and Malefactors to free themselves from blame, and from
punishment, if they could as well blind the eyes of the All-seeing God, as they
do many times the eyes of simple men; but though David's hands were far from the
Fact, and he seeming free from the blood of Urias, that was slain by the Sword
of the Enemy, yet God tells David, He was the Murderer; and his subtilty shall
not serve his turn to wipe away his punishment; for as the Devil, Aug. super
Johan.
says S. Augustine, is said to be a Murderer, Non gladio armatus, non ferro
accinctus, sed quia ad hominem veniendo, and verbum seminando occidit eum; not
because he kills with any weapons, Sword or Spear, but because he destroys
Man by his wicked Counsels, and by setting on others, his Instruments, to
destroy him; And therefore procul dubio decipiuntur, Idem and habetur de
paenit. did. 1. Periculose.
says the same Father, They are very much deceived, that think them only to be
Murderers, which lay violent hands upon their Neighbors, and not them also,
Per quorum concilium and fraudem, and hortationem, homines extinguntur; by
whose counsel, deceit, subtlety, persuasion or procurement, any man is unjustly
brought unto his death, whether it be suddenly by the Sword, or any other
violent way, or lingringly by poison.

The 2. 2. Publicly.
way that the blood-thirsty murderers use to bring whom they hate, and would
have killed, unto their death, I find twice practiced, and but twice, that
they brought their purpose to effect, that I can remember, in all the book of
God.

1. And this is likewise done two ways.
By a personal, and an inferior Court of justice, where one or 2. or very few
judges are deputed to sit, and judge the delinquents that are brought before
them.

2. By a national, and the highest Court of the whole Kingdom, where flos and
medulla regni, the choicest Peers and members of the Commonwealth do sit, to
judge, and to determine of the offenses, and the greatest affairs of the
Kingdom. And

1. 1. By an inferior Court of Justice.
I find, that the inferior Court of few Judges, did once condemn an innocent
person unto death, in the holy Scriptures; for so you may read, how Ahab and
Jezabel procured the Judges of Jesreel to condemn innocent Nabaoth, unto death;
and though we find not such another president in all the Scripture; yet I fear
that the like practice is used in many other places, where you may find such
an Ahab, and such Judges; but though Ahab thought he might with the harlot,
that commits adultery, and then wipes her mouth, and is clean, be freed from
this fact, because his wife procured it, and the Judges of Jezreel did
judicially, secunduns allegata and probatae, condemn him to death; yet the
Prophet tells Ahab, that God will condemn and punish him, and all his
posterity, for it; 1 Reg. 21.19. and 21.
for in the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy
blood, and God will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and
will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth-against the wall, and him that is shut
up and left in Israel; and so accordingly, Jehu caused the Rulers of Jezreel,
the very same Town where-Nabaoth was condemned, and likely the very same
Judges, 2 Reg. 10.7, 17.
that condemned him, to cut off the heads of 70 of Ahabs children: And when he
came to Samarta, he slew all that remained unto Ahab, until he had destroyed
him, according to the saying of the Lord by his Prophet.

2. I find one other example in the holy Scripture, and but one that I can
remember, 2. By the highest Court of Justice.
where the national Court, or the Synopsis and the Representative of the whole
Nation, did thus, judicially, condemn an innocent person unto death; and that
was, when the Sanhedrim, or High Parliament of Israel, where the High Priest
and the Elders sat, as chief Judges, condemned our Savior Christ, to death.

And I conceive, that the very like sin, is the proper and peculiat sin of the
Antichrist, What the proper sin of the Antichrist is: and why.
that is, a judicial condemning of an innocent person or persons, their
Superiors, (as Christ was) unto death, and that by the Representative of a
whole Kingdom;

one man can commit this sin, neither Pope, nor Turk, when it is to be acted by
the Representative of a whole Kingdom; therefore it can be no common sin, but
a sin only proper to such a Court, when as none but such a Court can commit it.

usually done, when we cannot read in any History, since the Jews condemned
Christ, to these our times, of any national Court, that agreed to condemn an
innocent person or persons, their Superiors, unto death; therefore this sin is
proper and peculiar to that Court that commits it, when as no other Court in an
other place, or at any other time, has committed it.

murder or homicide, be odious, and wicked, and detestable in the sight of God;
then certainly this judiciary murder, whereby the innocent person is not
killed, as was Abell or Amasa, but is condemned to death deliberately, by a
Court of Justice, as was Nabaoth by the Judges of Jezreel, and especially by
the Highest Court of the Kingdom, as Christ was by the Sanhedrim, and
Parliament of the Jews, at Jerusalem, must needs be most transcendently
abominable, and wicked, above all other kind of murders whatsoever; for that
this is not a single and simple sin of Homicide or murder, and shedding of man's
blood, to the defacing of Gods image, which I showed you was bad enough; but it
is morbus complicatus, a twifted decompound, multiplied sin of many many
branches; so that, neither Cain's malicious killing of his brother Abell, nor
Joabs traiterours murdering of Amasa, nor Adramelech his unnatural parricide of
Sennacherib, nor David's crafty killing of Vrias, nor Brutus and Cassius
conspiring the death of Caesar, nor Rich. the 3. secret murdering of his
Nephews, nor any other kind of Murder whatsoever, can be near comparably so
heinous, and so abominably odious, as this judiciary murder, which uno ictu, by
one single and simple sentence, does cast an infinite number of persons into a
multiplicity of sins, and binds them all together, to be liable to the
fevere judgment of the just God, and wrongs many more, whom their sin and malice
cannot defile; for that hereby,

1. The seat of judgment is made the stool of wickedness, the throne of Satan,
The manifold mischiefs of a judicial condemning of an innocent person to death.
John 8.
and the shambles and slaughterhouse of innocent blood, to do the greatest
wrong that can be done, where we should expect the greatest right.

2. The persons here offending are many many persons, as, the Witnesses
forsworn and perjured, the Jurie corrupted and involved in the blood of the
innocent, and in the sin of the Prosecutor, and the Judge or Judges Devils,
that were Liars, and murderers, as our Savior says, from the beginning, and
they do here, by their unjust judgment, wrong,

1. The innocent person, that is condemned;

2. The place, that is abused and defiled;

3. And they that do all these things against Christ can be no other than the
Great Antichrist.
All good people, that are scandalized and grieved to see this unjust
proceeding;

4. All lightheaded credulous people, that hold and believe the innocent
condemned person to be a malefactor, and justly condemned;

5. God himself, that is here by this unjust sentence,

1. Cast out of his throne of justice, and the Devil placed for a Judge in his
stead.

2. He is made a liar to pronounce false sentence:

3. He is made that which is worse, an unjust God, to condemn an innocent
person.

4. He is made a murderer, to kill a man, that by the Law deserves not to die.

5. and Lastly, He is made hereby a very Devil; for he that does all these
things, can be none other than the Devil.

And you know, the Judge stands here, loco Dei, as Gods Vicegerent, and
Deputy, in God's stead; and God says of them, dixi dii estis, I said you are
Gods, and commands the people to reverence, and to honor them as Gods, because
they possess the place, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
and execute the judgment of God; as the good King Jehoshaphat tells them.

Therefore this judicial condemning of an innocent man to death, does, as much
as lies both in the Judge and Prosecutors, make the just God to be an unjust
devil, which is far worse, than to ungod him, or making him no God at all;
because, as Plut arch says, and proves it too, satius est nullos deos esse
credere, quam deos noxios; it were better to believe there were no God, than to
be ^e^e that he is an unjust, and a wicked God: as it is more honor to think
there was never such a man as Alexander or Julius Caesar, than to think they
were such savage men, and bloody murderers, and Caniballs, as would kill and
eat their own wives and children;

And may not God therefore much rather say to such transcendent offenders, as
he does in a lower degree say unto the Jews, for swearing by them that are no
Gods, and assembling themselves in the Harlots houses; how shall I pardon thee
for this? as if the hainousness of this sin, of a judicial murder, and
mankilling, unjustly prosecuted, and sentenced to death, being far more odious
than any of those sins of the Jews, went beyond the understanding of the
omniscient and all-knowing God, to find out the way and the means to pardon
it; especially, if you consider these four particulars, that are evidently to
be seen, in the unjust judicial sentence, and killing of Christ, and in that
sin of the Antichrist; killing the Witnesses of Christ.

1. Four special things considerable in the Jews sin, murdering Christ; and in
the sin of the Antichrist in killing the a witnesses.
The sin it self, which is not a private, but a public sin, not a rash,
furious and precipitate manslaughter, but a solemn, deliberate unjust judicial
murder, and defacing of Gods image.

2. The sinner, or murderer, not a single person, as, Cain, or Joab, but a
collected multitude of people, the nobility and gentry, and the Representative
of the whole Nation.

3. The person killed, not our inferior, or subject, as Urias was unto David,
and Naboth unto Ahab; nor our equal, as Abel was unto Cain, and Amasa to Joab;
but our superior, our King, our father our Priest, and our Prophet, as Christ
was unto the Jews, and as the two witnesses of Christ are, whom the Antichrist
will destroy.

4. The end, why these sinful murderers do thus kill those eminent persons,
expressed by our Savior Christ in the Parable of the husbandmen, that killed
the Kings son, that he, being the heir, and being killed, the inheritance might
be their own, and they should rule and reign as Kings, and have all for
themselves; that was their chiefest aim; for they had learnt their Poetry to
make every Verse true, that ends with, semper tibi proximus esto. As, Cum
fueris faelix, The covetous and ambitious man's Poetry.
semper tibi proximus esto; Si fueris Romee, semper tibi proximus esto; Si
fueris alibi, semper tibi proximus esto; Si tibi sint nati, semper tibi
proximus esto; Si tibi sint nulli, semper tibi proximus esto;
and the like.

So their hate, their malice, and their murder, was not for the love of
justice, to have sin punished; but for the love of themselves, that they might
have the pleasure and the profit, for their iniquity.

And now, having passed through these Particulars, and seen the highest step
and staff of this ladder of homicide, and the worst degree or kind of murder,
I say, the sin of the Antichrist is like the sin of the Jews in the
condemnation of Christ; The sin of the Jews condemning Christ, what it was.
which was, an usurpation by Inferiors and Subjects, as the Jews were to
Christ, of the highest Court and throne of justice, and thence judicially and
most unjustly to condemn to death, and accordingly to kill, and murder the most
eminent person, their superior; placed over them by God, to be their King, to
rule them, their Priest and Prophet to pray for them, and to instruct them, and
all this under the hypocritical cloak and pretense of piety and Religion, but
indeed to this end, that they might get the rule, Government, and Dominion into
their own hands. And I conceive, the proper and peculiar sin of the Antichrist,
that the Apostle means in this place, The sin of the Antichrist like unto the
sin of the Jews.
to be just like unto the same, and never committed, either by the Pope or
Turk, or any other single person whatsoever, when it is to be done by a court,
and a collected multitude of men, which therefore makes the sin the more
odious and abominable in the sight of God, and of all good men.

And, if in all Aquinas Sums, or Antoninus his Titles, or in all the Tomes of
Abulensis, or the mighty Comments of Cornelius a lapide, or the painful Works
of Alstedius, or the Sums of Vices by Peraldus, or in and among all the
beastly sins that Azorius in his moral Institutions, sets down, or, as the
Prophet Jeremy says, Jerem. 2.10.
Pass over to the Isles of Shittim and see, send unto Kedar, and consider
diligently and see, if there be such a thing; or if you can find in any
Author, divine or humane, a sin more injurious to man, and more odious and
abominable in the sight of God, than this, thus committed by the Jews against
Christ, and by the Antichrist against the 2 witnesses of Christ, then will I
retract mine Assertion, and submit my self to the correction of the
Presbyterians, for misinterpreting this place, and mistaking this sin here
meant by our Apostle.

But to justify my Collection, you may remember, how angry the Lord was, Numb.
16.32.
and how terribly he punished Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with such a
punishment, as the like is not found in all the book of God, for despising
their Superiors and Governors, and refusing to yield obedience to Moses and
Aaron, in, but giving spiteful and scandalous words unto them, and saying,
when Moses called them, we will not come up: Numb. 16.12, 14.
how angry then, and what punishment, think you, would the Lord have inflicted
on these rebellious Subjects, if they had most wickedly, and thus
hypocritically, as I now showed you, killed Moses and Aaron, by a formal
judiciary judgment of a whole Court of justice?

And to make it plain and evident, that this man-killing is the notorious and
proper, peculiar sin of the Antichrist, by which, as by a plain and singular
character, he might be known to be the Antichrist, when he came into the world,
the holy Ghost says, that when the two Witnesses of Christ, the Supreme
Magistrate, E. H. de Antic. p. 76.
and the chief Pastor of Gods people, as some of the best Interpreters say,
have finished their testimony, that is, according to the time determined by
God, the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, that is, the
Antichrist, as all Interpreters do confess, shall make war against them, Revel.
11.7.
and shall overcome them and kill them, that is, in manner and form as I showed
to you before; because no other kind of killing them, The sin of Antichrist
proved to be the foresaid sin of man-killing.
could have been so odious and so abominable in the sight of God: And the
Apostle here, in 2 These. 2.3. does inrimate as much in the very next words,
that do immediately follow the man of sin, by calling him presently, (...), the
child of perdition, or the son of destruction, or of the destroyer, which I
find only ascribed to Judas, that betrayed Christ, and delivered him to death,
and to the Antichrist, that brought the witnesses of Christ to death: and so
both Judas and the Antichrist are rightly termed the sons of destruction, both
actively and passively.

1. Actively, in destroying and bringing others to destruction, as Judas did
Christ, and the Antichrist the Witnesses. And,

2. Vide Maresium in dissertat. de ontichristo, page 50.
Passively, in destroying themselves, as Judas did, in hanging himself, and the
Antichrist will do, for so unjustly delivering his King and his Master to be
destroyed. And so you have seen, what sin is the notorious, proper and peculiar
sin of the Antichrist, the murdering of the Witnesses.

2. 2. Who has committed this sin, that is the sin of the antichrist. Neither
the Pope nor the turk.
We are now to enquire, whom we can find, if we can find any, that has
committed, and thus committed, as I showed you, this sin: And here I must tell
you, it is far safer to tell you who did it not, than to name to you, who has
done it: But I am sure that neither the Pope nor the Turk has done it, neither
could they do it.

Inferiors and Subjects against their Superiors and Governors, as the Jews
did against Christ, and Corah, Dathan and Abiram against Moses and Aaron, that
were their Rulers and their Teachers; and the Pope has no superior Pastor, to
instruct him, nor the Turk any Emperor or King, to command him.

collected multitude, and a High Court of Justice, the highest Court in the
Kingdom where it should be done, and therefore neither by the Pope nor the
Turk, could it be done.

Who then has done it? This Book was written in the time of the Usurper.
Truly, if any Court has done such an Act, I think I need not, if I knew it,
digito demonstrare, and dieier hic est; because such a public Fact, and so
abominable in the sight of men, that is, as the Apostle speaks of the death of
Christ, not done in a corner, is known far and near, and talked of by young and
old.

Yet this much I will tell thee, my friendly Reader, for I think none but my
friends will read me, that I have read very many Histories, both of the Greeks
and Latins, and many of the Histories of the Church, Whence the 9 Speeches in
Parliament were collected.
and the Lives of many Kings and Emperors, both of our own Kingdom, and of
other Nations, and the Nine several speeches, as I believe, of the best
anti-regal Orators of the Long Parliament, concerning the Power of Parliament
to proceed against their King for mis-government: The which Speeches, if I be
not much mistaken, were all taken and collected out of Dolmans Book, that was
the great Jesuit and arch-enemy of Queen Elizabeth, Father Parsons, that
printed a Book full of treason against the Queens Majesty, under the feigned
name of Dolman; and the Book was condemned by Act of Parliament, the 35th. year
of Queen Elizabeth, and now with the change of the Title, the most of it is
reprinted, to show the Power of Parliament to proceed against their King; which
by that Act of the 25th. of the Queen, I conceive to be then judged no less
than crimen laesae Majestatis, a crime of High Treason against the Queen,
though in the Long Parliament, it was thought a point of just proceeding
against our Kings, especially against King Charles.

And yet in all the Histories that I have read, and in all those Nine Speeches,
and all those Examples, What Kings were deposed or killed by their Subjects.
that those Orators do produce, of the Kings and Princes, that were deposed,
banished or killed by their Subjects, for their Tyranny and mis-government, as
Saul and Ammon, by the Jews, Romulus, Tarquinius, Julius Caesar, Nero,
Domitian, Heliogabulus, Maxentius, Constantine the 6th. and Irene, by the
Romans; Childereck and Charles of Lorein, by the French; Flaveo Suintilla, Don
Alonso el Sabio, and Don Pedro, by the Spaniards; Don Sancho, by the Portugals:
Henry the 3. by the Polonians: Gustavus, by the Swedes: Cisternus, by the
Danes: Edwin, John, Edward the 2. Richard the 2. Henry the 6. and Richard the
3. by the English: Which are all but obliquely and poorly produced, and might
by a reasonable Historian be fully answered; especially because according to
that true Rule, Vivitur praeceptis, non exemplis: We are to frame our lives by
Precepts, as God commands us, and not by examples, as other men have done:
For I can have examples enough, beyond number, of men that have committed
murders, and that have been Robbers and Adulterers, and the like: And shall I
therefore follow their examples? God forbid. So many Nations have done thus and
thus unto their Kings: And will that warrant us, That we ought not to follow
unjust examples.
do to the like? By no means: Because we are to look, not what other Nations
do, but what God commands us to do: and he commands us, not to touch his
Anointed, nor to speak evil of the Governor of the people, be he good, or be
he bad; for if he be good, nutritor est tuus, he is thy preserver, and thank
God for him; and if he be bad, tentator est tuus, God sent him for thy trial,
and thou must not kick against God, but receive thy trial with patience, until
he that sent him in his anger, takes him away, in his wrath against him, and in
his love to thee; and he can take him away when he pleases; till which time,
with David, thou should rest thy self contented, as he did, to endure the
Tyranny of Saul: though I say, that I read of those foresaid Princes, that were
deposed, or killed by the foresaid Nations, and of many others, Kings and
Princes, that as the Poet says, came not to their graves, sicca morte, And as
the Parliament proceeded against King Charles.
without blood; yet I find not any one of them all, in any Nation whatsoever,
to have been proceeded against, and to have been condemned and killed modo and
forma, as the Jews proceeded against Christ, and the Antichrist would proceed
against the Witnesses, and the Parliament did against our King.

And therefore this sin of the Antichrist, is not an usual or a common sin, as
Idolatry, blasphemy, murder, and the like, but such a murder, as is to be the
proper and peculiar sin of the Antichrist, and of none else, in which respect,
the Apostle calls the Antichrist (...), the man of the sin, by which sin, so
done, as I showed you, you might know him to be the Antichrist.

positively and plainly conclude the Long Parliament, to be the great
Antichrist, and to have committed the proper sin of the Antichrist, because
that they, being the highest Court of Justice, have condemned their Superiors,
their King and chief Pastor, judicially, as the Jews did Christ, unto death.

Judge to determine whether the Long Parliament has justly or unjustly
condemned them to death; for, if they have done justly therein, they have done
well, and no ways committed the sin of the Antichrist, which is such a
condemning, as I showed of an innocent person unto death, and of such persons,
as God requires not, but forbids to be condemned; but if they have unjustly
condemned them, let them look to it, and answer to God for it, I will not be
their Judge; let who will determine the question: but I will proceed in the
Apostles description of this man of sin, that is, the Antichrist.

And to show that the Antichrist is full of other sins, though this man-killing
thus, That the antichrist will be full of other sins.
as I showed, be his Master sin, St. Paul goes on to set out some other of his
sins that tend to produce and to perfect the former sin; saying, that he should
oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped.
So that,

He is (...), an opposer, or an adversary, 1. A Rebel and an opposer of his
King and of his Passor.
as both the Syriack and the vulgar Latin reads it; and as learned Zanchius
says, this word (...), in Greek, answers to the word Satan in Hebrew, and as
the Son of Perdition, which the Apostle here ascribes unto the Antichrist, so
this word adversary alludeth unto Judas, of whom Christ says, have not I
chosen twelve, and one of you is a Devil? And why a Devil? but because he
proved himself to be a hypocritical Traitor, to betray his King and his Master
Christ, which is the head of the Church; and so is the Antichrist (...), a
Devil, for betraying his King and the Church, which is the Body of Christ; and
so our Savior says unto Peter, (...), John 6.70.
get thee behind me Satan, And why Satan? but because he was herein (...), that
comes of (...), contra, against, and (...), jaccre, to throw, and it
signifies, a gainsayer, a hinderer, an opposer, that would not have Christ to
do the service of God, and the work for the which he came into the world;
though Peter pretended thus contra-jacere, to cross Christ out of his love to
Christ; and so the best Critics tell us, that (...) significat adversarium,
and quovis modo alteri oppositum, signifies an adversary, and him that
opposes another any manner of way: And Aristotle says, (...), opponi unum
alteri dicitur quadrifariam; Arist. in Categ.
one may be said to oppose another four manner of ways: And the Antichrist,
says Maresius, not once through error, Maresius Let the reader judge whether
this be fulfilled in the Long Parliament. A true saying of Beza.
like Peter, sed perpetuo destinatoque consilio Deum oppugnat, ut Satanas; but
perpetually and of set purpose, opposes God, like Satan, and does especially
contra-jacere, throw against, rebel and oppose his King and his Pastor, his
civil and his spiritual Governors; and therefore is he rightly termed Satan,
or qui adversatur, or adversarius est, he that is an adversary, and that not
only against man, but li^ewise against God; because as Beza says, hujus
ordinis deus est author, ut qui sunt rebels, sciant sese cum Deo ipso bellum
gerere, God is the author and the approver of regal power, and so likewise of
our spiritual Governors, that they which rebel and op ose their King or their
Pastors, might know, that they wage war, and set themselves, like Satan as
adversaries against God himself, though they should pretend with S. 2. An
exalter of himself above his King and above his Pastor.
Peter to do it out of their love to God.

2. As the man of sin is (...), an adversary, to set himself against, and to
oppose his King and Pastors, the chief Rule's and Governors of the people and
Gods Church, and to make war with these witnesses of Christ, and the upholders
of his truth, and his Gospel, and to overcome them, and to kill hem; so having
vanquished and subdued them, he then becomes (...), self efferens, a lifter up
and an exalter of himself (...), supraomnem, above all men or every man, as the
Syriack Interpreter reads it, The Pope or Turk cannot be here meant; and why.
or above every one; or as some Greek Copies have it, (...), above every thing,
(...), that is called God: So that this does sufficiently show, how that before
his exaltation and his lifting up, he was an Inferior and a Subject; therefore
neither the Pope nor the Turk, because they are inferior and subject to none,
that they should lift themselves above them; but this man of sin, having now
made war with these Witnesses, that were his Governors and Superiors, and
having subdued them, he exalts himself above them, and will be a Subject to
them no longer, 1. An exalter of himself above his King.
nor be ruled by any of them any more. For,

1. He will exalt himself (...), above every thing or every one, that is called
god; and that is, above his King: For you must not think, that this man of sin
is so void of reason, as to think, that he can exalt himself above the eternal
and omnipotent God: For who can lift up himself above the Almighty God? or
challenge to be worshipped as that God? But the meaning is, that he will exalt
himself, super deos nuncupativos, Gorhan in loc.
non super eum, qui deus est naturae proprietate; not above him that is
essentially the true God, by the propriety of his nature, but above all the
nuncupative gods, says Gorhan: And we find, as he says, three sorts of these
nuncupative gods. That there are three sorts of nuncupative gods.


1. Falsa nuncupatione, by a false and unjust nomination, as are all the Idols,
Images, and the false gods of the Gentiles, gods falsely called, and unjustly
termed gods, when as indeed they were but Devils.

2. Gratuita adoptione, by a free grant and favor of God, who said to those he
honored, you are gods.

3. Delegata potestate, by a peculiar deputation, and a special commission from
God, to some persons, Exodus 7.1. c. 4.16.
to be as gods unto others, as where God says unto Moses, I have made thee
Pharaohs god, and to Aaron, thou shall be in stead of god.

And therefore, to show that he means not, that the Antichrist should fight
against the God of Heaven, and exalt himself above the Almighty God, the
Apostle adds, that he will exalt himself, (...), above all that is called
God; or as Beza reads it, Adversus quicquid dicitur Deus, He lifts up himself
against whatsoever is said to be God for otherwise Antiochus, that, as
Tremellius says, Daniel speaks of, Chap. 11. v. 38. and is confessed by all the
best Interpreters, to be the Type of the Antichrist, Mr. Mede p. 94.
is himself said to worship Maozim, which Mr. Mede renders Mahuzzimos, Deum
roborum, the God of Forces; and that, his God, whom he worshipped, Tremellius
thinks to be Jupiter Olympus; or, as it may be, the heathenish Mars, the
Gentiles God of War, by whose aid and affistance he believed, that he obtained
all his Victories; because this Maozim signifies the God of Forces, though I
confess, that under the name of Forces may be comprehended all that appertains
unto the War, as Men, Money and Ammunition, as well as the Victory: And as
Antiochus worshipped his God, so the Antichrist, says Cornelius a Lapide, Suum
Daemonem colet, will pretend to worship the Almighty God, but will exalt
himself above all those that are called Gods.

And who are they that are chiefly called Gods, but the supreme. Magistrate, or
the prime Governor of any Kingdom or Commonwealth? He that is appointed by God
to have the rule and power over all the rest: For so God says unto Moses,
Exodus 7.1.
I have made thee a God unto Pharaoh, that is, I have made thee higher and
greater than Pharaoh, by giving thee power and authority, as a Judge, to
condemn him, and as a God, to punish and to chastise him: and unto Aaron, thou
shall be instead of God, Chap. 4.16.
that is, to direct him in his Office of High Priest, and to command him to
discharge the same, as he ought to do, and to reprove and correct him, when he
does neglect it; which are the principal things, duties and Prerogatives of any
King or prime Magistrate of any Kingdom or Commonwealth.

And thus all the best Orthodox Interpreters, both Papists and Protestants do
agree, that the Apostle means here, Vide Tremellium in Joh. 10.34.
that the Antichrist should exalt himself above his King; because the Scripture
does most properly and plainly speak it of Kings, when God says, Dixi
Diiestis, I have said, you are Gods; and our Savior does primarily and
principally mean Kings when he cites the same saying against the Pharisees, as
Beza witnesses, saying, Testimonium quod citat Christus in Psalm. 82. v. 6.
Habetur, That in Psalm. 82.6. Kings are understood by Gods.
ubi expostulat Deus cum regibus terrae, qui imperio and potentia, quam a Deo
acceperant, abuterentur, hoc Christus ad presentem causam, accommodat, quod
deorum nomine ornemur, qui ad regendum mundum sunt ministri; that is, the
testimony which Christ cites against the Pharisees is found in Psalm. 82. v. 6.
where God ex^ostulateth with the Kings of the Earth, which abused that rule and
power, which they received from God; Beza in Annotat. in Joh. 10.37.
and this Christ applies to the present occasion, that they, which are Gods
Ministers and Deputies to govern the World, are honored with the name of Gods.
And so, the first words of that Psalm do sufficiently show, that Kings are to
be understood there by Gods; for God stands in the Congregation of Princes,
says the Prophet, he is a Judge among Gods, and therefore by God in this
place, the Apostle means the King, that God has set over this man of sin to
rule him, as well as others; because the Kings are appointed by God to govern,
and to judge the people of God: and therefore he tells his people plainly, By
me Kings do reign, that is, Prove. 8.15.
not only by my permission and suffering of them to reign, as I suffer many
disorders, and many evils to be done; but they reign and rule by my authority
and by my appointment, that have ordained, and set your Kings to reign and rule
over you; for they do sit in the thrones of judgment, as Gods Deputies and
Vicegerents, in Gods stead; to exercise a part of Gods power here on earth,
which is, as the Poet can tell you, Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos.
The lawful power of Kings.
To defend and to reward the good and obedient Subjects, and to punish the
rebellious, the wicked, and the wrong doers; and to that end, as God has the
Keys of heaven and of hell, to let the Godly enter into glory, and to shut up
the wicked within the Chambers of death; so Kings have potestatem vitae and
necis, the power of life and death, that is, to preserve the life of the
innocent, and to put the transgressors unto death, or to pardon them, if they
see cause, and to spare their life, which is the greatest power on earth; but
not to put to death whom they please, and for what cause soever they list,
which is the property and practice of an unjust Tyrant, and not the liberty of
a good and a righteous King.

So you see the honor, power and prerogative, that God has conferred upon
Kings, and is warranted and confirmed by our Savior Christ; and therefore
ought to be ascribed and yielded unto them by their Subjects; especially if
they be Christians, and such as profess to know the will of God. Let the Reader
Judge whether this be not fulfilled in the long Parliament.


And yet the Apostle tells us, that this man of sin, which is the Antichrist,
will exalt himself above his King; and I will not judge, but refer it to the
World to judge, whether the long Parliament and their adherents have not denied
this honor, worship and obedience, and indeed every part and parcel of that
honor, which God has granted and commanded to be yielded unto their King? Or,
whether they have not actually exalted themselves above their King? And whether
their words in their Petition to the King, The words of the Parliament in their
Petition to the King.
wherein they say, The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons in Parliament;
and therein further say, That his Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects
have represented their most dutiful affections in advising and desiring those
things which were most necessary for his Majesty's safety and honor; and in
the Conclusion thereof do say, That his Majesty's personal safety, and royal
honor and greatness were much dearer unto them than their own Lives and
Fortunes; being put in one end of the balance, and the warring against him,
and especially, the cutting off of the Kings head, in the other end of the
balance, where both their love and their hatred might be seen at once, do not
prove just like the Soldiers dealing with Christ, to bow their knees unto him,
Mat. 27.29.
to put a Crown on his head, and a Scepter in his hand, and to say, Hail King
of the Jews, as if his personal safety, and royal honor and greatness were
much dearer unto them than their own lives and fortunes: and yet immediately to
spit in his face, and to hang him up upon a tree? Which is the most paelpable,
the greatest and the grossest hypocrisy and mockery in the World; or I may
justly say with the words of Agur, Prove. 30.2.
Surely, I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a
man; For, Quid audiam verba, cum videam contraria facta? Will any wise man
believe men's words, when their deeds tell them to their faces, that they lie?
And how shall I believe, that his personal safety, and royal honor and
greatness were much dearer unto them than their lives and fortunes, when I see
them taking away his Life? And after they had finished the Tragedy of his life,
and had taken off his Head, to do, as the Athenians did with Herostratus that
burnt the Temple of Diana, that is, to extinguish with his Person, his Name,
his Memorial, and his Office; When they would not suffer his Friends, and his
Servants, to keep their King and their Masters Picture in their private
Chambers, but searched their houses, as they did my house, to see if they could
find the Kings Picture: And when, as the Prophet tells us, the lawless Jews
said, Hos. 10.3.
We will have no King, because we fear not the Lord; and what then should a
King do to us? For we, that fear not the Lord, will never reverence any King;
no more than they, that will have no King, will never fear the Lord; because
God has coupled the fear of the Lord and of the King together, with such an
indissoluble knot, that whosoever fears God, cannot choose but fear and
reverence his King; and he that fears not his King cannot be truly said to
fear God; Prove. 24.21.
So the Parliament said, We will have no more Kings, but we will be, as our
Neighbor Nation is, a Free State and a Commonwealth.

But for all this their saying, That they will have no King, it is demanded, If
these men proved not apt Scholars of those dissembling Jews, and imitate those
their good Masters to a hair? for as those Jews said, We will have no King,
that is, no Kingdom; Gods appointment, or no lawful King, that has a just
right and title unto his Kingdom; yet if you look but two Chapters before, you
shall find how God complains, they had set up Kings, Hos. 8.4.
but not by him; and this was first in their intention, before they rejected
their lawful King, that God had set over them, but last in the execution;
because the Old King must be first ejected, before any new Kings can be
established: So have nor the Parliament, when they beheaded their Old King, of
Gods appointment, and their lawful King, without question, made themselves new
kings over Gods people? I do not say, Usurping Kings, that had no right, nor
tyrannical Kings, that did no right unto the people; but as the Prophet says
of the Jews, so it is questioned, if the Parliament have not set up Princes,
yea, such Princes, as were, but Bankrupts, Shooe-makers, and Taylers, Drapers
and Tinkers, Carters and Cobblers, and the like Scum of men, of no learning,
Job. 30.1.
of no breeding, of no blood, and of no worth, but such as Job describes, whom
the ancient Gentry and Nobility of this Land, would have disdained, to have set
with the dogs of their flocks, and made these, or such as these, to be Rulers
in all Lands, the Justices of the peace; that, as the Prophet says, the Jewish
Rulers would sell the poor for a pair of shoes, so would these younger
brethren, that are to make their Fortunes, for a Print of Butter, or a
groars-worth of eggs, sell Justice, and betray the right of their poor
Neighbors? Such Rulers and such Princes, as no people in any Country would
have endured the like, to Lord it over them but those (...), Silly souls, and
poor spirited men, whose hearts and courages the Lord has taken from them, and
given up their best nobility and Gentry, to be quite befooled, besotted and
bafled by such Baffoons, when he intends to plague that Nation, and utterly
to lay all their glory and honor in the dust; even as the Poet elegantly
shows, Hoc placet, O superi, Lucan. Pharsal. l. 1.
cum vobis vertere cuncta
Propositum, nostris erroribus addere crimen.
Thus it pleases God, when for their sins he intends to plague, and to end the
glory of any people, to blind them so, that they commit error upon error,
adding thirst unto drunkenness, basenese unto their beastliness, and
Pharaoh-like, harden their hearts in their follies, that they cannot do what is
honorable, and what they ought, until they be destroyed and made Subjects to
those that were their Servants.

But God tells the Jews, that those new Kings of their own election, were no
Kings of his setting up, nor any Princes of his making, but of their own
establishment, Hos. 8.4. Usurping Kings no Kings of Gods making.
and so mere Usurpers through the pride of their hearts and the violence of
their hands, such as Athalia was among that people, and some others of our
former Kings, That I could name of this Land; and therefore the Author of the
Treatise of Usurpation, says, That the people of any Nation do owe unto such
Usurpers, such Kings of their own setting up, neither reverence nor obedience,
nor can any Officer with a safe conscience act under them; Though I say not
this, which is true, to deny that obedience to any Usurpers, or to the
unworthiest of our Rulers, which may stand with Gods Word, and may be yielded
unto them without sin; because I w^^ld have no weak people stirred up, to make
an insurrection against their powerful Governors; but when God, that casts
down one, and raises up another, takes away the right of our former Princes
and Rulers, and suffers others, how mean or how base soever they be, to step
into their places, and to sit upon the thrones of Majesty, and the seats of
Justice, howsoever this be come to pass, Deo permittente, my advice is to all
private men, to rest themselves contented for the present, and, as the Apostle
says, to study to be quiet, and for peace and quietness sake, to think it far
better to obey, than to rebel, and to leave all things to Gods disposing, Dan.
2.21. Romans 8.28. 2. The Antichrist will exalt himself above the Bishops.
qui disponit omnia suaviter, and will set all things right in his good time,
and as S. Paul says, Works all things together for the best to them that
love him.

2. The Apostle tells us, That as the Antichrist will be (...), and exalter of
himself above every one that is called God, and that is principally, as I
showed to you, above his King; because that in the first place, the King is
chiefly termed God; so he will likewise be (...), a lifter up of himself,
(...), that is, supra numen, as Tremellius reads it, or adversus numen, as Beza
renders it, above all that is worshipped, says our last and the Geneva
Translation; and the meaning is in few words, that the Antichrist will exalt
himself above the Bishops, and the Ecclesiastical Governors of the Church, as
well as above the King, which is the civil Governor of the Commonwealth; for
(...), the word which the Apostle uses, coming from (...), or (...), that is
read in profane Authors, as Pasor says, and signifies colere, that is,
religiously to worship, or the thing that we worship for Religion sake, from
whence a Proselite, or a religious man is termed (...), a pious and religious
person; and all sacred and holy things, that are dedicated, and consecrated for
Divine Service, are called (...), Religious things, or things that appertain to
Religion; which made Beza and Tremellius to translate it Numen, which
appertains to God; does sufficiently make it plain, and manifest, that the
Apostle means here, not the Emperor, nor any other King or civil Magistrate,
which had formerly expressed, under the name of God, as some Interpreters,
without reason, would have it; because that it is said, Act. 27.1.
that S. Paul was delivered to Julius that was a Centurion, (...), of Augustus
Band, says our Translation, whereas it should have been translated of the Band
of Augusta, That by (...), the Apostle means the spiritual Governors of the
Church.
or Augusta's band, which was the wife of Casar, and was styled (...), Augusta,
as Caesar himself was called Augustus, nam Augustos Graeci (...) vocant, for
the Graecians call Augustus, (...), says Maresius; but the Apostle
understands, as I said, the ecclesiastical Governors of Gods Church, whom we
reverence and worship, for their callings sake, even as the same Apostle
injoyneth the same Thessalonians to hold them worthy of double honor for their
works sake; that is, for the administration of the sacred Mysteries, the
preaching of the Gospel, and the deliverie of the blessed Sacraments, with the
pouring forth of their pr^yers to God, for a blessing unto the people, and
other the like religious acts and office; they do, in the service of God; and
above whom, notwithstanding their sacred function, and all the holy offices
they do to God, in the behalf of the people, the Antichrist will exalt himself,
and throw those reverend Bishops, whom all other good Christians honor, unto
the ground:

And therefore, That the Pope cannot be here understood to exalt himself (...),
supra numen.
as this cannot be applied to the Popes exalting of himself above the Emperors,
and the Kings of the earth; because he had showed this before, how the man of
sin, would exalt himself above them, and it had been but a frivolous
repetition, and tautalogie, which S. Paul never used, so suddenly to express
the same thing twice, and the later expression, that should be plainer, to be
obscurer than the former, contrary to all rules of Rhetoric; so can it neither
be any ways applied to the Popes exalting of himself above the rest of the
Bishops, and ecclesiastical Governors of the Church; because he is one of those
persons, and a special one too, whom the people worship, and reverence for his
calling and Religion sake; and therefore it were a Solicisme, and a very
improper speech to say, it was such a transcendent sin, for a man that is
worshipped for his Religions sake, to exalt himself above him that is worshipped
for his Religion sake, which seems to be none other, than to say, he will exalt
himself above himself, or above those that are no ways his superiors, but his
equals at the most, and at the best; as many other men do, besides the
Antichrist:

But the meaning of the Apostle is, that this man of sin, being but a subject,
will notwithstanding lift up himself above his King, that is, in the place of
God, over him: and being but a secular lay-person, he will, for all that, exalt
himself above his spiritual Pastors, whom he ought to worship, and to honor,
as all good Christians do, for their offices, and calling, and Religion sake:
this is the true meaning of the Apostles words.

And whether the long Parliament and their adherents have not been Adversaries,
Let the Reader judge whether this he not fulfilled in the long Paliament.
opposed and exalted themselves above the most reverend of all the Clergy, whom
the people honored and reverenced, for their Calling and Religion sake; and
not only above the dispensers of the holy things, and sacred Orders, and the
chiefest of all that have or ought to have any Government in the Church; but
also, (...), above all the forms of Religion, and religious worship, in the
Church of Christ; let the indifferent and judicious Reader judge of it.

3. 3. That the Antichrist will be an Usurper, and an intruder into the office
of the Church Governors, as well as of the civil Magistrate.
The Apostle still goes on to explain his former meaning, and to show further
the impieties of the Antichrist, and says, (...), so that he sits in the
temple of God, as God; which words immediately following (...), that thing, or
that person, whom we worship for religion sake, does likewise confirm the
former exposition of (...), to signify the Bishops, and the dispensers of the
holy things, of the sacred Orders, and of all the rest of the divine Mysteries;
because he exalts himself above them, to this end, and for this very purpose,
that he, as God, may sit in the temple of God, that is, that he may be as well
a Pope, in the Church, as a King in the Commonwealth; the supreme Governor and
disposer of all things, as well the Religious Worship of God, as the civil
Government of the people; for (...) here, which as Pasor truly says, comes
from (...), habito, to dwell, must not be raken for the Jews Temple at
Jerusalem, as the Greek Scholiast testifies, which is the error of some
Papists, What (...) properly signifies.
and of Grotius also, because Caligula intended to set up his Statue in that
Temple, under the name of Jupiter optimus, maximus, which notwithstanding was
not done; (...); but it must be understood of the Church of God, where God
dwells, and in the same sense, as our Savior uses the same word in John
2.19. John 2.19.
where he says, (...), destroy this temple: that is, where the Godhead
dwells, and I will rear it up in three days: for so the Church of Christ,
where God dwells is every where in the new Testament called (...), the Temple
of God, as Ephesians. 2.21. Apoc. 11.19. 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. and so
Theophilact says, he shall sit, non in templo specialiter, quod est
Hierosolymis, sed in Ecclesiis simpliciter, and in omni divino templo: not in
the temple, specially understood, which is at Jerusalem, but in the Churches
simply, and in every divine temple: and S. Hierome says, in templo dei
sedebit, vel Hierosolimis, Hieron. q. 11. ad Algas.
ut quidam putant, vel in Ecclesiis, ut verius arbitramur: he shall sit in the
temple of God, either, at Jerusalem, as some think, or else in the Churches,
as we more truly suppose:

And this clearly shows, that the seat of the Antichrist can be neither at
Rome, nor at Constantinople, as I have showed to you before, unless you will
yield, That neither Rome nor Constantinople, but the true Church, is the seat
of the Antichrist.
either Rome or Constantinople to be the truest and purest Church that Christ
has on earth: because the Antichrist will arise, and settle himself in that
Church, says the Apostle, which is, (...), the dwelling place of God, and not
where he has dwelt: that so he may do the most dishonor unto God, and the
most mischief unto his servants: and God dwells in the purest Church, no man
can deny it: and therefore the Antichrist must arise, and inthrone himself in
the purest Church, as I have fully proved before: and there, in that Church,
says the Apostle, he shows himself, as God, or as Erasmus does best
translate (...), (that comes from (...), demonstro) ostentans, boasting and
bragging, or prae se ferens, as Beza translates it, pretending that he is God,
or as Tremellius says, ostentet seipsum, ac si Deus esset, he will carry
himself, as if he were a God, that is, in Gods stead: the true King to rule the
people, and the right Bishop to govern the Church of Christ: or, That the
Antichrist will wholly direct the Clergy, and dispose of all things in the
Church, and about the service of God.
as some do read it, he would be esteemed and taken, tanquam sit Deus, for such
a supreme Monarch, and chief Governor over Gods Church, as God said unto Moses,
he should be to Aaron, his God, to direct him in all the service of the
Tabernacle, and the whole worship of God: so will the Antichrist be such a God,
to order, direct, and dispose of all the worship of God, and how all the
Clergy, in order and without order, should behave and carry themselves in the
whole service of the Church, which I take to be the true meaning of the Apostle
in this place.

For this showing himself, or bragging, that he is God, is not to be
understood, that he would have himself believed to be the true and everliving
God, and worshipped with divine worship, as the Historians tell us, Alexander,
Antigonus, Augustus, Caligula, Domician, and diverse others of the Caesar's and
Emperors, were transported to that height of pride and ambition, as, believing
themselves to be more than men, to require the people, their subjects, to take
them for Jupiter, Apollo, or some other of those anciently esteemed Gods, and
to ascribe the honor and worship, that was usually given to those Gods unto
themselves, as Altars, Sacrifices, and the like, whereof Virgil speaking of
Augustus says, Virgilius, eglog. 1.
-- Illius aram
Saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus.


And Horace also says, Horatius, epist. l. 2.
Jurandasque tuum per nomen ponimus aras.

But the meaning of the Apostle is, that this man of sin, the Antichrist, will
brag and boast unto the people, that he is all for God, and for the honor and
service of God, and therefore sits in the temple of God, to set out the right
directory of serving God, that so God, through him, and by his only means, and
endeavors, might be rightly served, and worshipped, according to his directory,
as the Mahometans worship Mahomet, according to his Alcoran, and we formerly
worshipped God according to the form prescribed unto us by our Governors, in
the book of Common Prayer, and so he shows, that he is God, that is, most
godly, and so a God, by the participation of the godliness and holiness of God;
which exposition does most fitly agree with (...); what he shows himself to
be, which is, the rediest way to deceive the people.

And whether the long Parliament has not usurped this ecclesiastical power and
jurisdiction over all the holy things, Let the Reader judge whether this be not
fulfilled in the long Parliament.
and to set forth the sole Directory of Gods service, tanquam sit Deus, as if
they alone had Aarons Office, to order all the other Priests and Levites, or
had the spirit of S. Paul infallibly to direct the Church of Christ, as well as
Moses his Authority, and the power of a King to rule the people: Let the
Parishes and people of God, that have none other form of Gods service, but what
the Parliament Preachers, and the observers of their Directory do use, be the
Judges, both of what service, and of what Doctrine is brought unto them.

I make small account, though I will not pass it unsaluted, of that
Observation, which some men have made, that the Parliament House, where the
members of the long Parliament sat, Arise Evans, in his Voice from heaven.
was a Chapel consecrated by King Edward the 3. to be the Temple of God, as
appears by many Records; because many other Parliaments have sat in that
Chapel, and yet not any of them all have usurped this power, to be the supreme
disposers and directors of all the holy service of God, the Commanders of all
the Bishops and Priests of the most high God, how to do his service, and what
service should be done unto him, and to make themselves the sole Possessors,
the right owners, to dispose, sell, or give, all the Revenues, lands, states,
Tithes, and offerings of the Church, as it is said, the Antichrist would do,
and which he may no better, nor so well do, as Scyrus and Procrustes, the two
vilest robbers, that we read of, could take thy purse, and all thy money by the
Highway side.

And here also I cannot omit to observe, Note the word fit in the temple.
that the Apostle says, that the man of sin, shall, not stand, but sit, in the
Temple of God; where the word (...), that comes from (...), which properly
signifies to fit, as where it is said, that Christ (...), John 4.6. and 20.12.
sat by the well; and so the two Angels were seen (...), sitting in white
raiments, is to be distinguished from (...), that is derived from (...), which
betokens and signifies collocare, to place, or to set a thing in some place,
as it is, where the Apostle says, if you have judgments of things pertaining
to this life, 1 Cor. 6.4.
(...), set such, or place them to judge, who are least esteemed in the Church;
and so, where it is said, that the Disciples brought the Ass, and the Colt,
(...), or as it is in some Copies, (...), they set him, Matthew 21.7.
or placed him thereon: And therefore it is rightly concluded by Maresius, that
this sitting in the Temple of God, is ill applied by Grotius, to Caius Caligula
his causing of his Statue to be placed in the Temple at Jerusalem: but it may
most properly signify the sitting of the Parliament, Let the Reader judge of
this.
or the like society of men, in that place; where they intend to acquiesce and
rest themselves, whether the place be physical or Metaphysical; And whether the
Parliament resolved, not only to stand in that their dignity and Authority for
a while, or intended to sit and acquiesce, and continue themselves and their
Successors for ever in the Parliament House, and in the Temple of God, to
govern the Church of God, as God, themselves know best: I will not judge of
their Intention.

CHAP. VI. That the Antichrist is a great Professor of Religion, and a seeming
Saint; That he belyeth his Profession, and is indeed the greatest Hypocrite in
the world; What the great Lie of the Antichrist is: What (...) signifies: What
it is to deny Jesus to be the Christ: And how the Father and the Son may be
denied two manner of ways.
2. THough I might go on, to explain unto you what S. Paul further sets down
concerning this man of sin, that is the Antichrist; yet, because they are not
such Characters and acts as are proper to him alone, and not also common to his
Proselites and Followers, and some of them likewise do rather show his
judgment, how he shall be destroyed, than his description, how he may be known;
therefore I will proceed from those sins, doings and demeanor of him, whereby
St. Paul has painted and set him forth, as I have showed you in the former
Chapter, to what the holy Ghost informs St. John, he should do, whereby the
people of God, might by what sins and description of him, as St. John sets
down, plainly know him and avoid him, when he should appear in the world, for
St. John shows many of the very same sins, and the same doings of the
Antichrist, though expressed in other terms, as St. Paul had done before; the
same sins by other names, and some other like sins added unto what you heard
before, because he is not satisfied with few sins.

And first, after that the holy Apostle and Evangelist St. John had said, they
had heard, that the Antichrist should come, even as St. Paul told the
Thessalonians, 2 These. 2.5.
that the Antichrist should come, that is, a great, eminent and transcendent
Antichrist: he adds, that now, that is, in his time, there were many
Antichrists; that is, of a lower form, and of lesser mischief, than the great
Antichrist would be: even as St. V. 7.
Paul likewise told the Thessalonians, that the mystery of iniquity had begun
to work in his days; that is, by the ministry of those Heretics, and false
hypocritical Professors that abused the truth of their Christian Profession;
then the Apostle St. John distinguishes betwixt the true Christians and those
false dissembling Professors, that were those many Antichrists that he speaks
of, and the forerunners of the great Antichrist; St. John shows there be a
sorts of Antichrists.
and he shows how the true Christians might be discerned and known, by the
unction, or the anointing of the true Christians with the Grace of Gods holy
Spirit, whereby they came to know, to confess and to profess the truth, that
is, the Faith and truth of our Christian Religion; and on the other side, he
does say, and positively affirm, that the denial of this Truth by the
hypocritical Professors, in the main head, that is, to deny Jesus to be the
Christ, is the proper note, and the undeniable mark and Character of the great
Antichrist, which is the head of all the other many inferior Antichrists, that
are all destitute of that Unction, whereby the true Christians do believe and
confess Jesus to be the Christ; let them make what Profession soever they
please, of their Faith and Christian Religion, yet indeed they are no true
Christians, but the great Antichrist, if they deny Jesus to be the Christ: For
says the Evangelist, and that by an Interrogation, which is the strongest
asseveration that can be, (...). 1 John 2.22.
that is, Who is the Liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? he is
the Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son: Here is the full
description of the Antichrist. two things observeable.


Touching which words, you must observe these two special things.

1. Two things observable.
That St. John calls the Antichrist a Liar.

2. You are to understand, what his Lie is.

1. St. John shows us plainly herein, that (...), the great Antichrist is a
great Liar, 1. That the Antichrist is a Liar 2 ways. 1. By belying his
Christian Profession.
and in that he is a Liar, it implies two special things.

1. That he is an hypocritical and apostate Professor.

2. That he is a crafty and cunning deceiver of the poor people. As,

1. It is apparent, that the Antichrist is an hypocritical and an apostate
Professor, such as the other lesser antichrists, that have been with us, and
went from us, are: For this great Antichrist will make a great profession of
Religion, as if he were the only Saint and the best Christian upon the earth,
that has the greatest care that can be, of Gods Service; for the observing of
his Sabbath, and the preaching of his Word, and the refraining from all
Swearing, and the like; and yet all is but a great Lie, only for an outward
show and no more, when he speaks that with his tongue, which he cares not for
in his heart; Rev. 13.11.
and therefore he is said to speak like the Dragon: And why like the Dragon?
Because that as the Dragon flattered Evah with many great and fair promises, to
make them like gods, and to fill them with knowledge, both of good and evil;
yet all were but lies, and every word against his Conscience, that knew well
enough, the listening to his voice, and believing his Words, would make them
like devils; so will the Antichrist flatter and fawn, promise and profess great
matters, and make you believe he is a Saint, and will bring you all to Heaven,
when with the Dragon, he tells you nothing but lies, and leads you straight to
Hell: And therefore does St. John say, that he is a Liar, that belyeth his own
Profession. Whether the Parliament members and their adhere^ts did not belly
what they professed, let the Reader judge.


And it is demanded, whether the Long Parliament Proselites and adherents, did
not even the like, and follow the very same course, as the Antichrist is said
he should do, and prove themselves such Liars, as he should prove himself to
be? For did they not profess themselves to be the truest Saints, the best
Christians, and the purest Church of Christ that is, or that men do know here
on earth? and that there were no Tares in their field, no Chafe in their
floor, no Trash in their Net, and nothing but Gold on their foundation? Psalm.
26.4, 5.
And do they not say, that they hate the Assembly of the Malignants? neither
will they sit among vain persons? And besides all this, have they not tanquam
Deus, as God and chief ord^iner and ruler of all Churchmatters, rejected,
cashiered and abolished the formerly established Orders and Ordinances of the
Divine Service, and as Christ, when the old Covenant of works and Legal
Ceremonies was to be expired, and those rites were to be nullified and done
away, Heb. 8.9.
did, in the stead of it, set up his new and better Covenant of Grace, as the
Apostle shows; So have they not devised and set forth a new, and as they say,
a better Directory than ever was before? that is, a new form of Divine Worship,
new Canons of Gods Service, and a Service of the new fashion, such as neither
we nor our Fathers did ever know the like, and far better than ever they had?
and for the observance of that Directory, have they not made stricter
Ordinances, and imposed severer punishments upon the transgressors, then (as is
conceived) the Pope ever did for the omission of his Breviary and Missal, or
the Turk for the neglect of using his Alcoran.

Yet, as the Author of the French History, relating the horrible rebellion of
the holy Leaguers in France, says, that the essential form of a zealous
Catholic in this League, was to rob and to profane Churches, ravish widows,
spoil the Clergy, and murder them even against and before the Altars; Mercurius
Rustic. printed at Oxford.
and to vomit out all kinds of indignities, and scandalous imputations against
their King; so the author of Mercurius Rusticus says, the Zealous Covenanters,
limbs of the Beast, and members of the Antichrist, the Proselites and adherents
of the Long Parliament (he does not say, the very members of the Parliament
themselves) have done the very same things, if not worse, and have out-gone and
outdone those holy Leaguers, and all examples of impiety, in justice and
wickedness, and have also passed all Presidents of Sacrilege and profanation
of Gods Holy Worship: So that, whatsoever the old Eustathians, Messalians,
Fratricelli and the rest of those hair-brained and mad Heretics durst never
attempt to do or say, these holy Schismatics, and Covenanters, that put no
difference betwixt holy and profane, whether persons, times, places or things,
have acted ever with greediness, and taken delight and pleasure in those that
did them, so, as if the devil would show in them the masterpiece of all
infernal impiety.

And what are these doings, but, as Christ says of the Scribes and Pharisees,
that would be counted the only Saints among the Jews, to sit in Moses Chair,
Mat. 15.3. Mar. 8.7.8, 9.
which they usurped, and to teach for Doctrines, the traditions of men, that
were indeed but the Doctrines of devils? And as the Apostle says, to sit in
the Temple of God, as God? When they have presumed to teach more errors and
heresies, than the Pope and the Romish Church ever taught, and to act more
impieties, than the Turk or Mahometans ever durst presume or adventure to do?
Or as St. John says here, 1 John 2.2.
what is all the great profession of holiness, that they make but a great lie?
When they say one thing and do another; profess Religion, and follow all
Abomination, and with the Jews draw near unto God with their lips, Esa. 29.13.
and to have their hearts far enough from him?

And this is the first and main branch of (...), the Liar, Judge whether the
long Parliament has not fulfilled this.
when the Antichrist does belly his Profession, and his doings, his practices
and his works, do rell and testify to his face, that all his words and sayings
are very plain and palpable Lies.

2. (...), the Liar does imply that the Antichrist is a great Covenant-breaker,
and a false Deceiver of those that trust him; because (...), 2. By Covenant
breaking and deceiving those that unst him.
that is derived of (...), which does properly signify decipere and fallere,
to deceive, to cousen and cheat, from whence, (...), a false brother, and
(...), a false witness is derived, does betoken a falsifying of ones faith, and
the breaking of the Oath and Promise that we make to any one; So that from
hence, you may likewife see, how that the Antichrist is an eminent Christian in
Profession, promising and vowing in his Baptism to forsake the World, the
Flesh and the Devil, and protesting in his words that he renounceth them all;
and yet but an hypocritical Apostata by all his Actions, and demeanor, both
toward God and Men; whenas he violates his Oaths, falsifieth his Faith, and
breaks the Promises and Vows that he has made to his God, to his King, to his
Country, and to all that trusted him, and believed him to be such a Saint and
good Christian, as he professed himself to be.

But whether the long Parliament, and their adherents have broken their
Covenants and their Articles, and deceived their King and their Country, and
have falsified their Oaths, their promises and protestations both to God and
Man, I leave it to God and their Country to judge.

2. The Apostle shows, he means not that every petty Liar, 2. What the
great lie of Antichrist is.
whereof we have too too many in every place, is the Antichrist; or that the
Antichrist is but a petite Liar; but his meaning is, that the Antichrist is
both an ordinary liar, cozener, and deceiver of men; and also an eminent,
notorious and a transcendent Liar; no small Liar, but a Liar (...), beyond and
above all other Liars whatsoever; for this great Liar does not only belie his
holy Profession, by his lewd and wicked actions, as I showed to you before, and
as very many other worldly men, and nominal Christians do; but he tells also
this great lie, this capital Lie, the worst of all lies, especially for a
Professor of Christianity to lie; that is, to deny Jesus to be the Christ: The
Antichrist is a negative Liar.
which is a negative lie, not the simple telling of an untruth, but a malicious
denial of the chiefest truth, and the most beneficial truth of all truths to
all mankind; and therefore a lie worse than any other lie whatsoever: and a
lie, that does (as you shall see hereafter) co-incidate and cohere with that
sin of the Antichrist, that S. Paul means, that I have expressed to you
before, and does make the esse formale, the very very being of that Antichrist,
that could never devise a worser, and a more pernicious lie than this; and
therefore in denying this truth, in denying Jesus to be the Christ, he denies
the Father and the Son, and discovers himself plainly, by this denial of
Jesus to be the Christ, as by a proper undeniable mark and character, to be
that great Antichrist, that was expected to come into the World.

For the better understanding of which great and special point, whereby you may
infallibly know the Antichrist, you must consider these two things:

1. 2. Special things to be observed.
What is the meaning, of denying Jesus to be the Christ.

2. Whom we can find, to have denied Jesus to be the Christ, and if we can find
any, that has, or does deny Jesus to be the Christ, than we have found the
Antichrist, let us take heed of him.

And for the clearing of the first point, A special observation. Luke 12.8, 9.
Mat. 10.33.
you are to observe here that this (...), the great Liar is, (...), a denier of
Christ; or of Jesus to be the Christ; and you know what Christ says, Whosoever
shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the
Angels of God; but he that denies me before men shall be denied before the
Angels of God; or as St. Matthew says more emphatically, Him will I also deny
before my Father which is in heaven; and not without great cause and a very
just reason for it, even, in any man's judgment: for that the word (...), which
is the word that St. John uses here, and which our Savior uses there, in the
place before cited, What (...) signifies.
does signify as the learned Critics do witness, not a bare and simple denial
of some truth; but a treacherous, rebellious and unnatural revolt from ones
lawful Prince or Master; and a revolt accompanied with such a malice against
his person, that the revolter resieth never satisfied with any thing, but in
the blood and utter destruction of the person denied; for so St. Peter tells the
Jews, that had crucified Christ, that God had glorified his Son Jesus, (...),
whom you have delivered, and denied, that is, that he should live, before
Pilate, when he was determined to let him go, that he should live, (...); but
you denied the Holy and Just, that is, you denied that Pilate should let him
live, and were never satisfied, until you had him crucified; and so the
Antichrist denies Christ, or Jesus to be the Christ, and never leaves to
prosecute and persecute the Christ, not Jesus, but the Christ, whom he denies
Jesus to be, until he brings the Christ, as the Jews did before bring Jesus,
down to the dust and unto death, and so becomes the man of the sin, that S.
Paul had spoken of before unto his Thessalonians, 2 These. 2.
that is, the murderer, in the transcendent and vilest kind and manner of
man-killing.

And here also you must observe, Another special observation.
that the Apostle does not say, This great Liar denies Jesus to be (...), the
Son of God; because this denial makes not the Antichrist; for so Arius, the
grand Heretic, denied him to be, and yet he is not said to be the Antichrist;
because he confessed and believed that he was the Christ; neither does the
Apostle say, The Antichrist denies not Christ to be Jesus, but denies Jesus
to be the Christ.
That this great Liar is the Great Antichrist, because he denies Jesus to be
(...), the Savior of men, or the Redeemer of Mankind, for so his Name Jesus
signifies; and so the Jews, the Mahometans, and all the Infidels deny him to
be; and yet they are not said for this denial to be the Antichrist, though
hereby they are (...); and do absolutely deny to believe in him, as in their
Jesus, and their Savior, as the Antichrist does profess, that he is the Jesus,
that is, the Savior both of himself and of all other men, that do believe in
him; and therefore he is not said to be (...), an Adversary, or denier of
Jesus; but he is said to be the great Liar and the Antichrist; because he would
make the World to believe, that he loves Jesus, and believes in Jesus, and is
the best Christian in the World; and yet absolutely and peremptorily denies
Jesus to be the Christ.

Therefore we must take some pains to untie this knot, and beg the assistance
of Gods Spirit to explain this mystery, Mark well this Aenigma.
that may seem as a Riddle, unless we examine it very well, to know why the
denial of Jesus to be the Christ, makes the Antichrist, and the Antichrist to
be the great Liar, because he denies Jesus to be the Christ; and how it can
be, that he, which believes in Jesus, that he is his Savior, and the true
Messiah that saves all mankind, and as he says, that this his Jesus is Christ,
and his Christ, should notwithstanding be the Antichrist, and in all his
sayings and profession but a great Liar, because he denies Jesus to be the
Christ; he says he is Christ, and believes in him, as in his Christ; and yet
denies him to be the Christ, or to be Christ; therefore we may well demand
with Nicodemus, Joh. 3.
How can these things be? I say very well; or if they were not, the great
Antichrist could not be the great Liar.

But for the clearing of these points, I confess, that I must plough with E. H.
E.H de Antichristo p. 82. and in his Proface to the Reader. p. 3.
his Heifer, that gave mea the first inckling of the discovery of the truth of
this double dealing of the Antichrist, where he has most truly, and learnedly,
though briefly, explained the sense and meaning of the Apostle, and discovered
the apparent great lie of the Antichrist, in saying and unsaying, affirming and
denying the same thing at a breath; that must needs make him a Liar, if any
thing makes him; for as (...), Christ, signifies anointed; and Jesus was
anointed to be both a King and a Priest; for so the wise men say, Where is he
that is born the King of the Jews? Simul natus, Mat. 2.2.
simul Caesar, He was a King as soon as ever he was born; and Pilate wrote upon
his Cross, Jesus of Nazreth King of the Jews; Joh. 19.19.
so that when his enemies bereaved him of his life, yet they could not deprive
him of his royal and Kingly Office; and the more firmly to ascertain us of his
Priestly Office, The Lord swear, and will not repent, Psalm. 110.4.
thou art a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchizedech; which was not
like the Order of Aaron, that was to be determined and to have an end, but was
an everlasting Order, to continue a Priest for ever; for these two Offices only
were the chiefest and the ordinary Offices, whereby the Lord ruled the people,
and governed the Church of the Jews; these were the ordinary Rulers of that
Commonwealth; and therefore these two Offices, of Kings and Priests, That the
Kings and the Priests only were ordinarily anointed. 1 Reg. 19.16. and v. 19.
were the only usual and accustomed Offices that were anointed in that Church
and among that People; for the Prophets were an extraordinary Calling; and
extraordinarily anointed: and that but once, as I find, in all the Scripture:
and that anointing also, not with oil materially, as the Kings and the Priests
were: but by the casting on of Elijah's Mantle upon Elisha, which was termed an
anointing of him; but the other two were usually anointed with material Oil:
And these two Offices, of a King, and a Priest, are the Offices whereby Jesus
redeemeth and saves, and also guides and rules his whole Church; and without
which Offices he could not be a Jesus, either to purchase and save, or to rule
and to instruct his Church; and therefore whosoever denies Jesus to be a King
and a Priest, denies him to be the Christ: and though he should confess him,
and believe him to be his Jesus and his Savior, yet he cannot save him, if he
be not the Christ, that is, anointed to be both a King and a Priest; and so in
denying him to be Christ, he denies him to be Jesus and a Savior, which he
says, he believes him to be; and therefore, he must needs be a great Liar, in
saying that now, which he presently denies.

is it, or how can it be, that the Antichrist, which professes himself to be,
not a Jesuit from the name of Jesus, but a Christian, as they were first termed
in Antioch, from the name of Christ: and says, he does acknowledge and
believe, and will not, and does not deny Jesus to be both a King and a Priest,
yea, his King and his Priest, whom he does above all others, both honor
reverence and obey, as his King and as his Priest: should notwithstanding be
said, and said truly, without any unjust impuration laid upon him, to deny
Jesus to be the Christ, that is, the King, to rule, and the Priest to govern
and to instruct his Church?

I answer, that the Apostle means not, Antichrist should in plain words,
positively and peremptorily deny Jesus to be a King and a Priest, He that
says thou art my King, and I am thy Subject, but thou shall not rule, me,
neither will I obey thee, is not he a Liar?
as the Jews, Turks, and other Infidels do; when as he confesses publicly,
and in plain terms, and never denies with any manner of words, that Jesus is
not the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and that he is not a Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchizedech: but professes the same as much and more than
any man living; and yet herein he is the great Liar, because that what he says
in words, Factis negat, he apparently denies by his deeds, which are the
chiefest affirmation or negation of any truth, and the best witnesses to
confirm both what we say, and what we deny: as both our Savior and his Apostle
St. Paul do sufficiently testify.

And so, What it is to deny Jesus to be the Christ.
the meaning of denying Jesus to be King and Priest, is not to be understood of
any verbal denial, but that the Antichrist, though he does in words confess him
to be his King and his Priest, and denies him not to be anointed by God, with
the true Oil of grace, He that denies Jesus to execute the Office of King and
Priest denies him to be King and Priest.
the ointment of Gods Spirit above and beyond all others, that ever were
anointed, to be the King and the Priest of the whole Church: yet by his deeds
and his actions, he would most treacherously and maliciously deny and hinder
Jesus to exercise and execute those Offices, that is, his Kingly Offices and
his Priestly Office, by those his deputies and Vicegerents, whom he appoints
and places under him, and in his stead, to rule, govern, and to instruct his
people here on earth: for he being ascended into heaven, executes these
Offices, of King and Priest, none otherwise now in his personal absence, than
by his Substitutes and Deputies, that he places to be Kings and Priests under
him: and whosoever denies and hinders them to discharge their duties and to
execute those Functions and Offices of King and Priest, denies Jesus to
execute the same, and to discharge the duties of his Kingly and Priestly Office.

And we must not understand the Apostles words, that the Antichrist denies
Jesus to be the Christ, or his denial of him to be the true Messiah, and
Savior of the World, and for that end, to be anointed both for a King and a
Priest, which he never denies; or otherwise, if this were his denial of him,
to be a King and a Priest to this end, That thousand thousands deny Christ to
be Jesus, but the Antichrist only denies him, whom he confesses his Jesus to
be the Christ.
we should have ten thousand thousands of such Antichrists, as Jews, Turks, and
all the Infidels over all the World, that deny Jesus the Son of Mary to be
anointed for a King and a Priest to become the true Messiah, and to save his
people from their sins; for we know that all those do thus peremptorily deny
Jesus to be the Christ, or to be thus and to this end anointed to be King and
Priest; and yet they are not said to be the Antichrist nor the great Liar,
which the Antichrist is said to be; because their lie does not contra mentem
ire, nor deny that, which they affirm; deny by their doings, what they affirm
by their sayings, but their hearts and their tongues do conceive and confess
the same thing, that Jesus is not the Christ, neither their King nor their
Priest, and the Antichrist does the clean contrary, saying in words that he is
his Jesus, and yet by his deeds utterly deny him.

And therefore, by this ample Explanation of this mystical Sentence that the
Antichrist is a great Liar, because he denies Jesus to be the Christ: I hope
it is made plain enough, that the meaning of the Apostle is, that the
Antichrist, which mendaciously and falsely, like a great Liar, professes
himself a Christian, and acknowledges in his words, that the Lord Jesus is the
Christ, that is, his King and his Priest, and himself his loyal Subject, and
the most faithful Servant of Christ, will notwithstanding all this great
profession, maliciously deny, and most rebelliously hinder and oppose the
lawful Deputies, Lieutenants and Servants of Christ our King and Priest, to
execute and to discharge their Kingly and Priestly Offices, under Christ, and
in Christ his stead; and will, as I showed you, from the force and true meaning
of the word (...), so deny them to execute their functions, that nothing will
satisfy or serve his turn, until he has utterly destroyed both King and
Priest, and so denied them, both to serve their Offices, and to live in their
places; that is to be King and Priest.

Thus the Antichrist denies Jesus to be the Christ, by denying his
Deputy-Kings and Priests, He that resisleth Christ his Deputies resists
Christ himself.
to execute their Kingly and Priestly Offices under him; for as he that
resists the lawful Magistrate, resists the Ordinance of God, says the
Apostle, and so far as he resists Gods Ordinance, he resists God himself;
because Man can make no other visible resistance of God, than by the resistance
of his Ordinance; So he that revolteth from, or rebelleth against, the
execution of these Offices of Christ, by those deputies, that he sets under him
here on earth, is rightly said, to revolt from and rebel against Christ; and so
he that denies them to execute their Offices of Kings and Priests under
Christ, may justly be said to deny Jesus to execute his Office of King and
Priest; even as you see, he that resists against the Kings Sheriff or
Lieutenant, is justly said to rebel against the King; For though Christ be now
in heaven, yet he has his Kingdom here on earth, and he is still our King, as
the Prophet says, The Lord is King, and has put on glorious apparel; Psalm.
93.1.
and he places other Kings to be his Substitutes and Vicegerents, to guide and
to govern his people, according as he does command; and therefore he says, By
me Kings do reign; Prove. 8.15.
and as he is still our King, so S. Peter says, He is still the Bishop of our
souls, 1. Pet. 2.25.
and the Priest that makes an atonement to God for us; and he places other
Bishops, and other Priests under him to teach, and to govern his Church in the
truth of his Service and Religion.

And you know what Christ says to these his Deputies and Vicegerents, Luke
10.16.
He that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me; So he that denies and hinders you to execute your Offices,
denies me mine Offices, to be both King and Priest; and so denies me to be
the Christ; and in denying me, he denies him that sent me, Psalm 2.8.
and gave me the Gentiles for mine Inheritance, and the uttermost part of the
earth for my Possession, and also Swear that I should be a Priest for ever,
Psalm. 110.4.
after the Order of Melchizedech.

Therefore it is most plain and apparent, that whosoever professes himself a
Christian, and yet maliciously opposes, and traitorously denies the execution
of the Kingly and Priestly Offices of Christ, to be performed by his Deputies,
Kings and Priests, that he appoints under him, and so far denies them to do
it, as utterly to destroy them, and deny them to live, (as the Jews denied
Christ before Pilate,) to be Kings and Priests in Christ's stead, to Govern and
to Teach his Church, is here meant by the Apostle to be the Grand Liar and the
Great Antichrist, that denies Jesus to be the Christ; and so you have seen,
what is the meaning of denying Jesus to be the Christ.

2. The other Point to be considered, is to enquire, and search if we can find,
2. Whom can we find to have denied Jesus to be the Christ. Neither Pope nor
Turk.
who have thus, as I showed you, denied Jesus to be the Christ; and if you
find, who has done so, you shall find out the Antichrist; and I believe we
shall find him neither in Rome nor in Constantinople; for the Pope, I am sure
of it, denies not the Bishops as Christ's Depu^ies, to execute their Priestly
Office, when he professes himself to be Christ's Deputy and Vicar, to discharge
that Office, to instruct and to govern his Church; and for the Turk, he will
not extirpate Monarchy, nor cast down Kings, when he professes himself to be
the chief Monarch of the earth, and a King of Kings, as his own Letters
testify.

But whether the Long Parliament and their adherents, Let the Reader judge,
whether the long Parliament has not fulfilled this saying of the Apostle.
that in words do constantly affirm and profess, that Jesus is the Christ, and
themselves good, if not the best Christians, that are on earth, have not by
their deeds, in opposing their King, the Substitute and Vioeroy of Christ, and
denying him, either to execute his Regal Office, or to live, and in suppressing
all the Bishops, and so many Orthodox Loyal Preachers, so that they shall
never, as Bishops, execute the Priestly Office of Christ, denied Jesus to be
Christ; by denying those Substitute Officers of Christ to execute those
Offices, or to live in those Offices; I leave it to them that can judge, who is
the Liar and the Antichrist, and that denies Jesus to be the Christ.

Only, I must say, That if I were a Pagan, and an Infidel, and had seen no more
of the Parliaments doings, but these two things, i.e.

1. Their words and great profession of holiness and Christianity. And, The two
chiefest things that do most of all regret the mind of the Author.


2. Their deeds in the cutting off of their own just and lawful Kings head, and
the head of their chief Priest, and the suppression, exclusion, and extirpation
of all the godly Bishops in these three Kingdoms, and likewise the prohibition
and sileneing of them, and the rest of the Orthodox Preachers, from preaching
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, not for any supposed Error in their Doctrine,
but for a suspicion they had, that those faithful men would publish the truth
and villainies of their Acts and Proceedings unto the People; I should believe
none could be a greater Liar, or a greater Antichrist, than they that did such
things: Being confident, that neither Decius, nor Dioclesian, nor any other of
the primitive Persecutors, nor Pope, nor Turk, nor any later Tyrant has ever
done the like.

And yet herein, That the Author can very well endure dissentients.
I am not so wedded to mine own opinion, as that I cannot endure dissentients;
for I am not of their minds, that hold him not for their friend, and will bear
no correspondence with him that will not, per omnia and in omnibus, in all
things be of their mind; neither do I propose my conceptions, notions, and
Expositions, as infallible Articles of faith for others, sub paena, to be
believed; but I only set down, what I conceive, and do verily believe to be
true, and my Reasons and Arguments that induce me thereunto: leaving to all
others, the liberty of their own conscience to believe what they will, and whom
they will to be the Antichrist, Pope, or Turk, or whomsoever they please.

3. 3. That the Antichrist, denying Jesus to be the Christ; denies the Father
and the Son which may be done 2 ways. 1. Way. Mat. 10.40. Luc. 10.16.
S. John proceeds and says, that the Antichrist not only denies Jesus to be
the Christ, but also, by this denial, he denies the Father and the Son, and
this, as I conceive, may be done two manner of ways:

1. By separating himself from the rule, Government, and Ministry of Christ,
and maliciously suppressing the ordinances, and the substitute Governors of
Christ: which is a most observable and inseparable, mark of the Antichrist, and
of all his followers; for thus our Savior tells us, that whosoever despises,
rejects and suppresseth the officers, Ambassadors, and Ministers, that Christ
sends, and sets over us to ru^e us, and to instruct us, despises,
rejects, and, by as much as in him lies, suppresseth Christ himself; and
whosoever despises, rejects, and denies him, despises and denies God the
Father, that sent him; and therefore you may plainly see hereby, Vide R. W. in
lib. The Doctrine of the Scripture touching the original of Government, page
117.
that the rebellious risers against their King, Prince, or any other, their
supreme Governor, that Christ places over them, and the suppressors of the
Apostles, Bishops, and Pastors of Gods Church, the successors of the Apostles,
that Christ sends to teach, and to govern his Church throughout all ages, do
rebel, reject, and deny Christ, which is the Son; and by rejecting and denying
Christ, that is, the Son, they reject and deny him that sent him, that is, the
Father; and so by denying, hindering, and suppressing these substitute officers
of Christ, that they shall not live to execute their office;, they reject and
deny both the Father and the Son; because these, master and servant, Christ and
his Deputies, as Kings and their Ambassadors are Relatives, and so
indissolubly knit together, that you can neither oppose, suppress, nor deny the
one without the other; and therefore, quia per latera nostra Christus petitur,
because Christ is thrust at, and wounded, through our sides that are his
servants, Act. 9.4.
he says unto Saul, Why persecutest thou me? when he neither did, nor meant
any hurt to the person of Christ, that was in heaven, but abused and persecuted
his servants, that were on earth; which is the true meaning of the Apostle in
this place: or otherwise, if you expound these words literally of him, that, by
denying the Son to be essentially one God with the Father, denies the Father
to be a God; because the Father and the Son are so essentially one, that no man
can deny the one but he must deny the other: then cannot this speech of the
Apostle be properly applied to the Antichrist; because, that if such a denyer
of the Son, to be one with the Father, be the Antichrist, you may find many
thousands of the Antichrists in the world:

But of such as profess to honor the person of Christ, Let the Reader judge,
whether this be fulfilled in the long Parliament.
that is in heaven, and yet quite deny, suppress, and extinguish his Deputies
and Officers, that should execute the Offices of Christ here on earth, we shall
find none but the great Liar, that is, the Antichrist, will do the same: And
whether the long Parliament did thus deny the Father and the Son, by denying
them that the Son has sent, as the denial of him whom the Father has sent, is
a denial of the Father, as well as of the Son; let the judicious Reader judge.

2. 2. Way.
The great Liar may be said to deny the Father and the Son, when he professes
to believe in the Father and the Son; and yet denies with the Arians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, and other old Heretics, the terms, and rejects the
notions and expressions, whereby we come to understand, and make the people
likewise, to have some competent measure of knowledge, in the great Mystery of
the holy Trinity, how the Father and the Son, and so the Holy Ghost, are the
only true God, as our Savior says, John 17.3. John 17.3.
the which thing the Pope never did, I am sure of it.

But whether the long Parliament Divines, and their Proselites, the false
prophet, 1 John 2.19.
and the Independent Apostata's, that are such Antichrists, as the
Apostlespeaks of, that went out from us, and were not of us, and such sons of
the Church, Whether the Assembly of Presbyterians and Parliament Preachers may
not be said to deny the Father and the Son, let the Reader judge.
as S. Bernard speaks of, Filii nequam, filii scelerati, qui scaeviunt in
matrem, do not thus deny the Father and the Son, when they reject and refuse
the words, Essence, person, unity, Trinity, and the like words, that totidem
syllabis cannot be found in the Scriptures, and do likewise cashier and exclude
from Gods service the Gloria Patri, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and
to the Holy Ghost; and cast away from all use that most excellent Hymn, Te Deum
laudamus, te Dominum confitemur, and others the like holy Hymns, and
expressions of our Faith, which S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and other godly men,
and after them the whole Church of God, -- Penes quam norma loquendi, that has
the power to coin words, to explain the truth, have ever used, to bring her
children to some understanding, and a competent measure of knowledge in that
great and ineffable mystery of Godliness, which is, the unity of the Godhead in
the Trinity of persons; and, e contra, the Trinity of persons, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost in the unity of Essence or Godhead; and to make the
weaker Christians, and the weaker Divines, the better able to answer, and to
confute those wicked Heretics, that are always ready to arise, (as now they
do) to deny the truth of these holy Mysteries? let the wise and experienced
Divines judge hereof:

For the Apostle means not, as I said before, that he, which in plain terms,
and with spen mouth, denies the being, or the Godhead of the Father, and of
the Son, is the Liar, and the Antichrist, but, as the crafty fool, that durst
not say it openly, yet cunningly and secretly says in his heart, There is no
God, Psalm. 53.1. and 14.1.
is a mere Atheist, though he never utters that atheistical wickedness with
his mouth; so are they mere Antichrists, and great Liars, that say, they do
believe these Mysteries; and yet secretly and maliciously deny the Father and
the Son, though not directly, yet by infallible consequences, when they deny
those notions and expressions, whereby we come to know the Father and the Son,
though they profess the contrary in their words, which makes them to be the
Liar, because they say one thing, and do another, that is still the property
of the Antichrist, to do just so, as they do.

And therefore, Let the Presbyterians think of this, and repent.
seeing he is the Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son, as the
Apostle says; and, that he which denies and rejects them that are sent,
denies and rejects him that sent them, as our Savior testifies; and that
they also, which deny the notions and expressions, whereby we come to know the
Father and the Son, do by consequence, and in very deed, whatsoever they say to
the contrary, deny the Father and the Son, it must needs follow, that the
deniers and suppressors of them that are sent by Christ, and the diniers of
those notions, and the rejectors of those expressions, whereby we come to know
the Father and the Son, must be the great Liar, and the Antichrist: from which
charge, though I accuse them not, yet I know not how the Assembly of the long
Parliaments presbyterian Divines will excuse themselves, and be quitted, cum
surrexerit ad judicandum Deus, when the Son of God shall call them to an
account for it: let them think of it in the interim.

For, What is to be understood by the name of the Lord our God.
as he that denies my name, whereby I am made known, denies me, and he that
denies his own name, denies himself, because his name is the chiefest note,
that makes him known; and, as when the Lord says, Thou shall not take the name
of the Lord thy God in vain; because his name is that, which chiefly makes him
known to us; and by his name there, all Divines say, that we must understand,
not only the name Jehova, and Lord, and God, and the other usual and proper
titles and names of God, which S. Hierome, and others have collected out of the
Scriptures; but also any other thing, that discovers and makes God known
unto us, as his works, his word, his titles, his attributes, and the like;
because God has no proper name, that can make him known unto us, or fully
express his nature, and his being, as God himself says unto Moses, Exodus 13.14.
when he desired to know his name, that he might thereby know him: So whosoever
denies the things, and rejects the words, notions, and expressions that
bring us to know God, or to know the Father and the Son, to be the true God,
does therein and thereby deny God, and is, as the Apostle says, the great
Liar, and the Antichrist, that denies the Father and the Son.

Leber Secundus.
CAP. I. The measuring of the Temple; the two Witnesses that should erect and
build the Christian Church; who they are; how long they should Prophecy; how
they should be killed, and used after their killing; how they shall be
resuscicated and revived; and in what time they shall be revived after they be
killed; and of the great mystery of God, what it is, and when that shall be
finished.
OUr loving Lord and Master Jesus Christ, having left us here on earth, was not
like Pharoahs Butler, so unmindfull of us, as we are of him, when he was
glorified in Heaven; but he sends his Angel to inform his best beloved
Desciple and Servant Ichn of those chiefest afflictions and persecutions, that
the Christian Church should find, and must so undergo here amongst the Sons of
men, from that time, that the Angel came unto him, until he should come to
judge the World, and to deliver his distressed Servants out of all their
troubles; To what end Christ foretells the troubles of his Church.
and he foretells us of them, that they being foreshewed unto us, we might the
better either study by our endeavors and prayers to God, wisely to prevent and
avoid them, or manfully with Gods assistance to undergo them, which might the
better, and the more patiently be done, being expected for to come; quia tela
previsa minus nocent; because expected troubles are always less dangerous, and
not any ways so grievous, as those that do suddenly surprise us, and rush upon
us like an A med man; and this sad and woeful condition of the Church, the Wars
and Conflicts that she must pass through, and the troubles and persecutions
that she must suffer, the Blessed Evangelist and Apostle St. John sets down
in this book of the Revelation, as the Holy Ghost by his Angel has showed them
unto him. And of all the things that are foreshewed, I intend only to handle,
What things the Author chiefly aims to treat of.
by the assistance of Gods Holy Spirit, and to treat in this place, what I
conceive to be the chiefest things that are observable in the 11th, 12th, and
13th, Chapters of this Book of the Revelation; and which are as I believe
principally meant, or at least, most probably applicable to these very times
wherein we live, and in all likelihood to this particular Church of great
Britany and Ireland, that to many men seems to be the Stage, whereupon all,
or most of the sad spectacles and Tragedies here in these three Ghapters
mentioned, are evidently seen acted as they were foreshewed.

I confess, the burden, that herein I took upon me, is very heavy, and the
charge very great; and I have often Prayed to the same Holy Spirit, The weight
of the burden that he undertaketh.
that as Daniel says, gives Wisdom and reveals Secrets: Dan. 2.21. and 22.
and that has revealed these secrets unto his Servant John, that he would be
pleased to reveal the meaning of them unto me, who without his help can
understand just nothing, but with his assistance may find out the true meaning
of these mysteries, which wiser men and greater Scholars without his help
cannot do; and herein I presume not positively to affirm any thing, as
Articles of Faith for others to believe, but I only do set down what I verily
do conceive to be the true meaning of the HolyGhost, and say with the Poet, --
Si tu quid rectius istis.
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.


Now the sum of these three Chapters, The sum of the three Chapters that
are explained by the Author. 11 chap.
in brief, is this:

1. In the 11th Chapter, the Angel sets down to St. John, the state and
condition of the Governors and Pastors of Gods Church, the two Witnesses of
Jesus Christ, and their fiery trial, their persecution, and their suffering
under the rule and Reign of the great Antichrist, termed here, the Beast that
ascends from the bottomless pit.

2. 12 chap.
In the 12th Chapter, he shows the troubles, Crosses, and Persecutions of the
whole Church, and the chiefest members of the same; and how that,
notwithstanding all the malice of Satan, and the spite of her persecutors, the
Church should be assisted and delivered from them all.

3. 13 chap.
In the 13th Chapter, the Apostle describes unto us the great Antichrist that
should most of all persecute the Witnesses of Christ; and the false Prophet
that should instruct and instigate the Antichrist to proceed on in all his
impieties; and he shows the Combination of these two and of others, the
chiefest Enemies of the Witnesses and of the Church of Christ.

First, 1. Of the measuring of the Temple, and of the Worshippers therein.
Chap. 11.1.
After that the Apostle had eaten (...), the little book which the Angel gave
him, and was told by the Angel, that he must Prophecy again before many
People, and Nations, and Tongues, and Kings; he says, there was given unto him
a Reed, like to a Rod, or a measuring Pole; and the Angel said unto him, arise,
and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that Worship therein:
And we find that this measuring Reed was used sometimes to pull down, to ruin,
and to destroy the measured place; and sometimes to build and to rear up the
same; and some Interpreters, whom E. H. follows, do understand it here for
the ruin and Rejection of the Jewish people, the dissipation of them by the
Romans, What is meant by the Temple that was to be measured. The building of
the Church of Christians.
and the end of their then Temple, their Sacrifices, and their Religion that
was now approaching on, and very nigh at hand; but I rather conceive that by
the Temple of God that was now to be measured, we should understand the Church
of God, that is, the Christian Church, that was now to be edified, to be reared
up, and to be reduced to a new form, and to have new Ordinances, and new
Sacraments, far better then those that were in the Jewish Temple; as Beza says.

Old Temple at Jerusalem was already destroyed by Titus, and the Jews
vanquished and scattered by the Romans, after they had won their City, before
this measuring Reed was delivered unto the Apostle, which was about the latter
end of Domitians Reign, after the dectruction of Jerusalem; therefore not
likely that the Angel would give him a Reed to measure their dissipation, after
they were dissipated, and their destruction after they were destroyed.

Temple was committed to the two Witnesses of Christ, as is plain out of the
third verse, which Beza therefore Translateth, by adding illam, sciliet
Ecclesiam. that is, the Church of Christ, or illud, scilicet Templum, which
signifies here the same thing, unto the words of the Text, saying, and I will
give her, that is, the Church unto my two Witnesses, to be instructed, and to
be governed by them; and not as our last Translation has it, I will give power
unto my two Witnesses, but I will deliver my Church unto my two Witnesses to be
guided and edified; whereas the Jewish Church, that was already dissipated, and
their Ceremonies now were to be quite abolished, was rather taken from the
Witnesses, and the Witnesses from it, and not given unto it to be edified by
them, when it was to be ruinted, as the Apostle shows.

measure, together with the Temple, them that Worship in the Temple, which
therefore must needs be understood of their building up, and not of their
destroying, when God will not destroy them that Worship him.

But the Court, says the Angel, which is without the Temple, and into which
all sorts of people were admitted to come, 2 Chronicles. 4.9
the same being answerable to our Churchyard, leave out, and measure it not,
says the Angel; and the reason is, because this Common Court was given to the
Gentiles, that is, not only to the Christian Church Apostatized to Idolatry, as
Mr. Mede says, but also to the Infidels, Worldlings, Mr. Mede part 2. page 3.
Hypocrites, and all other wicked and profane people, that were and would be
such as those, whom the Jews termed Gentiles, that is, not the true
Worshippers of God; which notwithstanding are permitted to come to the Court of
Gods house as the Gentiles were to the Court of the Temple, and to be there in
the material Church, among Gods people, and to seem to be as good Christians
as the best; and yet they are not measured to be built, and to be made true
Christians and right Saints and Servants of God; because they are, as the
Gentiles were accounted to be among the Jews, that is, not the right
Worshippers and servers of the true God, whom the Jews professed, and believed
that he was only known in Jury, Psalm. 79.1.
and his name only great in Israel, as the Prophet shows, but Idolaters and
the Worshippers of stocks and stones, and those Images that were no Gods; for
so are all the Hypocritical professors, and profane worldly men, and lewd
livers, that will not be reduced and brought by the Witnesses of Christ to a
better form, to be built in the true service of God, and the right faith of
Jesus Christ, none otherwise then as the Gentiles were among the Jews, not any
of Gods people.

And these Gentiles, that is, these Hypocrites, Worldlings, and profane people
that are as the Gentiles were, admitted to the Court of Gods Temple, received
into the visible and material Church amongst Gods people, and are accounted as
Gods Children, and good Christians, yet, being not measured, nor built by the
Witnesses, whom they regard not, upon the right foundation, that is, truly
ingrafted by a lively faith into Jesus Christ, whom they refuse to obey and to
believe in him, shall at last, faith the Angel, that is, when the two Witnesses
shall have finished their testimony, and that will be after 1200 and 60 days,
tread the holy City under foot, that is, How long the Wicked Worldlings should
afflict the true Servants of Christ. c. 13.5.
most grievously persecute and vex the true Church of Christ, and the Faithful
Servants of God, that are measured and rightly built, and instructed in the
true faith, and the right manner of Gods Worship by the Witnesses, for the full
space of 42 months; which space and length of time, does sune chronize, and is
the very same space, and expressed in the very same phrase, that the Antichrict
is said, that he should continue, to prevail in the molesting and persecuting
of the Saints and Servants of God, which is 42 months, cap. 13. verse. 5.
whereby it appears, that these profane Worldlings and Hypocrites will be the
followers and the adherents of the Antichrist, and that they will join with
him to molest and persecute the true Worshippers of God, when he appears in
the world; until which appearance and coming of him, the true Christians,
which is the holy City, shall be quiet in a fair manner, and the two Witnesses
shall have power, says our Translation, to Prophecy, and to build up the
Temple of God, that is, to edify and to instruct the true Church of Christ, as
Christ has committed the same to be instructed, guided, and governed by them.

There, after that the Angel had commanded the Apostle to measure the Temple, 2.
Of the two Witnesses, the Builders and Governors of Gods Church.
that the Christian Church might be edified and amplified by the labor and the
Testimony of his two Witnesses; he proceeds to describe the Witnesses that
should erect and build up his Church, and to show their indowments,
qualifications, and abilities, and what things should happen unto them, how
they should be destroyed and yet restored again.

But now touching these two Witnesses, Who are to be understood by the two
Witnesses.
the first thing that is most requisite to be known, for the better
understanding of all the rest of the things that are said of them, is to find
out, who are meant by these two Witnesses; this is the greatest question, and
most of all unconsented who they are; for the most learned Cardinal of Rome,
quoteth 4 Penmen of the Holy Scriptures, as Malachy, 4. and 5. the Son of
Syrach, Eccles. c. 48. 10. etc. 44.16. S. Math. relating the words of Christ;
Math. 17. c. 11. and St. John in this very place here treated of; Reve. 11. c.
3. and to these he adjoyneth seven or eight Ancient Fathers, and some other
learned Commentators upon the Apocalips, Bellarm. de rom^n. pontific. l. 3. c.
3.
that do all say, if we will believe his Interpretation of the foresaid
Scriptures, these two Witnesses are Henoch and Elias, that shall come from the
place where they are now preserved by God, to resist the Antichrist, when he
comes and appears in the world, and to Preach unto the people, that they
should not be seduced by the Antichrist; the which office they shall do for the
space of 1200 and 60 days, that make three years and a half, just so long as
Christ Preached, after he was Baptized among the Jews: and at the end of those
1200 and 60 days, they should be slain by the Antichrist, about one month
before the Antichrist should be destroyed: and it is a wonderful thing to
consider how many Papists are led away with the belief of these fictions, of
which I will not stand to confute, and to show their Vanity: for that
Bibliander and Chytraeus have sufficiently answered to these places, Chytraeus
in c. 11. Apoc. Math. 11.14.
and have fully showed howthese were the mistakes of those Fathers, and but
mere fancies of the Papists; when our Savior tells us plainly, that John
Baptist was the Elias, which was for to come, and which the Jews dreamed, as
the Papists do, should be Elias the Tisbite that was taken up to Heaven in a
Fiery Charet.

Dr. Hammond in Apoc c. 11. Eusebius l. 4. c. 6.
Others, by these two Witnesses, do understand two Bishops of Jerusalem,
whereof the one was Bishop over the Converted Jews, and the other of the
Gentile Christians: and these Berchochabas, a Seditious and Rebellious Jew,
whereof Eusebius writes, did kill in the civil dissension of the Jews, as
some Authors testify, but as unlikely, as the former fiction of the Papists.

And the acts of the Apostles seem not to intimate any such thing but rather
the clean contrary.
1. Because we cannot yield, that there were two Bishops of Jerusalem, one of
the Converted Jews, and another of the Gentile Christians, as if they meant to
make two distinct and several Churches, which might produce a great division,
and bring many Inconveniences betwixt the Jewish Christians and the Gentiles,
whereas now the partition Wall, betwixt Jews and Gentiles was broken down, and
as both people were to have but one chief Shepherd, that is Jesus Christ, so
they were to have but one fold, and one Deputy Shepherd, that is, one Bishop
under Christ, in one City; though I deny not, but there might be subordinate
Presbyters and Deacons under that Bishop, to assist him to instruct the people,
and to Govern the Church.

Revelation is not of known things, that were already past, (for that is not
properly a Revelation, but a Narration of things, especially things publicly
done, and not concealed) but it is of things that were to come to pass: and
though Berchochabas was suppressed by Rufus, in the time of the Emperor Adrian,
about the 130 year of Christ; yet it is thought that these men, which are
supposed to be two Bishops, were slain long before this Revelation was showed
unto St. John: and not unlikely: because Eusebius names 15 Bishops of
Jerusalem, that succeeded one another before Xistus, that was but the sixth
Bishop of Rome after the Apostles, and lived about the beginning of Adrians
time.

Berchochabas cannot be understood by the Beast that ascends out of the
bottomless pit, and the great Antichrist, which is here said to kill the two
witnesses; because none of the notes and marks of that Beast, under which
notes, the antichrist is described in the Scriptures, do any ways agree with
Berchochabas; for he never apostatized and fell away from Christ, whom he never
professed; neither did he ever sit in the Temple of God, as God; nor wrought
any signs, or wonders, nor went about his work slily and mysteriously, as the
Antichrist does; but he went about his design openly and plainly, aperto mart,
with armed Troops; and therefore he cannot be understood to be the killer of
these two witnesses, nor these witnesses to be those two supposed Bishops of
Jerusalem.

Francisc. Junius in loc.
Others, by these two witnesses do understand it generally of the Ministers and
Preachers of Gods word, that are expressed by the number of two, because of
their weakness, contemptibleness and fewness, according to our Saviors words,
The harvest indeed is great, but the laborers are few; and yet they are two,
that they might the better assist one another; and especially, Deuteronomy. 19.13. 2
Cor. 13.1. Mat. 18. v. 16.
to confirm the Testimony of one another unto all other men, according as the
Law requires, that by the mouth of two or three Witnesses, every word might be
made good unto men, as the Apostle shows.

But I can see no reason, that all the Ministers and Preachers of Gods word,
should be expressed by the number of two; when as, though in the beginning,
when Christ spoke it the number of the Apostles and Disciples were but very
few, yet the Psalmist, prophesying of the succeeding time of the Gospel, after
the day of Pentecost, says, that God gave the word, and great was the Company
of the Preachers; and they could not be weak and contemptible, during the time
of their prophesying, and before the coming of the Antichrist, because they
were the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks, that stand before the God
of the Earth, and if any man hurt them, that is, during the time of their
Prophecy, Apoc. c. 11.4.5.
fire proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies; and therefore
our last translation adds, for the explanation of the point, the word power
unto the Text, saying, and I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they
shall prophecy, that is, Apoc. c. 11.3.
during the time allotted them, 1200 and 60 days, so that none shall be able to
hinder them.

two witnesses, we may better understand the two Testaments, that is, the holy
Scriptures of the old and new Testament, whereof our Savior says, Search the
Scriptures, for they testify of me; John 5.39.
and thus do they expound them, that make the Pope to be the Antichrist,
because he has suppressed the Scriptures both of the old and new Testament, and
has offered violence, and so killed the true sense and meaning of these two
Testaments.

For the violence, that the Pope and his Cardinals, and the whole Church of
Rome have offered unto the holy Scriptures, I cannot, and I will not go about
to excuse them; neither do I think, that they can excuse themselves; but,
though the two Testaments are witnesses of Christ, and do bear witness of him;
yet because they are but a dead letter, and so dead witnesses, as are the
Heavens, and all the works of God, the witnesses of God, though the Scriptures
truly expounded are by far, the clearer and the surer witnesses of him: but
being turned like a nose of wax by the Heretics, as they are very often, I
assure my self they are not here meant by these witnesses; because they cannot
properly, nor indeed any ways, be said to be killed, when the truth may only
be wounded, and for a time suppressed, but never killed and quite extinguished,
quia magna veritas and prevalet, as Zorchabel proves; and it is but an idle
shift of Expositors, to make good their own conceits, Esdras 14.41.
to run unto tropes and figures when we may literally without tropes, expound
the same more agreeable unto the truth, and without violence unto the Text:
therefore I conceive that the two Testaments cannot, with any probability, be
understood by these two witnesses, that are said to be killed by the beast; and
especially because they cannot be said to be the two Olive Trees, or the
anointed ones, nor the two Candlesticks, that hold up the light, when as they
are the light, that these Candlesticks do hold, nor to be confined to such a
time, as 1200 and 60 days, when these two Testaments, maugre all the malice of
the Antichrist, shall continue to the last day.

And therefore I do rather expound these two witnesses to be the preservers and
the interpreters or preachers of these two Testaments, that being living
creatures, Who are these two Witnesies, that is, 1. The King. 2. The Bishop.
may be killed by this Beast; and these are rightly termed the two Olive Trees,
or the two Sons of Oil, that is, the anointed of God, and the two
Candlesticks that stand before the God of the Earth, that is, to hold up the
light of the two Testaments, to inlighten the Church of God with the truth of
his holy word, in despite of the Devil, which is termed the God of the Earth:
And these preservers and Interpreters of these two Testaments are, as E. H.
truly observes, 1 Pet. 2.13.
the civil Magistrates, and the Ecclesiastical Governors of Gods Church,
that is, Moses and Aaron; or the King, as the supreme Magistrate, and the
Bishop, as the chief Pastor, that has the oversight of the rest of the
subordinate Ministers; as St. Paul shows; 1 Timothy 3. c. 4.1.
for the King is custos utriusque tabulae, the defender of the faith, and
obliged to take care, as well of the Church and service of God, as of the
Commonwealth; All good Kings took special care to have God truly served.
so Moses testifies, and so David, Solomon, Jehosophat. Ezechias, Josias, and
all the godly and good Kings of Israel and Judah had; and so Constantine,
Theodosius, and our own pious Princes, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles, and all other good Christian Kings showed, that they took special
care to see the truth purely preached, and the service of God duly and rightly
executed, and therefore may most truly and literally without any trope or
figure, be said to be one of these two witnesses of Jesus Christ; and the
Bishop is to take upon him curam animarum, the special care and charge of
souls, and the charge of them that are under him, Act. 20.18.
and undertook the charge of souls, to see that they do carefully feed the
flock of Christ, whereof the Holy ghost has made them overseers; and therefore
also the Bishops and the Ministers of Gods word, may be rightly said, and none
can deny it, to be the other witnesses of Jesus Christ; and so Christ says
unto his Apostles, and in them to all the Bishops that were to succeed the
Apostles, that they were his Witnesses, Act. 1.8.
and they should testify, and bear witness of him in Jerusalem, and unto the
uttermost parts of the Earth, which they themselves could not do, but in and by
those Bishops, that succeeded them in all the ordinary duties of the Apostles:
and therefore no forehead, were it of Brass, can deny these to be the
witnesses of Christ, without blushing, when Christ himself does affirm it.

And so you see plainly, Zechary, 4.14.
that these two, which are indeed the Sons of the Olive Tree, the two only
Offices and Callings that are the anointed of God, and the two Candlesticks,
that hold up the light of the two Testaments, the King, by the strength of his
Sword, and the Bishops by the faithful preaching of Gods word, are the two
witnesses of Jesus Christ, and therefore well may the King and the inferior
Magistrates under him, and the Bishop with his subordinate Clergy, like Moses
and Aaron, the supreme Magistrate and the High Priest, be rightly termed the
two Witnesses of Jesus Christ, in every Kingdom and Commonwealth.

Then after that the Angel had intimated unto the Apostle, c. 11. v. 4.
who are to be understood by these two Witnesses, by terming them the two Olive
Trees, that is, the two anointed Officers of Gods Church; and the two
Candlesticks, that do bear and uphold the true light of the Gospel unto the
people: he proceeds to show the Power and Abilities, c. 11. v. 5. and 6.
the gifts and Endowments that God would bestow upon them, both for to enable
them to build up the Temple that was measured, that is to edify and to enlarge
the Christian Church, and also to protect themselves against their Enemies, and
to punish those that should be refractory; and to show for how long a time they
should freely and fairly enjoy this power and liberty to build this Church;
for (says the Angel) these two Witnesses shall have power to poewr out fire
out of their mouth, Numbers 16. 2 Reg. 1. Jerem. 5.14. Their power was the same
as Christ gave to his Apostles and God to Moses.
to destroy their Enemies, that go about to hurt them; and they shall have
power to shut the Heavens that it rain not in the days of their Prophecy;
and they shall have power over waters, to turn them to blood, and to smite the
earth with all Plagues, as often as they will: And these powers and Abilities
are the very same that Christ had formerly given unto his Apostles, and their
successors, the Bishops and Governors of his Church; and the very same powers
and abilities that God long before had given and granted unto Moses, and to all
his successors, that supply his place and office, the Kings and chief
Magistrates, that are, as he was, to rule over and to govern Gods people; for
our Savior tells St. Peter that he will give to him the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, that is, of the Church, which is the way that brings us to the
Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever he shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
Heaven; and whatsoever he shall leose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven; and
this power he gave not only to St. Peter, but also to all the rest of the
Apostles and their Successors for ever: as you may see in Math. 18. v. 18. and
John the 20. v. 23. Math. 16.19. so Mr. Mede part 2. and page 11.
And so according to this power granted unto the Apostles and Bishops that are
the Governors of the Church, and have the Keys thereof, the sentence of
Excommunication, or the shutting out of the Church, and the delivery of the
lewd and wicked refractory person unto Satan, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
5.5. The sentence of excommunication is the fire and the key.
is the fire that proceeds out of the mouth of this Ecclesia sticall
Witness, and the Key that shuts the Gate, and the Windows of Heaven, that
the rain of grace, and the comforts and consolations of Gods word, cannot fall
on such a person, so long as he continues in that excommunicate condition:
And, as God has given unto Moses power, by his Rod, to turn the Rivers and all
the waters of Egypt into blood, and to bring all the other Plagues, that were
brought upon Pharaoh, and upon all the Land of Egypt, The extent of the power
of the witnesses.
for their obstinate refusal to let Israel go to serve the Lord: So he has
given unto his Kings a power, and a Sword, that is signified by Moses his Rod,
to punish and to draw blood, even the hearts blood of such wicked offenders, as
will be like Pharaoh, rebellious and obstinate against the Commandments of
God; And herein, you may observe the extent of their power which he granted
unto them, that is, to smite the Earth, but not the Heaven, with all Plagues;
and that is, to punish the earthly and worldly minded men, that are wicked, and
do follow after the vanities, impieties, and iniquities of this sinful life;
but not the godly men, whose conversation is in Heaven, and which are obedient
to the Laws of God and man, with fines, mulcts, imprisonments, banishments,
and death it self; for if they smite the Heaven, that is, the righteous and the
innocent with any of these Plagues, that power is not given them from God, but
from the Dragon, that is, the Devil gives it them, Revel. 13 2.
as the Apostle shows. And so you see the powers and the abilities that God
has given to these his two witnesses, the King and the Bishop, the Civil and
the Ecclesiastical Governors of his People; the one exercising his power in
the Church with the word of his mouth, and the other in the Commonwealth with
the Sword in his hand.

And for the time, The time that the two Witnesses shall continue to prophecy.
c. 11. v. 3. Fran. Jun. in loc. Ezekiel. 4.6. Dan. 9.24. Numb. 14. v. 34. Mat.
3.2. Luc. 3.3.
that these two Witnesses shall quietly and peaceably execute their Offices and
Prophecy, that is, discharge their Duties to govern the Commonwealth, and to
build up the Church of Christ; the Angel says, it shall be 1200 and 60 days
clothed in Sackcloath; and that is, as Junius here, and diverse others do
rightly take a day for a year, 1200 and 60 years, as they do collect out of
Ezekiel and Daniel, and other places of Scripture, where under the number of so
many days as are expressed, so many years are to be understood; And so we find
that with the favor, and under the protection of Christian Emperors, and Godly
Kings, the Orthodox Bishops, and true Pastors and Preachers of the Gospel of
Christ, did freely without fear, publish the Doctrine of faith and repentance,
which was the Doctrine of John Baptist, and the Doctrine that Christ continued
to preach, and commanded his Apostles in like manner, to preach the same unto
the people; and which I take to be signified by their Clothing in Sackcloth,
in their so conforming themselves unto their Doctrine, as John Baptist did,
Mat. 3.4.
clothing himself, in a Garment of Camells hair, and a girdle of Leather about
his loins, and not mourning for the pollution of the true Church, (which
during the time of their Prophecy, was not polluted) as Mr. Mede and others do
suppose, but, Mr. Mede. part 2. p. 7 8.
as I conceive, much amiss, that we should think the true Church was, or that
God would suffer his true Church to be, so long polluted, for the full space of
1200 and 60. years, before the persecution of the Antichrist should begin, or
that his persecution should last so long.

And that is, if you begin to account, not as Junius would have it, Junius in
annotat. in loc.
immediately after the passion of Christ, because this power of free publishing
the Doctrine of repentance was not yet given them, while they were prohibited,
and persecuted from place to place, for preaching the Gospel of Christ; but it
was given them after the end and determination of the ten former persecutions
of the Church by the Heathen Tyrants, and after the other storms and
afflictions, that were raised against them, by the means and procurement of
the Arian Heretics, and were as violently prosecuted by Constantius and other
Arian Kings of the Goths and Vandalls, as the persecution of the Heathen
Emperors; as the life of Athanasius, and the story of the Church does
sufficiently testify, when the Church was settled and established in peace and
quietness, and the governing Bishops freely permitted, and royally protected by
the Christian Kings and Emperors, to preach the faith of Christ, and to exhort
their people to repentance from dead works, yea and to enjoin the
transgressors, to repent in Sackcloth, and to abhor themselves and their
former courses in dust and ashes.

And this was not, The time when the two witnesses received their full power to
prophecy about the year 382.
till after the death of Valens, which was about the year of Christ 382. When
Theodosius had vanquished the Huns and the Goths, and the rest of those
boisterous Northern enemies of the Empire, that exceedingly troubled, and
brought infinite crosses and molestations, not much inferior, if not some
ways worse, then the Heathen persecutions, upon the Church; as you may easily
find in those excellent Books of St. August. de civitate Dei, and others, the
Ecclesiastical Writers of those times.

And from this suppression of those fierce and cruel enemies, both of the
Orthodox Church, and the Roman Empire, which was, as I said, about the year
382. to the beginning of the long Parliament, we shall find about the sum of
1200. and 60 years; When the time of their prophesying in Sackcloth was ended.
throughout all which time, the true Orthodox Bishops, the one of the two
witnesses of Gods truth, in all the Christian Kingdoms, as Spain, France,
Germany, Ingland, Scotland, Ireland, and the rest, had full power and free
liberty to preach the Doctrine of faith, and to enjoin penance unto their
people; and they were not only protected from the wrongs, violence, and malice
of all their opposers; About the year 1642.
but they were also assisted to reduce all transgressors to repentance; as,
above all other times, in these Kingdoms, that are best known unto us, the
happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth, King James and King Charles, can sufficiently
justify this truth unto you; and the Christian Kings and Princes, that were
the other witness of Gods truth, and the nursing Fathers of the Church, were
through the faithful preaching of Gods word, and the strict and godly
Discipline of the Church, most loyally obeyed, and religiously observed, as
they ought to be, in all the Christian Kingdoms; and so both the witnesses, by
their mutual helping and assisting one another, were thoroughly strengthened and
enabled for this space of 1200. and 60. years, to build up the Temple, which
was commanded to be measured, to be reared up.

But then it is said v. 7. (...), and when these two witnesses, That the two
witnesses shall be killed.
thus orderly strengthening and assisting each other, shall have finished, or
end, their Testimony, that is accomplish the full space of 1200 and 60 years;
the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against
them, and shall overcome them, and kill them; three short sentences, and three
great wonders; for,

1. Three great wonders in these three short Sentences. 1. Wonder. Zech. 2.8.
(...); the beaft shall make war with them; and is it not wonderful, that
the beast should make war with Gods witnesses? for, if he be a Warrior, and
will needs make war, can he fight with none, or find none to fight withal,
but with the witnesses of Jesus Christ? for this is to fight against God
himself; and to touch them, is to touch the apple of his eye, as the Lord
professes most plainly in Zechary 2.8. and therefore, hoc magnum est, hoc
mirum, this must needs be a wonderful thing, that any beast should venture to
make war with Gods witnesses, but the second thing here said is more
wonderful; For,

2. 2. Wonder.
He shall make war with them, (...), and he shall overcome them; Indeed they
are filii pacis, no Swordmen, no men of blood, though the King wears the
Sword; because they are the Sons of Oil, and the Children of peace: and the
King wears the Sword principally to preserve peace; and the Office of the
Bishops is to be, evangelizantes pacem; the preachers of peace through Jesus
Christ: and therefore, in this respect, it is no wonder, that the Antich: which
comes (...), with all power, both of Arms, men and money, should overcome these
harmless men; but is it not a wonder, that God, whose Servants they are, and
whose witnesses they be, should, not only suffer this infernal beast; to make
war with them but also to vanquish and to overcome them? yes indeed, it may
seem marvelious in our eyes; and it stumbleth many men, and makes them to think
ill of Gods witnesses, to see them subdued by the beast, which they would not
so misjudge if they would, with the Prophet, consult with God, why he suffers
the wicked so to prosper, and his own Children so to be punished. And yet

3. The last point is most wonderful, and far more mavelous then the former,
3. Wonder.
that he should overcome them; for it follows, that he shall overcome them,
(...), and he shall kill them; what? will nothing serve to quench the thirst of
this beast, but the blood of these Saints, and the death of these witnesses?
and will God suffer his own dear servants, his choycest Officers, the rulers of
his people, and the witnesses of his only Son Jesus Christ, How God
suffers many things.
to be killed and murdered by this beast? for this will make men to believe, as
many do, that these witnesses are the beast, and the beast to be the best
witness of Jesus Christ; but they might remember, that, as God suffers all
this, so many times he suffers much more then this: as, when he suffered
Joseph to be sold into Egypt, Vrias to be killed, Daniel to be thrown into the
Lions Den, Shadrach, Meshac and Abednego, to be cast into the fiery furnace,
and above all, and more strange then all, his own dear and his only Son, to
be killed and crucified by the like beast: and they might think, that God
knows what is best, and that he does always what is best, and as the Apostle
says, works all things together for the best, for all that love him; Romans
8.28.
so that their conquered condition proves to be their happiness; and their
enemies Victory to be their misery; for though God suffered them to be
vanquished and killed, yet then are they Blessed, Psalm. 116.15.
and as the Prophet says right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his Saints, and much deerer is the death of his holy Martyrs, the Witnesses of
his truth, whose blood he will most assuredly avenge on them that dwell on the
earth, to make them most miserable.

question is, that seeing the two Witnesses of Christ are the supreme
Magistrate, which is the King, and the chief Priest, which is the Bishop, the
Civil and the Ecclesiastical Governors of Gods people; and it is the Beast,
that ascends from the Bottomless pit which killed them, who be they that are
killed, if they be killed; and who is that beast that has done it, if it be
done?

Brightman thought that this Prophecy was fulfilled in the Smalcaldick War,
under Charles the 5th; the which mistake, Mr Mede does sufficiently confute, so
that I need not stand to disprove this error; but if I demand, whether King
Charles and his Magistrates, and the Bishop of Canterbury and his Clergy were
not the Witnesses of Jesus Christ? I presume none will, none can justly deny
the same: and if again it be demanded, whether the long Parliament and their
adherents did not make war with the King, and accuse the Bishops, and most of
the rest of the grave Doctors and faithful Preachers of this Church, for
innovation, and a high Project of bringing in Popery into this our Kingdom?
which unjust suspicion and groundless jealousy they spread every where among
the people, to set them on fire, and to gallop unto the War against the King,
to press him to subscribe, confirm and ratify their covenant, whose
principal scope was to root out and to overthrow the Hierarchy, and the
Ecclesiastical Governors of Gods people, which were the Bishops, and the other
faithful Witness of Christ: I believe all this is so well known to all the
Kingdom, that every one will confess it; and, as they cannot deny the War with
these Witnesses, so they must yield, that these two Witnesses, both King and
Bishop, were vanquished and killed; I am sure that Parliament has overcome the
King, and he is killed, which was the supreme Magistrate, and one of the two
Witnesses of Christ.

And I find the names of such persons, as did actually sit as Judges upon the
Trial of his Magisty, with the Council and attendants on the Court, which
they called the High Court of Justice, to be these.

JOhn Bradshaw, And I do set them down, that all posterities and their
Childrens Children, and whose embrioes are not yet in being, may understand who
had the honor to be the Judges of this good and Godly King: to condemn him to
death. And I would have it observed, that of these. 32. were Colonels, and
three Generals that fought against the King, and all of them a party that
warred and waged the war against him; and these that were his enemies and
sought his life, were made his Judges to take away his life. And whether this
was good Justice in the Parliament, to make his enemies to be his accusers,
Witnesses and Judges, I leave it to wiser men then I am, to judge of it.
Sergeant at Law, President of the Pretended High Court of Justice. John Lisle.
William Say. O liver Cromwell. Henry Ireton.
Esqs Sir Hardresse Waller. Valentine Walton. Thomas Harrison. Edward Whaley.
Thomas Pride. Isaac Ewers.
Esqs Lord Gray of Groby. Sir John Danvers Knight. Sir Thomas Maleverer
Baronet. Sir John Bourcher Knight. William Heveningham Esquire. Alderman
Pennington, Alderman of London. William Purefoy. Henry Martin. John Barkstead.
John Blackiston. Gilbert Millington.
Esqs Sir William Constable Baronet. Edmond Ludlow. John Hutchinson.
Esqs Sir Mich. Livesey Baronet. Robert Tichbourne. Owen Roe. Robert Lilburne.
Adrian Scroope. Richard Deane. John Okey. John Hewson. William Goffe. Cornelius
Holland. John Carey. John Jones. Miles Corbet. Francis Alinn. Peregrine Pelham.
John Moore. John Aldred. Henry Smith. Humphrey Edwards. Gregory Clement. Thomas
Woogan.
Esqs Sir Gregory Norton Knight. Edmond Harvy. John Venn. Thomas Scot.
Esqs Thomas Andrews Alderman of London. William Cawly. Anthony Stapley. John
Downs. Thomas Horton. Thomas Hammond. Nicholas Love. Vincent Potter. Augustine
Garland. John Dixwel. George Fleetwood. Simon Meyne. James Temple. Peter
Temple. Daniel Blagrave. Thomas Wait.
Esqs
The Counselors that were appointed to be assistants unto the Court, and to
draw up the charge against the King, I find to be.

Dr. Dorislaus, Mr. Ask, Mr. Cook, Sergeant Dandy, Sergeant at Arms, and Mr.
Philips was Clark unto the Court.

The Messengers and doore-keepers were, Mr. Malford, Mr. Rudley, Mr. Pain Mr.
Powell, Mr. Hull, and Mr. King was the Crier: all which do make up 77. and of
those that were to be his Judges, any 20 of them were to condemn him.

And so this High Court of Justice adjudged him, that was one of the Witnesses
of Christ, to Death.

And for the other Witness of God, which is the Ecclesiastical governor of
the flock of Christ, which is the Bishop and his subordinate Clergy, I doubt
not but the most part of the Christian world understands, how William Laud,
Bishop of Canterbury, whose works do sufficiently prove him to be an Orthodox
man, and a faithful Witness of Christ, was adjudged to be beheaded by that
Parliament, and all the rest of the Godly Bishops, and the Faithful teachers
of Gods truth, and Witnesses of Jesus Christ, are spiritually and Civilly
killed by the suppression of their Office and calling; and silencing them from
Preaching: and some of them actually brought to their Graves, either through
want or grief, or some other ingredient, which that Parliament administered unto
them; and not any of them, but is brought to such contempt and scorn among the
generality of the people, and so spitefully used in many places, that the like
was never known since the Arian or the Heathen persecutions: Mr. Mede page 15.
and this dejection of them from their Offices (had none of them been actually
killed) is sufficient to prove the killing of the Witnesses, as Mr. Mede
confesses most truly.

But though we say, that the King, as supreme Magistrate, and the Bishop, For
the Parliament will say that they did most justly put these witnesses to death.
as chief Priest, are meant by these two witnesses, here spoken of; yet we do
not positively say, though we might, that these two witnesses that were thus
killed, by that Parliament, are the very witnesses that are meant in this
place, c. 11.7. by the spirit of God, or that the Parliament which killed them,
is to be understood by the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, but
we leave that to God, and to them, that are better able to determine, whether
they be or not.

Only I say, that we cannot find the Pope to have either actually killed, or
civilly suppressed these two Offices of the two witnesses of Christ, but that
he, to the uttermost of his power, upholdeth both the regal dignity of Kings,
and the divine calling of the Bishops; and therefore that he can no ways be
meant by this beast, That the Pope never killed these two witnesses.
that ascends out of the bottomless pit, and shall either actually or
civilly, or both actually and civilly, kill these two witnesses, and suppress
these two Offices and callings of the two witnesses of Jesus Christ; which
herein, in that which befell to our witnesses, fell out most unhappily here
amongst us, in these Dominions, and makes many men to think, that, as the Poet
says, haec haec, non sine numine divum

Eveniunt, -- All this was done, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, that
says, the two witnesses of Christ should be killed, by the beast, that is the
Antichrist; and therefore if they be not killed already, in those that I have
named, as we believe they are, I am certain, that they shall be killed in the
two forenamed Offices of King and Bishop, because the Scripture must be
fulfilled.

And now, the Witnesses being killed, that is, the chief of them, How the two
Witnesses being killed, shall be unburied.
as the King and Bishop Laud actually slain, and beheaded; and the rest
subordinate unto them, civilly killed, by their ejectment out of their Offices,
and quite put out of all hope of recovery, (which happened not all at once to
the Bishops, and which was not, till the good King was made away, and the
Parliament had prevailed, and fully vanquished all their enemies, and the
assistants of these witnesses;) the dead bodies of the witnesses, says the
Angel, shall lie in the streets of the great City, which spiritually is called
Sodom and Egypt, that is, Sodom, The full description and Character of the City
where the witnesses shall be killed.
for their great and abominable sins and filthiness; and Egypt, for their
blindness in the Religion and service of God, and for their cruel oppression,
and persecution of Gods right servants; where also the Lord was crucified, and
that was the great and holy City of Jerusalem; so that the dead bodies of
these slain witnesses, shall lie in such a City, as shall be like Sodom and
Egypt, for impiety and iniquity, and yet like Jerusalem, for profession of
true piety and sanctity, hearing of Sermons, and hating all superstition; for
as Jerusalem, the City where our Lord was crucified, was then pretended to be
the only holy City of the World, the City of God, and the Inhabitants thereof,
the only people of God; so that City, where the two witnesses of God, shall
lie unburied, and where our Lord Christ was crucified in his anointed
witnesses, the King and the Bishop, and the rest of their subordinate Officers,
his members, (as he said unto Saul, why persecutest thou me? when he persecuted
his Servants) will pretend to be the only zealous and best Protestant City,
Act. 95.
and the most opposite to Popery, that is in the World. And I know not how
London will evade, and wash away these Characters of Sodom and Egypt, and
Jerusalem; I will not accuse her, let her excuse her self, if she can;
howsoever, when the slaughtered witnesses are cast forth into the streets of
the great City, they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and Nations,
shall see their dead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer their
bodies to be put in graves.

Upon which words, Junius in his notes annexed to Beza's Translation, that
understands this beast that slew the witnesses, Ju^ius in annot. annex. Bezae,
translat. in apoc. c. 11. Quia tres annos cum dimidio Juper vixit bon facius
Jubilaeo suo; ut ait Bergomensis.
that is, the Protestant Preachers of his time, to be Boniface, the 8. (who
killed neither King nor Bishop, and I am confident, never did so much mischief
to the Waldenses and fratricelli, that were condemned for hair brained
Heretics, as the long Parliament did to the Orthodox Bishops) says, that
these three days and a half, do signify those three years and a half, that
the said Boniface lived, after his Jubilee, as Bergomensis records.

But I conceive rather, that these three days and a half, are not simply and
properly to be taken strictly for the set and determinate time of 3 years and a
half, but for some certain short space or time thereabouts, that, for some
reasons. I shall show hereafter, the spirit of God is pleased to express, by
these three days and a half; during all which time, thus expressed, the dead
witnesses, that are, in some part actually killed, and in the rest, spiritually
and civilly slain by the beast, shall, after the beast has triumphed over
them, remain in the sight of the World, in the streets, that is in the common
Roads, and open places of every Town, City and Village, rejected, despised, and
scorned; for so (...), the street of the great City signifies, as Mr. Mede
proves at large. And being thus despised and scorned in every place, the
wicked limbs of the beast and the adherents to the Antichrist, shall not suffer
their carcasses to be put in graves, that is, they will strip them of all
honor, they will deprive them of all their just Titles, and they will deny
them all civil respects, and esteem them no better then as the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 4.17. Vergilius Aeneidos, lib. 6. Plutarchus in vita Nic^ae. p. 544.
Quintus Curtius l. 5.
the very filth and offscouring of the Earth; for this is the meaning, and to
be understood, by the laying of them in their graves, which the very Heathens
reckoned the last, and not the least honor and respect, that we owe, and
should show unto our worthy friends, and deceased Heroes, as Virgil shows, by
the interring of Palinurus, to whom, he says, Et statuent tumulum, and tumulo
solennia mittent. And Plutarch shows, that the same due respect ought to be
observed as an honor that we owe unto all our worthy Heroes, friends and
benefactors.

And so Quintus Curtius says, that when Alexander lost so many men in the
straights of Pila-Susida, he would not depart thence and leave his slain
Soldiers unburied, Vide Tobit. 1.17, 18, 19. and c. 2. 4. and 7.
until they were interred; because, says Curtius, among all other Ceremonies
observed in the Discipline of their Wars, there was none more religiously
kept, then the burying of their dead; and you may remember what great account
Tobit made of this honor that is due unto the dead bodies of men; and
therefore especially of worthy men, such as these witnesses of Christ were.

And whether the godly and Christian King, the defender of the true Christian
faith, while he lived, was, according to the letter of the Text, suffered to be
put in his grave, after the Christian form, prescribed by the Church of
Ingland, or rather thrown like -- into a pit, Mr Fuller, in the Hist. of the
Church of the burial of King Charles.
without the due honor that we owed him, let the worthy Author of the History
of the Church of Ingland be consulted with. I am sure, the goodness, virtue,
and piety of this gracious King, and glorious Martyr deserved, at the hands of
his friends and subjects, a far more glorious Tomb, honor, and solemnities of
burial, then what Artemisia did for Mausolus, or what was done for Alexander,
or any other Emperor or King whatsoever, I will not except Constantine, nor
Theodosius, who though they were most pious men, yet did they not sacrifice
their lives, and suffer all their blood to be spilt, rather then they would
suffer Gods service to be any ways defiled, or his Servants to be destroyed,
as this glorious Martyr did; therefore I wish he should. --

And whether the Reverend Bishops, the worthy Deanes, the learned Doctors, and
abundance more of the faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ, do not thus lie
neglected, without honor, without respect, nay despised and scorned, without
means, and without maintenance, in the great Cities, and in the little
Villages, Towns and Country, throughout all Ingland, Scotland and Ireland, let
those that see them be the Judges.

And let my Reader consider, I beseech him, if that learned and pious man, Mr.
Mede seems not to intimate, that these two Witnesses of Christ shall be
killed, and rise again in the reformed Churches? for he says, who knows
not, Mr. Mede. page 22.
whether or no, the reformed Churches shall not be deservedly punished, for the
reproach offered to Christ in this behalf, by taking away the Witnesses for a
time, because they reverenced them not, according to the dignity of their
Embassage, while they enjoyed them; for it is too well known, A true conselsion
of Mr. Mede.
what offense the reformed Churches have committed in this behalf, that while
the Prophets of Christ mightily bestirred themselves in reforming the Temple of
God: others, in the mean while, disgracing that most sacred work, and
especially the Workmen, by pillaging the I reasure, and interverting the
oblations thereof, not leaving, in some places, so much as food, (to the great
disgrace of the true Religion) whereby the Ministers thereof, That the
Antichrist shall arise in the reformed Church; and why.
might be ho nestly, according to the dignity of their Calling, sustained, much
less, that any thing should abound, which they might set aside, for the
enlarging of the Reformation, the necessity of the Holy War, the relief of the
Afflicted Brethren and other pious uses; and was not the prevarication of this
kind, for which, the Jewish Temple, that was the Type of the true Christian
Church, was given to Antiochus Epiphanes, that was the Type of the great
Antichrist, to be profaned, and the true Religion of the true God, to be
trodden down for the space of three years and a half? for an Army, says Daniel,
shall be given to him against the daily Sacrifice, Dan. 8.12.
by reason of transgression, and it shall cast down the truth to the ground,
and it shall do it and prosper, which you may see more at large, in the History
of the Machabees, lib. 2. from the beginning of the third Chapter to the fifth
Chapter: thus far Mr. Mede: Wherein, habemus confitentem virum, we have this
learned man, Hucusque
ingenuously confessing enough to make good what I assume, that the Witnesses
should be slain in the reformed Church, and the cause that moves God, to
suffer them to be killed, and the Church to be deprived of them, to be our
sins; our Sacrilege in robbing them of their revenues, and our neglect and
contempt of their persons; which does always follow the pillaging of their
Estates.

And if Mr. Mede had seen the unparalleled sacrilege, and the incredible
contempt of the best men in holy Orders, and the trampling of the highest form
in Christ his school, underfoot, that we see now, what would he have said then,
to these things? I think as much as I, if not more.

But if the witnesses be taken away and killed, as he fears, Therefore he is
not the Pope, nor Turk.
in the reformed Churches, and their killing must be there, because there is
the place, where they do bear witness: and it is the Beast that ascends out
of the bottomless pit, that kills them, and that Beast is the great
Antichrist, as hereafter I shall make plain unto you: therefore it must needs
follow, that the Antichrist must needs rise in like manner, out of the reformed
Church, and so neither Pope nor Turk can be the Antichrist.

Then, after the witnesses be killed, ejected, and deprived of all respect, it
is said, How the worldly and carnal men rejoice for the killing of the two
Witnesses. For the manner of sending gists, See Hest. 9.19. and 22. Isai. 9.3.
Earthly men accounted those that restrained them from their wickedness, their
tormentors.
verse. 9. that they which dwell, (...), on the earth, that is, the carnal,
earthly and worldly minded men, shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and
send gifts one to another; that is, for very joy, that those witnesses are
vanquished and suppressed, they shall be the more Joviall, and much more
exercise the jollity of their mirth and Jubilee now, and send gratulatory
presents, and make feasts for Colonels and Captains that had followed the war,
and suppressed these two witnesses, and so rejoice, according to the joy in
harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil, Gaudebunt gaudio
maximo, they will rejoice with the greatest joy that can be, more then ever
they did rejoice before.

And the Reason of this their Jubilee and great joy, is not omitted to be here
rendered by the Holy Ghost, and therefore not to be passed over in silence; and
that is, says he, because these two Witnesses, that is, the King by his just
Laws, his powerful sword, that formerly turned the waters of their unlawful
lusts and pleasures, as Moses did the waters of Egypt, into blood; and the
Bishops by their spiritual Courts and sentence of excommunication, that like
fire proceed out of their mouth, to root out the refractory, carnal and lewd
livers, out of the Church, or to reduce them to repentance, tormented them that
dwell on the earth, that is, by rebuking them in their Sermons, and punishing
them in their Conrts; and so the witnesses vexed them by their reproofs, and by
their laws, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, which inflicted penance, and
imposed fines, imprisonment and death it self upon the scandalous transgressors
of the Laws of God and the King; by which means of the said civil Rule and
Government, there was some restraint to bridle those earthly and carnal men,
and to curb them, that they should not gallop so fast as they desired, and as
otherwise they would have done, in their lewd and ungodly courses; for which
bridling and hindering of them, to run on in their evil and wicked ways, these
two witnesses were deemed by all those that dwell (...), upon the earth, and
had their conversation and delight in the things of the earth, to be their very
enemies, and their greatest tormentors.

And now I demand, How the carnal and worldly men do rejoice to see the King
and the Bishops suppressed.
If the earthly and carnal men, the lewd livers, adulterers, Sabbath breakers,
Drunkards, and the like transgressors of the Law of God and the Church, did not
rejoice and leap for joy to see the King killed and all the Bishops suppressed,
and their Courts, that restrained their outrages and impieties, quite
abolished? for though all godly men, and all honest men, do mourn, and are
grieved at the heart for those things that were done to these witnesses of
Christ, yet they that dwell upon the earth, and are only cives hujus mundi,
the free citizens of this world, and have none of their conversation in heaven,
are exceeding glad, that there is no king in Israel; and no Bishop in the
Church of God; that is, no Monarch or supreme Governor to punish their unjust
doings, and no Bishops Court to question them for any of their profaneness, or
to prohibit any lewdness and exorbitances, but that they might, as now they
do, in many places, live after their own lusts, And do now what they list.
in all lasciviousness and wantonness, and do what they list, run and preach
without a calling, and so fill the Church with sects, heresies and errors; and
as it was said of some lascivous Friars: Mane filium virginis praedicant in
choro,
Nocte filium veneris agitant in thoro.


So may we far more justly say it of these unlawful, uncalled and unlearned
earthly Preachers, that prate and preach, and say, and say, and all to none
other end, but to hide their wantonness, and worldliness, and to deceive the
world.

Thus you see how the two witnesses of Christ are killed, That the Church, that
is, the true and farthfull Christians shall be trodden underfoot, so long as the
witnesses shall remain dead.
and shall for three days and a half lie unburied without their last honor,
without favor, and without any respect in the world, but the worldly men
rejoicing for their dejection: And all this while, that the witness-bearers of
Gods truth, shall be as dead men in the world, and as stinking carcasses in
the nostrils of them that dwell on the earth, the holy city, that is, the true
Church of Christ, which is, as St. Augustine calls it, the City of God, shall
be, as the Angel says, c. 11.2. trodden under foot by the Gentiles, that is,
the uncircumcised, that served not God, and were none of Gods people, but such
as followed after their Idols, and their own ungodly ways; so shall the wicked
hypocrites, worldlings, and carnal men, that are here understood, by these
Gentiles, profane the Houses of God, the Temples, the Oratories, and all other
places consecrated for Gods service, when the fonts wherein they were baptized,
shall be thrown out of the Churches, the windows shall be dashed in pieces, the
Altars or Communion-tables shall be trampled upon, the Bibles torn and burnt,
the Chancels made stables, and the whole service of the holy Church neglected,
contemned, and prohibited; the which things, I suppose, may very well be said
to be, a treading of the holy city underfoot; for so the Angel says, the holy
city shall be trodden under foot forty and two months, Rev. 11 2.
c. 11. v. 2. And here, verse 9. he says, the witnesses shall lie unburied
three days and a half, which, if you take a day for a year, as Junius,
Bellarmine, and most Interpreters do. they do sunchronize, and agree just with
the forty two months, which do make up the three years and a half that the
holy city shall be trodden underfoot, to show unto us, that while the witnesses
lie without their honor, and are suppressed, the King disobeyed and rejected,
and the Bishops dethroned and despised; the whole Church and people of God,
that would truly serve him, and respect his Vice-roes, and reverence his
Messengers, shall likewise be neglected, despised and abused, as we have most
apparently seen it here amongst us, how many good men have been despised and
abused, ever since the King and the Bishops have bin suppressed.

But though nocte pluit tota, yet redeunt spectacula mane; albeit, heaviness
may last for a night, yet joy comes in the morning, for God is so good and so
gracious, that he will not always be chiding, nor shut up his loving kindness
in displeasure, Psalm. 30.5.
especially toward those that serve him, and to the uttermost of their power,
discharge their duties; and therefore the Angel informs our Apostle, that
after 3. days and a half, which I conceive, is not precisely to signify 3.
years and a half, no more then I do take the 42 months for that just period,
and set term of 3 years and a half, without either more or less; but
indefinitely for some short space, expressed here by 3 days and a half, Why
the time of the witnesses rising is expressed by the notion of, after 3 days
and a half.
as the time of the treading of the holy City is expressed by the space of 42
months; not less then 3 days and a half, because they should not have the
honor, equally with Christ, to rise as soon as he, that rose again the third
day, and was most justly to have a greater privilege and pre-eminence, in
rising sooner then any other; nor yet any more then three days and a half;
because then they should stink, as Martha said of her Brother Lazarus, that had
been dead four days; and therefore, seeing that on the third day, the dead
Corpse remains sweet, and the flesh as yet sees no corruption, John 11.39.
but does begin to stink, and to putrify on the fourth day, as the Physicians
do relate, God would not suffer these two Witnesses to lie in the streets to
stink, and to be corrupted; but after 3 days and a half, while they were yet
sweet, and their memories precious with all that feared God; the spirit of life
from God, or the breath of life, for so (...) signifies, (...), shall enter
into them, and they shall stand upon their feet; not that the good King and the
Bishops, or any others of the Martyrs and witnesses of Christ's that are killed,
shall rise again, in their own persons; that thought is too gross; because they
are now in glory, The witnesses shall rise in their successors.
and great gainers by the malice of the beast, that killed them; and they
should be much the worse, and great loosers, to be reduced and brought back
again hither into this valley of misery; but the meaning is, that as our
Savior says, John Baptist was the Elias, that was to come; because he was
endued with the spirit of Elias, and was sent, to do the work and to supply the
place, and to execute the office of Elias; Mar. 9.13.
so they that shall be invested with the abilities, re-established in the
places, and confirmed with the power and authority of those witnesses, that the
beast has killed, and shall be enthroned, and take possession of the seats,
offices, and privileges of the slain witnesses, are said to be the witnesses
revived, and restored by the spirit of God, to stand up again upon their feet,
and So Mr. Mede says, Mr. Mede. p. 21.
the witnesses shall be restored, and revived in their successors, when they
shall enjoy the offices, and the former estate of the slaughtered witnesses.
And so we may be sure, when God sees his time, which is but a very short time,
expressed here under the notion of three days and a half, these two witnesses,
that are slain by this beast, that is, as I showed before, the monarchical and
Episcopal Government, by King and Bishops, shall and will rise again, and
stand upon their feet, And whether this be not now fulfilled, let my Reader
judge.
maugre all the opposition of their adversaries: and then, as the Holy Ghost
says, v. 11. great fear shall come upon them, that see them; that is upon
their enemies, that had killed them, either by themselves or by their
predecessors, and upon those also that consented and furthered to put them to
death; and I believe they may very well, and ought very much to fear, to see
that God is so mindful of his witnesses, and therefore, will without question,
be revenged on them and their Posterity, for the slaughtering of his anointed
Servants.

Then the Holy Ghost sets down Verse 12. v. 12.
the means and the manner of the rising and restoration of the slain
witnesses, saying, that they shall hear (...) (...), a great voice from Heaven,
that is, a powerful call from the Church, and from the People of God, How or
by what means the two witnesses shall be revived.
which is here meant by Heaven; for they only shall restore them, and shall
say unto them (...); come up hither, that is, ascend and take your former
places, your offices and your dignities, that the beast and his adherents have
taken away from you, and from your Predecessors; (...); and they shall ascend
up to Heaven in a Cloud; that is, by the help and assistance of a multitude of
unperceived, And let my Reader judge whether the King be not thus restored. And
we hope the Bishops shall be so likewise.
and as it were Invisible friends, that shall be as a Cloud of Witnesses of
their integrity, and a Cloud of Intercessors to speak for them, and to plead
their causes to God and all good men against all their malicious Adversaries,
and a Cloud of powerful Patrons, to regaine unto them, and to restore them, if
not to their Estates and possessions, which in all likelihood the Beast had
sold, or bestowed, or otherwise disposed of it, and the takers of them, perhaps
had expended and consumed, yet certainly to their Offices and dignities, with
some competency of estate to support their dignities, which they shall obtain
in despite of the beast and all his followers; for their Enemies shall see
them, says the Text, though they were brought to that pass in a Cloud, that
is, by a misterious and an unperceived way, and they shall not be able to
hinder them; because they shall be advanced and lifted up into their places, by
a Cloud, and in a Cloud, which signifies an innumerable multitude of Gods
Servants, that shall unite themselves together, to re-establish the two
Witnesses, and to advance the Kingdom of Christ against the Antichrist.

And therefore it is immediately added, v. 13.
v. 13. that (...), or (...); in the very self same hour, that is, wherein the
Witnesses shall ascend up to Heaven, that is, to take their places and
dignities in the Church of God, (...), there was, or there shall be a great
Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell, or shall fall; for in the
Prophetic style, things to come are spoken of, for the certainty of their
fullfilling, in the present or perfect tense, as if they were already past, and
in the Earthquake were slain, or shall be slain of men, 7000. Where, by the
way, What (...) properly signifies.
you must observe, that the word (...), which is derived from (...), moveo, to
move, does not properly signify an Earthquake, but simply any quaking or
motion, and may be referred to any matter, as head, heart, City, Kingdom, or
Commonwealth; And this I conceive to be also fulfilled.
and by the figure Synecdoche, it is specially used to signify an Earthquake;
and therefore the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this expression is, that when
the two witnesses that were killed, shall in their successors, be listed up to
their offices of government, both of the Church and Commonwealth, there will be
a great quaking and fear, and shaking in the Land, and a grievous stir among
the multitude, and perhaps a commotion or an insurrection, or at the least, a
mighty discontent and murmuring among the enemies of the witnesses, and of the
people against the Antichrist and his party; and in all likelihood, whenever,
and in what place soever the stir and commotion shall happen to be, it will
begin among the Antichrist his own party, either his Soldiers or adherents, or
some others of his chief Commanders.

And the Angel says, eodem v. that in the same stir and commotion, and
discontent, the tenth part of the City, that is, of that great City, where the
Lord was crucified, and the witnesses lay dead in the streets thereof, that
wicked Sodom, and hypocritical Jerusalem, fell: that is, from the Antichrist;
and that is but a very small number out of a very great City; What is meant by
the tenth part of the City.
or else it may signify, the tenth part of the servants, abettors and
followers of the Antichrist, that adhered unto him, in that City, Church or
Kingdom, where the two witnesses were slain, shall fall away from him, and
assist him no further in his Antichristian proceedings against the Servants of
Christ; because they shall by that time, perceive his hypocrisy, and how
themselves were deluded by his dissembling pretenses of piety; and if thus it
be understood, yet this is but a small discession from him, and he need not
much care to loose one part of ten, he may do mischief enough with the other
nine parts: M. Mede. p. 24.
and therefore I do rather approve of Mr. Medes interpretation, that by (...),
the tenth part of the City, we may understand, the tribute of the Antichrist,
the Taxes and Contributions, that are imposed upon the people to maintain the
war, to pay the Soldiers, and to defray all the other expenses of the
Antichrist, which are usually the tenth part of their estates at the least,
which will be denied unto him; And the falling away of this part may be to some
prejudice unto him, and cause some stir and commotion indeed; The chiefestcause
of the Earthquake or commotion.
because neither War nor Soldiers can be maintained without money, nor the
nine parts of the City stick unto him without their pay; and I conceive, that
the denial of those Taxes, Contributions and Excises, will be the prime cause
of that commotion, dissension and difference betwixt the Commanders of the
Antichrist, for want of their pay: and then (...), in that stir, quaking,
motion, or commotion and discontents were slain of men, says our Translation,
heads of men, says Junius, names of men, says the Text, 7000. the meaning is
the same; videlicet, that in the stir, tumult, and commotion, which shall
happen among the Soldiers of the Antichrist, and about the time of the setting
up of the witnesses, and the denial of the Tribute and pay to the Soldiers,
7000 men, which may signify, a great many men, shall be slain; That men may be
said to be killed two manner of ways.
and it may be, the meaning is, that they shall be civilly killed, that is,
only excluded from their places and offices, and become of no power, or
authority: being disbanded and scattered, because they did contest one with
another, and oppose and withstand the rising of the witnesses; for, as here
amongst us, the two witnesses of Christ, 1. The Monarchy and Magistracy. 2. The
Hierarchy and Episcopacy, were not all corporally slain, but only the King, as
the head and chief of the Magistrates, and the arch Bishop, as the prime and
first of the Hierarchy, and the rest both of the Magistracy and Ministry, were
only mystically and civilly slain by their suppression, silencing, and taking
away their means and offices from them; so I conceive, that in the stir,
muttering and discontent for putting down the witnesses, and in the desire and
workings, to set them up again, to revive them, How the enemies of the
witnesses shall be slain.
and restore them to their places and dignities, some few of the grand opposers
of the Monarchical Government shall be corporally put to death or killed, and
the rest, that will be very many, expressed here by the number of 7000
Chiestains, Officers, and their adherents, shall be only cashiered, displaced,
and their Commissions and power taken from them; and so mystically and civilly
slain.

And those 7000 men that shall be either thus mystically slain, or according to
the letter corporally killed, in that commotion, and for their opposition
against the rising of the witnesses, are not of the common sort of men, but
Chiestains and Officers, and all men of name, of note, and account, such as the
Companions of Corah were termed, men of renown in the Congregation: so shall
these men be, Numb 16.253. The great multitude of the followers of the
Antichrist.
men famous in the Army, and for their service unto the Antichrist, capita
hominum, heads of the people, and ring leaders of the seduced multitude.

Where by the way, you may yet take notice of the great malice of Satan against
Christ, and the great power of the Antichrist against the witnesses of Christ,
that he should have such a number of men of note, to assist him to overthrowe
the Servants of Christ, for, though among 600 thousand men that came out of
Egypt, Exodus 12.37.
there were but 250 men that rose up and rebelled against Moses and Aaron; yet
here is 7000 men of renown, that stand up, and fight, and are slain for the
Antich: to withstand the witnesses, and to hinaer them to obtain their Offices
and places; and if so many men of note be slain, what a multitude of other
inferior men of no note, may be slain, and of others that fight and assist the
Antichrist against the witnesses and are not slain?

But it may be, the number of 7000 does signify; as I said, a great many; That
the number of 3.7. and 10. do very often signify many.
because the number of 3 and of 7, and of 10, has very often none other
importance, then a great deal, or a great many, as in St. Jude, the Lord
comes with ten thousand of his Saints: so in St. Matthew. 12.45. and in St.
Luke 8.2. the number of 7 betokens many; and so I rather conceive the meaning
of these words 7000. men were slain, to be, that a great many were slain, and
not that the just and full number of 7000 men were to be slain in that
commotion. And it may be likewise conceived, that all these 7000, or great many
names of men, that were to be slain, or annihilated and undone in that
commotion, are not all of the Antichrist his party, but rather so many, and
such a great number should be slain of both parties, which is the likeliest
interpretation. Yet howsoever, whether you understand the words literally for
the full number of 7000 men, or mystically for a great many, Or 7 that should
be in the stead of 7000. The love of Christ to his servants, and his power to
desend them greater then the malice and power of Satan to hurt them.
or whether you understand them all of both parties, or all of the Antichrist
party, you may here observe, a greater love of Christ unto his witnesses, then
the malice of Satan can be against them, and the power of Christ far greater,
and better able to protect, and to set up his witnesses, and to overthrowe
their enemies, then the Antichrist can possibly have to destroy them, or to
hinder their restoration; for to the comfort of the witnesses, and of all
others the Servants of Christ, St. Cyprian, that was himself a Martyr, and a
faithful witness of Christ, says most truly, that non plus valet
addejiciendum terrena paena, quam ad erigendum divina tutela, the Lamb that
stands on Mount Sion, is far more able to protect us, then the roaring Lion,
is to overthrowe us; and Christ is far more powerful to raise his witnesses,
then the Antichrist is or can be to hinder their rising; and therefore, were
the Soldiers of the Antichrist, and the followers of the beast 70 times 7000.
And I demand if the adversaries of the King and Bishops be not affighted to see
them restored.
yet they should be subdued and slain in this Earthquake rather then the
witnesses of Christ should be hindered to ascend up into Heaven, and to be
restored to their offices and places; for so the Angel testifies, that the
witnesses ascended up in a Cloud unto Heaven, and 7000 heads or names of men
were slain in the Earthquake, and the remnant were affrighted, as well they
might, to see how gracious the Lord is to assist his servants, and how
powerful to overthrow his adversaries that will oppose and suppress his
witnesses; and they, that is the witnesses, gave glory to the God of Heaven,
which is indeed the God of his Church, more especially, then he is the God of
any other place, or people whatsoever.

And then says the Angel, When the second woe shall pass away.
when the witnesses are restored, and their enemies subdued, the second woe
shall be past, and the Saints and servants of Christ, will give thanks and
praise unto God, as they have most just cause to do, as for all things else, so
likewise more especially, for overthrowing their enemies, and restoring the
witnesses of Christ to erect and build up the Temple of God, by serving God
with the right service and preaching his word truly unto the people, as you see
they do, from this 14. verse unto the end of this Chapter.

But lest the restored witnesses, A good lesson, both for the King, and
Bishops, and the Church.
and the rest of Gods Servants should grow secure, after they had overcome
these great troubles, that with great constancy they had passed through, they
must still be exercised and trained up in gymnatio patientiae, in the School of
afflictions, and therefore the Angel adds, that although the second woe be
past, when the witnesses are restored, and the 7000 men slain; yet behold,
says the Angel, and consider it well, (...), the third woe comes quickly. And
this woe I take to be the last woe, that shall fall upon the Sons of men; The
last woe, upon whom, and when to fall.
and under which the Lord God will power out the 7 last vialls of his wrath,
upon the Antichrist, and his adherents, and upon the false Prophet, and upon
all profane worldlings and wicked Hypocrites, and in some respects, upon very
many of the true Servants of God, and the witnesses of Jesus Christ, as failing
in the same Ship, and being commorants in the same City among the wicked, and
perhaps soiled in some measure with the manners, and evil practices of the
world, and therefore must partake in some kind, of the plagues and punishments
that God powers down, like rain upon the wicked; and then, that is, after the
pouring out the Vials of Gods wrath, the mystery of God, which he has declared
to his servants the Prophets, shall come to an end, and be fully finished, as
the Angel testifies to our Evangelist, Revel. c. 10. v. 6. and 7.
c. 10. v. 6, 7.

And this mystery of God, I conceive to be, (with the favor of them that think
the contrary) not the restoration and calling of the Jews, and the other ten
Tribes of Israel, as Dr. Willet, E. H. and some other learned men do imagine;
The fictions of the Presbyterians and Jesuits, in mistaking this mystery of
God. 1 Timothy 3.16.
nor the reformation of the relapsed gentile Churches, and the destruction of
the Papacy, Turcisme and Mahometisme, as others of our late Presbyterians do as
fondly conceit; nor yet the overthrowe of the Popish Antichrist, set forth by
Sanders, Bellarmine and others; but the great mystery of godliness, whereof
Saint Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 3.16. that is, the mystery of Christian Religion,
which is the greateft of all mysteries, and therefore (...), termed the mystery
of God, and a mystery indeed to the World, and all worldly men, that know
nothing, and believe nothing of it, shall then be finished and be at an end;
and what God has declared unto his Servants the Prophets, and the Prophets
unto his People, John 1.1. and c. 3.16. Jude Ep. v. 16.
that God sent his Son, his eternal wisdom, (...), and the word God, to be
made flesh, to save all that believe in him, and repent them of their evil
ways; and that this Son of God will come to receive the believers in him to
everlasting life, and to execute judgment, and to render vengeance unto all
the ungodly, that will neither obey God, nor believe in him, and to cast them
for their injustice and impiety, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, shall then come to pass, and the truth of this
great Mystery, which now, the worldlings and Atheists will no ways believe,
shall then appear most manifest, unto all the Sons of men, good and bad.

For, though there be some other particular mysteries of a lower degree, spoken
of, in Romans 11.25. 1 Cor. 15.51. 2 These. 2.7. Ephesians. 5.32. Revel. 1.20. etc.
17.5. and in other places of the holy Scripture: yet this only mystery, is the
great mystery, and the mystery of God, which is principally and most specially
spoken of in the new Testament, as the mystery that was hid from the ages,
Collos. 1.26.
and from the wise and prudent of this World, and was declared unto all his
servants the Prophets; The great mystery of Christian Religion when finished.
and which shall be finished, when the seventh Angel shall begin to sound;
whose founding shall put an end to the third woe, and the 7 last Vialls of Gods
wrath, and shall begin the felicity of all Gods Servants.

And this I take to be the true sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost, touching
the particulars that are prophesied of, and foretold us in this 11th Chapter of
this Book; whereof you may apply to these present times, and our own proper
Church, what you conceive to be already fulfilled, and may unquestionably be
applied unto them: and for the rest, that is unfulfilled, Predictions
unfulfilled may easily be misapplyed.
I dare not presume to determine any thing; for as the Philosopher says, de
futuris contingentibus non est facile determinanda veritas, so I say more
truly, de futuris praedictionibus aenigmatice praedictis -- to explain the
predictions of the Prophets, and the Prophesies of the holy Scriptures, that
are so mystically foreshewed unto us, before they be fulfilled, may as easily
be mistaken and misapplied, I desire the Reader to judge of things as he sees
them fulfilled. Act. 1.7.
as rightly expounded by the best Interpreters, that can but conjecture at
things to come, especially for the times and seasons of their fulfilling, which
the Father has put, and reserved in his own power.

Therefore, for our two witnesses of Jesus Christ, that were here killed
amongst us, whether they be these two witnesses here spoken of, in this 11th
Chapter of this Book, or not, I leave it for others to determine; I must leave
them dead, and unburied in the streets of the great City, in the manner that I
showed you before, and the people making merry, feasting and rejoicing for
their suppression; and I hope we may without offense, I am sure, to all good
Christians, expect when the spirit of life from God shall raise them up again,
and accomplish the manner of their restoration to their offices and places,
which is yet unfulfilled and unbelieved, especially in the little hope we have
of the raising of the last, which is the Ecclesiastical witness; but the time
of their reviving, is the more uncertain, when it shall be; because we cannot
well set down, the exact time, when the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and chorus
prophetarum, were quite killed; for though the beheading of the King, and of
the chief Pastor of our Church William Land, is well known to a day; yet the
deadly wounds and strokes of the rest of the Bishops were many, and not all
imposed at one time; but

1. They were thrust out of their unquestionable right of sitting as Peers, and
members of the upper House of Parliament, which we confess, was the royal
favor of pious Christian Kings and Princes, that conceived them to be fit men
to be consulted with, and was confirmed by many acts of Parliament unto them.

2. They were put out of their calling, whereunto God had called them, and cast
out of their office, wherein Christ by his blessed Apostles had placed them,
and their Hierarchy was utterly denied them, and their dignity trodden
under-foot.

3. The Hierarchy being like a great Oak, had many strokes to throw it down.
Their whole means and maintenance, the Patrimony of the Church, which the
Parliament gave not to them, were taken from them, and either sold or given
away; and most of the faithful Ministers Livings were sequestered, and bestowed
upon young novices or worse, and the godly Incumbents left with their
diocessans, either to live on alms, if they have none other means, or else to
starve, as many of them did want.

4. They were excluded from all benefit of Law, and all Lawyers, Atturneys, and
Solicitors straightly prohibited to assist them in the legal seeking of their
due and just right, which was also a wrong to the Lawyers.

5. They were silenced and made speechless, by that Thunderbolt, which
proclaimed them enemies to the state, and should be proceeded against as
enemies, if they presumed to open their mouths to preach the word of God,
either publicly or privately, which is their spiritual killing, and may be
feared, to be the forerunner of their corporal slaughter.

But whether all those strokes before spoken, have laid the Ecclesiastical
witness down for dead, or that yet some heavier blow then all those, will be
given them, to make a final extinction of them, I am not sure; and therefore I
must, at this time leave them, either as the poor Traveller, that fell amongst
Thieves, betwixt Jerusalem and Hiericho, half dead, and to expect their deadly
wound, or as the Levites Wife, For an Army must be maintained to hinder their
rising, and that Army must be maintained by the sweat of the poor people.
quite killed, and parted among the twelve Tribes of Israel, and so must lie;
not only (...), mouthless and speechless, by this last blow, that cannot be
healed, but even dead, till the spirit of life from God shall raise them up;
till which rising of them, if they be these witnesses here spoken of, Chap. 11.
Revel. the second woe shall not be past, but afflictions shall be added to our
troubles, and sorrows to our afflictions, and miseries to our sorrows, taxes
upon taxes, oppressions upon oppressions, and troubles upon troubles, more and
more shall be powered out, and heaped together, to fill up the measure of the
second woe, that shall be inflicted for the killing of Gods two witnesses.

But if this stroke, that makes them speechless be the last blow that kills
them, and that our late ever blessed King and Bishops, be the very witnesses
that are here meant in this Chapter, as I conceive they are, then do I expect
their rising, and do hope their restoration will be about June 1660. that is
just about 3 years and a half, after this last blow was given, and is the very
time prescribed for their rising by the holy Ghost; for you must observe, that
although the actual and litterall killing of the King and the Arch Bishop was
done long before; yet this mystical metaphorical, and civilly final
slaughtering of the Ecclesiastical witness, the rest of the Bishops, was not
till about November. 1656. when this last blow was given them; and therefore
seeing the spirit of God does not say, that the two witnesses shall be killed
by the beast at the same time, but that after they are both killed, and lain
both dead 3 days and a half, (though the one of them has lain dead somewhat
longer) the spirit of God shall raise them up, What time should we expect the
restoring of the King and the Bishops.
it cannot be expected, that the time of their rising, taken to be, as most
Interpreters take it, for the set time of 3 years and a half, or thereabout,
can be, to either of them, until about June 1660. and it may be to the other,
a while after, and not both raised together, as they were not killed together,
but, that as the one was the longer before he was killed, so he should be the
longer before he should be raised, and to expect the help of him that shall be
first raised, to raise him also, which we hope will soon be effected, that we
may render the praises and thanks that follow in this Chapter unto our God.

CAP. II. Who is here meant by the Woman Clothed with the Sun; Cap. 12. Of the
Revelation treats.
who is meant by the Dragon; and by the Man child; when the Church began to be
freed from her bloody persecution; how long she was freed from it; what is
meant by the War of Michael and the Dragon; the last bloody War and persecution
of the Dragon, how long it lasts; how the Church is relieved in this bloody
persecution; and Junius his interpretation of this Woman rejected.
2ly. AS the Holy Ghost sets down the slaughtering of the two Witnesses, 1.
Of the Vision of the Woman, and what it signifies.
the Magistracy and Ministry, the Civil and the Ecclesiastical Governors of
Gods Church, by the Beast that ascends from the Bottomless pit, that is the
Antichrist; and the reviving of them again in their Successors, and restoring
them to their former state and condition, to execute their Offices, as before,
by the Spirit of God, that has done all this for them, in the 12th Chapter of
this book; so here in this 12th Chapter he sets down the State and condition
of the Church it self, how she shall be persecuted and afflicted both at first,
and at last, in her beginning, and throughout her continuance, especially in
the time, and by the means of this beast, that is, the great Antichrist; for
as the Apostle says, V. 1.
(...); there appeared a great Wonder in Heaven; that is in the air, which in
this place is signified by Heaven, as where the birds of the Air are called
the Fowls of Heaven; and what may that (...), great wonder be? Psalm. 104.12.
Jer. 7.33. Ezech. 31.6.
It is (...); a Woman Clothed with the Sun; and what means that? surely this
Woman signifies the Spouse of Christ, that is the Church of God; and this
Church is Clothed, that is enlightened, not with the new lights of Fantastic
upstarts, that are but old errors and heresies heretofore buried, and now
revived by our Novices, Deuteronomy. 32.17.
even as Moses says unto the Idolatrous Israelites that their new Gods were
nothing else but old Devils; but this Church and Spouse of Christ was Clothed
with the old and unspotted light of the Sun, which is the Fountain of our
light, wherewith she was girded and compassed about, as with a bright shining
garment; for so the word (...), that comes of (...), circundo, cingo, to gird
about, signifies: and this (...), the Sun, wherewith she was inlighted and
clothed, is none other, then (...), the Son of God; Malachie 4.2. John 1.9.
Jesus Christ, who as the Prophet says, is the Sun of Righteousness, and the
garment, that the Apostle bids every Christian man to put on; and so she was
Clothed and enlightened with the true light, What is meant by the Moon.
that lighteneth every man that comes into the World; And this woman thus
Clothed, had the Moon under her feet; that is, the true Church of Christ,
trampled all sub-lunar and mutable things, as is the Moon, under her feet, as
deeming them no better then dust and dross, and things of no value, as the
Apostle speaks, or as Mr. Mede says, by the Moon we may understand the
Mosaicall Ceremonies; as the Jewish feasts of new Moons, Mr. Mede. Page 33.
of the Passover, of Pentecost, and of Tabernacles, that were all ordered, and
observed according to the motion of the Moon; all which the Christian Church,
Colloss. 2.14.
as they were shadows of things to come, as the Apostle shows, trampled
under her feet, and cast them all away, when Christ, the true substance of
them, came in place: or else the Moon, which God made to rule the night, may
signify the power of darkness, Genesis 1.16. What is meant by the Crown of 12
Stars.
as the Worshipping of Idols, and all the gentile superstitions, there
following after their Oracles, and the like works of darkness, which the Church
of Christ quite Cashiered and abandoned. And this Woman had upon her head a
Crown of twelve stars, that is, as St. Ambrose says, the glorious and Heavenly
Doctrine of the twelve Apostles, that is, briefly comprised and knit together,
like an unvaluable Crown, in the twelve Articles of our Christian Faith, which
these twelve Apostles have composed, and delivered to this Woman for the
instruction of her Children, and which therefore should be deerer unto them,
then the fairest Crown of the purest Gold, v. 2.
though now our Presbyterians have cast them quite away. And she, being with
Child, cried, traveling in Birth and pained, to be delivered; even as other
women that are with Child use to do; for the Church, as Rabbi Kimchi says, is
compared to a Mother, Rabbi Kimchi Hos. 2.2.3.
in respect of Universality, and so cries and is pained in bringing forth
Children unto God; and she is likened to Children, in respect of particulars,
that are all the Children of the Church, begotten and brought forth by her unto
God, through their regeneration and new birth by Baptism, and the Preaching of
the Gospel and grace of Christ.

And these (...), The pangs of the woman, and what they signify.
pangs and pains of this woman to bring forth her Child, may most especially
signify the troubles and afflictions, that the Primitive Church endured for
the Preaching of the Gospel, and converting the Infidels unto the Faith of
Christ; under the first ten grievous persecutions; and so likewise for the
troubles, that the Church should suffer at any other time, and chiefly those
great troubles, that she must undergo, for doing the same service and work of
regenerating children unto God, in the persecution of the Antichrist; for these
troubles and afflictions of the Church, are compared by the Prophets to the
pain of a woman in travel; Esaias 66. and Jer. 30.6.7.
because the Church will endure as much, and as readily hazard her life, to
beget a Child to God, as any woman endures, and hazardeth her life, to bring
forth her Child into the world, and sooner too: And our Savior, to show the
greatness of these pangs, and pains of a woman, that is in travel with Child,
says, that the troubles of the Jews, which should happen unto them, and were
as great as any we read of, Mark. 13.9.
as Josephus ben gorion witnesses, are but (...), the beginnings of their
pangs or sorrows, which shall be no less then the pangs of a woman in travel;
so shall the pangs and pains of the Church be, under the persecution of the
Tyrants and the Antichrist, for bringing forth Children unto God, very great
pains and troubles; as that, which here follows, will make it more manifest;
for,

The Evangelist says, v. 3. 2. The Vision of the Dragon, and his malice to the
woman.
v. 3. (...), there appeared another wonder in Heaven; and that seems to be a
greater wonder then the former, and a wonder indeed, every way, if we should
consider all particulars, in very many respects; and therefore the Holy Ghost
prefixeth (...), and behold it, or consider it well; for a great red Dragon, or
as the Greek has it (...), a great fiery Dragon, Job. 1.6.
or a Dragon as red as fire, appeared in Heaven; so he that durst go into
Paradise before, dares now, to go into Heaven, and to appear among the Sons
of God, as he is more often, and more diligent in the Church of God, to hinder
our devotion, then we are, to perform the duties of our Religion; and he that
was but a Serpent before, crawling upon the Earth, is now become a great Dragon
flying in the Air; The Dragon had 7 heads, and 10 horns.
and therefore this sign or wonder, well deserves an (...), behold him, and
take heed of him; for he has 7. Heads, harder to be discovered then the heads
of Nilus, and harder indeed to unhead him, then it was for Hercules to cut off
the heads of hydra; and he had 10 horns, and therefore he was of a mighty
strength, The horn an Emblem of strength. 1 Reg. 22.11.
because the horn is an emblem of power and strength; as Zedechia made horns of
Iron, and said, thus says the Lord, with these shall thou push the Syrians,
until thou have consumed them; and he had 7 Crowns, upon his heads, that is,
upon every head a Crown; to show unto us, how glorious and majesticall
wickedness, and the instruments of wickedness would fain seem to be; and his
tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them to the
Earth; What the tail of the Dragon signifies. Who are the Stars.
by his tail, I understand the fear of him, the terror of his sting, and the
lashing of them far and near, that will not submit themselves to him; and by
the Stars of Heaven, I understand those, that seemed to be holy Professors,
good Christians, and to shine like Stars in the Church of God; or else, those
that were appointed to shine, and to give light, as Stars to them that are in
darkness and do walk in the night of ignorance, as are the Bishops, Preachers,
and Ministers of Gods word; for so the Angel says unto our Evangelist, Revel.
1.16. and v. 20.
that the seven Stars in the right hand of Christ, were the Angels, that is,
the Bishops and Pastors of the seven Churches; and by the third part of the
Stars, I understand not the subduing of the third part of the rulers of the
world, to the empire of Rome, as Mr. Mede thinks; for why should the rulers
of the world, Mr. Mede, page 35.
be termed the Stars of Heaven, and to be cast to the Earth, when as they were
earthly and worldly enough already, and had small correspondency with Heaven;
but a great many, (as I told you the number of 3.7. and 110 does often import,)
What is to be understood by the third part of the Starts. Let my Reader Judge
whether this was not fulfilled in our time.
both of the Clergy and laytie, that seemed to be as Stars in the firmament of
the Church, for fear of the Dragons tail, to be stung and lasht, with the
loss of their preferment, their wealth, their lands, their liberties, and their
lives, are pulled down from Heaven and drawn away from their station, and from
the performance of their due respects, unto the Witnesses, and of their duties,
of the right service of God in his Church, and are cast down to the earth, that
is, to follow after the world, and for the love of the world and the
preferments of the earth, to observe and follow any new form of Gods service,
and so to become Apostates, Meteors and falling Stars, and mere Hypocrites in
the Church of God; which is very much, that the Dragons tail should do such
great mischief.

And yet, this is not enough for this Dragon to do, to corrupt the third part
of the Stars, and to draw a multitude of professors from the right service of
God, to follow after the world and his wicked ways, but he would feign have
more grist to his Mill, Hell being like the Daughters of the Horse-leech, that
still cry, give, Proverb. 30.15, 16.
give; and being one of the four things that are never satisfied, and that
never faith, it is enough; and therefore he stands before the Woman, which was
ready to be delivered, to devour her Child, says our Translation, when she
had brought it forth (...), to eat up her Son, says the original; but (...),
being derived of (...), pario to bring forth, it may be translated her Child,
as well, or, as I conceive, more agreeable to the meaning of the Holy Ghost,
then her Son; and the Dragons eating of it, would be a speedy devouring of her
Child, whether it were Male or Female; so the Dragon was watching this woman,
and is still watching, to devour every Child of the Church, Male or Female.

And in the fifth verse the Angel says, (...), V. 5. The diversity of opinions
who this Child should be.
and the woman brought forth a man Child, who was to rule the Nations with a
rod of Iron, and the Child was caught up to God, and to his Throne; where, we
are past the plain, and are come into the Wilderness, wherein the way is not
so easy to be found out; when we do find so many paths, and such a great
diversity of opinions among the learned, who is meant by this Man child, and
what is to be conceived of his birth, and of his taking up to the Throne of
God; Rupertus de victoria verbi dei. l. 9. c. 28. and l. 12. c. 2. Math. 2.16.
etc 4.1.
for some Interpreters, by the Birth of this Man child, do understand the Birth
of Jesus Christ, in the Jewish Synagogue of the Blessed Virgin, whom the red
Dragon, the Devil, by Herod his grand instrument, sought immediately to
destroy, as soon as ever he was borne, as St. Matthew shows, and also tempted
him, as soon as ever he was Baptized, as the same Evangelist declares.

But against this, E. H. does rightly oppose* E. H. de Apostasia, page 44.
that the Revelation is not of known things that are past, but as the Angel
says, of things that must shortly come to pass: and the incarnation or Birth
of Christ of the Virgin Mary, was not to come, the same being already past,
well nigh an 100. years before; and therefore, though we deny not (but the
Dragon sought to destroy Christ, as Rupertus says, as soon as ever he was
brought forth, out of his Mothers Womb; yet we say that cannot be the meaning
of this place, which is to be understood of another Child, that is to be borne
of another Woman; E. H. Lococitato. By this Child understands the great
Constantine.
and therefore E. H. and some other Authors do understand this woman to be the
Primitive Church of the Christians, groaning to be delivered from under the
bloody Tyranny of the Red Dragon, that is, from the cruel dealing, and sad
condition, that she sustained under the Pagan and persecuting Emperors; and
the Lord delivering her from those Tyrants, by raising up Constantine, who, as
they say, is the Man-child, that the Church then brought forth a good
Christian, to rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron, that is, to subdue Licinius
and Maxentius, and the Nations that adheared to them, with his Victorious
Sword; and he was caught up to God, when he was converted from an Infidel, to
become a Christian; and he was placed in Gods Throne, when he attained to the
Imperial Majesty.

The which exposition, The former exposition rejected.
though it seem very probable and plausible, yet cannot I yield unto it, to be
the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this place, because this woman does not cry,
to be delivered from her enemies, that were without her, but (...), having in
her belly, that is, a Child, within her, (...) or (...), she cried, by reason
of her child birth pain, which the word (...), that comes from (...), which
signifies to bring forth a Child, from whence (...), does properly signify
dolor parturientis, the very pangs and pain of bringing forth the Child into
the world, and (...), that comes of (...), torqueo, to be grieved or vexed, and
wrested with pain, does make it manifest, that she cried, not to be delivered
from her enemies, but to be delivered of her child, that she had in her womb,
and would faign have him to be brought forth into the world.

That Constantine is not the Man-child here meant.
Neither can I see any reason, to persuade me to yield, that this man-child,
should signify Constantine the great.

woman which signifies the Church, was not, as then, before Constantines time,
(...); circumcinctasole, clothed, or girded and compassed about with the great
light of the Sun, that is fully enlightened and instructed with the Doctrine of
Christ, and the many points of particular truths of Christian Religion; nor can
we find her to be thus enlightened until the time of Theodosius, alter the
death of Valens and Gratian, which was about the year of Christ 382 when those
great lights, The woman not clothed with the Sun till 382.
that God then raised in his Church, to expel the foggy mysts of errors, and
clouds of heresies, that were formerly raised by the Heretics, and still
pestered the Church, St. Hierome, St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St. Basil, Bishop
of Caesaria, that for his great learning and wisdom, was rightly termed
Basilius Magnus, great St. Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, that for his excellent
skill and knowledge in Divinity, was styled Theologus, the Divine, as the
writer of these Revelations is called, John the Divine; Epiphanius, Cyrillus
Bishop of Jerusalem, When the Bishops were like Stars, and when like the Sun.
and many more most worthy men, of great learning and piety, made the truth of
the Gospel of Christ, that was left unto us by the Evangelists and Apostles, to
shine in the Church, as the Sun in the Firmament, that formerly, while those
heretics, that Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epiphanius, and St. Augustine record,
troubled the Church, and darkened the truth of the Gospel, the said truth shined
but as the light of the Stars; and therefore, during those times of the grand
Heretics, the very Angels of the seven chiefest Churches of Asia, that is, the
Bishops and prime Pastors of those Churches, Revelat. 1.20.
were called seven Stars; for the seven Stars are the Angels of the seven
Churches, says the Holy Ghost; and the twelve Apostles are compared unto
twelve Stars, as I showed to you before; and the Church could not be
enlightened, with the light of the Sun, when her chief teachers were but
Stars, and shined to her but as Stars, though the light, which these
Stars sent forth, was the light, which they received from the Sun, that is
the Sun of righteousness, as the Prophet calls him; but in the year 382. and
about that time, Reignolds Devitis Imperat. fol. 115.
was the flourishing time of the learned, when the Doctrine of Christ did shine
as the Sun, says Reignolds.

Church, like the woman, that is with Child, is pained before the time of
birth; yet is she most of all tormented, when the child is nearest to be born;
so the Church had her pangs in those that she brought forth in the time of the
persecuting Emperors; but now after the death of Valens, when Theodosius had
freed the Empire from the Northern blasts, and delivered the Church from those
grievous troubles and molestations of the Arian persecution, not much, if any
thing inferior to the Pagan persecution, that the Goths, the Huns, the Alans,
and the other cruel enemies, under Gensericus, Attalus, Alaricus and others,
had continually brought, as well upon the Church as upon the Empire, the Church
was near her time, that she should peaceably bring forth Children, very
plentifully unto God; and that is, to beget Christ by our Regeneration, and to
bring him forth by faith in the heart of many Sons and Daughters, At what
time the Church like a woman with Child, was near the time of her Childbirth.
which is the Child, that is now spiritually to be born, in every true member
of the Church, in every Christian soul; and in that respect, as the throws and
pangs of the Church are the thicker, and come the oftener, by reason of the
plenty of Children, that she now brings forth, so her pain and cry is the
greater; and therefore I say, that this her travel was not in the time of
Constantine, that was born about 284, when the Church comparatively, brought
forth but very few Children unto God; but in the days of Theodosius, about
382. when those great lights aforenamed, encompassed, and clothed the Church
round about, with the heavenly truth, as with the glorious light of the Sun,
the Church did then most plentifully bring forth very many Children unto God;
and so her pangs were the more, and her cry the greater.

Constantine subdued Licinius, Maxentius, and the rest of his and the Church
his enemies, and attained to the imperial dignity, to protect the Church of
Christ, as he did, within his Dominions, from all those Tyrants that formerly
vexed and molested her; yet, it cannot be said, that he should be able to feed
or rule (...), all the Nations; but this power must be left to that Child,
whose Government is upon his shoulders, (...), v. 2. Esaias 9.6.
the strongest part of his body to support it, and is therefore able to rule
them with a Rod of Iron, even while he is a Child, as being, by reason of the
hypostaticall union, of the Godhead to and with the manhood, of perfect power
and ability to rule or feed the Nations, Luke 2.46, 47.
as he was of perfect knowledge and understanding to pose and to confute the
Doctors; which Constantine, whose Government was in his hand, by the strength
of his Sword, was not able to do; for to this holy Child Jesus, as St. Peter
calls him, God had given the Heathen for his Inheritance, Act. 4.27. and 30.
and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his possession, which he gave neither
to Constantine, nor to the Pope, nor Turk, nor to any man else; and therefore
he only, and no man else but he, has right, as well as power, to rule them
with a Rod of Iron; and therefore, when Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles and people of Israel, which two species comprehended all Nations of
the World, were gathered together in a confederacy against this holy Child
Jesus, and did to him, what God before determined to be done; Act. 4.27.30.
yet did the Apostles then, many signs and wonders by the name of the holy
Child Jesus, as Saint Peter freely tells all his enemies.

Constantine should be meant by this Child, that is here spoken of, then many
men might conceive, that Helen his Mother, must be understood by the woman,
that was clothed with the Sun, and cried to be delivered, and being
delivered, fled into the Wilderness, where she was fed 1200 and 60 days; By
this man-child is understood Jesus Christ spiritually, conceived and brought
forth in every Christian man. Gal. 4.19. So Mr. Mede takes this man-child to be
Jesus Christ. p. 37.
which is most absurd to imagine, and therefore the other is as absurd to
conceive.

And therefore I understand, that by this Child is meant, not Constantine, but
Jesus Christ, not as he was born in Bethlehem of his Mother the blessed Virgin
Mary, which was past long before this time, but of his spiritual birth by
faith in the heart and soul of every true member of the Church, that is here
signified by this woman, which cried to be delivered, and to bring forth
Christ, into her member, even as St. Paul plainly shows unto the Galathians,
saying, My little Children, of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you, as the Child is formed in his Mothers womb; where the Apostle
uses the same word, (...), to travel in birth, as the Holy Ghost does in this
place; for so does the Church labor and travel, as the Mother of a Child does,
to beget and to bring forth Jesus Christ in every one of her members; and as
the Devil carried Christ himself, as soon as ever he was baptized, into the
Wilderness, where he sought by many temptations, to overthrowe him; so does the
same red Dragon, the Devil, watch and labor to destroy every Son of the
Church, as soon as ever Christ is begotten in them, and to extinguish, and
devour the spirit of Christ, that is, all the graces of Gods spirit, as soon
as ever they be regenerated, and made the Children of the Church; Christ is no
sooner brought forth by them, that is, the grace of Christ does no sooner
appear to be in them, but the Devil is presently ready to eat up all the
graces, the faith, the hope, the love, and all the other fruits and gifts of
Christ, and to take them quite away from them.

But the love of God toward all sincere Christians, is such, and so great,
that he takes up every truly regenerated Child of the Church unto himself, and
to his own protection, How God preserves every faithful Child of the Church.
and places them in his own Throne, even the Throne of Majesty, by advancing
them to regal dignity, and making them Kings and Priests, to sit and to
remain, where himself rests and delights to reside; and that is, among his
chosen Children, which is, the Church of God, where every faithful Child of
the Church, shall be as safe from the malice of the Dragon, as Noah's Children
were in the Ark, from the waters of the deluge; Satan being not able to pluck
them from thence, out of Gods hands. this Child of the woman, is to rule all
the Heathen with a rod of Iron, and to break them, that are stubborn and
refractory, in pieces like a Potters Vessel; and this, every Christian Child,
that the Church brings forth, cannot do.

Christian child, which is regenerated and brought forth unto God by the
Church, is the Child that the Dragon watches to devour; but Christ that is
mystically begotten, and spiritually residing in that Child of the Church,
which is truly regenerated, is that Child, which is advanced, and advances
with himself, as his member, every true Christian to the Throne of God, and
which, in, and by those, that are his members, and have him, by his spirit,
residing in them, What Child rules these Nations with a Rod of Iron.
subdueth the Devil, and all the Heathenish Idolaters, and all others, the
enemies of his Church; as he did overthrowe all the Oracles, all the Idols of
the Gentiles, all the Tyrants that persecuted, and all the Heretics that
molested his Church.

And all these things, were wrought by this child, in and by those instruments,
that were his members, and the Children of the Church, even as we find it fully
expressed in our Ecclesiastical Histories, how Constantine, overthrew
Licinius, Maxentius and Alexander, that rebelled against him, and vexed Gods
Church; and Theodosius vanquished Maximus, Eugenius and Arbogastus, and that in
so wonderful a manner, as not only the Christian Historiographers, but also
the Poet Clandian, in admiration of his Victory, says, O nimium dilecte deo,
cui militat ether, Claudian de consulat. Honorii. Judges. 4.

Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.


That as the Stars in their order did fight against Cicera, so the Skies and
the winds did help and assist Theodosius, so much beloved of God; and so many
other true Christians, Children of the Church, and the members of this Child,
or rather, as I said, this Child, in and by those his members, has subdued all
the Idolatrous Instruments of Satan, and the tyrannical enemies of his Church,
and so rules them, with a Rod of Iron, and breaks them in pieces like a
Potters Vessel.

And yet, notwithstanding all the omnipotent power, and the infinite ability of
this Child, By the Wilderness is meant a life sequestered from the pomp and
vanities of the world.
to protect his members, it seemed good to God, not to suffer the woman to
stay, before the Dragon; but he, by his blessed spirit, moved her for fear of
the red Dragon, as I conceive, (though that is not expressed) because he still
waits, and watches for any opportunity to destroy the faith of Christ, from
every Christian, and to bring them, either to renounce their faith, like the
Apostate Julian, or to follow after the world like Demas, or else to defile the
faith of Christ with the old errors and heresies of the primitive age, that are
still revived by upstart inlighters) to fly into the Wilderness; that is, to
forsake the vanities of the world, and all worldly pomp, and the society of all
wicked and earthly men; for the Wilderness is said to be the place, which God
had appointed and prepared for her, verse 6. And what place, I pray you, does
God appoint for his Children in this world, but such a Wilderness or desert,
let the same be where it will, where they may fast and pray and serve God,
without being hindered or corrupted by the wicked worldlings? for so Lot, while
he was in Sodom, Joseph in Egypt, and Daniel in Nebuchadnezars Court, lived,
as it were like Mark the Eremite, in a Wilderness; that is, sequestered from
the world and all the inticements of this world; otherwise, as St. Ambrose
says, Transire in Egyptum non erat criminosum, sed transire in mores Egytiorum
crimen habet, as it was no sin to pass into Egypt, but to follow the manners
and the Idolatries of the Egyptians, was most sinful; so to live in the
world, is no ways offensive to God, but to fashion our selves like unto the
World, and to be led away, and as it were bewitched with the vanities,
pleasures and delights of the world, is that which is forbidden, 1 Cor. 7.31.
In what Wilderness the Church lives;
and is most hateful unto God: and therefore God brings his Church, that is
his Children out of the World, though they live in the world, and wills them
to use the World, as though they used it not, or not abusing it, as St. Paul
speaks.

And in this Metaphorical Wilderness, or solitary unworldly manner of living
in the World, and not in any local Wilderness, Junius in annot in locum. When
the time of the Woman's feeding in the Wilderness expired.
such as the Children of Israel wandered in, the Church of Christ, by the
power and providence of God, was sed, that is, with the Heavenly Doctrine of
the Gospel, which is the Spiritual food of our souls, for 120 and 60 days,
says the Angel, v. 6. and that is, as Junius rightly expounds it, by taking a
day for a year, 1200 and 60 years; which must needs be expired, after the Woman
became Clothed with the Sun, and was so delivered, as I showed to you before,
and thus fed in the Wilderness, for fear of being corrupted by the wiles of
the red Dragon, just about the year of Christ, 1642.

For so the Ecclesiastical Histories do most evidently, That the Church of
Christ was free from any bloody persecution, from 382, until the year 1642.
which is the full space of 1200 and 60 years.
and undoubtedly declare unto us, that during all this time of 1200 and 60
years, after the reign of Theodosius, until the year 1642, the Church of God
had rest, and was freed from any bloody persecution for the profession of the
true faith and the right Service of God; and the two Witnesses of Christ, that
is, as I said before out of E. H. and others, the Christian Magistrates the
King as chief. and those that are sent from him, as St. Peter says, and the
spiritual Ministers, the Bishops and Preachers of the Gospel, living in their
Cloisters and Monasteries, as in a Wilderness, secluded from the world and all
worldly affairs, had free liberty and furtherance, through the protection and
assistance of the Christian Emperors, and those Kings and Queens that God
raised to be, as nurcing Fathers and nurcing Mothers unto the Church, to
Preach, open and publish the mystery of our Christian Religion, and the truth
of the two Testaments, and to instruct the people of God in the doctrine of
Faith and Repentance, and so to edify the Temple, that was measured to be
built, as I have showed to you before c. 11.3.

But then, the Dragon seeing the Woman and her Child, thus escaped and freed
out of his persecuting hands, the hands of his instruments, How the Devil
wheels about like a cunning Fencer.
the Idolatrous Heathen Tyrants, and the bloody Arrian Kings; he, like a very
cunning fencer, that can play with both hands, and is good at all Weapons,
wheels about; and because he cold not prevail in his own ground, and upon the
Stage of the Heathen Tyrants, he, like the Roman Scipio, very boldly enters
upon his Adversaries Territories, and makes a War in Heaven; and that is, he
follows the Woman into the Wilderness, and the Divines into their Cloisters,
which was the Churches Heaven upon Earth; and he will not so part with her, Mr.
Mede page 40. What is meant by the War of Michael and his Angels against the
Dragon and his Angels.
as there to let her escape free from his assault; but be will now prosecute
another kind of Combat with her, which he had only begun before, when he saw
himself like to be worsted, in the former conflicts; and that Combat shall be,
not, as E. H. and Mr. Mede do imagine, the bloody Wars of the persecuting
Tyrants, which was already past, and the Dragon failed of his purpose therein:
but bellum dogmaticum, a verbal War; that is, a spiritual, Scholastic, and
Ecclesiastical War, like the Pharsalian civil War of the Romans, when a
Kingdom is divided amongst it self, which is the Worst and most dangerous of
all Wars, and so is this Ecclesiastical War, that the Heretics, and their
grand Captains, the Proselites of Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Pelagius,
Manichaeus, Aerius, the Trinitarians, Millenaries, and the rest of that litter,
did still prosecute, to molest the Church of Christ.

And my reasons to prove this War to be no Bloody War, The heretical War.
but rather a spiritual and Ecclesiastical War, are these.

War is said to be in Heaven, which cannot signify the seat and place of the
Blessed Angels, and of the Saints departed out of this life; because, that
neither War nor sorrow, nor any other trouble can come there; and therefore the
seat of this War must be, not the World, simply considered, which is never
called Heaven, but the Church of God, which is the Christians Heaven here upon
Earth, and the Arc that carries us through the Seas of this World, into the
Eternal Heaven; and therefore, this War, being said to be rather in the
Church, then in the World, when as our Savior, speaking of our bloody Wars,
says, in the World you shall have Tribulations, must needs be an
Ecclesiastical, Heretical, and no bloody War, no worldly War.

Michael and his Angels, that is Christ and the true Bishops and Pastors of his
Church, that are called the Angels of the Churches, and not Michael and his
Princes, Revelat. 1.20.
fought against the Dragon and his Angels, and not, as it is said in Daniel,
that he affisted his Angel against the King of Persia, but with the Dragon and
his Angels, Dan. 10.13.
that is the Devil and his false Prophets, the Heretics, that molested the
Church, and corrupted the true faith and the right Service of God; and yet, as
their Master the Devil, transformeth himself into an Angel of light, as the
Apostle speaks, so will the false Prophets be deemed and esteemed Angels, but
this Heavenly Angel tells us they are the Angels of the Dragon, that make this
War with the Angels of Christ.

this War, we find none slain, nor any blood spilt, as they were under the
persecuting Tyrants, as well the Arian Kings, as the Pagan Emperors; and
therefore this War must needs be understood of no Foreign bloody War, but of
a Verbal spiritual War, waged within the bosom of the Church, that happened
after the death of Theodosius, who had freed the Church from all external
Wars, and bloody persecutions, but could not stop the mouth of the false
Prophet, nor hinder the Dragon and his Angels, to raise and prosecute this
Heretical War.

And yet now, How the Church prevailed against the Heretics.
as the Woman formerly prevailed in the first War, against the bloody
Instruments of the Dragon, that were vanquished in patientia Martyrum, through
the patience of the Martyrs, and the sufferings of the Saints; so here, in this
second War, she gets the Victory over her Enemies, and the Dragon is overcome,
c. 12. v. 11.
by the blood of the Lamb, and his Angels vanquished by the word of their
Testimony, v. 11. that is the Heretics, and Scismaticks were confuted and
silenced, in prudentia Doctorum; by the Wisdom of the Bishops, that were the
Governors of the Church, and by their learned writings, and faithful
Preaching of Gods truth; and not with the Sword or Cannon shot, or any other
such outward force which the Angels of Jesus Christ, the Ministers of the
Gospel, never use, as the Angels of the Dragon do and now did in many places;
because they are commanded with St. Peter to put up their Sword into the
sheath, and it is for none, but the satellites of the high Priests, Math. 26.52.
and the Jannizaries of the Antichrist, to come out against Christ, and to
fight against his Witnesses with Swords and Staves.

Then, Mr. Mede. page 40. Michael significat quis sicut deus? certe nullus nifi
Jesus Christus.
the Dragon being by Michael, that is, by the power and Wisdom of God, that
is, Jesus Christ, which Michael fignifieth, and not by any one of the chief
Princes, or of the seven Arch Angels, as Mr. Mede thinks, cast out of Heaven,
that is, driven from the Church, as he did the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple; when all the errors, heresies, and superstitions which the Devil by his
prime Angels: the Heresiarches had invented, and sowed amongst Gods people,
were confuted and rooted out of these our reformed Churches, and these Churches
restored to their Pristine purity, and settled in the right form of serving
God, by the painful diligence of the learned Bishops, the Pastors, and the
Protestant Preachers of Gods word, which was fairly begun in Queen Elizabeth's
time, The Victory in this War when obtained.
continued and bettered in King James his Reign, but not clearly done, and
perfectly finished until King Charles his days, nor any where so purely done,
as in these our dominions, as I have fully proved unto you, before; there
ensued a twofold act, or a double consequence of this great Victory of Michael
and his Angels over the Dragon and his Angels.

1. The Triumph, rejoicing and Jo-paean of the Conquerors, The twofold
Consequence of the Church his Victory over the Heretics. cap. 12.11.
the Inhabitants of Heaven. 2. The fretfull wrath and continued malice, of the
Conquered Dragon.
1. In Heaven, that is, in the Church of God, as I said before, St. John heard
a loud voice, saying; now is come Salvation, and strength, and the Kingdom of
our God, and the power of his Church, c. 12. v. 10. where you must first,
observe the Emphasis in the word, now (...); now is Salvation come; and it was
come long before, when Christ had fully purchased our Redemption before his
Ascension into Heaven; but I conceive this Salvation to be meant not of our
spiritual and eternal Salvation from Sin, Hell and Satan, which was come by
Christ long before, but for our Temporal Salvation and deliverance from the
power and malice of our Enemies; and that was now come, that is fully and
perfectly come, A special observation of the time of this rejoicing.
and not before; because that till now, the Church was exercised either with
bloody persecutions from without, or with intestine broils, and heresies from
within; but now, (...), the accuser and false traducer of our Brethren, the
Holy Prophets, and the Apostles of Christ, by misapplying their sayings,
misconstring their words, and perverting their meaning, and making them to say
that which they never thought, as all Heretics do, being cast out of the
Church, and quite vanquished, consuted and silenced; 1. By the blood of the
Lamb, that is, by the faith, which the true Christians had in the death of
Christ, and by the patient sufferings of the Martyrs, for the defense of that
faith in the former persecutions, both of the Pagans and Arians, when they
loved not their lives unto death, but valued them as nothing, and yielded them
most freely for the maintenance of that Faith, which they had in the blood of
the Lamb. and 2. by the word of their Testimony; that is the brief Articles of
their faith, and the uniforme rule of Serving God, and by the constant, firm
and faithful justifying and maintaining the truth of that Doctrine and Service
which they professed and published unto the people, against all Heretics
whatsoever.

Therefore now, (...), v. 12. rejoice you Heavens, 1. The rejoicing of the
Angels and Saints; the Church tryumphant and militant for the suppression of
the Heretics.
and ye that dwell in them; that is, the highest Heavens, and all you Blessed
Spirits, and Holy Angels, that do rejoice at the Conversion of one Sinner,
rejoice now much more, for these great Victories; and especially for this last
victory, that Michael and his Angels has obtained against the Dragon and his
Angels; and you, the Metaphorical Heavens, the Churches of God, wherein God
resideth, rejoice you, as you have most cause to rejoice that the accuser of
your brethren, and the false traducer of the Apostles and Holy Fathers of the
Church, is cast out from amongst you; and your Churches are purely reformed,
the doctrine of faith truly taught, and the service of God righty administered,
and all errors, heresies, and superstitions swept out of the Church.

But woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, v. 12. that is, Who
are meant by the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea.
to the Worldlings, Hypocrites, bloody men and loose livers; for the earth
signifies earthly men, and the Sea, is a loose, roaring and raging element
cold and moist; and therefore signifies the loose and dissolute livers,
roarers and furious men, that have not any heat of Love and Charity in them;
and those also, that for the love of gain and profit only, and not out of love
to benefit their Country and their Neighbors, and to show the bountiful
goodness of God to all places, but only out of a covetous desire, to enrich
themselves, do pass all Seas into all foreign Lands; woe, woe unto all those;
because that he, which could not and can not prevail, against the true
Christians, that do so firmly stand, and so stoutly oppose him, will be sure to
catch these soon enough within his net, and hold them, fast enough, to make
them pay for all; because, as the Holy Ghost says, he has (...), great wrath,
and is exceedingly troubled and vexed, not only for his former foyl, and his
casting out of Heaven, but also, most especially, for that now after these
victories, he knows, or as the word is, (...), he sees that he has but
(...), a short space, to recruit, and to see if he can revenge his former
foyls; and therefore,

2. 2. The bloody and the most malicious persecution of the Dragon, after the
suppression of the Heretics.
He goes presently among the Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, and
persuades them, to throw all the stones of the Earth, and to stir up all the
waves of the Sea, and to use all possible arts, to vex and oppress the woman,
and to overwhelm the Ship of Christ, which is the Church, in the Seas of all
miseries and afflictions; And so now, the Dragon begins a fresh to rage, and to
persecute the woman, says the Holy Ghost, v. 13. which brought forth the
man-child; and to vex and molest all her Children, all the true and faithful
members of the Church, whereof most of them, especially her lay children, were
left pretty quiet, while the spiritual and dogmaticall war lasted, that raged
most of all amongst the Clergy: but now, that war being ended, the Church
reformed, superstitions expunged and all the Heresies confuted, the Dragon
vanquished, his Angels suppressed, and the service of God purely and rightly
discharged, the true Church and all her members, (the corrupted, unreformed
Churches he has them in his hands already, so that he need not trouble himself
to meddle with them) are newly molested, and exceedingly persecuted with great
wrath, says the Angel, and that is, with a bloody war, and a greater war,
and a far more unnatural, and unchristian war, and a more violent, and more
malicious prosecution of the war, and persecution of them that were quiet in
the Land, then ever was done by this Dragon at any time, before this time.

And the reason of the exceeding greatness and sharpness of this persecution of
the true Church, The reason of the sharpness of this persecution, showed.
signified by this woman, is not omitted, to be set down by the Holy Ghost, for
the comfort and consolation of all the persecuted Saints, and distressed
members of Christ, and for to encourage them with the more constancy to
persist, and to withstand the assaults of the Dragon unto the end; and that is,
because the Dragon, that in the (...), had many hundred years, to prosecute
that heriticall and dogmaticall war, yet now knows and sees, that he has
but a short time to rage, and to wage this newly revived bloody war; and
therefore he must bestir himself, or he shall lose his Harvest, that has but a
short time to gather in his fruit; and that time, that he is permitted thus to
rage against the woman, as the spirit of God sets it down, Cap. 12.14. c. 11 8
and v. 11. c. 13 5. c. 11.2.
is but a time, and times, and half a time; which signifies the three days
and a half, that the two witnesses of Christ shall lie unburied, in the streets
of the great City, and the 42 months, wherein the beast should prevail against
Gods Servants, and should tread the holy City, that is, the purest Church,
under feet: for all these times, thus expressed by several terms and
expressions, The suppression of the witnesses and persecution of the Church,
the same time.
as of time, times, and half a time, and three days and a half, and 42
months, and do synechronize and cohere, for the length of the time, I take to
be the very self same time; and that is, the time, wherein the Antichrist
should rage, and should suppress and kill the two witnesses, and exceedingly
vex and persecute the true Church of Christ.

And these times thus expressed by the Holy Ghost, are interpreted by very many
of the most learned, How long the persecution of the Antichrist shall last.
both Papists and Protestants, to signify three years and a half, or, as some
men do think, three years and half three years, which makes up four years and a
half; though I rather conceive, it should be taken for some short time, much
thereabouts, which the good God, in his great Wisdom knows best, and would
have us, by these expressions of it, to know for a certain truth, and to
assure our selves, that it shall not, and cannot be long, but either that time
directly, A special observation.
or much about that time, though perhaps, not that time exactly to a day, yet
it may be most exactly, to a minute; as God sees best; I will not be too
curious, nor too presumptuous herein.

Only, I would have it observed, that the time of this persecution of the
Woman; That the time of this persecution of the Woman, and of her first abode
in the Wilderness is not the same.
and the time of her first aboade in the Wilderness, when she fled there first,
from the face of the Dragon, after the bringing forth of her Child, is not the
same; for that time is said to be 1200 and 60 days; and this time of her
persecution by the Dragon, is said to be a time, and times, and half a time;
which is just the same time, for the length of it, and expressed in the same
phrase, as Daniel says, Antiochus, that is the most lively type of the
Antichrist, that can be found in all the Scriptures, should rage against the
Church of the Jews; and that was just three years and a half, neither more nor
less, says Tremelius; or three years seven months and thirteen days, says
Junius and Deodate; for if that time of her abode in the Wilderness, and this
time of her persecution by the Dragon, had been the same time, why should it
not be expressed by the same term, and by the same phrase, but that the Holy
Ghost by altering the term, and using another phrase, to express it, would
have us to understand it of another time? when as we see, the time of the
Witnesses Prophesying, and the time of the Woman's first abode in the
Wilderness, being the same time, they have the same expression of 1200 and 60
days, as you may see in c. 11.3. and c. 12.6. and so likewise the time of
treading the holy City under foot, c. 11.3. etc. 12.6.
and the time of the beast continuing his War against the Church and the
Saints, in this last persecution of the Dragon, being the same time, it has in
like manner the same expression of 42. months, c. 11.2. and c. 13.5. c. 11.2.
c. 13.5.
that so we might understand it, to be the very same time.

And therefore I say that the Woman's first abode in the Wilderness for 1200 and
60 days, and this her treading under foot by the beast, and her last abode and
nourishing in the Wilderness for a time, times, and half a time, c. 12. v. 14.
is not the same, and does not Sunchronize, as Mr. Mede says; Mr. Mede in his
clavis, page 3.
but the continuance of the beast persecuting her, being 42. months, c. 11.2.
and her nourishing in the Wilderness, during this War, and the persecution of
her by the beast, being a time and times, and half a time, that makes 42
months, or three years and a half, as the most of the best interpreters do
agree it is to be taken, do sunchronize; c. 12.14.
and therefore must be understood for the very same time.

But all this while that is, during the time, thus expressed, by time, times and
a half time, and by three days and a half, and 42 months; how long, or how
short soever that time shall be; the great Dragon, that is the Devil, by the
cruel beast, that is the Antichrist, and the Dragons prime instrument of all
mischief, shall cast out of his mouth, says the holy Ghost, Waters as a flood
after the Woman, c. 12.15. What is meant by the flood that the Dragon casts
after the Woman. Judge whether this was not fulfilled in the time of the long
Parliament amongst us.
that he might cause her to be carried away by the Flood, v. 15. and that is,
he shall make Laws and decrees, orders and Ordinances, that do proceed out of
the mouth of men, (that must not be past over unobserved,) and are as poisonous
and as deadly as the waters, that are spued out of the mouth of the Serpent;
and they shall be made so plentifully and in such an abundant manner, that they
shall be like a flood, or a torrent stream that, as the Poet says, Fluit
acrius amne perenni, flows more violent, then any constant current; so shall
these new made Laws, and Ordinances of the Beast, be more prejudicial to the
Servants of God, then any former well known Laws and decrees; and they shall
be cast after the woman, that is, not gently made, but violently thrown with
such a force, as might wholly carry away the Woman, and so destroy the Church,
and overwhelme all the right Worshippers of God, and the true professors of the
faith of Christ; for by waters, as the Psalmist serteth down in many places, is
signified Crosses, troubles and afflictions, Psalm 69.1.2. Psalm. 124.4. Psalm.
144.7.
and all kind of molestations and miseries, which the Dragon by his new made
orders and Ordinances would bring upon the Church without measure, whereby her
members, from the highest to the lowest, should find plundering and pillaging
in all places, imprisonment without mercy, banishment without pity, taxes
beyond ability, death without example, and killing in all quarters; the which
things, are the floods of miseries and afflictions, How troubles and miseries
drive many away from the right way.
and not the Doctrines of Arius and other Heretics, as Mr. Mede says, that
the Dragon powers forth after the woman, that she might be carried away of the
flood; that is, that she might be terrified by these floods, and driven away by
these miseries, from the right service of God, and the performance of the
duties, that she owes unto the witnesses; as we see terrors and troubles are
too powerful, to drive away the weak, and such as have no solidity in them
from the right way, either of equity or piety.

And thus shall the poor and pious woman, the true Church of Christ, and all
her members, be persecuted and afflicted by the Dragon: and whether our Church
has bin thus used, or not, during the wars of the long Parliament, I leave
it to the judicious Reader to consider it; howsoever, the goodness of God, and
his love toward his Church and Servants, is such and so great, that he shows
himself to be, Psalm. 46.1.
as the Prophet speaks, deus in oportunitatibus, a good God, most gracious in
the most needful time of trouble; for as soon as the Dragon began to persecute
the woman, after that he was thrown out of Heaven, and cast unto the earth. God
gave unto the woman two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly away into
the Wilderness into her place; v. 14. c. 12.6. Two special things to be
observed.
v. 14. which was the place, that was prepared by God for her; to secure her
from the Dragon, v. 6. touching which wings, we are to consider these two
special things; that is, 1. What these two wings be 2. Why they were given
unto the woman;
and

1. We may well understand, these two wings are not the Magistrates and the
Ministers, as E. H. thinks, and some others with him; because now, in this
persecution of the woman, and the rest of her Children, the true members of the
Church, the two witnesses are likewise persecuted, and killed, and do lie dead
and unburied, all the while that the woman is persecuted; and therefore they
could not possibly help the woman to fly away. Mr. Mede. p. 64.
Neither are these two wings of the Eagle, the Eastern and the Western Empire,
as Mr. Mede imagines; because the East Empire, at the time of this persecution
of the woman, had wholly apostatized from Christ, and was become another enemy
unto the woman; and the West Empire, under the Papacy, was no faithful friend,
but had anathamatized the true Church, that is thus persecuted by the Dragon:
and therefore I do rather conceive that these two wings are;

1. 1. Observation What are the two wings that are given to the woman. 1 Pet.
3.16.
Faith, by which we escape all the fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. 1.16.

2. Good works, and an holy conversation, which stops the mouth of the wicked;
as St. Peter says; or rather, because their mouths, that hereby should be
stopped, will not be stopped, but will traduce and slander Innocence it self,
as the Jews slandered Christ himself, in whose mouth was found no guile, these
two wings may be said to be, 1. Constant patience. 2. Fervent Prayers.


manfully to suffer whatsoever it should please God to permit the Dragon, and
his Instrument, the beast, to inflict upon her; for not only Levius fit
patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas, patience makes every burden to seem
lighter then it is, and helps us to bear that, which we cannot shun; but also
vincit qui patitur, by a patient suffering, we overcome the greatest maladies,
as Christ himself, by his suffering, overcame all his and our enemies; and
therefore, si vis vincere disce pati, if thou will overcome this Dragon, and
conquer this beast, arm thy self with patience.

fervently and constantly made to the Almighty God, that he would assist her
and strengthen her, to endure faithful against all the assaults of Satan; and
in his good time, to deliver her from them; for the time would be too short,
and my papers too scant, if I should go about to set down, Nothing so powerful
to obtain what we desire as fervent and constant prayers.
what great things have been obtained, and what wonderful things have been
brought to pass, and effected by the power of prayer; when as a Father says,
haec est victoria, quae vincit mundum preces nostrae, this is the victory that
overcomes the world, and will overcome the Dragon, even our prayers.

And these be the two wings of the great Eagle, that is most able and
powerful, to fly and to escape, (and I know no graces more powerful then
these two) whereby the Church and all her members have always, and shall ever,
through Gods help, which their prayers will obtain, be able to persist in the
true faith, and right service of God, and likewise to discharge all other
duties, that they owe, both to the witnesses and to all other men, during their
lives, maugre all the spite of the Dragon, and the persecution of the beast,
and likewise to escape all their malice and mischief: and therefore let us ever
pray to God, and be patient and contented.

2. We are to observe, 2. Observat. To what end the two wings were given to the
woman.
that the Holy Ghost omitteth not to explain the reason and the end, why God
gave these two wings unto the woman not only to fly away, and to escape from
the violence of the Dragon, but more especially, to be noted, that she might
fly into the Wilderness, (...), into her place, which God had formerly
prepared for her; therefore, it is apparent, that she was now come out of the
Wilderness, and out of the place, and as the Children of Israel left their
Tents where Moses was, and joined themselves to Baal-Peor; so no doubt, but she
had left the Wilderness, and the heavenly life, that she should have led, Had
not the Church offended, in stepping out of her place, she had not been
afflicted.
and associated her self too much with the world and worldly men, which is the
cause of her persecution, and the inflicting of the second woe upon her, which
she might have escaped, had she continued in her place; because no punishment
comes, until a transgression proceeds; the sin goes before, and the
correction follows after; so the woman came out of her place, and the Dragon
was permitted to whip her into her place, and therefore this is a second
passage of the woman into the Wilderness; which being not well observed, has
made many Interpreters, to mistake the times, and the meaning of the Holy Ghost
in this place.

But seeing her coming out of her place, is the cause of her present woe, and
of the persecution of the Dragon, by the means and malice of the beast, let
her quickly. if she would be preserved, and escape the flood of waters and
afflictions, that the Dragon s^ueth after her, get again into the Wilderness,
and return into her place, and continue faithful in her Christian Profession,
and the discharging of her duties, both to God and man; because the neglect
thereof has been the cause of all her troubles, at all times whatsoever.

And let her and all her Children, the members of the Church, How God looks
upon the afflictions of his people.
the sconer and the rather do this; because that to encourage her, to continue
constant in the right service of God, and to honor the witnesses so
religiously as she ought to do, God locked down from Heaven, and, considering
the great wrath of the Dragon, and the flood of all miseries, that by the
service of the beast, he had cast after the woman, as he looked upon the
afflictions of his people, when they were in Egypt and sent Moses for to help
them; so now, in this persecution of the woman, v. 16.
he moved the earth to help this distressed woman; and to open her mouth, and
to swallow up the flood, which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth, v. 16

Where, you may see, and should consider it, How the senceless creatures do
their service unto God.
how the senceless creatures are obedient Instruments, to do their service unto
God; both to punish the wicked, and to help the godly; as the raging Sea was a
wall of defense unto the Israelites on every side, and a grievous gulf to
devour Pharaoh and all his Host; so here, the dead earth, that opened her
mouth to swallow up Dathan, and to cover the Congregation of Abiram, for their
wickedness, does now likewise, according to the letter, open her mouth, to
swallow up the flood, that the Dragon had caest after the Woman, to preserve
her from being ruined by that flood.

But here we are to inquire what is meant by this earth, that has a mouth to
be opened for the defense and preservation of the woman; and it is strange unto
me, that so learned a man, Mr. Mede. page 47.
as Mr. Mede should by the earth, understand the Bishops and Doctors that were
gathered together in the general Counsels; because I cannot remember any
place of Scripture, where the Godly, Religious, and spiritual men, are
expressed, and are to be understood by the earth; because that, although all
flesh is Grass, and every man is but dust and ashes, and therefore the Prophet
says, O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the Lord; yet being regenerated,
and filled with the graces of Gods spirit, and having their thoughts, and their
desires mounted up from the earth, and their Conversation in Heaven, they are
never termed Earth, but as the Church here, and in many other places, is called
Heaven, so are they styled spiritual men, though their bodies be nothing but
earth.

And therefore I conceive the meaning of the words to be, that God in the time
of this persecution of the Woman, ^ 12.10. and v. 7.
and affliction of his Church, inspired some men, and moved them, that
otherwise were as earthly and as worldly minded as any others, What is meant by
the earth that helped the the Woman.
though not altogether so malicious and so bloody as the rest, to open their
mouths, and to out vote the worser and most spiteful sort of the instruments
of the Dragon, that they should not utterly destroy all the Children of the
Woman, and Servants of God, but should suffer them to live, which the more
virulent party would have quite extinguished, and to let them compound for
their Estates, that they might have some small livelihood to support them,
Whether this also was not fulfilled in and by the long Parliament, let the
Reader judge. Prove. 16.7.
after all their plundering and persecution: and so God deals with them that
serve him, and continue constant, to discharge their duties, that as the
Prophet speaks, he makes their enemies to become their friends, and to be
their helpers, as here the very worldlings do open their mouths, and make
speeches to preserve many of Gods Children. And whether such a thing as this
happened not in the last long Parliament, I leave it to my judicious Reader to
consider it.

Therefore the Dragon, not satisfied with all the former miseries of the Woman,
and all the persecutions of her Children, which hitherto they had suffered, but
his wrath being still enraged to see any help or comfort afforded to the Woman,
he spurs and instigates his instruments, the beast and his associats, to make
war with the remnant of the Woman's seed, which keep the Commandments of God,
and have the testimony of Jesus Christ: v. 17.
v. 17. that is, the Dragon moves the beast to be incensed and enraged against
those, that, after the death of the Witnesses, and the small relief and
breathing time, Who are meant by the remnant of the Woman's seed.
that some members of the Church have had, will not submit themselves to do the
service which the Dragon, by the beast prescribes, and yield themselves to be
seduced by the false Prophet, which are the Angels of the Dragon, but will
constantly adhere to Gods right service, and the established form of Gods
Worship, and continue faithful observers of the Laws, discipline and doctrine
of the slain Witnesses; And is not this also fulfilled? let the ejected
Ministers judge of it.
these now must bear the brunt and malice of the beast, the poor and small
remainder of the true and faithful Servants of God, which, notwithstanding all
their persecution and deprivation, and all other sufferings whatsoever, will
keep the Commandments of God, and have therefore the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, that they are Gods faithful Servants, and not such as will turn with
every blast of wind, and be carried away with a little worldly preferment.

And thus I have run over this 12th Chapter of the Revelation, and have in a
plain style set down, what I conceive to be the true meaning of the same: how
the Holy Ghost therein shows the state and condition of the Church of Christ,
from the time of that Godly Emperor Theodosius, about the year 382. for the
space of 1200. and 60 years, which ended about the year 1642. about which time,
after the first Woe is past, by the invasion of the Turkish and Mohammedan
Tyrants into Christendom and the defacing of the Christian Churches, and
defiling the true Faith in the East Empire, the Dragon, as the Holy Ghost here
says, should more maliciously begin, by the Ministry of his chiefest
instrument, the great Antichrist, his greatest and sorest persecution against
the Church of Christ, expressed here under the person of this Woman, that has
these floods of waters, sorrows, and afflictions thrown after her; the which
persecution, (according to the old adage, si longa sit afflictio, levis est, si
gravis, brevis est; if thy trouble be long, it is but light; if great, it is
short; quiae nullum violentum est perpetuum; because no violent thing is able
to continue very long;) because it should be so great and so grievous; the
spirit of God tells us; it should continue, but for a short space, and a few
years; and when the same shall be ended, and fully expired, the second woe
shall be past; and then, after the end of this bloody persecution, and the
expiration of this second woe, the third and last woe, says the Angel, is
quickly to be expected, and shall not long be deferred, before it comes: and
this last woe shall be poured out in a full measure, upon the Turks and
Mahometans, the supplanters of the Eastern Churches, and upon the Antichrist
and his adherents, the great persecutors of the true reformed protestant
Church, and upon the Popish superstitious and Idolatrous Corrupters of the rest
of the Western Churches, and upon the false Prophet the Chapleins of the
Antichrist; and upon all other Hypocritical Worldlings, and Profane livers
whatsoever, and whersoever they be, and upon many of Gods Servants, that cannot
escape a common plague, while they live among the wicked.

And so you have the determination and extention of these three great woes, The
3 great Woes upon whom they are to sall. 1. Woe.
troubles and afflictions, that have and shall fall upon the World, thus more
plainly expressed.

The first woe fell heavy upon the Eastern Churches, by the coming in of the
Turks and Mahometans, for their Blasphemous Heresies, and denying the deity
both of Christ and of the Holy Ghost, and likewise the denial of all the due
reverence and respect, which they owed to the Martyrs and Saints of God,
whereof Leo Isaurus, and Constantinus Capronimus, and the Constantinopolitan
Council, that consisted of 338. Bishops, were the chief causers, and the
Principal Authors of that contempt, and were sufficiently chastised for the
same.

The second woe is now fallen, or falling, 2. Woe.
or most like to fall upon these Western Protestant Churches, by the coming in
of the Antichrist that was long expected, and Prophesied that he should come
amongst them, to play his part; for that having the true Doctrine of Christ,
and the right form and manner of Gods service settled and established amongst
them, they would notwithstanding, in a wild wantonness, be seduced by the false
Prophet, to reject the same, to suppress their Governors, to slay the
Witnesses of Christ, and, being most perfect Hypocrites, to lead a most worldly
life, far worse then either Papists or Pagans, under the Cloak and Visard of
piety and Saintship.

The third and last woe, that we are certain is yet to come, and will come as
the Angel says, very speedily after the end and determination of the second
woe, shall fall most Heavily, as I said, upon the Mahometans and the Antichrist
and his adherents, and the false Prophet, and upon all the Enemies of God, and
the bringers of the former woes upon his Church, and all other Lewd and wicked
livers whatsoever.

And now I should proceed to the 13th Chapter, 3. Woe.
but that there is an exposition of this 12th Chapter, annexed to our Bibles,
which might, if not answered, cross much, of what I have formerly explained;
for Francis Junius, a very Worthy man and not meanly learned, in his notes,
joined to Theodore Beza's translation of the New Testament, upon this 12th
Chapter, understands, by this Woman, Junius his interpretation of the Woman
in his notes on the 12. Chapter. Eusebius l. 3. c. 5.
sometimes, the Christian Church of the Jews, and sometimes he would have the
Woman to signify the gentile Christians: and he says, that the Woman which
fled into the Wilderness, where she was fed for a time and times, and half a
time, signifies the Jewish Christians, or Christian Jews, that fled out of
Jerusalem, when the Romans were coming to besiege it, into a little Village,
called Pella, as Eusebius writes, and remained there, a postrema Judaeorum
defectione ad urbis excidium usque from the last falling away or revolt of the
Jews, until the destruction of their City and Temple; which was just three
years and a half; and by the earth that opened her mouth to swallow up the
flood, that the Dragon cast after her, he says it signifies the unbelieving
and Rebellious Jews, that underwent the War, and sustained all the miseries,
that the Romans brought upon that Nation; whereby those believing Jews, that
were in Pella, did escape that flood of afflictions, that otherwise must have
fallen upon them, if they had not fled out of Jerusalem when they heard the
voice that cried in the air, migremus hinc; let us depart hence.

And so he conceives, this passage of the Woman into the Wilderness expressed
in the 14th. v. where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time,
which he rightly expounds for three years and a half, to be not the same,
with that passage of the Woman, The foresaid interpretation of Junius rejected.
expressed in the sixth verse, where she is fed 1200 and 60 days, which he also
rightly expounds to signify 1200 and 60 years; but he misapplyeth this
second passage of the Woman into the Wilderness, to a Woman that cannot be
understood in that place; as appears.

Woman, (for there is no mention made in all the Chapter, but of one, and the
same Woman) that is, the Christian Church, or the Christians that believed in
Jesus Christ, is said to be fed, that is, to be guided, Governed, and
instructed by the two Witnesses, that is, 1. The Kings and their under
Magistrates; and 2. The Apostles, and the Bishops that succeeded the Apostles,
and the rest of Gods Ministers, for 1200 and 60 days: that is, as Junius
himself expounds it 1200 and 60 years: and we are sure the believing Jews in
Pella were not so long guided and instructed by these Witnesses in that place,
nor in any place else that we know of; and therefore they cold not be signified
by this Woman.

Revelation was not of known things that were already past, but of things that
were hereafter to be fulfilled, that is, after they were revealed unto St. And
c. 4.1. Dr. Hammond in apoc. ex Epiphanio baeresi. 51. Irenaeus adversus
haereticos. libro. 5. Balaus l 3. says, it was in the 15th year of Domitian.
John; as the Angel tells plainly unto our Evangelist, c. 1. 19 And this
time, when St. John was banished into Patmos, and wrote this book, was not in
the reign of Claudius Caesar, that banished all the Jews out of Rome, as some
men, out of Epiphanius do imagine, and as hereafter I shall make it more fully
to appear; but it was about the latter end of Domitians reign, as both Justin
Martyr and Irenaeus testify; and as Balaeus, Beza, Maresius, and the most of
our best late Writers do assent to Irenaeus testimony: and that was about the
year of Christ 98. and these believing Jews fled to Pella, either when
vespasian began the War, or when Titus his Son came to besiege Jerusalem,
which was about 40 years after Christ his Ascension, that is, in the year of
our Lord 73. and in the second year of Vespasians reign, that was proclaimed
Emperor in 72: and therefore those Jews could not be here mentioned.

Pella, that was near enough to Jerusalem, though it was beyond Jordan, during
all the time of the siege, could be but little better, if we consider the
miseries of billetting our enemies Soldiers, and our plundering, our
commanding, and other abuses, that are incident unto us by and from them, that
follow the Wars, of whom the Poet says,

Nulla fides pietassque viris qui castrasequuntur; then if they had been within
the City of Jerusalem, save only the freedom of their lives, when perhaps
their other troubles and abuses were no ways Iess, if not in some respect, far
greater then the troubles of many of them, that were within the Walls of
Jerusalem; And therefore their being in Pella could not fignifie the earths
opening of her mouth to swallow up the flood of their afflictions, which no
doubt but they endured in full measure.

Pella, being but a little Village, it is not likely, that it could contain so
many of the Jews, or that so many should go out of Jerusalem unto it, as
should move the Holy Ghost to express them here, under the notion of this
Woman, that was persecuted by the Dragon, when as these were not the men
against whom Titus waged his War, being so few and so contemptible, and no
ways opposing him.

this persecution of the Woman, and her flight into the Wilderness is after the
War in Heaven, and after the Dragon was thrown into the earth, as the Text
makes it plain, v. 13. and 14. but these Jews being in Pella, was long before
this war; and therefore they cannot be meant by this woman.

non est distinguendum ubi non distinguit lex; we may not chop and change,
times, places, and persons, where Scriptures change them not, to fit our own
purposes, and to make good our own best liked Interpretations, which is but, as
the Poet says, to stagger, Nunc huc, nunc illuc, exemplo nubis aquosae;

Much like a waterish Cloud, which sometimes hither is driven with the wind,
How men should fairly proceed in their interpretations, without wresting of any
Text.
and sometimes thither, or as another says, Praxitiles like to make beguiled
minds to bow down to the painted strumpet, either of these high conceits of
the great Scholars, or of the brainsick fancies of the weaker wits; but we
ought fairly, to proceed according to the most genuine sense of the place that
we enterpret, and such as crosses no other truth, nor carries any absurdity
or impossibility with it.

And who sees not prima facie, at the first sight and reading of this 12th
Chapter, how the Holy Ghost proceeds therein, to set forth the dangers,
troubles, and persecutions of this woman, that signifies the Christian Church,
from the time, that she became clothed with the Sun, and the beginning of her
pain in travel, unto the end of her persecutions? as, how she should fly into
the Wilderness, how long she should be nourished and fed in that place, what
Wars she should undergo in that time, and after the ending of that War, and
the stepping out of her place, how she should be therefore punished and
persecuted, and for what time she should be distressed in that persecution, and
how she should be helped and relieved out of the hands and power of her
enemies; which are all successively in a continued Series, and a just order set
down, by the spirit of God, of the same woman, that was the Christian Church,
in this 12th Chapter of the Revelation.

And as, not all this, by Junius his concession, so indeed not any part of
this, can be referred to the believing Jews, in Pella, as understood by this
woman, v. 14. but to the Christian Church, converted and collected both out of
the Jews and Gentiles; especially considered, after the time of Theodosins, as
I have showed to you before. And this last persecution of this woman, can be no
otherwise understood, Why this last persecution of the woman is to be referred
to these our times.
as I conceive then of the sufferings of the reformed Protestant Churches, and
servants of Christ, in these our times wherein we live; because they fall out
just at the end of 1200 and 60 years, wherein the two witnesses, after that the
woman was clothed with the Sun, should prophecy, and the woman should be fed
by the witnesses, before they should be slain, and before the beginning of this
her great persecution, and flood of all miseries, that the Dragon, by the
service of the Antichrist, should raise against her, and throw after her.

And I say, that although Arethas, Rupertus and Barradius, do with Junius
understand this woman to signify the Jewish Synagogue, and Alcazar takes it
for the primitive Church of the Christians, to whom I do assent, she may be
taken for that Church, at that time, when the Dragon began to watch her, that
he might devour her Child; yet St. Ambrose. Ticonius, and Primasius, do with
me understand this woman here, flying to avoid the Dragons flood, to signify
the true Christian Church, in her last persecution, sub finem mundi, a little
before the end of the world, when Satan should be let loose, after his 1000
years imprisonment, and should then power forth a flood and deluge of all
crosses, troubles, and miseries upon the true Church, and the faithful
servants of Jesus Christ, the which I think he has now, within these late
years, done to the uttermost.

fed and nourished in the Wilderness for 1200 and 60 years, wherein the
Heretical war betwixt the Angels of Michael, and the Angels of the Dragon was
made, and was not ended here, in our Church, until King Charles his days; in
whose time, both the Brownists and Puritans were suppressed, and the Jesuit
Fisher, the great Golias of the Papists, That the times here spoken of, cannot
cohere with the Jews in Pella.
in these parts, was quite vanquished and confuted by Bishop Laud; and these
times, that are here expressed by time, times, and half a time, which are the
time of the Churches persecution, after the 1200 and 60 years, and the end of
the heretical war, cannot be referred to the believing Jews in Pella; but
rather for the persecution of our Protestant Churches, and the preservation of
them, from being ruined, by the earths opening of her mouth, to swallow up the
flood of afflictions, that the Dragon casts after them; because the Holy
Ghost says, that after three days and a half, which is the very same time,
though expressed in other terms, with time, times, and half a time, the spirit
of life from God shall enter into the witnesses, that is, ministris verbi, as
Junius confesses, the Bishops and Preachers of Gods word, or as E. H. more
rightly thinks, the Magistrates and Ministers, which formerly had been slain,
and they shall stand again upon their feet, that is, in their successors, by a
Monarchical and Episcopal Government, to show, that God will not suffer his
Church and Servants, to be always, nor long trodden underfoot, and to want her
lawful Pastors and Governors, but should have the witnesses of Christ, within
a short space, restored unto her.

And we are confident, that such a thing as this, never happened to the
believing Jews in Pella, nor to any other believing Church in the World, that
we know of, that both the witnesses of God, That we cannot remember where it
happened, that the chief Magi. strate and the chief Prelate were killed about
the same time, by the same persons, and for the same cause, as it seems, the
two witnesses of Christ were to be, and our King and Bishops were, for the
pretense of fear of bringing in Popery, as here it did.
1. The King, which is the supreme Magistrate, and 2. The Bishop, which is the
chief Praelate and Pastor of the People, should be killed, about the same time,
by the same persons, and indeed, upon the matter, for the same cause,
whatsoever pretenses should be alleged; the which cause, is showed to be, the
malice of the Dragon to the woman and her Child, and to slay the witnesses. And
I do verily believe, that if learned Junius, Beza, and others the like wise and
learned men, had lived in these times, and had seen the things that were and
are done in these days, of the last Century of years among Protestants, and in
the best reformed Churches, they would have interpreted this and many other
parcels of Scriptures far otherwise then they have done; and no marvel, nor any
disparagement to their learning and wisdom; because, as I said before,
Prophesies and Predictions mystically set down, are not perfectly understood
until they be fully accomplished and fulfilled.

And therefore, as the Holy Ghost had set down in the 11th Chapter, how the two
witnesses of Gods truth, and the Governors of his Church should be used,
persecuted, and killed by the Ministers of the Antichrist, the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit; so here in the 12th Chapter, he shows
how the Church her self, and all her members should be molested, afflicted, and
persecuted by the Serpent, that had formerly seduced her out of Paradise, and
now follows her into the Wilderness, makes War against her, and throws a
whole flood of miseries and mischiefs upon her, to see if he can utterly
destroy her; and, being exceedingly vexed, and filled with wrath, that the
woman should be any ways helped, as she was by the earth, and earthly members,
that opened their mouths to speak for the innocent Children of the woman, and
thereby swallowed up many of those bitter waters, that the Dragon had spued
upon her, that all the Servants of Christ, and the observers of the witnesses,
should not be wholly and irrecoverably destroyed, he goes about to make war,
with the remnant of the woman's seed; and yet it is not said, that he made this
war with the remainder of the woman's seed, after the death of the witnesses,
because they were so few, that they were not able to war with him, but he
went about to make war with them; and to that end, (...), he stands upon the
Sands of the Sea; for these words are the conclusion of the 12th Chapter, and
not the beginning of the 13th Chapter, and they are to be referred to the
Dragon, and not to St. John, as our English Translation mistakes it; and the
meaning is, that the Dragon intending to prosecute this war, against the
remainder of the faithful Christians that observed the witnesses, and did
their duties in the service of God, as they ought to do, and so kept the
Commandments of God, and had the Testimony of Jesus Christ, that they were
(...) true and faithful servants, stands upon the Sands, that is, upon the
rest of the Preachers of Gods word, and those faithful Clergymen, and other
zealous and conscionable Christians, that used and observed the right form of
divine service or the right mazner of serving God, Who are meant by the Sands
upon which the Dragon stands.
which the faithful and slain witnesses of Christ had prescribed, and obeyed
their Governors, and submitted themseives to the Discipline, and to the
uttermost of their abilities, justified and defended the same Government, which
the true Governors of Gods Church had ordained; and he trezdeth and trampleth
these Sands under his feet; for as the Sands are placed by God to keep in the
Seas, within their bounds, that they should not overflowe the Lands, so is the
Laws and Discipline of the Church, and those faithful Ministers and others
that observe the same, a stop and a bridle, to refrain the people, and to
hinder them from passing over the bounds of equity and piety; and though the
Discipline and sentence of the Church seems but a weak fence, to keep out the
wild beasts, and to retain, in the fold of Christ, his sheep; and of little
force, like a paper bullet, to terrify the wicked from any evil; yet, as the
Sands that are but of a small substance, do notwithstanding keep in the raging
Seas, and as the twigs, that tie the hoopes of a Hogs-head or Tun, are but very
small, and yet are the preservatives of the Wine; so are the Laws and
Discipline of the Church, though not capital, nor bloody, yet sufficiently
able, like the Sands to suppress the raging waves of wickedness, from all the
Children of the Church.

How the Dragon stands upon the Sands.
But now says the Angel, the Dragon stands upon these Sands, treads down all
holy orders, rages against all the Discipline of the Church, throws the
observers of them out of their Churches, deprives them of their livings, stops
their mouths with terrors and threatenings; and as he had formerly slain the
witnesses, so now he raises the winds, stirs up storms, and all the
Tempests that he can, Judge, if this also be not fulfilled in the time of the
long Parliament.
to blow away these Sands, that adhered to the witnesses, and endeavored to
keep in and to restrain the waters of the Seas, and the wickedness of the
people from overflowing: and wheresoever these winds do blow, and these Sands
are stood upon, I pray God to give them patience, to overcome these stormy
winds and Tempests. Amen.

CAP. III. The three principal enemies of Gods Church; Satan's 1000 years
imprisonment, when begun, and when ended; when the Christian Religion tryumphed
over the Idols of the Gentiles, and over all the Gods of the Heathens; that
the beast signifies the great Antichrist, and a pack or confederacy of most
wicked men; from whence it sprung; of the seven heads of the beast; what they
are, handled at large; and the Authors opinion of the seven Kings and the
eighth, that is the beast and the Antichrist.
3. AFter that the Angel, which Christ sent unto St, John, had informed him of
those sad accidents, that should befall unto the witnesses, in the 11th
Chapter; and the state and condition of the Church of God, under the person and
title of the woman, for the space of 1200 and 60 years, and the persecutions
that she must undergo, after the end and expiration of those years, that began,
as I showed unto you, about 382. and ended in or about 1642. in the 12th
Chapter, he proceeds in this 13th Chapter, to show unto him the Instruments,
that the red Dragon raises up, and the Devil uses to become the murderers
of the witnesses, and the persecuting enemies of Gods Church; and I find them
here, in the 13th Chapter, and in the 17th Chapter, wherein most of the things
that are showed in this 13th Chapter, are more clearly explained by the Angel,
unto our Evangelist St. John, to be distributed into three ranks, or three
principal Instruments, or generals of three great Regiments, or rather Armies
of the Devil.

The three principal enemies and persecutors of Gods Church.
1. The beast, that rose out of the Sea, and is the same that is said to have
risen out of the bottomless pit, c. 11.7. and is as the body of the Antichrist.
2. The beast that rose out of the earth, and was subservient to the infernal
beast, that rose out of the Sea, and is the false Prophet, and as it were the
soul of the Antichrist. 3. The Whores, that sat upon the scarlet colored
beast, and that sat upon many waters.
1. The Antichrist.
The first of these, as being the body, which is most perspicuous, is most
generally termed the Antichrist, that was prophesied, and expected, that he
should come into the Church of Christ, before Christ should come to judge the
world.

2. The salse Prophet.
The second of these, as being the soul, that animates and gives life unto the
body, is termed the false Prophet, that instructs, instigateth, and so
furthereth, and spurreth forward the Antichrist in all his proceedings.

3. The Whores. c. 17.1. c. 17.3.
The third of these, that is, the Whores, which are two, the one sitting upon
many waters, c. 17.1. the other sitting upon a scarlet colored beast, c. 17.3.
are apostate Churches, and backsliding Protessors, that have falsified their
faith, and departed from their first love to Christ, to follow after the world;
and then, as Hagar despised Sarah, and set her at naught, that was the true
wife of Abraham, so these strumpets and false Churches, persecute the faithful
spouse of Christ, as all Whores use to do, to the true and honest wives.

And although all these, the beast, the false Prophet and the Whores, be the
instruments of the Dragon, to vex and persecute the Servants of God and true
Church of Christ, and do all unanimously fight under the same banner, in the
grand Army of Satan, the prime adversary of Christ; yet, because these three
before cited, are three different and distinct Agents, and different
Instruments of the Devil, to effect different evils and mischiefs, and are
severally to play their several parts in their several stations, The
different evils that the three enemies of the Church do effect. 1. What the
Antichrist does. 2. What the false Prophet does. 3 What the Whores do.
in the Tragedy of Gods true Church, therefore they are accordingly described
by several names, and have their several actions and doings severally set
down, and so likewise their several judgments and punishments; for,

1. The beast, that arises out of the Sea, and is commonly termed the
Antichrist, that, slays the two witnesses of Christ, and intrudes himself
into their offices, and then destroys the people of God, that will not submit
themselves to him, and to his Ordinances.

2. The false Prophet, by preaching his new Doctrines, deceives them that
dwell on the Earth, that is, the worldly minded men, and instructs the
Antichrist what to do, and so instigateth and assisteth, and justifies him, in
all his wicked and unjust proceedings.

3. The Whores which are two, Non me latet Tertnll: l. contra Judaeos and in
contra marcionem, and hieron. ep. 17. ad marcellam. and quaest. 11. ad Algasiam
per meretricem intelligere romam, sed aethnicam, idola colentem and christianos
persequentem.
and do comprehend, 1. All schismatic and heretical Churches that are
corrupted with errors and superstitions. 2. All hypocritical Professors,
carnal livers, and worldly minded men.


Where of each one is termed Ecclesia fornicaria, the whore; because all these
have broken their word, and falsified their faith, which they had made to
Christ, and vowed to observe in their Baptism; and became drunk with the blood
of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and have made drunk,
the Kings of the Earth, that is, all earthly, and worldly minded Kings, and all
the Inhabiters of the Earth, that have not their conversation in Heaven, with
the wine of their fornications, when they had intoxicated and bewitched them,
with their fair and false glosses, that corrupted the Text, and with their lewd
examples to follow after the sweet pleasures of the flesh, and the vanities of
the world.

And, as the behaviors, the actions, The judgments and punnishments of these
three Enemies not alike. Vunde Fornicatio dicitur.
and the sins and wickedness of these three enemies and Persecutors of Christ
his Church, are different and thus severally expressed by the Spirit of God; so
their judgments and punishments are diverse, and their state and condition is
not alike, nor in like manner to be considered; for, as the woman that is
Married to an Husband, and then commits fornication, that is, secretly in
fornicibus, in some vaults as they used in Rome, and other great Cities,
coupleth her self, and is joined to another man, is said to play the Whore; And
yet, while she is undivorced, and not cast away, nor departed from her Husband,
she is still his Wife, and upon her Repentance and submission, A Married Woman
undivorsed though she plays the Whore is still the Wise of her Husband.
there may be a Reconciliation and a Remission of all her former faults; and
she may become a very good Woman; so that Church which is betrothed to Christ
by Faith, and by the Incorporation of her Members into him, in their Baptism;
and then afterward corrupts the true Faith, and breaks the Promise that
she has made to Christ, either by following after the Lusts of the flesh, and
the Vanities of this World, as the Hypocrites, Carnal livers, and formal
Professors do; or else by joining her self, as the Israelites did with
Baal-peor, with humane inventions, idle Ceremonies, and fruitless
superstitions, or imbraceth the Errors and Heresies of learned Heretics, may
rightly be said to commit secret Fornication, and to play the part and tricks
of a spiritual Whore; And yet, whilst either of these Whores professes her
self to be the Spouse of Christ, and is not departed from Christ, that is, not
wholly Apostatized from the faith of Christ, but still holds the maine heads,
the Fundamental points, and the Preservatives of the Christian Religion, which
are the Witnesses of Christ, undestroyed; we cannot deny that Church to be the
Spouse, and a true Church, though not a pure Church, of Christ; as a sickly
diseased man is a perfest man, though not a sound man; nor can we say but that
upon their Repentance and amendment, there may be a pardon of all faults, and a
reception of these Delinquents into favor, by him that is so gracious, and so
merciful, and abundant in goodness and truth.

And so it may be hoped, that both the Civil Whore, That we may conceive
better hope of the Whores then of the Beast and false Prophet.
that follows after the Lusts of the flesh, and the Vanities of the World;
and the Ecclesiastical Whore, which is bewitched with the love of errors,
Ceremonies and superstitions, and which most of our Protestant Writers take the
Church of Rome to be, and to be here signified by the Whore, may yet, by true
Repentance, and a full Reformation of all errors and abuses, recover and
retain the love and savor of Christ, to continue the loving Husband of his
penitent Spouse, and to find him ready to receive them, when he finds them
ready to return unto him; for, though the one of these Whores is said to have
committed Fornication with the Kings of the Earth, and to have made the
Inhabiters of the earth drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, c. 17.2. c.
17.2.
and the other Whore is said to be drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with
the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, c. 17.6. Yet, c. 17.6.
when the beast and the false Prophet, which are the most violent and virulent
Enemies of Gods Church, c. 19, 20.
were both taken and cast alive into the Lake of fire, burning with Brimstone,
there is no mention that the Whores were cast in with them; But the judgment of
the Whores is formerly described, and their punishments are very amply set down
and expressed, c 17 etc. 18. where the Horns of the beast are said to hate the
Whore, c. 17. etc. 18. c. 17.16.
and to make her desolate and naked, and should eat her flesh and burn her
with fire: c. 17.16. And these punnishments of the Ecclesiastical Whore, to
have her substance and het state eaten up, and her self burnt with the fire of
all Crosses and afflictions by the horns of the beast; and so likewise those
punnishments of the Civil Whore, that are so fully set down in the 18th
Chapter, and must be referred to the great Babylon of this World, that I have
formerly spoken of, and not to Rome, c. 18 24. Things in c. 18. to be referred
to the Babylon of this world, and not to Rome.
nor to the Church of Rome; because there are many things in this 18th Chapter,
and especially, that in her was found, the blood of the Prophets, and of
Saints, (...), and of all that were slain upon the earth, v. 24. which cannot
possibly with any face be referred to the Church or City of Rome, might be the
means to bring these Whores to Repentance, and so, to gain the Love of God;
and to escape the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the vile beast and the
false Prophet shall be cast.

For you must observe, The Beast and the false Prophet and Whores not to be
confounded. c. 17.3.
that although some Writers have confounded the Whores and the beast, and make
them all but as one Enemy, expressed by both these names; yet they be indeed two
Enemies, or rather three Enemies of the Church of Christ; and Enemies one to
another; for the Ecclesiastical Whore rides the beast, that is, curbes and
bridles the Beast, as a rider curbes his Horse; and so does the Pope and his
Cardinals, and all the Church of Rome curse and execrate the Antichrist; and
the ten Horns of the beast do hate the Whore, c. 17.16.
and make her desolate and naked, and burn her with fire; and so it may be
demanded if the long Parliament and their Polyarchy, The Paralele.
have not sufficiently showed their hatred to the Pope, and all Papists, and
have made all that they could reach, naked enough, and have eaten their
substance, and burnt them with the fire of Afflictions and Persecutions, and
have pretended to do the like to all Carnal and worldly professors? Esaias.
9.31. And yet as Ephraem did eat Manasses, and Manasses did eat Ephraim, and
both of them did eat Juda; Esaias. 9.31.
so do not the Whores and the Beast, the Church of Rome and the Synagogue of
Satan, do all of them what possibly they can to root out the true Protestants,
the only pure Church of Christ, from off the earth? though as I said, it may be
hoped that the judgment of the Whores and their afflictions, may at last,
through the goodness of God, reduce them to repent and reclaim them from their
Fornications, Hosea. 2.7.
and cause them to return, as the Prophet says of the like Harlot, unto their
former Husband.

But the Beast, which is the Antichrist, that ascends from the bottomless
pit, and is wholly fallen away from Christ, totally Apostatized from the maine
Heads of THE Christian Faith, and absolutely divorced from being any Spouse, or
Church of Christ, The Beast and the false Prophet commit far viler sins then
the Whores.
as you may see, not a few of the Members of the Beast and his adherents, that
drives off their Baptism, and permit not their Children to be Baptized, and
to be incorporated into the Church, to be made lively members of Christ, which
is, to renounce the mark of Christ, and to blot out the Seal of the Lamb, as I
showed before, and is therefore termed, the man of Sin, and the Child of
perdition, as committing the more masculine wickedness, killing, hanging, and
beheading, and the like, far more odious and more abominable bloody sins, then
are the infirmities of a woman; and the false Prophet, that seduceth and
deceives the poor simple people of God, and both furthereth the beast, and
instructs him, as Libanius the sophister instructed Julian, and Sergius the
Monk did teach Mahomet, how to proceed in most Villains, Enormities and
Cruelties that are inflicted and imposed upon the Church, Numbers 16.29.
they are said to be taken alive, and as Moses says of Corah and his
accomplices, not to die the common death of all other men, but to be cast alive
into the Lake of fire, burning with Brimstone.

For that the Devil having now ended his 1000 years imprisonment, which began
in Phocas his time, Phocas died Anno 612.
or rather in Heraclius his successors reign, about the year of Christ 620.
or 630. when the persecutions of the Heathen Emperors, and of Alaricus,
Attalus, Totilas, Gensericus, and others of the Arian Kings of the Goths and
Vandals, were all quite finished, and Boniface the third Bishop of Rome,

Super alios caput extulit omnes, Balaeus. l. 3. invita bonifacij.
Is extolled and worshipped above all other Bishops; and the Church began to go
hand in hand with the Civil state; and ended about 1620 or 1630. Some 45. or
35. years ago; when the Beast began to bite the King, and to incroach upon the
rights of Majesty, and the false Prophet to smite Michajah on the Cheeks, and
to out-beard the Bishops, and to trample them under feet: he does by these his
two instruments, the Beast and the false Prophet, most wickedly suppress Gods
Service, and persecute Gods Servants, for which they are to receive this deadly
doom, in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone.

But in the aforesaid time of a 1000 years, all from 630 to a 1630. Satan was
tied that he cold not raise any bloody persecution against the Church; though
it cannot be denied, but that the Church at this time, did, now and then
persecute some of her own Children, as the Waldenses, and our Murtyres in Queen
Maryes days, and some others in other places, which, as the Church says, was
but debita correctio propter indebitam contumaciam, when as in the Arc of
Moses, That the Church has often wrongfully persecuted her own Children.
there must be kept as well Aarons Rod for to Chastise the froward, as the
Heavenly Manna, to refresh the wearied; though in very deed the Church showed
her self herein, many times, not to be infallible, when she reproved the
Righteous, and winked at the Wicked, and oftentimes condemned the Righteous
with the Wicked, and sometimes more severely then the Wicked, so that of many a
Son of the Church, we might justly say with the Poet, The Church of Rome
severely taxed for her cruelty.
Crudelis matter magis, an puer improbus ille?
Improbus ilie puer, crudelis tu quoque matter.


The Church was more to be blamed for her cruelty, then her Children for their
insolency.

And therefore for these, and for other the like sins of the Church, When the
Lord suffered the Beast and the false Prophet to arise and to persecute the
Church. Revel. 20.4. Of the 1000 years the Church should rest in quiet.
that were now come, like the sins of the Amorites, to the height, and
deserving just punishments for these unjust dealings; And so, for other the
like Delinquencies of the professors of the Gospel, the Lord was provoked
hereby to let Satan loose, to whip his Children for these misprisions, and
stepping out of the Wilderness, out of their place, to follow after the World
and their worldly profit; and then, the Dragon being let loose, he begins
afresh to persecute the Church with Fire and Sword, and sends this Beast with
his Emissaries and Assassins to slay the two Witnesses of Christ, to destroy
the true Members of the Church, and to ruin all that he can beside: and then
St. John sees (...), a Beast rising out of the Sea; the which Beast I am now
to describe unto you.

But, before I proceed to the description of this Beast, I do think it most
requisite, that I should say somewhat more for the clearing of the time, when
the 1000. That Satan's 1000 years binding, and the Saints 1000 years Reigning
are the same. Papias that received this Doct. of the Chiliasts was a man of
small judgment, as Eusebius Witnesses, l. 3. c. 35. When the 1000 years began,
and when ended, if you take them for a determinar or set time, and not as Fulke
Deodat and others, take them for a long but an indesinite time which I think is
the smest exposition
years, wherein those souls that were beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, should
live and Reign with Christ, and Satan should be bound that he might not
persecute the Church with any bloody persecution, for the faith of Christ
(which are both to be done in the same 1000 years) should both begin and end.
And first

That the 1000 years, wherein Satan should be bound from persecuting the
Church, and the 1000. years, wherein the Saints should live and reign with
Christ are the very same 1000 years, and not as the Chiliasts or Millenaries
dream, that Christ shall come, either in his own person, as some of them
grossly think, or else by his Spirit, as others of them, the more moderate men
do say, and reign with them yet on earth, a 1000 years, it is so fully and
learnedly showed, by that worthy and learned Divine Dr. Hammond, that does so
in most of all his Writings, that he worthily deserves to be loved and honored
of all the Church, that for me to say any more, were but arenas in littus
fundere, to write Iliads after Homer, to no purpose, when better cannot be
said, and more need not be said, then what that worthy Scholar has set down on
the 20th chap. of the Revelat page 997. and so likewise, what the reverend
Author of the Revelation unrevealed has therein set down, to show the fond
conceits of these Chiliasts, which are very excellently discovered per totum.

But for the time, when those 1000 years, (both for the one and the other, i.
e. Satan's binding, and the Saints reigning.) should begin and be determined, I
shall humbly crave leave to dissent both from him and from all others, that do
subscribe to his opinion: for whereas he conceives the same to begin, either
in 455. when by the Wars of Alaricus in 410. and of Attalas in 451. and of
Gensericus in 455. Heathenisme and Idol Worship was fully destroyed in Rome,
and Christianity became Victorious over it; And to end, when Mahomet the second
took Constantinople in 1455. or, as some say, in 1453. or else, as he rather
thinks, they began in 311. or thereabouts, when Constantine receiving the
Christian faith concluded the persecutions of the Church, and by an imperial
decree, proclaimed Liberty and immunities to Christianity, and ended about
1311, when the Ottoman Family began to flourish, and to overrun Greece, and to
bring Mahometisme into Asia: though Mariana inclines rather to the other
opinion, that his Imprisonment began after Rome was taken by the Goths, and
after Momillus, that was termed Augustulus, the last Emperor of the West, was
driven away by Odoacer the King of the Heruli, which, was about 477. and so
must end in 1477.

I answer; The former opinion answered and rejected.
that although Constantine for this time, freed the Church from all Heathenish
persecutions, and then immediately the two Olive Trees, and the two
Candlesticks, to whom were given indeed before, on the day of Pentecost, such
gifts as enabled them to instruct and to inlighten the Church with a very good
and competent measure of true light, were now furnished with a larger measure,
and with such abilities as were sufficient to inlighten her, with the light of
the Gospel, and to feed her in the Wilderness, that is, to govern her in a far
better manner then ever they did, or cold do before; and though after this, in
the time of Theodosius, about 382, they were fully enabled to inlighten her
with the great and glorious light of the Sun; yet was not Satan bound all this
while, nor a good while after this; for when he saw how by the Ministry of
these two Olive Trees, the two Witnesses of Christ, that were now so well
furnished with abilities to build the Temple, that the Angel commanded to be
measured, the Church began to bring forth Christ most plentifully in her
Children, and was like to do the same more and more, he sought to devour this
Child, That the Church was grievously afflicted and persecuted long after
Constantines time.
that is Christ, which was brought forth by the Church in her Members, and he
used all his slights and devices to that purpose; And through his Instruments,
persecuted and destroyed many a Christian man; and therefore the Souls
beheaded for Jesus, did not as yet live in their successors, and reign with
Christ: nor was Satan bound from persecuting the Church, when as he beheaded
and killed them still, and stirred up, not only Constantius, the Son of
Constantine to be a great persecutor of the Orthodox Christians, and Julian the
Apostata, his Cosen German, and immediate successor, to be greater then he; but
also the Arian Kings, both of the Huns, Goths, and Vandalls, that invaded
Italy, sacked Rome, entered into Africa, besieged Hippo, and brought such
infinite troubles and miseries upon the Church, that Rupertus and Haymo,
considering the Cruelties of Gensericus against the true Christians, Bishops
and Priests, and all, that would not renounce the true faith, and become
Arians, by putting many of them to death, Victor l. de Vandalica persecutione.
and banishing others, as Victor shows, did find in him the number of the
Beast, 666; and therefore thought he might be the Antichrist; and Attila styled
himself Mundzuccus.
orbis terror, and flagellum Dei, the terror of the world, and the scourge of
God; and about the same troublesome times, the donatists swarmed in Africa,
and, as St. Augustine shows, brought an infinite deal of vexations upon the
Church; as did other Tyrants and Heretics in other places, which were wel-nigh
as bloody and as cruel, if not altogether as bad persecutions of the Church, as
formerly the Heathen Tyrants brought upon it. Apoc. 11.3. Beza in loc.
And therefore the words of Christ (...), and I will give (not Illud, nor
Illam, as Beza says,) but power unto my two Witnesses, as our last English
Translation has it, and they shall Prophesy 1200 and 60. days, are to be
understood to begin then, or immediately after, to be fulfilled, when Phocas
granted that power and pre-eminence unto Boniface the third Bishop of Rome,
Revel. 20.4. Satan was bound, and the Saints began to reign with Christ after
Phocas, in Heraclius his time, about 620. or 630.
that the Sword of Satan had neither edge, strength nor ability to suppress the
word of God, nor to abate one jot of the power of the Witnesses; but that the
Church and her Governors were freed from all fear of Tyrants; and judgments
were given unto the Saints; that is, they, which formerly were haled to be
judged, and condemned at the Bars of their Enemies, have now quiet possession
of judicatures and censures to punnish and condemn the refractory; which
Ecclesiastical discipline cold never be free from persecution, nor be executed
so freely and so justly, as it ought to be, so long as the Church was awed, and
her Governors suppressed and terrified, either by the Heathen or the Arian
Tyrants, or by any other temporal Potentate, or civil power of the Infidels
that could master them; for though as I said before, Christ, immediately after
his ascension, (...), gave gifts to his witnesses, Ephesians. 4.8.
to enable them to prophecy, and in and after Constantines time, they had free
leave to prophecy, (...), in a far better manner and condition then before,
and a more plentiful measure of Gods spirit and assistance, to beget Children
more plentifully unto Christ; and afterward, in Anno 395. Christian Religion
tryumphed over the Gods of the Heathen, when Theodosius first overcame Eugenius
and Argobastus, the two Standard-bearers of the Dragon, and took away the
College of the Idol Pontifices, and as Zosimus says, defaced the Temples of
the Idols, which Constantine had only shut, and Julian had opened again; yet,
in all this while, he gave them not that (...), power, so to prophecy, and so
to rule the Church, as that they could not be resisted, or hindered by any
Heathen Potentate, King or Emperor; nor did he give the same power unto them,
until Phocas his time, Speed in vita Henrici 2.
which then they had, and held it always after in their hands 1000 years at
the least; and indeed used it in a far higher measure against Christian Kings,
then God gave them leave to do; as it appears, not only in the lives of the
succeeding Emperors, but also in our own Chronicles, as specially by the
passages betwixt Hen. 2. and Bishop Becket, and the like.

And therefore the Saints 1000 years reigning and ruling with Christ, and
Satan's 1000 years binding, that he could not hinder the Church to rule, did
then begin, either about the end of Phocas, or rather in Heraclius Reign, about
the year of Christ six hundred and twenty, or six hundred and thirty: (for
Heraclius reigned 30 years, Satan's 1000 years binding ended in King Charles his
Reign about Anno 1630.
and died 641.) and must end just in King Charles his time, when the Devils
Chain was broken all to pieces, and Satan let loose, like a roaring Lion, to
devour both King and Priest, the two faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ, and
abundance more of Gods true Servants, throughout all Christendom.

And that for their Religion, the profession of the true faith, and the right
service of God; which was done no where else, at no time before, nor by any
other instrument of Satan, since the determination of the Heathen Tyrants, and
the Arian persecutions; for though the Turks invaded Greece, and took
Constantinople, and brought thither the Mohammedan Religion, as a just
punishment, and the first woe, upon those Heretical Churches; yet it is most
certain, that this their invasion was libidine dominandi, as Alexander entered
into Persia, and the Romans warred upon their Neighbors, to gain their
Territories through their ambition, and greedy desire of bearing rule, Which
does so infinitely bewitch the minds of men; as Camerarius shows. l. 5. c.
8. per totum.
for to enlarge their Dominion, and not so much for the suppressing of the
Christian Religion, or the enlargement of their own idolatrous superstition;
when we find the Turks do now, as the Romans did of old, permit all Religions,
both Jews and Christians, Orthodox and Heterodox to live, and to live
peaceably amongst them, and to exercise each one, their own Religion, without
any disturbance, so they pay their allotted taxations, and submit themselves
unto their Laws in a civil Government, which cannot properly be said to be a
persecution of the Christians, qua Christians, and because they do profess the
Christian Religion; but rather a worldly desire of Dominion; That the Turks
invasion was not for the suppression of the Christian Religion, but for the
desire of dominion.
and so we read that Almanzor, the great Mohammedan Emperor, which being
interpreted, signifies, the defender of the Law of God, meaning, the Alcoran,
(that Hozman, the Husband of Mahomets daughter, digested into four Books,
containing 206 Chapters) when by Tarif and Mura, his Generals, he conquered
Spain, and drove away Roderigo, which was their last King of the Gothish blood,
and replenished that Kingdom with Moors and Mahometans; yet persecuted he none
for their Religion, but only sought to allure them to their superstitions, and
idolatrous service, by giving Offices, Sir Walter Rauleigh in the History of
Mahomet. page 103.
and promising immunities, liberties and promotions to those Christians, that
would be contented to embrace Mahometisme.

And, as our Savior Christ and his Apostles, never forced any man by fire and
Sword, to embrace the Christian faith, nor killed any one, that refused the
same; because the true faith ought to be ingendered by persuasion, and not by
compulsion, by preaching and not by fighting; so Simon Magus, that is made by
some, though faw wide, Dr. Hammond, in 2 These. 2.
to be the Antichrist, spoken of by St. Paul, in 2 These. 2 3. and his Sect of
Gnostics, never forced any that we read of to follow their idolatrous and
Heathenish worship; indeed Arius and all the rest of the Arch-Hereticks of his
Sect, sought to compel the Orthodox by force of Arms, to leave the faith of
one substance, Lactan. l. 5. c. 14. and he cites Flaccus, that says, justum
and tenacem propositi virum non civium ardor prava jubentium, non vultus
instantis tyranni monte quatit solida.
and to become homoiousians, that is, similis essentiae, the believers of
Christ to be of the like substance with his Father, and so to embrace the
Heresies that they invented, as I have showed you before: for as Lactantius
says, quis imponat mihi necessitatem vel credendi quod nolim, vel quod velim,
non credendi? who can compel me either to believe what I list not, or not to
believe what I will? and he says most truly, that there is nothing more free
then Religion, which the mind no sooner withstandeth, but forthwith it
vanishes, and is no more Religion, when as constraint brings in
dissimulation, and makes Hypocrites, to worship thy power, but not thy God,
therefore King Theodoric did say very well, that he could not command Religion,
because no man can be enforced to believe against his will; and Justus Lipsius,
bids thee over run all Europe in thine imagination, and thou shall see, that by
these severe proceedings, that is, of fire and Sword, Cities are rahter
overthrowen, Lipsius polit. l. 4. c. 4.
and, I may add, Kingdoms ruined, then made religious; because those things
that do rest in opinion, are altered rather by teaching then by commanding, by
instructing then by threatening; and therefore, as when we find any discord in
our instruments, we do not in a rage break the strings, but reduce them to
concord by patience and leisure; so should we do with them, that dissent from
us in matters of faith, The Christian says and true Religion not to be forced,
by fire and sword.
rather seek to convert them by brotherly persuasion, then cut them off by an
hostile compulsion; and he cites Cassiodore, St. Bernard, and St. Augustine,
to be of the same judgment, and then concludes that 4th Chapter of his 4th
Book, with unfaigned Prayers and sighs to God, that men would endeavor to
redress and amend their Brethren in the points of faith and Religion, after
such a course, which indeed is the only Christian course that is chalked out
by Christ.

And yet, The Parallel.
I would fain know, if this last war, and our last persecution, that was
raised up by the long Parliament, that is supposed by wise men, to be this
beast, that is, the Antichrist, was not merely for Religion? pretended to have
the Gospel truly preached, and the service of God rightly and truly
administered, which was the incessant Song of the Instruments of that
persecution; but was it not indeed to suppress the true service of God, Let my
Reader judge whether it was so or not, in the persecution raised by the long
Parliament.
and under that fair pretense, to destroy the purest national Church, both for
Doctrine and Discipline, that was now extant upon the earth? which is, the
treading of the holy City under foot, c. 11.2. and was it not intended by the
Dragon, that used those his Instruments, for this end? and is not this most
apparent, both by the Covenant, that was so eagerly pressed to be taken by all
hands, and by those that were so furiously pursued, that refused it? and also
by the cause, the cause, that every one of those furious fighters cried, and
redoubled their cry to be the cause, that moved them to war against the
witnesses, and to persecute all the true faithful Christians, let the whole
Kingdom judge?

And therefore I do undoubtedly conclude, I know how variously Authors differ
about the beginning and ending of the 1000 years of Satan's binding; and it is
too tedious to relate it, and I set down what I conceive most probable, says
the Reverend Author of the Revelation unrevealed, page: 451.
that Satan's 1000 years imprisonment began about 620. or 630. in the Reign of
Heraclius, and was determined and ended in or about 1620, or 1630. about 35. or
45. years ago, in the Reign of King Charles: at which time, Satan, for our
sins, was by the just judgment of God, loosened and set at liberty, to whip
and scourge us with new persecutions of fire and sword, and all other their
concomitant miseries; and that not to bring us to any temporal or civil
subjection, as was the chiefest aim of the Turks against the Grecians, but
principally to drive us to renounce the truth of our Religion, and to omit the
duties of our profession, and the service that we justly owe both to God and
man, to abandon the long received lyturgie of the Church, that was weeded from
all dross, and sealed with the blood of holy Martyrs, and to embrace a new
invented Directory, imposed upon us by some few retrograde impostors, which is
a persecution against conscience, and so the greatest persecution in the world,
and far worse then the affliction, that Pharaoh imposed upon the Israelites,
that being for his own worldly service, and this to drive us from Gods service;
and the like whereof, I remember not to have read executed in all the Turkish
History; nor could I find the like in all the time before showed, in any place,
by any Tyrant, since the Reign of Heraclius, the successor of Phocas, to these
very days; and so now, Satan being set at liberty, and as Edwards says, Hell
broken loose, he stands upon the Sands of the Sea, to trample our Governors
and Government under feet; and then as I said before, St. John sees (...), a
beast arising out of the Sea.

And this (...), which is a diminutive word from (...), 3. The Vision of the
first beast, that signifies the great Antichrist. Bestia haec non Idolo atria,
non magia, non Trajanus, ut piscator videtur suspicari non Domitianus, ut
Grotius, sed imperium Romans significat, inquit Maresius. page 173. Irenaeus, l.
5. c. 28. Nazian. in Jam. 5. Cornelius a Lapide. in apoc. 13. That this beast
signifies the Antichrist.
for which the Aeolians use (...), fera. which signifies not every kind of
wild beast, but a fierce, cruel and savage beast, does here betoken the great
Antichrist, that the Dragon stirred up to kill the witnesses of Christ, and to
persecute the true Church of God; for though Haymo, Albertus and Pineda, do by
this beast understand Lucifer, the Prince of Devils, and Beda, Primasius, and
Richardus do expound it to signify Corpus diaboli, the body of the Devil,
that is, caetum and multitudinem impiorum, all the whole multitude of wicked
Reprobates, that as all the elect and godly men are termed the Church and body
of Christ, so are they termed the Synagogue of Satan, and the body of the
Devil, who is the head of this monstrous body; and so indeed it signifies
this whole multitude of Reprobates in some places; as in c. 19. 19. 20. when
all them shall be taken and cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone; and
Antoninus, Euthymius and Salmeron, do by this beast understand, Mahomet, the
first founder of the Turkish Empire, and the first inventor of that wicked
Alcoran; yet Irenaeus, Tertullian, Victorinus, Hypolitus, Prudentius, Prosper,
Ribera, Thomas, Rupertus, and long before them, Greg. Nazianzen, that says,
Quid est antichristus? vir opibus amplis,
Apostata ille pessimus, bellua venenum vomens:


And many more, even of the most ancient, do by this beast understand the great
Antichrist, that the Apostle speaks of, 2 These. 2.3. and that St. John says,
should come into the world; that is, to do the feats, which we have seen lately
done; and Cornelius a Lapide, whom, not only all the Divines in Europe, but
also all good Christians are obliged to honor, for the great pains that he
took for the good of Gods Church, says, this is the common received opinion of
Divines, to understand the Antichrist by this beast; and our learned Bishop of
Worcester, Dr. Prideaux, says, that antichristus typice demonstratur a
Daniele, topice a paulo, sed plenissime a Johanne, Apoc. 13.1. and I should
show my self too bold, Dr. Hammond, in apoc. 13. and ante eum Comentator. m. c.
13. in v. 1. p. 32.
(without apparent extraordinary good reasons) to depart from the judgment of
such a Cloud of Interpreters, as I could cite, as well of the modern as of the
ancient Doctors, that do with such unanimous consent, expound this beast to
signify the Antichrist, and nto the Heathen I doll Worship of the Romans, as
some Learned Divines conceive it, nor the Ethnic Empire of Rome, as Alcazar
takes it.

For though the Commentator, supposed to be Grotius, a man more then ordinarily
learned, does understand by this 7. headed and 10. horned beast, the Idolatry
of the Romans, or Ethnic Rome, as Alcazar thought; and by the horns of this
beast, he conceives those Kings that were subject to the Roman Empire, ought to
be understood. Yet Caracotta in his strigil against this Commentator, does most
fully convince this conceit of these men; because Daniel, Dan. 8.20. and v. 2.
whom this our Evangelist seems to imitate, even in the very Phrases of him,
by the beasts that he nominates, understands not any vices or errors, but the
domineering Kings, that reigned and ruled over the people, as the Ram which
thou saw, having two horns, are the Kings of Media and Persia, and the rough
Goat, is the King of Grecia, and the great horn, that is between his eyes, is
the first King; so the four Beasts which he saw c. Dan. 8.20. and v. 21.
7. are said to be four Domineering Kings, as the first of the Assyrians, the
second of the Medes and Persians, the third of the Grecians, and the fourth of
the domineering Senate, and people of Rome, under their Counsels and their
Emperors.

And therefore the spirit of God, This Beast signifies a domineering Senate.
following the same style, and the same expression here to our Evangelist, as
he had formerly done unto the Prophet, by this Beast that rose out of the Sea,
does mean some domineering Senate, that like unto the fourth Beast in Daniel,
that is, the Senate and people of Rome, should reign and rage over Gods people.

And so it is to be observed, that the Antichrist expressed by the Apostle
under the name and title of the man of the Sin, and here by the Evangelist,
under this Beast, That the Beast here spoken of signifies a pack and society
of most wicked Hypocritical men.
does not betoken any one particular man, either Mahomet or the Pope, or any
other Tyrant or imposter, how great or how wicked soever he be; but (as I
showed before) a pack or knot, and a confederate company of the most nefarious
and most ungodly Hypocritical reprobates, that either were before, or should
ever come after their time; And though Beda, Primasius, and Richardus do by
this beast understand the whole multitude of the ungodly; yet we do more
especially and particularly take it in this place, and attribute it to the
worser part, and a confederated united pack of that whole multitude of wicked
and ungodly men; and do conceive that as Solomon's Song for the excellency
thereof, is termed Canticum canticorum, the Song of Songs; And why called the
Beast and the Antichrist.
So this transcendent wicked pack of extraordinary sinners that is, like the
Catelinarian Conjuration, or rather far worse then that, when as that sought
only to subvert the Commonwealth, and this to ruin both the Church of Christ,
and secular state, for the extreme impiety thereof, (...) is called the Beast
and the Antichrist.

And so, August. de civitate dei. l. 20. c. 9. and c. 14. and c. 20.
St. Augustine long since, understands this Beast to signify not any one
impious wicked man, but a society or company of wicked Christians, and the
confederate communion of naughty men, that Hypocritically, under the name of
Christ, and upon pretense to propagate the Gospel of Christ, do fight against
Christ, Et faciunt unitatem contra unitatem, and do bind themselves together
in juncto, Esaias. 28.15. Who are to be understood by this Beast.
by a most solemn oath and Covenant, such as the Prophet speaks of, to fight
against the City of God, to overthrow the true Saints and Servants of Jesus
Christ, to slay the Witnesses of God, and to profane his House, and to
prohibit his accustomed Service; these men are the Beast, that is bellua
multorum capitum, the beast of many heads, such as the Heathen Philosophers and
Orators termed and deemed the vulgar people, especially when they do madly and
maliciously run on in their Wickedness, as they did against Christ, against his
Apostles, 2. Things to be observed.
and here against the Witnesses and Servants of Christ.

Now, for the better understanding of the particulars concerning this Beast, it
is to be observed,

1. 1. What (...) signifies, and how little it was in the beginning.
That (...) signifies (as I said before) a little Wild Beast, parallel to the
little Horn, that Daniel speaks of; for as that Horn at the first, was but
little, and indeed very little in comparison of the other nine Horns, and yet
afterward it grew to be greater, and of far greater power, and especially of
far greater Tyranny, impiety, and all other abominable wickedness, then all the
other nine Horns; So this Beast here, The parallel.
c. 13. spoken of, at the first compacting of it, when all the parts of it were
convened, and met together, to make one body, it had but a little power; and it
is objected that the House of Commons had not justly at first any power to
condemn any man; nor of right to administer an oath to any one; their
privileges, which at first they had by favor, being, through custom and
countinance conceived to have grown greater, then any power or authority, that
they could challenge by any right, let my reader judge whether this be true or
not, I will not determine it.

But as the Poet says, Inest quoque gratia parvis, there may be much virtue in
a little substance, so there may be much mischief in a little Beast, especially
when it is swollen to his full with deadly Poison, as the Serpent that deceived
our Forefathers, was but little, and a slender Beast, far less then many other
Creatures; yet was he more subtle then any Beast of the Field, Genesis 3.1.
and as the Spider is but a very small worm, yet it is full of most deadly
Poison; so this Beast, Here c. 13. spoken of. Let my reader judge whether the
diminutive (...) be answerable to the Parliament in their original. o nulla
dolor content paena, quaere supplicia horrida. incognita, nefanda; Junonem
doce quid odia vaeleant: nescitirasci satis. Seneca in Here. oet. 2. From
whence the Beast did arise. Genesis 1.10. Revel. 17.15. Ex populorum multitudine
marestus, page 115. The Pope not this Beast, and why. The world compared to the
Sea. 1. For the turbulency. Psalm. 65.7. 2 For the inconstancy.
though at the first convention, was but very little, both in power and
Authority; yet, being full of malice against the Witnesses, and for some
private respects, most greedy of revenge, and having the subtlety of many
heads, tempore succrevit, it grew in a very short time, to be so powerful,
that all men wondered thereat, and cried out, who is able to deal with the
Beast? for they saw the Poets could not express such a revengefull mind in
Medea. or Dianira, (that said, O sorrow, which no vengeance can suffice,
Some unknown horrid punnishment device;


What hate can do, let June learn of me:) as they saw in this Beast against
the Witnesses of Christ, and against all that assisted or adhered to them.

2. We are to observe that St. John saw, (...), this little Beast to arise out
of the Sea; and that is out of the deep; and it is therefore said to be the
Beast that ascindeth out of the bottomless pit, where the Devil was bound, and
from whence now he sends this Beast; and you know the Sea is corpus aggregatum,
a body compacted and made up of many waters; for the Lord called the gathering
together of the Waters, Seas: and the Holy Ghost expounds the Waters which
the Apostle saw, to signify peoples, and multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues,
so that the rising of this Beast out of the Sea is but the choosing, and the
electing of this pack and society or company of men, from the rest, and by the
rest of the multitude of men, that is, from the vulgar people and common sort
of men, which therefore cannot be referred to the Pope, that is always chosen
from and by a few Cardinals, and never by the vulgar multitudes; or else his
rising out of the Sea may signify, as Corna lapide understands it, their
springing and choosing of them out of the World, which in many places of holy
Writ, for the many Analogies and likenesses thereof, is often compared unto the
Sea, as especially

1. Propter Turbulentiam, as the Sea is a raging Element, so is the people
termed turba, quasi turbata multitudo, a very troublesome multitude, and
therefore the Prophet joyneth both these together, saying, thou stillest the
rage of the Sea, and the noise of his Waves, and the Madness of the people.

2. Propter inconstantiam, as the Sea is ever ebbing or flowing, and never
continuing in one stay; so is the people of this world ever unconstant in their
desires; to day they will cry Hosanna, to morrow Crucifige; in this Parliament,
they will have no King but a Commonwealth, in the next, they will be like
other Nations, and will have a King; now they will have a Monarchy, anon they
will have a democracy, and then an Anarchy; and so of all things else, they are
as changeable as the Moon.

3. In the 4th, c. v. 6. of this Revel, 3. For the frugility.
the World is compared to a Sea of Glass like unto Crystal; that is, to a Sea
of Glass, says Geminianus, Propter fragilitatem, for the frailty and
brittleness thereof, as you may fully see it, in the book entitled the Fall of
Unfortunate Princes; and to a Sea of Crystal, propter frigiditatem, 4. For the
frigidity thereof.
by reason of the coldness thereof, when as we see the love of many, especially
worldlings, even among brethren, is waxen cold.

Or it may be meant, that his rising out of the Sea might signify his rising
out of this Island of great Britain, which lies seated in the midst of the
Sea; that as Constantine, who, best of all the Emperors, promoted the Christian
Religion, sprung from this Island, so to be revenged for that benefit, the
Beast, who is the Antichrist and the worst enemy to all good Christians, should
likewise arise out of this Island, and be brought forth by the Dragon in this
I Will.

And so you see from Whence this Beast arises, Who is meant by this Beast.
even from the multitude of the people, or the Commons of the Kingdom; but the
question still remains far greater, to know who or what is meant by this
Beast; for notwithstanding such a Cloud of Witnesses, as I produced to you
before, do unanimously avouch, that he signifies the great Antichrist,
Francise. Junius in locum. The mistakes of some learned men so. So Mares. takes
it. Pro Romans imperio etiam aliquandiu ab imperatoribus Christianis obtinendum.
page 115.
that should come into the world, toward the end of the world; yet Junius does
expound it of the civil Empire of the Romans; Alcazar says it is to be
understood de Romano imperio athnico, of the Roman Ethnic Government, under
the Heathen Emperors; Mr. Mede understands it of the Caesarian Empire, parted
into ten Kingdoms: and Dr. Hammond makes it to signify the Heathen Idol
worship of the Romans; and so, as St. Augustine says of the like case, alij
atque alij aliud atque aliud opinati sunt; and it is not my purpose, neither
will my time and my book give me leave to show the mistakes, and to confute all
and every one of the assertions of these learned men, that, be they never so
learned, may be easily deluded by the strength of their own fancies,
especially, when they are biased to some wrong end, or carried away with any
prejudicate conceit; but I hope the Testimonies of so many ancient and worthy
Fathers, that I have before named, and the particular description of this
Beast, which I shall explain unto you, and likewise his acts and doings,
together with many other circumstances and particularities, That this Beast
signifies the Wicked state and Government of the Antichrist.
that are hereafter to be specified, will overweigh the opinions of these and
other worthy men, that think otherwise then I set down, and will make it
plain unto you, that by this Beast, is signified the great and greatest
Antichrist, that should come into the world, or the flagitious State and
Government of the Antichrist, opponent and set up against the true Government
of Christ, though pretending very strongly to be the very same, in all things,
with that Government which Christ himself has instituted, and for the
enlargement of the Church and Kingdom of Christ; for,

1. 1. The Beast had 7 heads.
This Beast is said to have seven heads; and these seven heads, say some of
them, that by this Beast do understand the Ethnic Empire of Rome, are the
seven principal persecutions of the Christians, betwixt the time of Nero, and
of Julian the Apostata; Ut refert Cornelius alapide.
as first Domitian, second Traian, third Antoninus, fourth Severus, fifth
Decius, sixth Valerianus, seventh Dioclesian; and those of Maximinus, and
Aurelianus, Dr. Hammond in c. 17 pagina 985. etc. 13. page 967.
are not accounted as any heads of the Beast; because the commands of
Aurelianus were not executed, and that of Maximinus was not universal; but
only against the Pastors and Preachers of the people: or, as some others do
account these seven heads: first Claudius, second Nero, third Galba, fourth
Otho, fifth Vitellius, sixth Vespasian, seventh Titus.

But against this, Caracotta strigil. page 52.
it is justly objected, that six of these never made any Cruel edict against
the Christians; and if these seven be the seven heads of the Beast, then these
being taken away, the Beast shall remain (...), a body without a head; and if
Domitian be the Beast, that was and is not, as both Grotius and Dr. Hammond
think, then these seven heads must be heads without a body; because they had
all been, and had all past before Domitian came.

Alapide says, C. a lapide in loc. Mr. Mede
hac septem capita sunt septem reges, qui praecesserunt Antichristum, these
seven heads, are seven Kings, which have gone, or shall come and go before the
Antichrist comes; Mr. Mede takes these seven heads for the seven states of
the Roman Government, page 49.
1 Kings, 2 Consuls, 3 Tribunes, 4 Decemviri, 5 Dictators, 6 Emperors, 7 Popes.
And so Maresius says these seven heads do signify not the seven Kings which
Grotius names, Mares. page 17.2. and page 118.
but the seven politic forms of Government, whereof five were now already
past, the sixth, that was of the Caesar's, was then in being; and the seventh
which was to continue but a very short time under Odoacer, was to succeed in
his time; for whereas Mr. Mede makes the 7th Order of their Government to be
that of the Popes. Maresius makes it of Odoacer King of the Heruli, which
extinguished the Government of the Caesar's in Augustulus, Baron, ad ann. 476.
n. 1.
when the Western Empire wholly ceas't, and was divolved unto the Barbarians,
and the form of Government quite altered; because (says he) nomen regis
assumsit Odoacer, cum tamen nec purpura, nec regalibus uteretur insignibus.

Alcazar says they be the seven deadly sins, that are the seven heads of this
Beast, Which Endaemon confuteth page 122. etc. and 128. etc. Apud Thomson. page
53.
as first, the pride of a Lion, second, the Covetuousness of a Tygar, third,
the Luxury of a Bear, fourth, the Anger or wrath of a Viper, fifth, the
Gluttony of a Wolf, sixth, the Envy or malice of a Serpent, seventh, the
Sloth and Laziness of an Ass; seven heads that are very great, and very bad
heads indeed, and he must needs be a very bad Beast that has all these seven
bad Heads; but

The Holy Ghost expounding these seven Heads, says they are (...), seven
Mountains: and Theodore Beza, c. 17.9. Francis. Junius, with the most part of
our latter Interpreters, that would feign make the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of
the Pope to be the Beast, and Rome to be his seat, do expound them to be the
seven hills whereupon the City of Rome was built, which are Mount 1. Palatine
2. Capitoline. 3. Quirinall. 4. Caelius. 5. Esquiline. 6. Aventine. 7. Viminall,
In respect whereof the Grecians call the City of Rome (...), and varro calls
it Septiceps, seven headed Rome, and others call it the City of seven Hills,
Virgilius georgic. lib. 2. versus sinem.
as Virgil speaking thereof, says, Scilicet and rerum facta est pulcherrima
Roma,

Septemque una sibi muro circumdedit arces: and Propertius says, Vrbs Septem
alta jugis toti quae presidet orbi: and Ovid says, Ovid. trist. l. 1. eleg. 4.
Sed quae de Septem totum circum spicit orbem,
Montibus imperij roma deumque locus.


But, though the Greeks and Latins call Rome the City of seven Hills, That the
seven Hills are not the seven Heads of the Beast.
yet this seems not to me to be the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this Text,
to understand these seven Hills, by the seven Heads of the Beast.

Hills, Rome had three other Hills that were of special note, though not
included within the pomaerium so soon as the other Hills were, as,

1. Collis Hortulorum, where the cirque or show place of Flora was.

2. Janiculus, where Janus was buried, and which is now called Montorius,
Rosinus antiquit. l. 1. c. 11.
or Mons aureus, the golden Hill.

3. Vaticanus, from vaticinium, from whence they had their predictions and
Prophesies: and therefore, seeing this City had ten Hills, it is not likely
that the Holy Ghost meant the first named seven Hills should be understood by
these seven heads.

Rome, as now it stands, is not as then the old Rome was, seated upon the
foresaid seven hills; but after it was sacked and destroyed by Alaricus, and
the other her most furious Enemies, the Goths and Vandalls, it was re-edified
out of the ruins of the old Rome, and both the Temples and the Vaticane, and
the Popes Palace, and many other fair buildings were seated somewhat distant
from the former situation of the old City, as many good Authors and Travelers
of good credit testify unto us; and therefore it is not probable, that the
Holy Ghost by these seven Heads should mean the seven Hills of old Rome, lest
we should be deceived in the predictions that do concern the new Rome.

Mountains are termed, (...), seven heads, c. 13. 1: Therefore they cannot be
taken literally in a proper sense, c. 17.9. and v. 1.
for the seven hills of Rome, which should be then rather called the feet of
the Beast, or the Foundation whereupon he stood, and not the heads of the Beast.

the Woman sits upon these Mountains, Not this Beast but the Woman, and the
Whore; do sit upon the Mountains and the waters.
as upon the Waters; therefore, though called heads, yet may they signify
these hills, upon which the City is seated, and sits upon them.

sitting upon these Mountains, as the sitting upon many waters, is meant
nothing else, but that the Whore and not the Beast, or the Beast here termed
the Woman, and v. 1. the great Whore, because she is the Spouse and Synagogue
of Satan, that has falsified her faith to Christ, does rest and rely upon the
Plots and devices of her own head; as all the wicked do indeed, whatsoever they
say in their words; for though they cry out Providence, Providence has
produced such and such victories and successes unto them, yet do they wholly
rely, stand and sit upon their own Prudence, and the plots of their own heads;
because no man can truly rely on Gods Providence, that wandereth out of Gods
ways; or else, by the Woman here, may be understood not the Beast, but the
Heretical Church, it may be the Church of Rome, that has played the Harlot
with Christ, and yet sits, rides, and seeks to tame the Beast, and to
subvert all the Plots and devices of his Heads.

Beast or the Woman sat upon (...) or (...), which do properly signify a
Hill; but he says, (...); the seven heads are seven Mountains, which do very
much differ from seven hills, as much as little differs from great, which in
quantity is a difference great enough; neither may we think that Rome was built
upon seven Mountains, or that the Holy Ghost spoke improperly, and called
seven Hills seven Mountains.

And therefore I conceive rather that the sense and meaning is mystical, The
meaning of the seven heads mystical. c. 17.9.
and not literally to be understood, and that by these seven Heads, which the
Holy Ghost says, are seven Mountains, we may understand seven great and
mighty things, as Mountains are in comparison of the little Hills; and so, we
may take these seven heads, as Alcazar thought, for seven most heinous, and
most odious deadly sins, not that every sin is not deadly enough, and brings
death to every sinner, but that those seven are more hateful and more
abominable both to God and man, then are all the other usual sins that are
committed; What are the seven heads of the Beast, that is, these seven sins, or
a great many sins like unto these; because the number of 7. imports many. c.
17.9.
and those seven sins of the Beast, I take them to be, or may be 1. Hypocrisy.
2. Lying. 3. Perjury. 4. Oppression. 5. Subtlety. 6. Sedulity. 7. Cruelty.
To dye and color all the rest with blood, to make them all Scarlet sins which
is the Livery of the Beast; for these be the heads whereupon the Beast rests,
and wholly relyeth, and beleiveth that by these heads he shall effect all his
prejects. Or else, because the number of seven, as of three and of ten are
persect numbers, and do very often import much or many, we may well understand
by these seven heads, the many plots and devices of this many-headed Beast,
which I take to be the best and truest exposition of these seven heads; because
this Beast is made up with very many heads; and these heads are likened unto
Mountains, and so styled by the Holy Ghost; because that by these means and
these practices of dissembling, lying, forswearing themselves, and using all
kind of subtlety, sedulity, and cruelty, with many more, the like wicked ways
and tricks, the Beast has effected and brought to pass very great and mighty
things, and has attained to all his strength and power, which is often
signified by the Mountain, as the Psalmist shows, when he says, Thy
Righteousness, Psalm. 36.6. Psalm. 95.4.
O God, is like the strong Mountain which can neither be removed nor shaken:
for if the hills of the Robbers be so strong, as is intimated in the Scripture,
then the Mountains must needs be thought much stronger.

And I can see neither incongruity nor absurdity to say that these Septem
capita rerum, Why the heads of the Beast are termed Mountains.
these seven chief heads, that produced all the plots and devices of the Beast,
should be termed Mountains for the greatness of the strength, power and
Authority, that the Beast has attained unto, by the tricks of these heads; and
that these (...), seven Mountains, should be styled seven heads, in regard of
their original Fountains, from whence they spring; because the heads of this
hydrian Beast have produced these bitter fruits, and have plotted all the
Villainies and mischiefs that have befallen to the two Witnesses, and to all the
true Servants of Jesus Christ.

But if these seven heads betokened seven Emperors or seven Kings, that
belonged unto the Beast, as the aforenamed Authors do conceive, then the
Crowns should have been said to be upon their heads; whereas you may observe,
that upon their heads are the names of blasphemy, which do well agree with
their lies, perjuries, and the like; and the Crowns are said to be upon the 10.
Horns, and not upon the heads of the beast.

And to make it yet more plain; That neither the Idol Worship of the Romans,
nor Domitian can be this Beast.
that this beast can neither signify the Idoll-Heathen-worship of the Romans;
and that Domitian cannot be the beast, as some do think, that was, and is not,
and yet is; for so the words are, (...): which the Holy Ghost says of this
Beast; it is apparent, that neither of these can be said to have been, and not
to be, and yet to be, at the same time, as the Holy Ghost affirms of this
Beast; for though Domitian was chosen by the Soldiers, whilst his Father
Vespasian was in Judaea, Vide Caracott^, page 52.
and then gave up his right and title to the Empire, when Vespasian returned to
Rome; yet this does not cohere with, he is not, and yet is, which is affirmed
of this Beast; and though it might have been said, that he was and is not, and
yet shall be, if this Vision of the Beast had been showed to St. John in
Vespasians time; but it could not possibly be said, that he was, if according
to Epiphanius his Testimony, St John was banished to Patmos, and had these
visions revealed unto him in the Emperor Claudius his time; because that after
Claudius, Nero reigned 13 years, Galba seven months, Otho four months, and
Vitellius eight months, before Vespasian was made Emperor: nor could it be
well said, that he was, whilst Vespasian was in Judaea, when he was but an
Usurper and an Intruder, while his Father lived; or though it might be truly
said in some sense, that he was, and in some other sense, that he was not; yet
can it not be said in any way, or in any sense, that he was, and is not, and
yet is, as the Holy Ghost says of this Beast.

How then shall we unfold this Riddle, and untie this Gordian knot? I answer,
That the Words in c. 17.8. do seem most coherent to the long Parliament, That
1. Was a true Parliament.
that I have often thought of it, and assayd it diverse ways, and yet could
never see how this Testimony of the Holy Ghost, touching this beast, that he
was and is not, and yet is, can be applied either to Domitian, or to any other
of all the Emperors, or Kings, or Society of men, so fitly, and so probably
agreeing with the meaning of Gods spirit, as it is, or may be applycable to the
long and lately dissolved Parliament; for that was a true Parliament, when the
King called them together, and they sat to consult with their King, de arduis
rebus regni, about the great affairs of the Kingdom, and took their Oaths, and
made their solemn Protestation to protect the Kings Person, and to maintain the
true Protestant Religion; 2. Is believed to be no Parliament.
But I heard many wise men judge it no Parliament, when they did expel and
cast out their guides, and their leaders, the Messengers of Christ from among
them, and endeavored, as the Giants did of old, (...), to make War against
God, and raised an Army against their head, and with all their might did fight
against their King, and at last, like -- did most disloyally cut off his Head,
that was the head of them, and of us all, and, as the Prophet speaks of the
like godly King, 3. And yet still is a Parliament.
the breath of our nostrills; and yet still it is a Parliament in their own
esteem, and with their adherents, and by their peremptory Acts and Ordinances,
that are still accounted most excellent and binding, and are so urged, and
observed by their adherents, and compelled to be observed by all others; and by
the greatness of that power and authority, which they assumed unto themselves,
and do by their Acts and Laws execute over all people, to this very day, more
then any other ordinary Parliament ever used; whereby you see how this may be
understood that is said of the beast, that he was, and is not, and yet is,
though I leave it to the judicious Reader to judge, whether he conceives this
to be the meaning of the Holy Ghost, or not; or whether all this may be so, as
may thus be coherent and applicable to that long Parliament or not.

And, as this, which I have now expressed, does seem very shrewdly to prove,
Some conceive it thus to be fulfilled. I will not determine it.
the long Parliament is or may be here signified by this beast; so that which
is set down by the Angel, in the 17th Chapter and the 10th verse, which is the
explication of this vision, that is here showed, c. 13. does more fully seem to
illustrate and confirm the same thing; for there he says, (...), and there are
seven Kings, that is, which have been, and will be great and grievous,
extraordinary persecutors of my people; The 5 Kings that were fallen, before
this Revelation was showed.
whereof, five are fallen, that is, dead and gone; which we understand by
(...), fallen; and these five says Junius, are 1. Servius Sulpitius Galba; the
seventh Emperor of the people of Rome. 2. Marcus Salvius Otho. 3. Aulus
Vitellius. 4. Flavius Vespafianus. 5. Titus the Son of Vespasian; and one is,
says the Holy Ghost, that is, says he, Flavius Domitian, another Son of the
foresaid Vespasian, in whose latter Reign, says he, St. John wrote this
Revelation, and another is not yet come, says the Text, that is, says he,
Cocceius Nerva, and the beast that was and is not, (...), which our Translators
render, Junius in annotat. in c. 17. joined to Beza's Translation.
even he is the eighth, (even he, especially to be observed, above any of the
other seven,) says the Angel, and this even he, says Junius, is Nerva Trajan,
that is, as I conceive him, Cocceius Nerva, the last that was aforenamed, or
rather, as the stories show, Vlpius Trajanus, qui hic vario respectu, Septimus
and octavus appellatur, who himself, in diverse respects, is called here the
seventh and the eighth; for that although in number and order of succession, he
be the eighth, yet (says he) because this man obtained his power and authority
with Nerva, and did execute his consular office with him, when Nerva died, he
is also said to be the seventh, c. 17.11.
and is reckoned together with Nerva, as if Nerva and Trajan were but one head;
according to which sense, our former Translation, though very corruptly, reads,
the beast that was, and is not, is even the eighth, and is one of the seven:
or, as the Geneva notes do understand those Kings. The 1. is Nero. 2. Galba. 3.
Dr. Hammond in permonit. page 907. Ex Hugone Grotio qui conjutatur Maresio.
page 169.
Otho. 4. Vitellius. 5. Vespasian. 6. Titus. 7. Domitian. 8. Nerva, or as
Doctor Hammond says, (which is more likely to be right, if St. John was
banished to Patmos in Claudius his time, and far more unlikely, if his
banishment was in Domitians time) the 1. is Claudins. 2. Nero. 3. Galba. 4.
Otho. 5. Vitellius. 6. Vespasian. 7. Titus. 8. Domitian.

But indeed all these Expositions, and the like annumeration of these Kings,
that were fallen, and extant, and to come, which would be too tedious for me to
rehearse, do seem to me, to be far wide from the meaning of the Holy Ghost in
this place; because the spirit of God, here, in this Book, sets down the
state and condition of his Church, The main end and scope of the whole Book of
the Revelation The fourfold enemies of the Church. 1. The beast conceived to be
-- 2. The Ecclesiastical Whore, or false Church which is the Church of Rome.
3. The secular Whore, or worldly Professors. 4. The false Prophet, or lying
Preachers; what piety they pretend, and what great mischief they do.
and foresheweth her, what afflictions and persecutions she should undergo,
through the malice of the Devil, and by the means of those wicked Tyrants,
his Instruments, that brought the first 10 great persecutions upon the Church,
and especially by those quaternion of adversaries, that toward the end of the
world, should arise and seek to make an end of the true Church, as

1. The beast, the man of the sin, the great Antichrist, that would be an
Antichrist, that is, an adversary unto Christ, (...), most eminently, and
therefore is termed the beast that ascends out of the buttomless pit.

2. The Ecclesiastical Whore, that breaks her faith with Christ, and makes the
Kings of the Earth, and the Inhabitants of the Earth, drunk with the wine of
her fornication, that is, the fair glosses and the sweet conceits of her
Idolatries and superstitions, and makes her self drunk with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and that is, because they
will not embrace, and follow her in her fornications.

3. The secular Whore, that follows after the World, and will not take upon
her the yoke of Christ, but hates all them, that seek to withdraw her from the
sweet pleasures of the flesh, and the deceitful vanities of the world.

4. The false Prophet, that by a pretended zeal to reclaim the Whores, and to
reduce the one from the world, and the other from her errors unto Christ,
deceives all them, that dwell on the earth, and instigateth, spurreth and
sets on the beast to proceed and to go on in all his villainies and
wickedness against the Servants of Christ: all which, that should happen unto
the Church, from the time of the Angels revealing them, before the end of the
world, the spirit of God would foreshew unto St. John, that St. John might
foreshew them unto the Church.

And this I take to be the main end, and the chiefest scope of the whole Book
of this Prophecy; and therefore, after he had told us of the beast that should
so extremely persecute his Church in the 13th Chapter, and would now further
decipher him here in the 17th Chapter, he adds, and there are 7 Kings, that
is, which have and shall in like manner, vex and persecute my Servants; and
this he says, Why the persecutions and afflictions of the Church are
foreshewed.
and foresheweth to this end, videlicet, to teach the true believers in Christ,
by the examples of those former Martyrs, that had already suffered, under those
five persecutors, that were fallen and dead, to be now (in the time of this
6th, and after, in the 7ths time, and under the Tyranny of the beast, which is
the 8th,) most patient in all their sufferings, and to comfort themselves in
all their miseries and afflictions, when they do consider, and weigh their own
present state and condition, with the precedent condition of those holy
Martyrs, that have suffered as much or more then they, and are now, for their
constancy and patience in their persecutions, crowned by Christ with eternal
glory; and also, to put his servants in mind, from what divine providence, and
to what end, these persecutions are sent unto them; when they do consider, they
come not by chance, being thus foretold, so long before they come, but by the
special appointment of Almighty God, that knows what is best, and disposes
all things for the best, and for the special good of them that love him; and
then lastly, to assure them of a glorious success, and an undoubted Victory to
become Conquerours, even when they are conquered, and do suffer their
persecutions unto death; because the same spirit that foretells us of their
coming, tells us also, how our Brethren, that went before us, overcame all
their sufferings, and how we shall overcome them in like manner, even when our
enamies seem to overcome us.

And therefore immediately after the description of our enemies, Chap. 13. and
the setting down of our sufferings, v. 7. the spirit of God adds, v. 9.
v. 9 Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints; that is, their patience
in suffering and their faith concerning their sufferings, to believe that they
come from God, for their good, and shall produce all good success unto them.

But these forenamed Emperors that are alleged to be here meant, The foresaid
Emperors not all so great persecutors of the Church.
were not all such great persecutors of the Christians; but some of them were
very Gentle and meek, as Titus the Son of Vespasian, who was therefore called
deliciae generis humani, the delight of mankind; though indeed he was not
altogether so delightful, nor so gentle to the Christians; and others ruled
but a very short space, as Galba reigned but seven months and nine days, Otho
but four months, Vitellius but eight months, and we read of no great evils,
that these three men did unto the Christians, though they were no good men; and
after these, Vespasian reigned but nine years and eleven months, and Titus but
two years, and twon months; So that all these five from Nero to Domitian,
reigned not above fourtee years; and therefore I conceive that these five could
not be meant to be set in the Catalogue of the chief persecutors of Gods
Church, nor be ranked in the same Class with the beast and his adherents, when
as neither Eusebius nor any other Ecclesiastical Historian reckons the first
three amongst the persecutors.

And whereas Junins, That the 8th is not said to be a King; which ought to be
specially observed.
in his Annotations annexed to our Bibles makes Trajan to be the 8th. and
others make Nerva, and others Domitian, I say that neither of them is here
meant to be the eight, and of the seven; for I would have it observed, that the
eight is not said to be a King; but there are seven Kings, says the Holy
Ghost, and but seven Kings are said to be; and the Antichrist which is the
beast, and the eight, is no where said to be a King, or to have a Crown upon
his Head, but upon his Horns; So that if either of these, or any one of the
other Roman Emperors, or any other King whatsoever, had been here meant to be
the eight, the Holy Ghost in all likelihood, would have said, and there are
eight Kings, Diverse attributes of the the 8th, not ascribed to any of the other
seven.
whereas he says, and there are seven Kings.

Besides, you may observe many other special marks and additionall
differences, that are given to this eighth, which are not attributed to any of
the other seven, and therefore makes it plain, that none of all the Emperors
or Kings can be understood by this eight; for first, It is said, that this
eight is the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit; and this is said
of none of the other seven. Secondly, It is said, that they that dwell on the
earth, shall wonder when they behold the beast, which is not said at the
beholding of any of the others, For so the Original is, (...), and not (...).
Kings or Emperors; Thirdly, It is said of this eight, that he is of the seven,
and not one of the seven, as our English Translation has it; and this is not
said of any of the other seven. Fourthly, It is said of this eight, that he
shall go into perdition; which in like manner, is not said of any of the other
seven; and Fifthly, As I noted before, when the Holy Ghost speaks of this
8th, he says, and the beast that was and is not, (...), which our Bible
renders even he, and none other, is the eighth, mark it well.

Therefore I conclude, that this eighth can be none of the foresaid Emperors,
nor any of all the Kings or Emperors of the world, of whom, none of these
things is said, that are said of this eighth, who is no where said to be a
King, or to wear a Crown, or to have any special Ensign either of King or
Emperor; and I conceive, Who were the five Kings that were fallen. 1. Caligula.
that by the 5 Kings, which were then fallen, we may understand the 5 greatest
persecutors, that lived and reigned after Christ his ascension, and before this
Prophecy was revealed unto our Evangelist, and I take them to be,

1. Caius Caligula, that most vicious and bloody Tyrant, who wished that all
the Citizens of Rome had but one neck, that he might chop it off, at one blow,
and whom Grotius makes the man of sin, and others do assent unto him.

2 Claudius Tiberius, 2. Claudius.
that banished both the Jews and the Christians out of Rome.

3. Domitius. 3. Nero
Nero, that Monster of men, that crucify St. Peter, and beheaded St. Paul,
within a year one of another, and when he had burned a great part of the City
of Rome, that he might see how Troy burnt, when it was taken by the Grecians,
to put off the blame from himself, he laid the fault upon the Christians, and
persecuted them for the same.

4. 4. Vespasian.
Vespasian, that besieged Jerusalem, and first began the War against the
Jews, that brought abundance of miseries upon the Christians.

5. 5. Titus.
Titus, that utterly destroyed both their Temple and their City; and therein
many Christians, as well as Jews.

The Holy Ghost omitting the other three Emperors, Galba 7. months Otho. 4. M.
Vitellius 8. M.
Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, as men, that although they had been never so
wicked, yet, in so short a space as they reigned, when as all three reigned but
one year and 7 months, they could do no such great mischief unto his Church,
as deserved to inrole them in the Catalogue of the most noted persecutors.

And by that one, 6. Then in being, Domitian.
which is said then to be. I do with Junius understand Flavius Domitian, who
caused this our Apostle to be thrown into a Tun of boiling Oil at Rome, and
afterward, seeing how the goodness of God preserved him therein, 7. Julian the
Apostata.
so that he took no more harm, then the three Children did in the fiery
Furnace, or Daniel in the Lions Den, he spared his life, but banished him into
the Isle of Patmos, where this Revelation was showed unto him; and by the 7th,
I do absolutely conclude him to be Julian the Apostata.

Dioclesian was the cruellest, and the bloodiest of all the former persecutors;
yet the Holy Ghost says, the other, that is not yet come, which was the 7th,
when he comes, must continue, but (...), a short space; and we find that
Dioclesian reigned 19 years before his persecution began, and in all 25 years;
whereas Julian continued but 3 years at the most, and therefore Dioclesian,
that continued so long, cannot be meant.

Deoclesian, Decius, Trajan, and the other persecutors, endured more cruel
tortures, and were far more in number Scribit Damasus in vita Marcellini, ut
Supra 17 millia Christianorum intra unum mensem a Diaclesiano inter fecta.
tormented by these Tyrants, then they were to be at any time, either before or
after, yet, quia sanguis martyrum semen Ecclesiae, because the blood of the
Martyrs is the seed of the Church, and causes it to bring forth fruits more
abundantly, when as the cruelty of the Tyrants made the Christians the more
constant in their profession, and so could not do so much prejudice to the
Christian Faith and Religion, as Julian did; for though Julian was not so
bloody and so cruel as Dioclesian, that forbad Charity to be showed to the
Christians that were in prison, and even to those, Vide Eusebium. lib. 8. c.
2.3. et deinceps.
that they were bound to pity by the Law of nature, their Kindred; nor did put
the Saints to such ceuel deaths and tortures, as the other, his preceding
persecutors were wont to do; yet was he more devilish, and far liker to
overthrow Gods Church, and to root out Christianity from off the earth, then
all the former Heathen persecuters were; for, as I said, the more cruel they
were against the Christians, The two things that increased the Christian
Religion. 1. The constancy of the Martyrs. 2. The Charity of the Christians.
the more did Christianity increase, insomuch that, as Sozomen says,
Christiana religio propter constantiam martyrum and Christianorum erga omnes
cujusvis religionis beneficentiam, long lateque propagata est; the Christian
Religion, by reason of the constancy of the Martyrs, and the Charity of the
Christians toward all men, of what Religion soever they were, spread it self
far and near, when as the beholding of a poor Christian Woman, so constantly
and so manfully suffering Martyrdom for the faith of Christ, moved a King and
all his Family to become Christians; which very point might be the Reason, that
all the other bloody Tyrants, that were so succeed Domitian, were pretermitted,
and not mentioned here by the Holy Ghost, as, upon the maine, bringing no great
detriment to the whole Church, that gains thus much, and more one way, as she
loses another way.

But when the Tiger Julian, that dealt like a Fox in all his ways, and
perceived the issues of the former cruelties well enough, and therefore
withheld his hands from blood, Socrates, lib. 3. c. 10.
and used his wit to root out the Christian Faith from off the world by taking
away all the means and maintenance of the Clergy, and so exposing all the most
reverend Bishops to scorn and contempt, and then, Idem. c. 11. Lament. 4, 5.
denying any Office or place of command or credit, either in the Army or Civil
Government, to the Christians, and thrusting all others out of their places and
employments, that professed the Christian Religion; and bestowing all Offices
of honor and profit upon the Idol-Worshippers; and so magnifying the
superstitious and idolaters, and bringing both the Clergy, and lay Christians
to extreme want and poverty, and making them the spectacles of reproach, when
as many of them had not bread to put into their mouths, and instead of Scarlet
that they formerly used, they must now be glad of rags, and be driven as the
Prophet speaks, to embrace the dunghill, and to dig or beg, or starve; he had
almost extinguished the light of the Gospel, and exhausted the very Soul of
Christianity out of the world, and had been very like to put out the greatest
part of the light of the divine truth from all the parts of his dominions, but
that the goodness of God, against whom it is hard to kick, and whose will must
stand, when as no Counsel can prevail against his providence, did raise up
the two Appollinarisses, that were two learned and most famous Christian
Schoolmasters, who teaching many Noble men's Children, Socrates. l. 3. c. 14.
The Father turned the five books of Moses into Heroical verse. Idem. l. 3 c.
15. Marcellinus, l. 22. c. 13. and l. 25. c. 5.
and by well grounding them in the Rudiments and principles of the Christian
Religion, did, in spite of all the subtlety of Julian, and the malice of Hell,
exceedingly uphold and preserve the faith of Christ: for this Apostata, bred in
Athens at the same time with Greg. Nazianzen, and very well skilled in all
humane learning, as, among other things, his (...), and the many elegant
Orations and books that he wrote, shows, and Marcellinus testifies, was not
ignorant of that maxim of Cornelius Tacitus, Sublatis studiorum praemijs, ipsa
studia pereunt, the only way to put out the fire is to take away the fuel,
and the readiest course, to put down all learning is to take away the reward of
learning, and the maintenance of learned men; for, as Martial says, Sint
Maecenates, non deerunt, flacce, Marones. Martial. epig.


Bountiful Maecenases, and Religious uncorrupted Patrons will bring forth
learned Authors, Poets, Orators, Historians and Divines; but if you will root
out any Art, science or profession, you need not defile your hands with blood,
by killing the Persons, but take away the means and maintenance of the
Professors; and let them starve, but not be killed; because poverty and want,
hunger and cold, nakedness and shame, with scorn and contempt, will prevail
with men, whose names are not written in the book of Life, and are not upheld
by the special grace of Gods mighty hand, O quantum cogit egestas: Juvenal.
sat. 3.
to do what thou will, more then the Sword or Canon.

-- Vellit nam saepius aurem
Invida paupertas, and dixit vilia rura: And as Juvenal says.
Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res Angusta Domi --
Therefore I take Julian, that took this course with the Church of Christ, to
be Primogenitus diaboli, and Proximus Antichristo, the first born of the Devil,
in respect of his Wickedness, though not of time, and the next Neighbor or
Gentleman Usher to the Antichrist, that chalked out the way to him, to
overthrow the Church, and is the vilest and the worst of all the persecutors,
that either preceded him or should succeed him, until the coming of the
Beast, that ascended from the bottomless pit, and shall descend to the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone; because all the other persecutors persecuted Presbyteros,
the Priests and Bishops that stood for the Faith, but this wretch endeavored
to root out Presbyterium, the most sacred Calling and Function of the Bishops
and Ministry; that there might be none to uphold the Faith of Christ upon the
Earth; but that the Religion, and the Service of his Heathen Gods might be
still continued, to whom, beyond all others, he was most superstitiously
devoted, Am. Marcel. l. 25. c. 6.
as Ammianus testifies.

And he is said here, c. 17.10. to be the 7th, and for the comfort of the
Church it is added, that he should continue but a short space; which was but
three years at the most; for this vile person beginning his Voyage against the
King of Persia, resolved and Vowed if he prevailed in that enterprise, to
Sacrifice all the Christians unto his Idol Gods; How God revenged the
Wickedness of Julian.
therefore the God of Gods, and the Protector of the Christians, sent his Angel
from Heaven, as some write, or a Devil out of Hell, as says Calistus, that ran
him through; or some other instrument of the divine justice suddenly smote him,
no man knows how, nor from whence, that he dyed, scoffingly saying, vicisti
Galilee, vicisti; and then one of his Compeers objected against the Christians,
that their God was not as they affirmed, slow to wrath, when he did so speedily
and so suddenly execute his fury against Julian; to whom we answer, that this
does exceedingly commend the great goodness of our God, that will, when he
sees his Patience and his long sufferance is abused, and cannot bring the
reprobates to Repentance, and sees his Servants in Jeopardy to be destroyed,
to preserve his Saints, and to prevent their own further judgment, suddenly
smite them, while they are acting their villainies, and their sins are in their
hands, as he did smite Nebuchadnezzar while the word was in his mouth, Dan.
4.31.
and Corah Dathan, and Abiram, before they had the opportunity to destroy his
Servants, and to commit any more wickedness, to heap more vengeance unto
themselves; So that as the mercyes of the wicked are cruel, Prove. 12.10.
the judgments of our God upon these transcendent malefactors, are mingled and
allayed with a great deal of Mercy.

And as these Reasons before cited, do sufficiently prove Julian to be here
meant by the 7th King the Angel speaks of; so the Holy Ghost says, The Beast
that was, and is not, is the eighth; as I have showed to you before, who might
be conceived to be him that was and is not; then it is said, that he which was
and is not, is of the 7th, and that is, not of the same race, or stock, or a
colleague of and with the 7th, Marcell. in vita constantij.
as Junius says Trajan was with Nerva, or Julian was with Constantius, as
Marcellinus says; But of the same quality and condition, of the same subtlety
and cruelty in persecuting the Saints, and suppressing the true Service of
Christ, as the seventh was, and is of the same livery and serving the same
Master, and after the same method as the 7th did.

And I heard it demanded very often, if any Beast, any like them, with whom St.
Paul fought at Ephesus, or any other Beast in the world, did or could possibly
more evenly immitate passibus aequis, even to a hair, and over immitate that
wicked Apostata in all points of subtlety and cruelty, and specially in this
preposterous and most odious course, now specified against the Messengers of
Christ, for the quite rooting out of them and their Message, the Gospel of
Christ, as the Rump Parliament has done; for as Julian did before them, The
Parallel.
so did not they by the same course, of plundering and ejecting the Clergy, and
taking away all livelihood from the Bishops, and other grave Doctors and
Preachers, cause many learned men, even all, whose names are not written in the
Book of life, as the Holy Ghost speaks, and some, that seemed Stars, and
not of the least luster, in the firmament of the Church, to fall from Heaven,
and to start aside, like a broken Bow, and rather to follow the indirect
Directory of the Parliament, then, for the observance of the direct form of
serving God, to forgo their rich Rectories? yea, and did they not cause them
to take the mark and Livery of that Beast, and against their Consciences, to
take the Covenant of the Beast, and so to forswear themselves, that they might
preserve their Lands and their Livings, which otherwise they must have forgone,
as they saw others do, in every place? Quam sunt laudandi, qui te florente
juventa sprevere, and luxus deliciasque tuas.
So bewitching a thing is the love of this World, as Demas can well testify,
and all that have not learned St. Peter's lesson, to forsake all, and to follow
Christ; and so you see, how the 8th, that is, the Beast, is of the 7th, and
practiceth the same acts, and the same ways as the 7th did. Or else, we may
understand these words, the 8th is of the 7, to signify, that this Beast is of
the same subtlety, cruelty, and condition, and has as much gall and bitterness
in him, against the true Church, and the true servers of God, as all, or any
one of all the other 7. had; So that you can find no villainy, or mischief in
any, or in all the other 7. but you shall find the same fully in this Beast,
that has as many heads, and more heads himself, then all the other 7. Kings
had; and indeed this Exposition is most agreeable to the Original Text, that
does not say, the 8th is (...), of the 7th, but (...), of the seven.

And whosoever reads the first and second part, What the Author of the
History of Independency, says of the long Parliament.
and especially the third part of the History of Independency, I should wonder,
if he find it not there showed, that all the devices, conspiracies,
hypocrifies, and cruelties of those Kings or Emperors here mentioned, yea and
Parallel 7 times 7, more unto them, are not reaching and answerable to the
plots and devices, iniquity and impiety of the long Parliament, conceived by
some men, as I said before, to be this beast, to possess the estates, destroy
the liberties, take away the lives of Gods Servants, and to overthrow the true
service and Religion of Jesus Christ; for the Author of that History proves
evidently, as he says, by the very Acts and Votes, the Ordinances and writings
of that long Parliament, that they are more bloody and cruel then the
proscriptions of Sylla, more unreasonable then the Articles of High Treason,
that were made by the Duke de Alva, (then which the Devil could not devise
much worse) and that their High Court of Justice is a new Slaughterhouse for
the murdering of the free Subjects of Ingland, without any just proceeding;
but in all things contrary to all the Laws and Statutes of this Land, which
are there abundantly produced by that Author, to make good his assertion, and
to condemn that Court and their proceedings therein, for usurpation, treason,
tyranny, The History of Independency part 3. p. 42.
theft and murder; for which illegal, arbitrary, and most barbarous bloody
proceedings, every man's hands would be about their ears, if they did not keep
an Army of Janissaries to suppress them, says that Author: And what viler,
baser, and more abominable things, then these, could any beast, any Antichrist,
or any Devil devise to do? I cannot tell, but I leave it to my Reader to
judge, whether these things be true or not?

CAP. II. The 10 Horus of the Beast, who they are, and what they may signify:
their Crowns, what they signify; their blasphemy; the three chief properties
of the Leopard; how agreeable to the long Parliament; of the feet and mouth of
the Beast, what they betoken; of the power and authority of the Beast; and the
head that was mortally wounded, who or what is meant thereby; and how the Beast
shall continue to make War.
2. 2. Of the 10. Horns of the Beast.
IT is said, that the beast had ten horns; and the Holy Ghost expounds the
meaning of this expression in the 17th Chapt v. 12. saying that these 10 horns
are 10 Kings, which have received no Kingdom, but receive power as Kings, with
the Beast; whereupon, Junius, to make good his former Interpretation of the
Beast, says, hos december Reges jam olim numeraverunt and circumscripserunt
multi, these Kings long ago, many have numbered and described to be 10, which
did arise and spring out of the Roman Empire, Junius in annotat. in c. 13. and
in c. 17.
quum politicum illud imperium art pontificum maxim capit labascere, when
that civil Empire began, by the craft and subtlety of the Popes, to fall unto
decay; and Mr. Mede names these Kings to be, 1. Vortimer, 2. Hengist. 3.
Childeric. 4. Gunderic. 5. Theodoric. 6. Viciarins, 7. Gensericus. 8. Sumanus.
9. Theodomir. 10. Marcianus. Alcazar says, that these 10 Horns do signify
Polyarchiam Romanorum, Mr. Mede in his Apostat. of the latter times, p. 82.
Anno 456.
the multitude of the Roman Senators, which gave their strength and power, by
which they formerly ruled, unto the Emperor; and Corn^a Lapide says, these 10
Horns are 10 Kings, equibus tres profligabit antichristus, and caeteri septem
territi ei sponte se subdent, whereof three shall be vanquished by the
Antichrist, as Daniel says of the little horn, tres Reges deprimet, he shall
suppress three Kings; and the other seven being terrified, that is, by the
humbling of those three, shall willingly submit themselves unto him; and it may
be, the three Kings, that A Lapide speaks of, might be, 1. The King of
Ingland. The Parallel. A Lapide his Exposition how fulsilled. M. Mede names the
other three which the Pope suppressed. p. 83.
2. The King of Scotland. 3. The King of Ireland; and the other seven, that is,
most of the Neigh bour Kings and States, being made afraid of that power, that
could so suddenly subdue these three Kingdoms, should very gladly yield
themselves to become friends and Associates, and to make a league of friendship
with this Beast: which Exposition, may possibly be very near unto the truth,
when we see little less then this already come to pass.

The Commentator, supposed to be Grotius, makes these 10 Kings to be the Kings
of Armenia, Thracia, Galatia, Judaea, Arabia, etc. which were under the Roman
Empire, and the Ministers of their Idolatry: Et sic alii atque alii aliud atque
aliud opinati sunt.

And truly, I do not wonder, that these learned men transported with a desire
to make the World believe that the Pope is the great Antichrist, and so
misunderstanding whom the Holy Ghost means by this Beast, should in like
manner, mistake what or whom they should conceive to be the heads, and horns,
and all other parts of this Beast, quia uno absurdo dato mill sequuntur, one
absurdity draws on another. But how far those Expositions of Junius, and
Alcazar, and that likewise of Mr. Mede, and of all others, that would have
these 10 horns to signify 10 Kings, pertaining to the Roman Empire, are from
the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this Text, will most evidently appear, if you
consider that the particulars of the description of these 10 horns, do no ways
square and cohere with these 10 Kings that they speak of; for these 10 Kings,
The former expositions rejected, and the reasons showed.
in the Text, have interest but in one kingdom, as you may see in the 17th
Chapt. v. 12. and 17. where the spirit of God speaks in the singular number,
(...), that they had received no Kingdom as yet, v. 12. and in the 17. v. it is
said, that God has put it in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree,
which those Kings never did, (...), and to give their Kingdom unto the beast,
and not their Kingdoms, whereas the Kings that were under the Emperor, and are
become under the Pope, were, and are properly Kings, and have every one of them
his own proper and peculiar Kingdom; neither can it be said of them, as it is
said here of these Kings, that they have received power, (...), one hour with
the beast, that is, a very very small time, when as they came to their power
and dominion by descent or by Conquest, and did not receive it as these did,
from any Master that gave it them, and they continued therein during their
life, some of them very long, and some of them at one time, and some at another
time, yielded themselvee unto the Pope, and all of them were of so different a
time, one from another, that it can never agree, The unlikelihood of Mr. Medes
Exposition.
with this one hour or a short space, wherein these 10 horns do agree to give
their strength, and power and Kingdom, which they have received, unto the Beast.

Neither is there any likelihood, that those 10 Kings, which Mr. Mede names,
should be the 10 Kings here meant; because they were but transient, by the
success of War, and of small Provinces, half or quarter of a Kingdom, as
Vortimer and Hengist here in Ingland. Childerick, and Gunderick and Theodorick,
in Gallia, and Sumanus, but in a little Continent between the Rhene; so that
they might be better termed Reguli then Reges; and because also they were, as I
said before, of a different time, one from another, which might be the reason,
as I conceive, that made Junius to pass them over un-named; because he saw the
unlikeliness of these men to be the 10 Kings, that are here meant; neither
could they be said, to be the horns of the Roman Empire, because they revolted
from it, and became horns against it, and pushed very hard to overcome it; but
as I said dato uno absurdo, mill sequuntur; so these learned men, mistaking
the beast, did easily mistake both his heads and his horns.

But if that by this Beast, you understand the long Parliament, The 10 horns
paralelled with the Parliament.
you shall find that as all the other particulars which are here set down in
this Prophecy, do in every point seem to accord and agree with that
Parliament; so does all the description of these 10 horns, that is, these 10
Kings, that had no Kingdom, The 10 Horns may be taken to signify one of these
three things. 1.10. Of their prime Commanders.
but the power, Authority and strength of Kings, which is potestas vitae and
necis, the power of life and death, and is the greatest power that any King can
have, and which they give unto the Beast, v. 13. that is use for the service of
the Beast, does agree with the Parliament, if we understand by these 10 horns,
either

1. Ten of the prime Generals and Commanders of that long Parliament, which
you will confess, had no Kingdom, and yet had the honor and power of Kings. Or,

2. If by these 10. horns, we understand all their Chieftains, 2. All their
Chietrains and Commanders.
whereof not one of them had any Kingdom, and yet each one of them had the
power and authority of Kings, for one hour, that is, for a small time; and you
may well remember, the best and greatest of them had it not very long; and you
know likewise, they all devoted this their power and strength for the service
of them; from whom they had received it; and they were all of them as the Holy
Ghost says, of one mind, Genesis 31.7. and 41. 1 Samuel 1.8. Job 19.3. Eccles.
17.19. Revel. 2.10.
and did all run the same way, to fight against the Lamb, to overthrowe the
true Church, and to slay the witnesses of Christ; and yet they did all of them,
as they said, hate the Whore, the Whore of Babylon, that is, as they expound
it, the Church of Rome, and all the Romish superstition; for 10. being a
perfect number, the Holy Ghost does in many places, put down this number, as he
does many other perfect numbers, for an uncertain number, as when Jacob said
unto Laban, Thou have changed my wages ten times, that is, many times, and the
Holy Ghost says unto the Church of Smyrna, thou shall have tribulation ten
days, that is, sever all times; so by these 10 horns, or 10 Kings, we may
understand many Chieftains, that had the power of Kings, which they all
employed for the service of that long Parliament, or else,

3. If by these 10 horns we understand the greatness and perfection of that
power, strength and authority, which was given, and was showed in those
Generals, The horn an Emblem of Strength. Psalm. 18.2. Psalm. 22.21. Psalm 75.10.
and they used, for the advancement of the Parliament; for the Scripture uses
to express our strength and power by the Epithet of a horn, as you may most
frequently find it in the Book of Psalms, where the Prophet calls God the
horn of his salvation, and thanketh God that he had delivered him from the
horns of the Unicorns, that is, from the strength and power of his enemies; and
he says, that the horns of the ungodly shall be broken, but the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted, that is, the strength and power of the former shall
vanish away, but the strength of the other shall flourish; the horn being an
emblem of power, as we see the strength and confidence of all horned Beasts,
are in their horns; and by ten, is signified the perfection of a thing, The
number of 10. a note of perfection, and comprehends all numbers be they never
so many, as all numbers are contained under 10. or made of their reduplication.
as when we give the 10th to God, we intend to ascribe all perfection unto him;
because, as Aquinas well observes, after we reckon and account by figures unto
9. we add the Cipher o, which is circular, and (as God) has neither beginning
nor ending, to make up 10, and then, we have no more figures, but to duplicate
and triplicate the former figures in infinitum, and the Cipher only makes up
the number. And so, by the 10. horns of the Beast, we may very aptly understand
the great strength, and the perfect power of the Parliament, that was able to
subdue the King, whose strength is so amplified by Zorobabel. and his
Companion, as you may see in the 1. of Esdras 4.1. and v. 28. and which the
Holy Ghost had set down in the 2d verse, and yet repeateth the same again here,
by this Epitkite, v. 4. to show the greatness of their strength, and the
perfection of their power, which is no less then 10. horns, and so a perfect
power.

But lest we might mistake by the sight of their great power, from whence and
by whom the Beast had received his great strength, the Holy Ghost omitteth not
to set down, it was from the Dragon, which does every where denotate the Devil,
though the Beast braggeth and boasts all his Victories and Successes are from
God; when as indeed all just Histories are from God, but when injusties gets
the best, Judges 20.25.
as it uses to do, not seldom, God does justly suffer the Devil to give power
and strength unto the wicked to prevail against the righteous, as the Tribe of
Benjamin did, and many others in like manner, against the prosecutors of truth
and right, and the true servants of God.

3. 3. The ten horns had ten Crowns, c. 13.1. The Parable.
It is said, that these ten horns, though they had no Kingdom, yet they had
(...), ten Crowns, that is, all the honor, service and observance, that could
be given to any Kings, the same was done and showed to these horns wheresoever
they came, and this was agreeable to the Generals and Commanders of that
Parliament: their Excellencies did expect as much, and the people durst offer
them no less, nor deny them whatsoever they required, when their lives were in
their hands, and all their Estates and goods were at their disposal; this needs
not many Arguments to prove it.

And thus from all the aforesaid particulars, I hope it is apparent, that the
Roman Empire cannot be signified by this Beast (which was the error, that
brought forth many other errors after it) as to recapitulate all in brief.

1. The recapitu, lation of the reasons that prove, the Roman Empire cannot be
the Beast here spoken of.
Because this Beast is (...), a little diminutive creature, and the Roman
Empire, one of the greatest States in the world.

2. Because the seven heads of this Beast had no Crowns, whereas the seven
Orders of the Roman Government, especially those of the Kings and Emperors
should have the Crowns upon their heads rather then the horns, if they had been
meant by these heads; and so should the seven Emperors, that others make to be
the heads, if the Holy Ghost had meant them for the heads.

3. Because the seven heads of the Beast, which Mr. Mede says, are the seven
Orders of Rulers of the Roman Government, The Decemviri ruled but two years,
and the Tribunes, but fifteen years, and all of them to Augustus not above 700
years, and they make the sixth to cease in the time of Boniface the third, which
was an 607. or thereabouts, so that the Popes Government is almost as long as
all the other 6 which was but 1300. and since Boniface there is above 1000.
years.
and which Junius and others make to be seven of the Roman Emperors, are no
where either in the Vision, or in the Exposition of it, styled seven Kings; but
after the Holy Ghost had expounded, what these heads are, namely seven
Mountains, he adds immediately, and there are seven Kings, meaning, as I
showed, that had been, and would be great persecutors of Gods children; to
signify unto us, that he meant not that these seven heads, are those seven
Kings, nor indeed any Kings at all, otherwise he needed not to have said any
more, but the seven heads are seven Kings, whereof five are fallen, and one is.

4. Because that if this Beast be the eight and the Caesarean Order of
Government be but the sixth, and in respect of the changed Caesarianship, but
the seventh, then this Beast is not signified by the seventh, and the changed
Caesarean order of Government cannot be this Beast, but as the Holy Ghost tells
us plainly, this Beast is the eighth and of the seventh.

5. Because that if either the seven Orders of the Roman Rulers, or any other
seven Emperors or Kings be the seven heads of the Beast, then are they some
part of the Beast; but not any of them is termed the Beast, nor said to be any
part of the Beast, but they all are styled Kings; and the eighth only is said
to be the Beast; therefore they are not meant by these heads of the Beast.

6. Because that if the Roman Empire be signified by this Beast, then the ten
Kings must be the horns, that is, the strength of the Roman Empire, but these
Kings having rebelled, and fallen off from the Roman Empire, they cannot be
said to be the horns of the Empire, but rather horns against the Empire: which
I take to be an Argument unanswerable.

7. Because that if the Beast of seven heads and ten horns, be the Roman
Empire, then the Roman Empire, and not the Pope, must needs be the Antichrist,
but according to these men, the Pope is the Antichrist, and not the Roman
Empire; therefore the Roman Empire is not the Beast, And I hope I have more
clearly showed unto you, who may be conceived to be the Beast, and what we may
understand by the seven heads and ten horns of the Beast.

But to proceed,

Fourthly, it is said, 4. Upon the heads of the Beast were names of blasphemy
which may be committed two ways. 1. Way. John 10.33. So it was blasphemy in
the Caesar's, to be called, divi, and dii, and aeterni, as Prosper says in
dimid. temp. c 7. Nam aeterna cum dicitur quae temporalis est, utique nomen est
blasphemiae. 2. Way. Psalm. 50.18,19, 20.21. James 2.7.
that upon the heads of this Beast there were (...), the names of blasphemies;
for so it is in some Copies, and it agrees better with heads then (...), the
name upon many heads; now blasphemy may be committed two special ways.

1. When we assume unto our selves that Deity, and Divine Honor and Right,
either of power or knowledge, which is only due to God, as when Christ told
the Jews, that he was the Son of God, that is, his essential and coeternal Son;
otherwise we are all his sons by Creation, and the elect by grace and adoption;
the Jews, not knowing, and not believing him to be so, said, that he
blasphemed; because that he being but a man as all other men were, and no more,
as they thought, assumed to himself the honor and title of God; or else when
we give and ascribe the divine honor to any other creature whatsoever, as all
idolaters do, and therefore idolatry in the Scripture phrase, is usually,
termed blasphemy, as you may see Ezech. 20.27. and Isa. 65.7.

2. When we derogate from God, that Deity and divine honor, and right, which
is due, and we do ow to ascribe unto God, or do conceive, and attribute unto
him any unseemly act or thing, whether words or deeds, which do no ways agree
with the excellency and purity of his divine Majesty; as when we do oppress
the poor, consent with Thieves, and be partakers with the adulterers, and then
think wickedly, as all such Actors, for the most part, do, that God is such an
one as themselves, or as Jupiter, Apollo, and the rest of the adulterous gods
of the Gentiles were, that has no regard of these things, as the Prophet
speaks, these do blaspheme that worthy name, by which they are called, as
Saint James testifies.

And is not the long Parliament, The parallel. That the Parliament Sectaries
are said to Blaspheme both ways. 1. Way.
or some of their adherents, justly said to be guilty of Blasphemy both these
ways? for,

1. Did they not assume to themselves, or at least their flatterers ascribe to
them, those attributes and Prerogatives, that are only due and proper unto God,
as among others, to break the powers of the earth in pieces, to level the
Hills, and to fill up the Valleys, to bruise the Nations with a rod of Iron,
and to break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel? as my self have heard one of
their Sword Preachers and adherent to the Parliament, Preaching the same unto
the people? and, as he ascribed unto them this attribute of Gods power, which
they made use of reasonable well, in these three Kingdoms, so do they not
arrogate to themselves, that attribute of Knowledge, 2. Tim. 2.19.
which as the Apostle says, is only proper and peculiar unto God? and that is,
to know, qui sunt ejus, who are his? for I refer it to the judgment of the
people, if these men's Chaplains and Preachers take not upon them to discern
and discriminate the elect from the Reprobate, And the Independants gathering
of Churches is a sufficient proof hereof. The History of Independency, part 3.
page 28. 2. Way.
and so accordingly do, what Christ did not to Judas, exclude them from Christ,
and from the Communion of Saints? and being such, to assure their followers,
that they may justly rob and kill these Reprobates, at their own pleasure, as
men, that have no right to the good things of this world, but are unworthy to
live upon the earth? as the Author of the History of Independancy witnesses,
and which is a most dangerous and destructive doctrine to all humane society;
and if the ground thereof be not extreme Blasphemy, let any sober christian
judge.

2. For the other way, as the Worshippers of this Beast Blasphemed, so, did not
the adherents unto the Parliament commit more Blasphemies, and more odious
Blasphemies then I am able to express? for our Savior says, Whoscever
speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him, but unto him
that Blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, Luc. 12.10. Math. 11.32.
it shall not be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in the World to come,
says St. Matthew: and yet, did not that Parliament, and especially the
independent party of the Parliament, and the whole pack of their proselites,
with all reverence be it spoken by me, make the Holy Ghost to be the pack-Horse
to carry all their vile and wicked sins upon his back? and the spirit of God
does exceedingly complain against this lewd practice of such wicked men,
saying, supra dorsum meum fabricaverunt peccatores, Psalm. 129.3. The Plowers
Plowed upon my back.
these sinners, do not only commit sin, but they will also build up their sins
and fasten them all upon my back, as if I were the Author, the mover and
contriver of all their wickedness and impieties; for when they are pulling
down, and setting up new Doctrines, and new disciplines, and change their Faith
and Religion, as the Nomades do change their Cottages, as they are led by the
Lesbian rule of their own fancies, which is the very square, by which they
interpret the Holy Scripture, The Common Doctrine of the Independents: as you
may see in the History of Independency.
do they not usually allege, that the Spirit which Sanctifyeth and illuminates
them, blows, when, and where he will, sometimes this way, and sometimes that
way, and oftentimes contrary ways? and therefore that they can make no
profession of any certain rule of Doctrine or Discipline, because they know
not which way the spirit will inspire them; and to justify this their
inconstancy, and their continual chopping and changing of their minds and
resolutions, they abuse that Text of Scripture, where our Savior says to
Nichodemus, (...), the wind (or Spirit) blows where it lists, John 3.8.
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and
whether it goes; So is every one that is borne of the Spirit, as every one of
them is without question in their own conceit; and therefore, when, contrary to
their Oaths, Protestations, and Covenant, they beheaded and murdered the King,
says the Author of Independency, part 3.
if he says true, did they not pretend, that they could not resist the motions
of the Spirit? and so when they break their faith, their Articles (as they did,
I know with whom) their promises, their Declarations, and their Covenant, do
they not avouch, that the Spirit moves them to it? which is most true, if they
understand it right, of the spirit of darkness, which they make to be the
Spirit of God; And I would feign know, what greater Blasphemy then these, if
these things be true, as men worthy of credit, assure me they are; for what
Blasphemy in the world can there be greater, then to make the Holy Spirit of
God, that flies from deceit, and dwells not in the body that is subject unto
sin, to be the foul Spirit of Darkness, and the Author, mover, and promoter of
such most horrid and execrable acts; acts never acted by any Christians, and
but seldom, if ever known, by the worst of Pagans, and never before adventured
or invented, as I conceive, to be justifiable by the most impudent of all the
Heretics.

And besides all this, have not their Assembly and Preachers, Wisdom 1.5.
as I told you before, by consequent, and in effect, denied the Father and the
Son, and so the Holy Ghost, which is amor, nexus and spiritus patris and filij?
Let the Reader judge what Blasphemous acts the Assembly of Divines and the
adherents to the Parliament did.
and have they not obliterated and cashiered some of the chiefest heads, and
maine points of the long received truths of our Christian Religion? and did not
that Parliament Authorize that Apostate assembly, and countenance the swarms of
their lay-sword-Preachers, to discountenance the 39 Articles of our Church, to
dispute about the expunging of the fifth Article of the Apostles Creed, to
Antiquate the Lords Prayer out of the Church Service, for fear, that, if they
should use to say the same, they should quench the Spirit, as if the spirit of
Christ would be offended with the Prayer of Christ, and to turn out the long
settled service of God, and the book of Commonprayer out of the Church, to give
way, as one says well, to a long-winded extemporary nonsense, and Blasphemous
repetitions, Such Blasphemies, as never were in the Church of Rome, are
broached in the books and Sermons of the Presbyterians.
and most saucy expostulations with God, in the steed thereof? which is the
readiest way to introduce Athiesme, and to abrogate Christianity out of the
world; which is the desire of the Dragon, and the proper work of the Antichrist.

And therefore, the Religion of the Fauterers and adherents to that Parliament,
being but a mere complication and a syncretisme, or rather a sink and common
sewer of all errors, Heresies and Blasphemies, may we not well say, that upon
the heads thereof, there is not only the name, but in the plural number, the
names of Blasphemy? especially, if I should set down, (which would swell to a
huge Volume) all the Blasphemous tenants, that some of their members, many of
their Preachers, and more of their adherents have broached, scattered and
printed throughout these three Kingdoms, since the unhappie birth of that most
unhappy Parliament, to most of the Kings most Loyal Subjects: and so you see
how this Appendix of the Beast, may be said to cohere with that long Parliament.

Fifthly, It is said v. 2. that this Beast was like a Leopard, 5. The Beast was
like a Leopard. Jun. in annotat. in loc. As after the 2d. Pun war Maced. Grec
syria, caeteraque omnia quasitorrente sequnta sun^. Dan. 7.6. Vt loquitur
florus. l. 2. c. 7. Diodorus siculus de success. Alexandr. 2.
and Junius following his former exposition, says, this ought to be understood
of the Roman Empire, that was like a Leopard propter velocitatem, by reason of
their swiftness, and speedy expeditions, and their extraordinary successes to
subdue their Enemies, when their Generals might say with Caesar, veni, vidi,
vici; as soon as I came, I overcame all the adversaries that opposed me;
whereby they have suddenly prevailed to enlarge their dominions over the better
part of the then known world.

But indeed that Empire cannot be understood by this Leopard; for Daniel,
speaking of the four great Empires of the world, says, that the third Beast,
which betokened the Macedonian or Greek Empire, was like a Leopard, that is
propter velocitatem, by reason of the sudden increase and speedy enlargement
thereof, when Alexander the great did most suddenly, in less then 10 years
space, subdue the Persian Monarchy, and brought under his subjection the most
part of the visible Dominions of the world; and his Empire was as suddenly
divided, when he bequeathed the same to the Worthyest of his Captains, and
almost as quickly again, translated unto the Romans; and therefore I say that
not the Roman Empire, Eodem. c. v. 7. and 23.
which was the fourth beast in Daniels Vision, and had Iron teeth, and stamped
the residue of the Kingdoms with the feet of it, but the beast, that is, the
Antichrist, which was typified by the little horn, that came up among the
horns of the fourth beast, ^ v. 8.
that Daniel saw, is here likened to a Leopard; and that, not only propter
velocitatem, for the great speed that he makes in all his actions, but also in
respect of all the other chief properties of the Leopard, which is observed to
be, 1. The three properties of the Leopard.
Velox, very swift. 2. Crudelis, very Cruel. 3. Maculosus, very much spotted.
And so was that many-headed beast that our Evangelift saw; And truly, I may
justly demand if that these three properties of the Leopard might not be
perfectly seen in the long Parliament? The parallel.
for

1. 1. The great speed of the Parliament.
Were they not most swift in their expeditions and executions, and subduing
all, that have opposed them, either Domestic and homebred Enemies, or any
other foreign foes? and have they not conquered these three Kingdoms, and
prevailed more in less then ten years space, then either the Warlike King of
Sweden, or any other King or Commonwealth, if you consider all circumstances,
since Alexanders time?

2. 2. The cruelty of the Parliamen.
As they were most speedy in their actions, so I may demand, if they were not
as cruel in their executions? and more cruel then all the examples that ever I
found in any History, to parallel them? more cruel, as it is conceived, then
John Vasilowich, that was the greatest Tyrant of Russia, and as they say,
greater then any other former Tyrant; and yet he never persecuted any man, as
these men did; only for being loyal Subjects unto their King, and faithful
Servants unto their God; though we might say of Vasilowich, that Saevior est
tristi Busiride, Saevior illo,
Qui falsum lento torruit igne bovem?


And therefore when I duly weigh the decenniall slaughters, practiced in these
Christian parts, by those that professed themselves to be the best Saints on
earth, especially, when I consider, not the bloody killing of men, but the many
deaths, that in a lingering death, they have imposed on many good men, and the
piece-meale taking away of the lives of many, quos oderunt gratis, whom they
hated without cause, but only for seeking to do them the greatest good, and to
prevent the greatest evil, that can be imagined, from falling on them: I cannot
choose but cry out with the Poet, O mites Diomedis equi, Busiridis arae
Clementes, Busiris or Orus the second, was the King of Egypt, and the first
oppressor of the Children of Israel.
jam Cinna pius --


All former Murderers were very mild, and all Tyrants gentle and light, in
comparison of these Leopards; when as, Vix erit ulla fides, tam saevi criminis
hosts,
Tot paenas cepisse pios: --


And we may demand, -- quis prodere tanta
Funera, quis cedes posset deflere nefandas?
Quid tale immaenes unquam gessisse feruntur?


How is it possible to believe, that men should do such acts as they have done?

For though I read of the cruelties of Phalaris, Busiris, Dionysius, Nero,
Dioclesian, and the Roman proscriptions, in the times and wars of Sylla,
Marius, Cynna, Augustus, Antony and the like; Yet the Tyranny and cruelty of
these men was but of a single thread, of one Tyrant at one time, save only 30 in
Athens, and that but once, and the Decemvirj in Rome, and that but once
neither, they were soon weary of their Polyarchy; but I know not when, or where
you shall read of such a pack and knot of Tyrants, and such a multitude of
persecutors, conspiring together as one man, to vent their malice, and to show
their cruelty against innocent men; and each one of them striving to become
more famous then the rest, by being the more odious in the severity of his
censure, Patercul. l. 2. c. 26.
and as Paterculus says, where the emulation was wont to be about virtuous
actions, the contention is now only for the height of mischief, and he thinks
himself the best man, who does most transcend in Villainy; when they are become
all such men as Aristophanes speaks of in Acharnensibus, (...), quibus nec ara,
nec fides, nec jus jur andum manet; that neither care for faith, nor oath, nor
God; where you can find such a pack and society of men, there I do believe you
shall find this beast that is like a Leopard.

Besides, the former Tyrants, and the most bloody persecutors of the Church
executed their cruelties only (except against some sew malefactors, or some
others, as the Christians, that were most innocent) against men for neglecting
their commands (which the Christians would never have refused, had they not
been repugnant to the Commands of God) or those men that they hated, for some
despite done unto themselves; and but very few good and innocent men (except
the Christians) either in the Proscriptions, or by the other Tyrants, were
otherwise causelessly spoiled and executed; but I pray you consider, without
partiality, what a number of noble persons, what an infinite number of good
Christians, that were so quiet, that they meddled not at all, on neither side,
He that would see more and more particular examples of the cruelty of this long
Parliament, let him look into the History of Independency, part 3. page 19.
etc.
what huge armies of faithful Subjects, besides all the Reverend Bishops grave
Doctors, and learned Preachers that offended no man, were utterly undone in the
last war, by those men that had no Command over them, nor received any the
least in jurie by them? but as Aristides was banished out of Athens, justus,
quia justus, only because he was too just; so were these poor innocents
plundered, robbed, persecuted, imprisoned, buffeted, stripped, banished and
killed, and their wives and children left either to beg or starve, only
because they would not be wicked; and are they not then, that do such things,
for their cruelty most rightly said to be like a leopard, when their feet are
so swift to shed blood, and they so merciless, and so universally malicious in
their proceedings of bloodshedding?

3. Can any Child be more like the Father, then the long Parliament and their
adherents are unto the Leopard, propter versicolorem, 3. The dive^sity of the
stains and spots of the Parliament and their adherents.
by reason of their diverse and bespotted colors? the Leopard being not so
bespotted with diversities of colors, as they are maculated and besprinkled
with the varieties of all kind of wickedness, if that be true which is written
of them, that they were as the Apostle says of the Gentiles, repleti omni
injustitia, filled with all unrighteousness, farragine haeresewn, a hodge-podge
of all Heresies, old and new; and a world of all kinds of sins, Romans 1.29.
as treason, rebellion, murders, thefts, sacrilege, rapes, adulteries,
oppressions, lyings, perjuries, hypocrisies, and abundance more of such stuff,
that are most amply explained by the Author of the History of Independency;
for as the Poet says, (...); -- Depravant publica jura,
Justitiamque fugant, divum nil verba verente^:


Which shows, in a word, that the adherents, favorers and followers of that
long Parliament, did neither fear God, nor love man, but have, notwithstanding
all their pretense of piety, sold themselves like Ahab, to commit ail
wickedness, even with greediness, and so, for the love of being great in the
World, to become the very bondslaves of Satan. And are they not therefore
bespotted with more spots, and more diversities of colors then the Leopard?
or, The diverse colored Regiments of the long Parliament, and their adherents.
have they not all the colors of the Rainbow, and some more then either of
these? if you consider, 1. The white Regiment of their Hypocrites. 2. The black
Regiment of their Independants. 3. The Scarlet Regiment of Presbyterians. 4.
The yellow Regiment of Anabaptists. 5. The green Regiment of Levellers. 6. The
blew Regiment of Seekers. 7. The Azure Regiment of Dive-dippers. 8. The tawny
Regiment of lay-Preachers, and a great many more Regiments of Sectaries, then I
can find colors to discriminate them; and though all these several Sects and
Regiments of diverse colors, do peevishly differ in some inconsiderable
Tenants, Vide, the History of Independency. part 3. p. 26.
yet they have some common principles to soader them together, that they may
attain unto that main end and scope, at which they all principally aim; and
that is, power, preferment, and profit; to rule all, and to have all the wealth
and estates of the Antichristian Bishops as they term them, and the reprobate
Royalists, the Cavaliers, and the Laodicean Newters; all which three sorts of
Cast-awayes, they may as well rob and take away all that they have, in their
conceit, as the Israelistes did from the Egyptians, and may as lawfully kill
them, as they killed the Canannites, and divide their Lands and goods among
themselves, that are, if you will believe them, the true Saints of God, as I
was told, one of their great Knights said, to the plundered Inhabitants of
Anglesey: and therefore,

6. 6 The feet of the Beast like the feet of a Bear. Prove. 4.26. Most ugly.
It is further said v. 2. that the feet of this Beast were as the feet of a
Bear; and by feet, in the Scripture phrase, we are to understand their doings
and their ways, as Solomon says, ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy
ways be established, that is, let all thine actions and thy dealings be just
and honest; and these feet of this Beast, are said to be like the feet of a
Bear, which are, the most ugly, the most ill-favored, and the most filthy and
dirty of any feet; and so are all the actions and proceedings of this Beast.

And are not the doings, The Parallel.
the Ordinances and practices of the long Parliament so? for what face soever
they bear, what color soever they make, and how pious soever they seem to be
in their preambles and pretenses; No Pope, Turk nor Tyrant, did ever commit
viler actions, then have been done in these Dominions, within these 20. years.
yet if you look downwards, toward the feet of these Peacocks, and search into
the depth of their actions, and find out the secret intentions of these
glorious Birds, the Birds of Juno, as the Poets faigne, and the Saints of God,
as themselves say, then I demand, if you shall not see, that there lies under
their glorious trayl, feet as black as the Swans, or Turkie-cocks, and every
way as ugly and as filthy, as the Bears feet, that is, as hateful, and as
abominable proceedings, as ever were masked under such specious shows and
pretenses of so much holiness? let the Reader judge hereof.

A special Instance of the long parliaments doings.
I will instance, out of many, but in one or two examples of the incomparable
justice of this Parliament, Dr. Wren, a very learned man, a most Reverend
Bishop, a painful Preacher, a prudent Governor, and a blameless Christian in
his life and conversation, yet because a Bishop, strict in his Government, as
all Bishops should be, he must be cast into prison, have all his goods rifled
and plundered, and have nothing left to him, to maintain himself, his Wife and
many Children; and yet because he was so Orthodox in his Doctrine, so regular
in his life, and so circumspect in his Government, I could not learn of any of
the members of the Parliament, the least crime, besides a general clamor, and
you know, that in universalibus latet error, that could be justly laid to his
charge; and though he is worthy neither of death nor of bonds, yet for all
that, to see if his bonds will bring his death, the good man must be detained
still in prison, for many years together; and why is all this? The Jews
demanded, if the Christ when he came, would do greater things then this man,
that was Jesus, did; so, it may be demanded, if these men be not the
Antichrist, will the Antichrist, when he comes, do greater villainies
cruelties, and outrageous mischiefs, then these men have done, that have
overdone all that went before them.
but to see if the length of his miseries would end his life and his injuries;
because they hated him without a cause, and laid to his charge the things, that
he knew not, and they proved not, and so could find no colorable cause of
death against him; a most admirable example of a very just Parliament; let
Heaven and Earth admire it: but I fear that in other such cases (God not
suffering them to do so in this) when they can find no just fault against the
persons that they hate, they will say with Caesar, aut viam inventam ant
faciam, and will imitate those flies, that finding no sores, will fasten upon
the sound flesh, to make sores, that they may suck our blood; to forge faults,
and to suborn witnesses, to prove them; and, to show the reason of this my
fear, I would add here the proceedings of this Parliament, and the great
justice that Col. Eusebius Andrews, and some others, found at the hands of that
long Parliament, but that a better Pen has set forth the same already. In the
Hist: of Independency. p. 63.

Yet I may not pass the justice that this Parliament has showed in their
public printed Act for the Assesment of that great and heavy Tax, which they
imposed upon the Kingdom, to maintain their Army, that when it was assessed,
and all paid by the Country, every penny; yet if their receiver, that is
appointed receiver by their Committee Men, whom they nominated, and appointed
to be their Committee Men, should fail to pay the moneys to their Treasurer,
and should run away with all the Countries money; why then, because the Army
must have money, the Country must be newly assessed, and what they had
formerly paid, they must pay again, so toties quoties, as often as their
receiver cheates the Country, the Country must still repay it, till the
Soldiers receive it; And according to this Act, a brave receiver of
Carnarvonshire, left the poor Inhabitants of that poor County to repay, what
they had formerly paid, about 4300 l. Let my Reader therefore judge if the seet
of the long Parliament be not as the seet of a Bear.
and odd money, as was reported by some of the Committee Men unto me, whereof a
1000 l. was paid again to the great wrong and prejudice, if not the undoing, of
a great many of the poor men of that County: and whether this act be just or
not, I refer it to the judgment both of Jews and Gentiles, and to the
Heathens and Pagans, that know not God, and yet, may know, by the light of
nature, what is just: for if you give full authority to your servant, to come
to me for money, and require me to pay it him, and I according to your
direction, do so, if he runs away with your money, will any Law make me to pay
it again? credat Judaeus Apella, non ego.

And besides all this, and all particular acts of their illegitimate Justice,
History of Independency. Part 1. Page 3.
they have passed an Ordinance of Indemnity, not only for them that acted for
the Parliament, but also for such as have over-acted, and have gone beyond the
authority, that was given them by the Parliament, and had sequestered men most
unjustly, and leavied the same Taxes three or four times over; and so they
secured them from the Law, and from Justice; which made the Author of the
History of Independency, to say, that you might as easily find Charity in
Hell, as Justice among any of their Committees; And I must here add, Idem.
Part. 1. Page 7.
how justly and how charitably they have dealt with the Reverned Bishops,
Deanes and worthy Divines, and other Gentlemen in Ireland; for when the Irish
Popish Rebels had causelessly and most inhumanely used them, expelled them from
their Inheritances, and robbed them of all their Estates; the Parliament, as
thinking this load of misery was not enough to be laid upon their backs, but,
adding still more sorrows unto the afflicted, instead of relieving them, do
make an act, to take away all their Lands and possessions for ever; And whether
the Irish Popish Rebels, or the English Parliament Saints, dealt with us more
Christian-like, and whether more devilish-like herein, I leave it to the Judge
of all the World to determine, they taking it from us, to give it to their
Popish Priests, and these keeping it to themselves.

But, as when Pilate said unto the Jews, 1 John 18.29
what accusation bring you against this man? and demanded three times of them,
what evil has he done? and they could make him none other answer, but, if he
were not a malefactor, and had not done evil enough, we would not have
condemned him, and delivered him unto thee; so their condemning of him only,
v. 30.
must be believed to be an unanswerable Argument, that he has done evil
enough, though Pilate, that examined the matter and the man, to the full,
protests, that he could find no fault at all in him; so if it should be
demanded of the Parliament, what evil have the Bishops done, that you should
suppress their Calling, nullify their Office, stop their mouths, take away
their maintenance, and sell their estates, that all former Parliaments had
confirmed unto them, to let them beg or starve, as many of them might have
starved, had it not been for the bounty and great charity that was extended to
them, by many worthy men, and most godly Citizens, and others, in and about
this famous City of London, they can make you none other answer, then what
their Brethren the Jews did to Pilate, if they had not been evil, and done
evil, though we cannot tell you, what evil they did, we would not have done
all this unto them; so their condemning of us, though they know not for what,
must be sufficient to lay upon us the heavy judgment of malefactors; and if
this dealing be not like the Bears feet, most ugly, I know not what can be,
let others judge. 7. The mouth of the Beast was as the mouth of a Lion. Amos.
3.8. The Parallel.


7. The Text says, (...): the mouth of the Beast was as the mouth of a Lion, v
2. and the Lion as the King of terrors, roareth to the trembling and terrifying
of all the Beasts of the Forest, and of all other men that hear him; for as
the Prophet says, When the Lion has roared, who will not fear? and does not
this description of the Beast most aptly cohere with the long Parliament? for
did they not roar so terribly, that as the Poet says, and all men do know
Projicit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba, Did it not, The Popes Bulls never
roared so terribly against any man.
speak very proud things, great swelling words, and which is more, and far
worse, breathed it not forth. Oris Cerberei spumas and virus echidnae;

Such cruel threatenings, as deadly, as the poison of asps, against those that
were quiet in the Land, against all the servants of Christ and that would serve
God aright, and continue faithful unto their King? for these men being all
made delinquents, aedibus and sedibus effugati sunt, they are to be driven, and
they must be packing out of house and home; and when they have destroyed all
these, and swallowed up all their Estates, then as Pyrhus told Cyneas his
Orator (that demanded of him, Plutarch, In vita Pyrhi.
what he would do, when he had conquered all Italy) he would win Sicilia, then
Africa, and Macedon, and after that subdue Persia and India, and so forward,
till with Alexander he should become the fool Monarch of the world, and then he
would eat, drink and be merry; so the Parliament Proselites believe, that after
the rooting out of the Cavaliers, the Parliament will conquer France, subdue
Spain, What wonderful things the Parliamentarians promised themselves, they
will do.
harrasse Italy, pull the Pope out of his Throne, throw down the Whore of
Babylon, and then pass on to reduce the ten Tribes, that were led away by
Salmanazar, and are so mixed with all the other Nations, that no man knows what
is become of them ever since; yet these men by the help of their false Prophet
will find them out, and in despite of the great Turk, they will subdue Gog and
Magog, and bring all the dispersed Jews, and distressed Israelites over the
Caspian Mountains, into the land of Promise once again, if you will believe
their Proselites, and false Preachers; quam facile est dicere montem, sed
transire grave est, which is easier said then done; and then their glorious
world, which they term the fifth Monarchy, and the Millenaries thousand years
felicity in all worldly happiness here on earth, shall begin, as I have read
it in one of their books, Printed at London; and dedicated by one of the
Members of the new collected Church of Wrexam to Colonel Twisleton.

And are not these things magnalia, very glorious great exploits? which I
cannot yet believe, though uttered by the mouth of a lion; and yet to further
the credit of these lying wonders.

8. 8. The great power and authority of the Beast, that has 1. The power. 2.
The Seat. 3. The authority of the Dragon. Matthew. 8.32. 2 These. 2.9.
It is said in the same place, v. 2. that the Dragon, that is the devil, gave
unto the Beast, (...), his power and his seat, and great authority; therefore
questionless the power of the Beast must needs be very great, if we consider the
great power and strength of the Devil, who is able to overthrow, not only a
few men, or some Armies of men, but all the men in the world, and drive them
all like the Herd of Swine, into the Sea, if he were not restrained by a
greater power of him, that 'puts a hook in his mouth, and bridles him, so that
he can do no more then he gives him leave; and therefore Saint Paul says, that
the coming of the Antichrist will be (...), with all power: and (...)
signifies copias militares, military Forces; as where the Septuagint renders
it for an Army, Exodus 14.28.
saying, that the waters covered (...), all the Army of Pharaoh; and God is
termed (...), the Lord of Hosts; because he has all the armies of the world at
his command, and therefore the Beast having received from the Devil, (...), all
his power, he has both the Secular power of gold and silver, and military
Forces of men and munition, Dan. 11 43.38.
wherein this power of the Beast, that is, the Antichrist, chiefly confifteth,
which is so said by Daniel to rule over the treasures of gold and silver, and
to worship Mauzim, whom I conceive to be the Heathen God of War; and also the
Ecclesiastical power, which the Beast, after he has gotten such abundance of
wealth, and powerful armies, will likewise exercise, according to his own will
and pleasure, over the Church, Church- men, and all Church Services, and
Revenues that appertains unto the Church.

And has not the long Parliament got such a power, The parallel.
and done all these things? I refer it to any man's judgment. I know the Pope
challenges (...), as great authority as can be imagined; but whether he has
this (...), such a military Force of gold and filver, men and munition, so
plentiful and so powerful as the Parliament had it, I leave it to the world
for to judge. But

Then it is said, that the Dragon gave his Throne or Seat unto the Beast; The
Throne of the beast, what manner of Throne it is. Isa. 14.13.14. Luke 46.
Matthew. 4.9.
and what Throne has the Dragon, but an usurped Throne? when with the King of
Babylon, that said in his heart, I will ascend into heaven, and I will exalt my
Throne above the stars of God, and above the height of the clouds, and I will
be like unto the most high; so he will assume to himself what is none of his
own, and as he said to Christ, all these things will I give thee, when as they
were none of his to give; so he gives unto the Beast no other Throne, but an
usurped Throne, such as himself had no right unto, nor any power to give, but
as the thief can give away my purse, which by force he has taken from me. The
parallel.


And so the Author of the History of Independency shows, how the long
Parliament entered and possessed this usurped Throne of the Dragon, when in
answer to the Kings offered Act of Oblivion, they intended (as they did
afterward) to pass an Act of general pardon, for which they expected a general
obedience, and submission to their Government for the future; because pardon
and protection implies obedience to the Protectors, without which they may be
handled as public enemies, and outlaws, that ought to be destroyed, as
Traitors and Rebels against the State; as Politicus the States interpreter sets
it down numb. 16. from Sept. 19. to Sept. 26.

But how came they (says that Author, (to that Majesty,) How the long
Parliament came to the Throne of their claimed authority.
to whom for birth and the highest of their education) that they should have
the power and authority of granting pardons, imposing Laws, and requiring
obedience from the people, and without that, to plunder them, and to punish the
refusers, as they please? You see what the Holy Ghost says, from whence the
Beast had it; from whence soever they have it.

But our new Statists (says he) will answer you, that the Supreme power is
originally in the people, and so the Parliament voted the same to be, and the
people have delegated, and committed the same to them, as the Representative of
the people; and so having this derivative authority from the people (which had
this authority but from them, and their vote) they use this authority to yoke
their Sovereign Lord, the people, (whose delegates they profess themselves to
be) and to make them yield Allegiance and obedience unto them, that are but
their own delegates, and servants of the Common wealth, under the penalty of
depriving them of their goods, Lands, and lives: Such a piece of circular
Logic, for them to give a power unto the people, who had no power to give it,
A strange piece of Logic.
and then to take it to themselves from the people, to master and to destroy
the people; as I think, neither Aristotle nor Ramus, nor all the School of
Athens did ever know the like; yet hereby we see how they have got to the
Throne of Supreme Majesty; and though it be but an usurped Throne, says that
Author, and their authority a selfcreated authority, merely to cheat fools, and
to domineer over the weak and helpless people; yet as Vespasian said, dulcis
odor lucri ex re qualibet, so they thought it a brave thing to rule, by what
Logic, Art, or means soever they can attain unto the Throne, be it right or
wrong. So cruelly hateful, and beastly is the nature of Ambition, and the
desire of bearing Rule, and Plutarch says. Plutarch in vita Pyrhi.


And now, the Parliament having gotten possession of this usurped throne, as we
may call it, and clothed himself with this new created Majesty: it is said
that he exercises (...), that great Authority, with such and so great
severity, and in so large and transcendent a manner over the people, as neither
King nor Keisar, neither Pope, Turk nor Tyrant, Walter Raleigh, in his Prerace
to the History of the world.
nor any other Pagan Infidel did ever the like; for, omitting others further
from us, though Henry 8. that was Praecursor Antichristi, the Gentleman Usher
to bring in the Antichrist, and of whom Sir Walter Raleigh says, If all the
pictures and patterns of a merciless Prince were lost in the world, they might
all be painted to the life out of the story of this King, that neither spared
Woman in his Lust, nor man in his Fury, has mightily magnified his Authority
over his Subjects, to make his Lustful will stand for law; yet he came far
short multis parasangis by many degrees of the power and Authority that this
Parliament has used over his Brethren, and over his own Sovereign Lord and
Master, the people; for though neither Henry the 8th, nor any other King of
this Land, did ever attempt to do any public Act of moment, as to levy monyes,
press Soldiers, Vieount verulam in the life of Hen. 7.
commit Prisoners, and put men to death, but according to the Laws of our
Land, howsoever they caused these Laws to be sometimes wrested by their
judges, to satisfy their own wills, as Sir Francis Bacon says Henry the 7th,
sometimes did; yet that Parliament without Law, and ex diametro, contrary to
our Laws says the Author of the History of Independency, have made themselves
Masters of our Estates, of our liberties, and of our lives: that as the
Centurion said, he was a man under Authority and needed but say to this man,
go, and he goes, and to another, come, and he comes, and to his Servant, do
this, and he does it; so this Parliament is above all Authority, and needs but
set down what sum soever he would have, he must have it; and what men soever he
would have dead, they must dye; for whatsoever this Parliament voteth, that is
a Law, and they can vote what they will; And what Authority in the world can be
greater then this? the Pope can do nothing without his Cardinals, nor the
Cardinals without the Pope; and King Ahassuerus could do nothing without his
seven Counssellors, nor the seven Counselors without the King; Hester 1.13.
Ezra. 7.14.
yet this Parliament will do any thing, without the King, and against the King:
and therefore mine Author says, that when this Parliament voted, that
whatsoever the Commons in Parliament Voted, and shall Enact, The strange Vote
of the long Parliament. Hist. of Independ. page 11. part. 3.
shall have the power and force of an Act of Parliament or Law, without the
consent of the House of Lords, or the Kings royal assent, any Statute, Law,
custom or usage to the contrary notwithstanding, he never read yet any Vote,
that has in it more of dissolution, and more of Usurpation, and innovation,
then this one Vote, which makes their Authority Universally arbitrary, and
lays the Axe to the root of all our Laws, Liberties, lives and propertyes,
all at once; and is not this (...), great Authority? or did ever Pope or Turk
exact more or so much as this?

And thus that Author says of the Power, Throne and Authority that the long
Parliament assumed to themselves, and exercised over all the people of these
Dominions; how far these things are true, I leave it, as I do all their Acts
and Actions, to be censured and believed by them, that are most judicious, and
do best understand and know all their doings.

But to proceed.

9. 9. Of the head that was mortally wounded, and healed. Junius in an not. in
H. loc. and so Severus sulpitius, and the Author of the Sybel verses, supposed
to be Montanus, do take it. The former exposition rejected.
It is said, v. 3. (...); and I saw one of the heads of the beast as it were
wounded to death, and his deadly wound was healed; whereupon Junius, that makes
this beast to be the Roman Empire, says that this head was Nero, qui in
domitiano, ejus successore, post vespasianum and Titum, suscitus est, who in
his successor Domitian was raised up; because that in Nero, the Caesarean line
and stock did wholly fail, and gubernacula reipublica ad alios fuerunt
translata, and the Government of the Common wealth was transserred unto others,
by whose means, especially in Domitian, his successor, after Vespasian and
Titus, the deadly wound of the Empire, that it received in Nero, was so cured,
that it remained firmer then ever it was before.

But this cannot be the meaning of the Holy Ghost, because as I told you
before, this Revelation, especially in the latter parts thereof, was of things
that were hereafter to be fulfilled; and Nero was dead, and five Emperors more,
Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian and Titus long before St. John saw these
things; therefore Luther, Illiricus, Chytraeus and others, by the Head that was
mortally wounded do understand the civil Empire of Rome, that was wounded in
the Emperors, sed resuscitatum erat per papam, but was healed, revived and
raised by the Pope; and this exposition is likewise approved and followed by
Mr. Mede, Mr. Meder page 5.3.
and by all that take the Beast to signify the Roman Empire, and the Pope to
be the Antichrist; Mr. Mede, page 53.
but I showed to you before, that this Beast cannot be taken for the Roman
Empire; and therefore by this Head, cannot be meant the Empire, that was
restored by the Pope, especially considering that, not the Beast, Dr. Hammond.
in loc. and Grotius in apoc.
but one of the Heads of the Beast was, as it were, wounded: therefore others
by this one of his Heads, that was wounded, do understand the Capitol of Rome,
that was twice burnt, about this time, but was after the burning of it, far
more sumptuously re-edified by Domitian; and for (...), one of his Heads, that
(...), one, is by an Hebraisme, Mat. 28.1.
put for (...), the first, as in St. Matthew, (...), one of the Sabbaths is put
for (...), the first of the Sabbaths, or the first day of the week; And this
conceit of Grouns seconded by Dr. Hammond, is more fully confuted by Maresius
dissertat: de antich.
so is this one of his heads, put for the first, or the chief of his heads;
because that here was Jupiter Capitolinus, which was the chiefest Temple of the
Heathen and Idolatrous Worship of the Romans; but seeing this Beast does not
signify the heathen Idol Worship of the Romans, as I have sufficiently showed
unto you before, this head cannot be taken to signify the Capitol; and
besides, the wounds of the Capitol were made by fire, whereas the head of this
Beast received his wounds by the Sword, as the Holy Ghost sets it down. c. 13.
v. 14.

But, taking the long Parliament for the Beast, it may well be said, What may
be meant by the Head that was mortally wounded.
that either the hypocrisy or subtlety of that Parliament, that is, their
crafty plot to overthrowe both the Monarchy of the Commonwealth, and the
hierarchy of the Church, (which I told you might be one of the heads of this
Beast) was as it were, mortally wounded, when the Earl of Essex was beaten at
Edgehill, and at Cornwall driven to fly for his life, by the Sword of the
King; so that if his Majesty had followed those good successes aright, like
Julius Caesar, and not like Hanriball, that knew, quo modo vincere, sed non
victoria uti, how to overcome, but not how to follow his victory, that wound,
in all likelihood, (had not the King been too merciful a Prince, when he gave
it, and too less politic then a prudent Soldier should be) had been so
mortal, that it could never have been healed.

Or rather, as I conceive, by this head, that was, as it were, mortally
wounded, we may understand the lies and erroneous Doctrines, of the false
Prophet, and the cunning tricks and deceits of the Beast, that were reproved
and confuted by the true Servants of Christ.

And so accordingly, The Parallel.
the falsehood of that Parliament in the misconstring of our Laws and former
Statutes, What the Author conceives the Head that is wounded to be lies
wounded by the truth.
and the scandalous traducing of the good King and his loyal Party, which, as
I showed unto you, might be conceived to be another of the heads of this Beast,
and was confuted and made apparently false, to all that would believe the
truth, and showed to be most unjust and false by the clear writings and answers
of the King and his adherents, for the truth of things, on the Kings side, and
the falsehood of the Parliament, and of their proceedings, were so fully and so
clearly showed, and their misconstructions detected, that I heard many of
themselves confess, that the King went far beyond them in his papers, and was
far happier in his answers, then they were in their objections; the King
always carrying away the Victory, and having still the better of them, while
the matter was disputed with the Pen, either about the Militia, or Episcopacy,
or any point in controversy, quia magna veritas, because truth is able to
prevail, and does, Revel. 19.15.
while we do peaceably seek the truth; and so, this false and lying head of the
Beast, was wounded with the Sword of truth, which is the Sword of Gods mouth,
from whence says the Holy Ghost, there proceeds a sharp Sword.

But yet, all this while, the Kings Weapons were but paper Bullets, and his
Spears but feeble quills; and therefore, though they may prevail in
Jerusalem, the City of God; yet oftentimes corruit in platea veritas, the
Steel cuts the quills in pieces, and the truth is trodden down in the streets
of Babylon, where the Devil rules, and where this head of the Beast, thus
wounded with the Sword of truth, was healed; for (...), the wound of his death,
or his deadly wound was healed, says the Text; that is, by the Weapon salve,
and by the War that they made against the truth; because the wound was, but
(...), quasi mortifera, as it were a deadly wound, Non quod revera talis erat,
sed quia talis videbatur, not that it was struck dead indeed, for then it could
not have been healed, Cohnelius a Lapide in loc.
but that it seemed so, and did appear sufficiently to be so, to all honest
men, as Cornel. a Lapide well observes; for it was such a wound, that although
to them, which obey not the truth, but are like the fool Harpaste, that, as
Seneca says, How the deadly wound of the Parliament was healed.
was as blind as a Beetle, and yet nesciebat se esse caecam, would by no means
be persuaded that her eyesight failed her, but that the Room was dark, the
Kings confutation of their lies, the detection of their falsehood, and the
manifestation of the truth and his innocence, were like Cassandra's Prophesies,
and would give them no satisfaction; yet to all those that had their eyes open,
and had sense to perceive the light of truth, this head appeared to be so
sufficiently wounded, that it was plain, and bootless to add any Plaster to
revive it, or to have it further to be disputed.

But it is conceived, that the Parliament hoped to thrive better by Club-law,
then by any truth; and therefore in this question, they will needs dispute the
matter again, and for a melius inquirendum, the question must be decided by the
Sword, that often beats down the truth, and prevails against the right; And so
now herein, Quia opera Dei and judicia ejus, occulta esse possunt, in justa
esse non possunt. Augustinus.
God, that in and out of his secret Council, does all things well, and cannot
do any thing ill or unjust, though we know neither the causes nor the reasons
of his doings, permitted, as the Prophet says he did in his time, veritatem in
platea corruere, the truth to be trodden under foot; and as he gave leave to
Satan, to overthrowe the House of righteous Job, and to slay his Children every
one, so he gave way to the Quack salvers, to heal with their Weapons of War,
the wound that the King and the Prieft had made with the Sword of truth.

And Mr. Medes Reason to prove the Roman Empire revived by the Pope, to be this
head, that was wounded, videlicet, because that, whatsoever evil the Beast is
mentioned to have committed, whatsoever adoration or worship is done unto him;
all that is said to have come to pass, after the curing of his wound; for I
saw (says St. John) one of his heads, Mr. Mede. p. 54. Mr. Medes reason to be
applied rather to the Parliament then to the Empire, revived by the Pope, in
Charles the Great.
as it were, wounded to death, and his deadly wound was healed; and then he
adds, and all the World wondered after the Beast, that is, now, being healed,
they wondered after him, and worshipped him, and he opened his mouth in
blaspemy, etc. all after his healing; and none of his heinous acts are
mentioned, or any subjection done unto him, or any honor conferred upon him,
by the Nations, before his wound was healed; I say, this does in all things
agree with the long Parliament far better then the Roman Empire revived by the
Pope; for the Eastern Empire, which was the best part of the Roman Empire, was
quite lost from him, and never revived by him, since the time of Momyllus,
called also Augustulus; and the Western Empire, conferred upon Carolus Magnus,
the Son of Pepin, King of France, was ever since rather weakened then revived
by the Pope, that has made it a Skeleton to rest in Germany, without much
honor, besides the title, and with less power then ever it had before; but
for that Parliament, we know that till their deadly wound was healed by their
Sword, and by their Victories and successes, neither did the people yield unto
them their subjection, nor the Nations round about them, honor them with such
Complements, nor themselves commit such horrible wickednesses, as afterward we
have heard, and some have seen so amply done: but when their wound was once
healed, and they became Masters of all that opposed them, then began their Io
Paean, and all the foresaid things succeeded, and they are said to have
proceeded, a malo ad pejus, and as the Poet says, From bad to worse, from
worse to worst of all.

10. How all the World wondered after the Beast.
And therefore, it is said then, v. 3. (...), all the World wondered after the
Beast, so they did after the Parliament; and so they might wonder well enough,
to see the falsehood of the Parliament, in their accusation against the King and
his Party, so clearly detected, and the truth and uprightness of the Kings
proceedings so fully confirmed to the World; and yet to find these like
incredulous Jews, and like Jannes and Jambres, to resist Moses, and to wage
War against the truth, and against all right, and to prevail against them,
which is able, if any thing be able, to make all the World wonder at it, The
Parallel.
as the Holy Ghost says they did; for who would not wonder,

1. To see men so impudent, as to war against the truth, and against
innocence, Two things to be justly wondered at.
and Children warring against their Parents, and subjects against their King?
and which is more,

2. To see iniquity prevailing against equity, and wickedness against piety,
and the followers of the Antichrist against the Servants of Christ.

But though this may move us to wonder at it, and to wonder much at all this,
quia mirabilis Deus in operibus suis, because God is wonderful in all his
works, and more especially, wonderful in his judgments, Psalm. 37.35.
when suffering the wicked to flourish, like a green Bay Tree, he chasteneth
his own Children every morning, and hedgeth their ways even with thorns, that
they cannot step aside, Hosea 2.6.
but they shall be wounded; yet we may not, by any means, forsake oppressed
righteousness, and be partakers with the wrong-doers in their prosperous
iniquity; and though to the amazement of all beholders, we see God permitting
them to thrive, prevall and prosper in all their ways; yet must not we cast
our lots with them, V. 4. To worship the Beast, what it signifies. Hinc male
bestia pro idolotria intelligitur, quia idolum adoratur and non idolctria.
and be their assistants in their unjust proceedings; for though to worship the
Beast, here signifies no more then to be subject unto him, and to do civil
service unto him; because (...), out of the use of the Hebrew, betokens
nothing else but civil worship, as you may see in Genesis 27.29. and c. 37.7. and
c. 49.8. and in 45.14. and so the words, Who is able to make war with him, v.
4. do show, that their worship was, no divine worship, but only to be subject
unto him; yet here you may observe, that the worshippers, that is, the servers,
assistants, and adherents of this prosperous Beast, are said to worship the
Dragon; to show unto us, that all those which do any ways serve the Beast,
beyond truth and against right, do indeed therein the service of the Devil,, to
enlarge the Dominion of the Antichrist, and to increase the power of the Beast,
against the servants of Christ: and therefore,

2. It follows, v. 5 There was given unto the Beast (and you may easiy
guess, 2. The two things that were given to the Beast.
who gave him these things, which God never gives)

These two things.

1. (...), a mouth speaking great things, V 5. The Parallel. The first thing.
and blasphemies; and magna loqui, non solum est blasphemias in coelum jactare.
sed etiam tumide and superbe, sive se laudando, sive hostibus victis
insultando: says Maresius, page 124. to speak proudly of our selves, or to
insult over those whom we subdue, may here be well understood by this speaking
great things.

2. (...), power to make war 42 months, Matthew 49. Such Mermaids live, that
promise only joy, but he that yields himself, they soon destroy, says the
Poet. The second thing Mares. p. 124.


And both these things were fully given, and are every way aplicable to that
long Parliament, as it is conceived, and I suppose rightly; for

1. Who ever promised greater things to any King, then the Parliament promised
to King Charles? you may remember their very words, to make him a most glorious
King, both feared abroad, and honored at home; but as the Devil said to
Christ, (...), All these things will I give thee, but upon this condition, that
thou will fall down and worship me: where the work was a 1000000 times and
more, surpassing the Reward; so the King conceived, they would deal with him,
i. to make him glorious in their account, but so, that he would be ruled by
them, and suffer them to rule the roast, and to govern all his three Kingdoms,
which was usura superans sortem, a making of him glorious to his loss, and not
without dishonor; and for their blasphemies, I have touched the same before.

2. Power was given unto the Beast, to continue, says our laft Translation,
forty two months, and so Mr. Mede brings diverse proofs, to show that (...),
should be taken in the signification of continuing; as it is in Acts 15.13. and
18.23. 2 Cor. 11.25. James 4.13. in all which places, and the like I do yield,
that the word must be so taken, That (...) of (...), facio does not properly
signify to continue, nor especially so in this place v. 7. Cap. 11.2.
as Mr. Mede says, for continuing; but the taking of it so in those places, is
no apodictical Argument, to prove that it must be taken so here in this place;
but rather the contrary; because that although some Greek Copies omit the word
(...), yet the ordinary Copies say that power was given to the Beast, (...), to
make war 42 months, which is agreeable to what is said, v. 7. that it was
given him to make war with the Saints, that is, for 42 months, which is the
same time, and expressed in the very same words, as the Gentiles, that is, the
unbelieving, the profane worldlings, and the dissembling hypocrites should
tread the holy City, that is, the true Church, and the faithful servants of
Christ under foot: and now let us consider, whether this may be applicable to
the Parliament; and you know that Parliament made wars, and wars indeed, the
worst of all wars, Valerius Maximus, lib. 5.
in the judgment of heathens, Civil wars, nullos habitura triumphos, where
oftentimes the father fights against the son, and the brother kills his
brother, as we read they did in the wars of Sertorius; this the Parliament
cannot deny.

But how long the Beast should continue to make war, it is not so easily to be
understood; How long the Beast should continue to make war.
the Holy Ghost says he shall continue to make war 42 months; and the
question is, what time is signified by these 42 months, Mr. Mede would have
these 42 months to synchronize with the woman's 1200 and 70 days abode in the
wilderness; and so the time of the Antichrist continuing, should be 1200 and
60. years at the least; but though the woman's abode in the wilderness, being
1200 and 60 days, That these 42 months do not synchronize with the 1200. and
60. days. Cap. 10.2. So Maresius expounds these 42 months for the
continuance of the Roman Empire, ab urbe condita, ad mortem Odoacri, in anno
493. to be just 1260. years. Three years and a half, or thereabouts. will be
the treading down of the holy City,
may be interpreted for 1200. and 60 years; yet with his leave, I say, that
this proves not the 42 months should likewise signify 1200. and 60 years;
because that 42 lunar months do not make up just 1200 and 60 days: and if you
understand the Solar months, and the Suns passage through the Zodiac, then
there is no reason the expression should be altered, no more then be does in
expressing the treading of the holy City under foot; which does synchronize and
betokens the same time, with this continuance of the Beast to make war; and
besides though we find so many days to signify so many years, and so many
weeks to signify so many years, as there be days in those weeks; because the
days of Septimana, a week, are certain, how many they are; yet because the
days of so many months are uncettain, how many they are, except you do
expressly set down, whether you mean the Solar or the Lunar months, I cannot
remember a Parallel Text in all the Scriptures, where so many months do
signify so many years, as there be days in those months; and therefore the
most part of all the interpreters both old and new, do expound this time of the
Beast that is, of the Antichrist, to be three years and a half; which 42
months does make; and throughout all which time, the Beast should continue to
make war, as is said here, and should by his adherents and associats tread the
holy City under foot, as the Holy Ghost sets down the time in the self same
phrase, c. 11.2.

But Mr. Mede excepts against this time of three years and a half, because all
the things that are to be acted in the time of the Beast, could not be
performed in so short a time; as that,

1. Ten Kingdoms to be founded in that time.

2. Peoples, and Nations, and Tongues to become to serve the Beast.

3. To make war with the Saints, and to overcome them.

4. Mr. Medes exception against the continuance of the Beast three years and a
half, Sixfold. The foresaid exceptions answered.
To cause all that dwell upon the earth to worship the Beast.

5. The whore of Babylon to ride the Beast so long, that all Nations shall
drink the wine of her fornication, and the merchants that had ships should grow
rich by trading with her. And

5. That the time of the Beast followed immediately after him, that is said to
continue but a short space, c. 17.10. therefore if the time of the Beast be but
three years and a half, how short must the other, that preceded him, be? or
does not this expression of his precedents short space, imply that the other,
which is the Beast should continue a long space? when the Holy Ghost does
insert so singular a note of difference, to the time of the former, from the
time of the latter.

To which I answer, that all the things requisite to be acted in the time of
the Beast, may very well be accomplished, as we see it already acted, within
three years and a half: for

1. There is no such thing to be done, as the founding or setting up of 10. 1.
Exception answered.
Kingdoms, as I showed to you before.

But Mr. Mede produces many Authors of the old Fathers, to prove that the
Beast should rise, when 10. Kings should spring out of the Roman Empire; and
that was in Anno 456. when Gensericus took the City of Rome; I confess that
diverse of the ancient Fathers, (supposing that the Roman Empire was that, 2
These. 2.
which the Apostle means to be the let, which hindered the rising of the
Antichrist, and therefore, prayed in their Liturgies. that the Roman Empire
might long continue, Tertul. in apolog. cap. 32. Aug. de civit. dei. l. 20. c.
19
that the coming of the Antichrist might be deferred, and be long before it
came) did imagine, that when the Empire should be shared among 10. Kings, the
Beast would then show himself, as you may see in St. Hierome, in Dan c. 7. and
ad Ageruchiam, de monogamia, and in Ireneus. l. 5. c. 21. 25. and others.

But the Roman Empire being not the thing, that hindered the rising and the
manifesting of the man of sin, that is, the Beast, who is the Antichrist, it
follows not, that the Beast must then rise, when the Empire falls to be
divided among those 10. E. H. de Antichristo. part. 3 p. 114
Kings; for the stop and remora that hindered the man of sin to be revealed, is
clearly and sufficiently proved by E. H. to be, not the Roman Empire, but the
two witnesses, that were as a Serpentine bar in his way, that he could not
rise and tyrannise over Gods flock, until they were killed; and you know when
they were killed, as I have showed to you before.

2. I say, that peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, 2d Exception answered.
might well serve the Beast in a less time then three years and a half, as we
see they have done to the long Parliament.

3. He might (as Antiochus, that was his type, did) war with the Saints, 3d
Exception answered.
and overcome them, in that or less then that time, and the issue of that
Parliaments War, ending much about that time, proves this to be true.

4. He might, by an hyperbolicall speech, which is not unusual in the
Scripture, 4th Exception answered.
cause all that dwell on the Earth, that is, to cause abundance of people, and
most of his Neighbor Nations, to worship him, that is, to reverence and to
respect him, to send Ambassadors unto him, and to court him; for otherwise, all
that dwell on the Earth, will never worship him, nor reverence him, as the true
Servants of Christ, that never did, nor ever will; and therefore by all that
dwell on the Earth, we must understand all the earthly minded men, or else, as
the Evangelists say, Matthew. 3.5. Mark 1.5.
there went out to John Baptist all Judaea, and all the Region round about
Jordan, that is, most of the people of those parts, or a great many out of all
the parts of Judaea; and this we have seen done in less then three years to
the long Parliament.

5. It is not requisite, that Babylon, or the Whore, should ride the Beast, 5th
Exception answered.
so long as Mr. Mede says, neither does the Text alot any time, nor determine
how long the Whore should ride the Beast, but says, I saw a woman sit upon a
scarlet colored Beast, c. 17 3. and 5. And I will tell thee, the mystery of
the woman, verse 7.
and the Beast that carries her: and this does not show but that the Whore,
which signifies the superstitious and Idolatrous Church, might be of a long
continuance, and yet that she has not rid the Beast all that while; for I do
not find, that the beginning of the Whore and of the Beast do synchronize, and
are of the same time; but that the Whore began to play the harlot, that is, the
Church began to apostatize, long before the Beast rose out of the Sea, and when
the Beast did rise, and began to appear, then the Whore began to ride him, the
meaning of which riding, I shall hereafter declare unto you.

6. I say that the precedent Kings continuance is termed a short space, 6th
Exception answered.
not in opposition to the long space of the Beast, but for the consolation of
those distressed Christians, that suffered under that seventh King; and I
showed you that Julian, which I conceive to be understood by that seventh King,
continued not in all his whole Reign, (and likely not so much in persecuting
the Saints) above three years, which certainly is but a short space; neither
does it follow, that because this is said to continue a short space, it
implies that the other shall continue a long space, nor that the Holy Ghost
does insert this as a singular note of difference of the formers time, Why the
Holy Ghost says the Antichrist should continue a short space.
from the time of the latter, but that the spirit of God, for the comfort of
his Servants, foretells them, that as well this as the other, shall continue
but a short space, God having always this respect to his Children, Si languor
longa sit, levis est; Si gravis, brevis est, when their afflictions are long,
as the Israelites vexation in Egypt and in Babylon was, then are they but
light, and when they are heavy, as were the persecutions of the Jews under
Antiochus, very grievous, then are they, as theirs were, very short; and
therefore, the troubles and persecutions of the Church, under the Beast, being
most heavy, and more grievous then ever the Church felt before, as I have
formerly showed and the reason of it, it is not likely it should be, as Mr.
Mede and some other learned men do think, very long, but as we conceive, very
short, about three years and a half, and not so many hundred years, as they set
down, that would have the Pope to be the Antichrst; about twelve hundred years,
at least; since the time that some men would make the Pope to be the
Antichrist. The Parallel.
And we all know, the Parliaments War with the King, continued not very long,
but much about the time here allotted unto the Beast, and that is 42. months,
which make three years and a half.

CAP. II. The blasphemy of the Beast, 1. Against God by the Doctrines of the
Presbyterians, and as it is alleged, the manifold injuries of the long
Parliament. 2. Against his Tabernacle, that is, the Churches and places, where
God is worshipped and served, and which the prime Christians had to serve God
in them; Of the twofold service of God; at what times God might be served in
any place; the two things that Jeroboam did to uphold his Idolatry; how God
will be served, in the time, by the persons, after the manner, and in the
places where he appoints; and in what sense all things are alike holy, and in
what sense some things are more holy then other things.
BUt how long soever these 42. months is, whether they signify three years
and a half, or three years and half three years, as some do think, which make
four years and a half, (for I dare not presume so precisely to determine, what
length of time is here meant to a hair, by these 42. months) or whether, as I
rather conceive, some other unlimited space, that should not be very long, when
it is expressed sometimes by days, and here by months, and not by years; for
where the Scripture sets down the time, that any thing should be done, as that
Antiochus should rage, a time and times, and the dividing of times, (which all
Interpreters expound to signify three years and a half: Dan. 7.25.
and that Christ should be three days and three nights in the heart of the
Earth; it is not meant, that it must be so, exactly to a jot, or a minute; for
we find that Antiochus continued three years, seven months, and thirteen
days; and Christ was buried by Joseph and Nicodemus, about three hours before
Sunset, on Good-Fryday, and rose again about four or five a Clock on Sunday
morning, which makes not in all above 36. or 38. hours, or not above 40.
hours, casting it to the highest account, and that reaches not fully to three
days and three nights, properly and literally taken: but the meaning is, that
it shall be so and so, much about that very time.

And so the Beast shall contiue such a time, as the Holy Ghost intends by
these 42 months: and in all that time, having received this power and great
Authority from the Dragon, he opened his mouth in Blasphemy against God, to
Blaspheme his Name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven: v. 6. I
desire my Reader to be an unpertiall judge, in whom he sees this Prophecy
fulfilled.
And I do earnestly beseech all men to observe, and seriously to consider
whether ever any Tailor fitted any Garment to any man's body, or Shoemaker a
shoe to any man's foot, fitter then this prediction does agree with the long
and lately dissolved Parliament, and their Teachers, the Presbyterians and lay
Preachers, and with none else, either Jew, Pagan, Turk, Pope, or any other
Infidel or Heretic whatsoever, so as it does with them of that Parliament and
their adherents? for here you may observe a three fold Blasphemy of the beast.

1. Against Gods Name. 2. Against his Tabernacle. 3. The Blasphemy of the Beast
3 fold. 1. Against Gods name. Mr. Mede, page 75.
Against his Servants that dwell in Heaven; but,

1. Mr. Mede says, that by Blasphemy here the Idolatry of the beast is to be
understood; and I confess that the Idolatry of the Israelites is termed and
translated Blasphemy, as in Ezekiel 20.27. where the Lord says that by
offering their Sacrifices in Bama, and polluting themselves with their Idols,
they Blasphemed him, v. 28. c. 31. Yet I say. 1. That every Blasphemy is not
Idolatry, neither does it signify the Idolatry of the beast in this place; nor
do Mr. Medes reasons confirm it; for

Though I do yield the beast to be an Idolater, and guilty of very much
Idolatry, That Blasphemy does not always nor here signify Idolatry.
and that the beast seateth himself in Babylon, and Babylon is the Mother of
Harlots, that commits Spiritual Fornication, which is the following after
other Gods, as the Whore follows other men, with or beside her own Husband;
Yet this proves not, that the Blasphemy of the beast, which is here spoken of,
must signify the Idolatry of the beast, when as the beast like unto a
shameless Whore, is guilty of more faults then one.

2. I deny the other heads of the beast, as I showed to you before to signify
those Kings of the Roman Empire, which Mr. Mede affirms to be; and so

3. I deny this beast to have descended from those Idolatrous heads, that he
conceives, and therefore that the Idolatry of those Roman Emperors or Kings
does not prove the Blasphemy of this beast to signify his Idolatry in this
place.

4. Neither do I conceive it likely that the Evangelist writing in Greek, and
to the Gentiles, should use the Greek words in the signification of those
Hebrew words that do in some places signify the same thing; therefore I
expound the word, The parallel. How the Parliament, Preachers, and Assembly of
their Divines have Blasphemed God? Unde factum Est ut tot gentes una cum
liberis suis infantibus aeternae morti involveret lap sus Adae absque remedio,
nisi quia Deo ita visum est? Decretum quidem horribile fateor. Calv. instit: l.
3 c. 23.
not for Idolatry, but according to the Gramnaticall and native signification
of (...), compounded of (...) noceo, laedo, and (...) dico, which signifies to
speak or write impiously, wickedly and unjustly both of God, and of his
Tabernacle, and of his Servants the Angels and Saints that dwell in Heaven; And
thus, consider

1. How the Chaplens of the long Parliament, and their selected assembly with
those that they admit for the Preachers and Ministers of Gods words, which are
the false Prophet here spoken of in this Apocalypse, as I shall anon show unto
you, have and do Blaspheme the most Holy Name of God, when as I told you
before, they do not only reject and deny the notions, expressions and means,
whereby we make God known unto his people, which is a Negative Blasphemy; but
also positively forswear themselves, by receding from that Promisory Oath
which they took, when they entered into Holy Orders, and were made Ministers,
and by Preaching unto the Congregations such palpable Blasphemies, as made my
hairs to stand, and my heart to tremble, when once I heard one of their prime
Doctors Preaching to a great and honorable Assembly: and also by the public
Lectures and printed books of the Presbyterians, and the determinations of
their Assembly at Westminster, and their Associats and Proselites, wherein you
may hear and read such Doctrines touching free will, And yet this horrible
Doctrine is still Preached by the Presbyters.
and original sin, the irrespective and absolute decree of election and
reprobation, and the inevitable consequents of these, and of abundance more of
the like deep points of Divinity, that they have broached, as are more
Blasphemous and more injurious and derogatory to the mercy and justice and
truth of God, then are any of the Blasphemous Errors and Heresies of the
ancient and grand Heretics, Bishop Montague in his appe^lo caesarem, Dr.
Tailor in his vindication of the divine attri butes. N.N in his prefatory cp.
to the examination of Tilenus.
as both learned Bishop Mountague, and Dr. Tailor, and many others have most
fully and abundantly declared unto you; and I, being too large already, must at
this time pass them over, and, for the further clearing of this point, referr
my reader only to Mr. Edwards his collection of their Blasphemous Tenants in
his Gangraena, and the book entitled, Hell broke loose.

2. Consider and inquire how often has that long Parliament it self Blasphemed
the blessed name of God? I mean not by their Idle, vain and customary
swearing, from which they do very well to refrain their Tongues, and some of
the adverse party do very ill to use it, but that, which is far worse, by their
solemn Vows, Oaths and Protestations, deliberately made in the presence of
God and men, and wilfully unmade again at their own pleasure, when they saw
that it made and served for their profit? Sr. Walter Raleigh in his Preface to
the Hustory of the world. Comenti quidam non sunt qui crimina mundi omnia
pertractent de tertora petunt: proh pudor, in Christam linguae temeraria dirae
teia vibrant; summo nil nocitura Deo. Sebastianus Brant.
as if Oaths and Vows were, but, as Lewis the 11th, King of France, was wont
to say, they were toys to deceive fools, or, as Apples and Nuts, and other like
things and Babies, to beguile Children; and therefore he was wont to wear a
leaden God in his Cap, and after he had put to death any one whom be hated, or
falfified his Oath or promise, that he had made and sworn to any man, he would
take his God and kiss him, and say, that if he forgave him that fault, he would
do it no more; meaning, that fact that was already done, but the like should
usually come very soon after; and did not that Parliament think and do the like
with their Oaths, their Vows and their Protestations? for you may inquire, how
often have they sworn to be true subjects, and to bear faith and true
allegiance to the beheaded King, to his Heirs, and to his lawful successors?
and how many Protestations have they made to the same purpose? and how often
have they falsified their faith, and broken this their Oath? So, inquire how
solemnly have they sworn to live and dye with the Earse of Essex? and when they
suspected, and thereupon disliked him, how suddenly did they disoblige
themselves from that knot, and did choose Sr Thomas Fairfax in his room? So,
inquire how Religiously, as it seemed, with hands lifted up toward Heaven,
they swear and make a solemn Covenant to preserve the Kings person? and yet,
by leaving the Clause of Preservation out of Sr. Thomas Fairfax his Commission,
do they not tacitly Authorize him, in the apprehension of wise men, to kill
their King, if he can? which is not much less in War, then a command, and
afterward, have they not killed and murdered him, most barbarously indeed?
then inquire how have they Voted and Vowed, and sworn at large, Consider
whether these doings be not to Blaspheme the blessed name of God.
to profess and to maintain the true Protestant Religion? and yet presently
have not they contemned, if not condemned and renounced the three authentic
Creeds, neglected the Lords Prayer, rejected the reading, and terrified the
Readers of the Decalogue, as they are set forth in our Lyturgy? and cashiered
the 39. Articles of our Church? which I believe was the true Protestant Church,
and all these forenamed things were the parts constitutivae, essential parts
of the Protestant Religion, that did only discriminate the Protestants from
the Papists; because we protested, thus to believe, and these things to defend,
which the Papists rejected and condemned for Heresies: and then to pass over
many other things of less moment; inquire how solemnly have they covenanted and
sworn to unite themselves by an everlasting indissoluble League with their holy
Brethren of Scotland? and how often have they termed that Combination against
their King, in their Papers and Declarations, a most blessed union, and a most
happy association, that is, as they meant for their own end, to subdue and to
overthrow the King? and yet presently, after they had attained their end, how
eagerly did they rail on them, as on a most perfidious Nation, as perjured, as
false confederates, and of less credit then the Punick faith? and how violently
have they afterward Warred, to subdue them, or destroy them? which is indeed,
one of the best acts that ever they did, to render vengeance unto them, and a
just reward of their unjust dealings and most perfidious disloyal
confederating with them, against their own King, and which without question,
was a work proceeding from the hand of God, who is most just in all his works,
and holy in all his ways, that as the wise man says, they might know, that
wherewithal a man sins, by the same also shall he be punished, Wisd.
11.15.16.
as the Idolaters, that worshipped Serpents, void of reason, and vile beasts,
had a multitude of unreasonable beasts sent upon them for vengeance.

And what mystical art, what tropologicall sense, or what subtle Scotus, or
any Sophister, more subtle then he, can, with any distinction, salve this their
doings, and a thousand such like juggling tricks of theirs, from flat and
literal perjury, and a gross blaspheming of the name of God, I cannot with all
mine understanding any ways imagine? for to swear the preservation of the King
in the House, and to give leave, and to wink at the killing of him in the
field; to swear to be faithful to him, and to his Heirs; and yet to cut off
his Head, and to do to his Son, if they had him, what I know not: and to
swear and protest, they did all that they did, for the ease, benefit, and
liberty of the Subjects; and yet to inslave them to their own arbitrary wills,
and to lay such heavy loads upon them, such yoaks of Iron upon their necks, and
such immeasurable Taxes upon all sorts of people, as the like was never known
in this Kingdom, nor that ever I read in any of all our Chornicles, and worse,
as I believe, then what Rehoboam imposed on them, that for his indiscretion,
did most undutifully rebel and revolt from him; I know not how, either all the
dispensation of the Pope, or all the addition of their abrogative to their
legislative power, that they claimed, can salve the same from the grievous
wound of apparent perjury, and high blasphemy against the name of God, done and
done over and over a tribus ad centum, I know not how many times; and done
always, as men conceived, to this end, not to blind God, which, I think, they
knew, saw their thoughts, and I am sure, hated all these doings; but to deceive
the simple people, that they might not perceive their intentions, nor see their
ends, but that, being veiled with these deceitful impostures, they might be
drawn on, by these religious cords, to follow and to assist them, as the people
followed Absolon with a simple heart, to work their pernicious ends.

And therefore, I read of a wise man that said, he did much wonder, what wise
man would pawn his soul upon these men's Consciences, that, as he avouched, made
no Conscience so frequently to break their own solemn Oaths? or who, but mad
men, would hazard their fortunes to maintain these men's cause, that had neither
cause nor reason for what they did? I omit to set down their other blasphemies,
which were more secret in the Tenets of their faith, against the truth of our
Christian Religion; because these are not so visible, and yet are so many, as
would make a volume of themselves.

But let them be as secret as they will, they may be sure, Non te latuerit, O
supreme Jupiter horum malorum quisquis author extitit.
that as the Heathen man could say, (...), the Authors of such transcendent
wickedness, cannot hide themselves from the sight of the all-seeing God; but
their perjuries and blasphemies so often, so secretly, and so hypocritally
done, whenever they do it, are laid in store with God, and sealed up amongst
his Treasures; and if they speedily do not repent, they may speedily perish
everlastingly; and because these sins, besides their other sins, are so great
and so many, Deuteronomy. 32.24.
their repentance must not be little nor slight; but, as St. Peter, when he
denied his Master, though he killed him not, went out and wept bitterly, so
must they have many bitter tears of most sorrowful souls, to wash away these
fearful sins, which they committed to destroy their Master, and so many of
their Pastors and Brethren, and for the sweet desire of bearing Rule, if they
desire to live for ever, which I do heartily pray God to give them grace to do.

And so you see, how the blasphemy of the Beast against God, though no doubt,
but is applicable to the Turk and to the Pope, yet by this that I have showed
you, may be more agreeable to the long Parliament, and rather meant here by the
Holy Ghost, to be applied to them, then either to Pope or Turk, as many men do
conceive.

2. 2. The blasphemy of the beast against Gods Tabernacle.
It is said that the Beast opened his mouth, and truly he opened it very wide,
(...), to blaspheme the Tabernacle of God; i. e. says Mr. Mede, the humane
nature of Christ, but not right, for though I deny not the humane nature of
Christ, to be the Tabernacle or the Temple of the God head, John 2.19. 1 Cor.
3.16. and v. 17. Mr. Mede. page 59.
according as our Savior says, distroy this Temple, and I will raise it up in
three days, as are also the bodies of the Saints, as St. Paul testifies, know
you not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in
you? yet I do much marvel, that Mr. Mede would have it so understood in this
place, only to transfer this blasphemy to signify the Idolatry of the
Romanists, in adoring the consecrated bread of the Eucharist, as the humane
nature of Christ; when as the blasphemy of this Beast against God was spoken of
before, and the spirit of God would not so suddenly express idem per idem; and
therefore to blaspheme the Tabernacle of God here, signifies to blaspheme the
place, where God, by his special grace and favor, resideth and dwells, to
protect his Servants, as it were, under the shadow of his wings, and to cherish
them, as the Hen cherishes her Chickins; which the word (...), that is derived
of (...), habito, or commoror to dwell, does properly betoken; for so, by the
Tabernacle of God, in the old Testament, is every where understood, the
Tabernacle, that Moses reared in the Wilderness, quod Josephus vocat templum
portatile, Josephus antiquitat. l. 3 c. 5. and aliquando Sanstuarium
appellatur. Godwin. in Synop. l. 1. Sect. 25. c. 2.
until the days of Solomon; and after that Solomon built that glorious Temple
in Jerusalem, the same was the Tabernacle of God, or Gods dwelling place
amongst the Jews; and so it was always deemed by all the Prophets and
Servants of God under the old Testament; and the material Churches, that were
edified, dedicated, and consecrated for the Christians to meet, and to serve
the Lord in them, are, as they were ever accounted by all the Fathers and
Doctors of the Church, the Tabernacles of God, under the New Testament.

Yet I deny not, but that by a metaphor, the Tabernacle may sometimes signify
caetum Dei, the company of Gods servants, that meet together in Gods House,
Psalm. 84.1.
to pray and to praise the Lord; as where the Prophet says, quam dilecta sunt
Tabernacula tua, Domine? O how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts?
for this was spoken before the Temple was built; Considenti in latibulo
excelsi, says Tremel.
and by a Synechdoche, it is sometimes taken for those that dwell in tents, or
Tabernacles, as it is in Ps. 91.1. and in Psalm. 92.12. but in neither of these
ways can it be taken here; because these dwellers in Gods House are
immediately set down in the next words; and sometimes by a Catachresis, it is
used for any dwelling place, as where the Prophet says, that God slew all the
most principal in tabernaculis vel tentoriis Chami, Psalm. 78.51.
in the dwellings of Ham, but (...), the Tabernacle of God can signify nothing
else, but the place, Psalm. 26.8.
which is set apart, and consecrated for Gods servants to meet in, to serve
God, and in which God shows his will, and promises his blessing, and his
presence among his people; for this is the place, where Gods honor dwells,
and is most perspicuously seen here on earth, because he is most honored in
this place; Psalm. 51.1.
and of this place and the type thereof, which was Moses his Tabernacle, the
Prophet David demanded of God, Who shall dwell in his Tabernacle? and says,
Psalm. 122.1.
that he was glad when the people said unto him, We will go into the House of
the Lord.

And truly this material house, and place dedicated and consecrated for Gods
service, our Savior Christ, out of the Prophet Isay, calls Gods House, and
says it is so called, Mar. 11.17.
and to be called, not of the Jews only, but of all Nations, the House of
Prayer; and so we find that this Tabernacle, Temple, and house of God, has
been ever reverenced and beautified, as the holy Sanctuary, and dwellingplace
of God, by Jews, Turks and Papists, yea, and the very Pagans, that knew not the
true God, Act. 7.48.
but knew that as Solomon, and Saint Steven do say, that he could not be
circumscribed in any place, and therefore dwells not essentially in Temples
made with hands, when as so, the heaven of heavens cannot contain him; yet did
they very much honor and adorh the Templess that were dedicated to the service
of any of their false gods, as Herodotus writes, Herodotus. l 1. Clio.
how exceeding bountiful Craesus King of Lydia was to the Temple of Apollo at
Delphos, and to the Oracle of Amphiaraus; and so, many other heathens spared no
cost, to enrich and beautify the Temples of their idols; and the neglect of
this duty of beautifying Gods House, as well as the profaning thereof, is
every where most sharply reproved by the Prophets, as where Haggai demands of
the Jews, if it were time for them to dwell in sieled houses, and to suffer the
House of God to lie wast? Haggai. 1.4. Matthew. 21.13.
and you know how our Savior Christ blamed the Jews for making the House of
God a house of Merchandise: and yet their Merchandise was not within the
Temple, but in the outward Court of the Temple, which was answerable to our
Churchyard, and was also called the Temple, because it was very fairly, and
strongly walled about, and preserved from all profane uses, until these
profane men began to abuse the same.

And therefore it is admirable to consider how the Primitive Christians, Eusebius
l. 10. c. 3. and c. 4.
as Eusebius records, erected such Oratories, and Basilica's, that is, Royal
houses, as stately, as any Kingly Palace, and beautified the same with
excessive charges for the Christians to meet in, and to serve their God; and so
the Church of Saint Paul in London, and of Saint Peter in Westminster, and the
rest of the Cathredrals throughout Ingland, and Ireland, to pass no further,
can bear sufficient witness, of the zeal and devotion of our Christian
Predecessors, to erect such great and adorn such beautiful houses unto God, as
became so great, and so glorious a God, as our God is.

And to prove that the first Christians, who lived under persecutions, even
from the Apostles time, had Churches, though as then not so magnificent, you
may see 1 Cor. 11.8. and 22. and c. 14.19. and 23. Clemens recognit. l. 10.
Tertul. l. contra Valent. Socrates. l. 1. c. 14.
and so the most ancient of the Fathers do bear witness; as Clemens, Tertul,
Socrates. and Eusebius proves the same out of the book of Philo Judaeus. l. 2.
c. 17. and Lactantius, in carminibus de Passione Domini says, Quisquis ades,
mediisque subis in limina Templi,
Siste parum. --


Whosoever thou art that come to the House of God, stay a while, that is, to
consider where thou go, and as Solomon says, Eccles. 5.1.
to keep thy foot when thou go to the House of God, which is as God himself
expounds the meaning thereof unto Moses, saying, pull off thy shoes from thy
feet, that is, to make clean thy ways, Exodus 35.
and bring no filth, nor any carnal affections, or wordly desires into the
house of God; because the place whereon thou stand is holy ground; by reason
of the gracious presence of God in that place, where Moses stood, and where God
is prayed unto, and praised by the Minister, and the rest of his faithful
servants: Bellarmin. de cultu Sanctorun, l. 3. c. 4. Let my Reader judge,
whether this Prophecy be not fulfilled by the long Parliament, or their
adherents The Parallel.
and if any man defires fuller proof of this truth, I refer him to Cardinal
Bellarmin, and to the excellent and learned Sermon of Mr. Mede upon 1 Cor.
11.22.

And yet I demand, if these houses of God, the Tabernacles of the most high,
that were thus consecrated, beautified, and adorned in the best manner, for the
Christians to meet for the service of Jesus Christ, were not most barbarously
profaned, and most odiously blasphemed by the Members of the long Parliament,
and their adherents, the instruments of the Beast? for if you read Mercurius
Rustiens, or the Country Complaint, Printed at Oxford, you shall there find,
how the Cathedrals, which are the Mother Churches, and the chiefest of the
material or inanimate Tabernacles of God, that are in Ingland, as the places
where the Sacred fire never went out, and where the morning and evening
Sacrifice of prayers and praises of God were always used, and the Ministers,
How the long Parliaments Party abused our Churches.
together with their Bishop praying in the Church for them that labored in the
field, or pleaded at the bar, were defaced, profaned, polluted, and abused by
the servants and the instruments of that Parliament; and not only made Stables
for their horses, Jakes for themselves, and brothel-houses for their wenches,
whom they abused, as is there said, at the very Altars; but also had, I know my
self, their windows broken, their carved works burned, their fonts, where
themselves and their fathers received their Baptism, and the badge of their
Christianity thrown out of doors, and the dead bodies of Gods Saints not
permitted to rest in their graves, but their memorials and statues, that
wronged no man, I am sure of it, were backed and bemangled, by pulling out
their eyes, cutting off their noses, chopping off their Arms, and tearing the
other parts of them all to pieces; and the Swine were suffered to root up their
flesh, In all this I say, but what I do professedly known, having seen the same
with mine eyes.
and the dogs to gnaw their bones, as if they had been the bones of beasts, and
not of men; such inhumane dealings with dead Saints, that were interred in holy
ground, as Savages and Cannibals could not exceed in cruelty and beastiality.

And what is this, but to blaspheme God and his Tabernacle, with the highest
degree of blasphemy that can be imagined to be done against the house of God?
and such, if not worse then what the Prophet shows, and exceedingly
complains, No Turk or Pope did ever abuse the Churches so much.
and exclaimeth against it in Ps. 74.7, 8. and Psalm. 79.2, 3. and you may be
sure, such as cannot be affixed on the Pope, or Popish Church; and yet this was
not only done by the rude and unruly Soldiers, but it was also egged on by
their preachers to be practiced by the people, whom they persuaded to believe,
that God is dishonored, if we think that he takes any delight in these
steeple houses, as with all scorn and contempt, they use to term these
Tabernacles of God.

And therefore (...), The objection of the false Prophet.
the Beast that arises out of the earth, that is, the false Prophet does
object that (...), the Tabernacle of God does not signify the steeple-house,
which we call the Church of God; because God dwells not in houses made with
hands; but in the hearts and souls of the righteous people, and the faithful
servants of Jesus Christ, which are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, as the
Apostle shows.

These are the Tabernacles of God wherein he dwells, 1 Cor. 3.16.
even as he himself promises unto his people; and for the place of his
service, it is wheresoever we lift up pure hands and hearts unto God, to call
for his affistance, and to praise him for his blessings; for as God is every
where, and as the old verse says, Enter, praesenter, Deus est ubique potenter,

Which is according to the Schools, supracaelos non elatus, subter terram, non
depressus -- above the Heavens, and below the Earth, and as the Prophet David
says, a spirit that fills all places, and is wholly present in every place;
for if I climb up to heaven thou art there, Psalm. 139.6. John 4.23. 1 Reg
18.4. Acts 20.7, 8. and c 21.5. 1 Timothy 2.8.
and if I go down to hell, thou art there also; even so, he may be served in
any place, as our Savior himself, tells the woman of Samaria, and as Moses did
serve him upon the Mountain, Elias under a Juniper tree, St Paul in an upper
Chamber, and the Disciples on the Seashore; and the Apostle says, I will that
men pray every where, lifting up pure or holy hands without wrath.

And as we may pray unto God any where, so we may preach unto Gods people in
any place; for so Christ has promised, that whenever, or wheresoever two or
three are gathered together in his name, Matthew. 18.28. c. 5.1.
or to do him service, he would be there in the midst of them: and so we find,
that he himself preached in the Mountain, and in the Ship, and in any place,
where a fit opportunity, and a just occasion was offered; and he bade his
Disciples to go, and to preach from house to house, which they did accordingly,
as you may see Philip preached to the Eunuch by the high way side, Act 18 35.
Neh. 8.3. Acts 17.22.
St. Paul unto the Athenians, as Ezra did unto the Jews, in the street, in the
mids of Mars-hill; and therefore, what need we to have a steeple house, to
serve God, when God may be rightly served in any place?

I answer, that the service of God is to be considered two ways, and is two
fold.

1. Private. Solut. The service of God is twofold.
2. Public. And

1. For the private service of God, as for a man to pray unto God, to catechize
his Children, and to instruct his Family, as Abraham and Joshua are said to
have done, we deny not but men may and ought to do the same, at all times, and
in every place; and they are the best, that do it most often.

2. For the Public service of God we are to consider it, either,

1. In ecclesia constituenda, in the establishing of a Church, or

2. In ecclesia constituta, in a Church settled and established; 2. The public
service considered two ways
and in the first sense, many things may lawfully be done, which may not be
done in a well settled and established Church. And in the second sense, there
is a time when the public service of God may be likewise done in any place,
but that is not always, save only when we cannot come, or not come without
great danger and detriment, What times God may be served in any place. 1. In
sickness time. Esaias 38 2. 2 Reg. 20.2. 2. In Plague time. 1 Chronicles. 21.29. 3. In
War time. 1 Chronicles. 13 3.
to serve God in the place where he requires to be served; and that is,

1. In the time of sickness, so Ezechias being in his bed, and not able to go
to the Temple, turned his face to the wall, and so prayed unto the Lord.

2. In the time of a Plague, or any other contagious Disease, raging among the
people; so David could not go to the Tabernacle of the Lord, for fear of the
Sword of the destroying Angel; and I could never find that God requires our
service with the loss of our lives, but when he is more glorified by our
death, then he is by our life, as he is by the death of those glorious Martyrs,
that lay down their lives for the defense of his truth.

3. In the time of War, which is the worst of all Plagues; so David inquired
not at the Ark of God in the days of Saul, that thirsted after the life of
David: and so we may absent our selves from the Church, for fear of the
distroying Soldiers, that do seek our lives.

4. In the time of persecution, 4. In persecution time. 1 Reg 19.4.4.
when our lives are sought after by Tyrants either for Religion, or the
transgression of any duty that is required against our Conscience, so our
Consciences be rightly informed; so Elias served God under a Juniper-Tree, when
he was feign to fly for his life from the face of Jezabel.

5. In Captivity or restraint, when we are held in durance, 5. In the time of
Captivity.
and cannot go where we would go; so Daniel prayed in his Chamber, when he was
held Captive in Babylon, and Joseph in Egypt, and the Apostles in the Prison,
and in the Stocks sung Psalms, and served God, when they were detained so fast,
that they could not go to the Temple.

6. In our Travel upon unavoided necessities, as Mariners by Sea, 6. In the
time of Iravel.
and others by Land, upon urgent and extraordinary necessary occasions, as for
Physicians to ride to preserve the life of man, and the like, they may serve
God, and both pray and preach, in their Ships, or in a private house, as if
they were in the Church of God.

7. When we are plagued by Soldiers, or any other enemies, 7. In the time of
great dangers.
so that we can neither tarry in our own Houses, nor go to Gods House, without
eminent danger, either of life or imprisonment, or the like; or where there are
no Churches to be frequented, then we may serve God without offense in any
place, wheresoever we are; for so the primitive Fathers served God, and
preached in Chambers, and in holes, and in Rocks and Caves, and in any other
like place, Act. 28.30.31.
where they might with security and convenience serve God, and discharge their
dutiful service unto him; and God accepted the same, and was with them in
those places, as well as if they had been in his Temple: and so St. Paul
preached two whole years, in his own hired House in Rome.

8. When by reason of War, persecution, 8. When the Houses of God are
destroyed.
or some other miserable devastation of Gods Houses, such as the Prophet
speaks of, Psalm. 74.9. That they have destroyed all the houses of God in the
Land, so that the Servants of God can have no consecrated place to repair unto,
then God accepts of their service, that they do in any convenient place,
wheresoever they do it; Psalm. 74.9.
for so Ezra expounded the Law of God in the street that was before the
Watergate; because the Babilonians had destroyed the Temple of Solomon, and
the second Temple, that Zorobabel built, Nehem. 8.3.
was not yet fully erected and settled, nor the people in quietness from their
enemies.

But when neither of these cases, God must be served in the place that he
choseth. Deuteronomy. 12.5.11.13, 14.26.
nor any other extraordinary exigent, or necessity like unto these, do hinder
them, God will in no wise approve, or accept of their service, but in the
place, where he himself has appointed; for you may see how often the Lord
tells his people, they must not do their service unto him in every place that
they do like, but in the place that the Lord shall choose; for, as he will have
none to serve him, that is, in the public Ministry, but those that himself
calls and chooses, so he will be served where and when, and how himself
appoints and commands, and not as every man's fancy pleases himself; quia
bonum non est bonum, nisi fit been bonum; because a good act may prove not
good, if we do it not so, as we ought to do it; as, though it be a good act to
relieve the poor; yet it is not good to rob thy Neighbor, to bestow it on
Alms; and though it was a commendable act, to stay the Ark from falling into
the mire; yet, because it behoved not him once to touch it, God stroke Vzza,
that he died for it; and though it was a good deed to bring the Arc to
Jerusalem; 1 Chronicles 13.9. Numb. 4 15. 1 Chronicles. 15.13.
yet David confesses, that, because they brought it not after the right
manner, which the Lord appointed, that is, upon the sholders of the Levites,
and not upon a Cart, therefore the Lord made a breach upon them, and the place
is called Perez Vzza unto this day: So though it be a good and a Religious
work, to Preach and to Administer the Sacraments; yet it is not good, that
thou, which art a layman, uncalled and unqualified, and have no Commission for
it, should do it, neither can thou answer for thy rash attempt, when God
shall say unto thee, quis requisivit haec? who required these things of thee?
and so, though it was a very good Service, to offer Sacrifice unto God; yet it
was not good to offer it in the high places, or under every green Tree, which
the Lord so often and so sharply reproves; And you know how Jeroboam that is
so often stigmatized, The two things that Jeroboam did to uphold his Idolatry.
carbone notabilis atro, and branded with that black note, of making Israel to
sin, is severely taxed for these two special things that he did, to uphold his
Idolatry, and to continue the Service of his Golden Calves, which he thought
would perpetuate his Kingdom to him, and to his posterity, but proved indeed
the quite rooting out of them; and which very things are now so commonly done
here amongst us, by the long Parliament and their adherents, that were never
yet done, as I cold find, either by Turk or Pope.

1. 1. To choose illegal persons. Qui docent Scripturas quas non intelligunt,
prius imperitorum magistri quam doctorum d scipuli. Hieron. in Epistola.
To make Priests of the basest of the people, that were not of the Tribe of
Levi, but Soldiers and Trades men, and other like Artificers, that had neither
learning, nor lawful calling, men fit to do service unto the Devil, when by
offering their Sacrifices unto their Idols, they sacrificed to Devils and not
to God, says the Scripture; for Jeroboam knew, and the Beast likewise knows
the same, that the lawful and learned Priests would never, generally, do that
unlawful service; therefore he chose, either, them, that were no Levites, that
is such as had no lawful calling, but were, as I told you, Tailors, and
Tradesmen; or, if he cold get any Levite, he must be such, as the long
Parliament received and maintained, some young Novice, or poor Curate, that
wanted means, or some worldly Demas, that would with Judas for preferment fell
his King and his Master; So were Jeroboams Priests, the meanest and the most
ignorant of all the Tribe that for a poor stipend, or a small living would use
any service, and observe any directory that their good Master should prescribe
them. And so the people had Golden Gods, and Wooden Priests? Gods that had
mouths and could not speak, and Priests that had eyes and could not see, which
made the blind people to fall with their blind leaders into the fearful pit of
eternal destruction.

Therefore the good and Godly King Josias, The different censure of Jeroboams
Priests by K. Josias.
that did set up the right service of the true God, deposed all these base
Priests, but with a different censure; for those that were ex genere Livitico,
of the Tribe of Levi, and so had a lawful calling to offer Sacrifice unto God,
he suffered them to live, and to eat bread among their Brethren, which was
favor enough to such offenders; but he never suffered any of them to come to
the Altar of the Lord at Jerusalem; because they that had so wilfully abused
Gods service for such poor rewards, should never have the honor to serve at
Gods Table, and to receive his reward: but those Priests of the high places,
that were not divinitus vocatos, lawfully called, sed ex institutione
Jeroboami, Tremel. in loc.
but by the approbation of Jeroboam, that is, such as were no Levites, no
lawful Priests, but mere lay men, such as our Sword-Preachers and Trade
Divines are, 2 Reg. 23.20.
he dealt with them, as Jehu did with the Priests of Baal, He slew them all
upon the Altars, and burnt men's bones upon them; and very worthily, when as
they durst presume so rashly to take upon them, and to intrude themselves into
that holy calling, which, as the Apostle says, no man should assume, Heb. 5.4.
but he that is called of God as was Aaron; And I would to God, I might see the
like good Josias that would deal in like manner, with the Ministers of the
Beast; or at least some other way, stop the mouths of these base, unworthy, and
unlawful Priests, and most ignorant Preaches of Blasphemous Doctrines, that do
now abuse Gods Service, and broach such damnable Heresies and wicked Errors, as
are able to Poison the souls of the simple people.

2. The other device of Jeroboam was, 2. To do the Service of God in unlawful
places. Deuteronomy. 12.5.11.13, 14 26.
to appoint the service of God to be done in Dan and Bethel, when as the Lord
required they should serve him in the place, where he should choose; and this
place for the Israelites, before their settlement in Canaan, and the building
of their Temple, was in any place, where the Ark of God resided, in the
Wilderness, in Shilo, in the house of Obed Edom -- and after their settling in
the Promised Land, and the subduing of their Enemies by King David, it was to
be done in Mount Moriab; where Abraham was commanded to Sacrifice his Son
Isaac, otherwise called, (as it was afterward) Mount Sion, where the Son of
God, (of whom Isaac was a type) was Crucified for us, 2 Chronicles. 3.1.
and which David took from the Jebusites, and built it round about from Millo
and inward, and called it the City of David, where he intended to build an
house to God, in the threshing floor of Arnon, or Arauna the Jebuzite, and
where the Angel appeared unto him, 1 Chronicles. 17.1.
and he built an Altar, and offered Sacrifice unto the Lord and where the Ark of God should be placed, and God should be there publicly served by all the
people of Israel, after that time; but the Prophet told him, 1 Chrou. 21.18.
etc. 22.
that the Lord accepted of his intention; yet because he was a man of War, and
had shed much blood, wherein the Lord takes no delight, though it was the
blood of Gods Enemies, he should not build him any house; because Gods house is
not to be built in blood, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. and c. 6. See Eusebius his
Ecclesiastical History, l. 10. c. 3. and 4. and there you shall find the
particulars of the Temple, and what every thing signified. Esaias 5, 6, 7. Jerem.
7.10, 11. Math. 21.13. Mark. 11.17. How God requires to be Worshipped. 1. At
the time that he appoints. Exodus 20. c. 12.18. 2. By the Priests whom he
chooses.
nor with the Sword, as now the new builders of the Beast, have and do most
eagerly strive to build it; but Solomon his Son, that was the Son of peace,
should build his house in that very place, where he intended it; and God
commanded Solomon so to do, which he did accordingly, as you may see in 2 Chronicles. 3.1. etc. 6. where you may read the Prayer that Solomon made at the
Consecration of this house, and the benefits that they should reap, which
served God in that house.

And I desire every good Christian to read over that Chapter at his leisure,
and to read it often, and then seriously to consider it, and withal to
remember that of this, and the like consecrated place, that is dedicated for
Gods Worship, the Prophet Esaias says, it should be called of all Nations, the
house of Prayer; therefore not of the Jews only, but of the Christians also;
and the Prophet Jeremy says the same; and our Savior Christ confirms it;
and no marvel; for God will be served. 1. In the Time. That he himself
appoints. 2. By the Persons. That he himself appoints. 3. After the Manner.
That he himself appoints. 4. In the Place. That he himself appoints.


1. As he will be served at all times, so specially at that time which he
pleases to prescribe, as you may see in the 4th Commandment, where he
charge us to remember to keep Holy the Sabbath day, and in Exodus 12.18. he
charge the Jews to observe the 14th day of the first month, to eat
unleavened bread, and whosoever neglected to observe this time, that soul
should be cut off from the Congregation of Israel; and this he repeateth again
in c. 13.5.

2. As God will be served in the time, that he prescribes; so he will have his
service performed, by the persons, whom he chooses; and good reason, he should
have the honor and the liberty to chose his own Servants, when a mean man will
scarce endure, to have Servants of another man's choice, intruded upon him;
therefore Christ did choose his 12 Apostles, and the 70. Disciples; and the
Evangelist tells us, he has chosen quos voluit, whom he would, and not those
that would be, whether he would or not.

3. 3. With the service which himself prescribes.
He will be served, with that service, which himself by his Prophets and
Apostles, has prescribed in the holy Scriptures, and not as every upstart
novice devises, which, (being not according to the received service, that is
deduced by the grave Governors of the Church from Gods word) is but (...), a
will worship, no ways accepted by God, but rejected and reproved as Idolatrous
by the Apostle, and demanded by the Prophet, quis requisiuit haec? who required
these things at your hands, wherein, you please your selves, and not God.

4. 4. In the place where the Lord commands.
As God will be served in the time, that he appoints, and by the persons,
that he chooses, and after the manner that himself ordains; so he will be
worshipped in the place that he commands; for you may see in Levit. 17.8. how
the Lord professes, that whatsoever man there be of the Children of Israel, or
of the strangers that sojourneth among them, Levit 17.8.
that offers a burnt-offering, or Sacrifice, and brings not the same unto
the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, i.e. the Church-door, to offer
it unto the Lord, even that soul shall be cut off from among his people: Exodus
23.19.
and in Exodus 23.19. he says, That the first of the fruits of the Land, they
should bring into the house of the Lord; Exodus 25.8.
and in c. 25.8. he charge them to make him a Sanctuary, or a Tabernacle,
i.e. an holy House or Temple, consecrated for his service, that he might dwell
among them.

And therefore, the Prophet David, before the Temple was built, desired that he
might dwell in his Tabernacle, and says, that he was glad when the people
said, we will go into the house of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4.
that was the Tabernacle, which Moses appointed to be made by the Commandment
of God, for the place where God should be worshipped, Psalm. 122.1. Joh. 18.20.
before Solomon had built his Temple: and when Christ came, he did frequent the
Temple, and says, I ever taught in the Synagogue and in the Temple, that is,
for the most part and ordinarily, and always, when he came to the Temple,
Matthew. 21.14.
and opportunity offered him so to do; and St. Matthew says, that the blind
and the lame came to him in the Temple, and he healed them; and so must we come
to him, into his Temple, if we desire to be healed of our infirmities; and so
the Apostles and Disciples of Christ after his ascension into Heaven, met and
worshipped God in the Temple, Act. 2.46. etc. 5.25.
and when the Christians began to be multiplied, they presently erected
Churches, and consecrated them for Gods service, as you may see in 1 Cor.
11.22. and from the 14th Chapter of the said Epistle, where the Apostle bids
the women to be silent in the Church, which must not be understood of any other
House or Congregation, but the Congregation that meets for Gods service in
Gods House.

And because that place was set apart from all profane uses, for to pray to
God, and to preach unto the people, and to do all other exercises of Religion,
as administering the Sacraments, catechizing the youths, collecting the alms for
the poor, and the like services of the Lord, and was hallowed and sanctified by
the prayers of the Bishop, only for that end, and that God has promised his
more special presence for our help and assistance, in a most special manner,
in that House, more then in any other place, 2 Chronicles. 6.
as you may see by Solomon's prayer; therefore the true Saints and servants of
God, did ever honor and reverence this very place of Gods Worship, more then
any Chamber of presence of the greatest Monarch in the World; and none but
profane Atheists, wicked Heretics, and the members and adherents of this
Beast, that are worse then the worst of worldlings, have ever abused,
profaned, or blasphemed these material Churches, whereof the Prophet says,
holiness becomes thy house for ever: for

Though originally, In what sense all things are alike holy.
and in respect of their own nature, all places are alike holy; and so are all
persons, all days, and all meats, and so all other things that are ejusdem
speciei, of the same kind; they are all alike holy, and there is no difference,
nor any more Sanctity or Holiness in the one then in the other, being all alike
Holily created by God.

Yet, if we consider Gods designation of any of these things, and the
Sanctification, In what sense some things are more holy then others; For the
further clearing of this point, I desire the Reader to look into Mr. Mede's
learned Discourse de sanctitate relativa, and his answer to Dr. Twisse. page 660
and in Levit. 19.30.
of the same, by the appointment of God for such and such uses, in the service
of God, then you shall find a great deal of difference betwixt the one and the
other, and a great deal of a relative accidental Holiness in and belonging to
the one more then to the other: otherwise, what difference will you make,
betwixt the common bread that we eat of the finest Wheat Flower, and the most
Holy and Blessed bread of the Holy Eucharist? or, the Lords Supper? but the
Sanctifying of it by Prayers for this use, to be the Body and Blood of Christ?
this makes the difference, so that now after the consecration of it with the
words of Christ, hoc est Corpus meum; we cannot without profaneness and a
mighty offense give the same to Dogs, or unbelieving Jews, or any other that
we know to be altogether unworthy of it, as we can give the other bread, that
is made of the same lump, to either of these, without any offense: or what
difference is there betwixt one day and another, but because the Lord designed
the 7th day to be set apart for his Service, and hallowed it for that end,
therefore it is more Holy then all the other six days; and so are the days
and feasts that are appointed by the Church to honor God in them, as the
Commemoration of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Resurrection, Ascension, and
other days of Thanksgiving for some special blessings, and extraordinary
favors, that, as on those days, we have received from God, which none will
profane, but the neglectors of Gods honor, and the prophaners of his Service;
So what difference, or what Holiness is there naturally betwixt one man and
another? but when the Lord chooses one before another to be his Servant, to be
sent as his Ambassador to Preach his Word, and to administer his Sacraments,
and causes him to be consecrated or hallowed by Prayers and impositions of
hands, for that purpose, there is a great deal of difference betwixt them, and
much additionall Holiness in the one more then in the other, in so much that
our Savior says of these men, he that receives you, receives me, Luc.
10.16. Zech. 2.8.
and he that despises you despises me: and the Lord says of them, he that
touches you, touches the Apple of mine eye: and you see this difference in
the Ambassadors, and other Officers of Kings, Princes and Potentates, whom we
honor, and reverence more then others, because they are deputed and Authorized
to be the Judges, Sherifs, or other Officers of the Kingdom, where they are
designed so to be: and so likewise what difference or what Holiness is there in
one place more then in another, in the Church- ground more then in the Barn-
floor? surely not any at all originaliter in respect of themselves; but when
such a piece of ground is designed and dedicated for Gods Service, and
consecrated by Prayers for that purpose, and God promises his presence to be
more especially there for our comfort then in any other ordinary place, then
certainly there is a great deal of difference, and a great deal of Holiness
in that place and Consecrated ground, more then in any other common ground
whatsoever.

Therefore Jacob said of the place, where God showed his presence to him, Genesis
28.17.
this is Gods house and the gate of Heaven, and the Lord said unto Moses, Exodus
3.5.
pull off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place where thou stand is Holy
ground: and why was that ground more Holy then any other ground? not in respect
of any innate Holiness, but because the Lord revealed himself there to Moses,
more then in any other place, and I pray you look what the Spirit of God
injoyneth us to do, when we come into Gods House; Eccles. 5.2.
for if we make no difference of these things, but that every man that will,
may intrude himself to do the Service which God requires to be done by
another, and he may do that Service any where, in any one place as well as in
another, in a Common Barn as well as in a Holy Church, then surely, we need
not observe any time, when any one day is as good and as Holy as another, the
Monday as well as the Lords day; and so confounding persons, times and places,
we shall confound all Religion, and suddenly bring Atheism, and all
Profaneness among the people, which I beseech All-mighty God of his mercy to
keep from his Servants, and to turn away this Blasphemy of the Beast against
Gods Tabernacle; And I may demand if the false Prophet, the Preachers, and the
adherents of the long Parliament, have not brought this contempt of Gods
Tabernacle, in too great measure among the simple people, and which very sin, I
am confident cannot be fastened either upon Jews, Turks or Papists.

CAP. IV. The Blasphemy of the Beast against the Saints in Heaven; the first
despisers of them; the Blasphemy against the Godly Saints on earth; who are the
Saints with whom the Beast warreth; the successes of the Beast; that we ought
not to wonder at his Victories; what the successes of the Beast should teach
us; and of the end and downfall of the Beast.
3. IT is said, that the Beast opened his mouth to Blaspheme, (...), 3. The
Blasphemy of the Beast against Gods servants. 1 Perfectos.
them that dwell in Heaven; and this may be understood for two sorts of Gods
Servants.

1. For the blessed Angels, and the Saints that are departed, and do now rest
and reside with the Holy Angels in Heaven.

2. For those holy men, that do wayfare here as yet, and are the lively members
of the Militant Church of Christ, 2. Inchoatos. Maledicta in Sanctos dicuntur
blasphemiae, quia Deus in Sanctis maledicitur, Cajetan in Thom 22. q. 88.
Artic. 5.
which warreth against the Beast, and which is often to be understood by the
name of heaven in this book. And the Beast has not spared to blaspheme both
these kinds of Saints, whose abuses are called blasphemies, because God is
blasphemed in them, says Cajetane; for

1. Touching these blessed souls that are with Christ, I speak not for the
invocation and praying to the best of those Saints, nor the adoration of their
relics and images; for that might well be thought to be flat Popery, and a
sin to be punished by the Judges or at least not well to be justified; neither
do I argue for the worshipping of them, no not the blessed Virgin, with any
kind of Divine worship, either (...), or (...), but only for a reverent
opinion, and a charitable estimation of them, free from contempt, and showed by
good words, and the addition of some reverent title, and honorable Epithet
added unto their names, as we use to do to the Heroes and noble persons, The
Parallel. Calvinus instruct contra libe tinos, c. 9.
or our honorable benefactors that are on earth, which as I conceive is but
the minutest honor that can be given them; and yet this is a great deal more
then this Beast can afford to bestow upon the most deserving of them; for as
Mr. Calvin relates of Quintinus, the father of the Libertines in France, and a
near kinsman of this Beast here spoken of, adeo petulanter in sanctos
debacchabatur, he did so insolently rail against all the Saints, that he termed
Saint Paul no otherwise then a broken vessel, Saint John, a foolish youth,
Saint Matthew an usurer, Saint Peter a denier of his Master, and I heard say,
that some one, of the spawn of this Beast; hearing a worthy Preacher citing
Saint Augustine, replied, Saint Augustine, Saint Devil; and I am sure, the
adherents of the long Parliament, as limbs of this Beast, do for the most part,
hold it blasphemy to call the holy men departed Saints, and therefore you
shall never hear any of them to say in their Sermons, or Writings, And Mr. Love
gives to Mr. Greenham, the Epithet of holy Greenham.
Saint Peter, or Saint Paul; but the bare naked nameof Peter, Paul, John, and
so of the rest, is good enough for the best of them; though they can be pleased
to give far more honorable titles to their own impure proselites, and some of
them to become so impudent, as to compare their own sinful mothers, with the
unspotted mother of God, the blessed mother of Jesus Christ, whom the Holy
Ghost says, all generations shall call blessed, as they all do that love
Christ, except it be this cursed generation of vipers, that gnaw out the bowels
of their own mother.

But this contempt of the heavenly Saints, The first despi sers of the blessed
Saints.
these new Scholars have learned of their old Masters, the first despisers of
the Saints and Martyrs, Leo Isaurus, and Constantinus Capronimus, that said the
blessed Virgin, after she was delivered of Christ, was like a purse that had
been full of gold, and that made (...), an universal Law, that none of Gods
servants, should be called Saint, says Cedrenus; Apud Surium to 6.28.
and so Steven, the Martyr of that time shows, that the
Constantinopolitan-Council of 338. Bishops assembled by Leo Isaurus had
proscribed against holy things, and had cast away in contempt this epithet
Saint, from all the righteous men of God, and would give no other title to the
Apostles and Martyrs of Jesus Christ, but as their Disciples do now, the bare
name of Matthew, Mark, and the like, and thought it an heinous crime, to say
Saint Peter; whereby you see, this new practice of the Beast, and of his
followers, that have unsainted all the holy inhabitants of heaven, and Sainted
all the hypocrites on earth, is but raked up out of the old dunghill of these
Hagiomastices, the Saint-scourgers that I named unto you.

Yet you hear what the Spirit of God says, that to speak evil of the Saints,
whom we ought to honor, as those that sit with Christ on his Throne, Rev. 21.
as Christ himself does testify, is no less then heinous blasphemy; and
therefore if we will not yield them that due respect and honor that we ow
them, as the friends of God, and as the brethren of Christ, and the sons of
God, and for the manifold good that they have done unto us; yet I hope this
will bridle all those that fear God from uttering any contumelious speeches
against them.

2. For the other sort of Gods servants that remain still in the world, The
Parallel. 2. The blasphemy of the Beast against the inchoative Saints that are
on earth.
and reside in the earthly heaven, that is, the Church militant, the Beast
terms them not only sinners (which they confess themselves to be, and
confess it with grief of heart, that they are so bad, and can not be better)
but calls them also Reprobates, Malignants, Members of the Beast, Sons of the
Whore of Babylon, Limbs of the great Antichrist, and faggots destined for
hellfire;

And for themselves, that are indeed the Members of the Beast, they pretend to
be the right Saints, and the only true servants of God; The strange Divinity
of the Beast. In the History of Independency, part 3. p. 29.
and therefore they may commit any Act, that is a sin in us, whom they deem
Reprobates, and yet is no sin in them, which retain their Sanctity in the very
acts of sinning; for what is sinful in other men, is not so in them, who may
commit any crime against the Law of God, and yet it cannot be imputed to them
for sin; because they know in their consciences what they do; and a righteous
man, such as they all are, in their own judgment, is a law unto himself, as
the apostles testifies; and therefore their consciences excusing them, as
being the rule and the Law whereby they square all their actions, they are
capable of doing any thing, and of committing any offense against their
neighbors, especially the Malignants, without the breach of the Law, either of
Justice or of Charity: the which privilege is only proper unto them, and to
none else; because they only and none else do hate the Assembly of the
Malignants, and they only will not sit with vain persons; but their field
alone has no tares, their floor no chaff, and their net incloseth no trash,
when as nothing but pure gold is built upon their foundation; therefore Dr.
Featley does merrily bid them go to New Ingland, Dr. Featlies merry speech of
these hypocritical Saints.
or the Isle of providence, or to Sir Thomas Moor's Vtopia, where Plato's
commoner, Osorius his noble man, Castilio's Courtier, Vegetius his Soldier,
Tullies Orator, Aristocles his Faelix, the Jews Benchochab, the Manachees
paraclet, the Gnossicks illuminat ones, the Pelagians perfect ones, the
Montanists spiritual ones, the Catharists pure ones, and their own precise holy
ones, may all meet at Prince Arthurs round Table, and every guest be like the
Table, totus teres atque rotundus.

4. But for them thus to call light darkness, and darkness light; to justify
the wicked, and to condemn the godly; to make the Members of the Antichrist,
the servants of God; and the true Saints of Christ, ungodly Reprobates; and so
to thrust the deserved heirs of hell into heaven, and the redeemed heirs of
heaven into hell; what is it else, but as Solomon says, an abomination to the
Lord, and as the Holy Ghost says here, to blaspheme them that dwell in heaven;
and therefore shall receive, without a speedy Repentance, the woe that the
Prophet denounces, and the Scripture every where threatens against such
wicked doings. Prove. 17.15. Isa. 5.20.


Then it is said v. 7. that it was given to the Beast, (...) (...), Who are the
Saints with whom the Beast warreth.
to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them; and this war is to be
understood of a bloody war, as it appears by the recompense that shall be
rendered unto the Beast, v. 10. He that kills with the sword, must be killed
with the sword; and Mr. Mede interprets the same of the war, that the Church
of Rome caused to be followed against the Albigenses and Waldenses: Not the
Waldenses.
which as I conceive, is far from the meaning of the Holy Ghost.

time of this Beast, continuing in his prevalency, being but three years and a
half, or some short space, much about that time, and not so many hundred years,
as Mr. Mede would have the Beasts 42 months to signify unto us, it can no
ways agree with the Wars of the Waldenses, that as the Histories record,
extended it self to a far greater time then three years and a half.

Alexand 3. died 1181. These were for the most part French Rebels. in Languedoc
Province, and other parts of France, and the Earl of Tholous was a prime Leader
of many of them against Lewis King of France, in the time of our Henry the third
2. Because this war of the Beast is said to be with the Saints; and those
Waldenses, and Albigenses, being ever accounted for most obstinate heretics,
and so condemned in the Council of Lateran under Alexander the third by 280
Bishops, and very stiffnecked Rebels against their Kings, it cannot be thought,
that such men are here meant under the Notion and Title of Saints; And
therefore I say, that although Thuanus writes, that in the wars waged against
them and the Lollards, about ten hundred thousand men were slain, yet I cannot
yield these mad heretics to be the Saints here meant, nor the prosecutors, nor
procurers of this war to be the Beast, that is here spoken of, and as yet had
not lifted up his head out of the sea; nor can I allow, that the Duke de Alva,
though a most cruel man, that slaughtered in Belgia only, as Junius and
Tilenus say, 36000 men, was a Champion of this Beast, though I confess him to
be like Cosroe King of Persia, a very great instrument of the Dragon, to
scourge these poor Christians for their sins; because this Beast was scarce
hatched, when that Viceroy acted his bloody part.

Who then are the Saints with whom the Beast warreth, and whom God himself
terms Saints, and therefore can be neither Heretics nor Rebels; because the
true Saints will ever choose rather patiently to suffer, then Rebelliously to
resist their lawful Governors; The true and Loyal Protestants, are the Saints
that are here meant.
as King Lewis was to those Albigenses? and I demand, whom can they be, if they
be not the true Protestants, that neither can be charged with any heresy
against the faith, nor taxed for any Disloyalty against the King, as the
Waldenses were both ways adjudged guilty? And therefore I believe, this is
plain enough for any blind man to understand, who are meant by the Saints, that
should be warred against and overcome, if he does but confider, who overcame,
and who were overcome in the last war, that has been made against the truest
Protestants on earth; for you see the Spirit of God tells you, the Beast shall
be the Conqueror, and the Saints shall be conquered; and so Daniel, that
typically prophesied of the Antichrist, which is understood by this Beast,
says, that he should wear out the Saints of the most High, and they should be
given unto his hands. And you see who are worn out.

And then having conquered the Saints, it is further added in the said 7. v.
that there was given unto him (...); Dan 7.25. Nations and tongues submit and
honor the conquerors The Parallel.
Power, or Authority over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations: and truly I
think none so blind but sees all this most suitable every way to the long
Parliament; for after they had subdued the King, have they not assumed to
themselves, and so attained greater power then any of all the Kings of England
ever had? when as not one of them could have so much as a small Subsidy nor
power to press any Soldiers to War against foreign Enemies, without the
approbation of their Peers and People; and King Charles could not have so much
as one penny of money to build his Ships, to protect his Merchants, and to
secure his Ports, without murmuring, without Suits in Law, and without --
neither could he be suffered to borrow money of his friends, without being
blamed and questioned for it.

Yet the long Parliament could have, and would they not have whatsoever they
desired, Loanes, Taxes, Excise, and what not? men and money to make War, and to
conclude peace with whom they pleased; they need no more but Vote it, and they
must have it; what part soever of our estates they vote; for if they may
lawfully demand the 20th part, thy may as lawfully demand the third part, or
the half, or all, if they please, when their own will must be the Rule to guide
them in all that they do.

And did not all the people upon the sight of this great transcendent, and
unlimited power of the Parliament, cry out, who is able to deal with them, and
to prevail against them? Because they saw, that whosoever did not submit to
them, or did seem to dissent and to be (as they phrase it) disaffected to them,
or else to be neuters, Judges 5.23.
as the inhabitants of Meroz were, and the Gryphan, when, as the Poets feign,
the Battle was betwixt the Beasts of the field, and the Fowls of the air, they
plundered their goods, sequestered their Estates, imprisoned their persons, cut
off their heads, and destroyed all that opposed them, and all their own
Laodicean followers, that would not be as violent for them, as they are said to
be virulent against both right and truth, and the true Church of Christ; and
that not only in Ingland, but also in Scotland, and in Ireland; and more then
this, did they not the like to the French, Dutch, Danes, Manks, Moors,
Portugues, and to whomsoever else, of what kindred, tongue or Nation soever he
were, as the Holy Ghost says, that durst stand to oppose them, either by Sea
or land, Did they not all taste of the like sauce? To whom then may this
Scripture be applied, if not to them?

And because of their Victories and successes, more then ever seemed usual
among any Princes, supra dorsum Dei fabricaverunt, did they not, as the Prophet
says, lay all their wicked acts upon Gods back? and, as Pharaoh Necho, King of
Egypt, 2 Chronicles. 35.21. How the Parliamentarians builded their sins upon Gods
back. Martial l. 4. Epig. 21.
said unto Josias, God has commanded me to make this War, so did they not
say, that God had done all that was done by them, and the hand of God was seen,
and might easily be seen in all their doings? which must needs therefore be all
good, because they all were done by God, and the blessing of God followed all
their proceedings, and prospered all their actions.

And so the Parliamentarians, Soldiers and abettors, builded their doings, and
laid their very sins, and all the injuries that they did upon God; which puts
me in mind of Martial his Epigram.

Nullos esse deos, inane coelum
Affirmat caelius; probatque,
Quod se videt, dum negat haec, beatum.
Which is thus englished by Mr. May, accutely;

That in the Heavens, no Gods there be,
Caelius affirms, and proves, cause he
Still thinking so, lives happily.
For I think this may be applied to many of our Independent Sectaries, and
admirers of the proceedings and successes of the Parliament, as well as to
Martialls profane Caelius.

Yet I showed you before, how the spirit of God tells us in the second verse of
this Chapter, it is not God, but the Dragon, that is, the Devil, which is
indeed, the god of the Beast, that has given this power and this great
authority unto the Beast, to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them;
God giving leave unto the Dragon so to do, without whose leave, we know he
could give no more power unto the Beast, then he himself had against holy Job,
and that was none at all.

But seeing the Holy Ghost tells us, that power was given unto the Beast, and
that, as our Savior says unto Pilate, he could have no power, except it were
given him from above, that is from God; so the Beast, the Antichrist, the
Parliament, and all the Tyrants of this World, could receive no power from the
Dragon, except God, the Fountain and the Author of all power, permitted the
Dragon, as his Instrument, to give it them, we do acknowledge the hand of God
in the Victories and successes of that Parliament against the Saints and
Servants of Christ, which he gives them leave to obtain, but not for any
blessing or love he bears to them, or any pleasure he takes in their doings,
but rather for a just Judgment against us; because he is angry with his
Saints, and displeased with their sins, committed, or omitted in the
performance of their duties, either toward God, or toward their Neighbors,
or else for the trial of their constancy and faithfulness in the service of
God: In which respect we know, that the more they are plundered, persecuted and
vanquished by the Parliament and his adherents, the more they are loved, and
continuing faithful, shall be honored and glorified by God and our Savior
Christ.

And this should teach men, That we ought not to wonder.
to wonder no more to see the Parliament and their parties prevail, and to get
so many signal Victories over the Saints and Servants of Christ, then to see
the Inhabitants of Aj prevailing against the Israelites, or the Tribe of
Benjamin, twice overcoming the 10. Tribes, and slaying at both times 40000. of
them, At the Victories of the Beast. Josh. 7.5. Jud. 20.21.25.
or the Philistines overthrowing the Army of Saul, or Nebuchadnezzar, a Heathen
Tyrant, carrying away the Jews, that were Israelites, and Gods own peculiar
people, Captives into Babylon, or Nebuzaradan leading the 10. Tribes into
Assyria, or now to see the Turks, (qui dum volunt and Judae^s, esse and
christianos, nec Jud^i sunt nec christiani, who patching Judaisme and
Christianity together, are neither Jews nor Christians, but do embrace and
uphold the abominations of Mahomet, the Son of Abdalia, Sir Walter Rawleigh
in his History of Mahomet. page 10.
that by the help of a Jew Scribe, his first Master, and of Sergius a Nestorian
Monk, his next instructor, penned the accursed Alcoran for his followers
Bible) to make both the zealous Jews and the Religious Christians, both his
Tributaries and his Gally-slaves, and to war upon many others of them, and to
overcome them, even as the Beast has done unto the Saints, and as you see, the
Parliament has done to all King Charles his true Subjects.

But this ought, What the successes of the Beast should teach the Saints.
as the Holy Ghost says, to teach us patience under our present burdens, and
repentance for our sins that are past, and have pulld these punishments upon
us, with a constant care to shun and prevent all sins to come, and continual
prayers to God, that he would make speed to save us, and make have to help us,
and to deliver us from this more then the Egyptian bondage of the Beast,
supposed by the persecuted Saints to be that long Parliament. And for those
that have so much wondered at the Victories and successes of that Parliament,
and are thereby seduced to take them for the true Saints, and their doings just
and well-pleasing unto God, and the poor persecuted party to be rejected of
him, and their cause displeasing in his sight, when they see them thus subdued
and subjected unto them, delivered up by God into the hands of their enemies,
to be robbed and killed, if they submit not themselves to be ruled and governed
by their Laws; I would desire them only to consider, who can deny the Jews
to be Gods own peculiar people, and a chosen Generation, that made their boast
of God, Psalm. 44.9.
and professed that they would praise his name for ever; and the Heathens to be
Gods professed enemies, and Idolaters that worshipped stocks and stones for
Gods? v. 10.
and yet in the very next verse of the same 44 Psalm, it is said, but now O God
thou art far off, and put us to confusion, and geest not forth with our
Armies, thou make us to turn our backs upon our enemies, which were Atheists
and Idolaters, and have scattered us among the Heathen, which had not known
Gods name, and they that hate us spoil our goods, which is the very case of the
Kings friends in these Kingdoms; Psalm. 79.6.
and in the 79 Psalm, the Prophet says, O God, the Heathen are come into thine
Inheritance, thine holy Temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem a heap of
stones, and we are become an open shame to our enemies, a very scorn and
derision to them that are round about us.

And though all this came upon them, Psalm 44.18.
yet as the Prophet testifies, they did not forget God, nor behaved themselves
frowardly in his Covenant, neither were their hearts turned back, (as I hope
nor ours) nor their steps gone out of the way; no, not when they were smitten
into the place of Dragons, v. 19.
and covered with the shadow of death; but they were still Gods beloved people,
his Saints and his Children, when they were thus beaten and spoiled, and even
eaten up like sheep, (as we are now) by those ravenous Wolves that were none of
Gods people, but the Rods of his fury, to chastize that people, which were his
Servants, though now offending their Master, for which they are chastized.

And therefore men should not judge our case, by our distress, nor approve of
the Parliaments proceedings by their successes, when we assure our selves, and
they might believe it, it is now with us, as it was then with the Jews; and
our losses loose us nothing, nor do their gettings gain them any thing, being
all laid up in a broken bag; for the Victories and prosperity of the wicked
puffs them up with pride, and a high conceit of their own Sanctity and deserts,
and so makes them far worse then they were before; but the adversities and
defeats of Gods Servants, their beating and their spoiling humbles them, and
causes them to run to God, to confess how justly they have deserved the same,
and to implore his pardon and deliverance, as well knowing, that there is no
place, to fly, a Deo irato, nisi ad Deum placatum; and so they are made by
their miseries better then they were before in their felicity; Mala quae nos
hic premunt ad Deum ire compellunt.
because as St. Augustine says, pari motu exagitatum, horribiliter faetet
caenum, and suaviter fragrat unguentum, the stirring of a Dunghill, or any
filthy puddle raises stink, but the stirring up of Ointment, makes a very
sweet and pleasant smell; so, though the punishment of the wicked drives them
with Saul, to despair of Gods help, and to run unlawful courses, to Witches
and Wizards; the chastisements of Gods Servants drive them with David, to cry
to God both for his pardon, and for his help: and cause them, with Daniel, to
behave themselves submissively, as they ought, while he was under the rule of
Nebucadnezar.

Therefore wise men should not judge of the equity of things by the success of
things, when the very Heathen man could say, -- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat;


Let him want all good success, that judges actions by the success; for if you
please to look into Jeremiah 12.1, 2, 3, and Psalm. 37.7.10.35, 36. and Psalm.
73.3, 4, 5. and 18, 19, and 20. verses, and Psalm. 92.7. and into many of the
like places of the Book of Job, you shall find, that the more men prosper in
their bad ways, the more sure they are to be destroyed, and the more fearful
shall be their destruction.

And so, Victories and Successes, such as Daniel speaks of, the Victories of
Antiochus, and such as the Holy Ghost sets down in this Chapter, the Victories
of the Beast over Christ's Saints, though we confess them to come from the hand
of God, without whose providence a sparrow cannot light upon the ground; yet we
avouch them to be no infallible signs of Gods love to the Victors, or of his
approbation of their actions to be just and blameless in his fight; when as we
know he gives the Victory to many men, and those Victors are neither approved
by God for just, nor their doings, as they are done by them, acceptable unto
God; but he does many times bate and abhor their very proceedings, even in
those things, and at that time, when himself gives them a power to prevail; and
he will in his good time, severely punish them for those their misdeeds, which
he himself, in his secret judgment, suffered them to effect, yea, and gave
them ability to bring them to pass, even, as I showed, he not only prospered
and gave the Victory to the Inhabitants of Ai, Josh. 7.5.
against the Children of Israel, and to the Tribe of Benjamin, against their
Brethren in two several Battles, but he also raised, called, anointed,
strengthened and assisted Jehu, that professed himself as zealous for the Lords
honor, as any man could be, 2 Reg. 10.
to make him as victorious over the idolatrous House of Ahab, to root out all
his Posterity, even 70. Sons at a clap, as the long Parliament has been over
the good King Charles, and his offspring, and yet the Lord says, and I would
the beast here spoken of would consider it, he Would require or avenge the
blood of Ahab, and the blood of those 70. Children, Josh. 1.4.
no doubt that were innocent, and causlesly caused to be slain, at the hands,
or upon the house of Jehu. And so without question, the just God, in his good
time, when he makes inquisition for blood, will avenge the innocent blood of
all those holy Martyrs, that has been unjustly spilt in our last War; for as
the Prophet says, right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints, and the voice of their blood does cry aloud, like Abels blood, in the
ears of the Lord, from off the Earth.

And so all their Narratives of their extraordinary Victories, and most
fortunate successes, in Ingland, Ireland and Scotland, do not prove them to be
the Saints of God, nor their doings acceptable in his sight; but they do
sufficiently prove, that they have made War with the Saints, and have
overcome them, and as the Prophet Daniel has typically prophesied of the
Beast, The Parallel. Dan. 7.25. 2 These. 2.3.
have worn out the Saints of the most high; and they may confirm the faith of
those that believe them to be the Beast here spoken of, and the great
Antichrist that is prophefied of by the Apostle.

Yet, to show the weakness of flesh and blood, and the blindness of frail man,
to understand and to judge of things, the Holy Ghost says, v. 8. that the
Victories and successes of the Beast, do so far prevail with all that dwell
upon the Earth, that is, all earthly and worldly minded men, And as H. Grotius
rightly says, morem ejus imitari.
that they are moved thereby, to worship the Beast, that is, to admire him, to
adhere unto him, and to assist him, in all his projects and persecution of the
Saints, which is done, as the spirit of God says by all those, whose names are
not written in the Book of life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
World, that is, by all carnal and worldly men, that are not enlightened with
the truth of Gods spirit.

But I would advise both them and all men else, seriously to consider, how
fearful is the condition of those Worshipers and assistants of the Beast, when
as God himself does testify, they are not in the Catalogue of Gods Children,
but are bletted out of his Book, as Reprobates to be tormented with the Beast,
in the Lake of fire, burning with brimstone for evermore.

And therefore our good God gives a Caveat to all the Servants of Christ in the
next verse, saying, if any man have an ear to hear, that is, a will and desire
to hear, let him hear, that is so attentively and considerately, that he might
rightly understand what he hears; for that is not a matter of small moment,
and slightly to be passed over, but they that have any regard of their eternal
salvation, or desire to avoid everlasting destruction, ought carefully to
examine, who are meant by the Beast, and then seriously to weigh in what sad
and lamentable condition the Worshippers and adherents of this Beast do remain
in. Then for the comfort of the persecuted, distressed and subjugated banished
Captives, and for a just reward and retaliation to the oppressing Conquerours,
Of the end and downfall of the Beast that is the body of the Antichrist.
the spirit of God adds v. 10. He that leads into Captivity, shall go into
Captivity, and he that kills with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword,
for so the word (...) signifies; and you know the Proverb, must is for the
King; truth it self has spoken it, that it must be so, and he has spoken it
often, therefore it shall undoubtedly be performed, and the Beast shall not
rule for ever, Let my Reader judge, if this Prophecy, of the downfall of the
Beast, be not now fulfilled, blessed be our good God for it.
nor the persecuted Saints be oppressed for ever, but the Saints shall be
delivered out of the hands of the Beast; and the Beast shall be excluded out of
his Dominion, and shall receive his pay, when God the just avenger of all
wrongs, and specially of all blood unjustly spilt, shall render their due
deserts, unto all the members, assistants and adherents of this outrageous
monstrous Beast, in the time that they look not for it; only, let the Saints
with patience constantly expect it, and with faith, assuredly believe it, even
as the Holy Ghost has said. Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints,
i. e. patience quietly to suffer, while they are under the rule, and the rod of
the Beast; and faith, undoubtedly to believe the dethroning and the downfall of
the Beast, which will be but the beginning of his sorrows, when as his greater
punishment and destruction is still behind; and I shall more fully declare it
unto you hereafter.

Liber Tertius.
CHAP. I. Who is to be understood by this beast of the earth, not Mahomet, nor
the Idolatrous Priests of the heathen Temple; when S. John was banished into
Patmos: That the Preachers of the antichrist, and not the Bishop of Rome and
his Clergy, but the assembly of Presbiters, Independants, and Lay Preachers are
the Prophets of the first beast; when the seed of this beast of the earth was
first sown; and when it became first apparent in these parts: and that this
beast of the earth is far worse then the first beast, that arose out of the sea.
THen, after that the Evangelist had expressed the forsaid particulars of the
seven headed and ten horned beast, 4. The vision of the second beast, which is
as the soul of the Antichrist.
he proceeds verse 11. to tell us of another vision, how he saw (...),
another beast coming out of the earth; where the holy Ghost follows the same
method, as he did with the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 8.6.13: 15.
to show him greater abomination then he had formerly seen; in as much, as the
most opposite place to heaven is the earth, and is farthest from it, and a far
baser Element then the Sea; so is this beast that rose out of the earth, far
more wicked, more odious, and more abominable in the fight of God, and all good
men, then the other, that arose out of Sea, as the Sequel of what we read in
this thirteenth Chapter, will make it plain unto you.

But first we are to inquire, who is to be understood by this beast, Who is to
be understood by this beast of the earth.
that can be worst then that beast that ascended from the bottomless pit, and
is the same with the great Antichrist; And I find some Divines, as Rupertus and
others, that think this beast of the earth, and the other beast of the sea, to
be the same beast, that first rose out of the sea, Not the same with the beast
that rose out of the sea.
and then was seen again to spring out of the earth. But the description of
this beast and his actions likewise, do so far differ from the first beast,
that it cannot be the same; especially considering the Evangelist says
plainly, it was (...), another beast; therefore not the same with the former;
And yet, as the soul and body, that are not the same, do notwithstanding
constitute and make up one and the same man; so does this beast and the other
former beast make up the same man of sin, and the same great Antichrist; this
being as the form, that as the matter, this as the soul, that as the body, of
that grand enemy of Jesus Christ.

Whence you may perceive, that as the definition of the soul, It is hard to
find out this terren Camelion beast.
and the faculties thereof, is far more difficult to be explicated, then that
of the body, so it is a more intricate work to find out, and to unkennel this
beast, amongst the thickets of the earth, then it was to find the other, that
arose ex plane, from the smooth and plain sea; Jerem. 16.16.
but, as the Prophet Jeremy shows, the Lord has many bunters, and by the
help of these divine hunters, I shall bring him out of his lurking holes, take
off his mask from his face, and bring him forth to be apparently seen before
your eyes, if you please to view him, and to take notice of him, who other wise
may bite you sore, ere you be aware of him.

Lyranus, 1. Some understand Mahomet.
Aureolus and Dominicus a Soto do, by the first beast, that rose out of the
sea, understand Synnochius, or Siroe, the son of Cosroe, King of Persia, that
slew Anastatius and 70. other innocent Monks besides; and by this beast that
rose out of the earth, they understand Mahomet, the false Prophet, that left
his wicked Alcoran for his followers Bible, and was indeed worse then
Synnochius, and did more mischief unto the Christians, then he, or any other
single Tyrant or false Prophet did; and he reigned (as they say) until the year
of Christ, 666. which is here said to be the number of the beast, and the very
letters of his name, written in Greek, the language in which Saint John wrote,
Zonaras annal l. 3. Montagu appello Caesar. page 151.
do make up, (as both Cedrenus and Zonaras say) the number 666. to an hair,
thus, 40. 1. 70. 40. 5. 300. 10. 200. m. a. o m. e t. i. which is in all, 666.
as I showed you before, and he pretended to work great miracles, as the holy
Ghost says, this beast seemed to do; Cornel. a lapide in H. loc. The 10
miracles of Mahomet. Sicut sydus radium, profert Virgo filium pariforma, neque
Sydus raaio, neque matter film, Sir corrupta, which is most true of the blessed
Virgin, and most false of that impostors mother.
and of those miracles of Mahomet, the Sarazens, that profess his religion,
do, as Cornelins a Lapide says, set down these ten.

1. That his mother, which was a Jew, brought him forth, after his father
Abdalla died, (for he was a posthumus) as the Sun shines through a glass,
without pain, as the blessed Virgin did our Savior Christ, without the loss of
her Virginity.

2. That, at his birth, as soon as ever he was born, all the idols of the
Gentiles fell, like Dagon, unto the ground, as the Sybills prophesied they
shoud do at the birth of Christ.

3. That Lucifer was then likewise thrown down to be drowned into the depth of
the Ocean.

4. That all the winds and the clouds did strive about his education and his
bringing up; for his mother, left a Widow, was but a very poor woman, and died
when he was but two years old.

5. That an Ass, like Baalams Ass, with humane voice, styled him sigillum
Prophetarum, the Seal, that confirmed and should ratify all the prophefies of
the prophets.

6. That a dark cloud, though the Heavens should be never so clear, did always
hover and hang over his head.

7. That the Moon, seeming to the beholders to be divided into two parts, he
compacted and joined them together.

8. That an Angel did usually talk and confer with him.

9. That a figtree, called out by him, bowed himself most lowly unto him.

10. That an Ox and a Lamb spoke unto him, as to the greatest of all the
Messengers of God. These are the ten lying wonders, that are suggested by his
followers to be the miracles of Mahomet.

But, notwithstanding the multsplicity of these forged and feigned miracles of
this great Impostor, Suarez and Perorius do sufficiently prove, that Mahomet
could neither be this beast nor the Antichrist; And the Histories do show that
he began his reign, Or in 631. 2^ Sir Walter Raleigh says, p. 24.
in Anno. 620. and died in the year 630. as Cedrenns says, or in Anne. 637. as
Palmerius says, having reigned, as all Writers do agree, just ten years; and
so he continued not to the year 666. as Lyra and Soto do affirm.

Others, with whom our Learned Paraphraster upon the New Testament, Dr.
Hammond, following the acute Grotius, understanding the heathen idolatrous
worship of the Romans to be signified by the first beast, 2. others do
understand this beast to be the idolatrous Priests of the heathen temples.
Philostrat. l. 5. c. 5.
do conceive this second beast to signify the Priests and Prophets of the idol
Temples, that gave the answers of those deceitful Oracles, who were Sorcerers
and Magicians, as was Simon Magus, that grand Magician and proto-impostor, and
Apollonius Tianaeus, that pretended to do very many, and very great wonders,
and did call down (in appearance) fire from Heaven, as Philostratus writes,
and as the holy Ghost says this beast should do.

And that which made these learned men, as I conceive, to make Caius Caligula
to be that man of sin, which the Apostle speaks of, 2. These 2. and Simon Magus
to be understood verse 8. that should then be revealed when Caligula should be
taken away. And to interpret the first beast here spoken of, chap. 13. to
signify the idolatry of the Romish people, and this second beast to signify
Apollon. Tyanaeus and the like Magicians, and followers of their idolatry,
was; because they saw how sondly, and without any probability, or show of any
solid ground, the most of our Presbyterians do expound both places of the Pope
of Rome, to make him to be the great and egregious Antichrist.

Therefore they found such an interpretation as is far more likely and more
agreeable to the Texts, then is the interpretation of the Presbyterians.

But we may not confute one error, with another error, Alios ita lego ut
quantalibet sanctitate, doctrinaque prepolleant, non idea ver^ putem, sed quia
mihi vel per illos autores canonicos, vel probabili ratione quod a vero non
abhorreat, persuadere potuerunt. Ang. ad Hierom. ep. 16. That St. John was not
banished by Claudius Caesar.
and bring in one falsehood to thrust out another falsehood, which is but to
change one evil for another, and by shunning the fire to fall into the water.

And therefore though I very much reverence Grotius, and do much love and honor
our worthy Doctor for his learning, and great pains in Gods Vineyard; yet I
cannot assent unto him in many of his Expositions upon this book of the
Revelation, nor especially that St. John was banished to Patmos by Claudius
Caesar, as he would faign prove out of Epiphanius, when as the most Orthodox
and the best Authors that I have read, both old and new, as well Protestants as
Papists, do believe the testimony of Irenaeus, and assent to his opinion, that
lived long before Epiphanius, and therefore could better inform us of the time
of his banishment then Epiphanius could, that he wrote this Revelation in the
later end of Domitiani reign; and Doctor Hammonds reason to confirm his
supposition, does no ways infringe the allegation of Irenaeus, which is, the
banishment of all the Jews out of Rome by Clandius Caesar; for though Claudius
banished them out of Rome; yet we do not find that he confined any of them to
this or that place, but rather gave them liberty to go to dwell where they
pleased, so they departed out of Rome, as it appears by Aquila and Priscilla,
that were driven out of Rome, Act. 18.2.
but were permitted to go to inhabit where they would; and therefore these, and
the rest of the Visions of this book, that were, after the revealing of them,
to be fullfilled, cannot be understood to be referred to any times or persons
before Domitians time. And though the holy Ghost says, these Revelations were
of things (...), Revel. 1.1. v. 3.
which must shortly or suddenly come to pass, and that (...), the time i. e.
of their fullfilling is at hand; yet does not this any way prove, but that many
of them might continue unfulfilled to these our times, and many remain to be
accomplished after our time, in the ages that are yet to come; because all the
time from the first coming of Christ on earth, to the second coming of Christ
to the last judgment, which is the last Age of the World, is termed by this
our Apostle, (...) the last hour; John. 2.18. Pet. 4.7.
and by St. Peter it is called (...), the last time. And he says further,
(...), the end of all things is at band; and St. Paul says, (...), yet a very
little little while, Heb. 10.37.
he that is to come, will come, and will not tarry. And Christ, speaking of his
coming to the last judgment, as appears plainly by the manner of his coming,
with his reward with him, to render unto every man according as his work shall
be, uses the very same word, as is here alleged for the speedy fullfilling of
these Prophesies, Revel. ult. v 12.
saying, (...), behold, I come suddenly: and therefore whenever any of these
Visions is or shall be fulfilled, it is shortly and suddenly absque mora,
without delay, even as the holy Ghostsaith.

And he that would see this error of Grotius more fully discovered and
confuted, Mares. p. 169.
let him look into Maresius in his dissertati^ de antichrist^, where he shall
find the truth of what I say more largely and most excellently confirmed.

And so Hyppolitus Carocotta says, Epiphan. heresi Alogor. c. 33.
that the authority of Epiphanius, who in the herefie of the Alogors, affirms
St. John to be in Patmos, and to have written this Revelation, in the time of
Claudius, is of no validity. And he further says that solenne est Epiphanio
caespitare in Historia, Epiphanius fails often in the History, and he shows
how Petavius the Jesuit notes in the Margin, Epiphanium mendose Claudium
posuisse pro Domitiano; and then produces St. Hierom. de script. Eccles. and
Eusebius in Chron. and Baronius that puts this his banishment in the ninth
year of Domitian, Baron an. Christi 92. Sect. 1. Three others understand by
this beast the preachers of the Antichrist. Bellar. l. 3. c. 15. de romans
pontifice. Junius annot. c. 13.11. and in c. 17.12.
which was 35. years after the death of Claudius.

But to return to this beast, other learned men, as St. Greg. Aretas, Rupertus,
and as Bellarm says, Richardus, Anselmus, and Haymo, by this (...), the beast
that rose out of the earth, do understand, the Preachers and Proclaimers of the
greatness, and the worthiness of the Antichrist. And so Junius likewise (in
his Annotations) says, it signifies the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, quam
pseudo prophetissam vocat; and further adds, that a Johanne pseudo prophetae
appellatione donatur; the Evangelist St. John calls this very beast the false
prophet, as you may see in cap. 16.13. and cap. 19.20. therefore this beast
must signify some Preachers that pretend to reach the ways and will of God
unto the people. And truly I am in part of Junius his opinion: and I do
subscribe to the judgment of the aforesaid Fathers, that by this beast, we are
to understand some Ecclesiastical Persons, that undertake the preaching of Gods
word, either lawfully called, or illegally intruding themselves into the Sacred
Function of the Ministry; and both sorts most wickedly corrupting the truth,
and seducing the flock of Christ; and so Irenaeus, one of the most Ancient
Interpreters of this book of the Apocalypse, has observed; and it will so
appear to any one, that will compare cap. 13. v. 13.14.15.16. where you may
see, how this beast is subservient to the other beast, with the 19. chap. v.
20. where the other ten horned beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet,
that wrought miracles before him, and with which he deceived them that had
received the mark of the beast; Mr Mede. p. 65.
So this beast is none other then the false prophet. And so Mr. Mr Mede. p. 65.
Mede takes this beast to signify some Ecclesiastical Persons, and so do I.

But with their favor, I take them not, as Junius takes them, for the Roman
Clergy, nor as Mr. Mede means, for the Pope and his Cardinals, which is the
same that Junius meant: This second beast exercises all the power of the first
beast. c. 13.12. but the Pope exercises his own power.
but I say that this beast cannot signify these men; because the practice of
this beast does no ways agree with those Prelates, nor those Prelates of the
Roman Church do any whit cohere with the particulars of those things, that are
here mentioned to be acted by this beast; for the Pope and the Cardinals of
Rome, as all men know, and our men tax them for it, do exercise their own
power, and use their own authority, and not the power of the other beast, which
Junius and his followers make to be the Romans civil state, or imperial dignity;
and those Prelates say, as you may obviously see it in Bellarm. Becanus, and
the rest of that Church, that as the Moon borrows her light from the Sun, so
should the Civil state take and receive all her directions and form of
Government from the Church, and the Governors of the Church, of which they
pretend to be the chief.

Pope and his Cardinals to be this second Beast, that they exercised the Power
of the first Beast, when the Empire was weakened, and the Civil State decayed,
and the Power of the Emperors was so usurped and transferred unto the Pope;
because this Power, which they now unjustly exercise, was the just Power of the
Emperor, and of other Kings, whom the Pope and his Cardinals subjected,
Volater. l 22. Authropolog in Alexand. 3. Hoveden and Math. Paris in Reg. Joh.
ursburgens. in Fred. 1.
as the Histories do relate, unto themselves.

second Beast took away, and usurped the Power and Authority of the first
Beast, but did all Acts, and exercised all his jurisdiction and his function,
by virtue of the power, and under the protection and the countenance, that he
received by and from the authority of the first beast; as the Sheriff
exercises the power of the King, for the service of the King; for so the words
do plainly intimate, that this two horned Beast exercised the Power of the
former beast, (...), in the presence of him, or before him; that is, for the
service, and to the use and behoof of the former Beast; because that (...), In
conspectu Jehovae, says Tremelius. 1 Samuel 2.18.
is here equivalent to (...), the dative case, as when it is said that Samuel
was (...), Ministering in the presence of the Lord, or before the Lord; it
signifies, as it is also expressed, Cap. 3. 1. that he was (...), Ministering
to the Lord; so this second Beast exercised all the Power of the first Beast,
(...), to the use, service, and setting forward the practices and designs of
the first Beast: and this appears very clear from the words immediately
following; in that this second Beast causes the Earth, and them that dwell
therein, (...), Cap. 13.12.
that they should worship the first Beast; that is, not to ascribe any Divine
Honor, but to submit themselves, to obey, and to serve, and assist the first
Beast.

And we know the Pope and his Cardinals, and so all the Roman Clergy, That the
Bishop of Rome and his Clergy cannot be meant by the second Beast.
cause all the Rulers of the Earth, and all the Iuhabitants thereof to worship,
Honor, and serve themselves, as those that are most worthy of Honor, for the
care that they take to save the souls of the people, rather and before the
other Beast, that is, the Civil Magistrate, which cares only for our
Temporal estates, and the things of this present life: and therefore deserves
not so much worship as the other, that by the Testimony of the Apostle, are
worthyer of double Honor; because they labor to bring us to eternal life; in
which respect we find how the Popes exacted, Plat^na in vita ejus French Epit.
p. 93.
and required the greatest Kings and Emperors to serve and to worship them, as
Gregory the third did to Leo Iconomachus, Gregory the seventh to Henry the
fourth, Pope Zachary the first, to Childerick King of France, Allexander the
third, to Frederick Barbarossa, Celestine the third, to Henry the sixth, Speed,
in the life of King John. Hoveden, Annal. p. 2. sub. Rich. 1.
Innocent, to King John, Adrian the fourth, that made the Emperor to hold his
stirrup, and the like, that you may find in the Annalls, and the lives of the
Kings and the Emperors; and therefore questionless the Pope, Cardinals, and
Clergy of Rome cannot be understood by this second Beast.

But all, that is here specified and spoken of the second Beast, The Parallel.
That the Assembly of Presbyterians, and the Independent and Lay Preachers of
the Parliament are the second Beast, and the false Prophet.
does in every particular point agree, and most aptly cohere with the
Parliaments Heter^geniall and La^dicean Assembly of Divines, that sat at
Westminster, together with their dispersed Disciples, wheresoever inhabiting
within these Kingdoms, and with the swarm of Independent and Lay-Preachers,
that sprang up since the beginning of that Parliament; for, these Presbyterian
Divines, that, contrary to their Oaths, contrary to the Commands of their
King, and contrary to their Faith, given in the presence of God, and in Gods
House, when they were admitted to Holy Orders; and the rest of the Independent
and Lay-Preachers, have, as the Text says, exercised all the Power of the
Parliament: they sat in Westminster under the wings of the Parliament, and with
the rest of their Associates, wheresoever dispersed, trusting to the Power and
Protection of the Parliament, they Preached, Consulted, and Determined all
things by the Power and Authority, and for the service, and advancement, and
behoof of the Parliament; for the overthrowing of the King, See also what the
Author of the last Will and Testament of Sir John Presbyter says. Edwards in
his Gangraena, p. 26.
the rooting out of the Bishops, and the utter defacing of Gods Church. And I
think all the people of this Land knows this to be so true, that I need not
use any argument to confirm it; and so the Independent Sectaries do avouch,
that the Presbyterian Government is the false Prophet, and the Beast here
spoken of; and the third part of the great City, Revel. 16.19. and on the
other side, the proud Presbyterians do as confidently aver that the
Independants and Lay-Preachers are this Beast; and so Clodius accusat moechum,
Catelina Caethegum. and I out of their own mouths will take it pro confesso,
and conclude them both to be parts constitutivas, the chiefest constituting
parts that make up the second Beast, That the false Prophet is three fold^
and the false Prophet.

And this false Prophet is like the three-headed Cerberus, consisting of three
special branches, or three sort of Preachers, 1. The Presbyterians. And, to
begin with the last. 2. The Independants. And, to begin with the last. 3. The
Lay Preachers. And, to begin with the last.


1. The Lay Preachers may rightly be said to be one of the heads of Cerberus,
and the false Prophet, in two special respects. 1. In respect of his eutrance
into his Office; 2. In respect of his ignorance, to discharge the duties of his
Office. For,


1. 1. The Lay Preacher a false Prophet in two respects. 1. His unjust
entrance. Malach. 2.7.
that the Priest is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts; and the Apostle tells
us, that no man takes this Honor unto himself, that is, to be a Messenger,
and an Ambassador sent from God, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron;
and how was Aaron called?

First, by the inward inspiration of Gods Spirit.

Secondly, least he should be mistaken in the inspiration of the Spirit,
because there are many spirits, by the appointment and Ordination of Moses,
that had his Authority from God, to approve of his Vocation, and to confirm him
in his Priestly Office: thus was Aaron called; and yet more then this; Heb. 5.4.
the Apostle says, that Christ himself, who is the wisdom of God, yet
glorified not himself, to he made an High Priest, but he that said unto him,
thou art a Priest for ever, Verse 5.
after the Order of Melchisedech.

And therefore none ought, like these Lay Preachers, thrust himself into the
Office of a Priest, or Minister of God, but such as are Lawfully Called, and
sufficiently allowed, and approved by them that have their Authority from God,
as Moses had to confirm Aaron, to be Ministers of Christ; because they are, as
the Apostle terms them, Ambassadors of Christ; and you know every Ambassador
must have his lawful Commission, or else he shall be taken for an impostor,
and a seducer; as he that came from the King of Ingland to the States of the
Low Countries, As the Answerer of W. Apollonius testifies.
and was sumptuously entertained the first day, but, being found an impostor,
was clapped up in prison the next day; which is the just reward of Intruders.

Therefore the Apostlos and Disciples of Christ, though filled with the Spirit
of Christ, in a far greater measure then the best of these Lady Preachers, yet
went they not to Preach the Gospel, Matthew. 10.5.28.19. Marck 16.15. John 20,
21.
until they had an outward injunction, and Commission from Christ, as you may
see in Matthew. 20.5, and 28.29. Mark 16.15. John 20.21. where our Savior says,
as my Father sent me, even so send I you; which is a plain and a full
Commission to them; that they were no intruders into the Sacred Function.

And so, after the Ascension of Christ, we never find that any of the true
Servants of God did ever undertake this calling, to be the Ambassador of
Christ, and a Public Preacher of Gods word, but such as were Lawfully allowed,
and Canonically Ordained to that Function, by those that had a lawful
Authority to admit them.

And that Ordination of them consisted chiefly of these two parts. 2. Things
requisite in the Ordination of Priests:
1. Fervent prayers. As you may see in Acts 6.6. 2. Imposition of hands. As you
may see in Acts 6.6.


Where the seven Deacons are set before the Apostles, and when they had prayed,
they laid their hands on them: so Timothy was ordained by Prophecy, with the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; 1 Timothy 4.14.
and least we should mistake his meaning, as the Presbyterians do, by making
this place their bulwark, to protect their new erected Presbytery, St. Paul
shows what he means by the hands of the Presbytery, when in the singular
number, he says, I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God,
which is in thee, 2 Timothy 1.6.
by the putting on of my hands: because he had the sole Power of Ordination
residing in him; though, as the Bishops now, following his example, do use to
call two or three grave Ministers for their assistance, so he called the
Presbytery, that is, some other of the Elder Ministers, to lay their hands
with him, as he joyneth Sylvanus and Timotheus with himself, 1 These. 1.1.
in his Salutation to the Thessalonians. And so, because Timothy was Ordained
to be the first Bishop of Ephesus, as not only the postscript of his second
Epistle testifies, but also Eusebius, and all other Ecclesiesticall Writers,
without any contradiction, do affirm; St. Paul charge him in particular, as
whom it particularly concerned, to lay hands suddenly on no man; that is, 1 Timothy 5.22.
not rashly and carelessly to admit any kind of men to be the Ministers of Jesus
Christ; but advisedly to consider, What the Primitive Church Ordered should be
done about the Ordination of Priests.
and Religiously to Ordain such as he found most fitting for so High a Calling.

And therefore according to this Charge of the Apostle to Bishop Timothy, the
Bishops of the Primitive Church, and the immediate successors of the Apostles
took such special care, to provide worthy Ministers for Gods Church, that in
imitation of the Apostles, Acts. 14.23.

1. They Appointed and Ordained, that the whole Church, that is, 1. Thing.
all the faithful people of God, that Professed to believe in Christ, should
observe four Ember weeks in every year, wherein all the Christians should
Fast, and Pray to God, that he would vouchsafe to send them godly and able
Ministers; because that

2. They Ordained, that each Bishop, on the next Lords day, 2. Thing.
after each Ember week, should, with the assistance of some of his Grave
Clergy, Ordain such as they found most fitting, and worthy of this High
Calling; and I fear that the neglect of the performance of this duty of Prayer
and Fasting on those Ember weeks, among the people, have produced such defects
as be in many Ministers; and perhahs the Bishops, as well as the people, were
not all so careful, and so circumspect as they ought to have been, in the
Ordination of their Clergy; for, as you may see in the 1 Timothy 3.10. and in
Titus, 1.5.6. 1 Timothy 3.10. Tit. 1.5, and 6.
those that were to be admitted Priests or Deacons, were to be proved and
examined, and being found blameless, and qualified, as the Apostle requires in
the foresaid places; prayers were to be made for them, The great care taken in
former times, in the Ordination of Priests and Deacons.
and hands to be laid on them, and then Authority was given unto them, to
execute that Holy Fuction; so great was the care, that was formerly used in the
Ordination of Priests and Deacons, and no man durst presume to intrude himself
into this Holy Office, nor any man was suffered to execute these Functions, but
such as were thus Religiously Ordained.

And no wonder; fot this calling, being fo transeendently high, non collectio
pecuniarum, not the gathering of Rents, or the Kings Revenues, but custodia
animarum the care and custody of men's souls, which are the living images of the
Eternal God; The great care that should be taken in ordaining priests and
Deocons.
and which is, onus Angelicis humeris formidandum, a burden, says S. Hierome,
that is able to make Angels shoulders to shrink under it? so heavy, that St.
Paul cries out, (...)? who is sufficient for these things?

And the Lord God himself shows unto Moses, what care ought to be had, in the
choosing, approving and sanctifying of them, that were to serve at his Altar;
for Aaron and his sons, that were but types and figures of the Evangelical
Priests, were to be consecrated seven days together, and a bullock was to be
offered for a sin offering every day, Exodus 29.35.
before they were admitted to administer in their office.

Jewish Rites and shadows, that are vanished with their temple; and therefore
no ways pertaining to us Christians; Heb. 10.
which was the shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the
things, Type and figure of the New Testament, The things of the old Test. types
of the things that should be done in the New Testament. 1 Cor. 13.12.
and the Gospel; not only, in the Legal Sacrifices, that were, but the shadows
of the True Sacrifice Jesus Christ; but also in most of the ritual things and
Ceremonies, that are mentioned to be used about the Service of God in the Old
Testament, whose soul or substance should be far more transcendently employed
in the service of God, under the New Testament, for as the New Testament, and
the service of God under it, is the very express image of the Celestial and
Heavenly things, and a figure of those things that we shall see in Heaven; as
St. Paul teaches; so those things, that chanced and were commanded to be
observed in the Synagogne of the Jews, were types and figures of these things,
that should be done in the Church of Christ; Gal. 3.24. (...). Nazianz. inorat.
de S. pas: cha.
and they are termed pedagogia ad Christum; introductions leading us unto
Christ: and Greg. Nazianzene calls the Old Testament: vallum quoddam inter
Deum and idola medium; a certain trench, or wall set indifferently betwixt God
and idols; so as we might pass by that, from the idell unto God, and from the
Law, as from the Sampler, unto the verity, from the figure to the thing, and
from the shadow to the substance.

And therefore the Apostle, in many places, cites the old Law for the very
figure of the New; Deuteronomy. 25.4
as where it is written in the Law, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox
that treads out the corn, he says, this was written for us, 1 Cor. 9. and 9.
that live under the Gospel, to teach us, that God would have the Lay men to
relieve their spiritual Pastors; and where he says, that Hagar and Mount Sinay
did represent the old Law, Gal. 4.24.
and Ismael the Jewesh Synagogue; and on the other side, Sarah and Jerusalem
fignified the Gospel, and Isaac represented the Church of Christ; and again,
where he says, that the fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed
through the sea, and all were baptized by Moses in the cloud, 1 Cor. 10.1.3.4.
and all did eat the same spiritual meat; and then he adds, haec omnia in
figura contigerunt illis, that all these things happened to them in a figure,
to fignifie the baptism, that we receive, and the spiritual food, that we take
in the blessed Eucharist under the New Testament; 1 Pet. 3.20. and 21. The
Cerem. sanctisying of the old Test. Priests, was a type of the sanctity
required in the ordaining of the priests of the New Test.
and St. Peter likewise shows how Noah's Ark, was a Type and a figure of our
baptism.

And so I say, that the Ceremonial sanctifying of the Priests of the old Law,
was but atype and a figure of that true and real sanctity and holiness, and
spiritual indowments, that are requifite to be in the Priests of the New
Testament.

Or, if our novices and Lay-intruders into this sacred Function, be not so
learned, as to understand types and figures, nor so quick-fighted as to
perceive things spoken in enigmate; then let them look into the New Testament,
and they shall find there, how our Savior Christ, Luke 6.12.
before the choosing of his Apostles, continued all night in prayer: and when
it was day, he called his Disciples, and out of them he chose 12. Apostles: and
was not this done for our instruction, to teach us, what we should do, before
we send forth Preachers, and Priests, to feed the flock of Christ? and after
his Resurrection, Luke 24.50.
before he sent his Apostles to preach, he lifted up his hands and blessed
them; and St. John says, he breathed on them, and said, receive ye the holy
Ghost; John 20.22.
and when the holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work
whereunto I have called them, the other Prophets and Teachers, which were
Simon, and Lucius, and Manaen, fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them,
Acts 13.3.
and then sent them away, to discharge their Function.

And so, as I told you, all the Primitive Bishops, and Fathers of the Church,
in imitation of Christ and his Apostles, have observed the same course, Acts
14.23.
of fasting and prayers, and imposition of hands, before they send any man to
be the Preaecher and Minister of any Parish; so careful were they heretofore in
this point, to see that no unlearned or unworthy person should be admitted to
be the servant and Ambassador of Christ, to declare his message, to administer
at his Table, to dispense his graces, and to be the shepherd to feed his flock,
which are Offices of so high an esteem; for if man will not receive every kind
of person, especially, such as he knows to be vain, vicious or idle, that
offers himself to be his servant; shall we think that God will accept of
every one, Ignatius in epist ad Smyrnenses.
that will presumptuovsly thrust himself to be the Ambassador of Jesus Christ?
no, questionless, and therefore Ignatius, that was Bishop of Antioch, in the
Apostles time, next after Evodius, writing to the Smyrnenses, or Church of
Symrna, says, Let no man do any thing appertaining, to the Church, Yea, let
not the Administration of the Eucharist, that is the Lords Supper, be lawful,
but by the Bishop, or by him that is admitted and has his authority from the
Bishop. God foretells us of these intruders, that we might shun them. Jerem.
23.21.


And yet, he that before all time foresaw these times, God himself, and Christ
himself tells us, that many false prophets would intrude themselves into his
service, and many false Apostles would very presumptuously thrust themselves
into the Ministry; for the Lord says, I have not sent these Prophets, yet
they run, that is more greedily then the true Prophets, that do know the weight
of this heavy churge; and again he says, I have not spoken to them, yet they
prophesied; therefore their preaching must needs be vain and erroneous; Jerem.
14.14.
and so the Lord testifies, saying, they prophecy lies in my name, for I sent
them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I unto them; but they
prophecy unto you a false vision, and divination, and a thing of naught, and
the deceits or devices of their own bearts: And our Savior says, Matthew.
24.24. ver. 5. ver. 11.
there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall show great
signs, and shall deceive many, and if it were possible, the very Elect; for
they will come, as he says, in his name, that is, profess themselves to
besent from him, and to be his most faithful servants, and the very Saints of
God; and thereby they shall deceive the people, which otherwise, if they came
in Mahomets name, or in the Popes name, they could not prevail to deceive them;
and St. Paul says, this I know, that after my departure shall grievous wolves
enter in among you, not sparing the flock; also of your own selves, that is,
questionless, among the Lay people, shall men arise, and not be sent, speaking
perverse things, Act. 20.29.
to draw away disciples after them; and these are the young novices and Lay
Trades men, that as St. John says, went from us, but were never of us, that
is, neither called nor approved by us, but, intruding themselves into our
Office, and separating themselves from the old way, which, as the Prophet
says, Jerem. 6.16.
is the good way, do preach strange doctrines, to gather to themselves Churches
out of the Church of Christ, and to lead them out of the fold of Christ, unto
the dens of the destroyer, from whence, as out of Cacus den, vestigia nullae
retrorsum; there can be no deliverance without great repentance.

Saint Peter likewise says, 2 Peter 2.1.
that as there were false Prophets amongst the people of the Jews, so there
should be false Teachers among us, who privily should bring in damnable
heresies, and many shall follow their pernicious ways; and these be our
itinerant Preachers, that wander from Parish to Parish, and go from house to
house, and so privily, as the Apostle says, do lead men into Schisms and most
damnable heresies; and of these Saint Jude prophesied, saying, Jude, v. 12, and
13.
that they were wandering stars without light, and clouds without water, carried
away with the wind.

Nay, more then all this, St. Paul tells us, the time would come, as we see now
it is come, when men would not endure to hear sound Doctrine, but after their
own lusts should heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears, which they
shall turn away from the truth unto fables: 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
for, if you search all times, from St. Paul's time to these very times, I would
fain know when was there such heaps of Teachers, and such an inhibition to
hear the truth, and to Preach sound Doctrine, as now it is? for, whereas before
the Teachers of errors and heresies were not endured; now, very few
Congregations where I live, are permitted to be content, and to enjoy their old
settled, and well known Pastors, but they must have some wandering stars to
inlighten them, and such Teachers to instruct them, as neither understand the
state of the Flocks, which we should be careful to know, as Solomon says,
Prove. 27.23. nor know the diseases of the sheep; and therefore must needs be
ignorant, how to apply any remedies to them, lest they should give them poison
in stead of medicines.

And if the old Doctors, and the Faithful Ministers of Christ undertake to
Preach, they are affronted, as I foreshewed, and so threatened and terrified,
that the people are afraid to hear them; whereby you may see, that, as the
Apostle says, the sound Doctrine, and True Service of God cannot be endured to
be heard; by reason of such heaps of false Prophets, and wandering stars, that
are sprung up amongst us.

And yet our Savior tells you, how these false Teachers should come unto you,
How the false Prophets deal with the people, and exclaim against true Prophets.
in sheep clothing, that is, with smooth flattering speeches, pretending
that they come for your salvation; but withal, he tells you, that in very
deed, they are inwardly ravening wolves, and their ways lead you to
destruction: for they speak you fair, and cry out against the trus Governors
of Gods Church, that never admitted such intruders to be Gods Ministers; and
they roar and rail against all the Learned Preachers of the Gosspell, as if
wisdom, and knowledge, and learning, were odious unto God, and to be excluded
out of Heaven, where they think none shall come, but folly, and ignorance, 2 Chronicles. 18.23.
and simplicity; and therefore they smite their Governors, and these Learned
men, on the cheeks, as Zedechia did to Michaiah, that is, they throw dirt in
their faces, and beslubber their reputation, with most scandalous aspersions,
that they are Popish, superstitious, and the very limbs of the Antichrist: and
that they have not Gods Spirit, which they presume to know, as if they were of
Gods Counsel; and all is to no other end, then to seduce the people to
renounce their true Pastors, as they have now done, and to take them for their
gracious Protectors.

But, How King Philip sought to seduce the Athenians, and how Demosthenes
prevented him.
let the people take heed, lest these new Teachers deal with them, as Philip
of Macedon intended, as Demosthenes said, to deal with the Athenians, when,
before he Warred upon them, he sent unto them word, that all his quarrel was
against their Philosophers and Orators, that suggested rebellions, and
disobedience unto the people; and therefore, if they would renounce them,
apprehend them, and transmit them unto him, he would become their true friend,
and loving Patron; whereupon, the learned Orator told the Athenians, that the
wolves, on a time, sent unto the sheep, to tell them, that their shepherds dogs
hunted them, and worried them, and very often bit them sore, and sometimes
killed them; and therefore advised them, to lay hold upon their dogs, and send
them bound to them, and so they should be freed from their persecutors, and
they would become their friends, to protect them from all dangers; whereupon,
the silly sheep, being glad to be freed from their dogs, and itching after
novelties, and desirous to make trial of their new masters, found a way to
catch their dogs, and so delivered all their faithful preservers unto the
faithless wolves, who, as soon as ever they got the dogs into their hands, fell
upon the sheep, without resistance, and destroyed them all at their pleasure,
without pity; even so, said Demosthenes, will King Philip deal with you, when
you have delivered your learned Philosophers, and grave Orators into his
hands; and he was herein a very true Prophet.

And I pray God these false Prophets, upstart novices, and unlawful, unlicenced
intruders into the sacred calling of the Ministry, deal not so or worse with
our people; for if the blind lead the blind, Matthew. 15.14.
both must needs fall into the ditch; if young ignorant Scholars lead old
ignorant men, both must fall into new and old errors, and if the tradesmen
teach the husbandmen, and the countrymen teach the citizens, and the soldiers
teach them both the way to heaven; I fear they will but walk apace toward
hell; when as this is but the devils new policy to obstruct the old way of
verity, and a hellish trick to put out the heavenly light; for, as Moses tells
the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32.17.
that their new Gods that came newly up, whom their fathers feared not, were
but old devils; so I may truly say, that these new teachers are but old
bereticks and false Prophets, and their new lights are but ignis fatuus,
infernal torches to lead the people to everlasting darkness. do in this case,
when such men, as have not been lawfully called, shall come to preach unto us,
and to do the service of the Lord?

Jeremy advises you, and as our Savior Christ counsels you; believe them
not; and because faith comes by hearing, the Prophet tells you, thus says the
Lord of Hosts, hearken not unto the words of these Prophets, that speak visions
of their own heart; Jerem. 12.6. Matthew. 24.26. Jerem. 23.16. John 10.5. What
the Cocarrice uses to do.
and our Savior says, my sheep will not follow a stranger, neither will they
know a strangers voice: but they will stop their ears as the Cocatrice, that
will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely, but will lay
one ear close unto the ground, and stop the other ear with her tail, that she
may not be charmed with his sweetest music; so should we deal with those
Preachers, that are not lawfully admitted to be the Ministers of Gods word; for
as a little Colloquiutida spoiled all the pot of pottage, 2 Reg. 4.40.
that the children of the Prophets cried out, mors in olla, and a little poison
infects the whole mess of meat; so a few dangerous errors are able to destroy
many of the hearers of these Preachers.

And therefore, as it is not safe to taste of a poisoned dish, so it is
dangerous to hear an heretical or schismatical Preacher; and as the Lord
demands of them, quis requisivit haec? who has required these things at your
hands? Psalm. 50.16,
and again, why take thou my laws in thy mouth, that is to preach them unto
my people, when as thou hate to be reformed, that is, to go the right way to
do thy work? so Christ bids us, to take heed how we hear, Mark 4.24.
and so consequently to take heed what we hear, and whom we hear; for as it is
a fin in them, to run to preach; unbidden, and unsent; without a warrant, and
without commission; so it is a sin in us, to be partakers of other men's sins,
and we make our selves as guilty in hearing them, as they are in preaching to
us; because they would not preach to us, if we did not hear them; and the same
God that forbids them to preach that are unsent, forbids us to bear them that
are unauthorized; for they that come in by the window, and not by the door,
that is the usual, accustomed and ordinary way to come to any house, John 10.
they are thieves and robbers says our Savior Christ; and Chemnitius, whom
Brightman says was prophesied of in the Revelation of Saint John, to be the
giver of a mighty wound unto the Antichrist, says, certum est, ex verb Dei
neminem in Ecclesia audiendum esse, qui non legitime sit vocatus; it is certain
out of the word of God, that we ought to hear none in the Church, which is not
lawfully called; Chemnit. loc. com. de Eccles. page 129.1. Clemens in epi ad
Corinth. de success. ministrorum.
imo Ecclesia non debent, nec possunt cum fructu audire eos, qui non habent
legitimae voeationis testimonia; nay, says he, the Churches ought not, nor can
they with any fruit hear them, which have not the testimonials of their lawful
calling: and if you look into Saint Clemens, which lived about the year of
Christ 113. you shall find him to be of the same mind; and therefore the Church
ordained, that Priests and Deacons should not depart from one Diocese to
another, without letters demissary from their Diocessans, that the Churches
might not be deceived by them; but be sure of lawful Ministers.

O but the people are glad to be eased, and to be freed from those large
Salaries and payments of their tithes and offerings, which they were wont to
pay to their old Pastors, and do esteem it better to have the word of God
brought unto them by these men, that do it, as the Apostles did it, freely,
then by those that look so plentifully to be rewarded for it.

To this Saint August. briefly answers, that neither the covetous worldling,
nor the miserable Christian shall go free, but, quod non capit Christus, rapit
fiscus; Hag. 1.16.
what the Minister of Christ shall not get, the soldier, and perhaps thine
enemy will have; and what they have by their exchange, they may, ere long, well
put it, as the Prophet says, into a broken bag. But were it so, that the
soldiers and Lay Elders would still continue, and preach always to them for
nothing; which I shall scarce believe; yet I would desire all good Christians
to remember what the Prophet David said unto Araunah, when he offered as a
King, unto the King, his ground and his oxen, his instruments, and his wheat, 2 Samuel 24. 1 Chr. 21.24
to bestow them freely upon him, to serve the Lord; nay, says, King David, but
I will buy them of thee, at the full price; neither will I offer burnt
offerings unto the Lord, of that which cost me nothing; because the Lord
commands us to honor God with our riches, and we ought not to love our gold
better then the service of our God. And so you see by their intrusion into this
sacred function, uncalled, and unauthorised, these Lay-Preachers are one
especial head of Cerberus, and a principal branch of this false Prophet. And

2. 2. The inability of the Lay-Preachers, proves them to be the false Prophet.
1 Timothy 1.6, 7.
As their usurpation of this office, and their false entrance into it, is one
main argument to prove the same, so their ignorance and weakness, to discharge
this office, is another argument to confirm it; and Saint Paul speaking of such
teachers, tells Timothy, that before his departure, diverse had swarved from
the true faith, and had turned aside into vain jangling, desiring to be
teachers of the Law, but understanding neither what they said, nor whereof they
affirmed; and so now these Lay-Preachers of the Gospel; whose office is, as the
word (...) does import, to publish the glad tidings of salvation by Jesus
Christ unto the people, will be always jangling in the harsh music of the
Law, to bring men, as they do many tender consciences, into fearful
desperation; because as the Apostle says, they understand not the right use of
the Law, The twofold reason why the Lay-preachers do misinterpret the
Scriptures.
nor how to make the right application of it; and so the do in like manner
misapply the promises of the Gospel, and pervert many places of the holy
Scriptures; and the reason hereof seems to be two fold. 1. Their ignorance, and
want of arts, languages, and learning, to search and to find out the truth: 2.
The obscurity and difficulty to understand the holy Scripture.


1. Because they are ignorant and unlearned men.
1. The wisdom of a learned man comes by opportunity of leisure, and he that
gives his mind to the Law of the most high, is occupied in the meditation
thereof, and will seek out the wisdom of all the ancient, and be occupied in
prophesies; he will keep the sayings of the renowned men; and where subtle
parables are, he will be there also; he will seek out the secrets of grave
sentences, and be conversant in dark parables.

But, how can he get wisdom, that holds the plow, and that glories in the
goad, that drives oxen, and is occupied in their labors, and whose talk is of
bullocks? for he gives his mind to make furrows, and is diligent to give the
kine fodder: so, every carpenter and workmaster, that labors night and day,
and they that cut and grave seals, and are diligent to make great variety; the
smith also, sitting by the anvill, and confidering the iron work, sets his
mind to finish it, and watches to polish it perfectly; and so the potter,
sitting at his work, turns the wheel about with his feet, and fashioneth
the clay with his arm, and is diligent to make clean the furnace.

And all these, and all others, the like Tradsemen, that trust to their hands,
shall not be sought for in Public Counsel, nor sit on the Judges Seat;
Ecclesiast. 38. and 24. Vsque ad 34. fin. cap.
for they cannot understand the Sentence of judgment, nor declare what is
justice; and therefore they shall not be found where parables are spoken, says
the wise son of Syrach.

And if such lay men, and tradesmen cannot understand justice and judgment in
Civil matters, nor find out the sayings, aphorisms, and parables of men, how
shall they be able to search out the deep things of God, and to understand the
Mysteries of the Holy Scriptures? for,

2. It is not an easy matter, and of small labor, and without learning, 2.
Because the Scaipture is full of obscurity, and very hard to be understood.
to explain the Scriptures, to reconcile different Texts, and seeming
contradictions, and to unfold the sense, and mystical meaning of the Holy
Ghost, as you may find by what the Apostles say, in 1 Timothy 3.16. Heb. 5.11. and
2 Pet. 3.16. how difficult, and hard a matter it is, to expound the Great
Mysteries of Godliness; and how, by reason of that difficulty, the unlearned
and unstable, do wrest them to their own destruction; for, you may observe,
that although Christ taught the people in the plain, yet he taught his
Disciples in the Mount; Luke 6.17. Matthew. 5.1. Luke 5.3, 4.
and while the people stood on the shore, he bids his Apostles to launch forth
into the deep; to show unto us, that as Origin says, the Scripture consists
of an outward bark, which is soft and tender, and may easily be plained, and
of an inward substance, which is hard and tough, and cannot so easily be
squared; or, as S. Gregory says, that the Doctrine of Christ, and the
Mysteries of the Holy Scriptures, are like the Ocean sea, where a lamb may wade
by the shore, where the people stood, and the Elephant may swimm in the deep,
where the Apostles launched forth; to Teach us this Truth; Many things in
Scripture easy to be understood; as the heads. 1. To be done. 2. To be
believed.
that the meanest capacity, the vulgar and lay people may understand out of the
Scriptures, what they should do, as to fear God, to Honor their Parents, to
obey the Magistrates, not to kill, not to commit adultery, not to steal, and
the like; and the chief necessary Heads of their Christian Faith, as to
believe in Jesus Christ, that thorough him they shall have remission of their
sins, and Eternal life; and that this truth is Sealed unto them by the blessed
Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper: and yet, the strongest Head, the
greatest Wit, and most exquisite Scholars, may find there such depth, as
cannot easily be dived into; but will soon swallow them up, and like the Sun in
his full strength, dazzle and confound their fight, The reasons of the
difficulty to explain, and to understand the Scriptures. 1. The diversity of
Languages.
if they be not very careful to go the right way, and take great pains, and
earnestly pray to God for his help, to understand the same. And the reason of
this difficulty, to explain, and to unfold the Scripture, is manifold; as,

1. The diversity of Languages; wherein the same was written, and the great
affinity of the Hebrew with the Syriac and the Chaldick tongue, with the very
many equivocall words of the Hebrew Language, which made the Jews themselves
many times to mistake the meaning thereof; as,

1. When Christ said, destroy this Temple, John. 2.19. Marck. 14.58.
and in three days I will raise it up, they thought he spoke it of the
material Temple, when he meant the Temple of his body; and the same word
signified both the one and the other.

2. When he told his Disciples, Matthew. 19.24. Luke 19.25.
it was easier for a Cammell to go thorough the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and this was a proverbiall speech
among the Jews, when they spoke of any hard, and unlikely thing to be done; it
was easier for a Cammell to go thorough the eye of a needle, as Caninius
observes out of their Talmud; and yet most men, and many good interpreters,
and of no small learning, have understood the word of that great and large
fiz'd foure-footed beast, called a Cammell, whereas the word indeed, quo hic
utitur paraphrastes funem anchoratum significat, which the Paraphrast says,
our Savior used, signifies a Cable rope, which being untwifted, may easily
pass thorough an needles eye, and so may the rich man enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, if he disperseth his wealth, and give them to the poor; though, as our
Savior says, it is easier for us to untwist the Cable rope, then to persuade
the rich men to part with their goods, and give them to the poor, or to any
pious uses.

3. When he cried out, Math. 27.46.
Eloe, Eloe, Lamasabacthany, the Jews said, he calls for Elias; when, as the
words fignified, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me?

4. When, John. 20.16.
after the resurrection of Christ, Mary turned her self toward him, and said,
Rabboli, which is, Master; Tremelius says, that in this word, either the
letter Lamed is put for Nun, and so Rabboli for Rabboni; or else it is a
composition of the Noune with the Pronoune, and Rabboli is put for rabbonli;
and it is not properly any Hebrew word, but a Chaldaic, and Syriac; and it is
said to be an Hebrew word, quia tunc temporis Syriaca lingua hebraeis esset
vulgaris; because that the Syriac Tongue was then common amongst the Jews,
when they had lost the use of their own Tongue in their Captivity, and had
learned, in that space of seventy years, the Idiomes, and the phrases of the
Conquerors, and the bordering neighbors, that were either the Chaldeans,
Tremel. in Joh. 20.16.
or the Syrians; and this, says Tremelius, non tantum hic observari debet,
ought not only to be observed here, but in many other places of the New
Testament, where these words, that are properly Chaldic, or Syriac, are said to
be Hebrew words.

2. 2. The not pointing of the Scriptures. In Scriptura divina dictiones,
Syllaba, puncta mysteria indicant divina. Hieron. in Epes. c. 3. and Basilius
l. sexto. c. 1.
The not pointing, and especially the mispointing of the Scripture-Writings
made many doubts, and brought many errors, even amongst the greatest Scholars;
for the Hebrews, at first, used no points at all in their writings; and then,
the Transcribers mispointing the same, made it to be mistaken, and
misunderstood of the readers, which is easily done, when the pointing thereof
is done amiss; as, Edwardum occidere noli, timere bonum est; and his keeper
read it, Edwardum occidere noli timere, bonum est; and so, the misplacing of a
comma, the least of all points, made the King to loose his life, the Highest of
all men; so the Oracle, saying, Ibis, redibis nunquam, mala morte peribis; and
the man reading the sentence of the Oracle thus; Ibis, redibis, uunquam per
bella peribis; made him to miscarry, because of his mis-reading it; and the
Poet wittily writing to a fair Lady, said, Women are Virtuous, Noble, and
Excellent,
Who can prove that they do offend?
Daily to please their husbands they do intend;
Never, to displease them they do purpose; commonly such qualities have women.


And the husband, who knew his wives qualities better then the Poet, read the
very same verses, thus; Women are Virtuous, Noble and Exceilent,
Who can prove that? they do offend
Daily: to please their husbands they do intend
Never; to displease them they purpose commonly; such qualities have women.


And so it is in the mispointing of the Holy Scriptures, as in Act. 1.25. the
placing of the comma, at the word fell, from whence Judas by transgression
fell, shows the meaning of the Holy Ghost to be, that Matthias might go to
his own place, that is, to his own proper Diocese, and allotted jurisdiction;
but the omitting of that comma, which is but a small point, made many Great
Scholars to commit a foul error, by referring the last sentence unto Judas,
that he might go to his own place, that is, the place which God had determined
for him, for his punishment, and he had justly deserved, which is, hell; as if
God, ab initio, had decreed this place for him, but could not in justice send
him thither, until he had fallen from his Ministry, by his transgression;
Which is the Doctrine of the Presbyterians.
which is derogatory to the goodness and justice of God, and far from the
meaning of the Holy Ghost, that refers this clause unto Matthias, and the
words, (from whence Judas by his transgression fell) betwixt two comma's, are
to be read, as if they were enclosed within a parenthesis.

And this reading of the place, thus pointed, teaches two things.

1. It freeth God from the imputation of injustice, or hard dealing, 1. To free
God from the imputation of injustice. All things past and to come, are present
with God.
that otherwise, the Heretics, from this place, might with some color object
against God, for preparing hell for men, before ever they sinned, which he
never did, but as he is a pure act, with whom there is neither prius nor
posterius, but foreseeth all things, and acts all things, that either were,
or are, or shall be, as things present, without any aspect, either backward or
forward; whereby things to come, with God, are said to be, as if they were
already past.

2. This shows, how the Apostles themselves, 2. That the Apostles, though
their Commission was general, yet had they their peculiar jurisdiction. Galat.
2.7, 8, 9. Dorothaeus de vitis Apostol Abdias Histor. Apestol. l. 7. Petrusde
not. l. 3. c. 149. Hieron. catalog. Eccles. Scriptor. Titus. 2.11.
whose commission was so general, as to go, in universum mundum, over all the
world; yet notwithstanding, to avoid confusion, they agreed to have their
commissions limited, and a proper Diocese, and a peculiar jurisdiction
assigned to each of them, as the Gospel of the Circumcision unto St. Peter,
and of the uncircumcision unto St. Paul; and St. Andrew was assigned to Preach
unto the Scythians, and Sogdians, Philip to the Phrygians, Bartholomeus to the
Indians, Thomas to the Parthians, Matthew to the Ethiopians, etc. and so the
lot fell upon Matthias, that he might take part of the Ministry of the
Apostles, and go to discharge that Ministry, in his own proper place and
Diocese, which the Holy Ghost should assign unto him, and which was Macedenia,
as Petrus de natalibus writes, or about the Haven of Hyssus, in Ethiopia, as
St. Hierom says.

So, in Titus 2.11. some read, the grace of God, which briugeth salvation unto
all men, has appeared; and from thence they conclude, that Christ has
purchased universal Grace, and salvation for all men, as well for Judas as for
St. Peter; but others read it, the grace of God, which brings salvation, unto
all men has appeared; from whence they conclude, that Christ brought only to
the true believers the grace of salvation, which by the Public Preaching of
the Gospel, appears to be offered unto all men; but he offers not, as he
purchased not the same for all; which, were it so, it were but a mere
collusion, which is far from the meaning of God; and yet you see, Which is the
deceitful Doctrine of the Presbyterians. 1 Pet. 3.19.
that the very self same words are made to be of very far different sense; and
all by the placing, or mis-placing of a comma.

And so the like difference, if not greater, arose amongst the greatest
Scolars, about the right pointing, and thereupon the interpreting of that place
of St. Peter, in the 1 Peter 3.19. and both the mispointing and misinterpreting
thereof has brought forth that spurious Doctrine of the Popish purgatory, that
brings only a gain unto the Teachers, but no Comfort at all unto the
believers; And I might collect abundance of such mispointings; both in the
Greek and Laetine copies of the Bible, besides what may be found in the Hebrew,
Chaldie and Syriac. 3. The confounding of names.


3. The confounding of names, when as some men having two or three names, and
the same name, being far unlike it self, when it is translated to another
Language, does require a great deal of pains, study, and care, to find out the
right persons that are meant, under those different names; and the neglect of
that care and diligence has produced many doubts, and bred some errors amongst
the best Authors; 1. Chron. 9.4.
as where, in 1. Chron. 9.4. it is said, that in Jerusalem dwelt Vthai, the
son of Amihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani; of the
children of Pharez, the son of Judah; and Nehemias, Nehem. 11.4.
in the 11. chapter v. 4. speaking of the same persons, that then were inhabiting
at Jerusalem, says, that at Jerusalem dwelt Athaiah, the son of Vzziah, the
son of Zecharia, the son of Amaria, the son of Shephatia, the son of
Mahalaleel, of the children of Peers: And how can these places, that are so
different, and as it seems, so fully contrary one to another be reconciled, by
him that takes no care, and has no learning, nor leisure from his secular
affairs and calling, to search after it?

But the learned Tremelius was able briefly to resolve this doubt, Tremel. in
loc.
saying, that it can be none otherwise, but that hi omnes binomines erant, all
these men had two names apiece; or else one of the two places of the Scripture
must needs be false, which would be most absurd for any Christian to imagine.

And so of the very Kings of Juda, 2 Chronicles. 22.6
Achazia is called Hazaria, 2 Chronicles. 22.6. and in another place he is called
Joachas; and St. Matthew calls him Ozias, Matthew. 1.8. Jerem, 22.24.
Matthew. 1.8. and so Vzzia is called Azaria; and Jehoiakim is called Jechoniah,
and by the Prophet Jeremie, he is termed Coniah; and abundance of men more have
two or three names apiece in the holy Scripture. And therefore it will require
no small diligence, nor any less judgment, to find out the right persons, that
are spoken of, by reason of this diversity and multiplicity of names that are
given to the same persons.

4. 4 The different Genealogies.
The different Genealogies of the persons spoken of in Scriptures, do bring
more doubts, and require no less pains unto the reader, then the diversities of
names; as where Jehoram is said, to have married Athaliah the daughter of Ahab,
2. Reg. 8.18. verse. 26.
2 Reg. 8.18. yet in the 26. verse, she is said to be the daughter of Omri; and
if she was the daughter of Omri, how was she the daughter of Ahab?

It is answered, that she was indeed the daughter of Ahab, that was the son of
Omri; and she was the grandchild of Omri, and according to the Hebrew manner
of speech only, she was called the daughter of Omri; for this was the
customarie language among the Jews, to call the Grandchildren, the sons and
daughters of their Grandfathers, and to call brothers children, brethren; and
this manner of speech is to be found most frequent in the holy Scriptures; as
where James, Galat. 1.19.
that was afterward made Bishop of Jerusalem, is called the brother of the
Lord, which made many men, mistaking the Hebrew manner of speech, to think,
that he was the son of Joseph by another wife, when he was only the
Cousin-German of Christ, being the son of Mary, that was called Maria Jacobi,
Matthew. 27.53
Mary the Mother of James, and was the sister of the Virgin Mary.

And this difficulty of finding out the right Genealogy bred many doubts
amongst the most learned, Aug. tomo 6. l. 23. c. 3 and. 4. cont. Faustum
manichaeum.
about the Genealogy of Christ himself; for he was to come of the seed of
David, and of the tribe of Judah; and as St. Augustine shows, the Manichees
stiffly held, that although Joseph descended from David, yet Mary was the
daughter of Joachim, the Priest, of the Tribe of Levi; Luke 1.36.
because St. Luke tells us plainly, that Elizabeth, the wife of Zacharias the
Priest, was her Cousin; behold thy cousin Elizabeth.

To this Origin answers, That the Priests might marry wives out of any tribe.
that according to the common received opinion, Mary was the lawful wife of
Joseph according to the law; and therefore of the tribe of Judah; and Elizabeth
was called her Cousin, not in regard of tribe, but of nation; but I say that
Elizabeth was her Cousin, not only by nation, but also by tribe; otherwise,
all the Jewish women might be called her Cousins, as well as Elizabeth; for
Elizabeth was of the tribe of Judah, though married to Zacharias, the Priest,
of the tribe of Levi; because it was lawful for the Priests to marry wives out
of any tribe, as Aaron married the daughter of Aminadab of the tribe of Judah;
Exodus 6.23. 2 Chronicles. 22.11
and Jehoiada married Jehosabath, the daughter of King Joram, of the tribe of
Judah; and so Zachary married Elizabeth of the tribe of Judah; and to prove
that Mary was of the tribe of Judah, St. Luke makes it manifest, because he
says that Joseph was the son of Heli, that is his son in law, the father of
Mary his wife; as Naomi calls Ruth her daughter, Ruth. 1:22. Videtur Matthan
pater fuisse Jacobi, Alphaei, and Heli; ex Jacobo Joseph, ex Heli, Maria
descendisse. Tremel. in loc. 3.23.
because she was her daughter in law; for otherwise, St. Matthew tells us
plainly, that Jacob was the natural father of Joseph; and Heli, which (as St.
Jerome thinks, had two names, and was called Joachim, and Heli) was the
natural father of Mary, and the son of Matthan, who was the father of Jacob,
the father of Joseph, and of Heli, the father of Mary, and of Alphaeus, that
were three brethren, all sons of Matthan, as Tremelius says.

And therefore also this requires a sedulous secrch, to find out the truth of
such Genealogies as are useful and necessary to be found out, for the
understanding of the right Line of the Messiah, that was to spring from the
loins of David, and from the tribe of Judah; for though, Titus 3.9. The Apostle
speaks of needless Genealogies.
as the Apostle says, it is not requisite that all Genealogies, should be
looked after, yet these, and some others, are very useful and necessary to be
knwon; and yet cannot be known without a great deal of care and search to find
them out;

5. The (...) Chronologies, of the ages and times therein specified, 5. The
Scripture Chronologies.
that, in very man respects, are most requisite for all sound Divines to know,
are more difficult to be understood, and bred more doubts, and brought forth
more errors, then the Genealogies have done; as the weeks, days, howrs and
times specified in the prophesies of Ezechiel, Daniel, and the Revelation, and
as among the rest of the Chronologies, where St. Steven says, that the
children of Israel should so journ, in a strange land, and be evil entreated
there 400. years; and yet, if you do rightly compute the times, Acts 7.6.
you shall find, as Helvicus well observes, that from Jacobs going down into
Egypt, until they were delivered by Moses, they do scarce amount to 250.
years; 215. fust. in the description of Canaan.
therefore, it is answered, that St. Steven meant not from Jacobs passage into
Egypt to inhabit, but from the time, that Abraham went thither to sojourn, and
from that time, to their deliverance out of Egypt, it is just 400. years,
Genes. 15.13
as the Lord had formerly said unto Abraham.

6. The Scripture phrases, and the manner of speech, 6. The Scripture phrases.
that the Hebrews used, is not an easy matter to be understood, as where
Naaman said to Elisha, when the Prophet refused to receive his gifts, shall
there not then, I pray thee, be given to thy servant two mules, burden of
earth? whereupon, 2 Reg. 5.17.
many men, and I heard some Preachers expounding it so, in the Pulpit, did
think, that Naaman meant hereby, two Mules load of silver; Habac. 2.6.
which he calls earth, (as the Prophet calls gold, red or thick clay, to
show the baseness of the best kind of worldly wealth) as if he should say,
seeing thou will receive nothing at my hands, then, I beseech thee, let me
bestow it upon thy servant: which Exposition, is far enough from the true sense
of Naamans words, Naamans words mistaken by many.
and much further from his meaning, for he meant no such thing; but his
thoughts were far better, and his meaning more religious; none otherwise, then,
shall there not be given to thy servant, (that is, to me, who, for the favor
that thou have done me, do profess my self to be thy servant) two Mules
burden, of this earth of Jurie, that I may carry the same into Syria, and
therewith erect an Altar there, unto the God of Israel; for so the words,
immediately following, do make this exposition most plain; because, says he,
thy servant, that is, not Gebazai, but himself, whom, in a complement, (used
commonly among the Jews) as many now likewise, amongst us, use to do, he
calls his servant, will henceforth offer neither burnt offering, nor
sacrifice unto any other god but unto the Lord; thefore, I pray thee, let me
carry two Mules load of this your earth to build him an Altar; otherwise, if he
had meant, let me give two mules load of silver to Gebazai, what sense or
coherence had been in his reason, that he alleges for his desire; because
thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt-offering, nor sacrifice to any
God but to the Lord, the Prophet might have answered, 2 Reg. 5.18.
no more he did heretofore; which Naaman did in the house of Rimmon.

So when Benhadad King of Syria sent Hazael unto Elisha, to inquire, whether he
should recover from his disease or not, and Elisha said unto him; go, say unto
him, that is, to Benhadad, thou shall certainly recover, howbeit, The Lord has
showed unto me, that he shall surely die; and if this was the meaning of the
Prophet, 2 Reg. 8.10.
as the words seem to intimate, what can you make of it, but that Elisha
teaches Hazael, how to tell a fair lie, and to say to his Master Benhadad, he
shall recover, when the Prophet tells him, he knew, that he should surely die?
therefore, Tremellius translates it, abi, dic, non omnino revalesces, Particula
negant cum antecedente verbo in Prosodia conj^^ngitur Euphoniae causa Tremel.
grammat. l. 4. c. 8. Origin. in Romans c. 1.
nam ostendit mihi Jehova, eum omnino moriturum; go tell him, thou shall not
altogether recover; for the Lord has showed unto me, that he shall altogether
die; and he adds that the negative particle is joined with the antecedent
verb in the Prosodie, euphoniae gratia, only for the better sound sake, to
make the speech seem the sweeter; the which manner of speech, says he, is
often used in the Hebrew language, as we have showed in our Grammar. l. 4. c. 8.

And so in the New Testament we find the like difficulty in the phrases
thereof, as Origin has observed upon the word (...), and others, upon these
words, in the first Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, verse 16. (...); which our
Translators turned right according to the words, and grace for grace; the sense
of which words has puzzled many of the best interpreters; but from the use and
nature of the phrase, they are now found to fignifie nothing else, but that of
his fullness we have all received, and thanks be to him for that grace, and
great favor toward us; otherwise the word (...), and, would be such a
tautalogie, as cold, never he brought to good sense, according to the Geneva
Notes upon that place; and (...) often signifies thanks as well as grace.

7. 7. The visions of the holymen of God.
The visions of Ezekiel, Daniel, and especially of S. John in the Revelation,
and of the rest of the Prophets and Apostles, I hope will be acknowledged, as
diverse of the most learned Fathers have ingenuously confessed, to be of a
greater depth, and harder to be understood, then can be easily fathomed by
every unskilful Seaman, or unartificial, and unlearned tradesman.

8. 8. The predictions of the Prophets.
The Prophesies and predictions of the Prophets are no less obscure, then
their visions, as Aquinas says, they are not understood sometimes of the
Prophets themselves, nor infallibly of any other, though never so learned,
until the time come, that we see they are fulfilled; as the prophecy of the
Antichrist, 2 These. 2.3.
the man of sin, and the child of perdition, which is the beast, that ascended
from the bottomless pit; some understood it of Nero, others thought he was
Domitian, and many conceived him to be Dioclesian, that was one of the
bloodiest of the persecutors; and after that, Mahomet, and his successors,
Prophesies never certainly and infallibly known until they be sulfilled.
the great Turk must be the beast, and that great Antichrist; and now of late,
our new Presbyterians will needs have him to be none other then the Pope; and
at last, he is found by some others, to be none of these, but nearer home, and
of a higher pitch, and greater wickedness then any of them; so hard it is to
unvaile the face of many a prophecy; and therefore it is most truly said of
Irenaeus, satius est expectare impletionem prophetiae quam temere divinare; it
is a safer course, and a surer way to expect the fulfilling of a prophecy,
then rashly to expound it to be fulfilled: and if it be so, for the best
Divines; 9. The divine Majesty that shines in the Scriptures. Dan 4.19. Acts
26.29:
what think you then of these lame and Lay-Preachers, when they shall undertake
to expound dark Prophesies?

9. The divine Majesty that shines in the expressions of the holy Scriptures
shows, that it is not for every mechanic to trade therein; for you may
observe in it such civil complements, as that of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar; and
that of Saint Paul to Agrippa, and the like; and also such eloquence, such
tropes and figures, that neither Demosthenes among the Greeks, Dan. 4.19. Acts
26.29
nor Cicero among the Latins, nor all the Schools of Athens can equalize the
excellency, and the exact language of the holy Scriptures, as Paesor truly
shows; when as no Orator could speak purer Greek, then the pure Spirit of God
spoke by the tongues of his learned penmen, Saint Luke, Saint Paul, and the
rest of them; and I am sure that neither Aristotle, nor Plato, nor any other
Moralist or naturalist can show such pure Ethics and true Physics, or any
other kind of Philosophy, as is to be found in the sacred writ.

10. 10. The many seeming contradictions of the Scriptures.
The many seeming contrarieties and contradictions that are obviously found in
these Scriptures, do sufficiently prove how difficult it is to reconcile the
difference, and to give the right sense, and the true meaning of every place; as

1. Where in 2 Reg. 17.24. 2 Reg. 17.24. Verse 34.
it is said that the men which came from Cutha and from Ava, and from Hamath,
and from Sepharuaim, and were placed in the cities of Samaria feared not the
Lord, and so it is reiterated in v. 34. that they feared not the Lord; And yet
in the 32. verse, and in the 33. verse, and in the 41. verse it is thrice
repeated, that they feared the Lord.

And how can these things be, that the same spirit with the same breath, should
say and unsay the same thing, they feared the Lord, and they feared not the
Lord? Non been convenient, nec in una sede moruntur.

It is answered, that if you mark it well, and understand it right; here is no
contradiction at all: for the fear of the Lord is here put for the whole
service of God: and so they feared not the Lord as it is said in the 17. and
34. verse, that is, more debito, they served him not, as the Lord required his
people to serve him; but yet feared the Lord and served him, as it is said in
the 32, 33, and 41. verse, that is, more gentilium, as the Gentiles, Cultus Dei
ex humano cerebro excogitatus.
and the other nations did; and this fear of the Lord, and service of God,
being but (...) a will worship is said to be not the fear of the Lord, nor the
service of God; because the Lord neither commands it, nor accepts it, when
as he tells us plainly, that he will be served as himself prescribes, and not
as man devises.

2. Where our Savior says, Matthew. 6.1. and 3.
Take heed that you do not your alms before men; but when thou do thine
alms, Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does; and when thou
prayest, go into thy closet, and shut thy door, and he that sees thee in
secret, will reward thee openly; and yet in another place he says, Let your
light so shine before men, that they maysee your good works, Verse 6. Matthew.
5.16.
and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

And how shall men see them, if I shut my door, and do them so close in my
chamber, and do mine alms so secretly, that none may see them?

It is briefly answered, that Christ does not forbid you to bestow your alms,
to pray, and to do the other duties of religion in the fight of men; but he
advises you not to do them, as the Scribes and Pharisees did them, only to
this end, that they might be seen of men; let men see them, but do them not,
that they might be seen.

3. Where Saint Paul says, Romans 3.28. etc. 5. v. 1. James 2.21.
we conclude a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law; and yet
Saint James says, that Abraham was justified by Works, and Rahab was justified
by Works, and then concludes it positively, and says, you see, how that by
works a man is justified, and not by faith only: And therefore Luther that was
all for faith, and not finding the way to reconcile these two Apostles,
rejects the whole Epistle of Saint James, as not Canonical, and calls it
Stramineam Epistolam, an Epistle not worth a straw, whereas he might as easily
have reconciled the two Apostles, How the words of Saint Paul and S. James are
reconciled.
if he had considered that Saint Paul speaks of that perfect and most absolute
justification, that freeth us from all sin, and is fully able to acquit us,
coram Tribunali Dei, before the throne of Gods judgment: and so Abraham and
all the sons of Abraham can be justified no otherwise, then by a lively faith
in Jesus Christ: and Saint James speaks of the manifestation of the faith,
whereby we approve our selves to be justified, coram hominibus, both to the
satisfaction of our selves and others: and this is by g^od works, which are the
fruits of our faith; and so no contradiction at all betwixt Saint Paul and
Saint James.

Many more seeming contradictions, and many more reasons of the difficulties of
the Scriptures, I might produce unto you; but out of this, that I have set
down, you may very easily see, that the best divine, the quickest wit, the
sharpest sight, and the greatest Scholar, when he considers the depth of
this Ocean, and the mysteries of these Scriptures, and his own shallow reach to
comprehend them, 2 Cor. 2.16.
may cry out with the Apostle (...)? who is sufficient for these things?

And what then? shall a Tailor, or a Shoemaker, or a Weaver. or any the like
unskillful tradesman, or unealled Lay man, be sufficient for these things,
wherein such a mass of treasure, and so much of Gods wisdom is contained? I
beseech you to consider what Saint August. says, and your selves know to be
true, that a reasonable good Scholar will not read Horace or Terence, without
a Comments; and will thou presume to expound the deep mysteries, and the high
secrets of Gods word, without the help of learned Authors, that have bestowed
much pains, and made many prayers to God for the help and assistance of his
Spirit to understand them? Quicquid est, creed mihi, in Scripturis istis altum
and divinum est; whatsoever is in these Scrriptures, believe me, says the same
Father, it is high and divine; and you know the Prophet David says, thy
commandment is exceeding broad; and therefore he does often pray for
understanding, Psalm. 119.
that he might understand his Commandments; and yet the Commandments, which
were things that appertained unto all men for to know, are the easiest to be
understood, as being delivered in the plainest manner of all the Scriptures,
that they might be understood of all, because they were to be observed by all.
And you know likewise, that it was prophesied of Christ, Matthew. 13.35.
that he should open his mouth in parables, and declare hard sentences of old;
so hard to be understood, that his own Apostles and disciples, who were always
conversant with him, yet of themselves understood them not, as you may perceive
by that reprehension of our Savior; are ye yet without understanding? Matthew.
15.16.
whose apprehensions and understanding nevertheless, was as you may believe
far better, then the best of our Lay-Preachers.

And therefore, seeing the Apostles and disciples of Christ, and the greatest
Doctors, and best Scholars in Gods Church must follow Saint Augustines rule, to
understand Gods word, S. Augustines rule how we may come to understand the
Scriptures.
where he says, agant orando, querendo, legendo, and been nivendo ut intellig
ant; that is, earnestly pray to God for the assistance of his Spirit, and
diligently to search and seek by continual studies, in the reading of Gods
words, and consulting with the best learned Authors, which God has given for
our help, and constantly, to lead an upright and a holy life, that God may be
entreated by these means to enlighten their understanding, that they may
understand his revealed will.

And now all the premises considered, I demand how dares the Lay-Preacher, the
rustic Plowman, and the City tradesman, and the blood-thirsty soldier, with
their miry shoes upon their unwashen feet, approach to that place of Gods
presence, which Moses himself, while he was thus, was forbid to do; and there
with defiled hands and profane mouths, not rightly divide the word of God,
but most miserably to tear and Massacre the Holy Scriptures, so shamelesly,
that it would make, not only our ears to tingle, but also our hearts to
tremble, when we consider how the Divine Truth is abused, and the Name of God
blasphemed, by these rude and ignorant Interpreters, that are the best
Seedes-Men in the World, to sow the Tares of errors, heresies, and blasphemies
among the pure wheat, in the field of Gods Church? because, as St. Augustine
says; hine ownes Hereses, The premises teach three things.
dum Scripturae bonae intelliguntur non been; all heresies do spring from
hence, when the good Scriptures are ill interpreted.

So, this that I have showed, of the difficulties of many places of the
Scriptures, and how hard it is to explain, and to reconcile them, should teach
us these three things.

1. It should deter, and stop the presumptuous attempts of ignorant men, from
meddling with the interpreting of Holy Mysteries.

2. It should move all good people to love and honor all those learned Clergy,
that are able to Teach them the Truth, and to unfold the Scripture truly unto
them: and not regard the bawling and barking of those whelps, that speak
against Learning, and Learned Men; for, if many of the Apostles were unlearned,
God enabled them with the gifts of Tongues, and fitted them with learning
Miraculously: Act 14.12. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
and does not that Miraculous descending of Learning and Languages upon the
Apostles, show unto us how necessary Learning and Languages are for the
Ministry? or, is the Learning of St. Paul any thing the worse, because he had
it not miraculously, he needing it not so, but in an ordinary way, being
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel? so, is Learning, and the gift of Tongues
now any thing the worse, because we have it not as the Apostles had it,
miraculously, but in an ordinary way, as St. Paul had it, and left more ample
fruits of it unto the Church, then most of them that had it miraculously?

But the truth is, that Learning, and the understanding of Arts, and Tongues,
howsoever gotten, in an ordinary, or an extraordinary way, miraculously, or by
industry, it is from above, and a special gift of God; for so the Scripture
says: the Lord has given me the tongue of the Learned, Esaias 50.4.
and therefore learning is not to be slighted, nor these Lay-Preachers, that
want it, to be regarded; because the Scripture cannot be understood, nor the
Divine Mysteries well expressed, without a competent measure of Learning and
Languages; even as the Apostles themselves could not well do it, until they
received the same miraculously.

3. It does in the second place make good my second Argument, and sufficiently
prove these Lay Preachers to be one of the heads of Cerberus, and a special
branch of this false Prophet here spoken of; because of t^eir ignorance, and
want of good literature to enable them to expoun^d the Scriptures. Why the
Presbyterians charge the Roman Clergy to be this false Prophet.


And neither of both these Arguments can be justly urged, and applied against
the Roman Clergy, to prove them to be this false Prophet, as Junius, and our
Presbyterians would have them to be; but, as the Fox, that being hunted for his
knavery, showed a hare unto the hounds, that the dogs running after the hare,
he might laugh in his sleeve, and pass away; so they, by making the people to
believe, that the Priests and Jesuit^s are this false Prophet, do think that
themselves may pass unsuspected, and to be taken for the true Ministers of
Jesus Christ. For, though materialiter, they of Rome, may, as they do, Teach
many points of false Doctrine, yet formaliter, The Roman Clergy are no^ liable
to these reasons, that demonstrats this false Prophet.
they cannot be said to be this false Prophet, modo and forma, as he is here
described.

1. Because they are by a successive unbroken line, from the Apostles time,
lawfully called and Ordained, by prayers, and the imposition of the hands of
those that have the Lawful Power and Authority to ordain them: none dares, in
that Church, intrude himself into any of these Sacred Functions, but such as
are lawfully admitted into Holy Orders.

2. The works of those Clergy men do sufficiently demonstrate, they are no
ignorants, but learned enough in all arts and sciences; if they had the grace
to make a right use of their learning.

And here, before I pass from this point, you must know that we have now two
sorts of Lay-Preachers. 1. One without any Ordination. And this 2. The other of
a false Ordination. And this
False Ordination, that is done only by other Presbyters, without the Bishop,
is no Ordination at all; no otherwise, then when my Lord Chancellor makes one a
Justice of Peace, and that Justice of the Peace will presently take upon him to
make others Justices of the Peace like himself; and you know the Authority of
such second Justices, is of no validity, because the one had no power to give
it, nor the other any right to use it; and so it is with those Presbyters, that
are made only by the Presbyters, they are none other then mere Laics.

2. 2. The Independent another branch of the false Prophet.
Another head of Cerberus, and a special branch of this false Prophet, is the
Independent; and this Independent is but a bastard Presbyterian, or an
illegitimate child, begotten of the luxurious seed of the Prtsbyterians, and
the frothy sperme of the fanatic people, that disdains as much to be subject
and guided by the Classis of the Presbyterians, as the Presbyterians do kick
against the Government of the Bishops; and both the one and the other do spring
from the same root of pride and ambition, and they run the same way of
disobedience, and opposition to their lawful Governors, and they aim at the
same end, to be Masters and Rulers; themselves and therefore I need not stand
any longer to unkennell this Beast, seeing that the same things that are
incident to the Presbyterians, may be truly applied to the Independants, but
that, in my judgment, the Independent is less rigid, more tolerable, and
quiet, and of far better faith and principles then the Presbyterians.

3. 3. The Presbyterians, the first fountain, and the chief Head of this false
Prophet.
The Presbyterians, not as they are Presbyters, but as they now show themselves
to be, under this notion, and name of Presbyterians, are the primum mobile, and
the maine stock from whence do spring all the branches of this false Prophet:
and though I might collect many more, yet I will infist, and that briefly, but
upon these four points, besides their correspondency with what the Spirit of
God sets down here, that do sufficiently show them to be this false Prophet,
and they are, 1. Their Apostasy.
1. Their Apostasy. For, 2. Their Perjury. For, 3. Their Hypocrisy. For, 4.
The obliquity of all their actions. For,


1. 1 John 3.19.
They were with us, and as St. John says, they went out from us, because they
were not of us; for, if they had been of us, they would, no doubt, have
continued with us; but, in the height of their pride they left their station,
forsook their coulors, and started aside like a broken bow. And so

2. 2. Their Perjury. The Oath of the Presbyters when they are made Ministers.
In Apostatizing from that Profession, which they made at their Ordination, and
denying their Bishops and Diocessans to be their Guides, and their Governors,
they became perjured, to break their faith, and to falfifie their Oath, which
they made in the presence of God, and his Congregation, when they were
ordained; for, when any one is to enter into the Holy Order of Priesthood, the
Bishop demands of him, will you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief
Ministers, unto whom the Government and Charge is committed over you, following
with a glad mind and will their godly admonitions, and submitting your self to
their godly judgments? and he that is to be admitted Priest, answers; I will
so do, the Lord being my helper, which is a promissory Oath, that requires
performance, and may no way be dispensed with, and violated at our pleasure; as
that Learned Regius Professor of Oxford, Doctor Sanderson, Vide, Dr. Sanderson,
de Juramento Promissorio.
in that excellent Book, De Juramento Promissorio, has most amply declared
unto us: and shall we think that they can be true Prophets to us, that have
been false, and perjured to themselves? or shall we commit our souls to their
custody, that have forfeited their own souls unto the Devil? or, shall we not
believe, that these, rather then the Roman Clergy, are this false Prophet. For,

1. They have not refused to be subject and obedient to their Governors, nor
stepped aside from their station, and therefore cannot be taxed with this
Apostasy, that the Apostle ascribes to the many Antichrists that were in his
time.

2. They have not falsified their faith, and perjured themselves, in not
performing their Oath, and observing their promise, which they made, when they
entered into Sacred Orders; but to proceed.

3. For their hypocrisy, I leave it to the world to judge of it. And

4. For the obliquity of their actions, it is well observed by one, that in all
their doings, they and their Proselites do imitate King Saul to a hair; for,
first King Saul, without any respect or regard to the Office and Authority of
the Priest, would presume to offer sacrifice, 1 Samuel 13.9, 10.
as afterward Vzziah would have done; so the new Presbyters, though they
cannot show that they have any authority, descentive from hand to hand from the
Apostles, as all, 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 17.
and every true Presbyter ought to have; yet will they intrude themselves to do
the offices of the Ministers of Christ.

2. Saul had an evil spirit, that could not abide any music, but would have
killed David, when he played before him; 1 Samuel 18.10, 11.
so the Presbyterians cannot endure any Organs, or Music in the Worship of God.

3. Saul made no conscience of his Oaths, but through the vehemence of his
Zeal, forsooth, to Gods Honor, he despised the wisdom of his forefathers, and
therefore he breaks the Oath that they made unto the Gibeonites, and would
needs slay those harmeless Gibeonites; and the whole Nation of the Jews must
smart for his foolish rashness, and his bloody act; so the Presbyterian, or
Rumpe Parliament, and their Teachers the Presbyters, were such Zelots, and so
Holy, that they despised the wisdom of our former Parliaments, and so brake
their Oaths of their Allegiance and Supremacy to the King, and as I said
before, of their obedience and subjection to the Bishops, and the Church of
Christ, and slew the two Witnesses of God: and the whole Kingdom has ever
since smarted for the same.

4. Saul was a most malicious man, and as cruel as any one of those times, as
you may read, how he persecuted and hunted after the life of David, 1 Samuel
18.11. Chap. 19.1.10. Chap. 21.1, etc.
without any cause, and against all Reason, would have put his own, son
Jonathan to death; and did not the Presbyterian Parliament as maliciously hunt
after the Kings life, and the Bishops, and abundance more of the Kings Party?
let my Reader judge.

5. This goodly King, for David's sake, caused fourscore and five persons of the
Lords Priests, that did wear a linen Ephod, says the Text, to be slain, and
all that they had, to be destroyed: and did not the Proselites of these
Presbyters, for King Charles his sake, because they were honest and faithful
unto their King, as he was loving, and like a Father unto them, run and ruinate
well-near as many Bishops, besides the Deanes, Prebends, and many more godly
Ministers, that were Canonical, and wore the linen surplice; though they that
hated the surplice, escaped their brethrens fate, and were protected and
advanced by these Presbyters, as those that rejected the linen Ephod, were
preserved by Saul; for it is most evident, that the Spirit of God would not
have set down the garments of those Priests that were destroyed, but to
intimate unto us, that some other false Priests, (that could no more abide the
linen Ephod, then our Presbyters can now endure the white surplice,) were
joined with Saul, and whispered in his ears, against those that did wear the
Ephod, as the Presbyterians did always ring in the ears of the Parliament men,
against the wearers of these holy garments; otherwise it had been enough to
say, that Saul had caused to be slain, so many Priests of the Lord, without any
further mention of wearing the linen Ephod: but the holy Ghost sets not
down the least title to no purpose.

And, I could wish his Majesty would well consider how that very very many of
the prime Presbyterians in London and the country, made such affectionate
addresses, and passionate prayers for the continuance of Richard Cromwell in
his Protectorship, as may be seen in their Diurnalls; and inquire if any one of
the Bishops, or of all the Episcopal party did the same; and then to consider,
whether such men that are so unjust to their King, and to their Civil
Governors, be fit men to be made Governors of the Church of Christ.
as they imitate this malicious King in their actions, so they are the
disciples of railing Rabsheca in their Sermons; for letting pass those
doctrines that derogate from the goodness, truth, and justice of God, they
stuff their Sermons with most unsavory expressions, and ridiculous things in
the ears of men, as a Presbyter Preacher in Christ's Church said, that hell was
paved with Kings Crowns, and Bishops sculls: another said, that God might as
rightly be said, to be the Author of sin, as of Monarchy; and a third said,
that Monarchy was such a beast, as he would venture his life to fight against
it; these, and the like were the doctrines of this beast; and yet now, who
pretends to be more zealous to reduce our David to his throne, then these
Presbyters? when as other men, knowing their doings, think it strange, they
should have the impudency to look any King in the face.

And to justify what I say of these Presbyters, the chiefest branch of this
false Prophet, as I will not refuse a pearl from a dung-hil, so I will not
disdain to allege the testimony of George Fox the younger, in the eleventh
page of his book, whose copy was delivered into the hands of his Majesty, the
fourth day of the fourth month, 1660. where he says unto the King; if thou
should come in upon the account of the Prethyterians, or should refuse to
bow to what they should set up, or not Jatisfy the covetousness of their
Priests, there be several of them would be ready to serve thee as they did thy
Father; and a little after he says, how abominably have these durty,
deceitful, covetous Priests, acted in all these changes, i.e. which he had
formerly spoken of.

Oh! it is hard to utter their deceit, who one while have prayed for a King and
Parliament; and when they saw the King was like to fall, and no ways likely to
maintain them, they turned against him, and prayed only for the Parliament,
and asserted their authority, and cursed them that would not go out to help
against the mighty; and shortly after, when Oliver Cromwell had turned out the
Parliament, and set up himself; they cried him up and prayed for him, and many
of them began to assert his authority to he just: and when he died, many of
these Preachers began to address themselves to his Son, and fawned upon him,
that he might provide for their God, which is their belly; and they appeared to
be sorrowful for his Fathers death, and blasphemously termed him, the Light of
their eyes, and the breath of their nostrills; and they told Richard, that God
had left him to carry on that glorious work which his Father had begun, and
some of these Preachers compared Ol. Cr. to be like unto Moses, and Rich like
unto Joshua, who should carry them into the promised land; and how soon did
some of them turn to cry for a Parliament again, when the Army turned out
Richard? and when George Booth made a rising, then they cried out against the
Parliament, and began to curse such as would not go out against them: and when
George Booth was taken, they petitioned to the Parliament to excuse themselves,
and that they had no hand in the rising; and now they are for thee, O King, and
if thou will believe them, thou art worthy to be deceived by them.

But, I should be overtedious, if I should relate unto you the abundant
blasphemies of their vile Doctrine, Which you may find at large in Arise Evans
his Euroclydon, per totum.
and obliquity of all the actious of these new Presbyters, and their
Proselites; and therefore I will pass to those things that are here mentioned,
and show the description of this second beast, as the H.G. does here set it
down, and leave my Reader to judge, whether they be not all fulfilled, and every
way appliable to our Presbyterians, to prove them, and none else, to be this
false Prophet, here mentioned in this Book of the Revelation.

Where notwithstanding I would have you to observe that there are two sorts of
the now and new Presbyterians; that is, 1. Rigidi, superhi and ambitiosi. 2.
Moderati, molles and timidi.


1. The proud, ambitious and rigid Presbyters, that sat at Westminster, like
the Synedrion under Cayphas, an Assembly of Divines, that chalked out the way
for the rest to follow them in their extravagant and exorbitant courses, and
these are the parts constitutivae, the chiefest, and the principal parts of
this false Prophet.

2. The moderate, remiss and fearful Presbyters are such, as to preserve their
livings, do unwillingly observe the Directory of the rigid Presbyters, that are
here so amply described by the holy Ghost, and do in all things correspond, and
are conformable to every point of the description of this two-horned beast, as
hereafter I shall show unto you.

The seed of this beast, though begun to be sown, When the seed of the beast
was first sown in the Church.
as the Apostle says of the my tery of iniquity, by Simon Magus, Ebion,
Cerinthus, Nicholas, and the like; in the first age of the Church; yet did not
this beast show his horns, nor this mystery so visibly with any strength
appear in our Church of Great Britain, till now of late; Indeed, when the godly
professors of the Gospel in King Edward the sixth his time, and in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, began to fow good corn in the field of
this our Church, and to make a reformation, and a rooting out of those weeds of
superstition, that the Ministers of the said mystery had spread, and now began
to be discerned among the wheat, then presently the envious man,
super-seminavit Zizania, that is, When Puritanisme began amongst us in these
dominions, which you may see more fully showed in Mr. Fullers History of our
Chuch. Brightman in Revelat. c. 2. Detrahunt no^is, perimus; detrahunt Canoni,
veritati non detrahant, Aug de verbis Aposteli Sermon. 14. And so may we say
of these men.
the devil stirred up his seeds-men, John Knox in Scotland, and Thomas
Cartwright in Ingland, to mingle our wine with wormwood, and to scatter
darnells and tares among our good wheat, whereby they infected very many with
an epidemical, and most deadly disease, then termed Puritanisme; the offspring
of the old Catharists, that is, a dissembling pharisaical purity, and pretended
holiness, far excelling the rest of their brethren, both in life and doctrine,
especially in the conscientious refusal to subscribe, and to submit themselves
to the established Liturgy, and the orderly observation of the discipline and
Ceremonies of our Church; which they spared not most loudly and lewdly to bark
against, and to call it the Laodicean, lukewarm Church; and the Governors and
upholders of all the good orders, uniformity, and discipline of this Church of
Christ, they blushed not to style Popish Bishops and proud Prelates, and the
Book of Common Prayer, (as if it had been the Turkish Alcoran) They persuaded
the people to believe it was the English Masse-Book, and all the Ceremonies
thereof the rags of Rome: and so belched out their poison against out Church:
And to what incurable mischief this disease was like to grow, that wise and
reverend Archbishop Bancraft did foresee, and with all his might endeavored
to prevent, by discovering and publishing the same unto the world; so did
worthy Doctor Whitgift before him; and so did Doctor Dove, Doctor Covell,
Doctor Gardener, Doctor Leon. Hutton, and Mr. Thomas Hutton, and many other
godly and learned men labor to unvaile this beast his face, to show his
horns, and the weakness of his reasons unto the weak and seduced people.

But as the harlot said unto Socrates, ego tibi Socrates multum praesto, I do
much excel thee, O Socrates, because I can sooner allure the youths of Athens,
and entice far more of them to my house of lewdness, then thou can with all
thy rhetoric and eloquence, persuade to thy School of Philosophy; so these
locusts, and their Proselites prevailed more with those that were such, as
Socrates answered, the harlot her customers were, proclives ad malum,
inclinable to be misled, and easily drawn to evil, as we are all by nature,
then all the wise Governors, and grave Doctors of the Church could do to
hindet them; so that in a short space, notwithstanding the execution of Martin
Mar-prelate, Penry, and some others in Queen Elizabeth's days, which did a
little stop their gallopping course, and the careful industry of King James to
suppress them, yet multiplicati sunt super numerum, they increased
exceedingly, like the frogs and rats of Egypt, that do super-faetare, beget
young ones, before they be rid of their old brood; and then, being so
multiplied, they that formerly pulled in their horns like a snaile, did begin
in King Charles his time, to set up their horns on high, and to speak with a
stiff neck; and now to set their instruments, the disconteuted Nobility and
Gentry, and their own seduced disciples on work, to bring their long-wished
purposes to an end; for, as the soul works no corporeal act, but by the
organs of his body; so these men, being spiritual men, could not themselves
prevail to attain unto their ends, against the power of the King, but having
so plentifully sown their seed among their Proselytes, and so well instructed
the body that was their instrument, they can with their help produce the acts
that they intended, and which they do suggest into the heads of the other
beast, which is their body.

And therefore, as in every sinful act, the soul, which is, actus primus
corporis organici and causa actuum secundorum, Arist. de anima l. 2. c. 1.
Text. 4.
Is more liable to judgment, and deserves more punishment then the body; so as
I said before, this spiritual beast is far the worst of the twain, and the
worst of all other beasts that ever were; so bad, that I am no ways able to
show unto you the badnesse, and to display the wickedness of this second
beast; yet, as the Arian heretics gave forth of themselves, Aug. epist. 48. ad
Vincent.
that they only were the true Catholic Church of God, and those that were the
members of the true Church indeed, they called Athanasians, Ambrosians,
Joannites; and as Nestorius being a pestilent heretic, covered himself
notwithstanding (...), with the cloak or veil of the Catholic faith, says
Theodoret, so I know these men think themselves to be the only true servants,
and the most faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ; but indeed, as David did worse
then Joab in the murder of Vriah; and as the teacher of a man to sin, is worse
then he that commits the sin, as the Serpent, that enticed the woman, to eat of
the forbidden fruit, was worse then the woman; so this second beast, that
seduced and taught the first beast, to do all or most of the evils and
wickedness that he did, is far worse then the first beast, that was but his
instrument, to effect all those vile acts and mischiefs, whereof this second
beast was the prime Author; instructor and instigator; and no marvel; for as
corruptio-optimi est pessima, The second beast far worse then the first
beast, and so I deem the Prerbyterians the worst of all the men in Ingland, and
the Authors of all the mischiefs done in this kingdom. Jerem. 24.23. Tertul.
l. de prescript. advers. haeres. c. 42.
and as Jeremy his figs were either exceeding good, or extreme bad; so are
the Preachers and teachers of men, either the best of men, and so worthy of
double honor, if with the true Prophets they go the right way to work, or else
the worst of all men, and so worthy of many stripes, if with this second beast
and false Prophet, they go about to corrupt the truth, to seduce the people,
and as Tertullian says of the heretics of his time, cum hoc sit negotium
illis, non ethnicos convertendi, sed nostros evertendi, to labor more to
overthrow us, then to build others in the faith of Christ; And as the Arian
Prelates, and Preachers were more cruel, and greater persecutors of the
Orthodox, then either the heathen tyrants, or the Ariankings, that were but
their instruments, and were indeed less bloody, and more conscientious then
their teachers; so are these Presbyterians, and Independents, and
Lay-Preachers, more proud and more cruel, and of less conscience, and less
honesty, (as being the prime Authors, fomenters, and devisers of all
villainies, miseries and mischiefs, that have been acted in these dominions,
ever since they were hatched) then were the members of that long Parliament, as
the sequel of their description, and their actions here specified, will make
it plain, and the Author of the Last Will and Testament of Sir John Presbyter,
in his Epitaph, that concludes too uncharitably, does briefly paint them forth,
saying, Here lies Jacke Presbyter, void of all pity, Sir John Presbyter, his
Epitaph.

That ruined the Country, and fooled the City;
He turned Preaching to prating, and telling of lies,
Caused Jarres and Dissentions in all Families;
He invented new Oaths Rebellions to raise,
Deceiving the Commons, whilst on them he preyse;
He made a new Creed, despised the old,
King, State, and Religion, by him bought and sold.
He four years consulted, and yet could not tell
The Parliament, the way Christ went into hell;
Resolved therein, he never could be,
Therefore in great have he goes thither to see.


And I would to God they had the Grace to see the mischiefs that they have
done, and to repent, that they may not go thither.

But, least I should condemn all alike, you must, as I said before, distribute
the whole Classis of Presbyterians into these two parts.

1. The plain, timide, unwilling and unskilful Presbyterians in the plots and
practices, and cunning devises of their Elder Brethren, and the other kind of
Presbyterians; for, these like well of the Episcopal Government, and could
very willingly conform themselves to the former discipline of our Church; but
for fear of want, and loss of Livings, they are unwillingly drawn to comply,
though more moderately, with the rest of the Presbyterians, and these I love,
and pity, and as they are moderate men, so I would have all men moderate in
their censures of them.

2. The rough, rigid, and proud polypragmaticall plotting Presbyterians, Where
you may see, the Author held the same Principles in his younger years, as now
he does in his old age.
that, for those causes and reasons, which I have set down in my resolution of
Pilate, well nigh fifty years ago, have, and do start aside from their faith
given, and from their duties, and obedience to the Governors, and Government
of the Church, and with all their wits, wealth, power, and abilities, do strive
and labor, rather to ruin the whole Church, and to bring all things to
confusion, then to be overswayed in their opinions, and be brought to any
subjection; their high minds cannot any ways bend, they are like oaks, not
willowes; and these are this second beast, whose ways I hate with a perfect
hatred, and think them well worthy our Saviors censure, to be heaten with many
stripes; because they know their Masters mind, and do it not, and in that
respect are far worse then the worst men that were in that long Parliament.

And here, I would have all men to observe, how these two beasts, How the two
beasts combine themselves together.
the feven headed, and the two horned beast, do combine and unite themselves to
effect all their purposes, and join together hand and heart, to assist each
other in all their projects; whereby it appears most manifest, that the Great
Antichrist consists of Tyrannizing Magistrates, and false Prophets, of a
secular Authority, and a spiritual or Ecclesiastical directory: all is but
one grand Enemy of Christ, and one Army of the Dragon, though disposed by their
Prince into two special Regiments.

CHAP. II. Why this second beast is said to be risen out of the earth; what is
meant by the two horns of this beast, and the two things signified by them;
what it is to speak like the Dragon. Of the wonders, or miracles of the Beast,
all false, in respect of the four special causes of true miracles; and of the
fire that this Beast brings down from Heaven, what it signifies.
BUt now, having understood, who is meant, and to be understood by this second
Beast, that is, as all Interpreters agree, the Preachers, and the Proclaimers
of the goodness, and the piety of the Antichrist, which is conceived to be the
Presbyterians, Independants, and Lay Preachers of the Long Parliament; we are
to proceed to the description of this Beast, and his actions, both his words
and his works, which will make the former Exposition, that shows who he is,
the more plain unto you. For,

1. Why this beast is said to be raised out of the earth. Jan. in Annot. in
h^^oe Mr. Mede. in loc. page 65.
He is said, verse 11. to be (...), that is, a Beast, risen (...), out of the
earth, that is, says Junius, quia haec bestia est terrae filia, id est,
obscure natae, and pedetentim emergens ex abiectione sua; because those
Ecclesiastical Prelates, (he means the Pope and his Cardinals) were sprung
up, out of obscure flocks, mean parentage, and poor beginnings, and by little
and little erept into the height, and highest step of all earthly dignity; and
with him Mr. Mede almost agrees in words, as he does in sense, saying, that he
is sprung from the lowest condition, or rather, because he is sprung up
secretly, without noice, like herbs out of the earth; Mares. p. 138.
which Exposition, though among so many Popes, foam of them sprung from mean
parentage, as Sixtus 5. was the son of a heardsman, Benedict. 12. of a baker,
Urban 4. of a shoemaker, and some others, so mean, that we know neither their
Sir-names, nor their Country; yet can it not be applicable to the
Roman-Clergy, when, as I told you before, the men, signified by the first
Beast, that rose out of the Sea, that is, from the vulgar and common people,
were of meaner abstract, and of far worse breeding, then the Roman Cardinals
and Bishops were, whereof diverse were Princes, even by birth, and the children
of Nobles, of Princes, and of Kings, as not only the Records of Spain, but
also, to go no further, the Chronicles of our own Kingdom, do sufficiently
testify; therefore I rather conceive, this beast is said to be risen out of
the Earth, because their hearts and souls were like Demases, only earthly,
glued to these vanities, and bewitched with the love of this present world, 1
Cor. 15.47.
even as St. Paul says, the first man is of the earth, earthy, and as is the
earthy, such are they that are earthy; so are the men signified by this beast,
earthy, and worldly, though of all others, they ought to have been, as they
professed themselves to be, most heavenly; for so St. Paul tells Titus, Titus
1.12. 1 Pet 2.3. Jude v. 11.
that they teach things which they ought not, for filthy lucre sake; and St.
Peter says, that through covetousness, they shall, with feigned words, make
Merchandise of you; and St. Jude says, they run greedily after the error of
Bal^am, that is, for reward; and St. Paul tells us plainly, that they which
cause division and offenses, Romans 16, 17, 18. The Parallele. The Assembly of
Presbyters and the rest of the pre-byterians most worldly.
contrary to the doctrine, which you have learned, serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own belly, that is, to get the things of this world, to
satisfy their fleshly lusts; but, for their earthliness, their covetousness,
and in justice, in taking, and possessing their brethrens livings and
livlihoods, it is so well known, that I need not speak of it, but only to say
with St. Paul, thou that teach another, not to steal, do thou steal?
thou that would have thy Parishioners to be just, will thou be unjust? and
take the bread out of thy brothets mouth? take heed, how thou will answer this,
at the last day. And I believe, that if the Assembly of Presbyters, and the
rest of the Independent and Lay-Preachers, had not been very worldly, and most
earthly minded, ambitious of greatness, and desirous to be wealthy, and to have
the honor, to bear rule, and to be, as the Scribes and Pharisees coveted to
be, great among the people, they would never have caused such division and
offenses in our Church, contrary to the Doctrine that we learned, and contrary
to all the established Laws of this Land: and they would never have disdained
to be Canonically subject to their Diocessan Bishops, and so make shipwreck of
their faith and a good Conscience, and through their pride, that aspired to be
free Masters, and no less then a Pope in every Parish, and through
covetousness, and hope to share the Episcopal Revenues among themselves, so
eagerly to have proceeded, to deface the most Glorious National Church that
was on Earth.

And, as the Apostle bids us, to mark them that cause division and offenses,
as he did himself by name, mark, and made known unto the people, Hymeneus and
Philetus, and Alexander the copper smith, and as St. John marked Diotrephes,
and our Savior Christ the Scribes and Pharisees, (...). Let the Reader judge,
if this be not fulfilled in the Presbyters.
that the people might avoid them, as they are commanded; so I could name to
you, such Presbyterians, that are so earthly, so worldly, so covetous, and such
extortioners, if printed books say true of them, as would make men wonder, that
any Christians should be such; but, I love not to throw dirt in any particular
man's face, only I let you know, that I conceive this to be the meaning of the
rising of this beast out of the earth, that he is earthly minded, as in
general, I say, and am sure of it, the Presbyterians are.

Then secondly, it is said in the same v. 11. 2. What is meant by the two
horns of this beast.
that this Beast had (...), two horns, like a Lamb, or like unto the Lamb;
and that is, the Lamb, which was spoken of in the eighth v. And these two
horns, says Grotius, do signify the chastity, and the abstinence, of
Apollonius, and the rest of the Magicians; by which virtues, so greatly
commended by the Christians, they made themselves most acceptable unto them;
but, while Grotius applies this Prophecy to Domitian and Apollonius, as he
does the other of St. Paul, 2 These. 2. to Caius, and to Simon Magus, he makes
the Apostles to Prophecy of things already done, and extending themselves no
further then their own time, which is contrary to the sense of all Expositors,
and cannot properly be said to be Prophesies, as I showed to you before. Mares.
p. 139.
They that mistake this Beast, and take him for the Pope, do likewise mistake
these horns, for the two fold sword, the Temporal and the Spiritual Power of
the Pope. Acosta says they are insignia (...), Acosta de tempor. nouis. l. 2.
p. 17.
the ensigns of the Episcopal Dignity, that was expressed by their Miter,
which seemed like Moses his horns, that were but the radiant beams of Glory,
which, like the sunbeams, reflected from his face and forehead, when he
descended from the Mountain, where he had been in conference with Almighty God:
and this dignity this Beast assumed to himself, which was only peculiar to the
Episcopal Function.

And did not the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, The Parallele. The
Presbyter challenge the Episcopal Dignity, and more.
and every one of the Presbyterians, arrogate, and challenge this Dignity unto
himself, when he refused to be subject, and to be directed by his Diocessan;
and with the Heretic Aerius, did stiffely maintain, that there was no
difference in Gods word, betwixt a Presbyter and a Bishop? yes; their own
writings, and the whole Kingdom are sufficient witnesses of this truth; yea,
they affected indeed far more then the Episcopal Power, as it has been fully
showed in the Diurnalls, and the weekly intelligence of the Parliament; and as
King James found it in Scotland, and the Independants and Lay-Preachers shall
find it to their cost, if ever the Presbyterian Government should be
established. But,

Mr. Mede says, that by these two horns, Mr. Mede. p 66.
we may understand the Power of binding and loosing, which Christ left to his
Apostles, and to their Successors here on earth, and which this Beast does
assume unto himsef; but, if this Power had been here to be understood, the Holy
Ghost had not said, these horns were like the horns of the Lamb, but that
this Beast had the two horns of the Lamb; because the Power of binding and
loosing are the two right horns of Christ, Revelat. 3.7.
that only has the Keys of David, which opens, and no man shuts, and
again, shuts, and no man opens; and this twofold Power Christ has given
to his true and lawful Ministers; Cornelius a lapide in loc.
and they truly and rightly have the two bornes of the Lamb, which, this beast
had not, but had counterfeit horns, (...), like the horns of the Lamb, as
Cornelius a Lapide, well observes; therefore this twofold Power cannot be
here understood.

But, because strength and Power is commonly understood by (...), the horn,
and our Savior Christ, that is here understood by the Lamb, showed his Power,
while he walked here on earth, chiefly in two main things; that is, The 2
things that are fignified by the two horns;
1. In his Prophetical Office, of foretelling things to come. 2. In his
Supernatural working of wonders, and miracles among the people.


So this beast pretends to be endued with the same double Power of the Lamb,
as, The Paralele. Let the reader, judge if Presbyters do not arrogate them to
themselves.
1. Of Foretelling hidden and future things. 2. Of Working strange miracles.
And Though I know the Presbyterians, and their associates, will deny, that
they challenge these horns, and the Power of doing these things, unto
themselves; yet, res ipsa loquitur, let their doings be the Judges of this
point; 1. To foretell things to come.
For,

1. Do they not presume, but most impiously, though not directly in words, yet
obliquely, by their deeds, to tell you, who are Saints, and who are sinners;
who are Elect, and who are Reprobates; who shall be the Heirs of Heaven, and
who must be the firebrarnds of hell; not plainly, it may be, but by their
deeds, I say, it is plainly seen they do it: and such knowledge is too
excellent for us, we cannot attain unto it; when the Apostle tells us in plain
terms, that the Lord, 2 Timothy 2.19.
and the Lord only, and not any man, knows who are his; that is, his Elected
Saints, They are so well versed in the hearts of men, and can so finely
distinguish betwixt the Saint and the sinner, the elect and the reprobate, that
herein no Tricotomist can be more acute.
that shall inherit his Kingdom; and yet these wise eagle-sighted
Presbyterians, contrary to this Testimony of the Apostle, when they Administer
the Holy Eucharist, besides other times at their pleasure, can distinguish
betwixt the sheep and the goats, and admitting the sheep to partake thereof,
they can exclude the goats from the Lords Table; though Christ admitted Judas,
whom he knew, far better, then these men do know those, whom they reject and
cast away; and we can, and ought to do no more, to the lewdest offenders, but
to show them the danger of the unworthy receivers, and exhort them to repent,
and to believe in Christ; and upon the confession of their faults, and
profession of their Faith and repentance, we ought to believe them to be Gods
children, and receive them among the Faithful, and leave them all for Christ
to judge, which of the guest does want his wedding garment.

Yet we confess, That the Apostles had two manner of gifts. 1. Extraordinary.
it is true, that the Apostles had a double qualification.

1. The one extraordinary, which was requisite for the planting of a new
Church, and that consisted chiefly in these two things. 1. Infallibility of the
Doctrine which they taught. 2. A powerful working of miracles to confirm that
doctrine, and to win the hearers to give credit, and to believe the same.


And when the Churches were converted, these graces determined, and ceased with
the Apostles.

2. Ordinary which were either.
2. The other was ordinary, which was requisite for the instructing, guideing
and ruling of the Church, so long as the Church should continue, till Christ
should come to judgment.

And these graces, that were thus requisite for the continuance of the Church
in the service of God, were likewise of two sorts.

1. Common.
1. Common to the Apostles and Presbyters, and Deacons; as reading the
Scriptures, preaching, or expounding the word, administering the Sacraments,
provision for the poor, and other like christian duties. 2 Proper, which the
Apostles reserved unto themselves, 2. Proper, which consisted in two things.
and to the Bishops that were to be their successors, to guide and to govern
the Church after them. And this proper qualification of the Apostles, which
they left as peculiar to the Bishops, that were to succeed the Apostles, was,
and is likewise twofold. 1. Ordination.
1. Ordination of Presbyters and Deacons, to read the word, and to preach, and
to administer the Sacraments, and to do all the other common duties of the
Church. 2. Jurisdiction which was twofold. 1. The lesser censure. 2. The
greater censure.
2. Jurisdiction, in censuring those that were refractory, and walked
disorderly in the Church; and this Ecclesiastical censure is either 1. The
lesser which is a debarring of the offender from the Lords Supper. 2. The
greater censure, which was by such an excommunication, as excluded the offender
quite from the Churh,


and was not received into it, until he had satisfied the Church by his
confession of his fault, and repentance showed for the scandal he had given.

Now such is the pride and ambition of every Presbyterian, that he would have
nothing left proper unto the Bishop, but that all must be common as well to him
as to the Bishop; How the Presbyterians do usurp the authority of the Bishop.
he cannot endure to be excluded or debarrd from any thing, but cries out, as
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram did against Moses, and Aaron, that the Bishops take
too much upon them; And therefore

1. They usurp and assume unto themselves the office of ordination, and do make
Priests themselves; the which boldness of theirs, I intend not to stand now to
confute; but do assure the people, Lay-preachers and tradesmen to execute the
Ecclesiastical function, have as good authority and calling as the new
Presbyterian Priests.
that the Priests of their making have no better calling nor authority to enter
upon that sacred function, then he, that is made a Judge, or a Justice of Peace
to rule the country, by a company of highway thieves, and robbers; and the
Lay-preachers, be they what they will, husbandmen or tradesmen, Tailors,
Shoemakers or Weavers, or the like; may as lawfully, and perhaps more
blamelesly, do all the service of the Church, as any of them that have their
ordination from these Presbyters.

2. They usurp the jurisdiction over the Church, as well as the ordination of
the Priests unto themselves; and they are more rigid in their censures, that
are also more illegally done, then either Bishop or Pope, See the translation
of Grallae. page 69. to page 90. and you shall find how these Presbyterian
censures; do exceed the tyranny of the Pope.
who exercised their discipline and censures in open Court, in forma juris, and
secundum allegata and probata; when the Presbyterians do it secundum
beneplacitum, as it seems good in their own eyes, because they have the
discerning spirit, to know who are worthy to be received, and who ought to be
excluded both from Christ, and from the Church of Christ.

And yet I do not wonder so much, that the Presbyters should be so ambitious,
to lay hold of this authority, as I do admire that the people should be so
foolish, as to hate us for telling the truth unto them for their own benefit,
and showing the other men's iniquity.

But I remember a story that Sir Thomas Moore tells us of two famous
Philosophers, that by their great skill in astronomy, foresaw that at such a
constellation, A pretty story of Sir Thomas Moor.
there would fall such a shower of pestiferous rain upon the earth, that all
the men, which escaped not the drops of that rain, should presently prove
frantic, and be distracted of their senses; whereupon those Philosophers
concluded, that they would hide themselves in a Cave, until that shower was
passed over, and so they did; and all things succeeded as they expected; for
when they came out of their hole, where they were hidden, they found all the
people, like madmen, playing the Anticks; and therefore they being sober,
thought to do them good by advising them to leave their fooleries and to follow
after sobriety; but the mad people told the Philosophers, that they themselves
were mad, and they would take a course with them, for saying, that they were
out of their wits, and knew not what they did; and so they laid hold on the
Philosophers and beat them, and they had much ado to escape from these mad
people with their lives; this was the reward they had for their well-wishes,
and desire to do those mad people good; to guide them and to direct them in the
right courses.

I wish it may not be so with us, that the people prove not themselves like
those upon whom that fatal shower descended; and that they would not deal with
us, It is easier to find few wise men, then to find many wise men.
for telliug the truth of these men's doings for their good, as those mad men
did with those Philosophers. And I would the people, that are so affected to
the Presbyterian government, would consider, whether it be as easy to find ten
thousand wise and sober moderate men, as to find out ten. The Kings and
Emperors heretofore were very careful to make choice of the best and wisest
men that they could find, to put these offices, and the government of the
Churches into their hands, and they thought it well, in such a kingdom, as this
of Ingland, if they found 26. men, that with the help and advice of their
brethren, their Deans and Prebends were sufficient to govern the Churches so
wisely, and so orderly as they ought to do it: and do you think it is as easy,
to find 6000. men that are fit to do it? that you may place a Bishop in every
Parish? I think you will fail; and your selves, at last will see your own
folly, and smart for your mistaking, when every Parish Priest will be as
imperious over you, as Hildebrand was over Henry the fourth. But

2. Touching the working of strange miracles, we say it was a great miracle, 2.
To work strange miracles. 1 Reg. 17.23. Acts 9.4. John 11.44.
that Elias did to raise the dead child of the widow of Sarepta, and a great
miracle that Saint Peter did, to raise Dorcas, an old widow, that was dead, to
life again; and it was a greater miracle that Christ did, to raise up Lazarus
out of his grave, when he had been dead four days. And yet besides their many
meaner, miracles, that these Presbyters say they do, they pretend, if you will
believe them, to do things that are far more miraculous, and greater wonders
then any of these, or them either, that Moses or Elias, or any other of all the
Prophets or Apostles ever did; for we are sure, that neither of all those,
either did, or could raise a soul dead in trespasses and sins, to the life of
grace; but this, being as it were a new creation, it must be left alone to God,
for ever, whose proper work it is, to create a new heart, and to renew a right
spirit within us; yet this beast, and the disciples of this false Prophet do
boast and brag unto the people, of the multitude of Saints, that they have
begotten to God; when as indeed, they have of late seduced them to be as false,
and as rebellious as themselves. What wonderful thing the Presbyters do. Psalm
51.10. The discourse of a Presbyterian with the Author. Esaias 53.^^.
And so, one of them asked me, where were the Seals of our Apostleship, the
signs and evidences of our Bishops and Prelatical men's ministry? how many
souls had they converted unto God? and where were those converts, whereby they
might approve themselves unto the people, to be the true Ministers of God, as
they could do, by the confession of their Proselytes? and I answered, that I
feared their converts were but perverted, and that I conceived it was not in
man's power to convert souls, when as the Prophet cries, who has believed our
report? and again, all day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a
disobedient and a gainsaying people; and if it had been in man's poower to work
faith in the hearts of the hearers, then questionless, Rom 10, 1. etc. 9.3. We
have not the power to convert souls.
this great Prophet would have done it in the children of Israel; and Saint
Paul would have converted the Jews his own brethren according to the flesh,
whom he did so dearly love, as himself does testify, to have believed in
Christ; but we know that, although the false Prophets may easily pervert men to
disloyalty and wickedness; because the devil is always ready to help them,
and natural men are prone to evil; yet we cannot convert men to the true faith
and to goodness, Acts 15.19.
unless the Spirit of God cooperateth with us, to open the hearts of our
hearers, as he opened the heart of Lydia, when the Apostle preached unto her;
because as Saint Hierom says, inanis est sermo docentis, nisi intus sit qui
docet, the Preacher may say with the Prophet, in vacuum laboravi, I have
labored in vain, if God by his spirit does not preach unto the heart.

And therefore their wonderful brags of converting souls, are but lying
wonders, not to be regarded by any man that regards the truth: Psalm. 15.12.
and these horns are not the horns of the Lamb, but ungodly horns, and the
horns of the ungodly; which, as the Prophet says, shall be broken by the Lord,
all to pieces. That the two horns may signify the two Testaments, Torres. in
sua Philosophia morali page 849. Texeda page 6. of his miracles unmasked.


Or else these two horns, as Cornelius a lapide says, to whom I subscribe, may
signify the two testaments, which are robora and ornamenta Christi, the
strength and ornament of Christ, and the language of the lamb, which bring men
to believe in Christ, rather then then all the miracles of Christ; for, as
Torres out of Lactantius says, non idcirco a nobis creditur Christus, quia
mirabilia fecit, sed quia vidimus facta esse omnia quae nobis annuciata sunt
vaticinio prophetarum; Christ is not therefore believed by us, because he
wrought miracles (which Vespasian did, and the idolatets of China do, and the
false Prophets, by our Saviors testimony, may do;) but because we have seen
all things accomplished, which were foretold us of him by the Prophets: The
parallel. This is infallibly fulfilled in the Paesbyterians.
And the beast lays claim to these horns, and so of all the Preachers, and
Prophets, Papists or Protestants, it is well known that none pretend more love,
and more right to these horns, then the Presbyterians, and the Independent and
Lay-Preachers do; for they reject all other learning, and all authorities, of
Counsels, Fathers, Poets, Orators, Histories, and all other Books, and will
allow of nothing but the pure book of the holy Scripture; they will have none
other horns but these, which they say, are the horns of our Lamb, and no
Christian will deny them to be so, nor gainsay the strength and authority of
these horns.

And yet, as A lapide rightly observes, as I told you before of it, A good
obserservation of Cornel a lapide in loc.
this beast is said to have, not the two horns of the Lamb, but two horns
(...), like to the horns of the Lamb; and every Sophister can tell you, that
nullum simile est idem, that which only is like a thing, is not the thing; and
therefore though they cry out with the false Prophets of the Jews, os Domini
loquutum est, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, for they preach nothing but
Gospel, and the pure Scriptures of the two Testaments; and it is we, and not
they, if you believe them, that run to the puddles of humane authorities; yet
in very deed, it is no such matter; for the holy Ghost, that best
understands, both the language of the Lamb, and of this beast, tells us
plainly in the very next words, that although their horns be like the horns of
the Lamb, yet in truth, Why this second beast is said to speak like the Dragon.
(...), the beast speaks like the Dragon; that is, though their words are
pretended to be the words of Christ, yet, that which they aim at, to effect,
are the plots of the Dragon; and I beseech you mark it; the first beast had a
mouth like a Lion, but this second beast spoke like the dragon; and why so?
because the first spoke Magnalia, great and glorious things, what would they
not do, The parallel.
if they might have what they desired? so you may remember, what fair promises
the Parliament made unto the King: and the second spoke mendacia, lies, and
falsehood, which is the first language of the old Serpent, the devil; who is a
liar from the beginning, and the father of lies, says our Savior, Job. 8.
John 8.
and so is the false Prophet; and as the Dragon clothed his lies with sair
speeches, and large promises; saying, you shall be like Gods, knowing good and
evil; so the Apostle tells us, Romans 16.18. 2 Pet. 3.26. Mat. 4.6.
these false teachers, that make divisions in the Church, and Rebellions in the
Commonwealth, and dissentions among neighbors, do with good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple; and what are those good words, but
the very words of the Holy Scriptures, then which, no words can be better; yet
St. Peter tells us, the Scriptures may be wrested, abused, and misapplyed, as
the Devil did to Christ: and so do the false Prophets; Trenens l. 1. c. 1.
for, seeing they come in sheeps clothing, it behooves them to bring nothing but
good words, even the most blessed words of the Holy Scriptures in their
mouths; but, as Ireneus speaks, adaptare ^upientes ea, quae been dicta sunt,
iis quae male adinuenta sunt ab ipfis; they are always striving to fit those
things, which are well spoken in the Scriptures, to what they have misinvented;
so did the Valentinians, to establish their thirty couples of Gods and
Goddesses; so did the Arians, to deny the Divinity of Christ; so do the
Papists, to justify their Purgatory; and so this Beast, the Presbyterians, and
their Disciples do, to uphold all the wicked Tenants that they have invented;
to oppose their King, to expel their Bishops, and to extirpate our Lyturgy,
and service of the Church, out of the Church; and to spread many other points
of their desperate Doctrine, which is, if any thing be, the Language of the
Dragon, though they speak it in the good words of the Holy Scriptures, and fair
speeches, which is a counterfeit show of much purity and holiness, that so,
with this shadow of piety, they might the sooner make the people believe, they
are the only Saints, Stap in his counter blast.
and their words the very truth, and language of the Lamb.

And I think the adherents of the Long Parliament, and this false Prophet,
scattered as many lies in their Books and Pamphlets, as Stapleton collecteth
out of Bishop Horn, if we had but such another Stapleton to pick them out; and
if you can name any Pope, that published more lies then this false Prophet, I
shall subscribe to the opinion of the Prosbyterians, that he is the beast which
speaks like the Dragon.

But, Sir John Presbyter confesses, that although they pretend nothing but
Scripture, yet, the Blasphemies, Treasons, Heresies, Incongruities,
Tantalogies, and Absurdities of his brethren and children, the Presbyterians,
in the large measure of their Prayers and Sermons, observed by the people, has
been a great cause of his untimely death. p. 5.

3. It is said, v. 12. that this two horned beast exercises (...), all the
Power of the first beast, or rather all the Authority, which (...) does more
properly fignifie; and he causes the earth, and them that dwell therein, to
worship the first beast, Bezius de regno Ital. l. 4. c. 5, 1. c. and 6.
which cannot be applied to the Pope and his Cardinals, that say, the
Temperall Sword is, and ought to be, subject to the Spiritual, as Bozius,
Hostiensis and Bellarmine, and the rest of that Church do avouch; and I showed
you before, how this false Prophet, the Presbyterians, Independants, and
Lay-Preachers, did all that they acted by the Authority, and under the Power of
the Parliament; Hostien. in can quod supor. his. etc. Bellarm. de romans pontif.
l. 5. c. 5. The parallele. Of the power of the second beast, plainly fulfilled
in the Presbyterians.
and therefore they Preached, and persuaded all men, especially the Inhabitants
of the earth, as the holy Gh. says, all such as were as earthly, and as
worldly minded as themselves, to adhere and to assist the Parliament against
the King and his Party, which is just, as is the worshipping of the first
beast, that is, the temporal state, and which is, and has been always the
property and practice of all false Prophets, to shelter themselves, as the
Arians did under Constantius, and to further their Projects under the wings of
their Powerful Protectors,, whom they do therefore magnify, and persuade all
others to worship them, that they might thereby effect their own wicked deeds,
and be secured from the Power of the Church. Then,

4. Of the miracles of the false prophet.
4. It is said v. 13. (...); and he does great wonders; where I take (...),
and, not for a disjunctive, or causative, as Mr. Mede takes it, but, as it is
commonly used for a copulative, to that which went before, as, that this second
beast used the Power and Authority of the first beast, and, being protected and
furthered by the Power and strength of the first beast, they did thereby great
wonders; and so St. Paul says, 2 These. 2.9.
the Antichrist should come, (...), with signs, and lying wonders; and our
Savior says, Bellar. Antichr. prodigia, potius praestigia daemonum mera and
mira quam vera miracula statuit. de notis eccles. c. 14.
the false Christ's and Prophets that are the followers and promoters of the
Antichrist, should arise, (...), and should show great signs and wonders;
whereby you may see, that both the beast and his instruments, the Antichrist,
the false Prophet, and the whole troop of his disciples, shall pretend to show
signs and wonders, to deceive the people; and the signs that they show are
just like the sign, that Judas gave unto his followers, a kiss, which is a
pretense of love, and great kindness: but it was both destructive to Christ,
and deceitful to the followers of Christ; so the beast, and the false Prophet
do kiss those their Proselites, with good words, and fair promises, whom they
intend to allure to foul acts, and to betray them to evil enemies; and so the
people are thereby deceived, and the Church of Chrift destroyed.

But (...), a wonder, which the false Prophets are said by Christ to do,
Aquinas in 2 These. 2. Prodigia quasi procul a digito.
is a degree beyond (...), a sign; for signs are but parva mira, some strange
accidents, and things done within the sphere of nature, but (...), wonders,
(which some conceive to be derived (...), that fignisieth to terrify, because
they strike amazement in the beholders,, Stapleton. asserit illa vera miracula
futura quoad actus su pernaturales, sed mendacia quoad usum, quia mendacio
inserviunt. dom. 24
as things that do far exceed the reach of nature, or the second causes) are
things of a higher strain, quaeque omnium naturalium causarum and creaturarum
vires excedunt, which do exceed the strength of all natural causes, and the
Power of all the creatures; and so there must be a supernatural Power, and a
Divine virtue to effect them; And such wonders this beast would pretend to do;
and not only this beast, but many other false Prophets, would pretend to do
the same: as I said before; for so the Friars, and the Nuns of the Roman
Church, have filled the world with such pretended miracles, Texeda. p. 23.
as could not be done without Divine strength, whereof you may see diverse of
them in Texedas miracles unmasked, and especially those of Mary, of the
visitation, priors of the Monastery of the Anunciada in Lisbon.

Presbyterians pretend not to do any such miracles; and therefore they cannot
be this false Prophet, nor can they be justly charged for such doings.

I Answer, that the deceits and fallacies of the pretenders to do miracles,
have been so sufficiently discovered by St. Augustine, St. Chrysostom, and
others of the ancient Fathers, and specially by our learned Protestants, that
have displayed the counterfeit miracles of the Roman Church, and the juggling
tricks of the Nuns and Friars, that the Presbyterians have so much wit, Aug. l.
de unitate Ecclesiae. The Parallele.
as in plain terms, not to pretend to work miracles; yet they will tell you
of such things, that the Parliament and themselves have done, which, if done,
as they say, are greater miracles, then any of the pretended miracles of the
false Friars; for, the doings of the Parliament, slaying the Witnesses, Let my
reader judge if the Presbyters have not hereby fulfilled this prophecy.
changing the Times, altering the Laws, stripping the Church of her Revenues,
subduing all Opposers; and the Pretensions of the false Prophet, (the
Presbyterians, and the Independants, and Lay-Preachers,) to convert souls, to
make Saints, to make fire to come down from heaven, to pull down the
Antichrist, to overthrow the whore of Babylon, to reduce all the Tribes of
Israel to the Sheepfold of Christ, as they hope to do, and the like (...),
strange things, The miracles of the Presbyterians greater then the miracles of
the Friars.
seeming to all the people, to surpass all humane reach, and not to be done,
but by the singer, and special providence of God, which they plainly Preach so
to be, unto their hearers, must needs be conceived to be greater wonders then
the pretended miracles of the Friars; and so accordingly (as great miracles,
and strange wonders are wont to do) these very things have wrought such an
admiration and amazement among the people, that they were very easily deceived,
by the means of these things, that were indeed, but as the Apostle says, the
miracles of the Antichrist should be, (...), lying wonders, false fignes, and
deceitful miracles, in respect of all the causes of true mirales; For,

1. That the wonders of the Presbyterians are all lying wonders. Bellarm de.
to. Pontif. l. 3. c. 15. Corn. Alapide in h. loc.
Whereas the end of a true miracle, and the proper use of it is to confirm, and
justify an extraordinary calling, and the truth of the Doctrine of them that
are so called, as Elias, and the Apostles did, and the Pharisees requested of
Christ to do the like, to show them a figue from Heaven, to justify his
extraordinary Office; the end of Antichrist his wonders, and of this false
Prophet, is not to justify their extraordinary calling, which they do not
challenge, lest that should discover them, but to deceive the people, and to
cheat them into a compliance with them in their wicked ways; and to that end,
says Gerhan, the man of sin, Vtitur, sapientia verborum, will be as eloquent
as Domosthenes, Guhan, in 2 These. 2.
and he uses simulatione virtutum, a dissimulation of much virtue in his life
and conversation, seeming as courteous as Titus, the son of Vespasian, The
differences betwixt true miracles and false. 1. Difference.
and as Religious as St. Antony, or Mark the Eremite; he will also use the
Testimony of the Scripture, and Preach, and allege Scripture, as readily, as
the Devil did to Christ; and he will pretend to do, (...), strange things, and
to make large promises of Preferments to his adherents, as, blessings here, and
happiness hereafter, if they follow him and his ways; and all this he uses
but to deceive the people, and to entice them to be his Proselites; and if
neither of these things, nor all these can do the deed, then as the King of
terrors, he will roar out his threatenings and persecutions like a Lion, no
less then hell and damnation remains for them; and are not the doings of our
Presbyterians just thus? as if Gorran had been alive, to have seen them, he
does so lively, and so punctually describe them under the person of the man of
sin.

2. Difference.
2. Whereas true miracles are done, by the help and operation of Gods Spirit,
as Nicodemus says to Christ, no man can do those things which thou do, John
3.2:
except God be with him; the lying miracles of the beast, and the wonders of
the false Prophet, are done by the help of the Devil, as the Holy Ghost
says, Revel. 13.2.
the Dragon gave him his Power, and his Seat, and great Authority, whereby
they were furthered, and enabled, to do those great things, and wonders that
they did; and St. Cyrill affirms, antichristum esse magum, and veneficiis,
and malis artibus instructissimum, the Antichrist to be a Magician, and most
expert in all kind of witcheries, Cyrill^s Cate^ ches. 15.
and wicked arts; I know not, whether any of the Long Parliament were such or
no, though many men suspected them to be such; but, I have often heard, that
those enthusiasts, that were Presbyterians, and Lay-Preachers, pretended
Revelations from God, which were indeed the delusions of the devil, 2 These. 2.
and as the Apostle says, strong delusions.

3. Difference.
3. Whereas true miracles are really the things that they seem to be; these
wonders of the beast, and his followers, the pretended doings of our
Presbyterians, videntur and non sunt, are but phantasmes and illusions, and a
kind of seeming to be, what they are not; and therefore Bellarmine well
observes, out of Ar^thas, this beast is said to do his wonders, (...), in the
sight of menj that is, so appearing to men, whose sight and judgment are
thereby deceived; for that they do nothing, of what they pretend and seemed to
do: but, the things that they do, are no such things indeed, in the sight of
God.

4. 4. Difference.
Whereas true miracles do exceed all natural causes, tam occultas quam
manifestas, as well the hidden secrets of nature, as those causes that are
known to us, and are done only by the hand and Power of God; and therefore
they are wonders, and not only in the fight of men, but also in the sight of
Angels and Devils; the wonders of the Antichrist, and his adherents, the
Presbyterians, and Lay-Preachers, have all of them their natural causes,
though they be hidden from the sight and understanding of the people; as, the
victories of the beast, and his successes, are obtained merely by his subtle
tricks, his cunning carriage of the war, and the desperate valor of his
soldiers; God gives them leave so to prevail over the pufillanimity, and
security of his children that offends him; and they are not obtained by the
immediate hand of Gods active Power, The Presbyterians gaining so many
Proselites, to what it is ascribed.
and a miraclous effecting Providence from heaven, as the beast pretends, and
so desperately blasphemeth God, in making him the author of all his bloody
cruelties, and the shedding of all the innocent blood that was spilt, which can
no ways stand, either with the goodness, or justice of God; and the
Presbyterians winning of so many simple men to follow after them, and to become
their disciples, to believe their erronius heresies, and damnable positions, it
is to be ascribed to their sedulity, vehemence, and good oratory, wherewith
Aeschines, Demosthenes, and Cicero, persuaded their Auditors to follow them,
and not to the powerful working of Gods Holy Spirit, who, though for their
sins, he permits the simple people to believe strong delusions, and to be
misled into most damnable conclusions by this beast, yet he never works, and
leads them into the same.

And therefore, what Vulteius Remensis says of some Franciscan Monks, that
played many juggling tricks in Orleance, Anno 1534. the same may be rightly
applied to these Presbyterians.

Cum clamat larvas furiosa caterua leonum
Infestare suam nocte dieque domum;
Res vera est; falsi larvati denique fratres,
Quos vestis sanctos prodigiosa facit,
Sunt lemures, larvae, furiae, vulpesque lupique,
Qui infestant vitiis seque suamque domum.
Which I may very well thus translate.

When Presbyters do cry, that scisme and heresy
Do spoil the Church of Christ;
The thing is true; for so these Saints in show
Are furious Fiends, the limbs of Antichrist,
That with their Lies and Heresies, given in a golden Cup,
Have poisoned all the whole Flock of Christ.
And so themselves are the Mischief that have spoiled all things, both in the
Church and Commonwealth.

But though all the wonders and workings of this false Prophet be but (...),
lying wonders, and no truth in them; yet hereby he deceives the people, and
especially when, as the Holy Ghost says, He makes fire to come down from
heaven on the earth: Touching which fire, What is here meant by the fire, that
the beast makes to come down from heaven. 1 Reg. 18.38.
we must not understand it to be such a fire as Elias brought down, to consume
the two fifty men that the King sent to fetch him: nor such a fire as by his
prayers came down to consume the Sacrifice upon Mount Carmel; because those
fires were true fires, and truly miraculously brought down by the Prophet: when
as the sire that this false Prophet pretends to bring down, is no such thing:
neither must we take it for such a fire, as Philostratus says, Apollonius
Tyanaeus fetched down from Heaven, in the fight of many people; because this
was some elfe-fire that he procured to appear, as the flash of a Meteor, by the
help and procurement of the Devil: when as this false Prophet pretends not to
bring down any such a fire; neither yet can I yield it should be taken, as Mr.
Mr. Medes Expofition rejected.
Mede and others of our late Writers do expound it: for the lightnings and
thunders of the Popes Bulls and Excommunication, against those that submit not
themselves to him and to his Decrees: because, as I showed to you before, the
Pope and his Cardinals cannot be understood by this false Prophet.

But I take it as a proverbial Hyperbole, for the application of that which was
said before, That this Beast does great wonders; so that he makes fire to come
down from Heaven: The parallel. The fire that Christ came to send on earth, the
Beast pretends to bring from heaven.
because the Jews do commonly attribute so much to the miraculous fire of
Elias, that they use for all wonderful works, proverbially to say, He brings
down fire from heaven, says Graserus: Or else it must be taken, as I rather
conceive, in that sense as our Savior takes it, when he says, I came to send
fire upon the earth: because this Prophet would fain seem to imitate Christ,
and to do all the things that he should do, and can do, as Christ did; and
therefore he pretends to bring the same fire that Christ brought down, and
that is, the fire of zeal, and a most ardent affection to Christ, and to the
truth of his Religion: and this fire the Presbyterians and the Independent and
Lay-preachers pretend to bring down from heaven to the earth, and
above all other men whatsoever: but in very deed, this fire of their is but an
ignis fatuus, a deceitful fire, and their seeming zeal, as well as all the rest
of their doings, is but as the Apostle says, a lying-wonder; for the true fire
that these men do bring, is of another kind, from another place, and to
another end; and that is, the fire of hatred and persecution, which they bring
from Hell, Not the fire of persecution.
and not from Heaven, and they bring it into the Church, and upon the true
Members of Christ, and not on the earth: but this their fire is not to be
understood in this place.

Beast brings the fire upon the earth; that is, the earthly minded men, whom
only he persuades to worship the Beast, and to adhere unto him, as being
deceived by his false wonders; and this he does by the fiery zeal of Gods
worship, which he pretends to bring unto them: and the persecution of the Beast
is against the Saints, and not against these earthly men, that by the sight of
this fire, are persuaded to serve and assist the beast, and to afflict the
Saints.

he deceives them that dwell on the earth: that is as I said, the earthly and
worldly minded men; for the true Saints he deceives not, but he deceives them
that dwell on the earth, and they worship the beast, and assist him and adhere
unto him; as being seduced and beguiled through the feigned and dissembled zeal
of the false Prophet; and the Sight of persecution, from them that profess
themselves Divines, could no more deceive the Beholders, and cause them to
worship the beast, then the persecutions of the Heathens deceived the people,
How the dissembling zeal of hypocrisy deceives many men.
that saw the Primitive Martyrs suffering for the faith of Christ: when as that
sight converted many of the Pagans to become Christians, as Sozomen writes,
and could do no more then terrify the fearful from christianity, but never
deceive any, to think well of the Persecutors, or ill of the pe secuted: but
the dissembling zeal of hypocrites has deceived many good men; and therefore
much sooner could the fiery zeal of this false Prophet deceive the carnal and
earthly men, and make them believe such zealous Professors, to be none other
then heavenly Saints. Nor the fire of false prestigies. But Janius in Annotat.
in loc.


And as this fire cannot be taken for the fiery persecution of the Saints; so
no more can it signify those falsa praestigia, the lying wonders, and the
juggling tricks of the Romish Priests and Friars, which Junius says, they used,
to justify their Doctrine of Purgatory, Indulgences, Transubstantiation, and
other like Popish Trumperies, whereof you may find store in their Legends, in
Vin ceutius his Speculum historiale, and some in Stapleton's moral Promptuary,
and in diverse others: because these fiery Meteors, or rather sulphurious fire,
and feigned wonders from the Souls in Purgatory, and those lying fables of
their Images sweating blood, and their wonderful Narratives of their Saints
Relics, and the Revelations of S. Bridget, and the like holy Matrons, do bear
no Analogy or correspondency with fire from heaven: when as all such
Prestigia's or prodigies, either of the Magiciaus, or of the idolatrous Priests
of the Gentiles, and so the feigned miracles of the Roman Clergy are well
known, not only by the learned, but even by all rational men, to be all framed
and forged upon the Devils Anvil, and do spring from Hell, and not from Heaven;
as all the honest Papists do confess: Teneda in his miracles unmesked, pa. 13.
but the fiery zeal which the Presbyterian beast pretends to have to Christ, to
his Religion, to the propagation of his Gospel, and to the pure worshipping of
God, above all other Saints of God, may without any absurdity, and without
incongruity be said, A fiery zeal to Christ and his sarvice.
and may be thought to be fire from Heaven; because such a zeal, if they truly
had it, as they pretend, could spring from no place else, and from no other
Fountain, then from the Spirit of God: and this fire of such a zeal, the false
Prophet pretends to make it to come down from Heaven on the earth; that is,
on the earthly, carual, and worldly men, to make them their Pros^lites, and so
to come to eternal happiness: and by their persuasion and the opinion that the
people have of thiis fire, and this their zeal, they are the sooner and the
more easily deceived, to become followers of their pernicious ways, and to be
the Assistants of the first beast.

Out of all which that I have showed, of their blasphemy against God, and their
tyranny over the Consciences of men, which is every way far worse then
tyrannizing over their bodies, it is apparent;

1. That although the Tenets of the Church of Rome, touching Purgatory, 1. The
doctrine of the Presbyterians more derogatory to the truth, justice, and
goodness of God then the doctrine of the Romish Church
praying to Saints, and adoration of Images, and the like stuff, be very
frivolous and fantastical: yet none of all the Doctrines of the Romish Church
is so scandalous, and so derogatory from the justice, truth, goodness, and
mercy of God, as are the Doctrines which these Presbyterians, Independants and
Laypreachers do preach, and publish in Print, concerning Original sin, the
cause of evil, Free Will, and the absolute irrespective Decree of God, touching
Election and Reprobation, and other the like points depending hereupon, without
any just distinction or expression of the foresight and knowledge of God,
which is so fully and so excellently set down by Doctor Stern, in his learned
Discourse, De medela animi, and by diverse others.

2. 2. The discipline and government of the Presbyterians, moro tyrannical over
the consciences of men, then the discipline and government of the Court of
Rome. Matthew. 11.28.
nor yet the Court of Rome has ever exercised such an absolute power, and
domineering Authority over the consciences of Christians, as this false Prophet
uses to do; for neither of the foresaid Courts did ever Excommunicate any
member of the Church, but either for apparent contumacy, and a wilful contempt
of the Power and Authority of the Church; or upon the proof of two or three
witnesses at the least, of such crimes, as were most scandalous unto the people
of God; and yet every petty Priest of our Presbyterians, either upon his own
malicious discontent, or some other private dislike to his neighbor, will debar
him from the Blessed Sacrament, and exclude him from the Body and Blood of
Christ, and so cut him off, as a rotten member, from his Savior, (that does so
lovingly invite him to come unto him) and deliver him unto Satan, as a lively
limb, to be tormented for ever. And, what is this discriminating of the sheep
from the goats, this admitting of whom we like, to be of our Church, and
refusing whom we hate, or do distaste, to any society, or fellowship with the
faithful? is it any other thing, then to fit in the Temple of God as God? and
oftentantes se esse deos, and every one of them showing himself, that he is
God, when he takes upon him to do the proper work of God, to distinguish the
reprobate from the Elect, the vile from the precious, and those, that have not
on their wedding garments, from them that had them on, which the true inviters
of Christ his guests durst not presume to do, until the Master of the Feast
came himself to see his guests, and to turn him out, that had not on his
wedding garment; how then dares every Presbyter do the same? Is not this to
have a Pope in every Parish? and, whether is it better to have one Pope, or a
thousand Popes, and every one of them more tyrannizing over their Flock, then
the Pope of Rome?

And therefore, if these Presbyterians, Independants, and Lay-Preachers, that
gather Churches unto themselves, out of the Church of Christ, and exclude many
true members of Christ, from the Communion of Christ, be not the false Prophet,
that has two bornes, like the Lamb, but do speak like the Dragon, I know not
who can be the true Prophet of Jesus Christ.

But, If you look into the translation of Grallae, that was made in vindication
of Vedelius, to answer Apollonius, and his Wallacrian Classis, which are the
Transmarine Presbyterians, you shall see, if that Author proves them not to be
all Popes, in every point: but the ignorant people are not yet acquainted with
them; for, he demands, if their pride and arrogance, as is seen in the
Wallacrian Classis, be settled in their Classis, how much will the world be
eased of the Roman Antichrist, that is the Pope; because they are such birds,
so like the Romish Pope, that they deservedly fall into AEsops fable of the
Cuckowe, which asked the rest of the birds, why they did all fly about him,
and pecke at him, as if he were a hawke, that did often molest them; whereas he
was a weak, and feeble bird, that neither did, nor wished them any hurt at all?
to whom the birds answered, they did it, because that in his feathers he was so
like an hawke, that they were afraid, and believed, that in a very short time
he would become an hawke; so the actions, and the doings of these
Presbyterians, like the Cuckowes feathers, are so agreeable to the pride and
presumption of the PoPe, and all the rest of his practices over Gods Flock,
that you may assure your selves, as soon as ever they shall have their Classes
settled, Puerilis Sapientiae cothurnus page 43.
and their Government established, you shall have so many imperious Popes
amongst you, as will vex you more, then ever the Pope of Rome has done; and
qui ante non cavet, post dolebit.

CHAP. III. Of the image of the first Beast; what is meant thereby: what it is
to give life to the Image of the Beast; the two things, that the Beast,
animated by the false Prophet, immediately acted; and the two things, that the
Long Parliament Acted, immediately after they were justified, encouraged, and
animated by the Assembly of the Presbyterians; of the mark of the Beast, and
of the engagement, and of the great iniquity of the engagement.
ANd therefore it follows in the next v. 14. that by the means of these
their pretended miracles, 5. Of the Image of the first beast.
that they do, that is, to convert souls, and to bring this fiery zeal out of
Heaven, unto their followers, they deceive them that dwell on the eartth, and
being thus deceived by them, they persuade them to make an Image to the first
Beast, that had the seven heads, and ten horns; for this was the usual
Honor, and the worship, that the people in those days, and in the eastern
Countries especially, did use to do unto their Emperors and Kings, or chief
Governors, whom they chiefly honored and obeyed; which was the first step, and
occasion of the idolatry of the Gentiles, when they began to ascribe Divine
Honor unto these images, as they did to the image of Belus or Nimrod, which
was the first Image that we read of; Rubenus de idololatrie. l. 1.
so the false Prophet persuaded the people to make an Image to the beast, and
so to honor, and to worship the beast.

And the Image of any thing must be a special resemblance of them, whereof it
is an Image, and f the Image be perfect and natural as the Son is the Image of
his Father, then must it have a likeness, not only representative, but also
in nature and being of existence; and if the Image be imperfect and artificial,
as the Image of a man drawn by the Painter on a Tablet, then, though it be
different, from the thing whereof it is an Image, in nature and being; yet it
must have a representative form of likeness, to the thing it represents; as
the Image drawn by the Painter, does resemble the person or thing that the
Painter draws; therefore I say the making of this Image to the beast, is not,
That the Empire caused to be set up by the Pope, is not here meant, as the
image of the old Caesarem Empire.
(as Mr. Mede, and all those, that would have the Pope and his Cardinals to be
this false Prophet, do say,) the setting up of the Roman Empire in the ten
horns, or ten Kings, that revolted from the Caesarean Empire, as the image of
that former Caesarean Empire, that was wounded, but now is healed and revived
in this image, that the Pope and his Cardinals caused to be set up, and to be
obeyed.

Caesarean Empire is not meant by this beast, that rose out of the sea, and the
Pope and his Cardinals cannot be meant by this second beast, and the false
Prophet.

similitude betwixt the image, and the person, or thing represented by the
image; but there is small resemblance, and abundance of difference and
dissimilitude, as much and more then was betwixt Pharaohs lean kinn and his fat
ones, or Hectors Ghost to the living Heroes, betwixt the old Caesarean Empire,
and the other new Empire, that was settled in the ten Kings; that being the most
glorious Monarchy that ever was upon earth; and this, that was established by
the Pope, but a skeleton, a shadow, and the bare name of an Empire only, of
far lesser power then some Kings of this small Island; and therefore, if by the
beast, that was wounded, we understand the old Caesarian Empire, and this new
settled Empire by the Pope, to be the image of it; I say, the wound is but very
ill and meanly healed, in that which is thus revived by the Pope, that gave a
shadow, and lost the substance; and the Pope is a very bad Painter, that can
draw his images no better.

But, the making of this image to the first beast, signifies nothing else,
What the making of an Image to the beast, signifies.
but the abetting, furthering, and setting forward of the doings, proceedings,
and impieties of the first beast; because the works and acts, the plots and
practices of the beast, are the very image, and the most lively representation
of the beast, as by and by I shall make it plain unto you. But so, the Pope and
his Cardinals never furthered and assisted the Emperonrs or civil State in
their tyranny, or impiety; but they required all Kings and Emperors to aid and
assist them, for the advancement and enlargement of the Church.

Yet it is notoriously known, The Parallel.
the Presbyterians and Lay-preachers persuaded all men to adhere to worship,
and to do all the honor and service that they could do unto the Parliament,
and seduced the people so far, that the very women were ready to part with
their rings, their thimbles, and their bodkins, to make money for to help and
to further the proceedings of the Parliament, Exodus 32.2, 3:
even as the Israelites parted with their earrings, and their Jewels, to erect
their Golden Calfe; and therefore this beast, this Ecclesiastical beast, who
may be said to be the Assembly of Presbyters and Independants, and
Laypreachers, is only said in this 14. verse, The mischievous persuasions of
the false Prophet.
to dcceive them that dwell on the earth, that is, all those that are like to
themselves, risen (...); from the earth, and are worldly minded men; and no
marvel, for it is most consonant to reason, and more likely, for the false
Prophet, then it is for the violent soldiers, that dispute the matter with the
sword, and will compel, rather then persuade, or the City Senators, that trade
only in worldly Merchandise, To deceive the people; poor people, that are
deceived by their leaders, and carried on the right way to bell, when they
think they are led straight to heaven.

But O thou false Prophet, thou deceitful Presbyterian, and the lawless
laypreacher, how will thou answer for all the injuries that have been done, and
all the blood that has been shed in our last war, through thy deceitful
persuasions, cum surrexerit ad judicandum Deus? when God shall come to make
inquisition for blood? for it is more then most likely, plain enough to them
that have their eyes open, the Parliament had never prevailed as they did, to
overthrow the King, to destroy the Bishops, to rob the Church, and to gain so
many victories; to make so many poor widows and Fatherless children, and
distressed infants, if thou had not most perfidiously and spitefully used all
the rhetorical art, to persuade the simple worldly men, to adhere, and to
assist that long Parliament, as the only Patrones of their liberty, protectors
of their estates, and the true propagators of the Gospel, against a King, that
invaded upon their estates, and incroached upon their privileges, and such a
Hierarchy of Bishops, and Episcopal Clergy, as did most palpably aim and
strive to bring in Popery like a deluge among the people, which was the string,
that the Presbyterians perpetually harped upon, and the only song, the false
song of their Sion. And therefore

6. 6. What is meant by the image of the beast. ver. 15. Doctor Sbelden page
13. Junius in annot in loc. Mr. Mede. page 67.
It is said verse 15. that this second beast gave (...), life, or breath, or
spirit, which (...) signifies, to the image of the beast; where the question
is, what is here meant by the image of the beast; and some Expositors, not much
amiss, do understand hereby the representation of the State and government of
the first beast; Junius means the setting up of images to be worshipped, in
the second Council of Nice; Mr. Mede says, the Roman Empire in the seventh
head, that is under the ten Kings, is the image of that Empire, as it was under
the sixth head, that is, the Caesarian Empire, which had the wound by the sword,
whose mistake herein, I have showed unto you even now, The impieties and
wickedness of the beaff ete the image of the beast.
that the present German Empire is but a very ill Image, of the old Roman
Empire; therefore I conceive, that to give life to the image of the beast,
signifies nothing else but to be a special means, and the chiefest
instruments to uphold and justify the Practices, impieties, and proceedings of
the beast, which is indeed to maintain the State and Government of the beast,
as Doctor Sheldon says; because the injustice, impieties, and wicked practices
of the beast; do most fully resemble, and are the very perfect image of the
beast; for, as an image shows the similitude and likeness of a thing to the
life, Geu. 1.27.
and as a man is said to be made in the image of God, which must not be
understood of any external form, or outward shape, which God, being a pure
spirit, Ephesians. 4.24.
cannot have, but must be understood of that holiness and true righteousness,
wherein man was created, as the Apostle shows, like unto God, Levit. 12.44.
Luke. 6.36.
and whereunto, we are now exhorted, to conform our selves, when the Lord
bids us to be holy, as he is holy, to be merciful, as our heavenly Father
is merciful; and so in all other imitable points and attributes, of goodness
and piety, whereby we may renew the lost image of God in our selves; so the
wickedness, the rebellion, the ungodliness, injustice, subtlety and cruelty
of the beast, John 8 44.
may as well be said to be the image of the beast; even as our Savior says,
the Jews were of their father the devil, that is, the very image of the
devil; Gen 5.3.
because they were liars, and murderers, and replenished with all other wicked
conditions, like unto the devil; and as Adam is said to have begotten a child
in his own image, that is, not only in the feature and liniaments of his body,
but especially in the deformity, mortality and corruptibility, that Adam by his
disloyalty had brought upon himself, and upon all his posterity; and as you
know, it is a common thing to say, that a subtle crafty fellow is, a fox; a
cruel man, a Tygar; an innocent man, a sheep; a foolish fellow, an ass; and
so forth: because of the likeness and similitude they bear, not to the shapes
and figures, but to the properties and conditions of these beasts.

And so, in this sense, What it is to give life to the image of the beast.
taking the image of the Beast for the wicked Government, and leaud practices
and proceedings of the beast, the second beast, that came out of the earth, is
said to give life to the image of the first beast; that is, to the wickedness,
and impieties of the first beast; because that, as the true Preachers, and the
Orthodox Ministers of Christ do, together with the inward help of Gods Spirit,
renew, and revive the image of God in men, in bringing the life of Grace unto
them, and destroying the image of the beast, and of the devil in them, by
killing their vices, and rooting out their impieties, and the lustful
corruptions of the flesh; so, the false Prophet, and the apostaticall earthly
beast, together with the help of the Devil, does give life and breath unto
the impieties, and wickedness of the first beast; even as the true Propets of
God tell us, the Priests of Baal did animate, The parallele.
and give life to the Idolatry of the Jews.

And thus, it cannot be said, that the Pope and his Cardinals did animate, The
Presbyterians animated all the proceedings of tha Parliament.
and give life, to the Tyranny and cruelty, or any other impiety, of any Civil
State, either of Kings or Emperors, that I read in any History; but, I suppose,
it is not unknown to any man in these parts, how the Preshyterians, and
Independants, and Lay Preachers, did animate, and give life to all the
injustice, and the impieties, and all the unjust proceedings that were done by
that Long-Parliament; or otherwise, their attempts against the King, Bishops,
and Church, had sooner died, had they not received life, from, and by the pens
and tongues of that beast, that sat at Westminster, and spread his Arms over
all the Kingdom, most unjustly to rob, and to take away their livings, from all
the poor, and honest ejected Clergy.

And therefore, what was hyperbollically said of Pope Clement the eighth, with
the changing of a word or two, may far more justly and orthodoxally be said of
this false Prophet, the Assembly, and whole company of Presbyterians, as a just
Epitaph upon their Tombs, when the Church shall be freed of them.

Hunc caetum eripuit nobis clementia fati,
Humanum toto gaudeat orb genus;
Hic est qui fuerat iam dedecus orbis and urbis,
and fuit aetatis magna ruina suae;
Hic est, si nescis, qui jam tibi multa paravit,
Excidium, pestem, funera, bella famem; The Presbyserians Epitaph, when the
Church shall be freed of them.

Hic est, qui fuerat regnans infamia mundi,
Imperii labes, spurcitiesque sui;
Contemptor divum, scelerum vir, publicus hostis
Perfidus, ingratus, raptor iniquus, atrox,
Videbit mortis centum tormenta futurae,
Paena tamen mortis non erit aequa suis;
Ex ista tandem, migravit urbe tyrannus,
Quo nullus toto pejor in orb fuit;
And therefore their impiety and wickedness herein, as in all other their
doings, exceeds the possibility of my expression, which makes me to borrow it
from better pens: and I profess to speak this, out of no partiality, or
disaffection to any particular man, of all the Presbyterians; because they are
all alike unknown to me, either by benefits, or injuries; but I speak it out of
a bitter distaste, and hatred to their Pharisaicall hy pocrifie, and blind
leading of the simple people, to no simple sin; when, as here, they are said,
to give life to the image of the beast, 1. c. as I said, to egg ou the first
beast to all wickedness, and to justify the same unto the people; and if
these forenamed things be not sufficient to make a perfect Antichrist, let
Lucifer send him out of hell.

Or else, the image of the beast may signify, not the actions, but the actors
of those injuries and impieties, Mr. Mede, page 6. clavis apocal.

That the image of the beast, and the seven headed and ten horned beast, are
the same thing, that is, the image of the two horned beast. Revel. 19, 20. 1.
Iustance. 2. Iustance.


that are committed, and that is, the first 10. horned beast is said to be the
image of the second two horned beast; for, Mr. Mede has rightly observed, as I
conceive, that the first 10. horned beast, and the image of the beast, are
voces convertibiles, and equivallent, and do fignifie not two things, as a man
and his picture, or his statue, but the very self same thing; which he proves
by three special instances.

1. In that, where the beast and the false Prophet are mentioned together,
which is three times at least, by the beast is understood the 10. horned beast,
and by the false Prophet is understood the two horned beast.

2. Where the Beast, and the image of the beast are coupled together, which is
six times at least, as Chap. 14.9. and ver. 11. Chap. 15.2. Chap. 16.2. Chap.
19, 20. Chap. 20.4. there, by the beast is understood, not the first 10. horned
beast, but the second two horned beast; and by the image of the beast is
understood the seven headed, and ten horned beast; as being now revived, and
healed of the wound that it had formerly gotten, by the means, that is, by the
pens, and tongues, the and writings of the false Prophet; and therefore, as
receiving in himself the Divinity, and direction, and the very platform of his
proceedings, from this Prophet, he might very well be said, to be the image of
the false Prophet: and that appears the more plain; because this image, when
it had received life and breath, by the means of the false Prophet, does now
begin to speak, and to make orders and Ordinances, that whosoever would not
worship the image of the beast, that is, serve, and obey him, which is nothing
else, but the very image, and the lively representment of this Prophet, whom he
deemes, as the Oracle of God, and whose instrument he professes himself to be,
to act according, as this Prophet, out of Gods word, does prescribe unto him,
should be killed; v. 15.

3. 3. Instance.
In that, wheresover the beast is present, together with the false Prophet, the
image of the beast, in the same construction of words, is not to be found; as
if the name of the beast should serve the turn; to let us understand, that the
first 10. horned beast is there, by the beast, to be understood.

And therefore, as the impieties and wickedness of the first 10. horned beast,
is rightly said to be the image of that beast; so, that beast himself is, and
may be as truly said to be nothing else, but the very image of the two horned
beast, the false Prophet, that gave life unto this image, that is, the
impieties of the first beast, to do all the mischief that was and is done.

And whereas Ludovicus de dieu, Objects, and says, that the 14. v. of this
thirteenth Chap. seems to contradict this that I have said; because the two
horned beast, or false Prophet, is there said, to say, (...), to them that
dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, that had the
wound; whereas, it should have been said, (...) that they should make an image
to him, if it were the image of the two horned beast, and false Prophet; but
the two borned beast, bids them make an image to the beast, that was wounded,
and healed; and if this image of the beast, be the very first ten horned beast,
it does not appear, how the inhabitants of the earth should be enjoined, to
make that, which was, and was seen to arise out of the sea before.

Mede answers right, as I conceive, that where the conjunction (...) of the
beast, and of his image, does meet; there, (...), his, is to be taken actively,
and not passively; that the sense might be, the image, which the two horned
beast required to be made; Judge 18.1.
as Micha's idol is said to be, (...), his image, and Nebuchadnezzars Statue,
is said to be, the image of Nebuchadnezzar; but where that copulation is not
found, as in that 13 Chap. v. 14, 15. there it is taken passively, and, as I
formerly said, for the impieties, iniquities, and wickedness of the first ten
horned beast, as they do most lively represent that very beast.

Indeed the conceit of Arise Evans, that the little Parliament, was the image of
the first long Parliament, is pretty, but not right; beause his Highness, the
Lord Protector gave life, and being to that pettyte Parliament; but the false
prophet, the assembly at Westminster, and their disciples, gave life, and
breath to the other, the long Parliament, and to their impieties, which were
but the very image of this false prophet, which was the primum mobile, the
first author, and the first wheel, that moved all the rest, to act and do all
the evil that has been done in these Kingdoms; and therefore, as the
teachers of all wickedness, are by our Saviors testimony, to be accounted
the least, that is, none at all, in the kingdom of heaven; but the greatest,
and well deserving the greatest punishment, in the place that is provided for
them; so are they, if they pray not for grace to repent.

And yet, notwithstanding all these transcendent impieties of these
Presbyterians, it is a wonder to me, that the people should be so affected, and
so wedded to the new Presbyterian government, that never yet attained to the
age of some men. The inconstancy of the people.


But as the people in the beginning of the long Parliament, were mad to have
Monarchy rooted out of the world, and to erect a Commonwealth, and to have a
state government; yet when they had it, they were soon weary of it; and were
as mad, and more mad, to have it cashiered; so, though they be now mad after
that Presbyterian government; yet, I doubt not, but after they have it a while,
and felt the smart of it, they will he soon weary of it and be as mad to have
it changed; for that, at the last, they shall perceive their own error, and
find, that those were the leaders, and the Teachers of them that murdered our
King, destroyed the Bishops, and did all the mischief that has been
perpetrated.

And, will the People, or Parliament, as they have done most justly, condemn
the Actors, that were but the scholars; Remember whose auditors were the
murderers of the King.
and not only suffer the Teachers to go free, but also magnify them to be
their Masters still? or will they punish the poor hares for their trespass,
and gratify the crafty Foxes, for their wickedness? for, I beseech you, tell
me; whose Scholars, and whose Auditors were those King murderers, the Bishops,
or the Presbyterians? the whole Kingdom knows, and the setting up of these
Teachers may prove to be the setting forward of the like tragedy; Verbum
sapienti sat est.

But to proceed, it is said in the same ver. 15. that the image of the beast,
The first ten horned beast, animated by the false prophet acts two things. 1.
thing.
that is, the first seven headed, and ten horned beast, having received life
and breath, by the means of the false Prophet, the two horned beast, whose
image the the first beast was, as I showed unto you, did presently act and work
these two observable things.

1. To speak, and to make orders, and ordinances, that (...), as many as would
not worship, that is, himself, which was nothing else, hut the very
representation, of the false prophet, should be killed.

2. To cause all, (...), both small and great, 2. Thing.
rich and poor, free and bond to receive, a mark; or as the original has it,
(...), or (...), as some copies read it; that he should give them a mark, or
marks, in their right hand, or wrist, or arm, Rhodiginus l. 5. c. 53. says
servants were branded in their foreheads; soldiers in their hands Vege^. l. 2.
c. 5.
which (...) fignifieth, all, from the hand to the sholder; and which aludeth
to the custom of Syria, and the neighbor countries, that used, even as our
own Country formerly did; and yet sometimes, do; to wear badges on their
arms, to demonstrate whose servants, they were; or in their foreheads, as the
Roman servants did, and the Soldiers used to do; to signify to what Master,
or Captain they did belong; and that no man might buy or sell, save he that
had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name; for so
Lipsius says, that they were branded in the hands, and marked with the name of
their their general or the Emperor, Lipsius de milit. rom l. dialog. Revel. f
14 1.
that they served; and so the followers of the Lamb, as contrary to the
followers of the beast, are said to have his fathers name written in their
foreheads; which was likewise done, to show to whom they belonged; that so by
the sight of these marks, and tokens, they might buy and sell, and have all the
other privileges, and benefits, that belonged to such servants. De Sheld. page
15.


Yet, you must not think this mark of the beast, to be a corporeal mark, to
be engraven by incision, or to be burnt by inustion (as the fashion of men is
to do with their cattle;) in the heads or upon the foreheads of the followers
of the beast; for to dream of such a mark, were to contemn all learned
antiquity, and to fall into a laborinth of contrarieties, absurdities, and
impossibilities; but as the marks of Christ his flock, and his fathers name
written in their foreheads, are not any real marks, by incision, or inustion;
but the profession of his faith, and obedience to his law, with the acceptance
of some godly Sacraments, King James in his premotion. haeg. 111.
and religious Ceremonies, for the testifing of the same; so the mark of the
beast must be conceived to be metaphorical, as King James shows by some rite
of profession, and mystical, by some rite of obedience, and subjection unto
the beast; as that in the forehead, must be some plain and public act, or
thing whereby the authority, and government of the beast is professed, and that
in the hand, must be likewise, some mpious act, or Ceremony, The parallel. I
only demand if that the Parliament after it received life from the false
Prophet acted not the foresaid things that the beast is said to do. 1. The
first thing.
either accepted of in our hands, or subscribed to, under our hands, whre by
subjection and obedience to that beast is professed to be performed.

And here I would feign know if the long parliamtnt did not act and do those
two forenamed things that this image of the beast is said to have done, and
thereby to have imitated the Romans, and Syrians, in the main point, and to
have fulfilled this prediction, of the doings of the beast, to a hair; For

1. Did they not speak, and speak loud enough, by their votes, orders, and
ordinances, that as many as would not worship them, (the image of the beast,
and the actors of all things, according as the Presbyterian assembly, out of
Gods Word, do prescribe and approve of their doings,) i. e. contribute to
their war, submit unto their power, and assist them against the King, their
goods should be plundered, their estates sequestered, and themselves if they
resisted them and assisted, the King, should be killed, as disaffected, and
malignants against the Parliament, and enemies to the State and Comon-Wealth?
and was not this their voice, and their act, an act, I am sure, bad enough to
undo so many, 2. The second thing
and to kill so many, as they did; and yet their second act is far worse; For

2. After they had killed as many as they could find opposing them, and their
proceedings, did they not make and frame an Engagement, in January 3. 1649.
that is, an iniunction, for all persons to subscribe, to be true and faithful
to the Commonwealth of England, as it is now established, without a King or
House of Peers? Camerar. l. 5. c. 4. page 333. A most malicious enemy.
and did they not likewise vote, that whosoever did not subscribe, and take
this Engagement, this mark of his subjection unto them, should be totally
deprived of all benefit, and protection of the Law? A mischeife far greater,
and worser, then the former; for as I read in Camerarius of a most malicious
enemy, having taken his adversary by some wile, and being desirous to be
thoroughly revenged on him, for some wrongs, that he conceived, he had done unto
him, he said; he would most cruelly butcher him, if he did not swear unto him,
that he would for ever afterward, deny his Baptism, and renounce Christ for
his Savior; which if he did, that should preserve his life; and the poor
captive, fearful of his cruelty, and desirous to save his life, did swear, as
his adversary required; but as soon as he had sworn to his enemies engagement,
he drew out his sword, and said, now I shall be fully revenged on thee, seeing I
shall both kill thy body, and damn thy soul; and so he run him through, that he
died; and then he bragged, that he had made his adversary to loose both body,
and soul; and so I demand if the Parliament by this engagement, did not
endeavor to destroy the souls of those good Christians, that had formerly
sworn, and taken the oath of allegiance to the King, to his heirs, and to his
lawful successors; and by this suare, and gin, to bring them to the pit of
perjurie and perdition?

But, The damnability of the Engagement.
to make the damnability of the mark of the beast (that exposes the
liberties, of the non-engagers, that is, the not takers of it, to false
imprisonments, their estates to rapine, spoil, and injustice, and their lives
and persons to wounds, and murders, at the will and pleasure of such as will
engage to take the mark of the beast) to appear more manifest unto you, from
the extent, and generality of those, that must receive this mark, it is said,
that both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, must receive this
mark in their right hand, or in their forehead; that is, either privately or
publicly; privately, by those in whom the beast confided, and whose heart he
knew to be as Jehu said to Jonathan, as himself was; or publicly, by all
those, Three special things to be observed.
whom the beast suspected, and was jealous of them; and no man might buy, or
sell, but he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his
name; where you are to observe two or three several things.

1. The mark of the beast, or the name of the beast; The mark of the beast,
by what note known.
for the mark is properly of his name, and therefore it is said, no man might
buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast; and in Chap.
14.11. it is called (...), the mark of his name; and this mark of the beast
is expressed, by the effects, and attributes thereof, that none might buy or
sell, without the taking of that mark, which is the only note, that the Holy
Ghost gives us, to know the mark of the beast; Apud viegam, in c. 13. Apoe.
and therefore the conceit of Primasius, and Ansbertus, that think the mark of
the beast shall be composed of three Greek letters, (...). which being joined,
and framed into one form, and figure, do compendiously represent the name of
Christ, which the beast pretends to honor above all men, is but a mere
fancy, without any ground in Scripture.

2. The name of the beast, is no where, that I find, set down in all the
Scripture, but is left, unill the beast should come to assume it unto himself;
for, as we name not the child, until he appears in the Church to be
Christened; so the Antichrist is not named, till he appears in the world. Yet,

3. For the number of his name, which the Beast takes to himself, when he
comes, the Holy Ghost tells us, (that we might mark the beast, and avoid him,
when he comes) it is 666.

And truly, if my life did lie upon it; I cannot find by any search, to whom
all these things do fit, and agree, so well, and so aptly, as to the Long
Parliament; For,

1. As the Arians, under King Hunericus, Victor Vticencis. l. 3.
compelled the Orthodox to be rebaptized, and thereof gave them a Chirography,
that is, a Testimonial under their hands, as Victor Vticensis, writes; and as
Dioclesian did set forth a most cruel Edict, that no man might sell, or
administer any thing unto the Christians, unless the Christians would first
offer Sacrifice unto the idols, and heathen Gods, as venetable Beda testifies
in the hymn of S. Justin, saying, Non illis emendi quidquam, aut vendendi
copia,
Nec ipsam haurire aquam dabatur ^oentia, Beda in Him. Sti. Justini.

Ante quam thurificarent detestandis idolis.


So, those many Dioclesians, that were in one house, when as before, The
Parallele.
the Devil had but one Dioclesian in all the world, they have imitated that
great Collonell, or rather General of the Dragon, and made an Act agreeable to
his edict; that whosoever subscribed not his name, or put not his mark to the
engagement, The Act for the engagement. June 2. 1649. Agreeable to the mark of
beast.
(which is done, (...), with the right hand, as the holy Ghost says, should
have no benefit of any law, in any Court in the kingdom, so that he can neither
buy nor sell; or if he does, he can neither recover what he bought, nor the
moneys, for which he sold his commodities, nor any other debts, that are due
unto him; except he has taken this engagement, and so received this mark, this
new invented trick that they devised, to hook in men into their faction, and to
conglutinate them unto their impieties.

Neither is this all the iniquity of this infernal engagement, The great
iniquity of the engagement.
that, as the Text says, no man might buy or sell, save he, that had received
the mark of the beast, but this goes a note beyond Ela, and a step further
then Dioclesians Edict. quia facile est inventis addere; for, let the not
ingagers be plundered, robbed, beaten, slandered, abused, imprisoned, and
killed, they are to expect no remedy, no relief, no benefit of Law, but they
are exposed to the mercies of their merciles adversaries, and to the wills of
the needy soldiers; whom, notwithstanding, we, the non ingagers, found,
(blessed be God for it) more favorable then this cruel Parliament imagined,
when at first they have devised it; yet this they have done; and this, neither
Turk nor Pope, nor any other recent, nor ancient Tyrant, (besides the
forecited, whom they sarre exceeded) that I remember to read of, did ever the
like, nor did any of them deny, but that I might have the benefit of civil
Commerce, as the Jews had with the Gentiles, and the Christians have now at
Constantinople, with the Turks, and in the Indies, with the Insidels, and the
Protestants with all Papists, Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l. 3. c. 11. page 733.
Et in ipsa urbe roma, ubi Romanus Pontifex sedem suam habet, plurimi Judaei
negotiantur public, emunt and vendunt; and as Bellarmine says, in the very
city of Rome, where the Pope has his Seat, many Jews do publicly trade and
traffic, and buy and sell without restraint; and so among all other nations,
every man, of what country soever, of what Sect or Religion soever he be, may
have civil commerce, and the benefit of the Country Law, where he tradeth,
which, without subscribing to that engagement, could not be had, in all the
territories of that Parliament; And how that Parliament can free themselves
from this charge, of setting forth the mark of this beast, viderit utilitas; it
passes my understanding to do it; when I can have the benefit of Law in Rome,
in Babylon, in Aleppo, in Japan, and in all other parts of the civil world,
but not in any part of the dominions of that Parliament.

And I think, if Junius had lived to have seen this course, he would never have
made the mark of the beast to be Chrysma illud, quo in sacramento
confirmationis, personas and actiones, obsignande little frontem manumque,
maneipant sibi Pontifices; because that neither this, nor the not-receiving of
this, did either further or hinder the civil commerce of buying and selling,
and all sociable dealing, with the benefit of law for that end, among men; whom
God has made sociable creatures; and this Engagement excludes them quite from
all society; but the unlawfulness of it, and the injustice of the obtruders
thereof, has been so sufficiently showed, by the Cheshire and Lancashire
Ministers, The History of Independents. Part. 3. page 15, 16, 17.
in their plea for Non-subscribers, that I need say no more of this, which does
so correspond with the mark of the beast here spoken of: and if any man desire
further in-sight into this mystery, I refer him to that plea, and to the
history of Independency.

CHAP. IV. Of the name of the beast; what it is; and of the number of his name;
how agreeable it is to the name of the long Parliament.
2. FOr the name of the beast, 2. What is the name of the beast.
I shall be no Priest to give it to the long Parliament; for they have suppressed
our calling, and intruded themselves into our office, but after very much
debate, what name, they should give and take unto themselves, it was concluded
at last, that it should be unchristened, and rebaptized, and therein named
custodes nostrarum libertatum; and in English, not the Parliament, but, The
Keepers of the Liberties of Ingland, by the authority of our Parliament; where
you see first, that liberty is the thing they chiefly defire, liberty they
profess, and Libertines they have upheld; and as the Poet says.

Sua cuique Deus fit dira lihido; Their lust, and their liberty is every man's
God, whom he serves; and when liberty is abused, obedience, which the Prophet
says is better then sacrifice, is trodden under foot; 1 Samuel
then rebellions and wars, mischiefs and miseries will follow, as they have
done amongst us, ever since the Birth of this beast, which is lust and Liberty.
But

3. The holy Ghost proceeds to set down a mystery to be observed, 3. The
number of the beast his name.
and yet not observed by all, not by the favorers, and the followers of the
beast, but by them that are wise; that is, with the wisdom of God; which the
worldly wise regarded not; and by that mystery, well and truly understood, they
might perceive and know, as by the most proper, and the most infallible Mark
that is set down, besides the proper acts and doings of the beast, who is
chiefly meant by this beast.

And the mystery, or secret sign, that is given, only to the godly wise, The
nama of the beast must be the name that he assumeth to himself.
whereby they might know the beast, that they might avoid him, and not be
deceived by him is; that his name or title, which he assumeth to himself, and
not the name, that was given to him at his Baptism, or afterward by lawful
authority, but the name, which in the pride of his heart he affects, and
unjustly arrogateth unto himself, as Rupertus long ago, has most rightly
observed, should make up the Arithmeticall number of 666. which also should be
the number of a man, a man (...), some eminent, and most principal man, no
doubt, either belonging to the beast, or every way opposite unto the beast:
touching which point, I may truly say, as Saint Augustine did in the like case,
that, Alii atque alii, aliud atque aliud opinati sunt. but,

1. Omitting those to no purpose, and passing over what Junius says, Junius in
annotat. c. 13.
that this expression of the holy Ghost, of the number of the beast his name,
betokens the decretalls of the Pope, as they were set forth with the sixth
Book, that was added to the former five books, by Boniface the eighth, and
summum gradum juris Canonici, as an explication, that cloudeth this mystery,
and makes it more mystical; and letting pass what Bellarm. Bellarm. de Romans
Pontif. l. 3. c. 10. Magdeburg. Centur. 1. l. 2. c, 4.
to as little purpose, says of the other side, against our Protestants, that
the name of Martin Luther in his own German tongue, and the name of David
Chytraeus, does make up the number of 666. I say that Bullinger and the
Magdeburgenses, that were great learned men, to whom also Thomson in his
arraignment of Antichrist, page 90. and many others do assent, are of opinion,
that this number notes the time of the coming of the Antichrist, and the
rising of the beast; and therefore they do say, that Vitalianus, a Musical
Pope, that in the year 666. turned the service of God into singing of Himnes,
by which confused noise of many voices, ignorance sprang among the people, and
the Antichrist began to appear in Gods Church: but if it be so, that it is to
denote the time of his rising, it agrees far better with the long Parliament;
for, omitting one thousand, which is a full and a perfect number, and which is
not an unusual thing in Scripture to omit one part, and to set down the other,
especially to make the matter mysterious, and not to be understood by all, but,
as our Savior says by them only, Matthew. 13.11. In page 109.
to whom it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. Et
exploratum est atque compertum, habraes and alios numerum mill narium in
calculis ratiocinisque suis omittere solitos, ut Munsterus Calendario suo
haebraico, p. 6. optime indicat. Basil. edit. 20. Au. 1527. And as a late
Divine says very well, a thousand years, being the number of perfection and
eternity, it is seldom used to be expressed in our ordinary computes, but it
is usually left out, for brevities sake, as we say, the Spanish Armado, was in
588. for 1588. and the Gunpowder plot was in 605. for 1605. and so forth of
the like; and then confider, that in Anno 1646. the great Sunedrion, the
Parliament, A thing, which I believe never any subject in any other kingdom
durst presume to ask. Balaeus makes it to begin in the time of Boniface the
third. about 607. l. 3 fol. 39. and expounds the 666. to be expired after
Jerusalem was taken by Pompey. l. 3. fol. 37. Feuard. in notis in Iraen. l. 5.
c 30. and Sixth. Senensis Bibl. l 2. page 9 and others have collected 12. names,
that contain 666. Vide Thomson de Antich. page 44. etc. Chytr. in Apoc. c. 13.
Bibl. ad Chronolog. tabula 11. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l. 3. c. 10. Names that
do contain the number of 666.
demanded of the King to have the Militia, that is, the strength and Sovereign
power, and rule over the King and kingdom, whereby they might unmake and make,
what Laws, what Wars, what Peace, and whatsoever else pleased themselves,
for the full space of 20. years: which 20. years being added to 1646. and we
shall find that they do make the just number of 666. And therefore this their
demand cohereth with the fulfilling of this mystery, if it be to be referred to
the time of the birth, and coming of this beast, as all the Divines of
Magdesborough, and many other learned men think it is; though they do not all
agree about the beginning of that time.

But you will say, the Holy Ghost tells us, it is the number of a man,
therefore Luther and Calvin do think that Boniface the third, who first took
the name of Universal Bishop from the Emperor Phocas, the murderer of his own
Master Mauritius, about the year 600. to be the first original of this beast,
and the great Antichrist; but Cornel, a lapide answers, that the taking the
name of Universal Bishop, does neither show the number of the beast, nor prove
the Pope to be the Antichrist, because we find that Leo the first, in the
Council of Chalcedon, and other Bishops before Boniface were called Papae
aecumenici, Universal Bishops; therefore Alcazar says, the name that in the
Greek letters contains the number of 666. and shows the natural properties
of the beast, is, (...), the pride of life; and truly I know not how the
Parliament and Presbyterians can quit themselves from this mark, when it was
their pride and haughty spirits, that spurned them on to do all the mischief
that they did: but that excellent Cronologer Chytraeus and Bibliander and
others, do collect out of Irenaeus, l. 5. c. 30. that first found out this
number in the word (...), that the Pope, which is now the Latin Prince, and
rules in Italy, must needs be this beast, and the Antichrist; to which charge
Bellarmine answers, and confutes this conceit, because the word Latinus, as
it signifies Romanus, a Roman, is not, and ought not to be written with et,
but with a single iotu; and then it wants five of the number; and besides,
Latinus notes rather the name of the country, then of the person; and I have
showed you many reasous to Prove, that the Pope cannot be meant by this beast,
and therefore the beast cannot be signified by Latinus, unless you mean, that
he is the greatest enemy to Latinus, that is, to the Pope, and to the Latin
service, as the Parliament professed himself to be; Rupertus and Haymo say (...),
is like to be the name of the beast; because (...), signifies Seductor
Gentium, a deceiver of the Nations, as the Holy Ghost says, the beast should
do; and it contains the just number of 666. and this likewise agrees very
well with the late long Parliament, who, as I believe, has many ways deceived
the people, and the nations round about him, more, and worse then any beast
living; Hyppel in orat. de Consum. Mundi.
Hypolitus, and Primasius say, the beast takes his denomiuation from (...),
Nego, which contains 666. and signifies to deny; because that, as Trajan and
Decius requires the Christians to deny Christ; so the beast, the Antichrist
would have them that were Christians to deny their Baptism, which is the badge
and them mark of Christ, and of our incorporation into Christ; and now we see
all the Parliament Anabaptists, and most of their Independants, which both
together, I think, were the most prevalent party of that Parliament, deny their
former Baptism very stiffely; and therefore must needs be the beast, according
to Primasins and Hyppolitus. Anselmus, Richardus, and Tyconius say, that (...),
does agree with the number of the beast, and signifies honori contrarius,
because the Beast should trample all Honor, and even the honor and reverence
that we owe to God, under-foot; and does not this (...) agree passing well with
that Parliament, that has put down, King, Dukes, Lords, Bishops, And all of
them may fitly be applied to the Long Parliament.
and the House of Peers, and all other Titles of Honor, and has placed all
Titles of Dignity, Rule and Authority in the Plebeyans, the common and the
vulgar sort of people? and have they not also thrown away, and hindered any
Reverent gesture, and decency of behavior, to be used in the Service of God?
and therefore in this respect, I suppose, that Parliament might justly be
termed (...), and so, the beast, according to these men's judgment; because
that, like a beast, they have showed themselves contrary to all Honor, which
the Apostles do require to be observed of all Christians; Arethas, and some
others, say, that (...) contains 666. Romans 12.10. 1 Pet 2 17. Hefiod in Theog
and Natalis Com. Mytholog. l. 6. c. 20.
and fignifieth a Giant, to show, that this beast should, like the Giants of
the former age, that the Poets mention, (...), make war against Ghost, that is,
against the Honor, Service, and Servants of God; and so (...) pravus dux, the
Captain, or General of the Beast, and (...), the victor, or Conqueror in the
Wars of the beast, do contain the same number of 666. and do meet at the same
end; and so (...), and some other names have been observed, by the diligent
search into this Mystery, to contain the number 666. and all these, and the
like to these, may be very well said, to cohere with that Parliament, that has
acted whatsoever any of those names has signified.

But, though all these are very near the mark, yet they do not fully come
home to the point; because, as Rupertus well observes, nomen quod Johannes hic
insinuat, non erit nomen antichristo ab adversariis impositum, -- the name of
the beast, that St. John understands here, shall not be any name, that his
adversaries shall give unto the Antichrist, as are most of the aforesaid names,
but the name, that the beast assumeth to himself, and glories in it, and
requires it to be ascribed unto him, and used by all his subjects and
adherents: that is the name that is here meant by the Evangelist; and
therefore, it is nomarvell, that the name of the beast could not be known, to
any of the foresaid Authors, before the beast assumed it to himself, God
giving notice of this name, mystically, under this number only to be
discerned, that it might not be known, and expressed, until the beast should
be discovered, which should be manifested unto the Saints, when they see him
called by that name, that should contain the number of 666. For, if God had
plainly told us his name, the beast would never have assumed it, because all
men should then have known, who had been the Antichrist.

And therefore now, let us examine, what name the Parliament assumed to it
self, and whether that name contains the just number of 666. The parailele
and I told you before, that the name and title, which that Parliament
challenged to be given unto it self is, custodes nostrarum libertatum, or, as
it was to be used in all writs, and in all judicial Course, The Keepers of the
Liberties of Ingland, The proper name affumed by the Parliament.
by the Authority of our Parliament; This was the name, and this was the
Title, and the Inscription, which by a secret instinct of Gods Providence,
unaware unto themselves, that Parliament took, and appropriated, as all men
know, unto themselves; and this name, both in Latin, and in English, does make
the full and just number of 666. for omitting the m. which is the number of
perfection and eternity, Haymo, in Apoc. l. 7.
as Haymo, and others do very rightly observe, and which is usually omitted in
our computes, as I showed to you before, you shall find the Arithmeticall
letters of custodes nostrarum libertatum, to be, c. u. d. u. l. 1. u. which
makes up just 666.

custodes libertatis, and you ad nostrarum; so you make their name, to fill up
the number, otherwise then they took it, or, that it was indeed.

old rule, that cannot be denied, quod necessario subintelligitur, Compare Mat.
4. and 10. v. with Deuteronomy. 6.13. etc. 10.12. and ^0 etc. 13.4. the word only, is
not in any of them. In the whole Trial of Mr. Live. p. 2. and 3.
non deest; as the word, only, (which our Savior adds to the texts of
Moses, when he says, (...), and him only shall thou serve, which is not found
in any Text of Moses,) shows, that it must necessarily be understood in those
Texts of Moses; so I add nothing, but what of necessity must be added, and
understood, or we shall never understand what they mean; because they meant
not that they were the keepers, patrones, and defenders of any one particular
liberty, but of all the liberties of the Parliament and people. And so their
Attorney General, every where, terms them, the Keepers of the Liberties of
Ingland, as you may see it, in his Charge of High Treason against Mr. Love; and
it must not be thought, they meant the Liberties of the French, Italians,
Spaniards, or of any other Nation, but of us, the Freeborn Subjects, and
Natives of this Kingdom of Ingland.

But, because they like not the Latin name, though Latin be one of the three
authentic Languages, L^desima de sacra Scriptura quavis passim lingua non
legenda.
that we find in Scripture, as Ledesima shows, but say, it is not their
speech, but the Language of the beast, whom they abhor; Let us examine their
name and title in their own native Language, and that is, The Keepers of the
Liberties of Ingland, by the Authority of our Parliment; this is the name that
they took, and appropriated to themselves, by an Act of Parliament; and
omitting in, as I said before, the numericall letters of this name are l.
1.1.1. l. d. u. 1.1. u. l. 1. which make up just 666.

our, to Parliament, which they do not: but, by the Authority of Parliament.

our, must of necessity be understood; because they mean not the Parliament of
Paris, nor any other Parliament, as I take it, but our Parliament of Ingland;
and therefore, if you will understand their name right, the word our, must,
without question, be added unto it.

And that very Long Parliament, summoned by the Writ of the late King Charles
the first, is called Parliamentum nostrum ad tractandum nobiscum super arduis
negotiis regni nostri; our Parliament, to Treat of the hard Affairs of our
Kingdom; therefore the word ( our) ought, and must be supplied here unto the
word Parliament, as the word, only, is added by our Savior Christ to the
words of Moses. And,

Mar. 4.10.
If again you Object, that Ingland is more commonly written with an (e) then
with (i) as rather England then Ingland,

common error, or an erroneus custom, does not nullify the truth of any thing,
nor does it tie all men, neither should it tie any man, either to follow it, or
to justify it: but, a single truth ought to be embraced, and followed, before
the most general custom of mistaken truth; when, as we know, that an error
once received, is often times so generally followed, that it can very hardly be
reclaimed; and I say, that the orthography, and right writing of this word,
should be Ingland, and not England; and, I refer this matter, and the
orthography of this word, to be decided, and adjudged by any judicicus, and
unpartiall Grammarians, that are to write all words, either according to the
derivation of the words, which is least usual, as a thing that is only
understood by the learned, in the Language: or else according to the proper,
and most accustomed sound, and pronunction of the words, which is the common,
and most usual course of writing; if Ingland ought not, according to the
prouunciation, be written rather with and, then with an e: and if so, as it is,
and ought to be so; then have you the number, of the name of the beast, in the
name of the Parliament; and the Holy Ghost tells you, here is wisdom, for him
that has understanding, to count the number of the beast.

And, besides this, whereas it is conceived, that this Kingdom was called
England from Hengist, that came hither out of Saxony, with his brother Horsus,
to assist the Britains against their Enemies, as if it were Hengist-Land, and
by contraction, England, I say, this is a mere fiction; Sam. Daniel. in his
History, p. 7.
because Hengist had at first but the Isle of Thanat, assigned for his Colony,
and it was an Heptarchy, seven Kingdoms, a long time after Hengist, until
Egbert reduced the same into a Monarchy; but, I find it was vulgarly called
Ingland, and not England, from a Queen, called Angles, from whence, and for
whose Honor, in Latin, it is called Anglia to this day. And Anglia may as
well be translated Ingland, as England; when the common writing is not
according to the common sound of our pronunciation of it. And I am not the
first that did write it Ingland, and not England: but I have read it so diverse
times in good Authors; and, as you may see it in the three conversions of
Ingland, page 51. and in Epistle dedic. and in other places of that book, and
in many other old Authors besides, if you do well observe it; and if any out
landish Alien, that knows not the custom of writing England with an e, were
to write the same, you may be sure, that the sound of the word Ingland, would
presently make him to write it with an I, and not with an e.

But, as you have the name of the beast, The Keepers of the Liberties of
Ingland, by the Authority of our Parliament, which contain the just number of
666. So we must examine, who they were, that took upon them to be those Keepers
of the Liberties of Ingland; and we shall find them to be; The House of
Commons, with the Lords; or the House of Lords with the Commons; and herein
omitting them, as I said before, the numericall letters we find to be. u. c. u.
u. 1. l. d. just 666. A strange thing to me, that such things should thus
succeed in every thing, unless you do ascribe them to the secret influence of
the all disposing Providence of him, qui disponit omnia suaviter, which
disposes all things wisely, and brings all things to pass by secret,
strange, and wonderful ways.

And then, the Holy Spirit adds, that this number of the beast, (...), is the
number of a man; a man, no doubt, either eminently bated, and persecuted by the
beast, or else exceedingly advanced to some eminent place, and Authority under
the beast, or both; and it has been showed, by Arise Evans, that Will. Laud: a
man, whom all men know, how the Parliament affected him, contained the just
number of 666. and I do assure you, that I have found this just number of 666.
in the Latin name of another eminent man, that belonged to the Parliament, and
loved not the Latin Beast, who is no other then dominus Crumwelus, wherein you
may find, d. 1. u. c. u. l. u. that make 666.

Cromwell, and not Crumwel, and so five is wanting to make 666.

Ingland, that the Spirit of God might mean, that the number of the name of the
beast, should be taken, as it is commonly pronounced, and so known of all, and
not as it is written, and so known only of those that are Scholars, and thus
should make up 666. and so Dominus Crumwelus does.

And besides all this, I will not here omit, to proceed to show unto you, how
it is observed, that this very number of 666. is found out, of their newdeviced
Covenant, as you may see it in querela Cantabrigensi, page 24. where those
Learned and judicious Divines say, it will not be more, then what upon trial,
Mr. Geast, a learned Divine and a prisoner for his conscience sake.
will be found true, if we here mention a Mystery, which many, (as we
conjecture) will not a little wonder at, that this Covenant of these Rebels,
for which all this perfecution has been raised, confisteth of six Articles,
and those Articles consisting of 666. words: and this is not the first time,
that persecution has risen in Ingland upon fix Articles; Mr. Fox, in his acts
and Mon. vol. 2. p. 443. Edit. Lod. 1631.
as witnesses those in the Reign of Henry the eighth, the which Master Fox
will show you more at large; but, as for the number of the beast, that they
should so directly answer to the number of words, in those six Articles of
their Covenant, if we consider Gods Blessed Providence, in every partitular
thing, it has made many of us (and so many others no doubt) seriously, and
often to reflect upon it, and I wonder, that it is not more generally and more
seriously thought upon.

And therefore; though I profess with Master Calvin, that I am no Pythagorian,
for matters of number, nor a Jewish Talmudist, to set my Faith, and to ground
my Religion upon them; yet I say, that, seeing it has pleased the Spirit of
God, to take up the same terms of numeration, for days, months, years, and
times, in the case of the Christian Church, which he made use of in the Jewish
Church, and to set down his Mysteries, which he would have his children to
understand, in numbers; and seeing 1. the cause, that is, the Covenant, for
which the Parliament prosecuted his war so eagerly; 2. the time, for which
they demanded the Militia; 3. the Name, which they assumed to themselves; 4.
the Name of a special Man, both persecuted by them, and advanced under them;
and 5. all the other particular words and names, which the Fathers
afore-cited, and other Learned Divines have observed, to contain the number of
666. do so fully, and so punctually cohere and agree with the impudency,
cruelty, impiety, and all other the wicked practices of that Parliament, is it
not apparent, that this Mystery, of the Name of the Beast, which is set down
for our instruction, that we might take notice of the Beast, when he came into
the World, if ever it was any where discovered, or accomplished in any Persons,
is now plainly, and evidently seen to be fulfilled in that Long Parliament,
which is therefore concluded, and believed by many good Christians, and of no
small Learning, to be the Beast here spoken of, and the great Antichrist, that
was so much Prophesied of, and so long expected, with great fear of his coming
into the World, to slay the Witnesses of Christ, and to do all the other
Projects that I have showed unto you? let the Reader, and the Christian World
Judge of it. And I suppose, none of the foresaid names that contain 666. or,
but very few, not all of them, I am sure, are applicable to the Pope, as, I
believe, most of the best judgment, will confess them to be the inseparable
characters of our late usurper, and the Rumpe, which was the prevalent faction
of the Long Parliament.

CHAP. 5. Of the interpretation of Mr. Potter, that would prove the meaning of
the Holy Ghost, in this mystery, to be, by extracting the root of this number
666, which is 25, and is in all particulars, answerable to the Hierarchy and
Church of Rome, plainly, and briefly answered; of the name of Independent; the
great persecution of the long Parliament, and of their gross and palpable
hypocrisy, that are two infallible marks of the great Antichrist.
SO you have the mark of the beast; the name of the beast, and the number of
his name; touching which number; before I proceed any further- I must yet say
somewhat, in answer to Mr. Potters interpretation of this number of the beast,
which is 666; for I have with a great deal of delight, read over the same, and
I must truly confess, he has done it with a great deal of industry,
sobriety, and variety of reading; sufficienty commending, the ingenuity, and
the learning of the man, which the very adverse party, without blushing, cannot
deny; yet pace sua, I must crave leave to say, that this whole discourse, how
exactly soever composed, does not seem to me, to be sufficient, by an
apodicticall, and unanswerable necessity, to manifest his conclusion, to be
infallibly believed for truth; and therefore though the Parliament has dealt
with me, and the rest of Christ his servants, as the Philistines did with the
Israelites, take away their weapons, and left no Smith in Israel to make them
new ones; that is, plunder us of our books, and leave us not any means to
provide any more; yet, as Sampson slew a thousand of those uncircumcised
Philistines, with the Jaw Bone of an Ass, so may a bookeless man, and
weaponless man, with the strength of truth, and good reason, answer and
overthrow the sutlest arguments, and most seeming probabilities of the most
famous, yet mistaking, Scholars; and so I hope I shall plainly, and yet
sufficiently, declare the misapplication, and sinister interpretation of that
learned man's discourse; For

1. Whereas he says, Epist. ad lect: page 4. that this his interpretation
supposes the number 666. to be animage, and a typical representation of the
whole body of Antichrist; that is, of the whole body of his kingdom, state,
and Hierarchy; what if I deny this supposition? it is but Marcus ait, Scaurus
negat; sit penes lectorem sides; the reader may as well believe my denial, as
his affirming of it; and if it be but a typical representation of the body of
the Antichrist, then I say with the Schools, that typica theologia nihil point
in esse, neque est argumentatiua, types and similitudes, quae non currunt
quatuor pedibus, which hold not in all points, and run not, as they say upon
all four, may serve only for illustrations, secundum materiam subjectam, but
not for an undeniable confirmation of a most necessary truth; so this
foundation, and groundwork being undermined, as not sufficiently proved, but
only barely supposed, tota machina ruit, the whole frame of the superstructure,
must, like the house built upon the sand, fall to the ground.

2. Whereas he says eadem epist. page 6. that the following interpretation of
this number 666, and the effect thereof depends chiefly upon the extraction
of the root, of the number, 666. and says page, 5. that the text says, (...).
let him that has underderstanding count the number of the beast; i.e. such
arithmet. understanding, as can find out the root and figure of the beast, by
extracting the root of 666. I utterly deny this to be the end of counting the
number of the beast, to find out the root of this number 666. but he that has
any spiritual understanding, let him count the number of the beast, that so he
may find out the beast, that is, the Antichrist, and not find out the root of
the number; otherwise the holy Ghost, which defireth not, and uses not to
amaze his children, would set down obscurum, per obscurius, a mystery to be
understood, and found out, by a far obscurer and by a more enigmaticall
mystery, that none but Pythagoras, and a most skillful Arithmetician could
find out; therefore I say that the Holy Ghost, in bidding the understanding
men to count the number of the beast, means not those, that had such a high
measure of arithmeticall understanding, as, could extract the root and figure
of this number of 666. which in respect of the fractions, and the diversity of
opinions about it, would prove a most intricate laborinth; but that we should
do it according to the usual custom among men; for which cause perhaps the text
says, (...), for it is the number of a man, or the number, or manner of
numbering, that a man commonly uses to number, which is not by extracting the
roots and figures of any number, which but very very few can do, but by
counting the number, that the numericall letters, Which are the letters that
arithmeticians count by.
1. u. x. l. c. d. m. which we find in the beast and in his name, do make up,
which I am confident, is the manner and common custom of numbering among men,
and has been so understood, to be here meant by all former interpreters, since
the time of Ireneus, that first understood it, as I do, of the numericall
letters of the name of the Antichrist, which he thought might be (...), and not
of the extracting the root of 666. which is 25. and which may be as well the
root of many other numbers as of 666. as Mr. Potter himself confesses, and
all arithmeticians do know.

This then, being the meaning of the Holy Ghost, (that we finding this number
of 666. in the beast, and in his name, that should contain this just number of
666, might thereby understand, who is the beast and the Antichrist, and not by
the extracting of the root of this number, thereby to know the beast,) the
whole frame that is built upon this his conceit falls to nothing.

3. Whereas he says, eadem epist. page 7. that it may be very well
acknowledged, that this his interpretation, is dark, and obscure in some
degree, and as it is dark and intricate, so must it also be acknowledged to be
new and unheard of in former times; therefore I say the difcovery of the
Antichrist, being a point of such great concernment to the whole Church, it
should be very well, plainly, and sufficiently proved, and manifested, and not
darkly and improbably demonstrated, or else it ought hardly to be received, and
not at all to be believed.

4. Whereas page 2. of this interpretation, he says, that because, oppositorum
eadem estratio, and that the mystery, of 144. to which this number of 666, is
opposed, is contained in the root thereof, which is 12, therefore the mystery
of this 666. must be contained in the root thereof; which is 25. I say; that
the mystery of 144. is indeed interpreted to consist in the root thereof,
which is 12. which being 12 times multiplied do make up just 144. and yet the
Holy Ghost, makes no such interpretation of it, but that those spirits, which
believe nothing but the express text of scripture, may as easily reject it, as
receive it; but being granted, that this is rightly interpreted, because the
twelve Apostles (St. Paul left out, that labored in the building more then
any, if not, then most of them all) were the foundations of the wall of the new
and spiritual Jerusalem; yet, it follows not, that because this mystery,
must be explained by the extraction of the root of 144. therefore the other
mystery, that denotes the beast, must consist in the root of 666, no more
then the mysteries of many other numbers, expressed in scripture, can be said
to consist in their extracted roots; and, though the beast be opposite to
Christ, and the Synagogue of Satan opposite to the Church of Christ, or Babylon
to Jerusalem; yet this does not in any understanding, prove that 666, is more
opposite to 144. as it is a set number, then it is to 444, or to any other
definite number; 333, being, as I conceive a more oppofite number, in respect
of division, to 666.

Only this 666, is said to be the number of the beast, in direct, and plain
terms; and the other number, of 144, is interpreted by some authors to be
understood of the Church militant, here on earth; and by others, of as good
repute, to be the typical expression of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Besides, the twelve Apostles, were but the foundations of this wall, as having
their names in them, v. 14. the wall being made up of other stones, that is, of
all the believing christians, and so it comprehends the whole Church; and
then the opposition must be, not betwixt the Hierarchy of the Pope and his
Cardinals, and the Hierarchy of the Christian Church; but betwixt the whole
Church of Christ, whose wall, and not whose foundation, v. 17. was 144, cubits,
and the whole Synagogue of Satan, that is made up of thieves, infidels, and all
other wicked reprobates; therefore, the Pope and his Cardinals, cannot be the
the beast, that, by this exposition of opposites, must fignifie all the whole
company of reprobates, which is far contrary to the meaning of the Holy
Ghost, that plainly differenceth the beast, and the worshipers and followers of
the beast, as the Lamb and the followers of the Lamb are not the same.

But indeed, contrary to the opinion of Mr. Forbes, and some other that make
this vision of the new Jerusalem, to be typus presentis ecclesiae, a type of
the militant Church, I shall, with many of the most ancient interpreters, deny
this description of the new Jerusalem to be the type of the Christian militant
Church, and say, that ad captum nostrum, that can reach no higher, then
demonstration, this admirable explication of this city, is thus set down, to
show unto us, those ineffable excellencies, and most glorious estate, which the
servants of Christ, shall enjoy in the kingdom of Heaven; for if you observe
the coherence of this 21, c. with the former, you shall find there, c. 20.
that the beast, and the false prophet, and the devil, are cast into the lake
of fire, to be tormented for ever, and ever, v. 10. and the dead, both small
and great, were all judged according to their works, v. 12, and death and bell,
and all that were not written in the book of life, were cast into the lake of
fire, which can be no other then the last judgment against all the reprobates;
this is the end of them.

And then, after St. John had showed the end of them, and their sad condition
for ever; he proceeds in the 21: c. to show unto us according to the best of
our apprehension, the most happy state and condition of the children of God in
heaven, which he expresses under this type, that he saw a new heaven, and a
new earth, even as St Peter, and before him, the prophet Esaias long agone, had
prophysied, and foretold the servants of God, how happy they should be; and
because that which is no where, is not at all, as St. Aug. Toll spatia locorum
corporibus nusquam erunt et quia nusquam erunt, non erunt.
says; therefore he describes the place, where they shall remain in bliss,
under this type of the new Jerusalem, whose excellent frame, and figure, he
does here so amply describe, unto us; wherein you may observe, that the things
attributed to the Citizens of this new Jerusalem, are incompatible with the
members of the church militant; for it is said, that God shallwipe away all
tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain, v. 4. which cannot be referred,
and applied to the members of the purest church on earth; and so many other
things are set down, c. 22. to be in this heavenly City, which cannot,
without apparent violence, unto the text, properly be thought to be in the
militunt church, but are most elegant expressions, by way of allusion, of those
incomprehensible excellencies, that the saints shall find in the kingdom of
heaven.

5. Whereas he says page 3. that it is not said (as it is observed by many)
let him that has understanding count the name of the beast, but count the
number of the beast; I answer that in c. 13. v. 17. it is said, that no man
might buy or sell, but he that had the mark or the name of the beast (...), or
the number of his name; therefore the number of the beast, and the number of
his name, are all one, and so both the one and the other, both signifying the
same thing, are said to contain therein, the just number of 666, when as the
number of the beast, is put down for the number of the name of the beast.

6. Whereas he says, c. 2. page 5. that the mystery of 144. consists in the
square root of it, which is 12. I answer as before, that I do not gainsay
it, but for the oppositio of 666, to this 144, that the mystery of the 666.
must consist in the square root of it, which is 25. as the mystery of a 144,
confisteth in the square root of it, which is 12, I utterly deny, until he
can bring me some intimation thereof, from some text of Scripture, as the
Scripture does for the root of 144. c. 21. v. 14.

Now for all that he says, c. 6. c. 7. and 8. touching the measuring of the
wall of the new Jerusalem, and the mystery of that measuring, I say nothing,
but that he has most rationally, and learuedly confirmed, what no man, that I
read of, has so clearly, before him expressed.

But 7. whereas c. 9. page 46. he blames those that extracted the root of
144. to find out the mystery thereof, because they did not likewise extract
the root of 666. to find out the mystery of that also; I say they are not
only to be excused, and justified without blame, but indeed to be commended
for it; because, as I said before, they had some intimation in the text for the
one, but nothing at all for the other.

Then 8. whereas he says, c. 10. page 51. the first beast with the wounded
head, to be the temporal power of the Roman Emperors; which since Constantines
time has been usurped by the Pope; and in page 54. that he believes the
Bishops of Rome, before they usurped any unlawful ecclefiasticall power, to be
the Antichrist, not in respect of their ecclesiastical or Episcopal power,
but in respect of that, their unlawful temporal power above mentioned, which
they had from Constantine, when he left Rome, and translated the seat of the
Empire to Byzantium; I say this is contrary to the plain text of Scripture;
for the whole time of the beast his continuance, especially in any Power,
prevaiencie, and authority, is said to be but 42 months, which by all
interpreters are expounded, either literally for 3, years and a half, or as
it is by them that understand it mystically, and take a day for a year, for
1260 years; which is the largest number, that any man has made of his
continuance; and if the Pope, in respect of this usurped temporal power, which
he attained unto, by the means of Constantine, that was about the year, 300,
be the beast and the Antichrist, then has he continued above 13 hundred years
already, and God knows how many years he may continue yet, before the
Presbyterians, and their scholars of the long Parliament can pluck him out of
his seat; and sic mentita est iniquitas sibi.

Then 9. whereas he says page 58. that there is no other way whereby men
usually do, or properly can be said to count numbers, but by such a kind of
computation, which either is, or is reduicible to addition, substraction,
multiplication, division, ot the extraction of the root of any number; I
answer, that by counting the number of the beast, and his name, I understand,
neither of these five ways, properly taken, as the Arithmeticians do, but for
counting of the number, that the numerall letters, 1. u. x. l. c. d. m. which
we find in the beast and in his name, by adding them together, do make up, as
the numerall letters of Iobannes Calviuus are 1. c. l. u. i. u. and do make up
162. so the numerall letters, that shall befound in the name of the beast, will
make up just 666. and therefore by this counting of the number of the beast, it
is not necessary, that some other number must be found out by it, as Brocardus
supposes.

10. Whereas he says, c. 11. page 63. that this number of the beast must be
counted by extracting the root of 666, and that the root of this number is,
just 25. and the fractious 41. which root being multiplied by it self, makes
625. to which, if you ad the fractions, which are 41. it makes the just sum of
666. and from hence he coucludeth, that the number, which is principally
intended, to manifest the beast unto us, is 25. and this is the cardo, the
hinge, whereupon all this interpretation runs, and turns every where, and
is the substance of the whole book.

To all which I say, first in general, that all these Arithmeticall, and
Geometrical discourses of numbers and measures, are very obscure and weak
pross to win credit, and to make men believe, upon such intricate
ratiocinations, that the Popish Hierarchy is the great Antichrist; when as
points of such great moment, ought to have plain and perspicuous proofs, and
easier to be understood, then these enigmata's, and dark ridles are, unless it
be to such, qui facile credunt, quae volunt, as will easily believe, what they
greatly desire to be true; for mine ownpart, I must say, as St. Hierome did
once in the like case to the letters of Iovinian.

Non lectore tuis opus estsed apolline scriptis: I am no Pythagoras, so
perfectly able to understand these enigmaticall speculations; but I can say
they are very unsufficient to make me, or any other unprejudicate, and
impartial reader, as I conceive, 10 believe the conclusion; for he confesses
in page 69, that 25, is the root of 625, and p. 70, that the same number of
25, may be the the root of diverse other numbers; and page 71. that there be
diverse other numbers, besides 666, by any one of which we might be infallibly
directed to this number of 25, and also that the root of 666, is nearer to 26,
then to 25, and the like; therefore I see no reason to peswade belief, that the
number 666, or 25, should be rather applicable to Rome, and to the Popes
Hierarchy, then to any other City, or Hierarchy, to whom those numbers, in
many particular respects, may be as rightly applied unto, as unto Rome and the
Pope.

But to this he answers c. 13. page 83. that there be a greater number of
particulars, in which this fatal, and unfortunate number of 25, is rather
applicable to the Romanists, then it is to any other state, Church, or Sect; or
then any other number is to themselves and to their estate.

To which I say, that, for the fatality, and unfortunatenesse or unluckiness,
of this number of 25, which he sets down c. 12, though I might answer, that
as one day, or one place simply considered in their own nature, as being all
alike, made good by God, is no more unfortunate then another; so no more is one
number more unfortunate then another, Luke 13.4.
when we find the Tower of Siloah fell upon 18. and Eliah twice called down
fire from heaven to consume 50, the like of either of which disasters, cannot
be found to happen to any 25, in all the Scriptures; and the Poet says numero
Deus impari gaudet; which will conclude 24. to be more unfortunate then 25; yet
I will not stand to gainsay those Authors, that he produces, to confirm this
point; but I say, that if I did as diligently search all other cities, and
states, Churches, and sects, as he, and others of the Presbyterians have
searched after the City of Rome, and the Popes Heierarchy, it is very
probable, I should find this number 25, to be in as many particular things
applicable to them, as he found it to be in Rome; for as the Prophet says,
that the Lord would search Jerusalem with candles; so have our men searched
every corner of Rome, that there is not a stone of it unfound out, but every
point of the Popes faith, Zephan. 1.12
and every act of his Court, and of his Council, are all discovered to the
world; and if I did the like to Constantinople, or Paris, or Antwerp or London,
or any other such great City, as Rome is, Perphaps I should find as many 25,
Particular things therein, as he finds in Rome, and as many 25, things in
other Churches as he found in the Church of Rome.

But, let it be granted, that Rome is answerable to Jerusalem; and the Pope and
his Cardinals to Christ and his Apostles, which is the sum of of his 14. c.
yet take it not in his sense, but as Aleazar says, utque successit antiquae
Hierosolimae, in co quod fidelium omnium eaput et metropolis sit effecta; and
so take the Pope and his Cardinals, not as enemies, but as successors unto the
Apostles and Vicegerent unto Christ; then all that he says, is rather an
argument to approve and commend them, for their desire to imitate Christ and
his Apostles, then any ways to condemn them for the Antichrist; and for the
25, number of their Cardinals, (which at first in the time of Clemens were but
15, and then were augmented by Anacletus, the 3 Pope, or the 2, as some count
him, and a most holy Martyr, within the 1 centurie, in anno, 94, to 25,) and
the 25 number of the articles of the Roman faith, into which Pope Pius the
fourth reduced the sum of the Tridentine Council, as Mr. Potter reckons
them, (even as the articles of our Church, which we believe, are augmented to
39) and the 25 gates of Rome, which notwitstanding, are not agreed by the best
authors, to be just so many, when pliny says there be but 24, and Liuius
says there be 27. and the 25, figures and characters, that he says are
engraven upon their chiefest Altar, and all the other 25 particulars, that he
collecteth from his authors, to belong to any thing, either in their City,
Church or religion, as (...), contrary positions to all the 12 things, that
are found in the new Jerusalem, as the 12 gates, 12 angels, 12 Tribes, 12
foundations, 12 thousand furlongs, 12 fruits of the tree of life, do no way
convince, and prove the Pope and his Heirarchie to the beast and the
antichrist, no more then the Mayor and the four and twenty Aldermen, and if I
should find 25 gates, and 25 Presbyters, and some other 25 particulars, either
in London, or Lisbon or Paris, to be the very seat of the Antichrist.

But I have been too long in the pursuance of these things, that he says are
to be found in Rome, and we are better to believe him, then to go there to
see; but I believe few wise men, upon such an implicit faith of things, not
apparent nor approved by any of the ancient authors, nor understood by very
good scholars, except perfect arithmeticians, as I take Mr, Potter to be, will
make this inference, to conclude the Pope and his Hierarchy to be the beast and
the antichrist, that is more perspicuously and plainly deciphered and showed
unto us in the holy scriptures, which I have applied to nothing, but to what
we have seen with our eyes, and all men know to be true, except the actors of
these impieties, and those, that will be wilfully blind.

And so to proceed upon plainer evidences, then these arithmeticall ridles, to
discover the beast unto you, 4. The name of Independents is most proper to the
antichrist.
I demand, if the very name of Independants, (that is usaully, and generally
given them, and by which the prevalent faction of that Parliament was best
known, and distinguished from the rest of the House, and of all other true
Christians, and apostate heretics, and wherein both themselves, and their
adherents do so much glory,) does not sufficiently mamanifest the same thing,
and evidently prove them to be this beast and the antichrist (...), that was
prophesied by the Apostles, and expected by the Church to come into the world?
for though in the days of Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, that lived in the fifth
centurie, there were some, that as the Cannon says, (...), lest their
absurdities, and novelties should be discovered, refused to submit themselves
unto the Council, and so became Independants from the Church of Christ; for
which cause Aurelius caused them to be removed by the Council, as obstinate
and rebellious, from all rule and authority over the people; yet these men
never assumed the name of Independants, neither was it given them for ought I
read, by any others; because they persisted not in their obstinafie, to draw
more proselites after them; but our Independants of these times, as flat, and
fully oppsite to the Church of Christ, are, and are so generally termed and
taken, Independants from the Catholic Church, and from every particular
national Church; and therefore they do gather Churches and congregations unto
themselves, and in that respect, are most properly styled Independants, as fit
a name, as any is in the world for the followers of the antichrist, when as,
all other creatures, men and Angels good and bad, and not any of all the former
heretics excepted, but that they acknowledged themselves to be entia
dependentia, not only depending upon him, Heb. 1.3.
that bears up all things by his mighty word, or the word of his power, that
is Jesus Christ, but also desired to be received into that unity, and to
depend upon the communion, and society of the Church, as Arius, that arch
heretic made great friends to be admitted into the communion of the Church of
Alexandria, as Theodoret writes. Theodor. haret. fabul. l. 4. The parallel.


But these men, as A- per se- A or as the arctick pole is from the antarchtick,
so are they fully opposite, ex diametro, to their head, and have assumed, and
let them have it, this antichristian name of Independants, they say, not from
Christ, but I say certainly from Christ, because it is from the Church of
Christ; for whosoever has not the church for his mother, 1 pet 3.20.
shall never have God for his Father; but as all perished by the deluge, that
were not in Noah's Arc, that was the type of the church, as St. Peter shows,
so shall they perish everlastingly, that are not the members of Christ, and of
his church, and within the communion of Saints, which is a special article of
the christian faith. Then

5. The ancient Fathers, as St. Aug. upon the words of Christ, 5. The great
persecution of the Parliament a concomitant sign of the antichrist. Aug. de
civit Dei, l. 20. c. 8. and 9 Hypol. in erat. de consumwat. mundi. Cyrillus
cateches. 15. Bellarum de, romans Pot. l. 3. c. 7. The parallel. Whom I never read
to have done things so unjustly as that Parliament did, utterly to undo so
many men, and never tell them what evil they have done
there shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the
world; no nor ever shall be; math. 24.21. and upon the words of the revelation,
where satan is said to be let loose c. 20. v. and Hypolitus, Cyrillus,
Isidorus, and others do collect, and avouch out of the scripture, that the
injustice and the persecution of the Antichrist, will be greater, and stranger,
and more grievous then any other of the persecutions that preceded it; and
therefore Bellarmine, and many others, both of the Roman, and of the Protestant
Church, do make the persecution of the Antichrist to be one of the two
concomitant signs, whereby the saints and servauts of Christ, shall know, and
understand, that he is come into the world.

But the unspeakeable, and unparaleled injustice, cruelty, and persecution, of
that Parliament, acted against the true servants of Christ, that were loyal
subjects of the civil state, and the faithful Governors of the purest church
that Christ had on earth, intimated by the Apostle, in the place before cited,
and lighting upon them, that I specified to you before, surpassed, in my
understanding, all the persecutions that preceded it; when as I showed you, in
the beginning of this book, the votes, ordinances and acts of that Parliament,
are not inferior, but, as I conceive, exceeding in cruelty, injustice, and
impiety the edicts of Dioclesian, or Decius, or any other of the worst of the
pagan persecutors; Aod does not this most plainly evince, and prove that the
Iuncto of united Independants, and their adherents, and associale Prebyterians
in that long Parliament, and their false Prophet, that sat at Westminster to
instruct them, are the beasts spoken of in the Revelation. c 13. and the man of
sin, the child of perdition, and the great antichrist, that St. Paul
prophesied of to come into the world, 2 These. 2?

6. Another undeniable, palpable sign of the antichrist is, 6. Gross:
Hypocrisy of the Parliament unfallible sign of the anti- The partlel.
his more then Pharisaicall hypocrisy, sitting in the Temple of God, as God,
preaching the Gospel as an Evangelist, and being in all things else, as I have
formerly showed; the best saint in show, and the devil in deed, and so an
absolute and a perfect hypocrite, as the Presbyterians affirmed the Pope to be.

And have not that long Parliment, most hypocritically, besides their other
doings, made an act for the propagation of the Gospel, and have nominated
certain men, of their own sect, to put that act in execution throughout the
thirteen shires of Wales, as where they found the people most loyal to their
King, and more desirous to retain the true service of God amongst them, then
any other parts of the kingdom, and therefore had more need to have their
Gospel preached there amongst them: but I beseech you mark, how finely the
dark fiend can change himself, into an Angel of light, that he might enlarge
the kingdom of darkness; for, if you would rightly understand how these men
have propagated the Gospel of Christ in those parts, where I had an occasion,
to be an eyewitness of their proceeding; I do assure you, upon the faith of a
christian, they have ejected, and deprived most, if not all, of the best
preachers, and grave doctors, some only for receiving their just dues, others
for their loyalty, and some without once calling them to answer, or telling
them why, or wherefore they were ejected; and they have set their livings to
Captains, and Soldiers, and have shut the Churches doors, and charged the
right Incumbents, neither to pray there, nor to preach, unto the people; and so
they have very formally, propagated the Gospel of Christ, by this their good
service, as is conceived, unto the Antichrist; and yet, that they might seem
good gospellers, to deceive the world, they have got some few novices, and
young striplings, that wanted means, as much as they lacked learning, 1 Timothy
3.6. Jude v. 12. and 13. How the Parliament has propagated the Gospel, in
Wales.
(such as St. Paul speaks of, and as wandering Stars, and Clouds without water,
as St. Jude calls them, or as the Pilgrim Jew, that was lately talked of,) and
with one pocket Sermon or two, that they got, as was reported, from their
brethren of Wrexam, and learned the same by rote, which were full of the
doctrines and blasphemies of the times, they became, as they are termed,
itinerant preachers, to bestow a Sermon upon a congregation, which they never
saw before, and which in all likelihood, they should never see again. And thus
the Parliament, with their wandering preachers, have propagated the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, the clean contrary way,

And who sees not, by all this, and by all their other doings like this, that,
as all divines confess, the Antichrist, under the name of Christ, and upon
pretense, to do the best service unto Christ, will be the greatest enemy of
Christ; so these men, under the show of propagating the Gospel, have done more
then all the wicked heretics, that preached, or the beathen tyrants that knew
not Ghrist, to overthrow the true church of God, and to root out the right
faith, and the clear light of the Gospel, from off the earth? And therefore if
the Parliament be not the great Antichrist, but that a greater and a worse,
shall come into the world, God, O Good God, I humbly beseech thee, for Jesus
Christ his sake, take me out of this world, before he comes into the world,
that mine eyes may not see that evil.

And now, being wearied in prosecuting the folly, and discovering the great
great iniquity and impiety of that Parliament, suitable to the predictions of
those things that should be acted by the Antichrist, and fearing that I have
too much wearied my reader in the pursuit of this wild beast, I should here,
end this point, What a preacher says in a printed Sermon.
but that I cannot omit what a godly preacher setteh down in a a Sermon printed
at London, 1647. upon St Luke c. 18, verse. 31.24. where he says. It has been
a long and a great dispute, whether the Antichrist be come, and who he is; and
if I be not mistaken, the scripture will easily resolve this question; for they
that oppose themselves against Christ, they that sit in the Temple, and set
themselves above all, deposing and murdering Kings, are not these the first,
and the great Antichrist? when they make themselves, what Christ alone is, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and therefore alone has the power to depose Kings
and to dispose of their kingdoms, are they not the Antichrist? For the Apostle
says, qui Christi sunt crucifixerunt carnem, they that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, or fleshly lusts; but qui Antichristi sunt crucifixerunt
Christum Regem, we may justly say, they are the Antichrist, that have crucified
the Lords anointed, that is, their King, (and as I may say, their Priest;) so
that by the beheading of our King (and of our Bishop) you have one step to the
discovery of the Antichrist, and a plain step it is, so that none can step
from it; thus far he; and this his stop; I showed you in the particular sin of
the Antichrist more at large.

Whereby, you may perceive, that although I have undertaken to prosecute this
discovery at large, and followed the same to the full; yet others, whereof I
might produce many, are of this opinion; that they would have the christian
world to judge, Whether the long Parliament, and their assembly of
instructors, at Westminster; and the rest of the Presbyterians, and lay
preachers, that were the prime sticklers to have their King killed, and their
Bishop beheaded, and all the rest suppressed, that are the two witnesses spoken
of in the 11 c. and 7. v. of the Revelation as we, conceive, be not the two
beasts that St John saw in the 13. c. of the Revelation, and the great
Antichrist, that so long ago was prophesied, he should come into the world, to
slay the witnesses, to persecute the Church of God, and to overthrow the
Governors and Government thereof.

And truly, reserving mine own judgment to my self, I have found many
learned, judicious, and godly divines, that have observed, some one mark of
the Antichrist, and some another, to be most properly belonging, and in every
point agreeable, and fixed to that pack, and knot of the enemies of Christ that
I spoke of, which for brevities sake, my book having swollen, The
recapitulation of the whole book.
with the poison of these two Beasts, too big already, I must omit, and leave
you to consider, what I have formerly demanded. As

1. Whether that Parliament has not opened the door of the grand apostafie and
rebellion, for the Antichrist to enter into the Church.

2. Whether it has not seated it self in that Babylon, where the Antichrist
should sit and dominere.

3. Whether it has not fulfilled all the prophecies of the old and new
Testament, that spoke of the coming and of the doings of the Antichrist: As 1.
The prophecy of Zachary, touching the foolish, and the idol Shepherd. 2. The
phophecie of Daniel, touching the doings of Antiochus, that was the lively type
of the Antichrist. 3. The prophecy of St. Paul, of the man of the sin which is
the proper and peculiar sin of the Antichrist. 4. The prophecy of St. John,
that the Antichrist should deny Jesus to be the Christ, that is suppress both
the regal and the priestly offices of Christ. 5. The visions of St. John, 1.
touching the witnesses, that the Antichrist should kill 2. The Church that he
should persecute, and 3. The two beasts that were as the body and the soul of
the Antichrist.


4. Whether it has not taken upon it the name, and especially, the practice,
of Independants, which is the sit name, and the properest work of the
Antichrist, to separate himself from Christ, and from the Church of Christ.

5. Whether it has not exceedingly wronged, and extremely persecuted the
Church of God, and especially the Governors of the Church, which is the
infallible concomitant sign, of the Antichrist.

6, Whether it has not showed it self so gross an bypocrite, in all his acts
and proceedings, that none but the Antichrist could do the same.

And when you have duly read, and impartially weighed all these things, that I
have set before you, as in a glass, then judge, your self, whether the
Presbyterians, and the Parliament be not the great Antichrist or not.

CHAP VI. Four special Objections answered; wherein the right use of all the
foresaid discovery of the Beasts and the Antichrist is declared, and the
precedent Discourse more fully confirmed.
ANd if any man shall object, The Author of the Revelatiou unrevealed in his
preface, 5 ob. 1. Sol.
and think it strange, as a most reverend and learned Author, whom I much
honor, seems to do; that the blessed Apostle in Patmos, overlooking all the
vast Continent betwixt him and us, should have his thoughts taken up with our
petty Occurrences in this other side of the World, which is not like to be.

I answer, That seeing God out of all the World, did such great things for the
small Kingdom of Israel, that in extent of Ground might scarce be compared to
any one of these three Kingdoms, the whole length of it, from Dan to Beersheba,
being not above three hundred miles, as S. Hierome witnesses; and seeing the
Holy Ghost vouchsafes to set down in this Revelation, many particulars of Iess
consequence, and to fore-shew some things of far lower concernment, then are
those great things, that have been acted by that Parliament, as in the 2. c.
and 3. c. the Sufferings of some particular Churches, and of particular Cities;
as Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatyra, Philadelphia, Sardis and Laodicea, and
the murdering of some particular men, as Antipas, c. That it is not strange
the spirit of God should foretell, the things that were to happen in this
Island.
2.13. and the failing, and remisness of some Churches in Gods Service, which
are of far lesser note and moment, then the men that were martyred, the
Churches that were profaned, the Apostasy that has happened, the Kingdoms that
have been ruined, and the horrible Impieties that have been committed here
amongst us: let no man wonder, that the Spirit of God, who is no respecter of
persons, nor oblivious of the meanest Countries, should likewise foretell the
sad Accidents, and the like, or more inexcusable Sufferings and Martyrdom, Mat.
24 33. The right use of all the foresaid discovery of the Antichrist to; know;
that should fall upon the King, and upon all the Bishops, and very many
faithful Pastors, besides the multitude of Saints and godly Christians of three
of the most famous and purest Protestant Kingdoms and Churches in the World;
that as our Savior says of the like Predictions, when we see them fulfilled,
we might understand and learn, how to make a right use of them; and that is,

1. 1. From whence our afflictions come, and why they are sont.
To know that these our Persecutions and Afflictions come not out of the dust,
nor by chance, but by the Divine Providence of Almighty God, that foresaw them,
and foretold us of them, long before they came, and has sent them to us,
either as just Chastisements for our sins, and remisness in his Service and
performance of our duty, or as trials of our faith and constancy in our
Profession, and for an example unto others, to imitate them that do patiently
suffer, or for so me other Causes best known to God himself.

2. 2. To teach us more zealously to serve God.
To learn hereby to fear God, and more zealously and carefully to serve him, to
pray unto him night and day, to forgive us our forepassed sins both of
commission and omission, to give us patience in all these our sufferings, and
to assist us for our constancy and perseverance in our duties, that we neither
murmr at our present condition, nor start aside one inch from the truth of
our Christian Profession, Non me videre superbum prosper a fatorum nec fractum
adversa videbunt. said Pompey. and how much rather should a Christian say it.
either for fear of losses, or for love of gain and preferment, but to proceed
on, codem vultus tenore, with the same cheerful countenance, as well in these
stormy thundering days of Adversity and Persecution, as we would do in the
cleerest Sun-shining days of pleasure and prosperity: and to remember that,
Rebus in adversis facile est in contemnere vitam,
Fortiter ille facit, q^i miser esse potest.


3. To abhor the ways of the wicked.
3. To abhor the ways and to fly from the service and allurements of these
Beasts, as from a Serpent; because the third Angel that S. John saw, said with
a land voice, so that all men might hear him, and plead no excuse, If any man
worship the Beast and his Image; that is, serve and follow the two horned
Beast, which is the false Prophet, and the ten horned Beast, that is, the Image
of the false Prophet, and assist them in their Impieties, or imitate and follow
them in their blasphemous doctrines, and their wicked ways; or receive his
mark in his forehead, or in his hand; that is, take an Engagement and oblige
himself to assure the Beasts, that he will uphold, assist, and desend them, and
so be true and faithful unto them, to further their proceedings, or to justify
their doings, either plainly or covertly, directly or indirectly, the same
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, The heavy punishment of them that
assist and adhere to the Beasts.
which is poured out without mixture; that is, of any comfortable thing to
allay the fierceness, or to sweeten the bitterness of it, into the Cup of his
indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence
of the holy Angels and of the Lamb, which will increase his Torment, to see
their happiness, and himself in such extreme misery, and the smoke of that
torment ascends up for ever and ever, to keep God still in mind of the
odiousness and stinking savor of their wickedness; and they have no rest day
nor night; that is, no manner of ease, or abatement of their Torment at any
time, that worship the Beast and his Image; that is, serve and adhere to the
false Prophet, and the ten horned Beast, Revel. 14.9, 10, 11.
and whosoever receives the mark of his name; that is, engages himself to
adhere and to assist them: which pathetical and fearful expressions of the
wrath of God, and the unspeakable Torments of them that serve and assist these
Beasts, if men did believe the Scriptures (should, as I think) make all men
afraid to receive the mark, The 2 Beasts often termed in the singular number,
the Beast; and why?
or to do any service to any that is like to have any affinity or society with
these Beasts, which though they be two, as the soul and body are, yet by reason
of their coberency and conjunction, like Samsons Foxes (or rather Herod and
Pilate, to crucisie Christ) to consume all the Corn in Joabs field, as being
subservient one to another, they are most commonly spoken of in the singular
number, and termed the Beast; whose undeniable notes, and indelible
characters, and whose words and works testified by the spirit of God in the
holy Scripture, I have in all particulars paralleled and expressed by the
doctrines and doings of the Assembly of Presbyters at Westminster, and their
associates, the Independent and Lay-preachers, and the long Parliament, that
beheaded the two Witnesses of Jesus Christ, and is therefore believed by very
many, to be the great Antichrist, and the man of the sin, that is spoken of by
the Apostle; from whose impiety, iniquity, and cruelty, I earnestly and humbly
beseech Almighty God night and day, to preserve me, and all the true Servants
of Jesus Cstrist. Amen.

The pious works of the long Parliament.
But secondly, Against all this that I have written, and showed in the
Application of the description and doings of the Antichrist, to the Actions and
determinations of the Presbyterians, and long Parliament, and the just
paralleling of the one with the other, to be as a man and his Image, or shadow
in a Glass: I know it will be objected and demanded, how it can be possible,
that that Parliament, which protested they made their War against the
Antichrist, to root out Popery, Idolatry, and Superstition from the Church, and
made so many Orders and Ordinances for Gods Service, and Acts for the
propagation of the Gospel, and to restrain the profanation of Gods Name; and
appointed so many Fasts to beg a blessing upon their Endeavors, and so many
Thanksgivings unto God for their good snccesses, which they ascribed only to
God, and not to themselves; and did many other such like acts of piety and
devotion, should be the great Antichrist, and the greatest enemies that ever
were to the honor of Christ and of his Church, since his ascension into
Heaven, as you seem to make theworld to believe they are: Are these things the
works of the Antichrist, or can they be compatiblc with the Antichrist?

briefly, If they had not done these things, they could not have been the great
Antichrist; for Christ himself does tell us, that the Antichrist and his false
Prophets would say, Matthew. 24.23.
Lo here is Christ; that is, with them, and there is Christ; that is, where
they meet, in the Desert, and in the secret Chambers; that is, in their private
Conventicles, and not in his consecrated Church, where we pray unto him: and
hereby says Christ, they should deceive the World, and as S. Revel. 13.14.
John says, All them that dwell upon the earth: i.e. All earthly men, yea,
Mar. 13 21.
and if it were possible, they should, by this their great profession of Piety,
deceive the very Elect, and the true Servants of Christ: and you know the old
Rule which is infallible, -- decipimur specie recti,
Fallit enim vitium, specie virtut is and umbra.
We are soonest and oftnest deceived with the show of piety, and under the
profession of the greatest holiness: Si. Walter Rawleigh in the life of Mabomet
page 7.8.
so Mahomet the great Impostor, by embracing a solitary life, free from the
ordinary conversation of men, and his speeches mixed with gravity, teaching
holiness and a good life, and beating down Idolotry and injustice, gained such
an extraordinary opinion of sanctity among the Arabians, that they which saw
him, admired him, and they that heard of him, held him to be a Saint, and
thereby he deceived the greatest part of this side of the world; and so all
Hypocrites do seem to be better Saints, then the best of all the true Saints: as
the Scribes and Pharisees can make this good unto you; for they were the only
appearing Saints among the Jews, Luke 11.42.
Tything the least things, praying in the Streets, cautious of their Oaths, and
very strict Observers of their Sabbath days service, and teaching as much
outward holiness, as these holy men do; Matthew. 23.13.
yet we may believe our Savior, that they were but holy Hypocrites, that
thought they did God good Service, when they did exceedingly offend him: for as
the Devil does then most of all enlarge the Kingdom of darkness, when he
transforms himself into an Angel of light, and made our Forefathers to become
like Devils, Genesis 3 5.
when he told them they should be like gods: so it is, as it hah been ever
since, his perpetual practice to teach his Instruments, and you may be sure the
Antichrist is one, The Antichrist will seen to his followers the best Christian
in the world.
Preponere quod delectabile, subponere quod exitiale, to give deadly poy son in
a golden Cup, and to pretend and to make show of the greatest Piety, Holiness,
and Devotion in the world, and with Judas to kiss Christ, to love him, and to
honor him above all men, when the consequents of their actions aimand level to
betray him, as Judas did, to be crucified; to overthrow his service, to kill
his servants, and to lay all his honor in the dust: and the more holy the
Devil seems to be, the more Devil he is, and the worse he means to be; so the
more Saints, and the more pretense of Devotion and zeal of Gods honor, these,
or any other Actors of wickedness seem to make, the more apparent proof it is,
that they are the greatest Adversaries unto Christ.

But it is true, A special observation to be considered. Luke 10.22.
and most worthy to be observed, that S. Paul calls the coming and discovery
of the Antichrist a mystery; that is a hidden, dark, and secret thing: and in
some respects, not much unlike the coming, and believing the coming of Christ
into the world: for as no man has known who the Son is, but the Father, and
who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him: so none
shall know the Antichrist to be the Antichrist, but only they to whom Christ
will reveal him: for as the mystery of Christ his coming into the world, was
bid from the wise men of this world, the Scribes, and the Pharisees, and the
rest of the Rulers of the people, that would never believe a man of such mean
birth, poor friends, and so contemptible in the eyes of men, as the Prophet
shows, Isa. 53.2.
And they beheld with their eyes, without form or beauty, should be the Christ,
that anointed of God, to be the Messiah, that was to be the Redeemer and
Savior of all mankind: but this mystery was revealed to Shepherds, and as
Christ says, to Babes and Sucklings; that is, Luke 2.10. Math 11.25. That the
discovery of the Antichrist is a mystery hardly believed by the wise men of
this world.
to some few that were as weak, as simple, and of as small account in the world,
as are the little Children among men; and yet to these only he was revealed,
and these first believed in him: so the mystery of the coming of the Antichrist
is hid from the wordly wise, from the great men, the wealthy men, and the
ruling Officers of the people, that shall not know him, nor will not believe
him to be the Antichrist, but shall wonder after him, and worship him, and
befool all those men, that shall imagine such successes, and protestations of
piety, and acts to suppress Idolatry and profaneness, and to further true
Religion and the service of God, can be any ways compatible with the
Antichrist; yet this knowledge and this revelation of the Antichrist, by the
special favor and blessing of God, shall be made known and discovered to some
few, mean, despised, and dejected ones in the world, that do truly love Christ,
and zealously stick to his service, notwithstanding all the affronts of the
world, and do perfectly hate the bypocrisy and hypocritical pretentions and
proceedings of the cruel and most hateful Beasts.

And therefore S. Paul calls the discovery and the knowledge of the Antichrist
a revelation, saying, (...), that he might be revealed, 2 These. 2. Emergere and
patesteri, and exten^bris in lucem prodire, ut a piis pro tali cognoscatur,
Maresius page 63. Matthew. 11.25. E.H. de Antichristo part. 3. c. 5. page 102.
Esaias 6.9. Act. 28.27. Luke 7.30. 2 These. 2.9.10.
which is the taking away of a covering, or the putting off of a Veil, or Mask
from some face, that was masked and hidden from public fight: so is the
discovery of the Antichrist, a reveiling of some bidden face, and a manifesting
of some secret thing, that is not commonly known, nor believed in the world:
but is and shall be only re veiled, especially at his first appearing, to some
few, and those of the meaner sort, or smallest account in the world, and it
shall be kept secret and hidden from the world, and the generality of men in
the world, especially the great men, and noted men of the world; as are the
revelations of all the mysteries of God: and therefore S. Matthew speaking of
Gods mysteries, joyneth, (...), which signifies to hide, with the word (...),
to reveil, to note unto us, as it is well observed, that the mysteries of God
and of our Religion, that are unfolded and published, are notwithstanding so
made known and reveiled, as that they are believed only by some few, that truly
love Christ, and earnestly desire to understand his truth, and are kept still
secret and hidden from all the rest, that believe them not, which happens
through their own fault; just as it was with the Jews, that, as the Prophet
Isay shows, had eyes and would not see, and had ears and yet would not hear:
and as the Scribes and Pharisees rejected the counsel of God against themselves;
for so it is with these wise men of the world, that when they are told this
truth, they will not understand it, when they are persuaded to embrace it, they
are averse to believe it, and think we are greatly deceived, and simple men
that teach it: because indeed the love of this present world has insensibly
bewitched and blinded them, and their care and search after the truth, has
been too remiss, for which cause, the Apostle says, God shall send them strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who
believe not the truth, but bad pleasure in unrighteousness: Where I would have
the great men, and the wise men of this world, to observe that this fearful
expression of judgment is against such as believe not, and receive not the love
of this truth, concerning the coming, the working, and the lying wonders of the
Antichrist, when they are told of it, as you may see in 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11,
12. and in Revel. 14.9, 10.

And therefore seeing the Holy Ghost has told us how things should happen,
when the Antichrist should be revealed; I wonder not, The worldlings cry up
Antichrist for a Saint.
that the worldly men, formal Professors, and all loose livers, should cry up
the Antichrist, when he is in the height of his tyranny, for an eminent Saint,
and a destroyer of the Antichrist, and his antichristian Hierarchy: but I say
to all that love Christ and his truth, Let not those hypocritical doings of
pretended Godliness, Lake 11.42.
which is but like the godliness of the Scribes and Pharisees, deceive you; for,
as I said even now, Luke 11.42.
they fasted and prayed as much, if not more then these men, they tythed Mynt
and the smallest Herbs, better then these men, and they were stricter in
refraining from Oaths, and observing of their Vows, and sanctifying of the
Sabbath, then the precisest of the followers of the Antichrist ever were, or
could be: and yet all this and much more outward godliness that they had, was
but as S. Chrysostom says, Isay 29.13. Matthew. 6.5.
In ostentatione non in rectitudine intentionis; or as the Prophet Isay says,
to draw near unto God with their mouths, when their hearts are far from him: or
as Christ himself says, (...), that they might be seen, and applauded of men,
and therefore he adds, for a truth, (...), verily I say unto you, (...), they
have received mercedem suam their reward; that is, the esteem that they
expected, and the Worship and Service that they required from those men, whom
they deceived, sed amiserunt meam, but they have lost my reward, that I should
have given them, had they not been such hypocrites, that is, eternal life.

Therefore I say once again, and again, to you that love the truth, let not the
pretenses of piety, and the shadow of godliness, with the usurped name of
Saints deceive you; but rather seriously consider; whether,

1. 1 Samuel 24.6.
The killing of Gods Anointed, which David so much abhorred, and the very
Heretics, Schismatics, and Apastata's, have heretofore confessed to be a
sacred Tree, forbidden to be touched, much less then to be rooted up.

2. The destroying, beheading, and famishing of Gods Ministers,.

3, The defiling of Gods House, the holy place of his service.

4. The Perjuries and forswearing of themselves.

5. The robbing of Gods people, of their Estates and livelihoods.

6. The killing of their brethren that were innocent, and deserved neither
death nor bonds.

7. The betraying of their Countries, and those Countries that loved them, and
elected them for their Patrons, of their lives, liberties, and livelyhoods.

8. The oppressing of all men, friends and foes, beyond measure.

9. The filling of Pulpits with Herefies, lies, and blasphemies.

10. The silencing of the faithful and Orthodox Preachers, for speaking truth.

11. The taking away of all restraint of lewdness and lasciviousness.

12. The abundance more of such other borrible acts of wickedness, injustice,
and impieties, be the Liveries of Christ his Saints, or the marks and
characters of the Antichrist.

Baptism, which, as I said before, was the razing of the mark, The
Presbyterians great opposers of the Anabaptists, and of the multiplicity of
sects.
and the blotting of the Seal of Christ, be an undeniable Character of the
Antichrist and the confused multiplicity of all Sects, Heresies, and Errors, be
the inseparable L very, and apparent evidence of the false Prophet; then
certainly the Assembly at West minster, and Presby terians cannot be this
second Beast, and the soul of the Antichrist; because they are no Anabaptists:
and none have written and preached more fully, plainly, and learnedly against
the Anabaptists, Independents, Lay-preachers, and all other Sects, Separatists
and Heresies, then they have done; and they are the only men that profess
themselves to be the grand enemies of the Beast, and the subverters of all
Hieiarchy, the Captains of Gods Host, that pulled down Episcopacy, teach parity
among Gods Ministers, and most strenuously fight against all the limbs of the
Antichrist.

The false Prophet teaches many truths, to gain the more (...) to his (...).
I answer, That it is not requisite that all the vices, and every particular
fin of the Antichrist should be accumulated in every Member of the Antichrist,
nor that every Error and Heresy should be taught and maintained by the fulse
Prophet, but rather that he should bring and teach many truths, that his
painful preaching and good doctrines that he teaches, might gain the more
credit to his lies, and falsehood; and the opposing of the Anabaptists, and
confuting the Independants, and Lay Preachers, and other sects,, the members of
the Antichrist, does no ways free them, from being the main part of this false
Prophet; for as God did set an Egyptian against an Egyptian, and divided the
army of Senacherib, to cut one another throat; Isay. 37.36.
so that in one night, there fell a hundred fourscore and five thousand of
them; even so God disposes of things often times, in the army of the
Antichrist, that there shall be, proditoris proditor, a traitor to betray a
traitor, and one rebel to rebel against another, and as Ephraim, was against
Manasses, Isay. 9.21.
and Manasses a against Ephraim, and both of them against Judah; so the
Independants, will be against the Presbyterians, and the Presbyterians, against
the Independants, and against all other sects, that will not fall down and
worship this Presbyterian Idol; and all these opposites, can be united, The
Pharisees compassed Sea and Land to make a Proselite.
and comine themselves together against the Governors of the Church: and for
their great pains, and seeming sanctity, no false Prophet, did ever want the
same; for does not Christ tell you, that although such false Prophets, be
ravening Wolves; yet they will come unto you, in Sheeps chothing? and does not
the old proverb tell you, that tuta frequensque via sub amici fallere nomen; is
it not safest, and the most usual way, and readiest to deceive, for the
Ministers of the Antichrist, to go under the name of the faithful servants of
Christ, and the best Soldiers, that sight under his banner, against all the
Limbs of the Antichrist? which has been the practice of all heretics, as
Tertul. in his prescript, and Irenaeus, contra here is. and St. Aug. against the
Donat. and many others, do sufficiently show unto us.

4. It is objected, that the Pope and the popish Hierarchy, Marth. 23.15. Ob.
Thomson in the Areignment of the Anrtchrist. I W. in his Romae ruina finalis
Powel, Sheldon, Downam, and many others.
being so puffed up with pride, that he exalts himself above all that is
called God, that is, above all Kings, and above the Emperor, and being so
silled with herefies, idolatries and blasphemies, and such a cruel, bloody
tyrant and persecutor of Gods true servants, as our Protestants have amply
showed in their books; and the Turk, directly, and (...), thrusting himself
into the place and office of Christ, and exalting himself above Christ, above
the Prophets, and above all the Apostles of Christ, and challenging to
himself, and his successors, absolute independent power over all the Kings and
Monarchs of the earth; and commanding his Alcoran, which is made up of
Paganish, Jewish and Arian herefies and superstitions, to be received and
preferred before the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and most cruelly tyrannizing over
those poor Christians that are under him, because they renounce not their
Savior, Bishop Mountague in his Appello Casarem page
and adore his false Prophet, and that religion, which directly leads them to
perdition, as learned Montague shows, it is incredible, and not possible to
be believed, that the Parliament, and specially the Presbyterians, that
profess themselves to be regulated, neither by Fathers, nor Councils, nor any
other Canon or rule, but only, by the pure Word of God, and do so
indefatigably labor to bring men to Christ, and to enlarge the kingdom of his
Grace, and have hazarded their fortunes, and lost their blood, and some their
lives in the defense of Gods cause, should be the great Antichrist, and a
greater Antichrist, more batefull, and a more abominable adversary unto God
and his Church, then either the Pope or the Furke?

To this I answer, that I never intended to excuse, or to lessen, Sol. The
Aurhor excuses neither Pope nor Turk.
the impieties of the Pope, or the cruelties of the Turk, or to deny them to
be Antichrists, and great adversaries, both to Christ, and to the Church of
Christ; I am no Proctor, to plead for either of them, especially against the
truth; but I say, the nearer men are to God, the more profession they make of
faith, and the better christians they think themselves to be; the more
faithfulness, and the more holiness and sincerity is required at their hands;
for to whom much is given, of them, much shall be required, says our Savior;
and it was wisely said of a fool, that dying, cried to God, that he would
require no more of him, The wise prayer of a Fool.
then what he gave him; though wiser men must employ their tallents to the best
advantage of their master, who expects a plentiful harvest of all good
fruits, where he has plentifully sown his good seed of knowledge, and of grace:
and so the sins of such men, as should be Saints, are far more heinous, and
more abominable in the fight of God, then the sins of those, that know not God;
yea sins, less heinous in their own nature, are more heinous in these
offenders, then other sins, far more odious in themselves, are in those that
are further off from God, and less acquainted with his laws; and therefore,
Act 17.30. Ps. 106.21.22. Romans 3.2.
the Iodolatrie of the heathens, that knew not the true God, God winked at,
says the Apostle, and it was not near so odious, in Gods fight, as the
Idolatry of the sons Israel, that had seen his wonders in Egypt, and had the
heavenly Oracles delivered unto them; and so, though Pilate, for condemning
Christ to death, is branded with great infamy, by the mouth of every
christian that says his Creed, that Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate; yet
Annas, John, 19.11.
and Caiphas, that professed to know Gods will, and thought themselves the
chiefest of Gods people, majus peccatum habuerunt, sinned more, by our
Savior's testimony, for delivering him unto Pilate, then Pilate did in
condemning him unto death; so likewise, though the sins of the Edomites were
very great, when the Prophet says, thus says the Lord, for three
transgressions of Edom and for four, Amos, 1, 11.
I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because he did pursue his
brother, (that is the seed of Jacob, that was Esaus brother, which is Edom) and
did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and kept his wrath
for ever: And so in like manner, though the sins of Damascus and of Moah also
were exceeding grievous, v. 3. c. 2.1. c. 1.13.
when the former threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of Iron, and the
others rage was so great, that death could not satisfy his wrath, but he must
burn the bones of the King of Edom into lime: How and whose sins do become
most odious.
and in like manner, though the sins of the children of Ammon, were no less
grievous, then the sins of Moab, when they ripped up the women with child, of
Gilead, that they might enlarge their borders; yet because these nations were
not the peculiar people of God, nor had received so many favors from God, nor
the knowledge of his laws, so as the Jews had done; these horrible sins, and
sins against nature, seemed not so horrible, and so offensive in Gods sight, as
Iudahs despising of his laws, and their lies, which caused them to err, and
Isreal's selling of the righteous for Silver, and the poor for a pair of Shoes,
c. 2. v. 4. and 6.
which seem to be but venial fins, in respect of the other bloody murders,
and inhumane cruelties; because, as I said before, to whom God has given much,
of them he requires much; and where he expects most holiness, there the
fins are most sinful; and as St. Bernard says of the Priests, and Ministers of
Christ, Quae in aliis nugae sunt in illis sunt blasphemia, so the sins that are
but trifles in the Pagans and Infidels, are most odious in the Christians; and
therefore, after that the Lord had recapitulated both the fins of those nations
and the many favors he had heaped upon the Israelites, with the rejectment of
the Amorites and the rest of the foresaid nations for their former
transgressions, c. ^3.5. The sins of Israel more displeased God, then the sins
of the Amorites; and why?
he adds of the Israelites; you only have I chosen of all the Families of
the earth, that is, for mine own peculiar people, to serve me, and to be
protected and favored by me; therefore, seeing you have done these things, I
will punish you, for all your iniquities; and when others that you think worse,
and greater finners then you be, may have some savor, yet you shall have none
at all; because these things in you, offend me more, and are more abominable in
my fight, then are all the abominations of the Amorites. And so according to
this determination of the Prophet, though the sins of the publicans, and
harlots, murderers and robbers, and the like, were more flagitious, and more
heinous in their own nature, then the sins and delinquencies of the Scribes,
and Pharisees, that, for the uprightness, of their outward carriage, were
deemed the only Saints among Gods prople; yet, because they professed to know
their Masters will, and did it not, our Savior was offended with them, and
denounces more, and more beavie woes against them, then against all the
enormous, horrible, and flagitious sins of others, the greatest finners, that
knew not so much of the will of God as they did.

Even so, though the Idolatries, and heresies, and superstitions of the Pope
and his Hierarchy, and their other sins; and the abominations, and cruelties
of the Turks, and Mahometans may in there own nature, simply considered, seem
more odious and heinous then the sins of the Presbiterians and long Parliament;
yet consideratis considerandis; all circomstances considered, that may be said
for the Pope, and popish church, No sinner so hateful in the sight of God as
the ypocritical saint.
and for the Turk and Mahometans, and against these seeming Angels, and the
grand masters of injustice and impiety in all their ways; I say no Pope, no
Turk, no Tyrant, no Scismatick, no Heretic, nor any other, the like great
sinner, can be so hateful in the sight of God, as are the doings of these
hypocritical Saints, that I have so clearly and so amply, displayed unto you in
this book; so far, that the best of mine understanding cannot immagine how a
greater Antichrist, more odious to God and more destructive to the Church of
God, can possibly arise, then that which I have described in these books.

CHAP. VII. Of the continuance, and destruction of the beast; the time of his
prevalencie; his utter ruin not till the day of judgment; and why? and what it
should teach us; how the seven Vials of Gods wrath shall be poured out; and
what the three unclean spirits do signify,
ANd now I should end this discourse, but that for the comfort of all the
persecuted Saints and Servants of Jesus Christ, that seem in mine ears to cry
to God, with the souls under the Altar, saying, how long tarriest thou holy
and true, before thou come to deliver us from the cruelty of this beast, and
to avenge the blood of thy servants, that has been spilt by them that dwell on
the earth? I think it requisite, that I should say somewhat of the continuance
of the beast, and the destruction of the Antichrist.

Touching which, being points of things to come, it is not an easy matter, nor
wisdom in any man rashly to determine; and knowing how many great Scholars,
and holy men have failed in the computation of times, I am very loath to be
too peremptory or positive therein; especially considering that I could not
yet satisfy my self, with any thing that I read concerning this matter, in
the best, either of the popish or the Protestant writers; For

1. The Papists, expecting the Antichrist, that in all probabilities, 1. What
the Papists conceive concerning the Antichrist. Bellar. de romans Pontif. 1. 3.
c. 8. and 16. Sanders in demonstr. Corn a la pi de, in Apoc. c. 3. Iraeneus;
Hyppolitus etc.
should be a Jew, risen of mean parentage, of the tribe of Dan, and by
cheating tricks, should first overcome the Kings of Egypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia,
and then many more, and should most cruelly persecute the Church of Christ for
three years and a half, in which time Henoch and Elias, should return in their
own persons, from the terrestrial Paradise, where God reserveth them, for to
preach and to preserve the elect, from the deceits of the Antichrist, do say,
that he is not yet come; and when he comes, that he shall continue but as I
said, three years and a half; and this shall be but a very little time before
Christ comes to Judgment; this is the generally received opinion of the
Papists which is but a fancy without ground.

2. The Protestants, whereof some, that make the succession of Popes to be the
Antichrist, do say, he has already continued ever since Boniface the third in
Phocas his time, Balaeus de vit: Pontif. l. 3. Thom. Antichrist arraigned. page
06. E. H. de Antichrist, etc.
as Balaeus says, or since Vitalianus in 666. as Thompsom and others say,
above a 1000 years already, and they cannot tell how many years more he may
continue, God knows, it may be a 1000 yet; if their exposition be true, and
the world continue so long; others think that the Antichrist is but some one
single, and singular person, that should arise, or is risen from the true
Church, that is, from the purest national Church, which I am sure, in King
Charles his time, was the Church of Ingland; and though he springs from a small
root; yet by his wars, his wits, and cheating tricks, he shall slay the two
witnesses of Christ, whic they conceive to be the Magistrates, and the
Ministers, that is, as I take them, the King, and the Bishops; and that man,
should still prevail over Gods people, and continue glorious, in all good
successes, according to his own desires, until the Ministers of Christ, that
through fear, shall be for a while, like Plinies (...), mouthless men, do
receive a new courage, and as it were, life from the dead, to preach him down;
and God shall second them, and assist them, by raising commotions against him,
and powerful armies, to overthrow both him, and his adherents; and thereby,
that is, the zealous preaching of the Gospel, and the great victories of Christ
his servants over the Antichrist, they shall proceed on, and reduce, not onley
the Jews, but also the ten tribes of Israel, that have been scattered like the
dust of the earth, to be converted, to embrace the faith of Christ, and to
restore them to repossess their Land of Palestina, and to make a glorious
reformation of the Church of Christ, thus collected into one sheepfold, that
shall continue, as some fondly dream, a 1000 years more in all worddly
felicity; the most of which conceits, I take to be as fabulous, and as
fictitious as the fictions of the Talmudists. And therefore.

I must humbly crave leave, What the author conceieth to be the truth touching
the Antichrist.
in many things to dissent, and in some things to assent to the expositions,
both of the Papists and Protestants, and out of both their assertions, to set
down what I conceive to he most probable, and likeliest to be the truth; and so
I say with the Protestants, that Sanders, and Bellarmine, and the rest of the
Popish Writers, that take the beast for one single person, are utterly
mistaken; and all that they say, of that person, are but mere fictions; because
all that is here spoken of this beast, and elsewhere of the Antichrist, can
never be applied to one singular man; nor all things that are to be acted, can
be peformed by one person; and yet I cannot assent with those Protestants, that
say, he is the succession of Popes, or popish Hierarchy, or a wicked Kingdom
and Polity, and the seventh head of the beast, that reigns after the Emperors
in the City of Rome, as Brightman, Downam, and many others that follow them,
do imagine; because not any one of all the Popes, can be justly proved to be
the Antichrist, but many arguments may be produced, which I have touched in
this treatise, to prove, that neither of these can be this beast, here spoken
of; and much less, can I assent to the fancies of these men, that dream of the
reduction of the long lost tribes, to their ancient possessions, and least of
all, of the opinion of Mr. Mede, and some others, far less learned, and indeed
far absurder then he, that speak of a 1000 years reigning of the Saints with
Christ, here in an earthly Paradise, after the destruction of the Antichrist,
and the conversion of the Jews; which unprobable paradoxes, are most gravely,
and truly demonstrated, so to be, by the reverend Author of the Revelation
unrevealed; but I say, as I showed to you before, that this beast, the
Antichrist, must be taken for a collected multitude, and an ungodly pack, or
knot of the worst, and most wicked men that cold live, which do covenant, and
unite themselves, like the Jewish Sanhedrim, to slay the two witnesses of Jesus
Christ, and so to accomplish, and to fulfill all the rest of the predictions,
that are set down in Scriptures, concerning the Antichrist. And for the
continuance, of that unchristians, Antichristian company, I conceive it must
be considered in a two fold notion. 1. Of their prevalencie and domineering
successful time. The continuance of the beast to be considered 2 special
ways. 1. The prevalent time of the beast:
2. Of their industry and endeavors still to rule and domineer.


1. For the prevalent time of the beast, I am clear of the Papists, and Fathers
mind, that say, the Antichrist shall domineer, in his full strength and power,
to the terror of the true saints; but three years and a half, or some short
space, expressed by that time of three years and a half, or three years and
half three years, that make four years and a half; or much about, that length
of time, though not precisely, such a time to a day; for as when the scripture
says, that Adam when he was an hundred and thirty years old, Genesis 53. and 5.
Casman. Cos^^piae, cap. 5. page 269.
begat Seth; and died, when he was nine hundred and thirty year old; shall we
think it necessary to believe, that he begat Seth on that very day, wherein he
did precisely, fulfill the hundred and thirty years? or that he died, on the
last day of the nine hundred, and thirty years complete? So it is not
requisite, that by these three years and a half we should understand that
exact quantity of time, without more, or less; but a short space, much about
those years; and no such length of time, as Balaeus, Brightman, Downam, The
prevalent time of the beast much about three years and a half.
and the rest of their followers, do attribute unto the Antichrist; because
the holy Ghost says the ten horns, of the beast, that is his chief generals,
and captains, shall receive power with the beast, (...), one bour, c. 17.12.
that is, as the same spirit expounds it, of the predecessor of this beast in
the same 17. c. v. 10. a short space, saying, that (...), he must continue a
short space; and that space of the beast his continuance is more clearly, and
precisely explained c. 13.5. to be 42 months; which must be taken as
Bellarmine, and the Fathers before him, took them for three years and a half,
and as many other Protestant writers do now gramatically expound them, for
that time, or some small quantity of time, much about that space, more or less;
as I said before: for otherwise, if you take every day of thee 42 months, for
a year, (to make them to synchronize with the 1200, and 60 days, that the
witnesses should prophecy in sack cloth) as Mr. Mede does, and as Iunius does,
and before them the Magdeburgenses did; and as the scriptures do set a day for
a year in many places, as in the words of Ezechiel, I have set thee a day for a
year, and the words of Christ, Mr. Mede in Clavi. apoc. Jun. in loc. Magdcbur.
cent. 1. l. 2: c. 4. Ezech. 14. Luke, 13.33.
I must walk to day, and to morrow, and the day following, that is three years,
as it is generally expounded, by most interpreters; and the 40 days wherein
the explorators; and searchers of the Land of Canaan, were searching the same,
signified that for their false report, they should bear their punishment 40
years; and Jonas his 40 days respite for Ninive, before it should be
destroyed, was extended, as the Lord meant thereby, to 40 years, and the 70
weeks of Da^^el, are by all interpreters taken for so many years as there be
days in those weeks; if I say you take it so here. then these 42 months.
cannot agree with one hour, nor with a short space, wherein this beasi and his
horns shall prevail, when as thus taking a day for a year, the 42 months do
amount to 1260. years; which is no short space, nor can any ways signify
(...), one hour which is the time of the beast.

Neither can I altogether assent to Bullinger, and Chytrans that say, Bulling,
and Chytrans in a poc. c. 13.
this certain number of months is absolutely put for an uncertain time; though
we find a certain number often time put down for an uncertain number; yet this
is never used, as Divines observe, but when some full and perfect number is put
down, as 10, 100, 1000, and the like; as, where Jacob said unto Laban, thou
have changed my wages ten times, that is several times; Genes. 37.7. Eccles.
6.3. Dan. 5.1.
and when Solomon says if a man beget a bundred children, that is, very many
children; and where Daniel says, Belshazzar made a feast to a thousand of his
Lords, that is, a great many Lords; and so many Interpreters, do take the
binding of Satan for a 1000 years, to signify, a long time, even from the
determination, and ending of the ten primitive persecutions, to the coming of
this beast, or as some think from Christ his time, to the time of the
Antichrist, and so they take the 1000 years reigning of the Saints, with
Christ, to signify all that indefinite time, of Satan's binding; and so
likewise our Savior saying to St. Peter, that he must forgive his brother not
till seven times, Math. 18.22.
but seventy times seven times, signifies that he must forgive him, as often
as he does offend him; but though, Aug. de civitate Dei, l. 20.
in these and the like places, a certain number, is put for an uncertain; Yet
is it never so used, and taken, where several numbers of few, and many, are
assigned and coupled together, as time, times, and half a time and here 42,
months, and three days and a half, as both Bellar. and St. Angust. do
observe; because the variety of numbers had bin to no purpose, if an uncertain
number had been to be understood thereby, when he might, as well have said 40.
months as 42 months; neither shall you find, that ever the greater number
signified a determinate lesser number, as a year tosignifie a month or a week;
or a month to signify a week or a day.

Therefore, these 42. months, wherein this beast shall reign and rage over Gods
servants, must be literally and precisely understood to signify, three years
and a half; or as some do expound a time, and times, and the dividing of time,
for three years, and half three years, or there abouts; or as I said even now,
for some short time, and small space, though not so exactly, and precisely
determined, as containing the just, and full measure of three years and a half,
without somewhat, either more or less

And thus it is observed, The prevalent time of the long Parliament just three
years and a half.
that the long Parliament, which is answerable to the first beast continued
prevalent in their good successes, just so long, or much about that time; for
Ingland, was proclaimed a free state the ninth of May, 1648. and the Dutch did
beat them at Sea, which was the beginning, of their declination, upon the ninth
of November, in 1651. which from their first peeping to be masters, to this
first blow, that they received, is the just time of three years and a half; and
in April, the 22, Anno. 1653. which was but a little more then four years and
a half, the Lord general Oliver alias Crumwell disolved that Parliament, with
a word of his mouth, even as the Apostle foreshewed; how easily, and after what
manner, the Lord of heaven would consume, or rather, dissolve, that man of sin,
and this beast, here spoken of, that signifies a knot of rebels, which the
word (...), or (...), that the Apostle uses, 2. Thessal. 2.8.
most properly signifies, with the breath of his mouth, saying (...), whom the
Lord will unbinde and separate, or scatter, as the Clouds are scattered by the
wind, which both the words, And so this man by the will of God, did put an end
to that long Parliament.
(...) and (...), betoken, with the breath of his month.

The which dissolution of the long Parliament, and the suppression of their
more then most bloody Engagement, that was formerly done by the same hand the
Lord General Crumwel did, and was the only good deed that ever he did to the
oppressed Cavaleers, and to all disaffected to that long Parliament.

politic head, as it is with the natural; nor with the Head of the Church of
God, as with the head of the beast, and the Synagogue of Satan; but as Christ,
which is our Head, saves his body, that is, the Church, so the head of the
beast, and of the Antichrist, A special observation. Revel. 17.27.
will every way destroy his body, and dissolve the knot, and scatter the pack,
of those wicked reprobates; for I would have it well observed how the Holy
Ghost says, that God has put it in the hearts of the ten horns of the beast,
and I told you these ten horns may be taken for ten, or many of the Comanders,
to fulfill his wall, and to agree, and to give their kingdom unto the beast until
the words of God, shall be fulfilled; and no longer; but when they have
fulfilled his will, they shall be no more horns of the beast, nor give their
kingdom unto him, but horns against the beast, to take away their kingdom
from the beast, to dissolve his members, and to sever them from their Head; so
the body of the beast, shall continue together entire, and with his Head, and
horns on, but 42 months or thereabouts; and after that time. it shall be
disjointed, and dissolved by his head, and separated from his head, which will
then become the head of another body, and to remain to fulfill more of the will
of God, it may be to do further mischief, and to give the lsst deaths wound,
unto the witnesses, or rather to restore the witnesses against his will, and to
setle the right King in these kingdoms; and the Bishops in the Church of
Christ.

2. We must consider, that although the Lord, by the breath of his mouth, 2.
The declining and de jected time of the beast after his dislolution. 2.
Theffal. 2.8.
dissolveth and scatters this proud beast, here spoken of, as the Lord
General disjointed, and dissolved the long Parliament with a word of his lips,
so that now, the beast, and his adherents, are like an army routed; yet he is
not quite destroyed; for as the Apostle says, (...), The Lord will destroy him
with the brightness of his coming; and this can be understood, of no other
time, then of his coming to the last judgment. as Faber Stapulensis, rightly
collected; for howsoever, Grotius thinks that both these expressions, tend to
signify the same thing, after the manner of the Hebrews, who in setting down
any thing certainly, and vehemently, do often use to express the same, by a
double form of speech; yet with that learned man's favor; I rather conceive
that this Apostle, by these two fold expressions means, two special things
that should come to pass, The two fold expressions do show two things.
at two several times.

1. The dissolution, and dispertion of the beast, and his members by the breath
of the Lord.

2. The destruction and final dissipation, and ruin of him, 1. (...), the
dissipation, dissolution and scattering of the beast.
and of all his adherents, at the last day, by the brightness of his coming.

And for the,

1. I am of Cornelius a lapides mind, that the breath, and spirit of Christ his
mouth, does not here signify, the preaching of the Gospel, (as those
interpreters, that make the Pope, and papacy to be this beast, that should be
overthrown by the faithful preaching of Gods truth, do imagine;) because the
Antichrist, and his followets regard not the truth of any preaching, but being
Sermon proof, he slays the witnesses, silenceth the preachers, and destroys
all that preach anything against him, and his proceedings; as you know the
Parliament and Protector did; but the disjointing of the beast, with the breath
of his mouth, signifies, as Grotius well observes, the facility of the work;
Tho facility of the work.
as we commonly say of a weak adversary, that we will blow him away; so easily
Christ can scatter, and dissolve this beast, sooner, and easier then Alexander
could untie the Gordian knot; when with his sword he cut it all to pieces; and
so did Christ most easily scatter that company, which was thought so
invincible, that no humane power could dissolve them; yet as you have seen, the
breath of their own general, without one blow given, without one drop of blood
spilt, did blow away that indissoluble conceived Parliament, whose members now
are metamorphosed, from cruel Tigers to most timorous Hares that fly away
from the noise of the hunters.

And thus as the Psalmist says, like as the smoke perishes, so did the Lord
drive away that cruel company; and herein the Lord our God did a work to his
poor servants, worthy of everlasting thanks and praise, for remembering us when
we were in troubles, and delivering us out of our distresses; and therefore I
may well say with the Psalmist, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for
his goodness, and show the wonders that he does for the children of men, and
specially for this favor to dissipate and scatter so many hundred tyrants,
that would have intailed the masterie, both of Church and kingdoms, upon them
selves, and their successors for ever; to perpetuate the slaverie of these
nations far worse then the Athenians under the thirty tyrants? Justin. l. 5.
versus finem. 2. The final and total destruction of the Antichrist; when to be,


2. Though we acknowledge, a threefold advent or coming of Christ.

The 1. In humility, when the word was made flesh.

The 2. In power, when by his Spirit, he does powerfully regenerate his elect,
and protecteth them from all their enemies, and destroys their ungodly
adversaries, and his despisers at his pleasure. And

The 3. In glory and Majesty, when he comes to judge both the quick and the
dead. But for

The 4. Coming, that the Chiliasts or Millenaries dream of, to overthrow the
Antichrist in his own person; and after that, to convert the Jews, and then to
reign a 1000 years with his Saints here on earth, it is such a fiction, as is
not worthy to be thought on, and brings so many erroneous consequents with it,
as are not fit to be embraced by any Christian; and though some learned Divines
do hold, and understand the destruction of the Antichrist to be by the second
coming of Christ, that is. his powerful coming by his spirit, which shall
utterly destroy this beast, and leave not one Limb of him to remain, and that
not by the faithful preaching of the Gospel, which the Antichrist shall put
down, and instead thereof, raise flattering and false Prophets, and Parasites,
to countenance him, in his impieties; but by some powerful strength, that
Christ by his Spirit, shall work in the hearts of his servants (beyond our
capacities to conceive how, as Moses says, One man should chase a thousand,
and two put ten thousand to flight) that shall rise against the Antichrist, to
overthrow him; yet we find two words in this expression of the Apostle, which
assure me that his utter destruction cannot be referred to any other coming of
Christ, That the utter ruin, and total destruction of the beast is not to be,
till the day of the last judgment.
then to his third and glorious coming to the last judgment. For

1. The Apostle says, (...), whom the Lord will destroy; and the word (...),
signifies to abolish, to make to cease to be, and inanem reddere, and to
render him void; the word being compounded of (...) and (...) ocior, to be at
rest; and is a word seldom found in classick Authors, Two words proving the
same.
but often in the writings of S. Paul, as Romans 7.6. (...); but now soluti
sumus, we are loosened, or, as the Syriac has it, aboliti sumus, we are
abolished from the law; and in Gal. 5.4. he says, (...), (...)
exclusi estis, separati a Christo, you are made void, and separate from
Christ, whosoever are justified by the law, says Beza; and in 1. Cor. 15.26.
he says (...), the last enemy, qui abolebitur, says Tremellius, or qui
aboletur says Beza, which shall be abolished, and quite taken away, that it be
no more, is death; so here the Apostle by this word (...) means that the
Lord, at his appearance, will exclude, separate, abolish, and quite take from
himself, and from his chosen saints and servants this wicked Antichrist, and
all his ungodly adherents, that they be no more.

And this separation of the goats from the sheep, and of the tares and darnel
from the Wheat, is not made until Christ shall set the Goats on his left hand,
and shall say unto them, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire;
because the tares shall not be weeded and rooted up, nor the wicked be made to
cease to be, but shall remain as the Canaanites among the Israelites, and as
the heretics, Why the limbs of Antichrist shall be still suffered to remain
among the faithful.
that being once sprung, were never quite rooted out of the Church but their
proselytes remained, more or less, in one place, or other continually, to be as
thorns in the sides of Gods children, to exercise their patience, and to make
them more watchful over themselves, and their own ways; while they walk, and
wander among such briars; so shall the members of the Antichrist remain
amongst us, and the final and total destruction and abolition of the beast, and
the quite taking away of all his Limbs, head and feet, root and branch, that
is, the utter ruin of the Antichrist, and all his followers, and adherents,
cannot be understood, to come to pass, until Christ shall come at the last
day, to make an end of them, and to evacuate, and bring to nothing, both them,
and their devices, plots, and successes and to render vengeance unto them,
according to their just deferts,

2. The other words that show the Antichrist shall not be quite abolished, 2.
The other word is (...)
and destroyed, till the coming of Christ to judgment, are, that the Lord
shall destroy him, that is, quite take him away, (...), with the brightness of
his coming, says our translation; revelatione adventus sui, by the revelation
of his Coming, says Tremellius, or illustri adventu suo says Beza, by his
illustrious, or glorious coming; and this coming of Christ, thus expressed, can
be no otherwise understood, than of the last coming to judgment; for though
each and every of the three comings of Christ be illustrious, and glorious, in
some respects; yet the proper titles and the usual Epithets of each coming,
are, that his first coming, The coming of Christ to judgment is properly
called, his glorious coming. Math. 16.
is called his humble coming, or his coming in humility, his second coming is
styled, his gracious coming, or his coming by his spirit; to offer his grace
unto us all; and his third coming, is termed his glorious coming, when he
comes in the glory of his Father, with his Angels. And the word (...), which
is derived of (...) which fignifieth to appear, to be made manifest, or to be
brought to light, because the proper signification of (...) is, in lucem
proferre, to bring into the light, that which was not seen, does here signify
that coming of Christ, which, in the most proper sense, is called his glorious
coming; The glorious Majesty of of Christ his coming to judgment: 1. In
respect of the person coming. Rev. 13, 14.
or his coming in great Majesty; and that is only his coming to judgment;
when as his coming in the flesh, was manifested, but to few, and his coming by
his spirit, is invisible to all, imperceptible, and unperceviable to most men;
but his coming to judgment shall be made manifest to all the men in the world
and therefore is, and may most rightly be termed (...), a most glorious
appearance; and that both in respect of the person that comes, clothed with a
garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle, his
hairs as white as Snow, his eyes as a flame of fire, his feet like unto fine
brass, his voice as the sound of many waters, his mouth sending out a sharp two
edged sword, and his countenanc, as the Sun shines in his strength, and every
way glorious, as he appeared to this our Evangelist; and secondly in respect of
the glorious train and company that shall attend, and wait upon him, 2. In
respect of the company that attend him.
which are thousand thousands of Angels, and all the heavenly saints of
Almighty God.

And though this (...), the glorious manifestation of him, does sufficiently
show the time of the quite rooting out, and total destruction of the
Antichrist not to be till the last judgment; yet here is another word, that the
Apostle uses, which puts the matter out of all doubt; for he says that the
man of the sin shall be destroyed, by the glorious appearance (...), (...),
signifies the coming of the Person of Christ.
of his Personal presence; for so the word (...), being compounded of (...),
and (...), co vel ad sum (...), essentia, does import, and must needs express
the coming of the Person of Christ to destroy the Antichrist, which made some
expositors to suppose, as I showed before, that his coming will be to begin the
1000 years felicity here on earth; whereas St. Peter tells us plainly, that
Christ never comes in his own Person, but the heavens must contain him,
until the times of the restitution of all things, which is the day of
judgment; and therefore the whole body of the beast, Act. 3.21. Ob Et sic Hugo
Grotius (...) Christi interpretatur de ilius adventum suum ad particulare
judicium i^ Judaeos v. 1.
and all the adherents of the Antichrist shall not be quite rooted out, till
Christ shall come to the last judgment.

But against this, E. H. and others, do object, that (...); does does not
always signify the Personal presence, or the essential appearance of Christ;
and to prove this, besides the judgment of Mr. Leigh, whom he rightly terms,
our noble English Greek Critic; that says, fateor quidem (...), saepe illum
juditii adventum significari, sed id perpetuum non est, this word I confess
does often fignifie his personal coming to judgment, but not always; and he
quoteth certain places of Scripture, where the word (...), signifies the
powerful coming of Christ by his Spirit, and not the personal appearance of
Christ, as where St. Peter says, we have made known unto you (...), the power
and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.16.
which says he, signifies his powerful coming by his Spirit, to convert the
Souls of his people. But

precedent and subsequent words, and the very scope of the Apostle in that
place, does most plainly prove, that he means not his spiritual coming to
work his graces in us, but rather the first coming of Christ in the flesh,
which he says, was no devised fable; because they were eye witnesses of his
Majesty, which they could not be of his powerful coming by his spirit; and
therefore this place is wrested to make good their sense, but clear enough to
prove the word to signify his personal presence, whereof they were eye
witnesses, 1 Jo. 1.3.
when the word was made flesh, as St. John likewise testifies, 1 John 1.3.

like phrase in S. Mat. c. 16, 28. There be some standing here, Mat. 16.28.
which shall not taste of death, until they see the Son of man coming in his
Kingdom; and that is, his powerful coming by his Spirit, to work faith in his
elect, to increase his kingdom of Grace, which is his Church, and not his
personal coming, to receive his Saints to the Kingdom of glory, before which
time all and every one of them did taste of death; no thing, and of no force to
prove that (...) signifies this his coming in his Kingdom, or any other his
powerful coming, by his Spirit, either to propogate his Gospel, as some do
understand that place of S. Mat. or to execute Judgment upon the Jews, as
some others do understand it, or upon any other enemies of Christ, as some of
our late interpreters think; because the words which our Savior uses, are,
they shall not taste of death until they see the Son of man, (...) coming in his
Kingdom, where you see our Savior does not use the word (...), to signify
this his Spiritual and powerful coming by his Spirit, but the word (...); and
we deny not the word (...) to signify his gracious and powerful coming by his
Spirits but we say that (...) is never found to signify such a coming or any
other besides his personal coming: yet, Mat. v. 3. and 30. Man. ^4. v. 3. and
30.
where in the 3. v. indeed, we have the Disciples asking the question of
Christ, (...)? what shall be the sign of thy coming? and and here you see they
use the word (...) for the coming of Christ: but I demand what, or which of his
comings do they mean? his gracious and powerful coming by his Spirit to build
his Church, and to destroy his enemies, or his glorious personal coming in all
Majesty to the last judgment? I hope the next immediate words that are
subsequent will show you plainly, that they demand not the figne of his
spiritual coming to enlarge his Church, but of his personal coming to the last
judgment; for they say, What shallbe the sign of thy coming and of the end of
the world? and I doubt not but you will confess he will come in his own person
at the end of the World, to judge both the quick and the dead? And for our
Saviors answer unto their question in the 30 th. ver. he uses not the word
(...), but he tells them the sign of his coming, which I conceive to be, not
the sign of the Cross, as some Papists foudly imagine, but as our Bibel notes
upon the place, do say, the exceeding glory and Majesty of his coming that
shall be as the light, which precedeth the rising of the Sun, and the sorrows
and mournings of all the kindred of the earth, for fear of that great and
terrible judgment, which formerly thy regarded not; and now they see so
nearly approaching, and they must undergo it; and then he shows the manner
of his coming, how they shall see the Son of man, (...), coming in the clouds
of heaven, (just as the Angels say he shall come, Act. 1.11.) with power and
great glory; Act. 1.12.
and therefore I am confident, that whosoever transferreth either this question
of the Disciples, or this answer of our Savior, wherein he uses the word
(...), and not (...), to any other coming of Christ, then to his last and
personal coming to judgment, I may justly say with Pet. (...), they wrest, or
as (...) properly signifies, they do stretch them, as shoo-makers use to
stretch their leathers with their teeth, 2 Pe^. 3.16.
that they may reach to be nailed upon their last, so do they stretch the
Scriptures, to make them reach to make good their own fancies.

And so Maresius proves at large, against Grotius, that (...) does constantly
almost in every place, Maresius in dissertatione de autichristo. page 43.
signify the coming of Christ to the last judgment; and to prove the same he
quoteth, Mat. 24.3. and Exo. c. v. 36, 37. 1 Cor. 15 23. and says, sic non
alia significatione usurpatur, 1 These. 2.19.3.13.4.15.5.23. Jacobi, 5, 7, 8, 2
Pet. 3.4. 1 Jo. 2.28. and then adds that, semel tantum ali^ sensu extat
propriori Christi. adventu in carne, 2 Pet. 1.16. the which place I have so
expounded to you before.

Hereby then it remains clear, that though the Antichrist his strength and
government shall be dissolved, the fierceness and violence of his persecution
abated, and the combination of his members and adherets untwisted, and they
made to vanish away and to be scattered and brought to nothing, very easily
with the breath of Christ his mouth, as we have seen a word of the Lord
general, that Christ used as his instrument, has blown away the members of
the long Parliament; yet the whole body of the beast, and all the members of
the Antichrist, the generation of these vipers, and the succeeding Scholars
and disciples of the false prophet, shall as they do, still continue, and
oftentimes recrute and gather some kind of strength, though never as they had
formerly prevailed, to vex and molest the Church and the true servants of
Christ, until he that sat upon the white Cloud, and had on his head a Golden
Crown and in his hand a sharp Sicle, and that is the Son of man Christ Jesus
in his pure and unspoted humanity, shall come to reap and to cut down all the
wicked persecutors of his servants, and prophaners of his service.

And this also seems most manifest unto me, To think the Autichrist to be one
single person, is the ground of many errors.
because the Holy Ghost says that in the great battle betwixt the beast and
the Lamb, (which you must not literally understand, for any pitched Field
betwixt Christ and the Antichrist, or betwixt the Soldiers of Christ and the
followers of Antichrist, which is the error of them that understand the
Antichrist to be but one single person, and is the ground and foundation of
many other errors, but we must spiritually take it for that continual
opposition, that the beast makes to the honor of Christ, and to the service
that the true Saints do render unto him, which is the warfare of the
christians,) the beast and the false prophet are said to be taken alive, Rev.
19.20.
and not killed, but cast alive into the lake of fire burning with brymstone;
for so the Scripture says, that all the wicked which remain upon earth, when
Christ comes to judgment shall be taken alive, and shall be cast alive into
that burning lake.

And I do likewise conceive this to be fully confirmed by the words of our
Savior Christ, when he says, this generation shall not pass, Mat. 24.34.
till all these things be fulfilled; for by this generation, we must not
understand all the people that were then alive; because all those things, that
our Savior spoke of were not fulfilled within the age of the longest liver of
all them, that were then alive, when Christ spoke this; as specially the
preaching of the Gospel to all Nations ver. 14. and the sign of the Son of man
in Heaven, ver. 30. and the mourning of all the Tribes of the earth, and the
like, that came not all yet to pass; but, by this generation, we must
understand, This generation shall not pass, what it signifies.
either the generation of Gods Children and Christians, that then began to
believe in Ghrist; or the generation of vipers the successive brood of Christ's
enemies, and the members of the Antichrist, that then began likewise to spring,
(as the Apostle shows of the mystery of this iniquiy) should not pass away,
and be destroyed, 2 These. 2.7.1.
and quite hindered to profane his service and to persecute his servants, but
should be suffered to be as the tares among the wheat, until they see the Son
of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory; v. 30. for
it is well known, that (...) signifies not only atas, or seculum, an age, but
also Gens, Natio, Progenies, a Nation, or Progeny, as where our Savior says,
Matthew, 23.36.
Verily, I say unto you, (...); all these things shall come upon this
generation, that is, the nation of the Jews; and again, the Son of man must be
first rejected, (...), a Gente ista, says Beza, of this Nation. And therefore
Saint Chrysostom applies these words of Christ, This generation shall not
pass away, Genti Christianae, to the generation of Christians, which he
calls; (...), the generation of them that seek the Lord; and I apply it here
both to the generation of the ungodly, reprobates, and wicked persecutors; and
also to the generation of them that seek the Lord, and refuse to serve the
beast; because both of them shall continue, and neither of them shall pass
away; the members of the Antichrist, and the false Prophet shall not be quite
destroyed; nor the members of Christ rooted out by the Antichrist, do what he
can; until all these things that Christ speaks of, be fulfilled, and Christ
come to judgment, to defend the one sort, and to destroy the other.

And this, I believe, if there were nothing else, does sufficiently confute the
charitable, yet groundless fancy of all those that dream of a general and
glorious restoration of the twelve tribes of Israel, and a reformation of the
Gentile Churches, after the destruction and quite abolition of the Antichrist,
before the coming of Christ to judgment: for, if it be a general received
opinion, that the Jews general conversion to the Gospel, shall not be until
the Antichrist be quite destroyed, E. H. De Antiocho. c. 12. page 130.
as E. H. confesses; and the Antichrist shall not be quite destroyed till the
day of judgment, when both he and the false Prophet shall be cast alive into
the burning lake; then is it manifest, that the discourse and expectation of
their general conversion, and especially, their replantation in Palestina, is
but like a sick man's dream, that seems to enjoy many glorious things; but when
he awakes, he find just nothing.

But this that I have proved, videlicet, that the beast, which is the
Antichrist, must not be taken for one single person, as the Papists, and some
of our Protestants do conceive, The limbs of the beast remaining undestroyed,
may teach the servants of Christ three things.
nor for the Pope or succession of Popes, nor Turk, nor the seventh head of the
Roman Empire, nor for any other Tyrant, in any polity; but for a pack, or knot,
and confederacy of most wicked Covenanters, hypocrites, and prophaners of Gods
service, and persecutors of the true servants of Christ; and that this knot and
collected multitude and assembly, in their progeny, and successive offspring
in wickedness, and impiety, shall not be quite rooted out and destroyed, till
Christ shall come to the last judgment, may teach the servants of Christ these
three specaill Lessons.

glorious world, and Halcion days of pleasure and prosperity, while they live
among such Antichristian Canaanites in this vale of misery, under the frozen
zone of hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness; especially considering that
the Antichrist, though dissolved, and scattered, like an Army that is routed,
yet shall not be quite extinguished, but shall still live to recruit and
continue in most of his chief members, still to rage, afflict, and persecute
the Saints of God.

afflications, and to pray to God for patience that they may through many
tribulations, arrive at last to a happy Port, and attain unto the Kingdom of
heaven.

times may grow worse and worse, and troubles arise more and more; because that
Satan being let loose, and the hypocritical members of the beast, mad with
fury, that they should be dismembered, and the loose lives of the worldlings,
wholly neglecting Gods service, as the Antichristian crew does abuse and
profane his service, they shall provoke the wrath of God against his people
more and more, and move him at last to send his seven Angels spoken of in this
book, that have the seven last plagues, in seven golden vials, that are full of
the wrath of God, to power out the same upon the earth.

For as God, when he began to plague Pharaoh, and saw that nothing would
prevail to work repentance in him, and to mollify his heart to let Israel go
to serve the Lord, never left to send trouble upon trouble, God will not be our
enemy by our wickedness.
and to add plague upon plague, until he had utterly destroyed him; so will
he do with the beast, and the false Prophet, that is the Antichrist, and all
their adherents; when as neither their dismembring, and scattering of them, nor
any other scourge, nor plague, nor token of his wrath falling upon many of
them, can work repentance in the remainder, and cause them to return from their
evil ways, and permit the witnesses of Christ to arise, and the true servants
of God, to worship him in the right way; then will he arise as a Giant out of
sleep, he will whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold of
vengeance, Giant.
and he will raise up his witnesses in despite of the beast that has killed
them; and he will little them in their thrones, maugre all the malice of the
Antichrist, and all the strength of his adherents; and, as the Holy Ghost
says, their enemies shall behold them, and shall not be able to binder them:
but a great, and a terrible fear, shall fall upon them; because now they shall
begin to find, that the Almighty God will not suffer himself to be overcome by
wretched man, nor forget the deep sighing of his Saints, and suffer the patient
abiding of the meek to perish for ever; but seeing they have despised his
patience, and his long suff^^^^^ (...), and abused his lenity and his great
goodness, he will send those sev^^ ^^gels with these seven vials of his wrath,
that our Evangelist spoke of, and they will power them out, one after another,
upon the remaining members of the beast, and the false Prophet and their
adherents, that oppose him and his witnesses, and do abuse his name, and his
service, until they be all emptied.

And when all those plagues shall be powered out, The method how the seven
plagues shall be powered out. The first upon the formal professors. The second
upon the great Cities. The third upon the Villages. The fourth upon the fruits
of the earth.
in that method which the Evangelist sets down; that is,

The first upon the earth, which fignifieth the worldly men, and the carnal and
the formal professors of his service.

The second upon the seu, which signifies the great Cities, where the most
multitudes of people are, that are compared unto the sea.

The third upon the rivers and fountains of waters, which betokens the
country towns and villages, that have but few inhabitants within them.

The fourth upon the Sun, to scorch and burn both men and beasts, and to dry
up the fruits of the earth, thereby to bring sicknesses and famine amongst men.

The fifth upon the seat of the beast, The fifth upon the rule of the beast.
which may signify either the city or kingdom, where the beast and false
Prophet did arise, and were upheld; or upon the rule and government, the
strength and domineering power, that the remaining scattered members of the
Antichrist, shall exercise over those people, that they tyrannize upon, and
keep under them; because a Seat signifies the place whereupon we rest, and the
power that upholdeth us in that place.

The fixth upon the river Euphrates, which is to be understood not literally,
no more then the other places aforenamed, but in the similitude for which the
Holy Ghost applies it; and that is, as the great river Euphrates was like a
wall of brass, to the City of Babylon, to preserve it from all invasion, so
will the Army of the beast, the wealth and great riches of the Antichrist, that
he has heaped together, and the wit and subtlety of the false Prophet, be as
an impregnable fortress to protect them in all their impiety, tyranny and
oppression, but, as Cyrus divided the mighty river Gyndes, that fed Euphrates,
into 360. brooks, Hgrodotus l. 1. Clio.
and then turned aside Euphrates out of her own channel, into that huge poole,
which was formerly made by Queen Nitocris, and so took away the strength and
considence of the City, and having thus made way for his soldiers, he entered
and took that great and famous City of Babylon, through the Channel of this
mighty river; so will Christ by the ministry of the first Angel, divide all
the strength, and take away all the confidence of the remnant of the beast, and
will dry up, or wast all the wealth of his adherents, and befoole the wit and
devices of the false Prophet, and so remove all the impediments, that were like
the river Euphrates, the hinderers of his servants to overthrew the kingome of
the Antichrist, and to take away his Rule, and Dominion, and to suppress his
tyranny over Gods servants.

And when all this will not avail, to cause this shaked beast, and disjointed,
routed army of the Antichrist, to return from his unjust ways and most wicked
courses; but that three unclean spirits, like frogs, shall come out of the
mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of
the false Prophet, which are the spirits of devils, working ^^^^cles, and
going forth to the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, (...) them to
the battle of the great day of God Almighty, that is, a great many lying and
deceitful spirits, What is meant by the war and battle, that the beast makes
with God.
and false prophets, (because the number of three, as of seven has very often
none other importance then a great many) shall be still sent forth to every
place, to oppose the true service of God, to lay his honor in the dust, and to
suppress and trample his servants under feet, which is all the war, that the
beast and all his horns, and all other beasts in the world can make against
God Almighty; then says Christ; Behold I come as a thief, that is suddenly and
unexpected; and he will send the seventh Angel, with the last vial of Gods
wrath, and the seventh Angel will pour out his Vial into the River, and a great
voice, shall come out of the Temple of heaven, Revel. 5.14. 2 Pet. 3.10. Esaias
14.4.
and from the Throne, saying, it is done; that is, the Preachers of Christ
shall by the light of the truth, tell the people, that will not repent; the
time is at hand, that Christ shall come to judgment; and that the heavens
shall depart as a scroule, and the Elements shall melt, with servent heat, and
there shall be an end of all things.

Then the Son of a man, Jesus Christ, ere it be long, though how long, or how
soon, no mortal man can tell, shall come in the glory of his Father with his
Angels, to take the heast, that shall be then alive, and the false Prophet, and
all his adherents, and all those that past away before, to make a final, and a
total end of them, and to throw them, into the Lake of sire and brimstone, and
to render unto every man, according to his deeds; to them, that by patient
conth^uance in well doing, seek for glory and honor, and immortality
eternal life, but unto them that are contentions, rebellious; murderers,
oppressors, idolaters, liars, and all such transgressors of Gods Laws, that
obey not the truth, but take pleasure in unrighteousness, indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish, and eternal destruction to every man that
does evil. And this is the end of the Antichrist, Amen.

Jamque opus est exegi --
Et plena jam Margin libri,
Scriptus and in tergo, nec dum finitus Orestes.
But I look that some Alter and ater Ecebolius, Some bold, blind, and ignorant
Presbyterian Zoilus, like an Orlando furioso, will run at me, as Don Quixot ran
against the Windmill, and like an angry Wasp, sting both me and my book,
animamque in vulnere ponet; yet as gold is gold, though the Chimick say it is
copper; and copper is but copper, though the deceitful Mountebank say it is
gold; so the truth of my writings will be found true, when their lies and
raylings like another Rabsheka, will appear of what stuff they are unto the
world; and si tantus amor, if they have such love and longing desire of a
railing digladiation, as one of them did against my Book, The Grand Rebellion,
Mr. John Goodwin.
they may chance to find their mate, that may fitter undertake them, then it is
for a man of my place and calling, and as leni fluit agmine tibris, so will I
gently and charitably pray that God would give them more grace, to have less
malice.

Trini vni deo sit omnis laus, honor, et gloria, in secula seculorum. Amen,
Amen.
Jehovae Liberatori.
FINIS.

