A SERMON Preached before the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners, IN DUBLIN:
July the 18th, 1700.

By Daniel Williams.

Published at the Desire of the said Societies.

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
for Matthew. Gunne at the Sign of the Bible and Crown in Essex-street. M DCC.

TO THE Societies for Reformation.
THIS Title wherewith you are adorned, is so Divine Beneficent and truly
Catholic, that your Request Obliged my compliance in Preaching the following
Sermon under all the Disadvantages of a Traveler.

Yet had I Conferred with Flesh and Blood, those many accurate Discourses you
have on this Subject, must have rendered my hurry of business and want of Books,
an insuperable Argument against the Publication of it.

But being persuaded the Bible is not only the fittest Book to justify the
Truth of the Duty insisted on, but attended with greatest Authority to enforce
it on the Conscience, the Censures of the Polite for my want of other
Ornaments, cannot deter me from exposing what you think Serviceable to your
good Design, as that which I am sure is not only according to Gods Word, but
undertaken in Obedience to it.

I am not ashamed the World should know how my Love for Ireland Exalts my Joy
at your Attempts, to Suppress that Wickedness which alone can Ruin it, and to
promote Practical Religion, which must cause its Flourishing against all
Assaults: They who less affect you, ought to be thankful for your good Success
herein, and ascribe the sudden prosperity of this Land, to Gods Approbation of
your vigorous Endeavors to Reform it.

The Argument whereby I urge all to Assist in your Blessed Work, is too evident
to be resisted by any, who account Service to God either a Privilege or a
Duty; and next in force to that I Published on the same occasion in London;
viz. That they who promote National Reformation are on Christ's side, and they
who neglect it are of the Devil's Party, in the Contest managed by them as the
Heads of their respective opposite Kingdoms.

The Consequence of your Undertaking may Excuse my Importunity, because I am
under Conviction, that when you become remiss, or altogether Unsuccessful, this
Nation will be under more than a Probable Presage of sudden Desolation, and
much severer than any that has befallen it heretofore.

If any think me too Close and Plain, Faithfulness to my Lord whom you serve,
and a peculiar regard for this Land which you would Save, must afford the only
Apology I dare make. As the Enterprise you are Inspired to Engage in, is too
fully Authorized by Divine and Human Laws, to be thought Unjust, and too
plainly Commanded, and Important in its Effects, to be esteemed Indifferent; so
its too contrary to Satan's Interest, and the degenerate Inclinations of
Mankind, to be Executed without great Fortitude, Vigor, Wisdom, Self-denial,
and Union; or to keep your Hearts by these in a fixed Disposition to pursue it,
without rich supplies of Grace, and great Care and Labor with your own
Spirits, whence all remains of Sin are not yet expelled.

Many do join with you in Prayer, that your fitness may improve by your work;
your Resolution by your Difficulties; your Union, by ill Designs to break it;
your Success by Opposition; and the Purity and Sedateness of your own Spirits,
by all your Endeavors to Reform others; which (among the rest) is heartily
desired by,

Your Servant in the Work of the Lord, Daniel Williams.

Proverbs 28. ver. 4. They that forsake the Law praise the Wicked, but such as
keep the Law contend with them.
THE Text includes so full a distribution of Mankind, that none of us can be
Exempted; one part forsakes the Law, others keep it; some Praise the Wicked,
others Contend with them; some are Wicked, others are Godly.

The Contrariety of what they are distinguished by, is Extreme; one Renounceth
that Rule which the other Sacredly observes, viz. the Divine Law; the one
Approves and Commends those, whom the other Reproves and Punishes, viz. the
Wicked. And no doubt the Difference extends equally to what is implied, though not
expressed, i. e. The Good man renounceth those Lusts and Customs, which the
Wicked submit to as their Governing Law, and praises the Righteous with whom
the Ungodly do contend.

It might seem an unaccountable Wonder, that men should thus greatly differ in
their Rules, Behavior, Favorites and Adversaries, were the Springs of this
Contrariety altogether unknown: But that Wonder will cease, when we consider
that these distinguished persons have Spirits, Tempers, Leaders, and Supreme
Ends and Designs, more contrary than their very Behavior is: Nay, were it not
for the Unhealed remains of Sin in the Godly, and some Operations of the Holy
Ghost on the Wicked, the difference between these men would be as great, as
between Es^ablished Angels, and Apostate Devils; and when I have said this, can
any of you forbear to cry out? Oh how necessary is Regeneration! And how great
a Work must that be, which so changes a man from what himself once was, as
well as others!

The last part of the Text I shall insist on, because it most properly answers
the present occasion. Such as keep the Law contend with them, i. e. with the
Wicked.

The words give us, 1. The Character of a Good man. 2. An Instance whereby the
Sincerity of that Character is made good.

I. The Character of a Good man, He keeps the Law; that which others forsake,
he sets before him as his directing Light, Psalm. 119. 105.
and a determining Rule; Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my
Path. What this injoyneth, he sets himself to observe; what it forbids, he is
watchful to avoid: He acknowledges the obliging force of the Will of God,
whether it be signified to him by the Light of Nature, or positive Precepts and
Institutions. He is subject to every part as well as to any; Psalm 18.
I have put away none of thy Statutes from me: He observes it at all times as
well as some, and in Secret as well as Public. To this he adheres against all
Discouragements, as well as when most Countenanced; he will keep it though all
others should forsake it; Psalm. 119. 51.
yea, declineth it not tho the Proud have him greatly in derision, for Obeying
it.

This Divine Law effectually prescribes to him what he will Believe and
Profess; it Forms his inward Temper, Regulates his Thoughts, Words and
Behavior; hereby he frames his Desires, Designs and Resolves. Obedience
thereto is with him a sufficient Reason for his Undertakings, and that which
his chief respect is to, in whatever he deliberately performs.

To examplifie this in his Inclinations, Affections and Carriage, is his chief
endeavor and aim; he Prays, Strives, and industriously Contriveth and Watches
to be complete in the whole will of God, Col. 4 12. Luke 1. 6.
and walks in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless.

Finally, wherein he is defective or offends, he seriously blames himself;
bewails his Fault, hates his Sin, and sincerely resolves amendment by greater
Watchfulness, and more fervent Applications to Christ for the assistance of his
Spirit.

He that answers this Account, keeps the Law in a Gospel Sense; his Obedience
is Evangelical, though in many things it be short of that which is Legal or
Perfect.

II. We have one Instance whereby the Sincerity of this Character is made good:
They contend with the Wicked. q. d. The behavior of Men toward the Wicked
shows whether themselves keep or forsake the Law. It Is a plain Characteristick,
if they praise the Wicked they are Men who forsake the Law; but if they contend
with such, they are Keepers of the Law. Whatever effectually inclines Men to
keep the Law, will compel them to contend with the Wicked; as that which
prevails with Men to forsake it will disincline them to contend with such. It Is
indeed not to be expected that such as live in Stated Rebellion against the
Will of God, should oppose the Profflgate; but it is so decent, congruous and
necessary for the Keepers of the Law to oppose the Wicked; and therefore to be
expected that God sets it down as a fixed distinguishing property of such, They
contend with the Wicked. You Will find them thus employed against violent
Transgressors, and thereby discriminated from them.

I shall in some few Positions explain the Words, and thereby come to state
that Observation, which will more directly support you in the work of
Reformation, and justify your engaging therein.

1. Keeping the Law is a fit Description of the Faithful Subjects and Servants
of the Living God, and such are intended thereby. The Servants of God are
variously denominated, as Men fearing God, Lovers of God, Believers, Saints,
Godly, Righteous, etc. But all these Titles center in, and refer to this in the
Text. They keep the Law. For this Law is the measure of all Goodness, all true
Excellency of Spirit, and all Regularity of Practice do lie in a Conformity to
this Rule. This perfect Law appoints all that is truly good; and all that is
accepted with God is done with a respect of Obedience to this Will of his:
Whatever justly bears the name of any Grace or Virtue, must be answerable to
what this defines to be such a Grace or Virtue; or it is no better than an
Hypocritical Image. Moreover, the Truth of the highest Graces must be adjudged
by their Operative Efficacy to the Obedience of this Law: Faith without this is
dead; James 2. 20.
and our Savior determines the Integrity of Love in this manner: If you love
me, keep my Commandments. Jab. 14. 15.
Yea, his Apostle faith, This is Love that we walk after his Commandments. 2.
Joh. 6.
Not that this is the formal notion of Love, but it is such a necessary Effect
of it, that it is no true Christian Love which is too weak to produce Obedience.

Now who is a Keeper of the Law? none but he who has renounced his own Will
and Humor, and is resigned to the Divine Will, the Language of whose Heart is,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? And is this any other than a Servant and
Subject of the Living God; Act. 9. 6.
even one who has freely accepted God in Christ for his Supreme Lord and
Lawgiver, upon which his Relation of Servant and Subject is founded: But does
this Devotedness confine it self to a mere Profession of Obedience, however
Solemn it be? no, there must be real Performance to make that good: His we are
whom we Obey. But this may suffice to Evidence that to keep the Law, Rom 6. 16.
and to be God's faithful Servants and Subjects, are equipollent Terms.

2. Offenders committing gross and notorious Crimes, are designed by the Wicked
in the Text. Not bad Men whose Crimes are concealed, for notice cannot be taken
of such: neither can one be called Wicked for mere Infirmities; for though Job
could not acquit himself of such, yet he appeals to God, Thou know I am not
wicked. The persons therefore chiefly to be contended with, Job 10. 7.
are such as commit flagitious Crimes; Crimes which infect others, defile the
Land, and stigmatize the Offender: of which sort are Idolatry, Blasphemy.
Profane Swearing, Cursing, Sabbath Profanation, Murder, Whoredom, Thefts,
Drunkenness, etc.

3. Contending with the wicked, imports all just and due methods to repel the
wickedness of Transgressors. The difference between good and bad men is fixed,
each Pleads his respective Cause, Persues his proper Design, Acts his own
Inclination, Propagates his own Likeness, and Abets his Party and Leader.
Christ and his Interest command the strength of his Subjects, in opposition to
Satan and his Followers: Satan as the Head of the Apostasy employs his
Followers, in opposition to Christ and his Reforming purposes: Mat. 12. 38.
Great is the contradiction, and the contest Vehement and Extensive. The Wicked
are intent to restrain the Godly from adhereing to the Laws of Christ their
Sovereign, and hence Violence and Persecution have their rise: On the other
hand, the Subjects of Christ endeavor to stop the Deluge of Impiety; they
Reason, Exhort, Pray, and live down Immoralities; these do what they can to
Reform the World, as the others struggle to Pervert it. They would rejoice that
their Instructions and Entreaties were successful to reclaim the Profligate;
but when these avail not, they instance their Zeal by a sharper Testimony
against crying Provocations, and to their power subserve men's Amendments by
what embitters notorious Crimes.

Magistrates become a Terror to evil doers, by the Sword of Justice; Ministers
rebuke and inflict Church Censures; Parents and Masters apply the Correcting
Rod, least Sin grow by the Impunity of Children and Servants.

Object. Some will say, These are obliged by Relation and Office to contend
with offending Correlates, but what obligation and power has one Neighbor or
Equal to embitter Sin in another.

Answ. Neighbors and Equals are obliged to reprove the Faults of one another,
its God's express Charge; Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not
suffer Sin upon him. (...) 19. 17.
This is by no means to be omitted, nor should any pretense excuse from it:
Thou shall rebuke him in any wise; they must be the profane Imitators of Cain,
who say, Am I my Brothers keeper? G^^. 4. ^0.
What is it to me, if he Swear or be Drunk? Let him look to himself, he is none
of my Charge; but such Language is an affront to God's Authority, who Enacts,
that thou shall reprove him, and requires the Sinner to accept of thy reproof:
You must tell him the Evil and Danger of his wicked course; his amendment you
must thus attempt, however displeasing it may be to him to bear it, or to your
selves to intermeddle in it.

Object. But suppose it be a Duty to reprove by Words, sure we may rest at
that, whether the Offender Reform or no.

1. Answ. You must stop at this, if you lived where no punishments are Enacted
against those Crimes which your reproof is unavailable to Reform. In such a
Sodom as allows the forementioned enormities, you must be satisfied with Lot to
entreat, Genesis 19. 7.
I pray you Brethren do not so wickedly; the despised reprover must not Usurp
the Sword of the Magistrate, but grieve at the abominations he wants Authority
to punish; the Case is the same as to all such Offenses the Law of the Land
takes no Cognizance of, when other Crimes be punishable by its Institutions.

2. Answ. But verbal reproof will not be sufficient, where unreformed Crimes
are punishable by the Law. If words will reclaim, its well, but where these
reclaim not, you are obliged to endeavor to reform transgressors by legal
Severities, and enforce despised reproof by such punishments as they will more
regard: Prove. 17. 11.
An evil man seeks only Rebellion, therefore a cruel Messenger shall be sent
against him; and this private persons should do by complaints to such as are
Authorized to Judge, and inflict the penalties Enacted: Informing in such Cases
is the necessary work of some; for if there be none to convict Offenders, the
punishment is Enacted in vain against the Crimes they are Guilty of, seeing it
cannot be executed: Deuteronomy. 17. 5.
therefore as the declaring of men's Faults to the Magistrates is supposed to
judicial censures, so the very Parent was obliged to inform against that
debauched Son, Deuteronomy. 21. 20.
whom his own Correction would not restrain; nay, several think that very Text,
Prove. 9. 8.
Reprove not a Scorner, excuses from verbal reproof, only by exposing him to
punishments more severe, which private persons cannot otherwise do, than by
Information; neither should any esteem this a reproach, for it was not
accounted a work to mean for Princes to be employed in. Ezr. 9. 1.


Having made it plain that such as keep the Law is a Periphrasis of the
Servants and Subjects of the living God; and that the Wicked here, are such as
are found committing gross Crimes; also that contending includes severe
penalties as well as reproof by words. I am sure the Text is a sufficient
ground for this Observation.

Doct. Such as would approve themselves the Subjects and Servants of the living
God, ought, nay, will by just severities as well as reproof, endeavor the
Reformation of notorious Offenders.

This Doctrine enlarged and altered into other words, is the same as to say; He
whose heart is right with God, will (in this Nation where good Laws are Enacted
against wickedness) not only Reprove, but duly Convict and bring to Legal
punishment, such as he finds to be Cursers, Swearers, Profaners of the
Lord's Day, Whore-mongers, Drunkards, etc. he will not forbear this for fear of
shame, let who will reproach him; he will do it, though his Trade be in danger, and
his Person threatened and exposed.

The Text as before explained, is a sufficient proof of the Doctrine, but sad
experience acquainting us, how much harder it is to prevail with people to do
what is their Duty, than to prove it to be so; I shall not only add some
further Evidence for this Duty from the Argument, included in the Doctrine, but
endeavor to plead that Argument with your Consciences, that if possible I may
bring such to attempt the Reformation of others, who have hitherto neglected
it, and invigorate the hearts of those who have therein so laudably engaged.

Can any Argument be likelier than this to persuade all Men to use due ways to
reform Offenders you cannot appear the real Servants of Christ, if you omit it?
Will any thing so compel such to this Work who think they are his Servants, as
a demonstration that you have not the temper nor Spirit of his Servants, but
are mere Hypocritical Pretenders if you neglect it? And how can such who are
his faithful Servants be so excited to Zeal for this Work, as by convincing
Evidence, that if you be remiss, you so far offer violence to the Instincts of
your renewed Nature; you disregard the Honor and Interests of your Blessed
Lord; you frustrate the design of that Relation to which you are admitted? you
counter-act the Genuine Dispositions of all who are sincerely devoted to God's
Service; you desert the Party to which you are united; you favor Satan and his
Cause whom you have renounced; and neglect that real Felicity which you are
determined to pursue? Now if such considerations remove not your Indifferency,
and secure you not against Fear and Idleness in this great Design, what will?

All these Motives will occur, but the great Argument I shall more directly
insist on is that which the Doctrine presents to us, viz. That none approve
themselves the Faithful Servants of God who do not endeavor the Reformation of
notorious Offenders. As for the other Point, viz. that this Endeavor must be
by Severities as well as by Reproof, or milder ways; I think already proved,
and therefore shall less enlarge on that.

Now, my well-beloved Friends! would not you be found among the Loyal Subjects
and Faithful Servants of your Creator and Redeemer? Yea, do not all of you
profess to be so? Now God's Challenge as to this forementioned Case, as well as
others, is strict, If I be a Master, where is my Fear, if I be a Father, mhere
is my Honor? Mal. 1. 6.
If I be your Master, show it by pleading my Cause against Transgressors; by
that Service show I am indeed your Lord, and you my Servants; the time is
hastening when all disguises will be taken off, and God shall make an apparent
Difference between such as serve him in Reality, Mal. 3. 18.
and such as put him off with mere pretense; therefore be now willing to endure
such Convictions from his Word as he will fasten by his Sentence when he comes
to Judge your State by this as the Rule of Judgment; Let no Soul guilty as to
this very matter of reforming others, vainly support his pretense to God's
Service; for if you live in a stated neglect of resisting Sin, and endeavors
to reform the Wicked, you are not a Servant of God's: If you omit this,
whatever you call your selves, you do want the great Essentials which
constitute the Temper, Disposition and Behavior of those who are God's
Servants in reality: This will appear if you consider,

1. You have not a true Zeal for God's Honor. Can any of you doubt whether a
Man can be God's Servant who has no Zeal for his Glory? whereas if you know
any thing of Religion, you must acknowledge that the Glory of God is the Chief
End of every good Man; and to that it is impossible to be indifferent. I must
have a Zeal for my Chief End, and when that is exposed, I cannot but resent it,
and endeavor its Vindication and Security with great concernedness of mind.

Now wherein is God more dishonored than By open flagitious Crimes? His Sacred
Name is despised by common Oaths: his Vengeance played with by Curses? his Day
polluted by profaning the Sabbath; the Authority of our Almighty God and of
his Laws, are trampled on by these and other open Sins. When Men dare declare
their Sins as Sodom, Isa. 3. 9.
they bid defiance to his Government, they slight his threatenings, they condemn
his Precepts as unjust, they contemn his promised Rewards as Trifles, they
openly avow the Empire of the Devil, they justify Man's Apostasy in the view
of the World, and to their power they raze out the Divine Image, and shut out
the Spirit's Operations which would, if complied with, produce in the Soul
those Impresses of God's Perfections, wherein he is most properly Glorified.

And can any one who serves and loves his God forbear to oppose this? Must not
the Zeal of all such kindle as Phineas? Number. 22. ^0.
Will not he take hold of all opportunities to vindicate the Laws, and assert
the Government of his Redeemer, Benefactor and Ruler.

2. If you neglect the reforming of others you show no true compassion or love
to the Souls of Sinners. Mat. 22. 30.
Love to our Neighbor is one half of God's Law; our Neighbor's Soul is his
better part, and therefore its benefit is to be most attended as an Evidence of
the Sincerity of that Love to him, which our Lord requires in his Servants.
Moreover, Love to Men is an Essential part of Godliness, for wherein are we
like God who is Love, if Love be a Stranger to us? Nor can any thing be a
grosser contradiction than to pretend Subjection to Christ, and yet renounce
Love to our Neighbor: And no less irreconcilable would it be to love Men, and
yet suffer them to destroy themselves if we are capable to prevent it by
stopping their self-ruining course, and forcing them to consider. When persons
openly commit their horrid Villainies their Sins go before hand to Judgment. 1 Timothy 5. 24.
And can you with any face profess to love such Men whiles you tamely endure
them to proceed for want of a Warning by Reproof, or fixing that Warning by
Punishment when Reproof is ineffectual? In which last case, Ah, be thou
reformed without Penal Restraint, is no more an Evidence of hearty Love than
Ah, be thou Clothed when Garments are denied. It Is no light matter to be
accessory to the Damnation of Souls, and be sure there is a secret Enmity in
you against them, whose case requires your utmost pity, and yet it will not
move you to do what you can toward their Salvation, no not to assist the
Magistrate to inflict those Penalties which may bring Offenders to themselves.

3. If you neglect Reformation-work, you have not a just Concern for the
Welfare of the Community. A Man truly Devoted to God will serve his Generation;
Acts 13. 36.
a public Spirit inspires him, and a common Good is dearer to him than his own
particular Affairs: Psalm. 137. 6.
David is their Pattern when he says, If I prefer not Jerusalem above my
chiefest Joy, let my Right Hand forget her Cunning. The Servant of God is so
far under the power of Self-Denial, as to esteem the Welfare of the Body of his
People, in it self preferrable to his own: and less than this cannot be
inferred, as the meaning of the words of Moses and Paul, Exodus 32. 32.
to whatever Transport you assign their Wishes. Romans 9. 3.
Now it is impossible to have a public Spirit, and not strive to reform the
Wicked; because a general Mischief is much promoted by unsubdued Vices, and the
public Good greatly depends upon Reformation. This will appear if you consider
how far,

1. Uncontrouled Vices do corrupt a People.

2. Unreformed Vices expose a Nation to Judgments.

1. Uncontrouled Vices do corrupt a People. Evil Examples infect and ensnare;
and where Sin goes unpunished it spreads the faster, because it appears so
innocent a thing as not to deserve Correction. How violently will Men be drawn
into those Crimes whereto degenerate Nature inclines, when they find all seem
to approve of them, because none call the most notorious Offenders to account?
The Torrent of Impiety must rise in that place, where many allure and none
rebuke it. But surely the best Men in such a Region must be base, selfish and
cowardly; it can never agree with a public Spirit to fit still when you see
the Plague to spread, a Plague which so defiles, enslaveth, debaseth,
disordereth, and perverts your Countrymen and Fellow Citizens: All which is
fulfilled by the Immoralities which are unrepelled by Punishments

2. Unreformed Vices expose a Nation to Judgments. Gross Transgressions are
called Crying Sins, because they cry aloud to Heaven for desolating
Punishments: where these abound the Lord will avenge. This righteous Governor
of the World will not suffer Proclaimed Wickedness to go unpunished, no not
where his Worship is frequented; yea, he is surer to visit his professing
people than any other, for their Abominations. Am. 3. 2.
You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore I will
punish you for all your Iniquities. Calamities hang over that place where
Rebellion is committed against God; and certainly he whose Quiver is so full of
destructive Arrows* cannot be at a loss how to visit fit all Ranks of Men with
Judgments, of which they shall be sensible, and against which they cannot
preserve themselves.

But can any of you imagine that you are concerned for the good of your Nation,
and not divert its Misery by opposing those Sins which do procure it? All care
for the Community is extinct when you do as good as say, I will not be at the
least pains or trouble to make them a Holy and a Happy People: I Will not cast in
my Mite to prevent their Defilement or Destruction: Such Gallios are unnatural
as well as Unchristian. Pretend not Inability, for each of you may do
something, at least you are able to complain against obstinate Sinners; and if
you can do no more toward saving the Land, this will acquit you, and be
accepted; whereas if you omit this little you can do, you would not advance
Reformation had you the greatest Power; for that selfish, base, careless,
cowardly Spirit would then restrain you from this good Work as well as now.

I might have added the greatness of those Benefits which Reformation secures
to a Land, every one whereof makes thy neglect in promoting that Reformation a
great instance of thy Unconcernedness for the Public. But I proceed.

4. If you neglect National Reformation, you have not that true regard to your
own Happiness which rational Self-love directs. Carnal Self-love destroys
Mankind, but Rational Self-love is that Principle by which God governs this
World, and on which he grafteth Grace it self: This God owneth himself the
Author of, and never separates his Service from our aim at our own Happiness,
but requires the pursuit of both these together: Nor indeed can we attain the
one without the other, for if we truly glorify God in a way of Service, we
shall be happy; and if ever we be happy, it must be by serving him who is
Glorified in our Happiness.

I think its needless to spend words to prove that you cannot serve God
acceptably, unless you love your selves; nor that you love not your selves if
you disregard your own happiness; the thing most likely to be doubted by
rational Creatures, is, that you despise your own Happiness, if you neglect
National Reformation; yet this you must be convinced of, when you lay to heart.

1. That you contract much Guilt by your neglect, to Reprove and Rebuke great
Sinners in order to their Reformation.

This is part of that Divine Law, which the Servants of God are obliged to
keep: He has set this upon your Consciences as part of your Duty: Lev. 19. 17.
Thou shall not suffer Sin on thy Brother, but thou shall rebuke him. And we
are enjoined to reprove the unfruitful Works of Darkness. Ephesians. 5. 11.
Must not Guilt lie on that Man who lives in the Stated Omission hereof?
Moreover, if thy Grace be true, thou do not only violate plain Precepts, but
Guilt is aggravated, because thou offerest violence to the Instincts of a
regenerate Nature; for that prompts thee to testify against Sin from a Divine
Antipathy, and excites thee to make Men better from those Holy Propensions
which render Goodness amiable and delightful, wherever it may be found.

Guilt thus aggravated, attending the neglect of National Reformation, where is
he that truly serves the Lord, who dares contract it, and make himself partaker
of other Men's Crimes by sinful Connivance? Or can a Man of that Character sit
easy under this Guilt from day to day? Is it a small thing to have God to
charge you with a disregard to his Interest; and to say concerning you, Here Is
one who professes himself of my Army, but will not strike a stroke for me: He
prays Thy Name be Hallowed, Mat. ^.
but dares not contend with open Blasphemers: Thy Kingdom come, yet suffers
Satan to Empire it without Control: Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in
Heaven, and yet allows my Laws to be openly trampled on, without so much as a
Complaint against the most heinous Transgressor.

Great Rebukes from Heaven may well be expected against such as this Accusation
belongs to; nor could you arraign God's Justice, if you and your Children
should be given up to be Infected with those Abominations you will not reprove:
Yea, must not you and your Families eepxct a deep share in those Miseries you
refused to prevent? Nay, should God make the Land happy upon its Reformation by
other Instruments, may not you fear that neither you nor your Families should
be Sharers in that Blessedness.

2. You loose great Benefits for your selves and Posterity which endeavored
Reformation would Entail. If Desolation comes on this unreformed Land, Ez. 9.
41. Genesis 6.
notwithstanding thy lost Labor, thou may hope to be Marked for
Deliverance; for we see Noah who strove to reform the old World saved from the
Common Deluge with his Family; and grieved Lot with his Children escaped the
Flames of Sodom.

Neither will it be a light matter if Sin should still abound and Judgments
ensue, that these quieting thoughts will possess thy mind, Could I have
reformed and saved this People, I would have done it: my Conscience bears me
witness, that I to my utmost have endeavored to put a stop to those Impieties
that procured these Woes which now so distress my Country. But if Virtue should
spring up and Wickedness hide the head, how happy will thou find thy self in
having contributed thereto? Psalm. 119. 136.
those Tears which streamed at the view of heinous Sins, will be turned into
the truest Joy and Gladness: Gladness to see Sabbaths Sanctified which used to
be Profaned; the Name of God Hallowed by a Sacred Reverence instead of Oaths
or Blasphemy; and Sobriety and Temperance obtaining in the room of Debauchery
and Excesses.

How will it revive thy years to see the Blessed Effect of this change of
things? when Peace, Prosperity, Love, Health, the Success of the Ministry, and
a Harmony among all sorts and degrees of Men, shall jointly witness God's
Approbation of a Reformed People! Thy own Graces will improve by the good
Examples such a state of things affords, and those pourings out of the Spirit
which it supposes: thou will be free from the Dread of Impending Judgments,
and instead thereof live in the cheerful expectance of public Good; nay, how
comfortable will it be when thou die, to behold an Entail of Helps to the
Holiness and Happiness of thy Posterity? These things may well convince us,
that such as neglect National Reformation, disregard their own Happiness.

I think I need insist on no other Mediums to prove that none keep the Law who
contend not with the Wicked, or which is the Sense of that; None are the true
Servants of God who oppose not Sin, and endeavor not the Reformation of
notorious Sinners. This you must allow to be beyond dispute, unless you can
think him a faithful Servant of God who has no true Zeal for God's Honor, no
real Compassion or Love to Souls, no due Concern for the Community, nor true
Regard to his own Happiness, or to that of his Posterity. It follows therefore
that you must Renounce that name, or engage your selves in resisting Sin, and
promoting the Reformation of others by all just means; and know, that your
assuming that Name unjustly will no more avail you than if it were renounced;
and if you are not the Servants of God in Reality, the Privileges of such
belong not to you; nay, you are the Slaves of the Devil and the Servants of the
Flesh; and oh! how miserable will the Portion of such be found at last?

I shall apply this truth, 1. Particularly to the Societies for Reformation. 2.
More generally to all who hear me.

1. To such as are Members of the Societies for Reformation, or any way engaged
in this great Work. You deserve Encouragement, nor may a word of Advice be
altogether needless: What I judge proper to you, will be comprehended under two
Heads.

1. Make light of the discouragements which attend the Work of National
Reformation. What you have heard may vindicate you from Reproach, and Steel you
against Fears. Can that be called busy meddling by which you approve your
selves the Servants of the Living God, and fill up your place as such for God's
Glory and a Common Good? or should any call you severe when you stop Men from
destroying themselves and Nation? Can any wonder that reproachful Lies pursue
you in this Enterprise? or be so imprudent as not allow for it when you thus
disturb the Kingdom of the Devil, stem a Tide of Wickedness to which Nature is
so prone, and contend with a Multitude who by long custom have become too
licentious to scruple either what they say or do. Need you fear your Opposers?
when you see what their contest is for, even Vices reproved by the Light of
Nature. 1. Joh. 3. 8.
and Works the Lord Jesus came to destroy. And who they are that contend with
you, even no other than the Wicked, who make God their Enemy by breaking his
Laws; who espouse the Cause of Satan against that of Christ's, and when
awakened will Condemn their own Follies, and approve of your Restraints.

Ought you to despond as if too seeble to carry on this Work? When you have
Christ and all Men of true public Spirits on your side; when your Attempts are
sustained by good Laws; when you are blessed already with so considerable
Success; and the Cause is God's, in whose Power are the Hearts of all Men.

Dare you be so impressed by Discouragements as to cease this Divine Work! when
it is so Noble in it self, so peculiarly the Care of the Almighty, so certain
of Success at last, so Glorious in its Rewards, and your time so short to
labor or suffer before you wear the Crown. I join with my Brethren in bidding
you be of good Courage, Isa. 41. 6.
and to depend on God's Protection, which has hitherto so interposed, that as
yet you have not resisted unto Blood, Heb. 12. 4.
striving against Sin.

2. Manage this Reforming Work as will most tend to its Success. To this end,
keep far from the Evils you do rebuke in others. Convince by good Examples such
as you enforce by Penalties. Watch your Temper and Words, that you give no
cause of stumbling to those with whom you contend. Let your Contests be with
Men as Wicked, and not from By-respects; let it be without Partiality with all
whom you find obstinately Wicked. Use Prudence as well as Conscience in all
your Undertakings; therefore never exceed the Laws, neither accuse any whom you
cannot fully convict: Make it appear to the Criminal that it is sense of Duty,
and not a meddling Temper; it is a design of Reforming Sinners, and not Enmity,
Cruelty or Selfish Ends which incline you to get them punished. Finally, be
Humble, Modest and Watchful; fairhfully Reform to the utmost of your Power, and
back all your Attempts with fervent Prayer to God for his Conduct, Success, and
Blessing.

2. I shall now address my self more Generally to all who hear me, and contract
the Improvement of this Truth to two Heads.

1. Love and readily submit to Reforming Means. Am. 5. 10.
I wish too many are not guilty of hating him who reproves, whereas such a Man
is your best Friend, for he exposes himself to pluck you as a Brand out of the
Burning. Jude 23.
He spends his time, and adventures your Indignation, to keep you from
destroying your self and others. It Is great folly to embrace the Flatterer who
serves his own turn, and to abhor a Reformer who is intent on your truest
Interest.

Be also willing to amend your ways and doings. Jer. 7. 5.
Tremble lest you be in their number who hate and refuse to be Reformed. How
sad is it to be fond of your ugliest Blemishes, and unwilling to be delivered
from your Mortal Disease! Whatever mistaken Conceits possess you, it is your
Shame you glory in; it is Self-ruin you are so resolved on, Phil. 3. 19.
and your obstinate Adherence to your vicious Courses is no other than
desperate Madness; the Considerate do now esteem it so, Pro. 1. 28.
and in a while it will be confessed such by your selves. God is now essaying
your Amendment by exciting his Servants to reprove and punish your Villainies;
for this you will be accountable as well as for all his other Methods of
Conversion. Whiles he strives there is hope of thy reclaiming; but know, he
numbers the days of his Patience, and the means by which he would cleanse thee;
and if thou still resist, he will give thee up to thy Lusts, and soon destroy
thee as incorrigible, because I have Purged thee, Ezekiel. 24. 13.
and thou wast not Purged; thou shall not be Purged any more from thy
Filthiness until I have caused my Fury to rest upon thee.

Oh then that you would strive to obey all the ways whereby God instructs you!
Engage your minds to serious Consideration, that so things may be represented
in a true Light, and with that pressing Weight as to affect you suitably to
their Nature; then it may be expected that you will be willing to part with the
Abominations, which you dare not justify on a Deathbed. I charge you in the
Name of that God who is your Owner, and will be your Judge, that you love not
what he abhors; that you venture not on what he so plainly, seriously and often
forbids; and that you be not such Fools as to make a mock at those Sins which
will render you infinitely more miserable, Prove. 14. 9.
than all the Punishments of God or Man in this Life can make you. In a word,
blush that your Lusts should ever be so loved as to make you content to suffer
any thing upon their Account; and now apply your selves to Christ for liberty
from that Thraldom, wherein your Vice restrains you; that so the good Laws of
Men may not be a Terror, nor God an Enemy.

2. Let your Reformation extend beyond those Sins the Laws of the Land take
Cognizance of. The Law of God is the only adequate Rule of Reformation; 1 John
3. 4.
whatever is a Transgression of this is Sin, though Humane Laws should command
it, or think it too trivial to be forbidden. Therefore study God's Law in the
Extent and Spirituality of it, and frame your Lives by no lower a Rule. Watch
against inward Sins which the Eyes of Man discern not, Romans 2. 16.
for God will judge the Secrets of the Heart, and Eternally punish many Civil
Persons for their Heart Unbelief* Malignity and Impenitency. Amend also those
outward Faults of which Magistrates take no notice; they restrain gross
Affronts to the Divine Being, and such things as disturb Human Societies. But
be you convinced that God's Penal Sanctions extend to whatever himself has
forbidden; and it is at thy utmost Peril if thou repent not of thy Lies, thy
neglect of God's Worship in thy Family and Closet, thy covetous Griping, thy
concealed Knaveries, thy Levity and Backbiting, thy waste of time, thy
inordinate Passions, and the like. My Brethren! God will reprove all these as
well as those Crimes which the Laws of the Land do punish: therefore these must
be Conscientiously forsaken as ever you desire a saving Interest in God's
Covenant, or would avoid Eternal Destruction from the presence of the Lord.

Take therefore your measure from God's Statute-Book (the Bible) and not only
from Man's. Oh live! and be what that appoints, for God will vindicate his own
Authority, and be sincerely regarded in whatever he has made to be the Duty of
his Creatures.

Finally, be not content to abstain from the Sins forbidden by the Divine Law,
but strive to obtain and exercise the opposite Graces and Virtues which it
commands; for negative Goodness will not suffice to save any person capable
of Obedience in what the Statutes of God enjoin as our Endowment and Employ:
Therefore let your Habitual Frame and constant Exercise discover that the
Affirmative Precepts do as effectually direct your Temper and Practice, as the
Negative Precepts do restrain them. Isa. 1. 17
Learn to do well as carefully as you cease to do evil: I shall conclude with a
few Motives to excite you both to reform your selves, and to endeavor the
Reformation of others.

1. Remember your late Troubles, and retain their Voice. Can you forget what
you so lately felt, as the effect of your former Sins? What Poverty accompanied
such as fled, what Frights, Losses and Anguish poffessed them as staid behind!
You felt much, and were in the highest danger of undergoing more. Oh! will you
not Reform those Immoralities which provoked a Merciful God to disarm you, and
leave you naked in your Enemies Hands? Were their Insults and Threatenings so
agreeable as to leave no Impression? Had your Dangers no Voice because they are
past? Know you not that it was owing to Providential Restraints, and not to
your Power, or the good Will of many of your Foes, that you were not Butchered,
and your Infants toffed on Pikes as formerly? And can you be so stupid as to
think God called you not to Reformation when he exposed you to the Brink of
Ruin for former Sins? or that your past Calamities do not remain a lively
Caution against persisting in those Sins? Must not you be Infatuated, if you
reassume the Crimes you were so lately convinced of; and be horridly
ungrateful, if you repeat them because your dangers are removed by his goodness
whom you had provoked? Isa. 27. 9.
He is profane who acknowledges not Gods design by all you felt or feared, was
to take away your Sin: Therefore be so regardful of God, and so wise for your
selves, as to say, Ezr. 9. 13. 14.
After all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, etc. Should we again break
thy Commandments, would not thou be angry with us till thou have consumed us;
so that there should be no Remnant or Escaping? Resolve then, we will not
commit those Evils, nor suffer others to repeat those Abominations, against
which God so plainly testified in the Distresses we lately suffered.

2. Consider the Signal Deliverances God has wrought, and the amazing
Prosperity to which you are so soon arrived; he is blind and base Spirited, who
owns not that Ireland was saved by the Lord; Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
Review the strength of the Enemy, and Disadvantages of your Friends: Was it of
man that Distressed, Feeble exposed Londonderry was preserved against so
formidable an Host? Or that such a multitude of well Equipped Soldiers were
Routed by a few undisciplined Enniskillen men? Was not God seen in the amazing
Retreat of those Weak, Ill provided, Diseased Forces with Duke Schomberg? Was
it not the Lord's doing that our King fell not by that Cannon Ball which
wounded his Shoulder? And that he obtained a Victory under such great
disadvantages at the Boyn? Was it not our God that Saved this City from being
Burnt by the enraged Enemy, at his Return? How near was all to be lost again at
Athlone, if God had not Infatuated the Enemy to leave the Works of that Town
undemolished, and so afford a Defense for our Forces that had passed the River,
who must otherwise have been cut off by that far superior Strength, which the
Enemy brought down upon them? Who can deny God the Honor of Guiding that
Bullet which cut off St. Ruth when he was directing the Guarding of that
Advantageous Pass, where our Forces without a Miracle must have been destroyed?

All must see the Arm of God was made bare for your help; Isa 52. 10.
he dispirited, Divided, and Infatuated the Enemy, and this apparently and
often. And can you be so vile as to think God did all this that you might
commit Abominations? that you might return to you Vomit? and commence a new
Rebellion against himself?

Moreover, you sudden healing is as signally the Lord's doing as your very
safety; who could imagine you should in so few years be so fully peopled; your
Stocks so Increased; your Houses Built; your Trade Revive; your Rents Advanced;
the Ordinances of God Restored, and all things flourish so as to make you the
Objects of Envy.

How can you persist in provoking a God so great, and sinning against a God so
merciful and kind? Has he done all this to make you capable of Offending him
more, or to oblige you in Gratitude to Reform? Sure, Romans 2. 4. his goodness
leads to Repentance; therefore Magistrates should resolve, and all Assist them
to do as, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33. Josiah took away all the Abominations out of all the
Countries, and made all that were present to serve the Lord their God.

3. You may Humbly and Mournfully Confess, there is much to be Reformed;
notwithstanding all the evil you have suffered, and the good you receive. God
might well expect that a people so Smitten and strangely Saved, should be very
peculiar in their Walk, and Devout in their inward Frame. But alas, is it not
far from this with many, with most! How much open Profaness (which the Laws
discountenance) does still abound! Oaths may be heard, and Drunkenness seen in
your Streets; the Strand and other places, witness how Sabbaths are
Unsanctified; stupid is he that cannot wonder to behold such a return to Sin,
after such Shakes, Desolations, Terrors and Deliverances. But were Provocations
confined to the Mockers at serious Religion, the Aggravation were less: But
alas, many who profess strictness, and expect Eternal Happiness in Gods
Service, are corrupted, and forsake the Law of our God; many such are drowned
in the World, as if Heaven had not room in your Hearts; you Match your Children
without regard to Grace, as if you cared not though the Devil had their Souls;
you neglect God's Worship in your Families, as if your despised the Curse that
hangs over such, Jer. 10. 25. You are Proud and Vain as if you would vye with
the world in its fashion; you are Extravagant as if you had never wanted any
thing, or were never in danger of loosing all; nay as if this were not enough,
I hear some Professors and Church Members are grown so loose, as to frequent
and plead for those Nurseries and Schools of Wickedness, the Play Houses,
places the Devil claims as his own, by his own account when he was
dispossessed of one, he entered into there, saying, What had she to do on my
Ground; places the Visible Saints of all Sects account scandalous and Ministers
of all Professions wrote against. What have many ascribed your Debaucheries and
Ruin to, more than these? and can you Encourage such by your presence, when
your awakened Consciences must tell you at least on your Sick Beds, Wretched I
that time was unredeemed which I spent there; Oh that I could recall it! it was
the gratifying my vicious vain Heart, which brought me there, and now I feel my
Guilt! There are other more inward faults to be amended, which I must leave to
your own Consciences; as decays in Grace; loss of your first Love; formalities
in Duties; yet these are great Faults, and will produce bitter Fruits if
Unreformed.

4. You are but upon Trial in all that Prosperity you now enjoy, and far from
being out of the reach of Danger; you have no Lease of it, that is not
Forfeitable, and God tries you how you will carry it, and speaks to delivered
Ireland, as Joh. 5. 14. Sin no more least a worse thing do befall thee; God can
strike again, your Enemies are not Dead, nor your Defense Impregnable; former
Sins which you may commit may bring your former Woes: Say not Profanely as they
Is. 9. 9, 10. least he say as ver. 11. how easily can God scatter you again, if
you Sin again; how soon can God take away the Life of the King, upon whom so
much depends of your Safety! Your Unreformedness after such methods looks like
a sad presage, that God's Sword will yet be drawn, and that he has not made an
end of Smiting, when you seem resolved to begin to Sin afresh; know that God's
Jealous Eye is upon you, to observe whether after all that is past over you, you
amend or not.

5. If God be forced by your growing worse to renew his Controversy, your
Calamities will be heavier than what you have yet endured, if not your utter
Ruin; your Sins will be aggravated hereafter by the fore Judgments you have
felt, the loud warnings you have met with, the strange Deliverances you have
found, and the Means and Mercies you now Enjoy; and be sure these aggravations
will be found in the weight of those strokes whereby God will testify against
them, Is. 63. 9, 10. God's Rebukes do rise still higher; Amos. 4. Bethink you
then how often God has Smitten and Saved Ireland; and how desolate he has made
the Churches of France, Hungary, Bohemia, Alsatia and the Palatinate; they were
often Smitten, often Delivered, and at last are laid utterly waste; and do we hold
our Mercies by a firmer Charter then they did? Have we past under less methods
of Amendment than they? Has God waited longer on them than you? Is God's
Honor more concerned in our Ruin than in theirs? Will not your Sins cry as
loud in God's Ears? are not the men God employed to Correct them, the Popish
Enemies to God's Cause as well as ours? And were there not some Faithful Godly
Praying Protestants in those places as well as among us? Oh then, what can
allay your Fears or uphold your Hopes, that you the Protestants of Ireland may
think to Sin on and prosper, or at most be but gently Smitten still! Flatter
not your selves when you see God is managing his Controversy with others, by
utter Desolations; it is a time of Jealousy, therefore awake: Reformation must
be your Safeguard, or you delude your selves, and will but dream your selves
out of the Gospel, the Plenty and the Peace you do now enjoy: You will find
that a Resolution to provoke God more, will end in such Plagues as will devour
your Mercies and embitter the Remembrance of them; when God shall lay you waste
with his Judgments, and pursue you with his Wrath, wherever you fly.

Oh that these things which ought to persuade, may by the blessing of God,
force and fix such Resolves as these! I will by the Grace of Christ faithfully
search what needs Amendment, and Reform to the utmost of my Conviction,
whatever I find amiss in my self and Family; that so we may not Forfeit our
present Enjoyments, and bring utter woe upon our selves and others. Yea I will
Contend with the Wicked, and do my utmost to restrain their Sins, that at least
they may not cry so loud as to make the Nation Desolate.

FINIS.

