monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION Requiring all Seamen and Mariners to
Render themselves to Their Majesty's Service.
Marie R.

WHereas diverse Seamen and Mariners have lately left their usual and ordinary
Places of Abode, and have removed themselves into some private and obscure
Places, endeavoring thereby to avoid or escape from Their Majesty's present
Service: Their Majesty's therefore, by the Advice of Their Privy Council, have
upon the present Extraordinary Occasion, thought fit to Publish this Their
Royal Proclamation; And do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Seamen and
Mariners remaining in any County of England or Wales, and not Listed in Their
Majesty's Service, That they forthwith render themselves unto the Principal
Officers and Commissioners of Their Majesty's Navy in London, or to the
Commissioners of the Navy at Chatham, or to the Commissioners of the Navy at
Portsmouth, or to Joseph Fownes Store-keeper and Muster-master for the Navy at
Harwich or to John Addis Store-keeper and Muster-master for the Navy at
Plymouth, or to the Bailiffs of Great Yarmouth, or to the Mayor of Hull, or to
the Mayor of Newcastle, or to Robert Henley at Bristol, or to (...) Arkinson at
Highlake and Leverpoole, in order to their being received into Pay, and sent on
Board such of Their Majesty's Ships as shall be found most expedient for Their
Majesty's Service; And if any of them shall hereafter be found out or
discovered to have neglected to obey this Their Majesty's Royal Command, they
shall be Proceeded against with all Severity. And Their Majesty's do hereby
Require all Mayors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables and
other Officers to whom it does or may appertain, That they cause diligent
Search to be made within all and every of their Precincts, for the said Seamen
and Mariners, and to Seize and Secure the Persons of such of them as shall be
there found; And also all loose and unknown Persons whatsoever, who may justly
be suspected to be Seamen or Watermen, and to cause them to be sent to the
Principal Officers and Commissioners of Their Majesty's Navy in London, or to
such other of the Persons and Places aforesaid, to which they may most
conveniently be sent, in order to their being Employed in Their Majesty's
Service; And that they send up to Their Majesty's Privy Council a List of the
Names of all such Seamen and Mariners as they shall procure for the Service
aforesaid, together with the Names of the respective Persons to whom, and
Places to which they shall send them. And the said Principal Officers and
Commissioners, and other Persons aforesaid, shall give Receipts in Writing for
the several Seamen and Mariners delivered to them in pursuance hereof. And
Their Majesty's do hereby straightly Charge and Command, That no Person or
Persons whatsoever, do presume to Conceal, or to further or favor the Escape
of any Seamen or Mariners as aforesaid, upon Pain that all and singular Persons
offending herein, be forthwith Committed to Prison by the next Justice of the
Peace or other Magistrate, and with all Severity Prosecuted, as Persons
Conspiring against Their Majesty's and the Safety of the Kingdom. And Their
Majesty's are hereby pleased to make known, That Money is already lodged in the
Hands of the Persons above named, for Repaying the Conduct Money, and other
Charges incident to this Service.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fifth Day of July, 1690. In the Second
Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Marry.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1690.


