THE CASE OF Indifferent Things Used in the WORSHIP of GOD, Proposed and
Stated, by considering these QUESTIONS.

Qu. I. Whether things Indifferent, though not Prescribed, may be Lawfully used
in Divine Worship? [or, Whether there be any things Indifferent in the Worship
of God?]

Qu. II. Whether a restraint of our Liberty in the use of such Indifferent
things be a violation of it?

LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne, Jun. for Fincham Gardener at the White Horse
in Ludgate Street. 1682/3.

Question.
Q. Whether things not prescribed in the Word of God, may be Lawfully used in
Divine Worship?
BEfore I proceed to the Case it self, it will be fit to consider what the
things are which the Question more immediately respects. For the better
understanding of which, we may observe,

1. That there are Essential parts of Divine Worship, and which are, either by
Nature or Revelation, so determined, that they are in all Ages necessary: In
Natural Religion, such are the Objects of it, which must be Divine; such are
the acknowledgments of Honor, and Reverence, due and peculiar to those
Objects, as Prayer, etc. And in the Christian Religion, such are the Sacraments
of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. These are always to be the same in the
Church.

2. There are other things relating to Divine Worship, which are arbitrary and
variable, and determined according to circumstances, as Gesture, Place, etc.

As to the former it is granted by the contending Parties, that they are all
already prescribed, and that nothing in that kind can be added to what is
already prescribed, nor can any thing so prescribed be altered, or abolished.
Nothing now can be made necessary and binding to all Persons, Places, and Ages,
that was not so from the beginning of Christianity; and nothing that was once
made so by Divine Authority can be rendered void or unnecessary by any other.

Therefore the Question is to be applied to the latter, and then it is no other
than, Whether things in their own nature Indifferent, though not prescribed in
the Word of God, may be lawfully used in Divine Worship? Or, Whether there be
any thing Indifferent in the Worship of God?

Toward the resolution of which, I shall 1. Enquire into the Nature, and state
the Notion of things Indifferent. 2. Show that things Indifferent may be
Lawfully used in Divine Worship. 3. Consider how we may know what things are
Indifferent in the Worship of God. 4. How we are to Determine our selves in the
use of Indifferent things so applied. 5. Show that there is nothing required in
the Worship of God in our Church, but what is either Necessary in it self, and
so binding to all Christians; or what is Indifferent, and so may be Lawfully
used by them.


1. I shall enquire into the Nature, and state the Notion of things
Indifferent. In doing of which we are to observe, that all things with
reference to Practice are reducible to these three Heads: First, Duty.
Secondly, Sin. Thirdly, Neither Duty nor Sin.


Duty is either so Morally, and in its own Nature, or made so by Divine and
Positive Command. Sin is so in its own Nature, or made and declared to be such
by Divine and Positive Prohibition. Neither Duty nor Sin, is that which no Law,
either of Nature or Revelation, has determined; and is usually known by the
Name of Indifferent, that is, it is of a middle Nature, partaking in it self of
neither extremes, and may be indifferently used or forborne, as in Reason and
Prudence shall be thought meet. Things of this kind the Apostle calls Lawful, 1
Cor. 10. 23. etc. because they are the subject of no Law, and what are
therefore Lawful to us, and which without Sin we may either choose or refuse.
Thus the Apostle does determine, Romans 4. 15. Where no Law is there is no
Transgression, that is, it can be no transgression to omit that which the Law
does not enjoin, nor to do that which it does not forbid; for else that would
be a Duty which the Law does not enjoin, and that would be a Sin which it does
not forbid; which is in effect to say there is a Law where there is none, or
that Duty and Sin are so without respect to any Law. But now if Duty be Duty
because it is enjoined, and Sin be Sin because it is forbidden, then Indifferent
is Indifferent because it is neither enjoined nor forbidden. For as to make it a
Duty there needs a Command, and to make it a Sin there needs a Prohibition; so
where there is neither Command nor Prohibition, it is neither Duty nor Sin, and
must be therefore Indifferent, Lawful, and Free. So that we may as well know by
the Silence of the Law what is Indifferent, as we may know by its Authority
what is a Duty or a Sin. And I have no more Reason to think that a Duty or a
Sin which it takes no notice of (since all Obligation arises from a Law) than
that not to be a Duty or a Sin which it does: The Nature of Lawful things being
as much determined so to be, by the want of such Authority, as that of
Necessary is determined by it: And he that shall say that is a Duty or a Sin
which is not so made and declared by any Law, may as well say that is no Duty or
Sin which there is a Law about. To conclude, there must be a Law to make it a
Transgression, and the want of a Law does necessarily suppose it to be none,
and what there is no Law for or against, remains Indifferent in it self, and
Lawful to us. As for instance, suppose there should be a Dispute concerning
Days set apart for the Service and Worship of God, how must this be determined
but by the Law of Nature or Revelation? and how shall we be resolved in the
case, but by considering what the Law injoyns or forbids in it? If we find it
not enjoined, it can be of it self no Duty; if we find it not forbidden, it can
be of it self no Sin; and consequently it is Lawful and Indifferent, and in what
we neither Sin by omitting nor observing. So the Apostle concludes, Romans 14. 6.
He that regards a day, regards it unto the Lord, and he that regards not
the day, unto the Lord he does not regard it; that is, there was no Law
requiring it, and so making the observation of it Necessary; and no Law
forbidding it, and so making the observation of it Sinful; and therefore
Christians were at Liberty to observe, or not to observe it as they pleased;
and in both they did well, if so be they had a regard to the Lord in it.

2. I shall show that there are things Indifferent in the Worship of God, and
that such things, though not prescribed, may be lawfully used in it. It Is
allowed by all that there is no Command to be expected about the Natural
Circumstances of action, and which the Service cannot be celebrated without,
such as Time and Place, and that these are left to humane Prudence to fix and
determine. But what those Natural Circumstances are is not so universally
agreed to. And if they be such as aforesaid, that is, such as the action cannot
be performed without, then it will very much serve to justify most of the
things in dispute, and defend our Church in the use and practice of them. For
what is there almost in that kind amongst us, which is not Naturally or Morally
necessary to the action, and if Time and Place fall under humane determination,
because they are naturally necessary, then why not also Gesture and Habit,
which Worship can no more Naturally be celebrated without, than the former; and
consequently a Surplice, or Kneeling and Standing, may be alike lawfully
determined, and used, as Time for assembling together, and a Church to assemble
and officiate in. And what Natural Circumstances are to a Natural action, that
are Moral Circumstances to a Moral action; and there are Moral as necessary to
a Moral action, as there are Natural necessary to a Natural action. As for
example, what Time and Place are to Natural, that are Method and Order to Moral
and Religious acts, and can no more be separated from these than the other can
be separated from the former, and therefore the Method and Order of
Administration in Divine Worship (where not otherwise determined and appointed
by God) may as well be determined by Men, as Time and Place, with respect to
the nature, end, and use of the Service. So that the exception made against
humane Appointments in Divine Worship, viz. (that all but natural circumstances
must have a Divine Command to legitimate their use; and that whatever is not
prescribed, is therefore prohibited) is of no service to them that plead it;
and it remains good so far notwithstanding, that there are things Indifferent
in the Worship of God, and that the outward Order and Administration of it is
left to Christian Prudence And this I shall more particularly prove.

1. From the consideration of the Rules laid down in the Gospel, relating to
the administration of Divine Worship which (except what refer to the Elements,
etc. in the Sacraments) are taken from the Nature of the thing; and so always
were obliging to all Ages under the several variations and forms of Divine
Worship, and will be always so to all Christians in the World, viz. such as
respect Order, Decency and Edification, insisted upon, 1 Cor. 14. 26, 40. So
that we are no otherwise bound, than as bound by these measures, and where not
bound by them we are free. For as in former Ages from the beginning of the
World, where revelation did not interpose (as it did under the Mosaical
Dispensation) all persons were left at liberty, and if so be they had a respect
to those natural rules, might choose what ways they pleased for the regulation
of Divine Worship: So when under the Gospel we have no other than those Natural
rules (except as above excepted) the particular circumstances are as much now
the matter of our free choice, as they were then, and this or that may be used
and observed, as the Case requires and Occasion serves. So that if ever there
were things Indifferent in Gods Worship, and the administration of it was left
to the Consideration and Prudence of Mankind, it is so still, since the Gospel
keeps to those eternal Rules which even the Nature of the Thing has invariably
established, and which, if it ever was sufficient for the guiding of the Church
of God in those particulars, is certainly so when the Nature of Man is improved
by new helps, and so he is more capable of judging what may be suitable to that
essential Worship which God has prescribed under the Gospel, and to Him whom
that Worship is directed to. But then that which confirms this, is that those
Rules are also general; and such as will in their use and end respect all
People in the World. The Apostles in all their Discourses upon this subject
rarely do descend to particulars, and in what they do, show how far Custom and
Charity, and the Reason of the thing ought to govern us; as in the case of men's
being Uncovered in the Worship of God, for which the Apostle does argue not
from Institution, but the Nature and Decency of it, being in token of their
pre-eminence, and the headship they have over the Woman, etc. 1. Cor. 11. 47.
But otherwise they without doubt thought it unpracticable to tie all Nations up
to the same Modes and Circumstances, or if practicable that it was not worth
the while, when the Worship might as well be Administered, and God as much
Honored by one as the other. Now if they did think it sufficient to prescribe
only in this General way, it must needs be that the particulars of those
Generals must be Indifferent, and that the choosing of one particular before the
other was left to Christian Prudence. And if it should be said (as it is) that
when the things are determined in general, the particulars are therein also
vertually determined, and so are not Indifferent; I shall content my self to
reply, that by this way of arguing there would be nothing Indifferent in the
World: There being nothing how Lawful and Indifferent soever in it self, but
what we are limited by General Rules in the use of. As for example, all Meats
are now Lawful to Christians, but yet there are General Rules by which we are
determined in the use of them, such as our own Constitution, and our Quality,
or Scandal given to others: But the being thus bounded by such Rules, does not
change the Nature of those Meats, and make them to be other than Indifferent.
So it is in the Worship of God, for the better Administration of which there
are general Rules laid down, and according to which we are to be determined in
our choice of particulars, but yet the particulars notwithstanding are
Indifferent, and matter of Christian Liberty, and what humane prudence is to
regulate us in.

All which will yet be further confirmed by considering the Nature of the
things which are the Subject of those general Rules, viz, Order, Decency and
Edification, which do mostly, if not altogether, depend upon variable
circumstances, and may be different according to those circumstances; sometimes
this, and at other times that being subservient thereunto. As for instance,
Decency does generally depend upon Custom, and the Custom of Ages and Countries
being different, Decency in one Age or Country may be and often is quite
different from what it is in another. It was once comely amongst some Nations
to be covered in Divine Worship, and practiced both amongst the Jews in their
Synagogues, as the Apostle does insinuate, 2 Cor. 3. 14. and their own Authors
do acknowledge Lightf. Hor. Hebr. in 1 Cor. 11. 4.
; and also amongst the Plut. Probl. Romans
Romans. But it was Comely amongst others to be Uncovered, as amongst the
Grecians, Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. c. 6.
who in those Times giving Laws of Civility, and in many things of Religion too
to other Nations, it became a prevailing Custom, and was, as a thing decent,
introduced into the Christian Church. Thus it is also as to Edification, which
does in like manner often depend upon circumstances, and according to those
circumstances the Edification of the Church in its Peace, Union, and Comfort
may be promoted or hindered, and that may be for Edification in one Age or
Church, which is not so in another.

Thus the being covered in Divine Worship was for Edification in the Jewish
Church, being used in token of Fear and Reverence, Distance and Subjection; in
allusion to which the Seraphims are represented appearng before God, after that
manner, Isai. 6. 2. and in mitation of whom the Apostle pleads that Women
should be veiled in Religious Assemblies, in token of Subjection and
Shamefacedness, 1 Cor* 11. 10. But on the contrary He does Judge and Determine
that, for the Reasons above given, it was better and more for Edification, that
Men should be therein Uncovered. So the Love Feasts, and Holy-kiss of Charity
were at the first thought good for Edification, and were accordingly used in
Apostolical times, Chrysostom. and Theophyl. in 1 Cor. 11. 17.
(being an Excellent and Useful, Admirable and Friendly, Custom) as thereby was
signified the Universal Love and Charity that Christians ought to maintain,
Tertul. Apol. c. 39. de orat. l. 6.
and which they should at all times but especially in Divine Worship be forward
to express and renew: But when Disorder and Licentiousness arose from them,
Council. Laod. c. 28. etc.
they were generally laid aside, and Abolished by Authority.

So it was thought to be for Edification in the Primitive Church to Administer
Baptism by immersion or dipping, and the Apostle does make use of it as an
excellent argument to newness of life, Romans 6. 3, 4. and yet notwithstanding
the signification of it, and the practice of the Church for a long time, a
Charitable reason has overruled it, and brought in Sprinkling instead of it.
Thus sitting at the Lords Supper is accounted decent by some, and for
Edification, as it is a table posture, and is a sign of our being feasted by
God; and yet in a general Synod of the Reformed Churches in Poland, etc. it was
declared that forasmuch as sitting was introduced first by the Arrians (beside
the Custom used in all the Evangelical Churches throughout Europe, Synod.
Petricov. conclus. 4.
) we reject it as peculiar to them (that as they do irreverently treat Christ,
An. 1578.
so also his Sacred appointments) and as a Ceremony less Comely and Devout, and
to many very offensive. So that Order, Decency, and Edification being generally
mutable things, and varying as circumstances vary, there could in the nature of
the thing be only general rules prescribed, and so the particulars must be left
to discretion, and to be determined by those that are best able and have
Authority to judge of the circumstances, and to pick out of them those which
are Indifferent, what may best serve the ends of Religion, and the honor of
its institutions.

2. I shall prove that things Indifferent in themselves, though not prescribed,
may be Lawfully used in Divine Worship, from the practice of our Savior and
his Apostles. Under the Law the Constitution was very exact, the Rites and
Orders of it very particular, and the Observation of them punctually required.
But as it was not so precise but that many things respecting the outward order
were added, so some things were altered upon prudential considerations; and by
the addition or alteration of which the Authority of that Law was not conceived
to be infringed, nor violated; as it is evident from the respect which our
Savior showed to them, and his compliance with them. An instance of this is
the Synagogual Worship; It Is a controversy whether there was any provision made
under the Law for the places themselves, the intimations of that are (if any)
very obscure, but there are not so much as any intimations of the manner and
order or parts of the Worship therein to be observed; and yet we find such
there was, Acts 15. 21. Moses being read and preached there every Sabbath day;
and that our Savior frequently resorted to it and bore a part in it, John, 18.
20, etc. The like temper we find him of, when he used the Cup of Charity after
the manner of the Jews, in the Passover, though there was no institution for
it; and that it was as many other things, taken up and used amongst them by way
of signification, and as a Testimony of entire Friendship, and Charity, Luke,
22. 17. But I conceive alteration of circumstances in the institution is much
more exceptionable than the addition of such to it, and yet this was both done
by them and observed by our Savior, when there was nothing else to oblige him,
but only a condescension to them in such usages and rites as were inoffensive
in themselves, and what were then generally used in the Church. That the
posture first required and used in the Passover was standing, the
circumstances, being to be eat with Staves in their Hands and Shoes on their
Feet, Philo. de Sacrif. Able, etc.
etc. do prove, and is affirmed by the Jews; and it is as manifest that the
Jews in the time of our Savior, and for a long time before, did recede from
it, and did eat it in the posture of discumbency; whether it was as they looked
upon themselves as settled in the possession of Canaan, which they were at the
first institution Traveling toward; or, as it is said by the later Jews,
Lightf. Hor. Matthew. c. 26. 20.
because it was a sign of Liberty, and after the manner of Kings and Great men,
is not so material, as it is that our Savior did follow this Custom, and
complied with this practice of theirs without hesitation. And thus did the
Apostles when they observed the hours of Prayer, Acts, 3. 1. which were of
humane institution as well as the Pray^rs themselves, (for without doubt they
were public Prayers, which were used in the Temple,) but though the place was,
yet that service was of no more Authority than what was used in the Synagogues.
Now if the Jews did thus institute and alter things relating to external Order
and Administration, according as the case might require, and it was lawful for
them so to do (as it is plain from the compliance of our Savior and the
Apostles with them in it) then much more may it be supposed lawful for the
Christian Church to exercise that liberty when they have no other than such
general rules for their direction as they had then, without such particulars as
they had.

And that this is no other than a certain Truth will appear from the same
liberty taken in Apostolical times in Religious Assemblies, when the Christian
Church not only complied with the Jews in such Rites as they were under no
Obligation, but that of Charity, to use, and which they did use because they
were not forbidden, and so lawful; (as when St. Paul took upon him a Vow, Acts.
21. 26.) but also had some Observances of its own, that were of a ritual
nature, and as they were taken up so might be laid down upon prudential
consideration. Such I account was the Washing the Disciples Feet, which was
done by our Savior in token of the Humility he was to be a president of, and
would have them follow him in; and which it seems was obferved amongst them, 1 Timothy 5. 10. and for a long time after continued in a sort in some Churches
Ambros. Tom. 4. l. 3. de Sacrament. c. 1.
. Such also were the Love Feasts at the Administration of the Lords Supper; and
the Holy-kiss used then amongst Christians, if not as a constant attendant upon
all public Worship, yet to be sure at Prayer Tertul. de orat. c. 1* 4.
. Which and the like usages, however taken up, yet were in the Opinion of the
Church no other than Indifferent, and accordingly were upon the abuse of them
(as I observed before) discarded. From all which it appears, that there was no
such thing as Prescription expected before any Rite should be introduced into
the Church, or before it would be lawful for Christians to use it, but that
where it was not forbidden, the Practice of the Church was to determine them;
and if Prescription had been thought necessary for every thing used in Divine
Worship, which was not Natural, then certainly our Savior and his Apostles
would never have used or encouraged others to use any thing that wanted such
Authority, and that was not of Divine Institution.

Now if it should be objected that these usages of the Christian Church were
Civil observances, Ames. Fresh Suit, l. 2. Sect. 23. etc. p. 334.
and used as well out of God's Worship as in it; and therefore what there
needed no institution for, and might be lawfully used without. I answer 1. That
this does justify most of the usages contended for, and there would be nothing
unlawful in using a White Garment, etc. in Divine Service, Casaub. Exercit. 16.
c. 73.
since that as a sign of Royalty and Dignity was used in Civil as well as
Religious cases, and according to this Argument may therefore lawfully be used
in Religious, because it was in Civil.

Secondly, They must say that either a Civil observance, when used in Religious
Worship, remains Civil, notwithstanding its being so applied, or that it is
Religious whilst so applied; if the former then Kneeling or Standing in the
Worship of God would be no acts of Adoration and not be Religious, because
those postures are used in Civil matters; if the latter, then it must be
granted that there may be Rites used in the Worship of God and to a Religious
end, which there is no Divine Prescription for.

Nay Thirdly, It Is evident that these and the like were not used by the
Christians as mere Civil Rites; this I think is made evident, as to Washing the
Feet, by a Learned Person Buxtorf. Exercit. Hist. Sacr. Coenae
; and not only was the kiss of Charity called the Holy-kiss in Scripture, but
by the Fathers, (notwithstanding what is Ames. ibid* p. 342. n. XXX.
objected) the Seal of Prayer, and the Seal of Reconciliation, and both
consistent, the one as it was an attendant upon that office, the other as it
was a testimony of their Charity and Reconciliation to each other in it.

Fourthly, If the being Civil usages did make them which were originally so, to
be lawful in or at Divine Worship, then there is nothing that is used out of
Worship in Civil cases and affairs, but may be introduced into the Church;
since if it be for that reason that any usages of that kind are defended, the
reason will as well defend all as one. And then the Histrionical Practices of
the Church of Rome might warantably be introduced, as the rocking of a Babe in
a Cradle at night, at the Nativity time; the Harrowing of Hell at Easter, etc.
Then a Maypole may be brought into the Church for Children to Dance-about and
Climb up on, in sign of their desire to seek the things above; and a stiff
Straw put into the Child's Hand, for a sign of Fighting against Spiritual
Enemies, as with a Spear; And all the absurdities of that Nature charged
injuriously upon our Proceedings Ames. ibid. l. 1. c. 3. p. 17.
would return with success upon themselves: Since all these are fetched from
Customs and Practices in Secular matters.

Fifthly, If this be a reason to Defend the Use of Rites in the Christian
Church, because they are used out of it, and in Civil cases; then what will
become of that position, before spoken of, and generally asserted by those who
oppose us, that nothing is to be used in the Worship of God without
Prescription, except the Natural Circumstances of Action; for though Civil and
Natural are sometimes coincident, yet they may be and often are Separated; for
Feasting and Salutation are Civil usages, but are no Natural Circumstances in
Divine Worship, and which that cannot be performed without. And if these and
the like were used in the Church, and applied and annexed to Divine Worship;
then the reason upon which they were introduced and used does, wherever that
reason is, justify the like Practice, and we are left still to choose and act
according to the Permission and Allowance that is given us; that is, all such
things that are not forbidden are just matter of our Christian Liberty, and
there is no Sin in a Prudent exercise of it.

3. I shall further prove and strengthen the Proposition, that things
Indifferent, though not prescribed, may be lawfully used in Divine Worship,
from the ill consequences attending the contrary; one of which is, that if we
hold all things not commanded to be prohibited, we shall find no Church or
Religious Society in the World but are Guilty; and if the doing so makes
Communion with a Church unlawful, there is no Church we can hold Communion
with. There are some Churches that do maintain and use such things as the
Scripture expressly condemns, and do lay aside such as the Scripture requires;
as the Church of Rome, in its Worshipping Saints and Angels, and denying the
Cup to the Laity, etc. And these things make it necessary for those to quit its
Communion that are of it, and for those to avoid it that are not in it. But
other Churches there are that are Guilty of no such Fundamental Errors and
fatal miscarriages, and may so far lawfully be Communicated with. But even none
of these are there, but what, either wittingly or unwittingly, do take the
liberty of using what the Scripture has no where required. It was notoriously
so in the Ancient Church when some Customs did universally obtain amongst them;
as the Anniversary Solemnities of the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of
Christ, and Descent of the Holy Ghost, the receiving of the Lords Supper
Fasting; Aug. Epis. 118. Januar.
the Praying toward the East Basil. de Spir. S. c. 27.
; the Standing in their Devotions on the Lords Days, Aug. Epis. 119. Januar.
especially from Easter to Whitsuntide; the Dipping the Baptized thrice in
Water Ambros. lib. 2. de Sacrament. c. 7.
, etc.. Now whatever some of the Fathers might plead for any of these from
Scriptures misunderstood, yet it is plain that none of these are required in
Scripture, and if so, a Person that holds it unlawful to use any thing
uncommanded, and to hold Communion with a Church so using, must have separated
from the Catholic Church, since (if there be Credit to be given to the Fathers
so reporting) they all agreed in the use and practice of the things above
recited. And he that held all fixed Holy Days of Ecclesiastical Institution
unlawful, and all Ceremonies not instituted by God to be prohibited, must not
have Worshipped with them, who did not only thus do, but thought it unlawful,
when universally Practiced to do otherwise.

But again as there were some Rites universally held in estimation, so there
were others that were peculiar to some Churches, and that were not thought to
be obliging out of that Particular Communion, as when in the Church of Rome it
was the Custom to Fast on the Saturday; and of most others to make no such
distinction betwixt that and other days. Aug. Epist. 118.
In the Church of Milain they Washed the Feet of those that were to be
Baptized, but in the Church of Rome, they used it not Ambros. l. 3. de
Sacrament. c. 1.
. Now if persons did believe such things unlawful, they could have no Communion
with any particular Church, because no Church was without such Uncommanded
Rites; or if they could be so fond as to think the Rites of their own Church to
be of Divine Institution, yet how could they have Communion with a Church,
where the contrary Custom did prevail, as in the cases abovesaid. And as it was
then, so it is now with all stated and settled Churches in the World, who do
Practice against this Principle, and either expect not or are not able to find
a Command for every thing established amongst them; and that Practice with as
much contrariety to each other as the Church of Rome and Milain once did. So in
some Churches they receive the Lord's Supper Kneeling, in some Standing, in
others Sitting. In some they Sprinkle the Child in Baptism but once, and in
others thrice. Now there would be no reconciling of these one to another, and
no possibility of holding Communion with them under these circumstances, or of
being a Member of any Church, if we must have an institution for every thing
done in the Worship of God, and that we must join in nothing, which has it not.
As for Instance what Church is there in the World, which has not some form or
forms of Prayer, and whose Service for the most part (generally speaking) is
not made up of them; especially that does not use them in the Administration of
the Sacraments. But now if a Person holds that whatever is not prescribed is
unlawful, and that forms of Prayer are no where prescribed, then he cannot join
with the Church so using, but while in the body of the Church by residence, he
must be no Member of that Body in Communion.

Nay further, if this be true, then none must hold Communion with them who are
of this Opinion; since those that pretend most to it, and urge it as a reason
against Communion with us, live in contradiction to it, and do Practice and Use
things which they have no more Authority, nor can give more reason for, than we
do for the things they condemn, and that is, that they are lawful, expedient,
and convenient. As for Example, let us consider the Sacraments, in which, if
any thing, we might expect particular Prescription, because they are mere
Institutions; where do they find that the Baptized Person is necessarily to be
Sprinkled? What Command or Example have they for it, or what reason more than
the reason of the thing taken from expedience and the general Practice of the
Church of God in colder Climates? And yet this is as much used amongst them
that pretend to keep exactly to the Rule of Scripture, as it is amongst us that
take a liberty in things Uncommanded; but with this difference, that they do it
upon the supposition of a Command, and so make it necessary, and our Church
leaves it, as it is, Indifferent. Again, where do they find a Command for
Sitting at the Lord's Supper, or so much as an Example? (For the Posture of our
Savior is left very uncertain.) Where again do they find a Command for the
necessary use of conceived Prayer, and that that, and no other, should be used
in the public Worship of God? And that they must prove that maintain public
Forms unlawful. Where again do they find it required that an Oath is to be
taken by laying the Hand on the Gospel and Kissing the Book? which is both a
Natural and Instituted part of Worship, being a Solemn Invocation of God and an
Appeal to him, with an acknowledgment of his Omniscience, and Omnipresence; his
Providence and Government of the World; his Truth and Justice to Right the
Innocent and Punish the Guilty; all which is owned and testified by Kissing
that Book that God has declared this more especially in. And if we more
particularly descend to those that differ from us in this point: Where do those
of the Congregational way find that ever Christians were otherwise divided from
Christians than by place, or that they did combine into particular Churches, so
as not to be all the while reputed Members of another, and might be admitted,
upon removal of place, upon the same terms that they were of that they removed
from; or indeed that they were so Members of a particular as not to be Members
of any or the whole Church of Christ, upon their being Baptized? Where do they
find that Christians were gathered out of Christians, and did combine into a
Society Excluding those from it that would not make a Profession of their Faith
and Conversion distinct from that at Baptism? Where do we ever read that he
that was a Minister of one Church was not a Minister all the World over, as
well as he that was Baptized in one was reputed a Christian and Churchmember
wherever he came? Again, where do we read that its necessary that Ministers
should be alike in Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction, and that there is to be
no difference in point of Order and Superiority amongst them: Or that there are
to be Elders for Governing the Church, who are not Ordained to it, and are in
no other State after than they were before that Service, both of which are held
by the Presbyterians, strictly so called? And if it be said these respect
Government but not Worship; I answer the case is the same, for if we are to do
nothing but what is prescribed in the Worship of God, because, (as they say) it
derogates from the Priestly Office of Christ, and does detract from the
Sufficiency of Scripture; then I say upon the like reason, there must be
nothing used in Church Government but what is prescribed, since the Kingly
Office is as much concerned in this as the Priestly in the other, and the
Sufficiency of Scripture in both. Lastly, Where do any of them find that
position in Scripture, that there is nothing lawful in Divine Worship but what
is prescribed, and that what is not Commanded is Forbidden? And if there be no
such position in Scripture, then that can no more be true than the want of such
a position can render things not Commanded to be unlawful.

And now I am come to that which must put an Issue one way or other to the
dispute; for if there be no such position in Scripture, either expressed in it,
or to be gathered by good consequence from it, we have gained the point; but if
there be, then we must give it up. And this is indeed contended for. For its
Objected, Object. I.


That its accounted in Scripture an heinous Crime to do things not Commanded;
as when Nadab and Abihu offered strange Fire before the Lord, Levit. 10. 1, etc.
which he Commanded them not, etc. From which form of expression it may be
collected, that what is not Commanded is Forbidden; and that in every thing
used in Divine Worship there must be a Command to make it lawful and allowable.

To this I answer that the Proposition inferred, Answ. I.
that all things not Commanded are Forbidden, is not true, and so it cannot be
the Sense and Meaning of the Phrase; for 1. then all things must be either
Commanded or Forbidden; and there would be nothing but what must be Commanded
or Forbidden; but I have before showed, and it must be granted, that there are
things neither Commanded nor Forbidden, which are called Indifferent. 2. if
things not Commanded are Forbidden, then a thing not Commanded is alike Heinous
as a thing Forbidden. And then David's Temple which he designed to Build would
have been Criminal as well as Jeroboam's Dan and Bethel; and the Feast of Esth.
9. 27.
Purim, like Jeroboam's Eighth Month 1 King. 12. 32, 33.
; and the Synogogal Worship like the Sacrificing in Gardens Isai. 65. 3.
; and the hours of Prayer Act. 3. 1.
like Nadab's Strange Fire. The former of which were things Uncommanded, and
the latter Forbidden; and yet They were approved and These condemned.

2. The things, to which this Phrase not Commanded is applied, do give no
encouragement to such an Inference from it; for its constantly applied to such
as are absolutely Forbidden. This was the case of Nadab and Abihu, who offered
Fire not merely Uncommanded, but what was prohibited; which will appear, if we
consider that the Word Strange when applied to matters of Worship does signify
as much as Forbidden. Thus we read of Strange Incense, Exodus 30. ^.
that is, other than what was compounded according to the directions given for
it; which as it was to be put to no common uses, Ver. 34.
so no common perfume was to be put to the like uses with it. Chapter 37. 29.
So we also read of Strange Vanities, Jer. 8. 19.
which is but another Word for Graven Images; and of Strange Gods. And after
the same sort is it to be understood in the case before us, viz. for what is
Forbidden. For that such was the Fire made use of by those Young Men will be
further confirmed, if we consider that there is scarcely any thing belonging to
the Altar (Setting aside the Structure of it) of which more is said than of the
Fire burning upon it. For 1. It was lighted from Heaven Lev. 9. 24.
. 2. It was always to be burning upon the Altar. Chapter 6. 12.
3. If it was not made use of in all Sacred matters (where Fire was to be used)
yet it was most Holy, and when Atonement was to be made by Incense, the Coals
were to be taken from thence Lev. 16. 12. 46.
, and therefore surely was as peculiar to those Offices as the Incense, and to
be as constantly used in them, as never to be used in any other. And it will
yet make it more evident if it be considered 4. That just before there is an
account given of the Extraordinary way by which this Fire was lighted, for the
Text says, there came out a Fire from before the Lord, Lev. 9. 24.
and consumed upon the Altar the Burnt-Offering, etc. and immediately follows
the Relation of Nadab's miscarriage. Now for what reason are these things so
closely connected, but to show wherein they Offended. For before it was the
Office of Aaron's Sons to put Fire upon the Altar, Lev. 1. 7.
and now through Inadvertency or Presumption Attempting to do as formerly, when
there had been this Declaration from Heaven to the contrary, they Suffered for
it. 5. It appears further from the conformity betwixt the Punishment and the
Sin; as there came Fire from before the Lord and consumed the Burnt-Offering;
to teach them what Fire for the future to make use of: So upon their
Transgression there came out Fire from the Lord and devoured them; to teach
others how Dangerous it was to do otherwise than he had Commanded. So that it
seems to me to be like the case of Vzzah, when they carried the Ark in a Cart,
1 Chronicles. 13. 7. 10.
which the Levites were to have born upon their Shoulders; and it was not an
Offering without a Command, Chapter 15. 2.
but otherwise than Commanded, that was their Fault; and without doubt they
might with no more Offense have taken what Fire they would for their Incense,
than what Wood they pleased for their Fire, if there had been no more direction
about the one than the other. But to proceed in the other places of Scripture
where this Phrase of not Commanded is to be met with, its also so applied to
things Forbidden; as to what is called Abomination, which is the Worshipping of
Strange Gods, Deuteronomy. 17. 3. 4.
the Sun, Moon and Stars, and the Host of Heaven: Jer. 7. 31.
To the building the High Places of Topheth, Chapter 19. 5.
and the burning their Sons and Daughters in the Fire to Baal, Chapter 32. 35.
and causing them to pass through the Fire unto Molech. Of such and the like
its said, which I Commanded them not, neither came it into my mind. And lastly
it is applied to the false Prophets, Jer. 29. 22, 23.
who spoke Lies in the name of the Lord; in which case the mere being not
Commanded nor sent by him, is in the nature of the thing no less than a
Prohibition, it being a Belying God; though there had been no such place as,
Deuteronomy. 18. 20. to forbid it. Now if so much stress was to be laid upon the
Phrase, as the Objection does suppose, and that we must take a Non-Commanding
for a Prohibition, we might reasonably expect to find the Phrase otherwhere
applied to things that were no otherwise Unlawful than because not Commanded;
but when its always spoken of things plainly Prohibited, its a sign that its
rather God's Forbidding that made them Unlawful, than his not Commanding. But
it may still be said, why should then the Phrase be used at all in such
matters, and why should the case be thus Represented, if not Commanded is not
the same with Prohibited?

To this I answer, 1. That all things Prohibited are by consequence not
Commanded; but it follows not that all things not Commanded are Prohibited. If
it was Forbidden to Offer Strange Fire, then it was a thing not Commanded (for
otherwise the same thing would be Forbidden and Commanded) but if it had been a
thing not Commanded only, it would not by being so have been any more
Prohibited than the Wood that was to be burnt upon the Altar. Now its with
respect to the former that things Prohibited are called things not Commanded;
and not with respect to the latter. 2. Indeed the Phrase not Commanded is only
a Meiosis or Softer way of speaking, when more is understood than expressed. A
Figure usual in all Authors and Languages, that I know of, and what is
frequently to be met with in Scripture. Thus its given as a Character of an
Hypocritical People, Isai. 66. 3. 4.
they chose that in which I Delighted not, which is but another Word for what
was said in the verse before, Chapter 65. 3, 12.
their Soul Delighted in their Abominations, or Idolatries. And when the
Apostle would Describe the evil state of the Gentile World, by the most Heinous
and Flagitious Crimes, Romans 1. 28, 29.
such as Fornication, Covetousness, Maliciousness, Envy, Murder, and what not,
he says of these, that they were things not convenient. And it is as evident
that the Phrase not Commanded is of the like kind, when the things its applied
to are alike Notorious and Abominable.

But its further Objected, Object. II.
that its said in Scripture, ye shall not add unto the Word which I Command
you, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
neither shall ye diminish ought from it: And that our Savior condemning the
Practices of the Scribes in this kind, concludes, Matthew. 15. 9.
In Vain do they Worship me, Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.
From whence it may be collected 1. That all things not Commanded by God in his
Word are additions to it. 2. That such additions are altogether unlawful.

To this I reply, Answer.


1. If they mean by adding to the Word, the doing what that Forbids, and by
diminishing, the neglecting of what that requires (as the next Words do
intimate, Deuteronomy. 4. 4, 6.
and is plainly the sense otherwhere Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
, when its no sooner said, What thing soever I Command you, Observe to do it;
but it immediately follows, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it)
its what we willingly condemn; Matthew. 5. 19.
according to that of our Savior, Whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called least in the Kingdom
of Heaven.

2. If they mean by adding the appointing somewhat else instead of what God
has appointed, as Jeroboam did the Feast of the Eighth Month; and by
diminishing, the taking away what God has Commanded, as Ahaz did the Altar, 2
King. 16. 14, 17.
and Laver, etc. This is what we condemn also, and do blame in the Church of
Rome, whilst they feed the People with Legends instead of Scripture, and take
away both that and the Cup from the Laity.

3. If they mean by adding, the adding insolent expositions to the Command, by
which the end of it is frustrated. This our Savior condemned in the Pharisees,
Why do ye Transgress the Command of God by your tradition? Matthew. 15. 3.
For God Commanded saying, Honor thy Father, etc. but ye say, whosoever shall
say to his Father, it is a gift, etc. Thus ye have made the Commandment of God
of none effect by your tradition. And this we condemn in the Church of Rome,
who do defeat the Commands of God by their Doctrines of Attrition and
Purgatory, etc.

4. If they mean by adding, the making of that which is not the Word of God to
be of equal Authority with it; This our Savior condemned in the Pharisees,
when they Taught for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, and esteemed them as
necessary to be obeyed, and to be of equal force with what was Authorized by
him; nay it seems, they had more regard to the Tradition of the Elders than the
Commandment of God, as our Savior Insinuates, verse, 2, 3. and has been
observed from their own Authors. This we also condemn in the Church of Rome,
which decrees that the Apocrypha and Traditions should be received with the
like Pious regard, Con. Trid. Sess. 4. Decr. 1.
as the Sacred Writ.

5. If by adding they mean the giving the same Efficacy to humane Institutions,
as God does to his, by making them to confer Grace upon the rightly disposed;
and by diminishing, that the Service is not complete without it. This our
Savior condemned in the Pharisees, when they maintained that to eat with
unwashen Hands defiled a Man, verse 20. And this we condemn in the Church of
Rome, in their use of Holy Water, and Relics and Ceremonies.

Thus far we agree; but if they proceed, and will conclude that the doing any
thing not Commanded, in the Worship of God is a Sin though it have none of the
ingredients in it before spoken of, we therein differ from them and upon very
good reason. For therein they differ from our Savior and his Apostles, and all
Churches, as I have showed. Therein also they depart from the notion and reason
of the thing: For adding is adding to the substance, and making the thing added
of the Nature of the thing its added to; and diminishing is diminishing from
the substance, and taking away from the Nature of it; but when the substance
remains entire, as much after this humane appointment as it was before it,
without Loss and Prejudice, without Debasement or Corruption, it cannot be
called an addition to it, in the sense that the Scripture takes that Word in.

Nay so far are we from admitting this charge, that we return it upon them, and
do bring them in Criminals upon it. For those that do Forbid what the Gospel
Forbids not, do as much add to it, as those that Command what the Gospel does
not Command: And if it be a Crime to Command what that Commands not, it must be
so to Forbid what it Forbids not. And this is what they are Guilty of that do
hold that nothing is to be used in the Worship of God but what is prescribed,
for if that be not a Scripture Proposition and Truth (as certain it is not)
then what an addition is this? A greater surely than what they charge upon us;
for all that is Commanded amongst us, is looked upon not as necessary but
expedient; but what is Forbid by them is Forbid as absolutely unlawful; the
latter of which alters the Nature, whereas the other only affects the
circumstances of things.

The second Commandment, Object. III.
Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image, etc. is frequently made use of
to prove that we must apply nothing to a Religious Use but what is Commanded;
and we are told that the sense of it is, that We must Worship God in no other
way, and by no other means or Religious Rites, than what he has prescribed.

The best way to answer this is. Answer.
1. To consider what is Forbidden in this Commandment, and 2. To show that we
are not concerned in the Prohibition. As to the former,

1. In this Command it is provided, that there be no act of Adoration given to
any besides God. By this the Heathens are condemned in their Plurality of Gods,
and the Church of Rome in the Veneration they give to Saints and Angels.

2. That the Honor we give to God be suitable to his Nature, and agreeable to
his Will. Suitable to his Nature; and so we are not to Worship him by Creatures,
as the Sun, etc. for that is to consider him as Finite; nor by Images and
External Representations, for that is to consider him as Corporeal: Agreeable
to his Will; and so we are Forbidden all other Worship of him than what he has
appointed. Its in the last of these we are concerned, for I believe there will
be no attempt to prove that there is any thing in our Worship that does
derogate from the perfections of God, and is unsuitable to his Nature, further
than the defects that must arise from all Worship given by Creatures to a
Creator. And if we come to consider it as to what he has revealed, there can
be nothing deduced thence to prove Rites instituted by Men for the Solemnity of
God's service to be Forbidden; and which for ought I see is not attempted to be
proved from this Commandment, or from Scripture else where, but by crowding
such Rites into and representing them as a part of Divine Worship. This way
goes one of the most industrious in this cause. Ceremonies, Ames. Fresh Suit,
part. 2. sect. 2. command. p. 228.
says he, are External Rites of Religious Worship, as used to further
Devotion, and therefore being invented by Man are of the same Nature with
Images, by which and at which God is Worshipped. In which are no less than
three mistakes. As 1. he makes whatever is used to further Devotion to be
Religious Worship. 2. he makes it a fault in External Rites in Religious
Worship that they are used to further Devotion 3. he makes External Rites taken
up by Men, and used for that end to be of the same Nature with Images. If I
show that these are really mistakes I think that in doing so the whole argument
taken from the 2. Commandment falls with it. 1. He mistakes, in that he makes
whatever is used to further Devotion to be Religious Worship: The error of
which will appear from this confideration; that all things relating to Divine
Worship are either Parts or Adjuncts of it; Parts, as Prayer, and the Lord's
Supper; Adjuncts, as Form and Posture. Now Adjuncts are not Parts, because the
Worship is entire and invariable in all the Parts of it, and remains the same
though the Adjuncts vary. Prayer is Worship, whether with a Form or without;
and the Lord's Supper is Worship, whether Persons Kneel, Sit, or Stand in the
receiving of it. And yet though the Adjuncts are no part of Worship, they
further Devotion in it. This those that are for conceived Prayer plead for
Their Practice, and this also is pleaded by those that are for a Form. This do
they urge that are for Sitting at the Lord's Supper, and this they say that are
for Kneeling; so that these and the like Adjuncts do further Devotion, and are
for Edification, is an argument used by both. Now if Adjuncts are not part of
Worship and may be yet used to further Devotion, then the furthering Devotion
by any Rite does not in it self make that Rite so used to be Worship. I
acknowledge there is False Worship as well as True; True Worship is of Divine
Institution, and False Worship is of Humane Appointment; and becomes Worship
when either Divine Institution is pretended for it, or its used for the same
special ends that God's Worship is instituted for, that is, as necessary to
acceptance, or as a means of Grace. And so I confess Adjuncts may be made parts
of False Worship, as many Ceremonies are in the Church of Rome; but this is not
the case with any things used in the Administration of Worship in our Church;
we plead nothing of Divine Authority to enforce them, use them not as
necessary, nor as means of Grace; after the manner we do the Word of God, and
the Sacraments. 2. Its another mistake, that its charged as a fault upon Rites
in Worship, that They are used to further Devotion. Without this end surely
they are not to be used, or at least not to be encouraged; for Divine Worship
being the acknowledgment of God and a giving Honor to Him, should have all
things about it Grave and Solemn, that may best suit it, and promote the ends
for which its used, But if Rites are used in it that have no respect to such
ends, they become Vain and Trifling, neither worthy of that nor our Defense.
And therefore we justly blame the Church of Rome for the Multitude of
Ceremonies used in their Worship, and for such that either have no
signification, or whose signification is so obscure as is not easy to be
observed or traced, and that rather hinder than further Devotion. Surely it
would not so well answer the end if the Hand in Swearing was laid upon another
Book, as when on the Gospel; nor if the Love Feasts at the Lord's Supper had
been only as a Common Meal, without respect to Charity signified by it. 3. Its
another mistake that External Rites taken up by Men, and used for the
furthering Devotion are made to be of the same Nature with Images. This there
is no foundation for, for the Religious use of Images is expressly contrary to
the Command of God, and Forbidden, because it tends to debase God in the
thoughts of those that Worship him by such mediums. But there is nothing in the
use of such External Rites (as are before spoken of) that fall under the
censure of either of these; but that we may lawfully use them, and the use of
which is not therefore at all Forbidden in the 2. Commandment.

If there be not a Rule for all things belonging to the Worship of God, Object.
IV.
the Gospel would be less perfect than the Law; and Christ would not be so
Faithful as Moses, in the care of his Church, Heb. 3. 2. which is not to be
supposed.

The sufficiency of Scripture and Faithfulness of Christ are not to be judged
of by what we fancy they should have determined, Answer.
but by what they have. Its a plausiable Plea made by the Church of Rome for an
Infallible Judge in matters of Faith, that by an Appeal to him all
controversies would be decided, and the Peace of the Church secured. But
notwithstanding all the advantages which they so hugely amplify, there is not
one Word in Scripture (which in a matter of that importance is absolutely
necessary) that does show that it is necessary; or (were it so) who the Person
or Persons are that should have this Power or Commission. And in this case we
must be content to leave things as the Wisdom of God has thought fit to leave
them, and to go on in the old way of sober and amicable debate and fair
reasoning to bring debates to a conclusion. Thus it is in the matter before us,
the pretense is very Popular and Plausible, that, Who can better determine
things Relating to the Worship of God, than God whose Worship it is? And where
may we expect to find them better determined than in his Word, which is
sufficient to all the ends it was writ for? But when we come to enquire into
the case, we find no such thing done, no such care taken, no such particular
directions as they had under the Law; and therefore its certain that neither
the sufficiency of Scripture, nor Faithfulness of Christ stand upon that
foundation. And if we do not find the like particular prescriptions in Baptism
as Circumcision; nor in the Lord's Supper as in the Passover; nor in Prayers as
in Sacrifices; its plain that the sufficiency of Scripture and Faithfulness of
Christ do respect somewhat else, and that they are not the less for the want of
them. Christ was Faithful, as Moses, To him that appointed him, in performing
what belonged to him as a Mediator (in which respect Moses was a Type of him)
and discovering to Mankind in Scripture the method and means by which they
might be Saved; and the sufficiency of Scripture is in being a sufficient means
to that end, and putting Men into such State as will render them capable of
attaining to it. And as for modes and circumstances of things they are left to
the prudence of those who by the Grace and the Word of God have been converted
to the Truth, and have received it in the Love of it. I have been the larger in
the consideration of this principle, viz. that Nothing but what is prescribed
may be lawfully used in Divine Worship, that I might relieve the consciences of
those that are Ensnared by it, and that cannot be so, without subjecting
themselves to great inconveniences. For if nothing but what is of that Nature
may be used or joined with, and that the second Commandment does with as much
Authority Forbid the use of any thing not Commanded, as the Worshipping of
Images: If Nadab's and Abihu's Strange Fire, and Vzza's touching of the Ark be
examples Recorded for caution to us, and that every thing Uncommanded, is of
the like Nature, attended with the like Aggravations, and alike do expose to
God's Displeasure: If the use of any thing not prescribed be such an addition
to the Word of God, as leaves us under the Penalty of that Text; Rev. 22. 18.
If any Man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the Plagues
that are Written in this Book; we cannot be too cautious in the Examination of
what is, or what is not prescribed. But withal if this be our case, it would
be more intolerable than that of the Jews. For amongst them every thing for the
most part was plainly laid down, and though the particular Rites and
Circumstances prescribed in their Service were many, yet they were sufficiently
described in their Law, and it was but consulting that, or Those whose Office
and Employment it was to be well versed in it, and they might be presently
informed, and as soon see it as the Book was laid open. This they all agreed
in. But it is not so under the Gospel, and there is no greater proof of it than
the several schemes drawn up for Discipline, and Order, by those that have been
of that Opinion and made some attempts to describe them. And then when things
are thus dark and obscure, so hard to trace and discover, that it has thus
perplexed and baffled those that have made it their business to bring these
things within Scripture Rules, how perplexed must they be that are not skilled
in it: And (as I have above showed) must all their Days live in the Communion,
its likely, of no Church; since though a Church should have nothing in it but
what is prescribed, yet it would take up a great deal of time to examine, and
more to be satisfied that all in it is prescribed.

3. I shall consider, How we may know what things are Indifferent in the
Worship of God? I may answer, to this that we may know what is Indifferent in
the Worship of God by the same Rule that we may know what is Indifferent out of
Worship, that is, if the thing to be enquired after be neither required nor
Forbidden: For the Nature of Indifferency is always the same, and what it is in
one kind or instance, it is in all; and if the want of a Law to Require or
Forbid does make a thing Indifferent in Natural or Civil matters, it does also
the same in Religious: And in things Forbidden by Humane Authority, the not
being required in Scripture; and in things required by Humane Authority the not
being Forbidden in Scripture is a Rule we may safely determine the case, and
judge of the Lawfulness and Indifferency of things in Divine Worship by. But I
confess the Question requires a more particular Answer, because things in their
Nature Lawful and Indifferent, may yet, in their use and application, become
unlawful. As it is in Civil cases and Secular matters, to be Covered or
Uncovered is a thing in it self Indifferent; but to be Covered in the presence
of such of our Betters, as Custom and Law have made it our Duty to stand bare
before, would be unlawful, and it would be no excuse for such an Omission and
Contempt, that the thing is in it self Indifferent. And then much more will
this hold where the case is of an higher Nature; as it is in the Worship of
God, where things in themselves Indifferent may become Ridiculous, Absurd and
Profane, and argue rather contempt of God than reverence for him in the Persons
using them. Again, the things may, though Grave and Pertinent, yet be so
numerous that they may obscure and oppress the Service, and confound and
distract the Mind that should attend to the Observation of them; and so for one
reason or another are not to be allowed in the Solemnities of Religion.
Therefore in Answer to the Question, I shall add,

1. That things Indifferent are so called from their general Nature, and not as
if in practice and use, and all manner of cases, they always were so, and never
unlawful; for that they may be by Accident and Circumstance; being lawful
unlawful, expedient or inexpedient, as they are used and applied.

2. I observe that there are several Laws which things Indifferent do respect;
and that may be Required or Forbidden by one Law, which is not Forbidden or
Required by another; and that may be Indifferent in one State which is Unlawful
in another, and by passing out of one into the other may cease to be
Indifferent, and therefore when we say things are Indifferent, we must
understand of what Rank they are, and what Law they do respect; As for example,
Humane Conversation, and Religious Worship are different Ranks to which things
are referred; and therefore what may be Indifferent in Conversation may be
unlawful in Worship. Thus to Enterchange Discourse about Common Affairs is a
thing lawful in it self, and useful in its place; but when practiced in the
Church and in the midst of Religious Solemnities is Criminal. This distinction
of Ranks and States of things is useful and necessary to be observed, and which
if observed would have prevented the objection made by some, that if a Church
or Authority may Command Indifferent things, then they may require us to Pray
Standing upon the head, etc. for that though Indifferent in another case is not
in that, as being unsuitable to it.

3. Therefore we must come to some Rules in Divine Worship, by which we may
know what things in their Nature Indifferent, are therein also Indifferent, and
may be lawfully used: It being not enough to plead they are Indifferent in
themselves (as some unwarily do) and therefore presently they may be used; For
by the same reason a Person may Spit in another Face, may keep on his Hat
before the King, etc. the Spitting and being Covered being in their Nature
Indifferent. But now as there are certain Rules which we are to respect in
Common and Civil Conversation, and which even in that case do tie us up in the
use of things otherwise Indifferent: So it is as reasonable, and must be much
more allowed that there are some Rules of the like Nature which we must have a
regard to in the Administration of Divine Worship. And as in Common matters,
the Nature of the thing; in actions the end; in Conversation the circumstances
are to be heeded, viz. Time, Place, Persons; as when, where, before whom we are
Covered or Uncovered, etc. So in Sacred matters; the Nature of the thing, in
the Decency and Solemnity of the Worship; the end for which it was appointed,
in the Edification of the Church; and the Peace, Glory, and Security of that,
in its Order are to be respected. And according to these Rules and the
circumstances of things, are we to Judge of the Indifferency, Lawfulness, or
Expediency of things used in the Service of God; and as they do make for or
against, and do approach to or recede from these Characters, so they are to be
rejected or observed, and the more or less esteemed. But yet we are not come to
a conclusion, for 1. These are general Rules, and so the particulars are not so
easily pointed to. 2. Decency, and Edification, and Order are (as was observed
before) Variable and Uncertain, and depend upon Circumstances, and so in their
Nature not easily determined. And, 3. Persons have very different Opinions
about what is Decent, Edifying, and Orderly; as in the Apostles time in the
Church of Rome some were for, and others against the Observation of Days; and
in the Church of Corinth, some doubtless were for being Covered, others for
being Uncovered in Divine Worship. And therefore there is somewhat further
requisite to give Satisfaction in the point; and by which we may be able to
Judge what is Decent, Edifying, and Orderly; as well as we are by what is
Decent, etc. to Determine what is fit to be used in Religious Worship. And this
we may be helped in by considering,

1. That some things make so Eminently for, or are so Notoriously opposite to
these Rules, that Common Reason will be able forthwith to Judge of them, and to
declare for or against them. So when the Love Feasts, and the Lord's Supper
were appointed for the testifying and increase of mutual Charity; if one took
his Supper before another, 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21.
it was to make it rather a private Meal than a Religious Feast, and so was a
Notorious Breach of Order and Christian Fellowship. So a Tumultuous speaking of
many together is less for Edification, and has more of Confusion than the
Orderly speaking of one by one. And Service in an Unknown Tongue does less
conduce to Edification than when it is in a Language Vulgarly known and
Understood; 1 Cor. 14. 16, 17. 26, 27.
this is a case that Reason as well as the Apostle does Determine to our Hands,
and which Mankind would with one consent soon agree to, were it not for a
certain Church in the World that carries those of its Communion, against Sense,
Reason, and Nature, for its own advantage.

2. But there are other things which are not so Clear and Evident, and so the
case needs further consideration. For the clearing of which we may observe,

1. That we are not so much to Judge of Decency, Order, and Edification
asunder, as together; these having a mutual Relation to and dependence upon
each other. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
So its well observed by St. Chrysostom, That nothing does so much Edify, Chapter
14. 40.
as Order, Peace and Love: And the Apostle when he had reproved the Disorders
of their Service in the Church of Corinth concludes it, 1 Cor. 14. 26.
Let all things be done to Edifying. The not observing of this is the occasion
of very great Mistakes in this matter; For Persons when they would Judge of
Edification consider presently what they conceive does most improve them in
Knowledge or any particular Grace; and having no further consideration, for the
sake of this throw down the Bounds of public Order and bring all into
Confusion; and for Edifying (as they apprehend) themselves do Disturb if not
Destroy the Church of God, and render the means used in it ineffectual to
themselves and others. Thus again they Judge of what is Decent, and Indecent;
and conclude that there is no Indecency in Sitting, suppose at the Sacrament,
or the Prayers; but they mistake in such a conception, whilst what is against
public Order and Practice, is for that reason Indecent, were there no other
reason to make it so. So that if we would Judge aright of either of these we
must Judge of them together; and as Order alone is not enough to make a thing
Decent which is in it self Indecent; so Decency or particular Edification is
not enough to recommend that which is not to be Introduced or Obtained without
the Disturbance and Overthrow of public Order and Peace.

2. When the case is not apparent, we should rather Judge by what is contrary
than by what is agreeable to those Rules. We know better what things are not
than what they are: And if Christians should never agree to any thing in the
External Administration of Divine Worship till they agree in the notion of
Decency, Order, and Edification; or till they can prove that the things used,
or required to be used in a Church, do exactly agree to the Notion and
Definition of it; Worship must never be Administered, or the greater part of
Christians must Exclude themselves from it. And yet this must be done before it
can be positively said (unless in things very manifest) that this is Decent, or
that is Orderly, etc. These things as I have said are variable, and depend upon
Circumstances; and so Persons must needs be Wonderfully Confounded if they come
to Niceties and insist upon them. And therefore as we better know what is
Indecent than Decent, Disorderly than Orderly, against than for Edification, so
its better to take the course abovesaid in Judging about it. As for instance,
if we would enquire into the Decency of the Posture to be used in the Lord's
Supper, or the Edification that may arise from it; some will say its best to
receive it in the Posture frequently used in the Devotions of the ancient
Church of Standing or Incurvation; others would choose Sitting, as the
dissenting Parties amongst us, and some Foreign Churches; others be for the
Posture of Kneeling used in ours and many more, and all with some show of
reason. In these different cases it may not perhaps be so easy for a Person
(Educated in a different way from what is Practiced and Prescribed) to Judge of
the Decency or Edification; but if he find it not Indecent, or Destructive of
Piety, and of the ends for which the Ordinance was Instituted, he is therewith
to satisfy himself. Epist. 118.
St. Austin puts a like case and gives the like answer. Some Churches Fast on
the Saturday, because Christ's Body was then in the Grave, and he in a State of
Humiliation. Others do Eat on the Saturday, both because that Day God Rested
from his Work, and Christ Rested in the Grave. And how in such a case to
Determine our selves, both in Opinion and Practice, that Father thus directs,
If says he, what is enjoined be not against Faith, or good Manners, it is to
be accounted Indifferent. And I may add, if it be not Indecent, Disorderly and
Destructive of Piety, its lawful.

3. If the case be not apparent, and we cannot easily find out how the things
used and enjoined in a Church are Decent, etc. we are to consider that we are
in, or Obliged to be of a Church, and that these things do respect such a
Society; and therefore are to be Cautious how we Condemn this or that for
Indecent, Confused, and Inexpedient, when we see Christians agreeing in the
Practice of them, and such whom for other things we cannot Condemn. When we
find if we argue against it, they argue for it, and produce Experience against
Experience, and Reason against Reason, and that we have a whole Church against
our particular conceptions of things of this Nature; we should be apt to think
the Fault may be in our selves, and that its for want of Understanding and
Insight, for want of Use and Trial, and by Reason of some Prejudices or
Prepossessions that we thus differ in our Judgment from them. We see what
little things do Determine Men ordinarily in these matters; how addicted some
are to their own Ways and Customs, and forward to Like or Condemn according to
their Education, which does form their conceptions and fix their inclinations;
how Prone again others are to Novelty and Innovation. Epist. 118.
So St. Austin observes, some warmly contend for an usage, because its the
Custom of their own Church; as if they come, suppose into another Place where
Lent is observed without any Relaxation, they however refuse to Fast, because
its not so done in their Country. There are others again do like, and are bent
upon a particular Rite or Usage, Because, says he, they observed this in their
Travels abroad, and so a Person is for it, as perhaps he would be thought so
much the more Learned and Considerable, as he is distant or does disagree from
what is observed at home. Now when Persons are Prone thus to Judge upon such
little Reasons, and may mistake in their Judgment, and do Judge against a
Church (which they have no other Reason against) it would become them to think
again; and to think that the case perhaps requires only time or use to wear off
their Prejudices, and that by these ways they may as effectually be reconciled
to the things Practiced in a Church, as they are to the Civil Usages and the
Habits of a Nation, which at the first they looked upon in their kind as
Indecent and Inexpedient, as they can do of the Usages of a Church in theirs.
As suppose the Dispute should be about Forms of Prayer, or the use of
responsals in it, we see that Decency, Order, and Edification are pleaded by
the Parties contending for and against, but when a Person considers that
whatever Opinion he therein has, yet if he be against them, he is at the same
time against all formed Churches in the World, he may conclude safely that
there is a Decency, Order, and Expediency in the Public use of them; Epist. 86.
and as St. Austin says of a Christian living in Rome where they fasted upon
the Saturday that such a one should not so praise a Christian City for it,
Casulano.
as to Condemn the Christian World that was against it; so we should not be so
Zealous against a Practice, as to Condemn those that are for it, and be so
addicted to our own Opinion as to set that against a Community and a Church,
nay against all Churches whatsoever. This will give us reason to suspect its a
Zeal without Knowledge when we presume to set our Judgment, Reason, and
Experience, against the Judgment, Reason and Experience of the Christian World.
Which brings to the Fourth General.

4. How are we to determine our selves in the use of Indifferent things with
respect to the Worship of God? For resolution of which, we are to consider our
selves in a threefold Capacity. 1. As particular Persons, solitary and alone.
2. As we are in Ordinary and Civil Conversation. 3. As we are Members of a
Public Society or Church.

In the first capacity, every Christian may choose and act as he pleases; and
all Lawful things remain to him, as they are in their own Nature, Free. He may
eat this or that; choose this day or another, and set it apart for the Service
of God and his own soul. In this state, where there is no Law of man to
require, he may forbear to use what is Indifferent; where there is no Law to
forbid, he may freely use it.

In the second capacity, as in Conversation with others, he is to have a regard
to them, and to use his Liberty so as shall be less to the prejudice, and more
to the benefit of those he converses with. So says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 2
all things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient; all things are
lawful for me, but all things Edify not. In this capacity Men are still in
their own Power; and whilst its no Sin they may safely act, and where its no
Sin they may forbear in compliance with those that are not yet advanced to the
same Maturity of Judgment with themselves; as the Apostle did, 1 Cor. 9. 19.
etc.
Though says he, I be free from all Men, yet have I made my self Servant unto
all, that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews I became a Jew, etc. In such
a case the strong should not despise, affront, or discourage the weak; nor the
weak censure and condemn the strong.

In the third Capacity, as we are Members of a Church and Religious Society, so
the use of Indifferent things comes under further consideration, since then the
Practice of a Church and the Commands of Authority are to be respected. And as
what we may lawfully do when alone, we are not to do in Conversation, because
of Offense: So what we may allowably do when alone or in Conversation, we must
not do in Society, if Forbidden by the Laws and Customs of it. For the same
reason (if there was no more) that Restrains or Determines us in Conversation,
is as much more forcible in Society, as the Peace and Welfare of the whole is
to be preferred before that of a part; And if the not grieving a Brother, or
endangering his Soul makes it reasonable, just, and necessary to forego our
Liberty, and to Restrain our selves in the exercise of it, then much more is
the Peace of a Church (upon which the present Welfare of the whole, and the
Future Welfare of many depend) a sufficient reason for so doing, and to Oblige
us to act or not to act accordingly. The Apostle says, Let every one of us
please his Neighbor for his good* to Edification, Romans 15. 2.
that is, to his Improvement in Knowledge or Grace, or Christian Piety, and the
promoting of Christian Concord and Charity: Now Edification is eminently so
with respect to the whole, as the Church is the House of God, and every
Christian one of the living Stones of which that Spiritual building is
compacted; 1 Pet. 2. 5.
and so he is to consider himself, as well as he is to be considered, as a part
of it, and to study what may be for the Edification of the whole, as well as
the good of any particular Member of it. And how is that but by promoting Love,
Peace, and Order, and taking Care to Preserve it? 2 Cor. 10. 8.
So we find Edification Opposed to Destruction, 1 Cor. 14 26.
to Confusion, to Disputacity and Licentiousness: 1 Timothy 1. 4.
And on the contrary, Romans 14. 19.
we find Peace and Edifying, 1 These. 5. 11.
Comfort and Edification, Union and Edification joined together, Ephesians. 4. 12. 16.
as the one does promote the other. And therefore as the Good and Edification
of the whole is to be always in our Eye, so its the Rule by which we ought to
act in all things lawful; and to that end should comply with its Customs,
observe its Directions, and Obey its Orders, without Reluctance* and
Opposition. Thus the Apostle resolves the case, Writing about public Order and
the Custom newly taken up of Worshipping Uncovered, if any Man seem, or have a
mind to be, ^ Cor. 11. 16.
contentious, we have no such Custom, neither the Churches of God; looking upon
that as sufficient to put an end to all Contentions and Debates; that whatever
might be Plausibly urged against it, from the Jewish Practice, and the
Representation even of Angels adoring after that manner; and from the reason of
the thing as a signification of Shame and Reverence; or from the Practice of
Idolators that did many of them Worship Uncovered; yet he peremptorily
concludes, We have no such Custom, etc. The Peace of the Church is to a
Peaceable Mind sufficient to put an end to all Disputes about it; and the Peace
of the Church depending upon the Observation of its Customs, that is infinitely
to be preferred before Scrupulosity and Niceness, or a mere inclination to a
contrary Practice. For in public cases a Man is not to go his own way, or to
have his own mind, for that would bring in Confusion (one Man having as much a
right as another.) There must be somewhat Established, some Common Order and
Bond of Union; and if Confusion is before such Establishment, then to break
that Establishment, would bring in Confusion; and where that is likely to ensue
it is not worth the while for the trial of a new experiment to decry and throw
down what is already Established or Used in a Church, because we think better
of another; for says a Grave Author, and well Skilled in these matters, Aug.
Epist. 118.
The very change of a Custom though it may happen to profit, yet does disturb
by its Novelty. Public Peace is worth all new Offers (if the Church is
Disquieted and its Peace Endangered by them) though in themselves better; and
it is better to labor under the infirmity of public Order than the mischief
of being without it, or, what is next to that, the trial of some Form,
seemingly of a better Cast and Mould that has not yet been experimented. I say
it again, Infirmity in a Church is better than Confusion, or Destruction which
is the Consequent of it: And I had rather choose that as I would a House, to
have one with some Faults, rather than to have none at all; And if I cannot
have them mended (when tolerable) I think my self bound not only to bear with
them, but to do all I can for its preservation though with them, and to observe
all things that are lawful for its suppore and encouragement. In doing thus I
serve God, and his Church, my own Soul and the Souls of others, promote
Religion and Charity in the World; 1 Cor. 14. 33.
For God is not the Author of Confusion but of Peace in all the Churches of the
Saints. In things which neither we nor the Worship are the worse for, but the
Church the better for observing, Peace and Order is far to be preferred before
Niceties: And certainly neither we nor the Service of God can be the worse for
what God has concluded nothing in. What the Gospel looks at is the Main and
Essential parts of Religion in Doctrine, Worship and Practice. And if these be
Secured, we are under no Obligation to contend for or against the modes and
circumstances of things further than the Churches Order and Peace is concerned
in them. So the Apostle, Let not your Good be Evil spoken of: Romans 14. 16.
For the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost; the promoting Love and Charity, and substantiul
Righteousness. He that in these things Serves Christ is acceptable to God, and
approved of Men. Aug. Epist. 86.
The Beauty of the Kings Daughter is within, says St. Austin, and all its
observations are but its vesture, which though various in different Churches,
are no prejudice to the Common Faith, nor to him that uses them. And therefore
what he and his Mother received from St. Ambrose, and looked upon as a Divine
Oracle, Epist. 118. and 86.
is worthy to be recommended to all, That in all things not contrary to Truth
and good Manners, it becomes a Good and Prudent Christian to Practice
according to the Custom of the Church where he comes, if he will not be a
Scandal to them, nor have them to be a Scandal to him.

And if the Custom and Practice of a Church should be thus taken into
consideration by a Good Man, then certainly much more ought it so to be, when
that is Established, and is made a Law, and is backed by Authority: For then to
stand in Opposition is not only an Offense but an Affront; and to insist upon
the Gratifying our own Inclination against public Order, is to contend whether
we or our Superiors shall Govern, whether our Will or the public Good and
Order must take place And what can be the Issue of such a temper but the
distraction if not Dissolution of Government; which as it cannot be without
Governed as well as Governors, so cannot be preserved without the submission
of the Governed in all lawful things to the Governors; and the permitting them
to choose and determine in things of that kind as they shall see meet. Its
pleaded That there should be a Liberty left to Christians in things
Undetermined in Scripture, and such things indeed there are that Christians may
have a Liberty in and yet hold Communion, as in Posture, etc. (though Decency
would plead for Uniformity in those things also) but there are other things,
which they must agree in, or else there can be no public Worship or Christian
Communion, which yet they differ in as much as the other. As now whether
Worship is to be celebrated with or without a Form; whether the Lord's Supper
is to be received in the Morning or Evening; whether Prayers should be long or
short, etc. Now unless one of these disagreeing Parties does Yield to the other
or there be a Power in Superiors and Guides to determine for them, and they
are to submit to them in it, there will be nothing but confusion. And why
Superiors may not then Command and why Inferiors are not to obey in all
things of the like kind; In Posture or Habit, as well as the time (above
specified) and Forms, I understand not.

To conclude this, if we find any thing required or generally practiced in a
Church, that is not Forbidden in Scripture; or any thing Omitted or Forbidden
in a Church, that is not required in Scripture; we may and ought to act or to
forbear as they that are of its Communion do generally act or forbear, or the
Laws of that Communion require; and in such things are to be determined by the
public Voice of the Communion, that is, Authority, Custom, or the Majority.

But to this it will be said, Object.
If we are thus to be determined in our Practice, then where is our Christian
Liberty, which being only in different things, if we are restrained in the use
of them, we are also restrained in our Liberty, which yet the Apostle exhorts
Christians to stand fast in. Gal 5. ^.


1. This is no argument to those that say there is nothing Indifferent in the
Worship of God; Answer.
for then there is nothing in it matter of Christian Liberty;

2. A restraint of our Liberty, or receding from it is, of it self, no
violation of it. All persons grant this in the latter, and the most scrupulous
are apt to plead that the Strong ought to bear with the Weak, and to give no
Offense to them by indulging themselves in that Liberty which others are afraid
to take. But now if a Person may recede from his Liberty, and is bound so to do
in the case of Scandal, and yet his Liberty be not thereby infringed, why may
it not be also little infringed, when restrained by others? How can it be
supposed, that there should be so vast a difference betwixt restraint and
restraint, and that he that is restrained by Authority should have his Liberty
prejudiced, 1 Cor. 10. 29.
and yet he that is restrained By another Conscience (as the Apostle says)
should keep it entire? And if it should be said this is Occasional, but the
other is perpetuated by the Order, perhaps, of a Church. I answer, that all
Orders about Indifferent things are but temporary, and are only intended to
bind so long as they are for the good of the Community. And if they are for
continuance that alters not the case; For though the Apostle knew his own
Liberty and where there was Just Reason could insist upon it, yet he did not
suppose that could be damnified, though for his whole life it was restrained. 1
Cor. 8. 13.
For thus he resolves, If meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no flesh
while the World stands, which certainly he would not have condescended to, if
such a practice was not reconcilable to his Exhortation of standing fast in
that Liberty, etc.

3. Therefore to find out the tendency of his Exhortation, its fit to
understand what Christian Liberty is, and that is truly no other than the
Liberty which Mankind naturally had, before it was restrained by particular
Institution; and which is called Christian Liberty in opposition to the Jews
which had it not under their Law, but were restrained from the practice and use
of things, otherwise and in themselves Lawful, by severe Prohibitions. Now as
all the World was then divided into Jews and Gentiles, so the Liberty which the
Jews were before denied, was called Christian, because by the coming of Christ,
all these former restraints were taken off, and all the World, both Jews and
Gentiles did enjoy it. And therefore when the Apostle does exhort them to stand
fast in it, it was, as the Scope of the Epistle does show, to warn them against
returning to that Jewish state, and against those who held it necessary for
both Jew and Gentile still to observe all the Rites and Orders of it. Now if
the Usages of a Church were of the same kind, or had the same tendency, or were
alike necessarily imposed as those of the Mosaical Law, then Christians would
be concerned in the Apostles Exhortation; but where these reasons are not, our
Liberty is not at all prejudiced by compliance with them. As long I say, as
they are neither peccant in their Nature, nor End, nor Number, they are not
unlawful to us, nor is our Liberty injured in the use of them. And so I am
brought to the last General, which is,

V. That there is nothing required in our Church, which is not either a duty in
it self, and so necessary to all Christians, or else what is indifferent, and
so may be lawfully used by them. By things required, I mean, such as are used
in the Communion and Service of our Church, and imposed upon the Lay-members of
it (for these are the things my Subject does more especially respect.) This is
a Subject too Copious for me to follow through all the particulars of it; and
indeed it will be needless for me to enlarge upon it, if the foundation I have
laid be good, and the Rules before given are fit measures for us to Judge of
the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of things by; for by these we shall soon bring
the Cause to an Issue. I think there is nothing to be charged upon our Church
for being defective in any Essential part of Divine Worship^ (as the Church of
Rome is in its Half-Communion) nor of any practice that is apparently
inconsistent with, or that does defeat the ends of any Institution (as the same
Church does offend by having its Service in an unknown Tongue, and in the
multitude of its Ceremonies). I think it will be acknowledged, that the Word of
God is sincerely and freely Preached, the Sacraments entirely and truly
Administered, the Prayers for matter inoffensive and good. And therefore the
matter in dispute is about the Ministration of our Worship, and the manner of
its performance; and I think the things of that kind Objected against, refer
either to Time, or Forms, or Gesture. To Times, such are Festivals, or Days set
apart for Divine Service; to Forms such are our Prayers, and the Administration
of our Sacraments; to Gestures, as Standing up at the Creed or Gospels, and
Kneeling at the Lords Supper. But now all these are either Natural or Moral
Circumstances of Action, and which, as I have showed, are inseparable from it.
Of the former kind are Days and Gestures; of the latter are Forms of
Administration, and so upon the reasons before given may be lawfully determined
and used. Again, these are not forbidden by any Law, either expressly, or
consequentially, and have nothing that is indecent, disorderly, or unedifying
in them; and which if any should engage his own opinion and experience in, he
would be answered in the like kind, and have the opinions and experience of
Thousands that live in the practice of these, to contradict him. And if there
be nothing of this kind apparent, or what can be plainly proved, (as I am apt
to believe there cannot) then the Proposition I have laid down needs no further
proof. But if at last it must issue in things inexpedient to Christians, or an
unlawfulness in the Imposure; are either of these fit to be insisted upon, when
the peace of one of the best Churches in the World is broken by it, a
lamentable Schism kept up, and our Religion brought into imminent hazard by
both? Alas how near have we been to ruin, and I wish I had no reason to say,
how near are we to it, considering the indefatigable industry, the united
endeavors, the matchless policy of those that contrive and desire it! Can we
think that we are safe, as long as there is such an abiding reason to make us
suspect it, and that our divisions are both fomented, and made use of by them
to destroy us? And if this be our danger, and Union as necessary as desirable,
shall we yet make the breach wider, or irreparable by an obstinate contention?
God forbid! O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
thee: Let peace be within thy Walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces. Amen.

THE END.
Books Printed by Fincham Gardener.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England.

2. A Resolution of some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion.

3. The Case of indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and
Stated by considering these Questions, etc.

4. A Discourse about Edification.

5. The Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England?

6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion.

7. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining
with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship. In two parts.

8. The Case of Mixed Communion. Whether it be Lawful to separate from a Church
upon the Account of promiscuous Congregations, and Mixed Communions?

9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayers, and some
other Parts of Divine Service Prescribed in the Liturgy of the Church of
England.

10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament, Stated and Resolved, etc. The
first Part.


