The Advancement of Christ's Interests the governing End of a Christians Life.

A SECOND SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN SHORTER Knight,
Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of LONDON; AT GROCERS-HALL, January the 9th. 1687/8.

By Daniel Williams.

Published by his Lordships Command.

LONDON: Printed for J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Pauls-Church-Yard,
and Tho. Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultry. 1688.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN SHORTER, Lord Mayor.
I Present to your Lordship the second Sermon, and the Bookseller is
accountable for the late Publication of it.

By the first Sermon, I endeavored a real Subjection of Hearts to Christ as
King: In this I call Men to the utmost serviceableness to him, as the governing
Aim of their Lives. No Service to Christ is possible, but with respect to his
Interests; and by our devotedness to these, he determines our Regards to
himself.

If we consider that part of the World called Christian, we shall find that
nothing is more pretended than the advancement of these Interests of Christ,
even when they are most disserved. These are made to patronize the great
Weaknesses of some, and the grossest Villainies of others. This induced me to
explain and state the Interests of Christ, as far as one Discourse would admit.

Natural Religion is not so opposed, as the additional and more peculiar
Concernments of Christ as Mediator: The innate Enmity of Men's Hearts and
Satan's Attempts, are more directly levelled against these; the former, because
they are less advantaged by those Remains of Light preserved by God in our
Apostate Nature; the latter, because the Devil well knows, that natural
Religion will not be improved to any saving Purpose, if these additional
Interests of Christ prevail not. This Consideration led me to insist on these
Mediatoral Concernments of our Lord Jesus, and persuade to a more special
regard to such Points, which Christ is gradually advancing in the World in our
Day; and the rather, because the Testimony of Christ and the mighty Influences
of the Spirit in any day, are much confined to those Points, which at that time
he designs the Advancement of.

I am express and large, in proving that the Dedication of our Lives to the
service of the Interests of Christ, is an essential Duty of all Christians;
because it is the great Security to our holy Profession; it is the Spring of all
Endeavors whereby God is glorified, and a common Good promoted; and without
it, Truth will be betrayed by Men that make the greatest Noise.

The Hints I am confined to, may be subject to various Inferences; to direct
which, I do declare, that in general I do intend the persuading Christians to
do all that is lawful in their Places, to promote true Religion and Godliness,
and their cautious Forbearance of whatever is a certain detriment or hazard
thereto.

In particular, I would have none in this Crisis (if duly called) scruple
Offices from uncertain Events; much less employ them to lower Ends than the
Advancement of Truth, and that with all Prudence and Meekness.

I would persuade all Nonconforming Ministers not to neglect the present
Opportunity of exercising their Ministry; their Obligation and License to it,
is from Christ's prior Commission, and not the present removal of a Physical
Obstacle; and woe to us if the undoubted Interests of Christ gain not by this
Liberty. I think I have more comfort than seeming Caution ^^ Idleness would
afford, when I reflect that from the 20th Year of my Age, I remember not three
Lords Days wherein I have not preached in one place or other.

A Subsistence to these Ministers I also aim at. How sad is that narrow and
unjust Spirit in Men of Estates, which restrains the Gospel for want of
Maintenance? I am sure none that know me will suspect a Selfish Design by this.

The only thing I can foresee the need of an Apology for, is my plainness with
some Persecutors that are Members of the Church of England, and lately
monopolized the Name even from all others of their own Communion. These I call
to Repentance for their great Opposition to the Interests of Christ. Some part
of the two Days allowed to prepare this Sermon, was spent in debating with my
self the expediency hereof; and I judged at last, it was my Duty, and conducive
to the public Good, on such Grounds as these.

The Crime is too notorious to be palliated, when they have Silenced 2000
Ministers, because they durst not lie, etc. and with such rage persecuted their
quiet Neighbors for worshipping God according to all the instituted Rules of the
Gospel, their Enemies being Judges.

The Effects of their Severities are visible in the Danger, that not only the
Power, but the very probable Form of Religion is reduced to.

The Repentance of these very Men, is necessary to divert the Judgments which
hang over our heads. That Temper continued, makes all healing Methods for
accord impossible. If they repent not, it is of little moment if they be
irritated by a Call to it; being disowned by all serious Men of their own
Party, who indeed were hated and wounded by them as well as the Dissenters.

Yea, God by his present Providence seems to design these Men's Repentance,
while he is blowing on them from that very Point, where their Faces and Regards
were directed in all their mischievous Attempts.

I hope no pious Men of that Party, who approved not these Men's Practices, will
think themselves concerned in this Reproof; their Credit and Serviceableness I
am tender of. Yea, I would persuade a Forgiving of the most Guilty, tho I call
them to Repentance: And Providence directs the Sufferers not to exert their
Resentments, by the Damage it will expose to.

I find it convenient to explain somewhat in my first Sermon.

By Conditions, p. 18.
I mean the things which the Gospel injoyneth indispensably on all Men, that
shall partake of the saving Blessings of the New Covenant, which are owing to
Christ only as the meritorious Cause. p. 22.
By Spiritual Life, I intend that inherent vital Principle wherein all Graces
are comprehended. p. 8.
By Remedial Law, I mean the Law of Faith, published for the recovery of
Apostate Sinners; and by which God will judge the Secrets of Men.

But yet the Objectors are very weak or uncharitable, and little consider what
fatal Influence their Distempers have on the Interests of Christ, whilst they
sacrifice the Serviceableness of others to their own little Aims and Fancies.

It may be added, that I managed my first Text without much reference to the
extraordinary Power of Apostolical Administrations; as not so suitable to our
Day, nor yet principally intended.

Your Lordship is concerned, or I would not Preface your Name to th^^ Apology.
I believe it is your aim to serve Christ in the World. Many of your Actings may
convince the Envious, it is not a Selfish Interest you serve. That you and your
Brethren may entirely dedicate your Selves, Power and Advantages, to the real
advancement ^^ the Interests of Jesus; was the Design of this plain Discourse,
and is the Prayer of

Your Lordships most humble Servant, Daniel Williams.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN SHORTER, Knight. etc.
PHILIPPIANS Chap. I. ver. 21. For to me to live is Christ.
THE Apostle was in a happy Strait, from his Fitness to live, and Readiness to
dye. He knew not well how to fix his Choice, because both Life and Death had a
desirable Tendency. There was Service to Christ by his Life, and great
Happiness to himself by Death.

Affection to Christ swayed his Inclinations both ways; he loved Christ, and
therefore must desire death, that he might fully enjoy him; he loved Christ,
and so might incline to a longer life, that he might more advance his Interest.
Rational Self-love would move to the Former, yet Regard to Jesus and his
Members overswayes him to the Latter. He is content to expect the Crown, rather
than quit his Work: And tho Heaven was the better State in it self, and happier
for him; he prefers his stay on Earth, as better for the Church, which could
not bear his Absence. A wonderful Instance of a Public Spirit! how enlarged is
this Soul, that was assured of Glory in Heaven, and of very sore Trials on
Earth, and would yet tug longer at the Oar for Public Good* rather than be at
Rest!

The great Purposes he resolved to live to, are manifest from his Contentment
with the Delays of Glory. Had sensual Enjoyments, and trivial Employs been the
Advantage proposed by a longer Life, how impatiently must he have endured a
Moments Absence from Heaven? He that knew Death could not lay his Soul asleep,
but that it immediately passed into a State of the highest Activity, and
Receptiveness; yea, and would be admitted to a near Converse with Christ, and
other glorious Objects, which must fully employ these active Powers of the
Soul, and fill it with Good to the utmost of its Capacity to receive: Could he
(I say) desire an Abode on Earth, to relish carnal or animal Delights, 1 Timothy
5. 6.
which with him is a being dead while one lives? By no means.

But my Text represents to us the Design and Tendency of the Apostle Paul's
Life. To me to live is Christ.

I know there are many things to be inferred from the Words, besides what I
think is their principal Scope. As, 1. Christ is a Believers Happiness, while
he lives. q. d. Life were worse than Death, were not Christ known, Gal. 2. 20.
and enjoyed by me in this Life. 2. A Christian's Life is a mere dependence on,
and a manifest discovery of the Power and Grace of Christ. Emanations of his
Power supports it, and his Grace is displayed in our Lives, when useful to any
valuable purposes, or employed in any momentous Actions. But I pass by these to
the Chief Design of the Text, which may be expressed under two Heads.

1. An entire dedication of Paul's Life to Christ, exclusively of any Carnal
Designs of his own.

As if he should have said, I devote my Life to the Glory of Christ, I propose
the Advancement of his Interests; my Design is to be Instrumental in his Work,
and the propagation of his Concernments: There is no base selfish Turn of my
own intended, nor shall my life waste in idle Uselesness. I will be active, and
that for him, to the last Moment, and the utmost of my Abilities. This my
Judgment dictates as my Duty, to this I am devoted, and on this only I am
intent.

II. A persuasion that Christ had been, and still would be advanced by his Life
and Labors. This he expresses in v. 20. As my expectation and hope, that
Christ shall be magnified in my Body, whether by Life, or by Death. q. d. I
have by his Grace promoted his Interest, I fear not but the same Aids and
Blessing will still concur to the like serviceableness; and so the Issue of my
living will be his Gain. This is the (...) in v. 22. It Is no secular Interest
of my own is like to be advanced: The building of my House, or erecting
Trophies to my Name I expect not. Nay, I am sure, Poverty, Contempt, and
Hardships in those respects will attend me; but Christ in his Gospel-Interests
will be contributed to, and he will overruled my Sufferings and Labors to his
own Advancement.

The Text may also include an Hint at the Reason of this Confidence, as to this
decribed Success; it being introduced under such a respect: For to me to live
is Christ. Sincere devotedness to Christ, is ordinarily successful; and upright
Designs duly managed, prove not Abortive. When the best Endowments of a man
indisposed to the service of Christ, produce not equal Fruits to the lower
Gifts of a Soul engaged for his concerns.

The first of these will be the Subject of my Discourse: viz. The Dedication of
the Life to Christ. This was no Duty peculiar to the Apostolical Office; and
tho it is predicated of St. Paul in his own Person; yet he affords us an Example
which binds our Imitation. Yea it is the fundamental Duty resulting from our
Baptismal Vow, included in all our Christian Profession, and supposed in all
acceptable Service. So that the Obligation is universal; it is the Duty of all
here, even of such who least regard it, yea live in greatest repugnancy to it.

By living to Christ must be meant, living to the promoting, and defense of the
Interests of Christ in this World. This his designed Endeavor had a respect
to, and to this he devoteth his Life: That is, all the opportunities for acting
which Life includes, all the Abilities which Life imports, and all the good
things he possessed, which are comprehended in the word Life, as being less
valuable than life is: Even all these he designed to lay out for the Interests
of the Blessed Jesus. He valued living for no meaner uses, and determined to
live to no lower purpose.

When the advancement of Christ's Interests governs our Time and Abilities,
then to live is Christ. For herein is our living to him within our reach; by
this it is expressed, and the evidencing thereof in this instance, is what he
has appointed, and still expects from all his Members and Servants.

I need say no more to introduce the Doctrine I purpose to insist on: which is
this.

Doct. It is the duty of all Christians to dedicate and employ their lives to
the advancement of the Interests of Christ in the World.

It Is not sufficient to be religious in Contemplation, or mental Acts; our Lord
expects, and real Piety enclineth to a vigorous activity in our holy
Profession. He will be served by his Members, as they expect to be saved by
him. They must imitate him in his Communicative Goodness, and express their
resentments of his Grace to them, by these powerful acknowledgments. They must
not grudg his Service; tho he redeem them freely, they shall sacrifice all to
him; and while he is managing our Interest in Heaven as Intercessor, he will
have us employed in his Concernments on Earth, as Instruments dedicated to the
advancement of his Name, and enlargement of his Kingdom.

To do thus is agreeable to the inclination of every holy Christian; love to
Jesus fills with zeal in this enterprise. Therein they are employed; nothing
delights them more than any visible success; yea, they bemoan their
uselesness when their industry seems greatest. A Hermite's Cell for rest is not
esteemed by them as an opportunity for service; tho difficult, and dangerous.

I Shall manage this Subject in this method. I. I will lay down some
preliminary Propositions. II. Acquaint you more fully with the nature of this
Duty, of dedicating our Lives to the Interests of Christ. III. Offer plain
Reasons, to put it out of doubt, that to dedicate our Lives to Christ is the
indispensible duty of all of us. And then apply these things more particularly.
Prop. I. Satan, the World, and the Flesh have an interest among men; in the
overthrowing whereof, much of the Interests of Christ consists.

The Interests of the former are one, and principally stated, and managed by
the Devil. He set up the World as an Idol, and the Flesh as a Ruler, by
introducing Sin into the World: so that the whole may be called his Interest;
the inclinations of the Flesh affording him advantages, and the World yielding
him means to advance that Interest by.

This Interest of Satan is fixed 1. In opposition to the original Dominion of
God among Men. 2. To the Attempts and Successes of Christ in restoring of God's
Dominion, and advancing some additional Interest of his own, with respect to
fallen Man.

1. The Interest of Satan is fixed in opposition to the original Dominion of
God among men.

Man was made upright, loyal to God, glorious in the image of God on the Soul,
Eccl. 7. 29. Gen 1. 27.
and expressing the Nature of God in light, love, justice and purity, etc.

Satan hastily engages in a Design of overthrowing the Authority of God,
defacing his Image, and introducing his own Temper and Power in the hearts and
practices of Men. He soon effected this, by the Compliance of our first Parents
with his Snares; and pursues it from one Age to another; Ephesians. 2. 2.
still working in the Children of disobedience.

Hence you may easily conclude, that his Interest lies in Man's rebellion
against his Maker, darkness of mind as to Divine Matters, Injustice, Cruelty,
Irreligion, Blasphemy, Uncleanness, Intemperance, Wrath, Earthliness, and all
things which render Men devilish or brutish. His great Concern was to dethrone
God, whom he hated; and to destroy Man, whose happiness he envied; tho he
concealeth the latter, that he may the better effect it.

2. Satan's Interest is in opposition to the Attempts of Christ for restoring
of God's Dominion, and advancing some additional Interests of his own with
respect to fallen Man.

Satan hoped from the sanction of the Law, and God's dealing with himself, that
his Design so far accomplished by the Fall, would never miscarry; but that such
Rebellion and Misery begun so to be executed, could never be retrieved. He
enjoys the prospect of a quiet Throne but a small moment; then a Curse (which
affects him, tho spoken to the Serpent) seizes him as a Tempter, and Christ
sets up as his Antagonist, to recover the Elect, revive the trampled Interests
of God among rebellious Sinners, and erect to himself a glorious Name and Body,
as the Mediatoral Head.

Satan endeavors the blasting of these Attempts of Christ, and the support
of his own Interests thus threatened: and hereby we see, there is an Interest of
Satan's, which tho to the same ends, is yet managed more directly in opposition
to Christ, as Redeemer.

This lies in obstructing the Gospel, hardening the heart to impenitency, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
blinding men's minds lest they should believe; advancing Idolatry and
Superstition, in opposition to the Worship of Christ; perverting the mind with
Errors, contrary to the Truths revealed; persecuting the Members of Christ,
silencing a faithful Ministry, dividing the Church, destroying godly
Discipline, causing Backslidings and Apostasy; with whatever else may hinder
the Attempts of Christ, or blast the Successes of our Redeemer in any place,
person, or matter: that by all he may obviate the gracious Purposes of Jesus
toward men, and make his Enterprise abortive.

How vigilant, subtle, and unwearied is Satan in managing this Interest? he
engages all instruments, he takes advantages of all Tempers and Circumstances;
often influenceth good men to serve his Purposes; Mar. 8. 33. 2 Cor. 11. 14. Rev.
12. 3, 15.
transformeth himself sometimes into an Angel of light, at other times as a
Dragon pours out a flood of persecution. Innocent things he often abuses; by
things seemingly indifferent he propagates his Designs, as well as by grosser
matters. He waits every Age to obstruct the Points Christ seems designed to
gain, 2 Pet. 1. 12.
(called by the Spirit the truth of the present time) as if he were content to
endure past instances of Christ's Conquest, which he could not hinder. He
refineth his Interests according to the light that grows, that they may be
the more likely to be complied with: tho every step he gains be but a degree,
which he would improve to the utmost villainy, by a gradual process.

The more eminently any thing, Constitution, or Party, expresses his
prevalency, or serves the Devil's purpose; the more his Interest is staked
therein, and his Power exerted thereby. Rev. 13. 3, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Thus after Rome Pagan failed his Design, he begins an Idolatrous Apostasy in
the Christian Church; and gives the Head of that Apostasy (under the emblem of
a Lamb with two horns) wonderful skill, and power: by him he corrupts the
Church, and encounters the growing Kingdom of our Lord, as the great
Antichrist. By him Satan's Interests are kept up for many Ages over many
Nations, wearing a Christian name: and the remains of his infection disturb the
Interests of Christ in Churches relieved from grosser Pollutions; which is
effected by Customs, and Officers uninstituted by Christ; by Errors eclipsing
the Authority, Operations, Merits, and free Grace of our Blessed Lord, wherein
many departed from Babylon are too deeply engaged. In every one of these,
Satan's Interest consists, either as a means which Satan makes use of, or as
it stands in opposition to any Truth and Institution of Christ.

Much of the Interests of Christ consists in opposing each of these, and
blasting those Counter-designs of Satan. Wonderful will be the Scheme of
Christ's Counter-acting, and baffling these various Efforts, when the methods
and seasonableness of all shall be at once made known.

Prop. II. All men by nature are devoted to the Interest of Satan, the World
and Flesh.

Satan executes his Purposes by Men as Slaves in Chains. It Is true, this is
generally by uniting his Interests with theirs, and so serving himself by them,
while they are acting their own Lusts, and consulting a fleshly Interest. They
are bribed by advantage, engaged by grandeur, or politic reasons; whereby they
seem to justify the Devil's drudgery. They favor some Errors, as the lusts of
the Mind; others, as leading to licentiousness, or countenancing them therein.
Their corrupt hearts are under the government of lust; and the World being
their Idol, the Devil may thereby gild over any Pill, and employ them in most
undertakings. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
The God of this World wants not means to hire, affright, or allure them by;
and these seldom are unsuccessful, unless when God overacts their Inclinations;
or in his Providence prevents the gainful offer; or when he chaineth some
loss, shame, or such sensible evils, with their serving Satan's turn at present.

But with most Sinners, in most of his Concerns, the Devil gains concurrence,
and that by means grateful to the Flesh. Ecclesiastical grandeur supporteth
uninstituted Officers in the Church; vast incomes and exorbitant power tempt to
Idolatry, to an universal Headship, and a world of vile Appendants. Ignorance
must be countenanced, lest these emoluments be exposed to hazard. Superstition
will be contended for, as its pomp is pleasing to a vain mind: dead Forms are
abetted, as lulling Conscience asleep; which is needful to the quiet of an
unregenerate heart, where the Gospel Light is by Christ forced on them.

Mahumatism and Pagan Idolatry were introduced by methods adapted to men's
lusts; and are maintained by reasons from worldly Interests

This way usually Satan attains his ends by miserable men: but sometimes he
does by strong delusions hurry them without apparent motives; yea by his
service expose them to hardships ungrateful to Nature, tho vicious. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
8, 11.
A strange impetus reconcileth them to torments, yea and death in the Devil's
work: God permitting him to impress their Imaginations, and act their Souls in
an amazing manner. Thus many errors are suggested and propagated.

One way or another, all ungodly men willingly serve the Devill's Interest.

How are most of Mankind employed in this slavery, by Satan? yea, their Lusts
often carry them to intemperance, impiety, violence, (...) when unsolicited. Oh
dreadful aspect of an Apostate World!

Prop. III. Men are naturally disposed to resist the Interests of the Lord
Jesus, especially, as far as they are opposite to their own carnal
Inclinations, or Interests.

Christ is sure of an Enemy, where a carnal mind prevails; and no endowment
short of Grace, prevents the opposition. The Wise resist his Doctrine as
foolishness. 1 Cor. 1. 23.
It Is a stumbling block to the Jewish Church, tho entrusted with Divine
Oracles: and a long expected Messiah is rejected by them, because he appears
void of pomp, and to purposes more spiritual than a carnal mind could relish.
The best Natures become cruel from a blind zeal, Acts 3. 50.
and the very devout turn Persecutors of Religion, as abominable to their
unrenewed minds. Acts 24. 5.
Satan paints the Servants of Christ as factious, turbulent, and dangerous; and
so engages the Powers of the Earth to the highest vigor in their extirpation.
The Rules of his House are often opposed as inconsistent with some Maxims of
Policy. Amos 7. 10.
Ignorance and strong Delusions cause many to sacrifice the real Interests of
Christ, even from seeming regards to him, where Providence has forced some
reverence to his Name, tho enmity against his Laws and Nature do still abide.

It Is true, that ungodly men may bear with the external profession of Religion,
when education has familiarized it, and they find it can consist with the
dominion of a carnal heart; nay, they greatly like a dead form of Christianity,
because it suits all men to be of some Religion; and no other can quiet their
Conscience in its awakened foresight of Eternity, when enlightened at all by the
Gospel; but still their Enmity vents its dislike against the Inwards, and power
of Religion; tho the Form thereof is become thus necessary.

They despise worshipping God in the Spirit as unintelligible, because unfelt.
Phil. 3. 3.
A lively Ministry is hated, as disquieting their feared Consciences: They
loathe the strictly Pious, as a Reproach to themselves. A progress in
Reformation in the Church, is obstructed from inward antipathy to any further
Advance to Christ, and hazard to secular Interests thereby: Or it looks too
trivial to be contended for by them, to whom all Religion is indifferent,
further than as rivited by long Custom. Yea, they oppose it from a proud
Conceit that it would reproach their former usage, as erroneous and imperfect.

Indeed sometimes the Profane grow zealous for some Cause of Christ, but never
for the Sake of Christ. Applause, security to their own Interest, or long
Custom, awaken their Concern. God by his Providence supports his own Cause by
Evil Men: their Estates, Honor, Emulation, Quarrels, and the like, influence
their Endeavors in that which proves a Service to the Truth. They are often
zealous for a lower Degree of Reformation, in opposition to a greater; not
seeing that that lesser Degree cease to be the Interest of Christ, when it
becomes an Impediment to, or Rival with Reformation in greater Instances.

But however the Ungodly may be thus overruled to comply with any thing which
belongs to Christ, their prevailing Inclination is to betray all of Christ
which they profess, when damage to their fleshly Interests attends it. Yea in a
quiet Season their Religion dwindles into an empty From; the Truths of the
Gospel are supplanted by encroaching Errors, and Christianity so clogged and
eclipsed in evil men's management, that it hardly retains what deserves that
Name. To this opposition in the nature of Man to the Inrerests of Christ, must
be ascribed the wonderful Degeneracy of Christian Churches: And as far as the
remains of Corruption influence the Best Men, Christ shall suffer by them in
his Concernments: His Name shall endure reproach, and his Ministers damage; his
Church is divided, Love destroyed, the Conversion of Sinners hindered, Advances
in Godliness obstructed; and many such ways our sinful Natures disserve, yea
oppose the Interests of our Blessed Lord. This should make the Pious watchful,
as not ignorant they have Lusts which the Devil may improve to the damage of
Christ. And it should make the Ungodly suspicious, when they contend with many
good men, that it is not the Interest of Christ they are engaged for, which
they are so far likelier to mistake and oppose, than those more Holy persons
are.

Prop. IV. Obligations and a Call to Service, result from, and are measured by
men's different Places and Capacities for the advancements of Christ's Interests.

All should be devoted to it, but all are not equally capable of it; nor called
to express it in the same Instances. None should usurp another's Station, under
pretense of Service; yet all must be diligent to the utmost of their own
Talents. God has wisely ordained variety of Callings, with a tendency in their
Nature to his Use; Providence disposes and fitteth men to these several
Offices. The faithfulness of the meanest is regarded; Col. 3. 23. 24.
Servants do serve the Lord Christ, when their meaner Employs are clothed with
an obediential Respect to him. Luke 21. 2.
Two Mites from the Poors stock is a commended Offering; and a Book of
Remembrance treasureth the concerned Thoughts, Mal. 3. 16.
and edifying Discourses of them that fear the Lord, when disabled from
performing more.

But Christ will not accept a faint endeavor from a man of Strength; 1. Sam.
3. 13.
nor a bare advice against Sin, when we are invested with Authority to restrain
it; as you see in Eli's case. A few pence are not fit layings out to a good
use, for him who has a great Estate. Woe be to him, Mal. 1. 8, 14.
that in any respect has a Male in his Flock, and gives to God the Blind and
Lame. Not discerning this, keeps so many useless and ill employed. All may be
useful to Christ in their own place, by doing or suffering; none may neglect
the greatest service which their Callings and Gifts give opportunity for.
Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, are by their place Servants to the Lord Jesus,
and for him should they be employed.

No Station is so high, as to plead exemption by its dignity; nor any Gifts so
eminent, as to allow remisness. To forbear the utmost service of Christ in the
Ministry, when dedicated to him in that Office, is sacrilegious: yea, a degree
thereof is chargeable on men in any other Office wherein God has placed them.

No man may refuse any Office or Work, to which Christ manifestly calls him:
a call to service, or suffering, ensureth sufficient aids; and we know not what
we can do, or suffer, till our work or trial discover what supplies Christ will
afford. Zerubbabel is called to build the Temple, when visible abilities
rendered the success improbable; but he attempteth it, and succeeds under the
influence of that: Hag. 2. 4.
Be strong, for I am with you. We must attempt what Christ makes our duty, and
he will take care his Interest shall not suffer by our weakness.

Prop. V. The success of all faithful endeavors to advance the Interest of
Christ, depends on the influence and blessing of God thereon.

He builds the Temple, and must bear the glory, whoever be the Instruments.
Zech. 8. 13.
He that planteth, tho it be a Paul; and he that waters, tho it be an Apollo,
are nothing* but God that gives the increase. 1 Cor. 3. 7.
There is an hidden energy and disposition of circumstances which do effect
what we otherwise vainly attempt. No concernment of Christ would prosper in the
World, if left to the sole management of them, who are most fitted or devoted
to it; their power being so incompetent to the opposition which every design of
Christ meets with. The interest which a subtle and mighty Devil has in men,
the abject state and vile inclinations of mankind, the suitableness and power
of sensitive things, the enmity of the heart against Christ, the incapacity of
a dead blind World to relish, and perceive the nature, glory and advantage of
all the Designs of Christ: are all such obstacles, as might cause us to
despair, if a Divine Power were not at hand to execute this purpose.

To set up God's Throne, cast down Satan's Kingdom, and convert Sinners, was an
enterprise becoming only an Almighty Savior to undertake, and possible only
for him to effect. Therefore we should in all our endeavors rely on his help,
and in every success humbly acknowledge him. He is pleased to secure this
honor to himself, by blasting often the most probable means, and giving the
greatest lifts to his Interest, by Instruments too contemptible to conceal his
Arm.

It Is enough for us, that our work is with the Lord for reward, Is. 49. 4.
when our upright labors are in vain as to the event. Yea, he may hereafter
prosper our attempts beyond what their present influence can promise.

Prop. VI. I hope I need not add, that the Doctrine of Merits receives no
support from our greatest Services.

Our Forfeitures are too many, our Performances too imperfect, our Engagements
too strong, Divine Aids too arbitrary, and the Rule of Righteousness too
strict, to allow us to plead our Service in Bar to eternal life as a gift; or
to the atonement of Christ, Romans 6. 23.
as the only meritorious Cause of all the good we hope for. Whatever evidence
our faithfulness gives to the sincerity of that faith, whereby Christ is made
ours; whatever encouragement the promises may yield to the diligent Soul, no
upright heart can be puffed above subscribing his hearty Amen to that Caution
of our Lord's, When ye have done all, Luke 17. 10.
say, we are unprofitable Servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.
No, not that Lord, so as not to need forgiveness for many faults cleaving
thereto.

I shall now proceed to explain the nature of this duty of dedicating our lives
to the Interests of Christ. This will be done under these two enquiries: 1.
What are the Interests of Christ? 2. What is it to dedicate our lives to the
serving these Interests.

Qu. 1. What are the Interests of Christ, to serve which our lives should be
dedicated?

Answ. All the declared Designs of Christ in his Mediatoral Office, in
opposition to the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.

To this must be referred all the ends which he pursues, and to effect which,
his heart is intent on; and injoineth our concurrence in. They may well be
called his Interests, considering, they are things undertaken by him; all his
Institutions, Laws and Providence refer to them; he died, sent his Spirit, and
still intercedeth, as means of their accomplishment. His Glory and Truth, as
Mediator, is concerned in them. These things may be referred to these three
Heads.

1. The restoration of God's original Dominion and Image among men, against
the usurpations and defilements of Satan, and vile apostasy and rebellion of
Sinners.

His Design is to destroy the works of the Devil, and advance that purity and
order, 1 John 3. 8.
which the entrance of Sin expelled. His Interests under this Head consists in
the conversion of Sinners, obedience of men to all the Laws of God; their
resemblance of his imitable Perfections, and utter renouncing of all that is
devilish, or brutish. His concern is to enlighten the ignorant mind, subdue
disorderly appetites to the dominion of Grace, and Reason. Sound knowledge, fear
of God, love to God and one another, justice, temperance, chastity, discharge
of relative duties, Divine Worship in opposition to Idolatry, and all
godliness, truth, and goodness, are parts of his Interest, which men should
studiously promote, that God may be the portion and supreme end of men.

2. Such things wherein the peculiar glory and influence of Christ, as
Mediator, consists.

Under this are included every Doctrine, Institution and matter which relate to
Christ, and are superadded to what concerned Mankind before the Fall.

He died to be Lord both of dead and living. Romans 14. 9.
And his Interest which we must serve; is in these things: John 10. 15.
gathering to himself a body of all that belong to the election of Grace; the
improvement of every Believer to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Ephesians. 4. 13.
That he prevail and be acknowledged as Prophet, Priest and King; all pardon
and favor with God ascribed to his Merits, all grace derived from his fullness,
and all duty performed in his name. That his People, who be his Members and
Heritage, be succored, his Churches have their due privileges, all worship
managed by Gospel-rule, a Gospel Ministry encouraged; no Officers imposed, but
whom he has appointed in his House; and none of them neglected: love and peace
maintained among his Followers, and they admitted to the privileges of his
Sanctuary, on his terms.

It belongs to him that there be a godly Magistracy, a Gospel Discipline, and
whatever else he has either appointed as Means, or declared as Instances of
his Triumphs as Mediator; and also that the Gospel terms of Life be truly
stated, and complied with.

3. The Interests of Christ may be considered as they stand in an opposition to
such errors, parties, and practices, wherein the Attempts of Satan against the
glory and influence of the Mediator consist.

The Devil sets up his Standard at every point, which Christ gains; no Truth
escapes his Assault; and he never wants men of wit and power to abet his
opposition: yea, generally the Crowd has been of his side, when the Witnesses
of Jesus have been few and contemptible. Satan has his stated Sects and
Parties, and tho many Truths of Christ be owned by some Sects, yet in whatever
respect they are denominated from their Contests against Christ, the Interest
of Jesus lies in opposition to them. Under this Head I shall be sparing,
because I fear no Party has all the Interest of Christ, and nothing else. And
I hope God is about some great things, which will be attended with such a light
and spirit, as may end in a name comprehensive of all that is Christ's, and
exclusive of all else. He has promised his Church, Is 62. 2.
Thou shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name.
Christian is the best we yet know, but how much opposite to Jesus is pretended
to under that name? However I must not fear to say, the Interests of Christ
consist in Protestanism, in opposition to Popery in all things wherein it is
Antichristian. (Which are too many.) The Interest of Christ is in
Nonconformity, in opposition to the imposing sinful and doubtful terms of
Communion of Saints, or exercise of the Ministry; and sacrificing the great
things of God to a Constitution uninstituted by Christ, and incapable of
promoting real Religion to that degree, as I hope many of its abettors desire.

Qu. 2. What is it to dedicate our lives to the service of the Interests of
Christ?

I must suggest to you, that under the word life. (by a Synechdoche and
Metonymie) are included our time, talents, opportunities, all enjoyments, yea
life it self, as an offering, whenever the service, or testimony of Christ
require it. Having premised this, I answer,

Answ. 1. It implies a solemn offering of our selves and all in our power, to
Christ.

This is injoined; Romans 12. 1.
Present your Bodies a living sacrifice, etc. This ought to be expressly done in
our first Conversion, and often repeated, especially at the Lord's Table. Engrave
the stamp of Christ on all you possess, and acknowledge his propriety. Lord, my
self, and all that is mine, I offer to thee, and will serve thee with. This Vow
in thy constant observation will keep thee from a supine neglect, when
opportunity of service is given; and silence all repinings, when his service is
hard or expensive. He that neglects this, will soon find matter of excuse in
his holy profession.

Answ. 2. The Service of Christ and his Interests must be the governing end in
all deliberate Acts and Contrivances.

Men are devoted to what they chiefly intend. Paul expresses that his life was
indeed dedicated thus, when amidst all disswasives from a dangerous duty, he
asserts, I count not my life dear, Acts 20. 24.
so I may finish my course, and the Ministry which I have received. Woe to them
whose Consults still terminate in some selfish matter, and are concerned for
Christ only by the by. Providence may serve it self by their Sins, as well as
by their chance Services, which they hardly intend. Christ accounts none
faithful to his Concerns, who provide for them last, but chiefly contrive for
things that are none of his. Which prevail when in competition? for what are we
most industrious? about what are we most sollicitous? that our lives are
dedicated to, whether they be the Interest of Christ, or other things.

3. There is an actual and stated employing our lives and all our abilities for
Christ.

This dedication consists not in faint acts of the mind, but extends to, and
expresses it self in the doing all we can to promote Christ's Interests.

Thy heart cannot concur in this dedication, when thy performances do not
conduce to exalt him. Romans 12. 11.
You must be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. To live is Christ; when our
parts are engaged to plead for Truth, our power subserveth his Claims, our time
and Estates are employed to uphold his Gospel, advance Piety, and abet the
testimony of Jesus: Phil 1. 27.
striving together for the faith of the Gospel. He dedicates his life and
talents to Christ, who uses them for Christ in all opportunities of doing, and
willingly parts with them, rather than renounce his Interests. Moses yields an
instance, when he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 25, 26.
renouncing all temporal hopes, to give a specimen of future service.

This living to Christ imports also a stated Course of life. It Is not enough to
serve Christ by starts, or occasional acts. It must be our ordinary employ, and
the scope of our lives. Our abilities must be still on the altar, and our ears
ever open to the Voice of God by all occasions, however frequently they return.
Happy they, who early engage in this, and the longest life gives no period to
it. Yea, all we do, and every moment we spend, should mediately, or immediately
serve the Interest of Christ.

4. We live for Christ, when we value our lives and talents, as they be
serviceable to the Interests of the Lord Jesus. Men live to themselves, and
their time is dedicated to their Lusts; when they esteem their Estates, as they
afford fuel to carnal Inclinations; and are fond of long life, as an
opportunity of pleasing their Senses and Appetites. To such all is despicable
and uneasy, which yield not Flesh-pleasing-contentments. Thus bruitishly they
express their sentiments, 1 Cor. 15. 32.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.

But he that dedicates his life to Christ, is glad of an Estate, that he may be
useful by charity in employing it; and express lively hopes of Heaven, when
called for Christ's sake to relinquish it. What is esteem with men farther than
as it may add to his influence? or parts, or power, than as they qualify him
for greater services? a good Soul (assured of Heaven) would gladly resign his
Spirit, when he cease to be useful.

What is more awful to such a man, than to be cast by as an useless Vessel,
Jer. 22. 28.
whom God disdaineth to employ? and nothing yields them greater delight, than
capacity for the Service of Christ, and success therein. Every Convert by their
ministry, 1 These. 2. 19.
is their joy, and their Crown. How cheerfully do they own Divine Goodness,
when their hearts are enlarged to any useful act, and they enabled for it? 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
Who am I, and what is my People, that we should be able to offer so willingly
after this sort? are the words of David, when his People had joined with him,
in so liberal an offering for Temple-work.

It Is a Curse in a holy man's thoughts, to have talents without a heart to use
them for God; and much more to be abused in spending them on his Lusts. How
contemptible in their eyes be the Nimrods of the Earth, whose greatness is
merely for oppression, foolish grandeur, and the Devils Service? they would
prefer the condition of a Beast, to the greatest Monarchs thus brutishly
satisfied, and employed. The Saints would not change their persecuted State,
for that of the greatest Princes, Rev. 21. 26.
unless they bring the honor glory and of their Nations to the new Jerusalem:
that is, to the Church of Christ fully reformed, and enlarged.

Herein you have an account of the Dedication of our lives to Christ; thus do
all they to whom to live is Christ.

Perhaps you may say, these are mere Contemplations, but to do thus is not the
Duty of all, nor the Attainment of any, whatever they pretend.

I shall therefore undertake next to prove, that it is the Duty of all of you
thus to dedicate your lives to the service of the Lord Jesus, and his
Interests. I shall offer Reasons to convince you, which refer to us as Men, and
Christians.

That supreme Love and Regard to God, Reason 1.
which is the Duty of all men, must dispose them to this Dedication.

Can you doubt, Mar. 23. 37.
whether you ought to love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all
your soul, and with all your mind? Must not God be loved above self by every
rational Creature? Is it not the appointment of God to every man? Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
Thus shall fear the Lord thy God, him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou
cleave. These are Duties resulting from our relation to God as our Maker, and
due to him on the account of the transcendant excellency of his Being: yea the
very Order of the Universe directs to it; the first cause of all should have
the supreme Regard and Interest among all Beings.

Now know, that it is impossible to love and regard God in this supreme manner,
if you dedicate not all to his Interest. Can any man regard God above himself,
and yet serve himself above God? Or can any man serve God above all, and
neglect the Interests of God? These are the Occasions he gives men to express
their regard to him by: Psalm. 16. 2.
His Essence is above what our goodness can be extended to: but his Saints, his
Honor, his Truth, his Image, and Cause, are his Concerns on Earth: and as
these are regarded or neglected, he esteems himself valued or despised by us.
To each of these the saying of Christ is applicable, Mat. 25. 40, 45.
Verily I say unto you, In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of
these, ye did it not to me; and in as much as ye did it to one of the least of
these, ye did it unto me.

The Relation God has to, and Concern he has in these Interests, transfer the
respect of all to himself.

So that it is a Duty to dedicate all to his service, and as far as he calls us
to it, to employ all to that end; or it is no Duty to love and regard God above
all: yea it must then be a Duty to despise God, and prefer Self, Satan, and
other Rivals to the infinitely blessed God; which a reasonable Soul must
tremble at.

Gods absolute propriety in men, R. 2.
and in all which they possess, makes the sacrifice of all to his Interests a
Duty, by all the rules of Justice. Notions of just and unjust are preserved by
God in the Conscience, above most others. Principles of Justice are the
strongest in that natural habit, which we call (...); and these require that
every one receive his own. Now what has any man, which he has not received at
the hands of God? Is it not he that made us by his Power, endued us with gifts
intellectual? has any man an Estate or Honor, but he to whom God has given
them? Eccl. 6. 2.
and is not all at his disposal?

God did not release his own right, when he entrusted us with the use of any
talents: and as to him we are stewards, not proprietors, Luke 16. 2.
and therefore accountable for all.

God had a respect to his own glory and service, in his creating of all things:
he made all things for himself. Yea he has dispensed all under this rule, Pro.
16. 4.
that they be employed for him. This Law every brute creature, and inanimate
Being observe: yea the glorious Angels do not deny, Heb. 1. 14.
or disdain this homage. They are ministering spirits, whose utmost abilities
are consecrated to the execution of Gods will, tho it be often us poor sinners
in whose behalf they serve.

And must not the same Justice be observed by Men? can any thing be denied God
equally, when all is his, and he asks service by nothing but what is his own?
Paul is but righteous, when his labors and sufferings for Christ were most
abundant; this he suggests, as well as his privilege by it, Act. 27. 2.
when he says, The Angel of God whose I am, and whom I serve, stood by me.
David in his large offerings acquits God from being a debtor; and himself of
being more than just. All things come from thee, and of thine own we have given
thee. 1 Chronicles. 29. 14, 16.
God charge the man who improved not the one Talent, not with unkindness, but
unjustice: and so will he reprove all that deny him any thing which his
Interest requires: Thou ought therefore to have put my Money to the
Exchanger, Mat. 25. 27.
and then I should have rereived my own with Usury.

You may as well accuse God of Injury, when by his Providence he brings you to
Death, Poverty or decay of Parts; as deny him the utmost Service in his
Concerns. In the former, he asserts his own Right without your leave; in the
other, he yields you opportunity for Consent, to your own Benefit. He offers
you an Occasion to trade for your selves with his Stock. If the Testimony of
God requires any thing to be laid out for it, which is not his, you have some
Pretense to plead; but that can never be, unless when Men do wickedly for God,
Job 13. 7.
which he abhors.

3. The Lord Jesus has an additional right to all of us, and our utmost
Services by purchase.

The Interests of God and his Claim, as Creator are in the hands of Christ. But
as Redeemer his Title is added too, and our Service more strongly demanded: 1
Cor. 6. 20.
For ye are bought with a Price; therefore glorify God in your Body, and in
your Spirit, which are his. He may justly serve himself of us, and by us, as
his redeemed Captives. We cost him dearer, than our utmost Service can amount
to. All our Graces and Gifts are from him by a new Dispensation, Ex. 13. 15.
and chapter 13. 15.
and held by a new Tenure. You have an Emblem of it in the Redemption of the
First Born, and in the Ransom of all Souls.

How much more may Christ use the words to Philemon, which Paul uttered only as
an Instrument of his Conversion? Albeit, I do not say to thee, v. 19.
how thou owe me even thine own self besides.

Does he wrong us, if he calls for our Gifts, our Estates, yea, our Lives; when
he continues them to us after our manifest Forfeitures, and gave them to us, if
Believers, as he is Head over all things to the Church?

So that if it be a Duty to be just to God as Creator, or just to Christ as
Redeemer, all our Lives and Abilities must be devoted to his Interests.

4. No man is a Christian indeed, that dedicateth not himself, Life and all to
Christ: And so if it be a Duty to be a Christian, this devotedness is a Duty as
it is essential to our Christian State.

It Is true, you may bear the Name; but you cannot be the thing designed by that
Name, if you devote not all to the Honor of the Lord Jesus; and design it as
the chiefest purpose of your Life, to propagate his Interests. Can any Man be
his Subject, who contributes not to his Affairs what in him lies? Consent to
be his, is the greatest Fundamental of Religion; and this includes a solemn
Surrender of all to him. Union betwixt Christ and his Members, makes their
Interests common; his Interest is their Interest; and they are to submit to his
Conduct as their Head, in what their usefulness must consist. Rev. 14. 4. Joh.
12. 26. Col. 4. 23.
Their Character is, They follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Their Motto is,
I serve the Lord Christ.

Religion is not a State of Freedom, to live to our selves under the Covert of
Gospel pardon, but an Obligation and Inclination to live to our Blessed Lord; 1
Cor. 9. 21.
being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ. Therefore you must
account Christianity a Crime, or you must profess the true Faith, and plead
Christ's Cause to the utmost.

R. 5. It is as much Men's Duties that profess to be Christians, to dedicate
their Lives and all to the interest of Christ, as it is to avoid Perjury,
Sacrilege and Hypocrisy.

These Crimes are too horrid to necessitate Arguments, to prove that
forbearance of them is a Duty. Your Conviction, that to neglect this Dedication
is thus Criminal, I hope will suffice. To this End let me reason with you: Is
it not Perjury to violate your Baptismal Vow? Yea, sure the greatest: And did
not you then vow to fight under Christ's Banner, renounce the World, the Flesh
and the Devil, and that you would never be ashamed of Christ's Cross? Is not
your neglect of Dedication of all to Christ, an express violation of this Vow?
When you fear, or grudge performing a Christians Work, dare not profess the
true Faith and Worship of Christ, nor engage in the supports of his Gospel and
Truths; are not your Estates and Abilities dedicated to the Devil, and your
Lusts? Is not Christ deserted? Is not his Cross refused, when you prostitute
the Concernments of your Savior? None can do more for Christ, than the
Baptismal Vow includes. What Perjury then lies at your Doors, who are no way
concerned for him? Is it no Sacrilege to alien duly dedicated things to common
use, without divine Allowance? Were not your Souls, Bodies, Gifts, and all you
have, dedicated to the Lord Jesus, when you were Baptized in, or into the N^me
of the Father, Mat. 28. 19.
Son, and Spirit? This Surrender was professed, and Gods Propriety and Disposal
acknowledged: Ez. 20. 37.
All past under the Rod; and Gods Name was enstamped on all thus devoted to his
use.

Now when you neglect to honor Christ, and serve his Interest with your
Substance, Time and Gifts; do not you withold what was Consecrated, and apply
it to your own carnal Ends and Use? Every idle cowardly Christian, keeps back
what is Gods, and not his own. Every Apostate does the same more grossly: Every
Enemy to any Concern of Christ, employs the Consecrated Things of Christ
against him.

So that here is Sacriledg at your Door, if you improve not all for Christ's
Interest in your Places. And this Perjury and Sacriledg is double in any
Ministers or Magistrates, who are under Vows and Dedications, additional to
what is common to all Christians. Is it not Hypocrisy solemnly to profess to
intend, do, and be what we neither do, nor are? Now can you deny that you
profess to intend Christ's Service, to advance his Name and Interests, and be
for his Praise, as Witnesses to him in the World? You appear and would be
thought such, in professing to be his Followers: For on these Terms he admits
Men to wear his Name; Luke 9. 23.
If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross
daily, and follow me. There he injoins, that Self have not the disposal of us,
or ours; That we follow him in his Testimony and Designs which he is carrying
on in the World, and abett these still tho the Cross be our daily Associate.
All this thou pretendest.

And now when thou refusest to dedicate thy Life to Christ; do not thou
betray Christ with a Kiss, affront God, and abuse Men by delusive Mockery, and
wearest that Title of Hypocrite, which thou brandest the upright with? Oh!
think of this, you who spend your Time and Estates as fuel to your Lusts; not
once laying to heart any Engagement on you, to employ them to higher Ends.

R. 6. All living Christians are chosen Ones, appointed by Christ to advance
his Interests in their Day.

Great are the Purposes our Lord is accomplishing. And tho his immediate Power,
or the Ministry of Angels, would be effective of them; yet he honors Mortals
as Instruments therein. He overturns Satan's Throne, erects and propagates his
own Kingdom, leads Men into Truth and Holiness, by the Ministration of Men like
our selves; tho the effective Virtue be from him.

All are obliged to concur; but living Saints are under a more peculiar
anointing for it, and more especially entrusted with it in their respective
Stations. He says of every godly Magistrate, Ps. 80. 17.
This is the Son of Man, whom I have made strong for my self. Of every holy
Parent as of Abraham, For I know him, Genesis 18. 19.
that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord. It Is true of every upright Minister, Phil. 1. 17.
That he is set for the Defense of the Gospel: Yea, every private Christian is
among them, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
who are an holy Nation, a peculiar People; that they should show forth the
Praises of him, who called them into his mavelous Light. The weakest
Christian has some Influence, and is furnished suitably to what Christ intends
by him.

Is it not a great Duty to discarge this glorious Trust, and observe these
Precepts which connote our Excellency as well as Duty? In this respect, we are
they of whom he says, These are the People I have formed for my self, Isa. 43.
21.
they shall show forth my Praise. If you are Believers, you have a greater
aptitude to serve Christ; and devotedness to his Designs is directed to you,
above the rest of the World.

This is but keeping up our holy Profession, Heb. 10. 23, 25.
which Christ is so intent on. And what Engagements had other Saints to
transmit to us Christ's Truth and Worship, which we are not under to imitate in
our Day, for the good of following Ages?

What Good do we enjoy? What advantage does the Cause of Christ now reap, by
the Expense and Labors of Christians in former Days; yea, by the Blood of many
faithful Martyrs?

Shall then any thing dear to Christ be so trivial with us, as not command the
utmost Service or Suffering? We owe Christ as much as others ever did; we cost
him as dear; he has forgiven us as much, if not more; we hope to be possessed
of the same Glory; and his Interests in our Day, are likely to be attended with
more glorious Success.

If your Hearts be not obstinate against what God injoyneth, you must engage in
this Duty, which is so apparent by these Reasons, to which many more might be
added. Can you after all I have said, let any gasping Concern of Christ want
the utmost Aid, which you are able to afford it duly, and in your Places? Or,
dare you do any thing fatal to it, whatever be your Temptations? I am led to
the Application of this Truth, which I shall attend under these following
Particulars.

1. Exhort. I would call such of you to deep Repentance, who have employed your
Lives and Abilities in opposing the Interests of Christ.

What I shall say under this Head, is not designed to upbraid or reproach any
Man; much less to hinder peace with, and love to the most guilty, when you
become sensible of the provocation God lays to your charge: And least of all
would I be interpreted to impeach the Innocent, to whom the things perpetrated
by Men under any distinguishing Character with them, must needs be afflictive.

My aim is only to bring you to Repentance, if so be, your Hearts are not so
desperately hardened, as to bind on your selves those Woes, which so unchristian
a Behavior has exposed you to. I am induced to this unpleasing Work, by the
opportunity which this mixed Congregation affords me of speaking to such, whom
I expect not to meet elsewhere; and I fear, this Admonition to you, is too much
neglected by such, from whom it might be better resented.

Repentance is the great design of the present Providence we are under, and
the best expedient to prevent the Evils we are threatened with. God will
embitter that profane and persecuting Spirit, which has raged in the Church of
England; and tho forgiveness be our Duty, yet Providence levels its Arrow
against the guilty, in a manner too extraordinary to be disregarded; but how
few consider the dealings of God, even when Clothed with the greatest Light
and Wonder?

I know the Guilty have Ignorance enough to impute to their Zeal for truth,
what they have done from their innate Enmity to Christ; but mistakes do not
acquit in a Matter so important: And Persecutors never ruin the Godly under a
good Character; Joh. 16. 2.
but think they do God good Service, in destroying whom ever they can call
Factious, or Schismatical. The concern of Christ is too hid, not to be often
mistaken by Sinners; 1 Cor. 2. 7. 8.
For had they known it, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. And
profane Persecutors do as truly wound Christ in his Doctrins, Worship and
Members, as if they laid violent Hands on his very Person.

Oh profane Ones! Who else could it be but Christ, whom you opposed in his
Members, whiles you persecuted the most serious imitaters of him, and Men of
all their Neighbors most devoted to him?

Was it not Christ in his Gospel you despised, when you ridiculed the most
essential Doctrins of his Gospel?

Have you not acted against Christ in his Ministers, whiles you stopped the
Mouths of such, who were as likely to advance his Interests by their Ministry
as any others; yea, and to this added a heap of malicious Lies and Slanders,
lest Christ might be served by them?

Have you not hated and laden with Contempt the most probable Evidences of real
Holiness; as a strict Life, serious Discourse, and holy Tenderness?

Is it not the special Testimony of Christ in your Day, which you have
resisted, when you disabled from Service, and exposed to extreme Hardships; all
that considerable number who stand and suffer for this? viz. that the Ministry
of the Gospel and the Communion of Saints, ought not to be clogged with sinful,
needless, or uninstituted Terms and Practices; to the wounding of Conscience,
dividing the Church, hazarding the reformed Interest, and destruction of
Christian Love and Serious Piety.

What has all your Pretense been, but a Zeal for what your selves call
indifferent? And for these you have hated, opposed, and almost at last quite
ruined the undoubted Interests of the Blessed Jesus. How much have you done to
give a fatal VVound to the very Form of your Religion, not to be recovered by a
little unseasonable Noise?

Surely, it is high time that your personal Irreligion and Profaneness should
force you to suspect; that you are not so likely to know or serve the Cause of
Christ, as others, so much more pious and concerned than your selves.

Ought you not at last fear, you have been acted by the Devil against Christ,
especially when you reflect on the Methods you have used? Would Christ have put
you to serve him by Lying, Perjury, profane Scoffing, and cruel Persecution, to
the utmost of your Power? Were Sabbaths spent by you in disturbing Meetings, as
if you were the Men that designed to serve Christ thereby? If nothing else will
cause you to suspect, that Enmity against Christ did govern you; consider how
you treated any of your own Church, who were Pious and Serious: How much more
were they valued by you, than us whom you pretended some Difference with, as
Cause of Dislike?

God calls you by me to deep Humblings for these things: Be convinced and
ashamed of your Opposition to him; and be assured, Luke 13. 3.
if you repent not you shall all perish. Can you pretend so much as to say, To
me to live is Christ? Who would have Christ and Holiness, have as little
Interest in others as they have in your selves. Was it not too much that your
selves did not live to Christ, but that you must grudg and ruin any that did
live to him?

How will you answer the Lord Jesus, when he shall ask you, Act. 9. 4. Jud. v.
15. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
Why persecutest thou me? What account can you give of all your hard Speeches
uttered against him, his Truths and People? Must not you fear you have filled
up your Sins; and the wrath of God is come upon you to the uttermost, by
forbidding the Ministers of Christ to preach his Gospel? How must you wail,
when he shall at his Appearance convince you, that you have pierced him in your
evil Treatment of those Men and Things, which he will then own to be his
Interests?

In pity to your Souls, consider, Is this you have done suitable to your
Baptismal Vow? Does your Profession of Christianity oblige you to do nothing
for Christ and his Cause, except venting your Scoff and Rage against things
wherein his Interest seems most concerned? The Lord fasten these things on
your Hearts, and force you to a Repentance as notorious as your Scandal.

I speak not these things as if Repentance were confined to you; we have all
need of it: And if God intend good for us, he will incline all sorts to it,
according to our respective Guilt: But yours is most notorious; and God seems
by his present Dealings, to point more directly at it.

Having said what I think my self engaged to suggest to profane and persecuting
Ones, I must solemnly warn you against all censorious Thoughts and evil
Speeches, against any godly Ministers or People of the Church of England; their
Differences with us will not justify uncharitable Surmises, nor reproachful
Language against them. All good Men aim at one thing, even to serve Christ; tho
they do not agree always in the Means, God serves himself by the different
Sentiments of his People, and has his own Methods to convince and cement them;
greater Union is reserved for that new Jerusalem that will descend out of
Heaven from God, Rev. 21. 10. 16.
that bears the Form of a Cube; i'ts of one measure, and there carnal
Interests will not divide.

2. Exh. Let all real Christians live more entirely to the Service of Christ
and his Interests.

You may be humbled that you have done no more for him, and that your
unusefulness to his Concerns, is imputable to your remiss Temper, more than
want of Talents. How many of your Gifts were never employed to advance Truth?
His Members have been in straits, and his Gospel languishing, when your Riches
were hoarded up. Many neglected opportunities of Se^vice, must reproach you,
when the Frame of your Hearts bespeak them tender. Many have been your
industrious Contrivances, wherein Christ has had the least, if any share.

Oh! Be awakened this Day to strong Resolves, that hereafter to you to live
shall be Christ; yea, only Christ, and all other Interests subordinated to his.
Let all you have be laid anew on his Altar. Get your Hearts lifted up in the
ways of the Lord; 2 Cron. 17. 6.
and be wholly for him, whatever Choice shall be made by others. Satan's
Instruments are industrious, unwearied, and prodigal in his Service: Christ
has but few engaged in his behalf; and shall the declinings of his Interests
lie at your door?

I shall annex some Directions and Motives.

Dir. 1. Exercise your selves in the advancement of the Interests of Christ in
your own Souls.

If Christ Reign wholly in us, he will Reign greatly by us. Ephesians. 4. 15. and chapter
3. 19.
Grow up into Christ in all things, till you are filled with all the fullness of
God; and your capacity and readiness for his advancement will be enlarged. Be
more acquainted with him, and you will judge him worth your Service, and highly
value all that is his. Flaming Grace will contrive much: What can I serve Christ
in? and freely consecrate all to him. Whereas, our backwardness is an
infallible sign that his Life is feeble in us. In a word, He that neglects
Christ in himself, will be little fit for, or concerned in the advancement of
Christ in the World; nor indeed be blessed with much Success in his Attempts
for it.

2. Dir. See that your Aims be sincere in all which you seem to serve Christ by.

Low or bad Purposes spoil good Works. God tries the Heart (in our best
Services,) and loves Uprightness. 1 Cron. 29. 17. Phil. 1. 15. Mat. 6. 2.
Good Sermons were spoiled by Envy, and charitable Deeds by Ostentation. It Is
unhappy when our Hearts have not higher Aims for Christ, than our Hands at best
can accomplish; but it is wicked when what we seem to offer to Christ, is a
Sacrifice to our Idols.

3. Dir. Cheerfully dedicate all you have to the Concernments of Christ.

It Is a cursed Wedg which is reserved from this Dedication, whether it be
Estate, Act. 5. 3.
Relation, Gifts or Life. What Ananias spared, spoiled the acceptance of the
Part he offered; tho it be not always necessary all should be parted with, yet
it is necessary that nothing be unemployed, when Fidelity to Christ calls for
it; and it cease to be yours, when it cannot be kept without treachery to his
Interests. As all must be dedicated, so it must be cheerfully laid out, as what
is fit and best. None but free will Offerings and a cheerful Giver, are lovely
in Gods account. 2 Cor. 9. 7. Heb. 10. 34.
It Is left on Record as the Praise of some, They took joyfully the spoiling of
their Goods. Indeed, the hardest thought in our greatest Toils and Expense for
Christ, should be, blessed be God, that I have any thing to express my Love and
Zeal for Christ by.

4. Dir. Be always solicitous to know what the Interests of Christ be, which
you should at present serve; especially if there be Doubts concerning them.

The Gospel is an infallible Rule in general; Providence and the Series of
Prophesies may contribute to your direction, under the guidance of that higher
Rule. Undoubted Duties must always be done in their season; undoubted Truths
must never be denied; yea, must always be professed, if some damage to the
Interests of Christ do not attend it, beyond what our Profession of that Truth
at that time, will countervail; doubtful Sins must never be committed,
undoubted Sins must be discouraged in our place. Present Good which is less,
may not be bought by the certain loss of a greater Good at some distance; nor
at the expense of a greater Evil in sure Prospect. The more material Interests
of Christ must not be sacrificed to them less considerable, nor undoubted to
doubtful: I can but glance at these.

You ought to be assured in every thing you engage in as for Christ, that it be
his Concern and your Work; yea, your present Duty, which a greater is not
excluded by. Assurance in this will command your Engaging for it, and encourage
under all Difficulties in it.

Mistakes herein cause great Disorders, kindle a fiery Zeal, Romans 10. 2.
which is often fatal to the Concerns of Christ: And whatever we do to advance
these mistaken Interests, are Offerings to a Lust, and unprofitable to our
selves. It would amaze one to see the heat of some in supporting Errors,
opposing Truth, destroying Peace, and propagating a weak Notion, to the hazard
of the most considerable Interests of Christ.

But yet our indifferency is Carnal, when Christ seems by his Providence, by
Satan's violent Assault, or by the great Influence of a Truth at that time, to
call us to engage strongly in it; tho it appears at other times less momentous.
To say no more, search well what will be most for Christ's Glory.

5. Dir. Mortify those Lusts which most hinder, and improve in those Graces
which most forward your living entirely to Christ.

Men's Lusts are their greatest obstacles to Service; and it is impossible to
advance Christ considerably, if improved Graces afford not willingness and
strength: Therefore trample on your Pride which will disdain low Service, and
fret at any Contempt which attends your Labors: But be more Humble, and you will
agree to be any thing, so Christ may be all: Be more free from Covetousness,
which grudgeth all expense and loss for Christ, sells Truth to get or save a
little Dross: But get more heavenly Mindedness, which disdains Earth so it may
but get more Treasure in Heaven. Cast away that slavish Fear, which betrays
Conscience to a mortals Threatening. But be more endued with holy Courage, which
will dare to be zealous for Christ in the very Face of Danger. Dan. 3. 13.
Silence Unbelief that still suggests Difficulties, but hides from you both
supplies of Strength and the promised Rewards. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
Whereas, more Faith will still enlarge your Service, in the view of sufficient
Aids and an eternal Crown. Above all trample on Selfishness, which most
devoureth our Talents: Whereas, 2 Cor. 4. 18.
a public Spirit and superlative Love to Christ, would constrain your
Consecration of all to him, 3 Cor. 5. 13. 14.
as one well deserving of it.

6. Dir. I might add, that you ought to manage all your designed Service as may
be most conducive to the advancement of these Interests of Christ.

Great Prudence is necessary to give an advantage to all our Undertakings, that
the Success we aim at be not prevented.

But I have no more time than to conclude all with a few Motives to this Duty.

1. Mot. It Is the Interest of Christ I am persuading you to dedicate your Lives
to.

It Is that Christ who has so amazingly denied himself for you, to whom you owe
so much, from whom you have received and still expect such great things. Can
you behold any thing as his Concernment, and not be enflamed with Zeal? Oh!
What Honor is it to serve him! Being his Interests they must needs deserve our
Regard, and command our Industry: This glorious One would not stake his Glory,
and set his Heart on Trifles. And who but the unbelieving and ungrateful can
grudge him any thing? Methinks a Reflection on any thing as his Concern, would
inspire with all that can envigorate our Attempts.

2. Mot. It Is but our Lives at most, which are to be dedicated to him.

They are short, and so it is but a little while and the Hardship is over. They
are but poor and mean things, to be an Offering so acceptable to him. Alas! How
inconsiderable is all we can do or suffer, that they should reflect any Glory
on him who fills the Heavens, and is now (by us) raising a Monument which will
be admired for ever? Who would not strive to contribute most to his blessed
Designs? How can our little Matters be laid out to so great Purposes?

3. Met. In serving the Interests of Christ, we do in the best manner serve our
own.

What we do for him, he does not need; but if we refuse it, we are undone. We
must shortly reckon for all Talents: And how uncomfortable will the Account be,
when little can be reckoned as placed to Christ's Account?

But there is Gain by the most costly Service, and Profit by the worst of
Hardships. Mat. 19. 29.
The Advantage is more than an hundred fold; if you live to him you shall ever
live with him; a share in his Glory will be yours, if you partake in his
Concerns. Joha 12. 25. 26.
If any Man serve me, him will my Father honor: How wisely is our All laid
out, when it will yield such great Returns? Look upward, and see what Mansions
Christ is preparing for you, whiles you are laboring and laying out your
selves for him: And he is like to receive the most illustrious Crown, who
yields the greatest Service. Surely, you are injurious to your selves in
sparing any Seed now, 2 Cor. 9. 6.
when you have Christ's word for so vast an Increase. He that sows sparingly,
shall reap sparingly; but he that sows bountifully, shall also reap
bountifully. Oh! into what a State will you soon pass from an useful Life? To
die will be Gain, if to you to live be Christ. In Eternity you will find all
your Endeavors carefully Recorded, and abundantly Rewarded.

Must not you say from this moment, Whatever I can do, and all that I Possess
shall be devoted to Him and his Interests. Engage then in his Service; you have
Angels and all Saints sharers with you in the undertaking, E^. 4. 14. 1 Cor.
15. 25. 28.
and Christ at the Head of this Royal Company. They are Interests will stand,
tho you refuse to assist; they do still advance, tho invisibly to us. If you
dedicate not your Lives to the Concernments of Christ, you must lay them out
for the Devil; one of them is served at all times, and by all Persons. Faithful
Service will give a great Testimony to the Lord Jesus, and yield wonderful
advantage to such under your Influence, whose Good you are inclined to
endeavor. You will prejudice no Interest by this, but the Interests of the
Devil, which commenced and grow still on the manifest Ruins of Mankind: And
ought you not to oppose him, to whose Usurpation are owing all the Disorders
and Calamities in the World, which Evils are redressed to the Degree of the
Advancement of the Interests of Christ, and no further.

Can you after all this refuse to bemoan the World, where so many opposite
Interests are set up against Christ; and pity Sins, who so blindly resist and
impatiently bear the merciful and just Attempts of the Lord Jesus? Must not
every Soul Echo to the Apostle in my Text, Now to me to live is Christ?

The whole Discourse is so applicable to your Lordship and Brethren, that I
need no more than entreat, yea, charge you to Act in your Places, as Men to
whom to live is Christ. Let not any opportunity for Service to him, bring your
Souls under the Guilt of Negligence, nor yield Christ matter to upbraid you
with. A Trust is in your Hands; see that the Ends of God be faithfully
answered. Consider that place, Ps. 60. 4.
Thou have given a Banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed
because of the Truth. Resolve then in your Station, that if Christ gain not by
our Power, our Consciences shall not reproach us with refusing to dedicate all
our Abilities to him, whose Glory we chiefly aimed at, and to whose Interest we
are fully devoted.

FINIS.

