STAMP Mayor.
Curia Tent. Jovis tertio die Decembris 1691. Annoque Regni Regis and Reginae
Willielmi and Mariae, Angl. etc. Tertio. Ordered,
THAT the Thanks of this Court be returned to Dr. Wake, for his Sermon preached
at the Parish Church of St. Mary le Bow, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Citizens of this City, on Thursday the 26th of November last, being the day of
Thanksgiving for the Preservation of Their Majesty's Persons, the Success of
their Forces in the Reducing of Ireland, and for His Majesty's Safe Return; and
that he be desired to Print the same.

Goodfellow.

A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR AND Court of Aldermen, IN THE Church
of St. Mary le Bow; On Thursday the 26th of November, BEING THE Day of the
Public Thanksgiving.

By WILLIAM WAKE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, and Preacher
to the Honorable Society of GRAY'S INN.

LONDON, Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate next Holbourn, 1691.

Psalm Cxliv. 9, 10, 11. 9. I will sing a new Song unto Thee O God; upon a
Psaltery and Instrument of Ten Strings will I sing Praises unto Thee.

10. It is He that gives Salvation to Kings, who delivers David his Servant
from the hurtful Sword.

11. Rid me and deliver me from the Hand of Strange Children, whose Mouth
speaks Vanity, and their right hand is a right Hand of Falsehood.


IT is but a very little while since we were wont to meet together in this
Place, to implore the favor of God in the Preservation of their Majesty's
Persons, and for the Good Success of their Arms in those Great Enterprises they
were pleased so generously to undertake, for the necessary Defense of our
Country; the Preservation of our Religion and Liberties; and to put a quicker
End to those unhappy Confusions, we have been so long and dangerously exposed
to.

We are now Assembled with all possible Thankfulness to acknowledge his Mercy,
in the Gracious Return which he has vouchsafed to make to these our Requests.
That He has Preserved our King, and Prosper'd his Enterprises; and given a
Success to our Arms, if not equal to what perhaps some would have wished, yet I
am sure beyond what any of us could reasonably have expected.

Now this being the Design of this days Solemnity, I cannot tell how I could
better entertain your Devotion than in offering you some Reflections upon the
Words before us. In which we have the Thanksgiving and Prayer of a King: A
Gratulatory Acknowledgment of God's Mercy to Him in his past Deliverances, and
an earnest Request that He would still continue to deliver him both from the
Power and Malice of his false and treacherous Enemies.

That this Psalm was composed by King David the A Psalm of David.
Inscription of it will not suffer us to doubt. And that he composed it upon
the account of some great Deliverance which God had given him, from a Personal
danger, as well as for some Great Victory which He had obtained against his
Enemies, the words of the Text sufficiently demonstrate.

But now what that Deliverance in particular was which he here acknowledges
with so much Gratitude, and promises God He would ever celebrate with the most
pious Resentments, and in the most solemn manner that He was able, we are no
where told; nor is it perhaps an easy matter to determine any thing certainly
concerning it.

Indeed were the Title which the Septuagint praefix to this Psalm, of such
Authority, that we might securely rely upon the Credit of it, we should then
soon come to a Resolution of this Point. The Danger which the Psalmist here
refers to, being (...).
therein expressly said to have been that which he underwent when he encountered
singly with Goliath, 1 Samuel XVII. and from whose Sword the (...)
Chaldee Paraphrast on the Text tells us he here blesses God for delivering of
Him.

But as it is certain that this Inscription is not now to be found in any of the
Hebrew Copies at this Day, so Tom ^in Psalm. 143.
Theodoret assures us that neither could He in his time meet with it in any.
And the expressions of this Psalm both in the 2d and 10th Verses, plainly show
that when he composed it he was not only King of Israel, but thoroughly
Established in the Throne. For so those Words must be understood V. 2. Blessed
Compare this with Psalm. 18. 2. 47. 2 Samuel 22. 3. 48.
be the Lord my strength who teaches my Hands to War and my fingers to fight:
My Goodness and my Fortress, my High Tower and my Deliverer, my shield, and He
in whom I trust, who subdueth my People under me: i. e. Who after all the
Contests that have been raised against me to oppose my Authority, has at last
fully established me in the Throne, and brought All Israel to submit themselves
unto Me.

Now this has made Others suppose that the Sword So R. Kimchi in loc.
from which God had delivered David, and for which he here offers this
Eucharistical return to Him, was the Sword of Saul, who so eagerly sought after
his Life; and from whose hand he could never have escaped, had not the same
Providence which before designed him for the Throne, in a wonderful manner
preserved him for it, and at last confirmed him in it.

It cannot be denied but that this is a Conjecture agreeable enough to one part
at least of the business of this Psalm, which was to return Thanks to God for
putting an End to those Oppositions that had been raised against him by the
Friends of the House of Saul; and bringing all Israel to receive him as their
King.

But though I shall not therefore exclude this from being a Part of what the
Psalmist here intended to Bless God for, yet I cannot think that this comes up
to the full meaning of the Words of the Text. For if we look more narrowly into
the Expressions of it, we shall find good grounds to believe that David not
only composed this Psalm after he was come to the Crown, but does more
especially refer to some Deliverance which he had received after his Coming to
it; and by consequence after all his Dangers from the House of Saul were at an
End. For having first vowed a Thanksgiving to God, Us. 9. I will sing a new
Song unto thee O God: upon a Psaltery and Instrument of Ten strings will I sing
Praises unto thee. He tells us Us. 10. That the subject of his Hymn should be
this, It is he that gives Salvation unto KINGS, that has delivered David his
servant from the Hurtful Sword: i. e. as the Connection plainly shows, when he
was a King; and as such received Salvation from Him.

In short, As the Passage I have now mentioned does I think plainly enough
argue that this Psalm was a Thanksgiving for some Deliverance which God had
vouchsafed to him since he was King of Israel; so we may reasonably conclude
from the Acknowledgment V. 12.
which he makes in the Beginning of it, of his being at last Peaceably Settled
in the Throne, as a Blessing which He had but newly received of Him, that it
was a Deliverance from some Danger which befell him not long after his solemn
Inauguration at Hebron, 2 Samuel V. And the Character which he gives us of his
Enemies in two places of this Psalm, that They were Strange V. 7. 8. 11.
Compare Deuteronomy. 32. 21. 2 Kings 17. 15. Jer. 2. 5. etc.
Children, whose mouth did speak Vanity; and their Right hand was a Right hand
of falsehood, farther shows that They were some of the Idolatrous Nations round
about Him that rose up against Him, and put him in that Hazard out of which God
had in a singular Manner delivered Him.

Now this will lead us to a very probable Account of the Occasion and Design of
the Psalm before Us. For in the second of Sam. V. 17. we read that no sooner
had the Philistines heard that they had anointed David King over Israel, but
they immediately Armed themselves against Him, in Hopes that whilst He was yet
scarce well settled in his Government they might be able to deal with Him; least
if they tarried till men's Affections were wholly engaged to Him, He should then
Grow too Strong for them.

But God who had in so wonderful a manner brought him to the Throne, now no
less miraculously preserved him in it. He went forth Himself into the Battle to
smite the Host of the Philistines; He directed 2 Samuel V. -- 23. -- 24. -- 20.
-- 25.
Him both when and How to fall upon Them. And having thus discomfited them in
two Battles; and though not utterly destroyed them, yet obtained a Considerable
Advantage against Them; He composed this Psalm, as a Solemn Thanksgiving and
Prayer to God Almighty; both to Bless him for that Success he had already
obtained, and to implore his Favor in the utter Subversion of these his
Treacherous and Idolatrous Enemies.

I have before observed that this Psalm consists of two principal Parts; viz.
1st. A Thanksgiving for that Great Deliverance which God had already given him
out of the hands of the Philistines: And 2ly. A Prayer for the Continuance of
his Favor and Protection; that He would still go on to save him from his
Enemies, and to bless his Government with Peace and Prosperity: And my Text
leads Me to consider both of them;

Is It. The THANKSGIVING, Vss. 9. 10. I will sing a new Song unto Thee O God! etc.

IIdly. The PRAYER, Us. 11. Rid me and deliver me from the hand of strange
Children, whose Mouth talks Vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood.

I begin with the former of these:

1. The Thanksgiving, which David here made to God Almighty for preserving him
from the Sword of his Enemies, and for the Good Success he had met with in his
Enterprises against Them.

It was a Part of that Religion which the Light of Nature taught the very
Gentiles themselves, as to See Dionys. Hal. l. vi. p. 411. Et supr. l. ii. p.
90.
implore the help of their Gods in times of Danger and Distress; so to make
their Solemn returns of Praise and Thanksgiving to them, as often as they
escaped with Safety out of it. The same Reason which forced them to acknowledge
the Being of a God in the Creation of the World, carrying them on to confess
the Interest he had in the Government of it: And that it was to his Providence
therefore they ought both to recommend Themselves in All their Affairs, and to
render the Praise of whatsoever Success they met with in them.

Hence we find so many Jupiter Fe^etrius Live. Dec. I. l. 1. Stator. ib.
Imperator. l. 6. p75. G. Victor. l. 10. p. 121. I. Pistor. Lactantius de F. R.
p. 110. Tonans. Sueton. in Aug. n. 29. Conservator. Tacitus. Hist. l. 3.
Custos. ib. Propugnator, etc. Apollo. Solianus. Medicus, etc. De Fortunae
Cognominibus. Vid. Alex. ab Alex. Genesis D. l. I. c. 13. Hercules. Victor.
Custos, etc. Ib. l. II c. 14.
Titles given to them almost upon every Occasion of their Saviors and
Deliverers: So many Live. Dec. I. l. 6. Suet. in Augusto. n. 29. In Domitiano.
n. 5. Dionys. Halic. ^ VI. p. 411. Alex. ab Alex. l. I. C. 22. Plut. in Romans n.
8. 9. Plin. N. H. l. VI. c. 28.
Trophies and Monuments set up to perpetuate the Memory of their Blessings to
Posterity: So many public Themist. Or. xiii. p. 305. Ed. 4 to Dionys. Halic.
l. 2. p. 90. Ib. p. 130. l. 3. p. 173. l. 6. ad finem. Virg. Aen l. viii. ver.
172. 188. 189. etc. 268. etc.
Festivals appointed, wherein to commemorate their Favors: So many Live. Dec.
I. l. 5. p 63. H. Vid. Dionys Hal. loc. citatis in (d). Tacit. Ann. l. xiv. c.
21. Live. Dec. I. l. I. p. 9. D. in Tarq. Prisc. Suet. in Aug. c. 18. Vid. Alex.
ab Alex. l. v. c. 8. and l. vi. c. 19.
Shows, and Games, and Spectacles set forth in Honor of their Benefactions:
And to come yet nearer to the Business of the Text, so many Sacred Dionys. Hal.
l. 2. p. 102. and p. 130. Plut. in Romans n. 8. See Orph. Hymn. Callim. in laud
Apoll. Virg. Aen. l. viii. V. 287. etc. 303.
Hymns composed, to declare the Greatness of their Love and Kindness to
Mankind. The very See Rosinus Antiq. Romans lib. x. cap. 28. 29. Dionys. Hal.
lib. 2. p. 102. Alex. ab Alex. l. v. c. 6. Plin. H. Not. l. xv. c. 30. Seneca
l. de Concol. cap. 10. Plin. Panegyr. c. 8.
Triumphs of their Generals were no less designed in Honor of their Gods, than
for the Praise and Glory of their Commanders; Who esteemed it a sufficient
reward for all their Dangers, to go with Pomp and Majesty to their Temples; and
there with the public Acclamations of their Country, present the Spoils of
their Enemies before them; and confess it was by their help See Rosinus Ant. R.
l. X. c. 29.
that they were returned from the Field with Safety and Success. And from all
which no other Conclusion can be drawn than this; That as they were sensible
their Help came to them from above, so they thought it their Duty by all
possible means to express their Grateful Resentments of it.

And indeed if to be Insensible of the Favors which one of our
Fellow Creatures bestows upon us, has ever been Esteemed enough to fix one of
the blackest Imputations, (for so we all of us account that of Ingratitude to
be) upon such a One: How much more both Wicked and Ungrateful must he be judged
who neglects his God, and takes no notice of those Blessings which his
bountiful Providence showers down upon Him?

But there is yet much more to be considered by Us as to this Matter: For not
only our Piety toward God, and that grateful Sense we ought to have of his
Mercies to us, oblige us thus to return our Thanks for them; but our very
Interest too concurs to engage us to it.

He who neglects to acknowledge the Kindness of One of his Fellow Creatures,
and thereby forfeits all Pretense to any farther Favors from Him; runs only
the Hazard of being deprived of that little Help which such a One might
otherwise have afforded Him some Other Time, and of which perhaps He may never
find any great Want. To be sure the most we can suppose he could lose by it,
would be to become thereby Exposed to the Resentments of a Man whom he needs
not much fear, and against Whom he may find out many ways to defend Himself.

But it is not so with relation to God-Almighty: His Providence is always over
us, and we cannot subsist the least Moment of our Lives without it. In Acts
xvii. 28.
him we live, and move, and have our Being. The very Breath that we draw in,
the World in which we dwell, Our Health and Strength, Our Food and Psalm. civ.
28, 29, 30.
Raiment; In a Word, Our Lives and all the Comforts of them, are All of them
the Effects of his continued Bounty to us. And should we by our Ingratitude
provoke Him to withdraw His Favor from us, we should then become Destitute
indeed, for ever lost to all the Hopes both of this World and of the Other.

Now the only Acknowledgment we can make to God for all his Mercies to us, is
this of Praise and Thanksgiving. He is above receiving any Other Returns from
Us. Whasotever we have besides, it is all of his Bounty to us, nor can he at
all be profited by it. Psalm. L. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Psalm. exvi. 12, 13, 17.
And sure when God bestows so many Blessings upon Us, and expects only this
little Tribute to be paid for them, that we should own them to be his Gift, and
celebrate his Mercy for the Giving of them: We must needs be very inexcusable
indeed, if we neglect to return this to Him; and more insensible than the very
1 Chronicles. X. 9. Dan. iv. 34, 37. Jonas 1. 16. etc.
Gentiles themselves; who, as we have before observed, never failed in the most
solemn manner they were able, so to do.

Such then was the Justice and Reasonableness of that Acknowledgment which the
Royal Psalmist here engaged himself to make to God Almighty, for delivering Him
out of those imminent Dangers to which He had been Exposed. I will sing a
New-song unto Thee O God! upon a Psaltry and Instrument of ten strings Will I
sing Praises unto Thee. And it is supposed by some that the very next Psalm to
this, was that Hymn which he composed in pursuance of this Vow: And in which
with all the height of Poetry, and in the most exquisite Form that Art and
Piety joined together and assisting one another could produce; He sets forth
the Glorious Goodness of God, to the Whole World, but especially to Mankind;
and among them more particularly to such as duly serve him, and put their Trust
and Confidence in his Mercy. And in conformity to whose Example it will behove
every One of us this day to lift up our Hearts to Heaven in Songs of Praise to
that God, who has now again in our Case, as He did heretofore in David's, in so
extraordinary a manner made Good the Character of the Text to us; It is He that
Gives Salvation unto Kings, that has delivered David his Servant from the
hurtful Sword.

But of our own concern in this Duty, I shall take Occasion to speak more
particularly hereafter. In the mean time having thus briefly considered in the
General, What those Grounds were upon which the Holy Psalmist took up the
Resolution you have seen in the Words of the Text, I will sing a new-song unto
Thee O God: Let us for our further Direction in the Duty before Us, enquire
more expressly, What the Subject of his Praise was, and what Ours ought at this
Time to be?

Now this He tells Us in the next Verse; viz. that it should consist in a
Grateful Acknowledgment of Gods particular Providence.

(1st.) Over See R. Kimchi in loc.
All Kings and Princes whatsoever, more than over other Men: It is He that
gives Salvation unto Kings.

(2dly.) Among Them in a more especial manner over Himself, more than any Other
King besides: It is he that gives Salvation unto Kings; and delivers David
his Servant from the hurtful Sword.

And (1st.) That we ought to bless God for that particular Providence he is
pleased to exercise over Kings and Princes, beyond what he usually does over
other Ordinary Persons. See Cic. de Not. Deor. l. ii. ad fin. Quae ratio
Poetas, maximeque Homerum impulit, ut principibus. Heroum -- certos Deos
discriminum and periculorum comites adjungeret. Vid. pl.


For let not the Greatest Monarchs mistake themselves, as if it were their own
Power or Conduct that secured them against those many and imminent Dangers to
which their very Place and Station continually exposes them. But rather let
them consider, (...). Heracl. in Us. 10. Huj. Psalm. Et Supr. in Us. 1. Vid.
Cat. ib. in Us. 2.
What would all their Guards and their Attendants, all their mighty Power and
Forces avail Them, were there not a superior Eye of Providence continually
watching over them, to protect and preserve them?

That a whole Nation should stand in awe of one single Person, whom they all
know to be but a Man like unto themselves; That they should obey his Commands,
and tremble at his Justice: That those who oftentimes despise their own Lives,
should yet not dare to strike at His; but startle at the very Thought of doing
him a Mischief: It Is not their own Wisdom, or Power or Resolution, it is not the
Name or Ensigns of Majesty, than can be thought sufficient to work such a
Restraint. It is the Providence of that God by whom Kings reign, and Princes
decree Prove. viii 15.
Justice, that alone is able to give such a Reverence and Security to them. He
has set his Stamp of Majesty upon them; He has declared them to be his
Ministers: and this forces even the most Violent Men Romans xiii. 1, 2, 5.
to have such a regard for them, as nothing but this could ever engage them to.

And this I say ought at all times, but especially on such Solemn Occasions as
these, to be esteemed a Matter of especial Praise and Thanksgiving to God for
it.

For were it not for such a Restraint as that we Hieroclea de Prove. p. 18.
have now been speaking of, What would become of All the Peace, and Order, and
Government of the World? Kings might enact Laws; they might settle our Liberty
and Property at Home, and enter into Leagues of Peace and Commerce Abroad: But
alas! What precarious things would All these be, were they left open by God to
the Violence and Fury of every bold Invader; and no longer to be of any Force,
than till some desperate and turbulent Spirits should be found to run All
things into Disorder and Confusion?

But Blessed be God! who has not given Us up to the Wild Passions, and
ungoverned Appetites of Wicked and Violent Men. But as he has laid the
strongest Obligations upon Us to be subject to the higher Powers, not only for
Wrath but also for Conscience Romans xiii. 1, 5.
sake; to obey their Laws, and support their Government; to bear with their
Infirmities, and if Occasion be, even Suffer too rather than dare to resist
their Authority: So has he impressed on our Minds a certain Awe of that Power
which he has put into their hands, that will not permit us, no not in our very
Hearts to despise or disregard them; and by frequent Instances of his Vengeance
has effectually assured us, that there is a Singular Eye of Providence that
overlooks them, and that no One shall 1 Samuel xxvi. 9.
lift up his hand against them and go unpunished.

This as it is the Great Security of all the Peace and Quiet, of all the
Happiness and Prosperity which we Enjoy; So ought we upon all Occasions to be
ready to declare our Sense of it, by our grateful Acknowledgments to God for
it. But the Royal Psalmist had a yet more particular Subject for his Praise
than this. For

(2dly.) This God who has such a near and tender regard for All Kings and
Princes whatsoever, above Other Men; did in a Singular Manner show his Concern
for Him, more than for any Other Prince that then lived in the World.

If we consider Him before his coming to the Throne; From how many Dangers did
it even then please God to save and deliver Him? Let the Hazards which he run
with the Lion and the Bear; His 1 (...).
Encounters with Goliath first, and then with whole

Armies of the Philistines: His narrow escape from Ib. C^. xviii, xix. etc.
the 1 Samuel xviii. 1^.
Javelin of Saul; and his yet more narrow escape from the Hands of those Ib.
xix. ^0.
Murderers whom he sent on purpose to slay him: Let the Perils he underwent
when Ib. Chapter xxii xxiii, xxiv. etc.
Saul with his Army hunted him up and down from place to place; forced Him to
flee sometimes into the Wilderness, among the Wild Beasts for Refuge; at other
times into the Enemies Country, to those very 1 Samuel xxvii, xxviii
Philistines whom he had so much enraged by his frequent Encounters against
them; not to mention any more Particulars, declare to us.

Nor were those he underwent, 2dly, after he 2 Samuel Chapter ii, iii, iv.
came to the Throne any less remarkable: Whilst the Kingdom was yet divided
against Him, and but one of all the Tribes of Israel stuck firm to Him, Ib. Chapter
v. 5*
and owned his Authority for above Seven years. And when at last it pleased God
to unite the whole People under him; no sooner was He free from those Civil
Disturbances at Home, but a Foreign -- 17.
Enemy forthwith invaded him from Abroad, and again exposed him to New Dangers.

(...) out of all these Difficulties God delivered him; and were it necessary
for me to go on to the following parts of his Life, we might find yet greater
Instances than these of his Wonderful Preservations of him. And as it is certain
that no One ever took more Care to magnify the Mercies of God, than David did;
So I may say that never had any Prince greater reason than He had so to do: Who
seems to have been chosen by God out of all the Kings of the World, to show
what a tender regard the Almighty has to his own Ministers, whilst they take
care to live well, and to demean themselves as becomes that Place, and
Character which he has bestowed upon Them.

This then was the Case of the Royal Psalmist, when he resolved upon that Song
of Eucharist, of which the Text speaks, in acknowledgment of all those
Blessings which God had Vouchsafed to Him. And if we Enquire into the Reason of
all this, What it was that moved God to show such a particular regard to this
Great Man; I think we may give these two Accounts of it.

1st. That He was King of Gods own peculiar People; that People which he had
chosen out of all Psalm. 135. 4. Deutr. iv. 7, 8, 32, etc. 2 Samuel vii. 23.
the Inhabitants of the Earth to be his own Inheritance. To whom alone of all
the Nations of the World he had Declared his Will, and given many noble
Discoveries of himself; whilst the rest of Mankind lay in a miserable State of
Darkness and Idolatry: And of whom therefore he took a singular Care, more than
of any Other People or Country besides.

Now if God had an especial regard to the Jewish Nation more than to any Other;
If he kept as it Exodus xxv. 8. Jer. vii. 12. Ezekiel. xxxvii. 26.
were his peculiar Residence among them, and maintained a more than ordinary
Communication in all other respects with them: It ought not to be wondered, If
we find him in a singular manner watching over their King too, more than over
those of any Other People or Nation besides, and in an extraordinary manner
careful to save and desend Him.

But this is not yet All: For if we look into the History of the Holy David, we
shall find that God did not only favor Him more than any King of all the
Nations round about Him, but more than any other King, even of Israel its self.
And therefore I add

2dly. That this Great Man was not only King of God's own peculiar People, and
as such the Guardian of his Laws, and Supporter of his Worship: But he was
moreover Himself a most excellent Person too, A Man after God's own Heart; and
by his own 1 Samuel xiii. 14. Psalm. v. 12. xxxiv. 15, 17. xxxvii. 17, etc.
Piety, no less than by his place and Character in a more particular manner
entitled to the Divine Care and Protection.

And this is what I take to be implied in that Expression of the Text where He
calls himself God's Servant; It is He that gives Salvation unto Kings, who
delivers David his Servant from the Hurtful Sword. Compare 1 Chronicles. x. 13,
14. with Joseph. Ant. L. vii. c. 4. Where speaking of David's Care in this
particular, He observes: That it was the Neglect of this that ruined Saul:
(...). 2 Samuel vii. S. Ib. xxii. 21, etc.
Intimating to us, that it was This Relation in which he stood to God above all
other Kings, and indeed almost beyond all Other Men that ever lived in the
World, of being Zealous and Faithful in his Service, that Engaged his
Providence to such an extraordinary Concern for Him.

And if we look into all the following Reigns we shall find, that according as
any of his Successors showed themselves either 1 Kings xv. 4. 2 Kings x. 30. 2 Chronicles xv. xvii. 5. xx. 37. xxvi. 5. xxvii. 6.
careful for Gods Service, or 1 Samuel ii. 30. 1 Kings xi. 11, 31, 33. xiv. 9,
10. xv. 29. xvi. 12, 13, 19. xvii. 18. xxi. 10. 2 Chronicles. xii. 5, 6, etc. xxv.
14, 15.
negligligent of it; Accordingly God appeared to be more or less careful to
prosper and protect them.

Whilst Solomon continued to walk in the Steps See 1 Kings c. x.
of his Father David, never was any Prince more Great or Honorable than He
was. But when Peace and 1 Kings xi. 4.
Plenty, His Wives and his Pleasures corrupted his Religion, and made Him halt
between God and Baal, the Temple and the Groves: though for his Father David's
sake God would not rend the Kingdom -- 9. 11, 12, 13. -- 14, 23, 26.
from Him in his own time, yet He threatened to deprive his Son of it; and
raised up many Dangers and Troubles against him, to disturb his Peace, and
diminish his Glory.

On the other side we are told of Hezekiah, 2 Kings xviii. 5. That after Him
was none like Him of all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before Him. For
he clave to the LORD and departed not from following Him, but kept his
Commandments which the LORD commanded Moses. And what the Consequence of his
Piety was we read in the very next Verse; And the LORD was with Him, and he
prospered whithersoever he went forth.

It were an Easy matter to add many more Examples in proof of this Remark,
were it at all necessary to insist upon it. The Sum of all is this; That as
God does in a particular Manner Exercise his Providence in the Preservation of
Kings and Princes above other Men; so among them he is yet more especially
careful to prosper and protect Those who profess his true Religion, and take
care both to Live themselves, and as far as they are able, to engage their
People too to live according to the Rules of it.

Indeed there are Certain Seasons when God suffers the Best Princes not only to
fall into some Hosea x. 3. and xiii. 11.
lesser Dangers, but it may be utterly to be cut off by Wicked and Violent
Hands. When the Sins of a Nation are come to their full Period, So that all the
Piety and Prudence of their Governors are neither able to reclaim them from
their Evil ways, 2 Kings xxiii 26.
nor to intercede with God for a longer Forbearance of them.

Such was the Case of the 2 Kings xxii. 16 ^. xxiii. 26.
Jews in the time of King Josiah; a better Prince than whom never sat upon the
Throne of David. Yet God suffered him to fall by the Hand of 2. Chron. xxxv.
2^, etc.
Pharaoh-Necho King os Egypt, that so he might not survive the 2 Kings xxii.
18, 19, ^0.
Fortunes of his Country, nor see the Evil which was then just ready to break
in upon it. And when Schism and Faction, when Base Designs, and Open
Immoralities had in like manner prepared Us of this Country for some great
Destruction: We know how it pleased God from small Beginnings, and unforeseen
Accidents, to throw us into a miserable State of War and Confesion; and to
deprive us at once both of an Excellent Prince, and with him of our Church and
Monarchy too.

But then even this God appoints in Mercy to Isai Lvii. ^. 2 Kings xxii. 18, etc
them, when it would really be more Grievous to them to Live than to Die: And
the Misfortune generally is not so much theirs, as the Country's or Nation's
from which they are taken.

And so on the Other hand, There is a time when the Worst Princes are strangely
preserved; though Jer. xxv. 12. L. 18.
yet even then we may observe that for the most part they perish miserably in
the End. When God raises them up to be the Scourge and Plague of a wicked
World; and makes use of them as he did Jer. xxv. 9. xliii. 10. Ezekiel. xxvi. 7.
sometimes of the Kings of Egypt and Babylon heretofore, to punish the People
and Kingdoms round about Them.

But otherwise, I believe it will generally be found true, that the more
Careful any King or Prince is to live well, and govern justly, and do what in
Him lies to propagate a true Sense of Piety among his People, the Happier He
proves; and is the more Eminently preserved by God, as he is certainly the more
dearly Beloved by Him.

And good reason there is why God should observe this Method with them: For

[1st.] This, if any thing, will lay the Strongest Obligations upon such
Persons to be Very careful to support the Honor of God, and the Credit of
Religion: When once they shall perceive that their Welfare in this present
World, as well as their final Happiness in the Other, depends upon it.

And I need not tell you what a mighty Advantage this must needs bring to
Virtue and Piety; To find not only a Refuge in the Courts of Princes, Themist.
Orat. xvii. p. 462. Ed. Paris. 4to.
but a Respect and Encouragement too: And be countenanced by those whose very
Examples are Influential, and will contribute more to the promoting a Sense of
Religion in the World, than all the Motives or Arguments that we can urge, will
ever be able to do without it.

[2dly.] Such a Procedure as this gives a Great Justification to the ways of
Providence, in the Menagement of Affairs here below. It shows that there is a
God who judges in the Earth: That he does Psalm ^iii. 11.
not look on as an unconcerned Spectator of the Affairs of Men; but when he
sees Occasion, both can and does interpose too, and reward or punish the
Greatest Persons, according to their Works.

The Fortunes of Princes as they are placed in a much Higher Sphere Habet hoc
primum magna Fortuna, quod nihil tectum, nihil Occultum esse patitur. Plin.
Paneg. c. 83.
than those of Other Men, so are they by consequence more Conspicuous too; and
lie open a great deal more to public Observation. And when once it shall be
remarked that they flourish or decay, are either Exalted or Cast down,
according as they live or not in the Exercise of Piety: This will effectually
silence all the Cavils of the Greatest Sceptick in his Disputes against a
Providence; and force him whether he will or no to confess, that Verily there
is a reward for the Righteous, doubtless there is a God who observes whatsoever
is done by us, and will not suffer the Wicked always to go unpunished.

Again, [3dly.] It is commonly alleged, and I think very truly too, that
Kingdoms and Nations, are therefore either rewarded or punished in this World,
because they shall not as such be judged in the Other. And the same may be said
of their Rulers too: When the Greatest Monarch goes down into the Grave, all
his Pomp and Power; His Titles and Majesty perish together with him. And he
shall stand in Judgment in the same undistinguished Rank with the meanest of
his Subjects.

Whatsoever Reward therefore God shall please to give to such an One as a King,
it must be all in this present Life. Now though I will not deny, but that those
who employ their Power and Authority which God has committed to them to the
Ends of Virtue and Religion; to promote the Peace and Welfare of their Country,
and as far as they can, to procure the Happiness of all the Nations round about
them; both may receive a super-abundant reward for it, and I doubt not shall
receive a more than ordinary Retribution in the Other World: Yet I cannot but
think there may be some reason too, why they should meet with some part of
their Recompense in this. And since to their private Piety as they are
Christians, they add a public Concern for the Glory of God, and the Good of
the World as they are Princes: Though I dare not say that God in Justice ought,
yet I think we may affirm that it is not without good reason that he does
vouchsafe in a singular manner to watch over them, as a common Blessing to
Mankind; and prosper their Endeavors in what tends so much to the noblest Ends
of his Providence, to his own Honor, to the Interest and Reputation of his
Religion; and in one word, to the public Advantage both of M^ns Peace and
Tranquillity in this Life, and of their Everlasting Happiness and Salvation in
the Other.

And this may suffice for the first thing I propo^d to speak to, Of the General
Obligation which ^y, upon the Royal Psalmist thus to praise God; and of the
particular manner wherein he engaged to do it. I shall add but very little as
to the Other Consideration,

IIdly. Of the Prayer with which he closed up his Thanksgiving: Save me and
deliver Me from the hand of strange Children, whose Mouth speaks Vanity, and
their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.

I have before observed, that the Enemies against Whom David here prays; and
whom he brands with the Ignominious Character, of a Vain, Idolatrous, and
Perfidious People, were the Philistines, who declared 2 Samuel v. 17
War against him, immediately upon his being Anointed King in Hebron. Now though
by the Blessing of God he had already obtained two considerable Victories over
them, whereby he was for the present at Ease from them: Yet he knew, that by
the assistance which the Sea Jos. Ant. l. v. 1 cap 4.
Neighboring Countries were all ready to lend to them, they would again be in
a Condition in a little while to make Head against him; and he doubted not but
that as soon as ever they were able, they would be Treacherous enough to do it.

And it was upon this Apprehension, that having first given Thanks to God for
his present Deliverance, he in the next place subjoined his earnest Request to
him, that he would in like manner preserve him from their Attempts for the time
to come. And how necessary such a Prayer was, the Event showed. For it was not
very long before he was again engaged with them: And then God 2 Samuel viii. 1,
etc xxi 15 etc. Compare with xxii. 1. See Joseph. An^. lib. vii. cap. 10. (...).
remembered his Prayer, and not only delivered him out of their hands; but
strengthened him in such a manner, till at last after many Encounters. He
utterly disabled them from giving any farther Trouble to Him.

But I insist too long upon the Consideration of these Words as they lie before
me in this Psalm: And the Solemnity of this Day calls me off to another
Application of them. And though I doubt not but you have in a great Measure
prevented Me in your Reflections upon the foregoing Parts of this Discourse;
yet I cannot conclude without pointing out to you somewhat more plainly, how
great an Interest we have in the Subject of it.

And Is It. As to what concerns the Eucharistical part of the Text, never had any
People greater Reason to join with Holy David in his Thanksgiving to God, than
We of this Nation at this Time have.

For indeed, when did God ever more eminently show himself to be the Savior of
Kings, than in those frequent and signal Deliverances which he has afforded to
our own Royal Sovereign from the Hurtful Sword?

If (1st) We consider his Personal Deliverances; I may venture to affirm, That
never did any Prince more generously expose himself for any People, than his
Majesty in these late Years has done for Us; nor I think ever did any more
narrowly escape with Safety out of them.

For not to say any thing of the Common Hazards of War; though perhaps no Prince
either undertook more Expeditions, or carried them on with greater Diligence,
or appeard in them with more Courage; or Ended them with better Success; or
less considered His own Safety, in comparison of the public Good, than our
Royal Master has done, since the time of Him of whom our Text speaks. I can
scarce yet without Astonishment remember, How near the Fatal Blow At the B^^^e
in Ireland.
came to him, which had not the watchful Providence of God, for sure nothing
else could have done it, prevented, must for. Ever have quenched the Light of
our 2 Samuel xxi 17.
Israel; and have at once put a final period both to his Life, and in that to
all our Hopes. But that God who raised him up to assert his Cause, and to
vindicate the Liberty not of this Country only, but of all Europe, from the
Rage and Power of its Common Enemy and Oppressor, had yet more Victories for
him to obtain. And therefore he heard our Prayers, and covered his Head in that
Day of Battle; and sent him back to us with so much the Greater Joy, by how
much the nearer we were to have been utterly deprived of Him.

But that which ought yet more to be considered by Us, and to raise up our
Souls to a still greater height of Thanksgiving for this Deliverance is; that
as his Danger was Imminent, so was it of such a Nature too, that nothing but
the same God who preserved David heretofore from the Hurtful Sword, could have
delivered our King from the Stroke of it.

Here was no room for Counsel or Advice; No Opportunity for any Humane Means to
have interposed for his Preservation. Neither the Courage of his Bravest, nor
the Conduct of his Wisest Servants, could have stood him in any Stead. No; it
was that God who did Deliver Him, that alone was capable of doing of it: And
therefore not unto Us, O Lord, but Psalm Cxv. 1.
unto thy Name be the Glory of it.

And these are such Circumstances as would at any time have engaged us to a
lively Sense of so great a Deliverance: But at such a time as that was, in
which God was pleased thus wonderfully to preserve him, to restore him again to
us; this is what gives a singular Addition to the Blessing of it.

For a Nation to be deprived of a Good Prince, a King endued with all those
Royal Virtues, which even the Enemies of our Great Sovereign cannot deny to be
most Conspicuous in Him; must certainly at any time have been a very great
Calamity, and what would have called for the Lamentations of all that truly
valued either the Honor or Welfare of their Country.

But to have been deprived of such a Prince in a time of Trouble and
Difficulty; when nothing but his Conduct, his Courage and Reputation could
possibly have prevented Us from an utter Ruin and Confusion: I want words to
express how Fatal the Consequence must have been of it.

And yet this, or rather if possible, somewhat beyond all this was our Case,
when God sent us this great Deliverance.

Our Enemies defied us from Abroad; They threatened us even there where we
thought our selves the most Secure against Them: Where we were wont till now to
give Laws, and strike Terror into all other Nations besides. And had they
obtained this farther Advantage against us; What could have hindered but that
our very Name and Nation, our Liberties and Religion, must for ever have been
buried in Reproach, and Desolation?

Nor was the Insolence of Those within any less. They began already to devour
us again in their Hopes; and expected only when the Happy Minute should come,
that would again have put them in a Condition to have accomplished their Wicked
Designs against us.

Thus did all things seem manifestly to threaten us with Rain and Confusion.
Nothing now remained but the Dread of our absent Prince; and whom though at the
Greatest Distance they cannot but tremble at, to rescue us from these Dangers.
And we may truly say, it was the Reputation of his Name, and the Apprehension
of his Conduct, that then kept us in Peace and Quiet, when We justly feared
that all was running into War and Tumults. And had the Providence of God then
fais'd him; had not the Almighty in a most wonderful manner preserved Him; and
given him a more than Ordinary Success in his Undertakings: We should now have
been perhaps One of the most Miserable, to be sure one of the most Slavish and
Contemptible Nations in the World.

I should much exceed the Bounds of such a Discourse as this, should I go on
particularly to recount to you what mighty Deliverances God has again
vouchsafed to Him, since that of which I have been hitherto speaking. To what
Dangers he has been exposed in an Element that of All Others has ever been the
most Contrary to Him? What new Hazards he has again encountered in the Field?
And all this for our sakes, to promote our Welfare, and if it be possible,
secure it to all Succeding Generations.

Blessed be God! Who has again brought Him back to Us in Health and Safety, and
Crowned him yet once more with Honor and Victory. That has turned those
Dangers we before lay under, into some Hopes, that I do not say into a fair
Prospect of Peace and Security. That has restored our Country its King, Our
Church its Defender, and all of us Our public Welfare and Security. And who if
We be not our selves wanting to his Desires, shall by the Blessing of the same
God, not only save us from Ruin, but repair our Credit, and revive that Spirit
amongst us which enabled our Ancestors so Gloriously to Triumph over their
Enemies heretofore: And show that it is not in vain We either bear the Arms of
France, or pretend a Right and Title to it. That Our Nation is still the same
it ever was, and has only wanted a Prince to lead it on. And having now at last
met with such a One, who can tell but we may yet see that Proud Monarch at last
shown no longer to be Invincible? But that a King of England, supported by the
Favor of God, the Justice of his Cause, and the ^^^^age and Affections of his
People, is still able to give a Check to his Carier; And deliver Europe from
the Insolence of a Power which it had never feared, had not the Pacifick Temper
of our late Princes, and even the Help of our Arms unhappily raised it to too
Great a height, either for the Common Peace, or our own Security.

Which brings me to the Consideration of that Other sort of Deliverances which
God has vouchsafed to our King, as he did to David heretofore, viz.

2dly. From the Force and Power of his Enemies.

And this again carries me into a new Field of Discourse, and ministers another
large and noble Subject to us of Praise and Thanksgiving.

It is but a little while since we seemed to have been a Nation marked out by
Heaven for Ruin and Destruction. see the Declar. of the Lords and Commons, Feb.
13. 1688.
Our Religion and Liberties, were begun to be both equally trampled under foot.
Our Laws were overruled, and become no longer of any Use to us: The very
Legis-lative Power its self, see Knygh^on p. 2681 K. Chapter Is It, Ans. to the xix.
Propos.
contrived by our Ancestors in such a manner as to be the Great Security of the
Subject, and Barrier against the Arbitrary and unbounded Power of the Prince;
by See 2 Inst. f. 169. ^ Inst. 10. Stat. 7. H. 4.
Secret Practices, and unwarrantable Attempts endeavored to be turned against
us, and made the very Means of running us into Slavery.

In the midst of this Distress, God raised up a mighty and unexpected Salvation
for us. A Prince not less injured, but much more able to assert his Rights, and
exact a Satisfaction than We were. And God prosper'd his Enterprise in such a
manner, as I believe is not to be paralleled in Story, nor will Posterity
perhaps believe it. That there should be a Conquest without a Battle: A Kingdom
peaceably See K. J's Letter to the E. of Fev. about Disbanding the Army, with
the E's Letter thereupon to the Prince of Orange.
Delivered up by a Prince to his greatest Enemy; who had at the same time to
all Appearance a better Force actually in the Field to defend it, than the
Other had to force him out of it.

But what can be done, when God infatuates Men's Counsels, and strikes a Terror
upon their Hearts, that will not suffer them bravely to defend, what they have
Vainly undertaken? And though Subjects for Conscience sake may submit to the most
unjust Usurpations, and not dare by Force to Right themselves: Yet I think few
have ever been so delicate in their Obedience, as to esteem themselves under
any Obligation to fight themselves into Slavery; and contend for their Chains,
with those who would set them at Liberty from them.

Thus did God begin to Save us from our Enemies, and from the Hands of those
that Hate us; Or rather in Luke I 74.
the words of the Text, from the hands of strange Children; whose Mouth
speaks Vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of Falsehood. But we have
yet more than this to fill out our Hymns of Praise and Thanksgiving. God has
not only saved Us from this Danger within, but has preserved us too from that
which was the natural Consequence of it, the Fury of War-Abroad: And given such
a Success to our Arms, as I am persuaded the most Sanguine amongst us, could
hardly have flattered Himself withal.

When was it ever heard before, that a little weak Town, and a few
undisciplined Men, baffled all the Attacks of a numerous Army, provided with
all things necessary for the reducing of it: And at last forced them, after a
Siege of Fifteen Weeks, to quit their Attempt as Vain and Unpracticable?

That a whole Kingdom, fenced by Nature to a degree of being almost
impregnable; supported by Men every way engaged both by Interest and Religion,
by all their Hopes of this World and the Other, to do their utmost to Defend
it; Assisted by a Powerful Force from Abroad, and to all this, animated with a
Spirit of Hatred and Revenge; should yet in two years time be reduced to that
Degree, as not to let the least corner of it remain Unconquered?

Where can we find any Instances that may serve to parallel the Battles that
have been fought, and the Attempts that have been made upon this Occasion?
Scarce did ever Despair its self oblige Men to run such Hazards as our Forces
have freely done; and that by the wonderful Providence of God, with Success too.

Nor let any here Object either the Treachery or Cowardice of our Enemies; as
if it were to those we ought to ascribe a great part of that Success we have
had against them. But rather let us attribute these Blessings, as most
certainly we ought to do, to the Favor of God; to the Justice of our Cause,
and to the Fortunes and Bravery of our Princes; dear to Heaven, and raised up
by it to be the Instruments of Providence, in reforming the Manners, and
redressing the Oppressions of an injured and groaning World: In short, to the
Help of that Hand which has so plainly shown its self in all this Deliverance;
that we may with Assurance cry out with the Holy Man in our Text; It is the
LORD who Gives Victory unto Kings; that has delivered David his Servant from
the Hurtful Sword.

And having thus fulfilled this first part of the Duty of this day; let us now
to our Tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving add,

2dly. Our Prayers too, that He would vouchsafe to Accomplish what He has thus
graciously begun for Us; and not cease to protect our King and Prosper his
Arms, till he shall have finally delivered us out of all our Dangers.

It was the great Complaint of David heretofore, and what made him so much the
more Earnest in his Requests to God for his Assistance; that his Enemies were
Men of no Religion, neither whose Faith could be relied on, nor could any thing
keep them from doing him a Mischief, but only their being reduced into such a
State, as not to have it in their Power to hurt Him.

This is the Character which He gives Us of Them in the Text: And what a deep
Impression the Consideration hereof made upon his Mind we may see by this, that
he not only insists upon it, in his Prayer to God against Them, as one great
Motive to implore his Help for the utter Destruction of them; but repeats it
again and again: Send thine hand from above, says He, rid me and deliver Me out
of the Great Waters, from the hand of strange Children, Whose Mouth speaks
Vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of Falsehood, Vss. 7, 8. And again,
Us. 11. Rid me and deliver me from the Hand of strange Children, whose Mouth
speaks Vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of Falsehood.

So that then if We would know how far we are concerned to join with David in
the Prayer before us, we must stop a little, and consider how nearly our
Enemies resemble his. And if upon the Enquiry it shall appear that they come up
in every particular to the full Character of those in the Text; If it shall be
found that We have now to do with the same Strange Children that he had
heretofore, Whose Mouth speaks Vanity, and their right hand is a right hand
of Falsehood: Then doubtless it must remain that we ought also to pray as he
did, that God would rid us and deliver us out of their Hands.

And 1st. As to what concerns the Point of Religion; they are in the utmost
import of the Phrase, Strange Children. They not only differ from us both in
their Faith and Worship; but they do what in them lies to Destroy our Religion,
and even Our selves for its sake.

How many See a Catalogue of them set out in Triumph by Monsieur le Feure,
Nouveau Recueil: a la fin. de la 3 me Party. Monsieur Varillas boasts that
they were 2150.
Protestant Churches have within these few Years been Demolished by them? What
See * Plaints des Protestans: * 'Etat des Reformez en France: * Lettres
Pastorales de Mr. Jurieu: * Recueil de Mr. le Feure: * Defense des libertez des
Eglises R. de France.
Multitudes of our Brethren have they Persecuted even into strange Countries?
And with what unheard of See * Plaints des Protestans: * 'Etat des Reformez en
France: * Lettres Pastorales de Mr. Jurieu: * Recueil de Mr. le Feure: *
Defense des libertez des Eglises R. de France.
Cruelty have they treated such as could not escape out of their Hands?

Nor did their Fury stop within the Bounds of their own Country: It reached
even into Foreign Lands? And they did what in them lay to promote the same
Treatment to them all the World over. I need not tell you by whose means the
Ancient See an Account of this in the Letters between the D. of Savoy and the
Fr. K. translated from the Originals, and Printed, Anno 1690.
Churches of the Valleys were almost totally extirpated. And how fast the same
Design was carrying on in our own Country, you all very well know.

When the Decree for revoking the once supposed Irrevocable Edict of Nantes was
resolved on; It was not thought sufficient to extend the Fury of it to the
Subjects of the Crown of France only, but they struck even at Foreigners too.
Arrest. du. 11. Janvier. 1636. -- A la charge qu'ils ne pourront fair dans le
Royaume aucun Exercise de leur Religion.
And all the Grace that could be allowed them was that they might live, and
Traffic in that Country, but then they must not Exercise any Act of Religion
within its Territories.

Nay but this was yet too much, and therefore another Du 12. Juillet. 1686.
Art. 1. Nous defendons a tous Ministres de la R P. R. tant Francois qu'
Estrangers de rentrer dans notre Royaume-pour quelque raison on pretext que ce
puisse etre -- and en cas qu'il s'y en trouve -- voulons qu'ils^^^ent punis de
MORT.
Edict was sent out, and such as I believe was scarcely ever heard of before;
forbidding all Ministers, as well Strangers as French, to come into that
Kingdom upon any account whatsoever, upon Pain of Death.

I shall not now enquire how consistent such Decrees See their Majesty's
Declaration of War, against the French K.
as these are with the Common Laws of Nations; Or whether it ought not justly
to excite all other Princes to rise up and unite against Him as their Common
Enemy, who thus sets himself up, Alone against All. Un a Tous
See le Feure, in his Dedication. On se persuaderoit difficilement, que Vous
eu^^iez force toute l'Europe a embrasser les Conditions de Paix qu'il avoit plu
a V. Majeste de luy prescrire. Que vous eu^iez Oblige des Souveraigns a venir
implorer votre Clemence, aux pieds de vostre Trone. Nor is this any more than
what their public Inscriptions justify: In one we find this Verse: Undarum.
Terraeque potens, atquo ARBITER ORBIS. In another He is set forth under the
Emblem of the Sun, at whose breaking out all the other Princes, like so many
Stars disappear; with this Motto, UT PATET, ISTA LATENT. Particularly with
relation to England, a Lion is represented running from the Cock; with this
Motto, Veni, Vidi, Vici. And to mention no more, in another Medal the King of
France is drawn standing with the Globe on the Point of his Sword, vaunting
that he does what he pleases with it; Quod libet, licet. See the Collect. of
Father Menetrier.
As if he were indeed, what some of his Flatterers doubt not to represent Him,
the Universal Monarch; and all other Princes but as so many Slaves and Vassals
to Him. But sure I am that our Prayers cannot but be Seasonable and even Pious
against such an Enemy; who is not only a Stranger to the True Religion, but one
of the Greatest Persecutors of it that ever was; and as such may well be looked
upon by us, to be Gods Enemy no less than Ours.

But, 2dly. And to carry the Parallel yet higher: We have to do not only with
Strange Children, as David also had; but with such whose Mouths also speak
Vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of Falsehood. That is in other
words with such as can never securely be trusted by Us, whilst they are in a
Condition to do us a Mischief.

A sufficient Argument of which may I think be taken from the Consideration of
those Measures by which they have acted in this last Reign; and grown up to
that Power which is now become so formidable to all Europe. For give me leave
freely to remonstrate it to you: When did they ever neglect by any means to
enlarge their Borders, and encroach upon all (...) an Acount of All this in a
little Tract lately Reprinted, viz. Christianissimus Christianandus.
their Neighbors round about them? What little Pretenses have many times
served them so to do? And why then should it be thought that they will be more
careful to repress their Violences and keep within the Bounds of Equity and
Moderation for the time to come, than they have been to observe any such kind
of Measures hitherto?

The truth is when I consider with what gross Injustice the many Treaties of
Pacification confirmed by Charles IX. 1573. gave them an Edict which He called
Perpetual and Irrevocable. This was confirmed by Hen. III. in 1576. and 1577.
And again in 1579. and 1580. Then followed the Great Edict of Nantes under King
Hen. IV. This was confirmed by Lewis XIII. An. 1610. and again An. 1615. And by
the present K. An. 1643. and 1652. In the former of which, speaking of the
Edicts before mentioned, it is said; Lesquels Edits, bien que PERPETUELS, nous
avons de nouveau, entant que besoin est, ou seroit, confirmez, and Confirmons
par ces dites Presents.
Five Successive Kings to those of the Reformed Religion, have all been broken;
How the Great Edict of Nantes its self, not only called Perpetual and
Irrevocable, but with all possible care endeavored to have been See Def. des
lib. des Egl. R. de F^. pt. 1st.
made so too; Confirmed 'twice by that very Prince, who has since revoked it;
has nevertheless been violated, and contrary to the Express Intention of it,
their Religion prohibited, their Estates Confiscated, themselves Banished, or
else forced either to Rot in their Prisons, or be made Slaves in their Galleys:
I cannot but think, that certainly that Maxim so often charged upon those of
the Other Communion See the State of the Protestants in Ireland, Chap. III. 13.
p 169, etc. to 178.
That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, is much more Catholic than they
would have it believed to be; but especially in those places where that Society
prevails, which is of all others the most deservedly Scandalous, for being the
Great Supporters of such kind of Tricks and Devices.

And should this be the Case; then I am sure we may here also have again
another Reason both to look to our selves; and to pray with the Holy Psalmist
that God would deliver us from such Enemies, whose Mouth speaks Vanity, and
their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.

But I must now go yet farther; and offer you another Reflection, which will
show us to have still more Reason than ever He had to pray against our Enemies.
And that is upon the account of that Ruin and Destruction which they carry
wherever they come almost beyond whatever any People in the World ever did
before.

For however the Misfortunes of War are always very deplorable; and they who
are esteemed the most moderate nevertheless allow themselves a great Liberty to
Wast and Destroy; yet I think it has been ever judged by all civilized Nations
whatsoever, that there is a See this largely discussed by Grotius de Jure
Belli, etc. lib. iii. chapter 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Moderation to be observed even against an Enemy; and that the Laws both of
God, of Nature, and Nations require it of us.

It is this that has prevailed with the Greatest Generals See Grotius, ib. l.
3. cap. 11.. 2. Themist. Or. x. p. 259.
heretofore to spare the Country of their Enemy, as far as might be done
without Injury to their own Cause. But alas! Our Adversaries are above such
Menagements. On the contrary, their delight is to Ruin what they cannot
Conquer; and according to One of their own In a late Medal. they represent
themselves under the figure of a Bomb towering in the Air, with this
Inscription, Quocunque cadat, Dat Stragem.
Emblems, to ravage and destroy all before them.

How many Noble and Ancient Cities have they Spire, Worms, Ban, etc. See the
Emperor's Letter to King James Apr. 9. 1689. A great part of the Nor of
Ireland, burnt by Rosen.
but very lately left in Flames, and that without the least Reason, that should
have moved them so (...) do? See Grotius, l. c. St. Austin commends the Goths
when they took Rome for sparing these, De Cio. D. l. 1. Grot. ib.
Even the Houses of God, and Sepulchers of the Dead; which the most barbarous
People were wont to regard with Reverence, and thought it a Sacrilege to
violate; have all Partaken in their undistinguishing, and unrelenting Fury.

When the Great Emperor of Persia declared War Xenophon, O Econ. l. 2.
against the Assyrians, the Historian tells us it was agreed between them, that
the Husbandmen and Common People should on both sides be secure; and the War
extend, only to those who were armed for it. And we read See Diodorus Siculus,
l. 2. To which Grotius adds many more Instances. De Jure. B. ac P. l. 3. c.
12.. 4. and in Annot.
that it was a Constant Law among others in those Eastern Countries to observe
the same Measures. But now we see even these miserable disarmed People, not
only spoiled of all they have, but contrary to their own Agreements, as well as
to Common-Humanity, put oftentimes under the severest Execution, when they
have nothing but their Lives left them to lose.

And when such is the Cruelty, and Fury of our Enemies; Certainly we ought to
pray with all Earnestness to God against Them, as we would do against some
devouring Fire, or a raging Pestilence: And beseech him that He would still
continue to deliver us out of their Hands, as well as bless him that he has
hitherto preserved us from it.

Nor let us look upon our selves to be ever the less concerned to do this,
because we do not lie so much exposed to their Assaults, as some others may
seem to do. It is indeed the singular Happiness of our Situation, In another of
their late Medals they have represented the Helm of a Ship in the Sea, with
this Inscription, Legem. po^ Aqui^.
that We cannot presently be surprised by Them: But yet if we do not timely
prevent it, we may be Conquered. They who from either none at all, or at best
but a very small Power at Sea, are already grown up to such a Pitch as to
dispute with us for Victory; may perhaps, if not prevented, in a little time
become able indeed to give Laws to us. And what the Consequences of that must
be, I cannot without Horror consider.

But God forbid! We should ever be so unhappy as to fall into the hands of
those whose usage of their own Countrymen too plainly show what all others are
to expect from them. Rather let it be the Great Business both of our Prayers
and of our Endeavors, now that God seems again to offer us a fair Opportunity
of securing our selves and Country, our Religion and Liberties, against their
Devices, effectually so to do.

Let the Consideration of that Success which he has already given to our Arms,
encourage Us to go on with the greater diligence to our Common Preservation.

Let it Unite our Minds, and Quicken our Preparations, that so we may not fail
in the Last Act; nor fall at once both under the Reproach and the Concern of
being ruined by our own Fault, when hardly any thing else could have done it.

And that God may continue to bless us in these our Great Undertakings; let us
to our Care for our own and our Countries Welfare, add also our hearty Zeal for
the Honor of God, and the Promotion of Truth, and Peace, and Piety among Us.

Let us do what in Us lies to imitate the Examples; and to comply with the
Pious Care and Endeavors of those whom God has made the Happy Instruments of
our Preservation. That so we may in some measure answer the Ends of his
Providence in our Deliverance: And being saved from our Enemies, and from the
hands of those Luke I. 74.
that hate us, may serve him without fear; In Holiness and Righteousness before
him all the days of our Life.

So may all those Blessings we have already received, be only the Beginnings of
that Great Felicity we shall from henceforth enjoy. When God shall have changed
even this Prayer too, into a Song of Thanksgiving; And instead of Supplicating
any more with David, Rid Us and deliver Us from the hand of strange Children,
whose Mouth speaks Uanity, and their right hand is a right hand of Falsehood:
We shall have only remaining to give thanks as He did, when his Labor was at
an End, and God had finally delivered him from all his Enemies; 2 Samuel xxii.
40. Thou have girded us with strength to the 2 S^. xxii.
Battle, Them that rose up against us have thou subdued under -- 40,
Us. Thou have also given us the Necks of our Enemies, -- 41,
that we might destroy them that hate us. They looked but there was none to
save; Even unto the Lord but he answered -- 42.
them not. -- Therefore, We will give thanks unto Thee O LORD among the
Heathen, and we will sing praises -- 50,
unto Thy Name. He is the Tower of Salvation for his King; and shows mercy
unto his Anointed; and to His -- 51.
Seed for Evermore.

Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible; 1 Timothy I. 17.
to the Great and Wise God, who is the Blessed and only Potentate, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; Ib. VI. 15.
Be Honor and Glory for Ever and Ever.

Amen.
Advertisement.
TWO Sermons, The one Preached at the Reviving of the General Meetings of the
Gentlemen and others of the County of Dorset, December the 2. 1690. And the
other before the Queen, May 10. 1691. by W. Wake, D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to
their Majesty's, and Preacher to the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn. Both Sold
by R. Sare, at Gray's Inn Gate next Holbourn.

FINIS.

