A SERMON Preached in the High Church of EDINBURGH, June 9th 1695. Before HIS
GRACE The Marquess of TWEDDALE HIS MAJESTY'S High Commissioner And before many
of the Nobility, Barrons and Burrows, Members of the High Court of Parliament,
And the Magistrates of the said City

By David Williamson Minister of the Gospel at the West-kirk.

EDINBURGH, Printed by George Mosman and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Parliament-closs. 1695.

GOOD READER.
The Author being threatened by some. that they would cause Print his Sermon, as
written from his Mouth (however uncorrect it might be) And that severals had
made wrong accounts of the matter spoken; He was pressed upon these Reasons, by
Friends; to offer a correct Copy to the Press, Which he condescended to do
upon their Importunity, without alteration of words or Sentences.

The Text
Isaiah Chapter 38.3: And said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee, in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight: and Hezekiah wept sore.


HEzekiah was a Good Man, a Great Man, a Rare Man, a Praying King. Of all the
Three and twenty Kings of Israel and Judah, before, and after the Schism, We
find only Nine commended for Good. viz. David, Solomon, Asa, Jehosaphat,
Amasiah, Azariah, Jotham, Hezekiah, Josiah: Of the Twenty Kings of Israel after
the Rent, We find none commended for Good, but only Jehu, commended for
cutting off the house Ahab and destroying the Worshippers of Baal 2 Kings 9.10.
Yet was he reproved for cleaving to the Sins of Jeroboam 2 Kings 10.31.

Hezekiah was a Good King, but not faultless, his Heart was lifted up with
Pride, and he Paid dear for it, 2 Kings chap. 20. verses 14. etc. Nor did his
Goodness exeeme him from Trouble; in the preceding Chapter he was sore
distressed by a seige, and now sick unto Death.

The words contain his fervent Prayer; I shall not trouble you with tedious
Explication, nor Curious Division.

1. He Prays that the Lord would Remember him, not that God is subject to
forgetfulness, but he would have the Lord effectually to mind him, according to
his promise made to Abraham when he indented with him Genesis 17.1.2. Walk before
me, says the Lord, and he thou perfect, I am God Almighty, And I will make my
Covenant between me and thee, and I will multiply thee exceedingly: Now he had
in some measure (Human Frailty excepted) kept the condition there required. 2.
He reflects on his Heart and Way, I have walked before thee; That is, under the
awful apprehensions of an Omniscient everywhere present God: In truth and with
aperfect heart, It Is the same on the matter with simplicity and Godly sincerity
2 Cor. 1.12. Mentioned in opposition to Carnal policy, called there fleshly
Wisdom; Would he say, I have studied to be sincerely and honestly minded, and
am not conscious of gross Exorbitancies in my course, which uses to shorten
Men's Days. 3. We have the proof of his Sincerity in a Good Conversation, I
have done that which is good in thy sight. 4. We have his present Melancholy
temper. and Hezekiah wept sore, for Deaths aspect was not pleasant to him, he
would sam have lived a while longer, either to have throughed the begun
Reformation, or forseeing what might follow to Church and state upon his
removal, especially they being for present in a distracted miserable condition,
or probably he Scunnered at Death, as nature will do in the best of Saints.

I shall only take up this one point from the words.

Doct. That these who would expect comfort at Death, must make conscience of a
sincere Religious walk in their life. Whose Heart condemns them not in this may
be very confident of that. I shall speak to those three Branches. 1. of Death.
2. of Uprightness. 3. of a Religious walk.

1. First for Death, I would say these five things. 1. It is certain it is
appointed for all Men to dye, and but once Heb. 9.27. All are born with the
seeds of Death in their bosom; The prophanest Atheist, who defyes Death, shall
not shift it when his day comes.

2. It is certain Death is uncertain. 1. As to the place where, at home or
abroad, by Sea or by Land. 2. As to the manner how, a violent or narural Death,
sudden or lingering. 3. As to the time when, we read of no Man who ever got a
lease of their time, but this Hezekiah.

3. It Is certain Death waits no Man's readiness, if a Man be not prepared, that
Messenger when he comes will not defer one moment.

4. Death cannot properly be said to be a surprise to Believers in Christ, it
may be sudden, the Christan not being in that frame and Exercise desirable, may
fall short of Consolation, but his state being sure, his Salvation is secured.

5. It is certain we may have a day better and another worse, in time, but
after Death there is no change, Eternal Well or Eternal Woe, where the Tree
falls there it Lies Eccles. 11.3.

Use. 1. We shall make some practical improvement of this: And 1. Be
convinced, That this Tyrant Death is the indispensible fatality of all Men;
Although some adjourn the thouh^s of it, which is their sin and folly, and they
may be refuted from the consideration of the frequent warnings of Mortality and
the shortness of time compared to an Hand-breadth Psalm. 39.5. To a Vapor Jam.
4.14. to the fading Grass 1 Pet. 1.24. Yet many put that Day far away Amos 6.3.
teasing up their thoughts, anent the increase of their Riches, the standing of
their Family, the advancement of their Honor, the filling of their Cup of
pleasure, and before they are aware Death puts in the sickle, and their Breath
goes out, they return to their dust, and in that day their Thoughts perish,
^sal. 14.6, 4, 5. their fair white thoughts as the word is all their designs
and endeavors, either for themselves or others. O if people would take leisure
but to Commune with their own Hearts, till they had some impression and present
Heart-affecting thoughts of Death, then reflecting on their way in the World,
for the World, they would conclude, that all their Labor amounted to no more,
than what is imported in that Verdict Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of Vanitys, all is
Vanty and Voxation of Spuit; Then should Self-designing-men, and Self-deceivers
whose desires, designs and endeavors, did rise no higher then Self, find that
they had played the fool and cheat to their own Souls, when their hearts shall
overcast, with the confusion of these thoughts and challenges, that they sh^ned
in due time to intertain,

Although death be in the Creed, yet it is not in many peoples belief, such as.
1. The stupid and secure, who are not moved with Terrors and threatenings, like
to those of Noah his days, who did eat and drink till the flood came, Math.
24.38.39. 2ly. The worldly minded, whose time and cares are Swallowed up with
vanities of this life, as if they were never to separat, like the man Luck 12.
3ly The proud, and Grandees of the worldmind not they will be laid in the Dust,
where their bones will bear no badge of their Gentility, These, with the
worldly, go far in the way to Hell for their honor and profit. 4ly. Those who
are careless to trim their Lamps, and get interest in Christ and live as never
to dye.

I Would press upon you all, frequent and serious thoughts of Death from these
considerations 1. Believing thoughts of Death would aquaint you with it before
it come, which were your advantage, to make it the easier, and Less terrifying
when it comes; Were you Seasoning your Hearts with the Morning and Evening
thoughts of it every day. 2ly. It would make you diligent in hearing of the
word, not knowing but every Sermon may be the Last, the Lord knows, this may be
the Last to some who hears me.

3ly. It would let you see an end of all perfections Psalm. 119 96. That these
who call their Lands by their Names, Their honor descends not to the grave
with them Psalm. 49.11.17. Nor will their Grandeur distingaish their Dust from
the Beggars, Job. 21.26, They all lie down alike in the Grave. 4ly This would
stir up to excelent thoughts of God, there be some, God is not in all their
thoughts, Psalm. 10.4 Because Death is not in them Job, 19. When Job. speaks of
the Worms he has exalting thoughts of God. 5ly. It would make People more
useful to others, and better neighbors, It would make meek in passing
injuries, watchful against offering of them Phlip 4.5 Let your Moderation be
known unto all Men, the Lord is at hand. 6ly. It would rectify your Judgment,
of sin, of Crosses, yea, of things Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal; Men in
health living at distance from the thoughts of Death, Think otherwise of
things, than in Sickness, and under the apprehension of Death. 7ly. It will
regulat your affections you need be very sober, the day is but short Eccles,
1.9. The wise Man laughs at the young Man who Lets his heart Loose Telling him,
for all these things he would come to Judgment 8ly. Believing thoughts of Death,
would beat back Temptations to sin, Mortify dols and Lusts Job. 3^.13.14. They
would say, what should I answer for this when the Lord rises up; It would make
people quit bosom Dalilahs and Lose pleasure in them 1. The proud Man minding
Death would account little of being like Haman, the Second person in the
Kingdom. 2ly. The covetous worldling entertaining believing thoughts of Death,
would not be so much hunting after rents and profits, Judas-like selling their
Master, Math. 26.16. He said, what will you give me, and I will deliver him
unto you, And they covenanted for Thrity pieces of Silver; Nor like Demas who
forsook Christ for the present world 2. Tim. 4.10. 3ly. Beleiving thoughts of
Death would mortify pleasures, and all vain delights, They would be als
unsavory as the white of an Egg, the Harlot and drunken companion would be an
ugly sight; you would be convinced of the truth of that, That these pleasurs
Last but for a short Season, and leave a Lasting sting behind them, Heb: 11.25.
Prove: 23, 32 Yea beleiving thoughts of Death, would make you double your
diligence in your pace to heaven Eccle. 9.10. And quicken you to those duties,
hearttenderness, and bitterness for sin, as the Text points, Hezekiah wept
sore; It would make you earnest in Self-examination 119. Psalm. 59.59 And
instant in prayer Romans 12.12. And would be a notable spur to preparation for
Death.

Lay your account with it, Death is inevitable, and will not be put off as
Dyvors puts off their Creditors, with fair words, flattery, Suspensions,
Cautioury, flight; it will pursue, go where you will, nor will it bebrav'd out
with a man's power and Station, and there is none can loose Deaths Arriestment.
Therefore wisely reckon your time, and the shortest count is the best. Psalm.
90.12. Lord teach us to number our days that we may apply our hearts to
wisdom: There was a fool who reckoned on many years and had not a Night before
him. Luk, 12, 20. But Job more wisely reckoned Death a daily door-neighbor,
every day waiting his change, Job. 14.14 Know, that your holding here is not
property, but Tennent-right, we should always be on a call; O make your
reckoning and testament in time, Josiah made a good Testament,, who turned to
the Lord with all his Soul with all his heart, with all his might, according to
all the Law of Moses, 2 Kings 23.25. etc. David made a sweet end who served his
Generation according to the will of God, and fell a sleep in Christ. Acts.
13.36. Some great men have made an ill Testament, as Jehojakim who was buried
with the burial of an Ass. he lived undesired and died unlamented, none to say,
Ah Lord, or Ah his Glory, Jer, 22.18. etc. There are some who dies and none to
say, Woe is me for him, but that he is well away, and we are als well quit of
him; their Memory Rots, and they are remembered with disdain, Prove, 10.7. But
the Memory of the just is blessed, and they shall be had in overlasting
remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. A good man's name never dies, they will speak good of
him when he is dead; who cared little for him when he lived, they will speak
good of Moses and Samuel now, who would have thought meanly of them had they
lived in their days.

Herod that proud persecutor, who slew James and put Peter in Prison made an
ill Testament, he swallowed down Impious Flatteries, and was eaten of Worms or
Lice, that he died, Act, 12, 2.3.23. Some have made an ill Testament at death,
who have used Hellish policy in their Life, as Pharaoh who devised to keep down
and crushed the People of God, and would have had his Lust satisfied on them.
Exodus 1.10. and 15.9.

I warn you great men who hear me, from the greatest to the lowest; many great
men has dyed in Scotland within these sixty years; Charity binds me up from
speaking of their eternal state, some of them survived their Honor, and went
off the stage as the snuff of a Candle, your Honors will not go under the Turf
with you: Many has darr'd and given defiance to death, that when that pale
Horse has looked them in the Face, and Conscience awakened on them, changed
Colors and quaked as Belshazzer did Dan, 5.5. 6, You who are great men had
need to walk so, as death be not terrible to you. 1, Because few such are
called and saved. 1 Cor. 1, 26 6. Not, many Noble, etc. 2. Because many great
men will be sore put to it at last Rev. 6.16.17. To cry to Mountains and Rocks,
Fall on us and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his Wrath is come, and who
shall be able to stand; Many who hold their head very high now, Mighty men, and
chief Captains may be put to it, and some who hears me this day, it may be
their case.

I warn Your Grace, and my Noble Lords, and much Honored Gentlemen, take heed
what you do, the judgment is the Lords; there be few Parliaments but some
Members dye in the time, or shortly after, God knows within a few days where
some of you will Land for Etemity: I remember within these thirty four years,
of one who rode in Pomp to Parliament but warmed not his Seat, was hurried to
his Lodging, took bed, and his Sun set in a dark and stormy cloud, he was a
principal contriver of the overthrow of the Work of Reformation in Scotland.
Take heed what you do or design, you must all dye and compear 2 Cor. 5.10. As
the word is, Be manifested, discovered, laid open, your deeds your intentions,
your Cabin-Counsells, there will be no palliating of foul things with fair
Colors.

I will tell you to whom Death will be terrible, and why, 1. It will be
terrible to them who have not their aggreement made with God, not found in
peace, Them God will meet as an enemy. 2ly. These who has not repented and
obeyed the Gospel, As the foolish Virgins Math, 25. Christ threatens the Jews
they should dye in their sins unrepented of John 8.24. 3ly. Who ly down in the
dust and their bones full of the sins of their youth, Job, 20 11. 4. Who dye in
unbelief, to such, God swears they shall not enter in his rest, Psalm. 95.11. 5.
Who have not their work perfect before God, but rests in an empty name and
profession. Rev. 3.1.2. 6. The backslider in heart, Heb. 10.38. 7. These who
hears the word and does it not, Matthew. 7.26. 8. Who sets their nest on high, as
the fool, who said, he had much goods laid up for many years. Luke 12.19. 9:
The persecuter and contemner of Gods People, as Nabal. 2. Sam, 25.10.38. 10.
These who dye under the plague of a hard heart as Pharaoh. Exodus 14. 11. Death
is terrible to these who are self Cheaters and Deceivers, who cries peace,
peace, when sudden destruction is at the door. 1 These. 5.3. 12. Who dies
neither to be desired of God nor man. as Jehoram. 2 Chronicles, 21.20. 13. These who
dye embracing Idolatry as Ahaz. 2 Chronicles. 28.22. He Trespassed yet more against
God, and Sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus. 14. These who dies without the
experimental knowledge of these three. 1. Without the knowledge of Conversion,
except one be converted he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Joh. 3.3.
2. Without the knowledge of Holiness, without which no man, if he were a King,
shall see the Face of God in mercy. Heb. 12.14. 3. Without some knowledge and
belief of their eternal lodging. 2. Tim. 1.12. I know in whom I have believed
says Paul, I know of a house not made with hands, 2. Cor. 5.1.

Quest. But why will Death be terrible to such? Ans. Because then they will get
no desire granted; not a drop of cold Water to cool the Tongue, Luke. 16 24.
The rich Glutton could not obtain that mean request 2. Then their Carnal propes
and confidences are battered down, their hope gives up the Ghost. Job. 11, 20.
3. Because then God will be terrible to them, He will meet them as a Boar
bereaved of her Whelps, and rent the Caul of their heart, and devour them as a
Lion Hos. 13.8. Consider, this you that forget God, least he tear you in pieces
when none shall deliver. Psalm. 50 22. 4 Because then, fear and loss comes at
once, and there is no hope, that their case will mend.

Now, would you have death not to be a terror, but a comfort to you, Then 1.
Look to it through the righteousness of Christ, who takes away the Sting, 1
Cor. 15.55. etc. 2 Be Zions friend, and her King Christ's friend, and embrace
him as thy Souls Beloved, and his terms of peace prescribed. 3. Look on Death
as the Vessel, that will take thee off this troublesome Sea to thy eternal
rest. 4. Look on death as Christ speaks of it, Our Friend Lazarus sleeps,
John 11.11. 5. Look to it in the promise of his presence, Who will be with thee
when thou goes through the dark valley, Psalm, 23.4.

6, Look on Death as thy God's Servant, that dare not touch thee, but as thy
God will. 7. Be prepared for it: Are you ready, and your Lamps Trimmed? I fear
the Echo of conscence in some, is, I am yet to Learn this Great Lesson.

Consider these things, 1. Wishes and would be's will not be taken off your
hand, Balaam a Stranger to God, wished to dye the Death of the Righteous Numb.
23.10, O Says the man I would fain be Godly, Thou will not come to a Blessed
end if thou get no more. Says Christ Blessed is the man whom his Lord finds so
doing Matthew, 24, 46. Not so wishing that he had been better. 2. Many meet with
Death before they be ready, what knows thou, if thou get time at Death; What if
the Lord answer thee as Judges 10.13. Go to the Gods whom you have served;
Shall I take the worlds, the devils, your Lusts, and sins Leavings? 3. Consider
you may be confused at Death; It Is harder to dye well than is imagined, Death
will try to purpose your Graces, duties, and enjoyments; you have need to be
busy, and be as busy as you can, you will have enough to do, to win to
patience and assurance. 4. Mind as Death leaves you, Judgment will find you;
You will not dye twice, if so you might take a venture, Therefore deferr not
preparation, which is of universal and Greatest concernment; If peace of
conscience, To dye with comfort, To have the Soul bound up in the bundel of
life, be of concernment, Then preparation for Death is of concernment; If
eternal well and woe; to escape hell, and come to Heaven, be of concernment,
Then is preparation for Death of concernment.

Quest, But wherein consists this preparation? Ans: 1. In laying up a store, a
good foundation for the time to come 1 Timothy: 6.19. To be wise as the Ant, that
provides in Summer for the Winter storm Prove. 6.8.

2. To live a Righteous holy life, the life of a wrestler with God as Jacob
Gen: 32. The life of walking with God, as Enoch Gen: 15. The life of
Selfdenyed-obedience, as Abrabam Heb: 11.8. He went on a call, not knowing
whether, and the life of a pilgrim and stranger, Desiring a Heavenly contry
Heb. 11.13.

3. It consists. in having the Heart Sequestrat from Lusts, Idols, and Creature
enjoyments, Crucified to the world, and the lusts and affections thereof Gal:
5.24.6.14.

4. In being on the watchtower Psalm. 130. Luk 12.37, Blessed are those
Servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching.

5. In having Graces in Lively exercise, Faith ready for Vision, and Hope for
possession.

6. In having thy peace within between God and thy Soul secured, the Spirit
witnessing with your Spirits that you are the Sons of God. Romans 16

7. In dying in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. Found in Christ Phil. 3.9. United to
Christ John. 17.23. ^ in them, and thou in me; Commiting the Soul to him as a
God of truth Psalm. 31.5, Trusting Christ as a safe Vessel to to carry the
through.

O what an excellent Death is it, to dye in the Faith of these Six things 1.
That thou are Elected, called, adopted, justified, and he is thy God, and that
thy name is Written in the Lambs Book of life, And thou has no more to do, but
say, Father in thy hands I commend my Spirit, as said Christ Luke 23.46,

2. To dye in the Faith of this, that all his dealings to thee in thy life,
have been Mercy and truth, and for good Psalm. 25.10 and thou will not question
his favors; To dye in the Faith of this, that thy Works have been accepted,
and to say with old Simeon Now lets thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine
Eyer have seen thy Salvation Luk 2.29.

3. To dye in the faith of the promised Glory, and of the out making of all the
promises, that thou can say as Psalm. 17.15. When I awake I shall see his face
in Righteousness, and be satisfied as with the likness of God.

4. To Dye in the Faith of this, That Christ has taken away the Sting of
Death, and thou have interest in his Victories, over Death, Hell, Sin, and the
Grave, and that he will be with thee, and measure out thy pain, and make all
thy Bed in Thy Sickness.

5. To Dye in the Faith, That God will visit his Church, as did Joseph Genesis
50.24.25.

6. To Dye in the Faith, That all the enemies of his Glory shall be brought
down, and his Kingdom shall be exalted.

Death will give people experience of these five things, Of the Vanity of the
World, of the Truth of the Word, of the Bitterness of Sin, of the Terribleness
of falling in the hands of the living God, and of the Sweetness of Gods Service
to them that shall rest from their Labors.

Many Dye with strong Terrors, not prepared, and some Stupid, ly down with a
Lie in their Right Hand Isai: 44.20. And yet are said to Dye like Lambs; They
are like a Man put out at the window of a high Tower in a Dark-night, and falls
in a deep Ditch, sad is his Wakning.

Happy are they who are ready, Willing, and desirous to Dye. 1, There is a
Childish desire of Death, like Achab, who would Die in a pe^t for Naboths
Vineyard 1 Kings 21.4. 2. A passionat desire like Jonahs for the Gourds
withering Jonah 4.8. 3. A Rebellious desire, like that of the Isaraelites Numb.
14, 2. 4, A solid and Judicious desire, That is attended 1 with diligence in
every duty, knowing that shortly we must put off this Tabernacle 2 Pet. 1.14.
2. With laying up a store that we may be accepted of him 1 Timothy 6.19. 3 With a
constant waiting for a change Job 14.14. Trimming the Lamps, and girding up the
Loins with the wise Virgins, Math. 25.4. 4 With the knowledge of their Well
being after Death 2 Cor. 5.1. We know if our earthly house of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, We have a building with God, an house not made with hands;
eternal in the Heavens. 5. It Is attended with an heart deadness to things
here-away using the World as if we used it not, because time is short 1 Cor.
7.29.31. O for such grounds of desire.

The second thing I would speak to, is, That who would expect favor at Death,
would study Uprightness. 1. There is a Moral Uprightness in reference to Men's
Actions, which a Graceless Man like Abimeleh may have by restraint Genesis 20.2.
an Evangelical Uprightness, that sets the Eye and Heart Godward, which is not
an Act, but a Gracious frame and habit, wrought in the Heart, which is the
chief seat of it; Hypocrisy is like a paint that only colors the Skin, This is
God's Work, for no Man can make his Heart clean Prove. 20.9. It fits the Soul to
walk with, and serve God in the right manner, and to design the Lords Glory as
the main end; The upright Man knows no other fountain of Mercy but God's Grace,
and no end of duty but God's Glory.

For confirming the point. 1. It is the paremptor will of God, which is the
highest of Reasons: God remits from the first Covenant with Adam of absolute
personal perfection but requires a second Covenant perfection Gen: 17. 1,
Uprightness, Truth in the inward parts Psalm. 51.6. Which is the highest
Believers can attain while on Earth. 2. It is highly well pleasing to God 1 Chronicles. 29.17. I know O Lord, says David, thou takes pleasure in Uprightness; O
how well pleased was Christ with Nathaniel an Israelite indeed in whom there
was no guile John 1.47. His countenance does behold the upright Psalm. 11.7.
they get a good look of God; We should imitat Christ if we would do what
delights God John, 8.29. He did always those things that pleased his father,
who has no pleasure in sin Psalm. 5, 4.^, This is the great and characteristical
distinction that puts a difference between the Saint and Hypocrite in point of
duties, as between the Publican and the Pharisee Luke 18. Between Cain and Abel
Genesis 4.4. It is that without which a man cannot be a true Christian, under the
highest profession, and with which a man is a true Christian with Less
profession; It is the very standart of every Grace and duty, Grace without it,
is but hypocrisy, and duty without it is but iniquity: A Saint cannot want it
to Season all his Graces and duties, it qualifies all, It Is like the blood that
runs through all the veins, the very life of the Christian 1. Faith most be
unfeigned 1 Timothy, 1.5, There werea sort of people seemed to trust in God, but
were not sincere, they thought not as they spoke the Lord could not abide them
Psalm, 78.35.36.37. 2. Repentance must be sound, the Lord challenges feigned
turning to him Jer. 3.10. We have need to pray, Lord wish our Tears from
hypocrisy.

3, Love to God must be sincere, or elss we are cursed Ephesians: 6, 24, 1. Cor:
16.22. There were some who pretended great respect to God, and undertook fair
Jer. 42, 2.3.6.20.21. but stood not by it, they were false dissemblers in their
hearts, they never kept a word. Jer. 44.16. They down right gave themselves the
Lie, and declared they would not do as they had said. 4. Love to our neighbor
must be sincere, we must love him with a pure Heart fervently 1. Pet, 1.22 5.
Prayer to God must be sincere 1. Tim. 2, 8. We must lift up pure hands. 6,
preaching must be as of fincerity, in the sight of God 2 Cor. 2.17. In a word
we have so much grace in good earnest, as we have sincerity, and no more. Last
reason none. else can expect Heavens glory, and who wants Hope of Heaven cannot
dye with comfort Math. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, they shall see God.
Psalm. 140.13. The upright, and only such, shall dwell in his presence Psalm.
15.1.2, Only these who walk uprightly, shall dwell in his holy Hill, Without
Faith, repentance, love, we cannot be saved John. 3, 18. 1. Cor. 13 Luke 13.3
And without uprightnes we have none of these; All depends on this one thing,
both in point of present comfort, and everlasting happiness without this, the
soul is lost when we have done all we can.

There is great need to try it, for both Sincerity and Hypocrisy lies deep in
the heart, and both may be over-looked: A Gracious Soul may be I ealous he
wants it on mistakes 1. Because of decays in Grace; To remove this, consider 1.
Peter had his decays, yet his heart was right in the main, a while we are
here the best have some remainders of corruption to molest them. There is none
perfect Rom, 7.20. Honest Paul complains of an ill Neighbor. Sin dwelling in
him. 3. a decay may be apprehended, and appear to be where it is not, there may
be a growing at the root in humility, as in winter, the sap goes to the root of
the tree, and keeps life in it,

2. Some question their uprightness because of Severe rods, Thy witnesses are
against me says Job, 10.17. I answer, this were to question that Gold were
Gold, because put in the fire to be refined and purged of its dross, the best
Saint on earth has some dross of corruption to be purged away by the Cross
Isai. 27.9 In heaven the Saint is all Grace and no sin, in hell the sinners is
all sin and no Grace.

3. Some Jealous their sincerity because of distracting vain thoughts in duty,
I answer, this is dangerous, for thus you condemn the generation of the
righteous; There should be none sincere on earth, if this did hold; There be
none who wants these; but are these thoughts thy burden, art thou striving
against them, and hates them Psalm, 119.113. Thou does not cherish them, Its
well.

4. Say some, my Self-love fears me: I Answer there is a Self-love in
Subordination to the Glory of God, whereby a man aims in the first place at
God's glory, and then his own happiness, That is Lawful. There is again a
self-love in competition wherein a man regards Self more then God's glory, that
is unlawful, and a ground of Jealousy when a man puts himself in Gods room.

Use. For trial 1. The upright man his great work is about his heart to purge
it, He knows sin in the heart is worse than sin in the life: Sin in the life
may proceed from weakness of grace, sin in the heart from strength of
corruption Psalm. 66.18. If I regaird inquity in my heart no hearing of prayer.
There be two things the Sincere looks most to, His God that he may be Honored,
and his heart that it may be reformed; Hypocrites are most upon outward, and
justifies their hearts by venture. The upright man neglects not his outward
work, he knows as to neglect the heart argues Hypocrisy, so to neglect the life
argues profanity; He looks to both, but most to the heart.

2. The upright Man has a twofold universality, one as to sin, another as to
duty. 1. For sin, his heart is carried out against all sin, secret as well as
open because it is against the Lord, as Jospeh Genesis 39, 9. and David Psalm:
1912, The hypocrites fails here, he refrains from sin obvious to the world only,
The upright man sets himself against small sins as well as great; It Is true as
sin is against God, and his holy Law, there is no sin small, but there are
degrees of sins, the upright man setts himself against his own sin, his
predominant, The sin of his constitution Psalm. 18.23. Yea, he hates every false
way Psalm. 119.104. There be some goes over the belly of known acknowledged
principles intheir sin; Some say a man should not commit adultery, who will
commit adultery, some will abhore Idols, that will commit Sacrilege Romans 3.22.
Some will abhore swearing, Thieft, whoredom, who will debauch time and person
with tippling and drunkenness, this is to be guilty of the Breach of the whole
Law, because it is a despising that authority that is stamped on all the
commands Jam: 2.10, 11,

2. The upright man his heart is carried out to all duty, to esteem all Gods
commands concerning all things to be right Psalm. 119.128, To have a good
Conscience in all things Heb: 13, 18, Who obeyes one command for Gods sake will
obey what ever he commands,

3. Uprightness presses the Man's heart to reach the highest seize of
Grace, the hypocrites obedience is stinted, but Paul forgets things behind and
presses forward Phil. 3.12.13.14.

4. The upright Man baulks no duty for suffering, some come out of Great
tribulation washing their Garments in the Blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7, 14.

Use. 1. For exhortation, O Study uprightness 1 Because its rare, and ill
looked on in the world, Micah. 7, 2, there are none upright among men. Psalm.
12, 1, The faithful fails from among the Childeren of men Job, 12, 4. The just
upright Man is laughed to scorn; It is for a Lamentation, that sincere Souls
are thin sown in this generation, if there be any more sincere than another,
they are like the speckled bird Jer. 12.9. That all the birds of the Field
gazeth on Isaiah. 8.18. I and the Children whom the Lord has given me, are for
signs and wonders in Israel, the World cannot abide such Prove. 29, 27, He that
is upright in his way is an abomination to the wicked; So much the more study
uprightnes. 2. Consider there is nograce like it, and no grace without it, it
denominats a man a Christian, and a Blessed man Psalm 119.1. 3. It gives
confidence before the Lord in prayer 1 John 3 21. Prove. 15.8. The prayer of the
upright is his delight, such are welcome to God in their adresses, that is a
Rich Blessing Jam 4.8. 4. Such shall be made glad and Glory in the Lord, who
are upright in their hearts Psalm 64.10. 5. The Upright Man shall keep his feet
when falsehood will fail Prove. 10 9 He walks surely Isai 28 17. The refuge of
Lies shall be sweeped away, the Upright may have many Enemies, but God Almighty
is on his side Genesis 17.1. Psalm. 55.16.18. Many are with me says David, they
shall get their feet on the Neck of all their Enemies Psalm. 49.14, The Upright
shall have dominion in the Morning. 6, Uprightness supplies many defects, when
one can appeal to God anent the sincerity of his Heart as Paul did Acts 23.1.7.
The Upright have room in the Saints Prayers Psalm. 125.4. Do good O Lord to them
that be good, to them who are upright in their hearts. 8. Sincerity Crowns all
Grace with perseverence, Hypocrisy withers, sincerity holds out in the worst of
times, like the good ground, It Is fruitful notwithstanding of scorching heat,
Luke 8.15.9. Without this all duties are a Lie Psalm. 78.34. etc. They prayed
and flatered God, and Lied with their Mouth, for their Heart was not right with
God. 10. The upright man has comfort in the greatest Extremity and storm of his
Life, a bosom friend: Paul, when he had the sentence of Death against himself
and others, said, this is our rejoicing, the Testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and Godly sincerity we have had our Conversation in the World 2
Cor: 1, 9, 12. This makes the Man's Face to shine, and makes quietness within
Prove. 14.14, Whereas an ill conscience is like a gnawing worm, a heavy load
above a burden. Then sincerity gives comfort in the last Extremity of Death,
Mark the persect, behold the upright the end of that man is peace, though he Dye
in War Psalm. 37.37. O that is sweet when the Heart does not reproach in a
Dying-hour Job 27.6. and God not a terror to the Man. Lastly that Man has
interest in that promise, that is of a wide compass Psalm. 84.11, The Lord God is
a Son and a shield, to direct Comfort and defend, he will give Grace and Glory,
and withold no good thing from him that walks uprightly.

Quest. How shall we win to this lovely desirable thing? 1 Be convinced of
heart unfoundnes, make an errand to God for it Psalm. 119.80. Let my Heart be
Sound in thy statuts. Psalm 51.10, Creat O Lord in me a clean heart a study much
the attributes of God, especialy his omnisciency Heb. 4.12.13. All things are
vaked and open before him with whom we have to do keep God in your Eye, that
is injoined Genesis 17.1 Walk besor me and be upright; This kept Joseph right
Gen, 39.9. You will never prove steel to the back if God be out of sight; this
kept David right Psalm. 16, 8, and 25.15. Keep upon your hearts the persuasion
of his Alseeing-Eye, what makes many so unstable, they forget God, 3, keep
Heaven in your Eye, this kept Moses right amidst many temptations and snares,
he had respect to the recompense of reward Heb, 11, 26. This kept Paul right,
that he fainted not, he minded the exceeding and eternal weight of Glory 2 Cor:
4, 16, 17, You will faint and give over if your Hearts be fastened on things
that are seen, you will take to the nearest shore, so has been seen of an
apostat generation.

The last branch of the point, they who would have comfort in Death, must have
a Religious walk in their Life, and do what is good in the Lords sight Walking
is a progressive motion, not like that of the door on the hinges that moves
often, but goes not foreward.

Consider these things for clearing this point, 1. We are commanded to walk in
the Lords way, and that constantly Deuteronomy. 19.9. Walk ever in his ways. 2. The
Saints have resolved this as Psalm. 119, 112, and are enjoined to make inquiry
after the Lords way for this end Jer. 6.16.3. The Lord commends those who make
conscience of their walk, as Zacharias and Elizabeth Luke 1.6. Whose
commendation will never die. 4. The Lord threatens them sore who looks not to
their walk Jer. 9.14. Lev: 26.21. etc. he will heat the furnace seven times
more for them. 5. It is one of the precious promises of the New Covenant, that
the Lord will give us his spirit to cause us walk in his way, Ezekiel. 36.27. 6.
The Lord calls for it as a chief evidence of a Souls sense of Kindness that we
walk humbly with our God, Mitah. 6.8. 7. The Lord's people sensible of kindness
have iugaged thenselves to this Psalm. 116.12, etc. What shall I render to the
Lord? I will walk before the Lord. 8. You will find the Lord quarrels no people
so much for their words as for their walk Deuteronomy. 5.28.29. They had well spoken,
O! says the Lord, that there were such a heart in them to fear me, and keep all
my Commandments, the Man is only blessed in his deed. Jam. 1.25. Many are
strangers to a Christian Walk. 1. some will not so much as give God fair words
for all his favors, but Sacrifices to their own Net Hab. 1.16. 2. Some
complement God in words, and little affected in their hearts Psalm. 106.12.13.
They sung his Praise but soon forgot his Works, and waited not for his Counsel.
3. Some with some kind of sense will commend God in words, who never came the
length of a Christian Walk; profess they know God, and in Works deny him. Tit.
1, 16, these are Self-cheaters.

Question, Why are most people pleased with a profession without a Christian
walk, 1, From Ignorance of God, as if he would be put off with fair words and
bare acknowledgment, this is a mocking of God. 2 It flows from undervaluing of
his Mercies, as if they were worth no more. 3. Because there is not so much
difficulty in profession and words, as in a walk; It is Grace that must dispose
to this, the Devil cares not how much you complement God with Words, if the
heart be not toward God, and your walk commend you not to him.

1. As ever you would show a sense of the Lord's kindness in your life, and
expect his kindness at Death make conscience of a Religious walk: I press it
with these Arguments. 1. It is your Christian walk that will put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men and convince others 1 Pet. 2.15. 2. Its the walk that
will best secure peace of conscience in the worst of times Psalm. 119.165. Great
peace have they which love thy Law: and nothing shall affend them. 3. It is
your walk that will keep the passage open to God in all your necessities, the
man is barred out who hears and does not, Ezekiel. 33.31. he will not be inquired
of such, but set his face against them Ezekiel. 14.2.8. The slanderer and
Adulterer what ever he profess, he is not welcome to God, Psalm. 50, 16, etc. 4.
It is your walk that will difference you from the World, not a common gift or
profession Luk, 18 In these a Hypocri^e may go beyond a Gracious Man. 5. There
is nothing sweeter for a Man to reflect on when the Eye-strings are breaking,
than for a Man to have that to say, that he has Exercised himself always to
keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and Man in his walk, and in this
Hezekiah had ground of Comfort, but it was not the ground of his Considence;
that was placed in Christ's Righteousness.

Use. 2. I would offer these things by way of Advice. 1. If you would walk so
as to commend God, and expect comfort at Death, set your Face to the right Airt
to Zion Jer. 50.5. To Glorify God in all your Actings. 2. Have your Salvation
much in your Eye, as preferable to all things, Many forget they have immortal
Souls; all their care is for things below Heaven. 3. Study much acquaintance
with the word as the Rule Gal. 6.16. He that walks according to that Rule,
peace shall be upon him and Mercy, as upon thee Israel of God. 4. Eye Christ
much as your pattern and absolute copy 1 John 2.6. Walk as he also walked. 5.
Look farther than Grace within Psalm. 71.16. says David I will go in the
strength of the Lord God; you will miscarry if you take on upon your own heads.
6. Be often taking account of your self, that you may better recover a lost step
Hag. 1.7. Consider your ways Psalm. 119.59. I thought upon my ways, and turned
my feet to thy testimonies.

Use. 3 There be seven sort of people reprovable. 1. These who walk in black
Ignorance and have no persuasion of things in their own minds, only receive
such and such things from custom or practice of others, these cannot keep a
straight course. 2. The profane carnal walker Ezekiel. 16.27. The Philistines
were ashamed of what the Israelites did; We are all shamed in this Generation,
and Heathens if they were among us, would be ashamed of us: How many of all
Ranks, walks in Drunkeness, Lying, Swearing, Whoredom, Sabbath-breaking,
Living a Prayerless Life bringing forth the Fruits of Atheism, which excluds
people out of Heaven and brings on the wrath of God 1 Cor. 6.9.10. Ephesians. 5.6. I
am afraid there is a storm of Wrath and Vengance coming on the Land, if
matters mend not, if Mercy and Repentance prevent not. 3. Some are inconsiderat
in their walk, some mistake, placing all their Religion in Zeal, and it may be
bastard Zeal without knowledge, people nor knowing what spirit they are of,
Romans 10.2. Luke 9.55. and such have a kind of heart abhorrence of prudence,
others place too much in prudence, and gives no kindly way to Zeal, such will
not commend God, nor are on their guard against Temptations and Snares. 4. Some
consult more their wit than their conscience, in all their actings, but it is
not right if conscience have not a vote in the matter, such will go a black
gate readily in an hour of Temptation, and so at length be taken in their own
craftiness 1 Cor. 3.19. 5. The timorous walker, although he have good
inclinations and meanings, yet he is easily scarred from the most necessary
duties Prove. 29.25. the fear of man is a snare, such will make a Slave of their
Conscience, and lay their Soul in pawn to rescue themselves from danger. 6. the
unconstant walker will never Glorify God, all his Religion lies in starts, his
Goodness wears off like the Morning Cloud and early Dew, Hos. 6.4. 7. The Lazy
Christian, who makes no progress, going from strength to strength Psalm. 84.7.
The motion of some is so slow that it is hard to guess whether they be bound
for Heaven or Hell; Be more serious and diligent.

I know not how you will take it, but if ever your Religion pass current before
God, Its your walk will bear the stress of its commendation.

I would add a few things shortly by way of Caution, in reference to your walk
1. Beware you be not in League with any known Sin, Unmortified Lusts,
unrepented of Idols, you will never have a day to do well if you regard
Iniquity in your Heart, for then you have no access to God Psalm. 66.18. 2.
Beware of misbehaving to the spirit of God, by whose influence and assistance
alone, you can move in the way of God, Tempt him not as Annantas and Saphira
did Act. 5.9. Vex him not as these Rebellious persons did, who made God turn
their Enemy Isai, 63.10 Resist him not as these stiff-naked, and uncircumcised
in heart did, Act. 7.51. Quench not his motions 1 Thessalonians: 5, 19. Grieve him not
Ephesians: 4, 30, if you adventure thus to miscarry, you will not step a right step.
3. Beware of needless, familiar, frequent haunt and converse with persons
perverse in principles, that you receive not of their ^lagues, Rev, 18, 4, and
with persons perverse in practices, that you learn no their ways, and get a
snare to your Souls Prove: 22, 24, 25, For bold adventures in this has been the
ruin of this Generation, Prove: 13.20. A companion of fools shall be destroyed:
You may have a bad Acquaintance and Relation to whom you must no ways
mis-behave by incivility, and you may buy and sell with a Turk, But touch with
them in a point as a ball on a plain that soon rolls off, but choose no wicked
Companion. 4. See that you be not glutted with excessive Love of the World, 1
John 2, 15, If any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him;
This Love and excessive care of the World, stiffles and choaks good motions
Matthew. 13.22, As it was with the young man in the Gospel Matthew: 19 22, And
Demas embracing the present World, turned his back upon the way of God 2 Timothy:
4.10. if you advert not to these things, you can never walk in truth and with a
perfect heart.

I would address my self to this Honorable Court; I know not if ever I shall
preach more, or some of you hear more, 1. You have many Eyes of men on earth on
you, and his Eyes that are like a flam of fire Rev. 1.14, 2. You bear a great
figure by office, called Gods Psalm. 82, 1, and Fathers to the people Genesis 45,
8, Isai 45, 19, and many other styles of great import, 3. God severely
threatens Magistrates if they misbehave, who are neither above instruction, nor
without correction, if they fail Job, 12, 21, He poures contempt upon Princes,
and weakens the strength of the mighty. 4. You are liable to many difficulties
and dangers, which many see not, who will readily observe your defects, 5. Your
task is great, to hear the plaints of the poor, to repress the insolency of
the proud, and Minister justice to all. Although God has exalted you above
others, you are servants to Subjects to watch for their well Romans 13.1. 2.
Therefore take heed, beware, 1. Of unseasonable undue contendings, that ye
consume not one another Gal. 5, 15, unite in what is true and good 2. Beware of
Tyrranny and oppression, Fathers of the republic, should not provoke people to
wrath, no more nor Natural Parents should provoke their Children Ephesians. 6, 4.9,
No man's power on earth is absolut, but Limited, Kings must have revenues to put
them in better capacity Ezra. 4 13, And they should have more in time of war
than in time of peace, then our Hearts must be enlarged without grudge, to make
a liberal offering; better venture much then Loss all: I hope the Lord will
help this Honorable Court, to shun what may grind the faces of the poor, and
what is heavy to widows and Fatherless, or may break credit in the Nation, but
none will misconstruct to require what tends to the honor of the King, to whom
we ow so much, and seeks nothing for himself, but what is for the safty and
security of the Nation 3, Beware of pride, and upliftedness of Spirit, which
overthrew Pharaoh and Haman. 4, Beware of persons, and things that may prove
dangerous to Kirk, or State. 5, Bewarre of Crudulity, try before you trust that
ye be not imposed on, Satan may borrow Peter's Tongue to give ^ad advice to his
Master Matthew. 16, 22, 6 Beware of Self-seeking, the plague of the genration,
it is a brand of infamy, especialy in Great men, where it is, it is a deep Large
gulf, in which some Men's motions all center, as did Judas, who betrayed Christ,
and Pilat's, who to please the people, and gratify Caesar, crucified Christ,
over the Belly of his Concience, and warning of his wife; He made a foul hinder
end; We have often smarted by men of that temper: We may cry out as its in Phil.
2, 21, All Seek their own things, not the things which are Jesus Chrisis. such,
whatever fruit they bring forth, being to Self they are reckoned empty Hos:
10, 1, There be three ill properties some have, which come all to one,
Time-serving, Man-pleasing, Self-seeking; A Self-seeker will serve the humor of
any time, whom he harrasses this year, he will carresse the next, if the wind
blow so, and it may serve a turn He will study to please men (to the venture
of his Soul) if they command him this day to do, he is ready, and if the nex
day, to undo, he is always at command, such are not unlike that Rust^^
Ecclesiastic in England, of whom its storied, he would stand with all, but
fall with none, As Protestant or Papist had the ascendant, accordingly he
moved, and when asked, how he came to stand so? He answered, he keept still one
principle, and that was to hold his Living.

I would advise you to these things in your walk. 1. Labor for a good
foresight in things, be not head strong in what may endanger, As David in an
humor, would number the People, 2 Samuel, 24, what tends directly to Gods glory,
constancy in that is a commendation. David never changed his purpose of
building the house of the Lord, Psalm, 132, 4.5. And of paying his Vows, Psalm,
66, 13, 14 2. Be well acquaint with the word, The word of the Lord to some is a
reproach, they have no delight in it, they mock it, Jer, 6, 10. Such are the
plague of their Generation, in the word the rules of Government are insert, the
sins and snares of Rulers are related, the examples of good, and bade are
proposed, for imitation and caution: You would examine all instructions of Men,
by the injunctions of the word, and steer your course by this compass, if you
would Land fair when you go off the stage of time. 3. Have a good care of the
state, it will never be well with the Kirk if it be not well with the state
Psalm (...) last, the wicked walk on every side, when vilest men are exalted;
Some endangers crowned heads, and runs them on precipices; Kings should make
choice of Favorites, men fearing God, loving truth, hating covetousnes, Exodus,
18, 21. Psalm, ioi, 2, etc. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, O
when will thou come unto me: I will walk within my house with a perfect heart;
he looked well to his Court and his Family, he abandoned the deceitful
workers, and made choice of the Faithful of the land. 4. Be careful to make
good Laws, conform to the word of God, the law of laws, and that there be
vigorous execution of good Laws, made, or to be made which is the life of the
Law, Laws are not for Theory, but for Practice, the best practice on the
Peoples part, is obedience, on the Magistrates part, is execution, duly and
impartially applying rewards and Punishments. Cruel were these Laws Daniel. 3,
and 6, Chapters, and Act 4, and 5, Chapters, forbidding Preaching, prayer, and
worship to God; we have smarted under some such grievous Laws; the vigorous
execution of cruel Laws, broke the work of Reformation, God forbid the slack or
none execution of good Laws, should ruin it once more. I must warn you all
who hears me, if any of you has had a hand in the l^te Perfeution, directly or
indirectly, in less or in more, in Fining, Confining, Imprisonment, Banishment,
Torture, Intercommuning, Shedding of Blood, Repent or dear shall you buy it. 5.
Your chief care would be about Religious concerns, to advance Zions welfare, as
David by vow and Oath shows his concernment Psalm, i32. 1. Let not what concerns
Zion be reckoned a by-work, so did not David, Psalm. 137, 4. He preferred
Jerusalem to his chief joy, and, as with a curse, wished that he might neither
have Skill nor power to Act, if he should forget or slight Zion 2: Mind how God
resents and speaks with contempt, of those who postponed the building of the
Temple (which was the principal fruit and end of their deliverance,) to the
building of their own houses, and tells plainly, they should not thrive the
better of it, what they earned, they should put it in a bag with holes, Mag,
1.6.3. Mind the example of the Jews, when they were stirred up to build the
Temple, Ezra. 5, i, 2. They say not, we must first build the Walls of
Jerusalem. to hold out the enemy, but they began to build the house of God;
happy these who are so disposed to promot the public interest of the Church
more than their own. 4 For your own sakes be concerned in the Lords interests,
and he will be concerned in you in these five Respects. i. He will be concerned
in your honor; The Lord resents the indignity done to Magistrates, and
Stigmatizeth these who despise Dominions, and speak evil of dignities Jude 8
These that honor me, I will honor, who despises me shall be lightly
esteemed. 1 Samuel, 2, 30, 2. He will be concerned in your house and Family, 1.
Chron, 1, 13 14. The Lord blessed the house of Obed-Edom and all that he had,
because of the Ark of God; And the Lord promises. 2 Samuel, 7. To build David a
sure House, because of his respect to his house. 3. The Lord will be concerned
in your thriving Psalm, i22 6. They shall prosper that love Jerusalem, so did
Moses, Joshua and others prosper upon this Account. 4. The Lord will be
concerned in your safety in a dangerous time; when the Lord threatened old and
young by a Destroying Angel, he allows a mark of providential preservation to
be set on such, Ezekiel, 9.4, 5 The Lord will be concerned in your Consolation,
Isai. 66 10, Such Persons shall share of Jerusalems joy. 5, Lose not a Season
of doing service to the Church, and easing her of what is grievous; There is a
hazard in this Eccles: 10, so, what thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy
might, for there is no work nor device in the grave; you wot not if ever
another opportunity be put in some of your hands: Some are off the stage, who
losed a Season, you may rue it out of time, do what remains, and is needful to
be done for advancing the work of God; remember what Mordecay says to Esther
Esth. 4.14. If thou hold thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargment
and deliverance come to the Jews from another place, but thou and thy Fathers
House shall be destroyed, and who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom
for such a time as this; If you be inconcerned in his matters, he will be als
inconcerned in you, and break you if you prefer your own house to his 6, In
order to this, promote piety, ^, By your commands as Asa 2. Chron 14.2.4, He
did that which was good and right in the Eyes of the Lord his God, and
commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law and
commandment: And Josiah 2, Chron. 34. Covenanted the people to walk after the
Lord. 2 By the example of your persons and Families, as did 'David and Joshua
sal. 101, and Joshua 24, For this end strive to get divine principles,
according to these, will your actions be, Let God's Statues be the men of your
Council, and his Glory, the end of your actions; Constantius, the Father of
Conslantine, tried his Courtiers wisely; who adhered to truth, he honored
them; who fore-sook Christ them he degraded and said, who were false to God,
would never be true to him: Much depends on Magistrates their personal carriage
and their Courts; Leaders of people easily causes them to err ^sa^ 9.16, One
wicked man in authority destroys much good, Eccls 9, 18, Their example is so
powerful 3, Encourage and strengthen the hands of painful, faithful
Ministers; men according to Gods own Heart, 4, Discountenance what smells of
superstion and Jdolatry; We are glad that course has been taken, and will be
farther taken by his Majesty's Honorable Privy Council, to ease the Land of
Jesuit Priests, the Grand trafficquers, who infuse the Venom of cruel and
damnable principles, the fopperys of superstitious and unscriptural conceits
and have been, and are the principal abetters of horrid cruelties; Such have
been too much carressed by many 4. Have a fervent care to look well to
seminaries of Learning; It Is an old trick of Rome to poison the fountains that
the streams may be mudded; Much depends on the piety, principles, and example
of Masters, young ones may soon get a wrong set that will not easily cure; It Is
dangerous to suck in poison with milk. 5. Be careful of the established
Government of the Church, which we own as founded on the word of God, in which
these five things are express. 1 Anent its Officers as ye have them
distinguished Ephesians. 4.11, 1 These. 5.12. 1 Timothy 5.17. Act. 6, And not a Prelat
among them all. 2. Its Courts and Judicatories Matthew. 18, 16.18, It was no
civil Courts meant there. 3. Subordination of Lesser Judicatories to Greater
Acts 15.4. We have the order of procedure in relation to censure Matthew 18.16.
5. The natural kind of these censures, not Bodily but Spiritual; And there is
a Charge to observe all these things inviolable until Christ second coming 1 Timothy 5.21.1. Tim. 6.14 We most say, that the Scots soil could never agree with
Prelatick nor Erastian domination: This government was owned by Ambassadors
from most of the reformed Churches of Europe at the synod of Dort and subcrived
by them all save two; it was solemnly sworn to be persons of all ranks in this
Nation an Hundred years ago; It is most adapted to the ends of an Established
Ministry to edify Souls and to guard against vice and error Ephesians. 4.11.12.

Beware of what may give a Back-set to this Government and is grievuees to it
for I may venture to say in Scotland there is so strong a twist in the present
establishment bet wixt Kirk and State that they may reckon heart friends and
foes together that who are Heart-friends to the State will be friends to the
Kirk as now established for I Judge it will be found, friends to this interest
will be found in Scotland, His Majesty's best Friends if not His only Friends
whatever others pretends for their own safety advantage or advancement, Our
readiness to venture and offer in a dangerous Juncture is not unknown: I may say
in Scotland if King William had a strait they would make but a small Batalion
of trusties that would be found on the other side; I neither think nor speak so
of England, how many there of the Episcopal persuasion, have given, and do give
pregnant proofs of their Loyalty, and good affection to The King, beyond all
exception.

There has been a great work about taking in of Conformists in Scotland to the
Government, but how have they slighted the condescendency of Parliament, to
make application and qualify themselves? Yea they are imboldned by the
forbearance of Church and State; nor have we taken the advantage allowed, not
that we are for Cruelty, but for Charity, which we have extended to some for
their supply, and inclines yet to do so, wishing that the most needy and best
affected might share of the Charity of all, yet are we not fond of meddling
with them, knowing their temper; There are a number taken in by us, I deny not,
there may be some more sober, Serious, and deserves more encouragement than
others; I judge we are through the throng of them, and wishes they be all sound
at the heart: For those we received in the North, if there be truth in Men, we
had ground to think, they would be true to their trust: For others in the
North, we found their pulse, that they were neither Friends to Kirk nor State;
In stead of Application, they rushed in on the Committee, unmannerly, being
neither cited nor called, and gave in Protestations disowning the Authority of
the Church, and spitting in the face of the Law for our establishment, although
under the color of a fair complement to the State; A mere pretext, no more to
be trusted then Joabs simulat complement to Amasa 2 Samuel 20.3. ^0. Who, under
the covert of a fair Brotherly Salutation, intended a deadly wound, which he
gave him under the fifth Rib, and shed out his Bowels to the ground; Some of
these are declared Intruders, illegally settled, some of them Lybelled for
Scandals. And its known from the North especially, there were offers in a
Formula, repeated Addresses to His Majesty, Petitions to the last Session of
Parliament, declaring themselves ready and willing to join with the present
Church Government; Yet in their Protestations, they pretend to give Reasons,
why in conscience they cannot do it; where is their ground of Trust? Judge how
well contrived they are, made up of Contradictions; Now if such Men who Savor
of Tobia's and Sanballat's complexion, should offer to feign Subjection, with a
mind to undermind the work it were no wonder we were shy to deal with them: And
for those who at best declare their indifferency for any Government the State
appoints especially considering how guilty they are of coutradictory Oaths
subversive of the Government; Who can trust they will support it; and not
subvert if? A cold and feigned friend may soon turn an Enemy; can we be blamed
being convinced they are generally Enemies to Kirk and State to decline
cementing, with them: A King would be thought ill advised, to take and keep in
his bosom, Men whose disaffection and inclinations, subversive of his
Government and interest, might be evidenced to a demonstration: For some of us,
before we closed with such, we would rather choose to take our old venture to
seek our Bread with the peril of our Lives.

I will crave your pardon and patience, in all Soberness to represent a few
grievous things. 1. That those who neither comply with Kirk nor State meet in
pre^ended Presbytries and Synods, and act as Legal Jud^catories, and obtrude
Men of their way on vacant Churches: 2, Many of them who refuse to own the
Government of Kirk and State, take on them to preach irregularly, Baptize
Children, and even of Scandalous persons, without regard to the removing of the
Scandal; And Marry persons claudestinly, without knowledge or consent of
Parents: Who are secure of their Children at this rate? And they Marry some
persons, within forbidden degrees, and some whole former Marriages are not
disolved; some of them antidate Testimonials, and absolve persons in whom they
have no interest, some of them have likeways brought in innovations in worship,
never used under any Government of Protestants in Scotland: And farther,
contrair to all order and in manifest contempt of Church Censures, several
deposed for gross in moralities, Conturnacy, and Supine-negligence, continue in
all the parts of the Ministerial function, which in some places breeds a great
dale of confusion and disorder; these things we can instruct if need be; From
all which flows and a bounds profaneness, Irreligion, and Atheism,
notwithstanding of all the excellent Laws made against them.

Now it is in the power of your hands to order remedies for all these things, by
applying the Laws made, and to be made in Church Matters, and encouraging the
Church in her Liberties, and all her Assemblies: I would exhort all the Members
of this Honorable Court, As ye would prove your selves to walk in truth and
with a perfect heart, in your Spheres and Capaciti^s, prove your selves Nursing
Fathers to the Church, and guard against those who would poison or starve the
Flocks, and overthrow the Government of the Lords house.

I do here declare, I did not intend to irritat any Man; I dare not be a
Man-pleaser, for then I should not be the Servant of Christ, Gal. 1.10. But I
resolved to exoner my Conscience in the fight of God, who is your Master and
mine, if I should never Preach more; Now, as you will all answer before Him,
consider what I have said, for there is a day of Count and Reckoning coming.

My hearty Prayer to God is, That His Majesty's high Commissioner, and all the
Members of this Houourable Court, may be helped by Grace so to behave, As in
that Great Day, You may all meet with that sweet welcome, Well done Good and
Faithful Servants, enter into Your Masters Joy* The Lord grant You
understanding in all these things, To His name be Praise.

FINIS

