THE BISHOP of CHICHESTER's SERMON Before the LORD MAYOR, At St.
Bridget's-Church on Easter-Monday. 1697.

Clark Mayor.
Martis xiij. die Aprilis 1697. Annoque RRs Willhelmi Tertij Angliae, etc.
Nono. THIS Court does Desire the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop
of Chichester to Print his Sermon Preached at the Parish Church of St.
Bridget's on Monday in Easter Week last, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Governors of this several Hospitals of this City.

GOODFELLOW.

A SERMON UPON THE RESURRECTION, Preached before the Right Honorable Sir
EDWARD CLARK, Lord Mayor, THE ALDERMEN, and Governors of the several Hospitals
of the City; At St. BRIDGET's Church, On Easter-Monday, April 5. 1697. BEING
One of the Anniversary Spittal-Sermons.

By JOHN Lord Bishop of Chichester.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill: At the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Corner of Warwick Lane in Paternoster Row.
MDCXCVII.

ACTS X. 40, 41, 42. Him [Jesus] God raised up the third day, and showed him
openly, not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to
us, who did eat and drink with Him after he rose from the dead. And he
commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, That it is he who was
ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead.
THESE Words are part of the Sermon St. Peter Preached to Cornelius and his
Friends; who by the Immediate and Special Direction of God in a Vision, had
sent for that Apostle to know from him what he ought to do Ver. 6. Who, in the
First place shows, That by Jesus Christ the Lord of all, peace is to be
preached to Mankind, Ver. 36.; Which he confirms by a Fourfold Evidence* viz.
1. By the Testimony of John the Baptist, whose History was not unknown to them,
ver. 37. The word ye know, which was preached throughout all Judea after the
Baptism which John preached. 2. By the Miracles and Wonderful Operations of the
Divine Power, appearing in, and wrought by Our Savior, V. 38. God anointed
Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with Power; who went about doing
good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil: For God was with him.
3. By the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead. So in the Text: Him God raised
up, etc. 4. By the Testimony of the Prophets. Ver. 43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, That through his name whosoever believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins.


As to the 3d of these (the Chief Point to be considered) the Apostle shows
what Evidences there were for it in these words; Him God raised up, and showed
him openly, not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God,
even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead, etc.

In discoursing upon which Words, I shall 1. Consider the proof here alleged
for the Resurrection of Christ; which was, That he was shown openly, and that
he was shown to chosen witnesses; and that those Witnesses were commissioned to
preach this to all people upon the Evidence they themselves had for it, and
should be further enabled to give. 2. I shall consider why Christ after his
Resurrection was shown openly to such chosen witnesses, and why not to all the
people. 3. I shall show this to be a sufficient proof of Christ's Resurrection,
That he was thus openly shown to such Witnesses, though not to all the people.
4. I shall show, What Authority this Testimony of Christ's Resurrection gives
to the Doctrine Taught by those Witnesses, viz. That of Christ's being ordained
of God to be the Judge of Quick and Dead.


1. I shall consider the proof here alleged for the Resurrection of Christ.

As,

(1.) That he was shown openly.

The Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, is in it self one of the chief
Articles of our Religion; and is so much the more necessary to be believed and
confirmed, as it gives Testimony to the rest, and upon which as to their Proof
and Evidence they do mainly depend. So the Apostle grants. 1 Cor. 15. 14. If
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain; and your faith is also vain.
And therefore as our Savior himself beforehand referred his Disciples
frequently to his Resurrection; Matthew. 12. 38. 16. 4, 21. 20. 18.
So in the first place the Apostles insisted upon it as being what, Joh. 2. 19
is proved, would render the whole unquestionable. Acts 2. 23, 24, 32. 3. 15,
26. 4. 10. 5. 30.
This Article then required sufficient proof; and for this reason God showed
him openly, (...), he gave him to be manifest, or made it manifest that he was
the Person whom they had known, So the Phrase is used, Romans 10. 20. (...), I
was made manifest.
and had known before to be Crucified and Dead. So it follows here, God showed
him to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead: Or, as
it is, Acts 1. 3. To whom he showed himself alive after his Passion, by many
infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days.

This was absolutely necessary then to the proof of his Resurrection, That he
should be thus evidently manifested to be the very Person that had been
Crucified and Slain, and was now verily alive; and that it should be to such as
had intimately known him before and conversed with him afterward. (...)


(2.) But though he was (...) yet it was unto witnesses chosen (...) By which
Phrase St. Peter here seems to point more particularly to the Apostles, when he
adds, Even to us that did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.
And therefore this seems to have been a peculiar Qualification for an Apostle,
that such a one should have seen and conversed with our Savior both before his
Death and after his Resurrection from it. So when they were about choosing one
into the place of Judas, Peter said, Acts 1. 21, 22.
Wherefore of these men who have companied with us all the time that the Lord
Jesus went in and out among us, beginning at the Baptism of John unto the same
day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us
of his Resurrection.

Thus it was appointed by Our Savior himself: Luke 24, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
These are the words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you -- And
thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead -- And ye are
witnesses of these things.

And accordingly the Apostles insist upon this their designation and choice,
Acts. 2. 32. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are witnesses. Acts 5.
30 (...). The God of our Fathers has raised up Jesus, (...) slew and hanged on
a tree. Him (...) etc. And we are his witnesses (...).

(3.) They are such chosen Witnesses as had sufficient Evidence to prove this
their Commission, and the Authority they had to testify and preach to the
people that Christ was thus risen, and was ordained of God to be the Judge of
quick and dead. And this Evidence was the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them:
Therefore these two are joined together, Acts 5. 32. We are all witnesses of
these things, and so is also the Holy Ghost whom God has given to them that
obey him. But this brings on the Second General, viz.

2. Why was not Christ shown after his Resurrection to all the people as well
as unto chosen Witnesses?

Our B. Savior in the time of his Three Years Ministry went about doing good,
v. 38. and came (as he says of himself) eating and drinking, Matt. 11. 19.
and freely conversed, as there was occasion; but though he abode 40 days upon
the Earth, after his Resurrection, he seemed then rather to retire from
Conversation, than to use it as before; and his Visits were rather occasional
than continued.

Now it might be thought to have rendered his Resurrection more unquestionable,
and would have been more to the satisfaction of Mankind, if he had as commonly
and publicly shown himself alive after his Resurrection, as before his Death,
to all the people. For in such a case, what a Man sees himself, is better than
a Thousand Witnesses; and the more there are that see it, the stronger is the
Evidence to those that have not seen.

Our Apostle foresaw this Objection; and that the Jews at that time might cavil
at what the Witnesses Taught concerning our Savior's Resurrection, and would
probably say; If he were risen, Why did he not appear to us as well as to you?
We heard him Teach for Years together before his Death: We saw him Crucified,
and knew that he died: And if he is risen from the Dead, the best Proof of it
to us, is to have him show himself to us to be alive, as ye say he did to you.
Therefore the Apostle prevents this, when he says, God showed him openly, not
to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who did
eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. Where the Apostle grants,
That Christ was not shown to all the People after the Resurrection; but withal
he insinuates this to be no prejudice to the proof of it; forasmuch as he was
manifested to Witnesses chosen before of God, and that did Eat and Drink with
him afterward.

In which there are several things included; As,

1. That it was not necessary that Christ should be openly shown to all the
people, to induce and oblige them to the belief of his Resurrection.

2. That if there were sufficient Testimony of it by persons in all respects
credible, and as far as Testimony could go, That was a sufficient Motive for
credibility, and a sufficient Argument to oblige those to believe, that did not
see. Indeed there is no other way than Testimony to induce those to the belief
of it, that had not the opportunity of Seeing, Hearing, Eating and Drinking,
and Conversing with our Savior, in matters depending upon Testimony; and where
there cannot be any other Evidence (as it is in Matters of Fact remote in time
or place) all that is to be relied on is the reasonableness and possibility of
the thing, and the credibility of the Testificators. As to the possibility, it
may with great reason be asked, as it is Acts 26. 8. Why should it be thought a
thing incredible, that God should raise the dead? Or that a Dead Person should
revive. And as to the credibility of the Persons, What can be a greater
Evidence, than that they saw and felt that he had Flesh and Bones, Luke 24. 39.
beheld his Wounds, John 20. 25.
Eat and Drank, and for 40 days together on and off, conversed with him? Act.
1. 3..
So that the proofs they had, were infallible, (...)
and of the greatest certainty. They had such an Evidence as was to themselves
undeniable, and which showed him to be the self-same person that they conversed
with before his Death, and that they saw Dead. Thus St. John represents it in a
sensible way, 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3.
That which was seen, from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of
the word of Life. (For the Life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear
witness, etc.) That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you: And the
Evidence they gave to others was as convincing; they professed it boldly in the
midst of the most apparent dangers; and notwithstanding the threats of a
provoked and implacable Adversary, were ready to, and did, seal it with their
Blood. Act. 4. 8.
And that nothing might be wanting to give the greatest corroboration and
strength to their Evidence, they did work such Miracles as were manifestly the
effect of a Divine Power, and which they professed to work only in the name of
Christ, whom they affirmed to be risen from the Dead. Acts 3. 16. 4. 10.

So that if ever there was sufficient Evidence for a Matter of Fact, this is
the Evidence. And where this was, there needed no more.

But however, because it may still be urged, That there was a shorter way to
this; and there needed no Witnesses, nor Miracles, if he had appeared to the
People; and therefore why was not this allowed to them, as well as the Apostles?

I Answer,

1. It was allowed to a sufficient Number, besides the Apostolical Witnesses;
for besides his first Apparition, and the casual Visits he gave to the
Apostles, there was a solemn Assembly in a Mountain of Galilee, where he
appointed to meet them: Mat. 28. 7, 16.
And there, or elsewhere, was he seen by above Five hundred Bretbren at once. 1
Cor. 15. 6.
Nay, we are told, That he was seen of them Forty days, Act. 1. 3.
and talked with them of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.

2. The Christians are called always in the Phrase of this Book of the Acts,
the Brethren, Believers, or Disciples: But by the People is meant the
Promiscuous Multitude of the Jews: And then we are to consider what the mass of
that People was; they were the obstinate incredulous People, that imputed his
Works to Beelzebub, that cried out, Mark 15. 13.
Crucify him, and wished his Blood to be upon them and their Children. Matt.
27. 25.
They were such as were no longer to be a People, and whose House and Temple,
Matt. 23. 38.
Church and Nation were to be laid desolate: And so had no Pretense to such a
Savior.

But as for such among them as were sincere, and ingenuous, and could be
prevailed with, here was Evidence sufficient; and if upon such Evidence they
could not be prevailed with to believe, nothing would prevail upon them; nor
was any other means due to them.

Thus we find it was with the Jews in another Case; some of whom, that saw
Lazarus after his Resurrection, went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them
what things Jesus had done, John 11. 46.

And the Chief Priests, when the Watch gave them an account of what happened
upon the Resurrection of our Savior; and told them, how the Angel appeared,
and came and rolled back the Stone; and that for fear of him they did shake,
and became as dead Men, yet remained obstinate; and by large Money prevailed
upon the Soldiers to say, His disciples came by night and stole him away whilst
we slept. Mat. 28. 2, 11, 13.
When there is such a Perverseness of Mind, they will cavil eternally, and will
question their own Senses rather than own that which they do not like, and is
to be and may be proved by that means to them. Thus our Savior resolves the
point, Luke 16. 31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
be persuaded, though one rise from the dead.

It was to little purpose to labor to convince such; it was in our Savior's
Phrase, to cast Pearl before Swine, to give them an occasion of renewing their
invectives and reproaches. Such as these were not worthy of such favors. So
Lactantius says, Noluit se Judaeis ostendere, ne adduceret eos in
paenitentiam, atque impios resanaret. De Ver. Sap. L. 4.
He would not show himself to the Jews, lest he should bring them to
repentance, and heal the wicked. For,

3. The nature of the thing would not admit it, that he should thus be shown to
all the people; For Faith is all along made a necessary qualification for
Salvation. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved, Romans 10. 9.

But where had there been any room or occasion for the Exercise of this so
celebrated a Grace, if our Savior had openly been shown, and appeared to all
the People after his Resurrection? This had been such Evidence as none could
have gainsaid: And then there would have been no Mark nor Character by which
the Believer and Sincere could have been distinguished from the Unbeliever and
Caviller; nor would Faith have been a Virtue worthy of Praise or Reward, more
than the Exercise of our Senses is upon their proper and natural Objects.

Our Savior said to Thomas, John 20. 25. etc. (Who, when he beheld in his
Hands the print of the Nails, and thrust his Hand into his Side, acknowledged
him and said, My Lord and my God) Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have
believed; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. To
believe that Christ was risen when he saw him, and put his Finger into the
print of the Nails, and thrust his Hand into his wounded Side, was an Evidence
no more to be questioned, than whether he himself was alive and sensible.

And therefore if there was to be such a thing as Faith, or a believing where
they have not seen: If Faith is a Virtue commendable and worthy of such a
Reward as Eternal Life; it is fit there should be a way of trial, by which the
candid and ingenuous, the honest and sincere, may be distinguished from the
perverse and obstinate. 1 Cor. 11. 19.
And as the Apostle says, there must be Heresies and Sects, that they which
are approved and sincere may be made manifest: So it is fit that there should
not be the utmost Evidence given that can be, or that Cavillers may require,
for the trial of sincerity, and whether persons will use that attention and
diligence in inquiring, that candor and sincerity in entertaining, as Faith is
not to be obtained, nor can truly be called Faith without. And this is a reason
why Christ after his Resurrection was openly showed to chosen Witnesses, and
not to all the People. Thus Tertullian says, Apol. Non in vulgus eduxit se, ne
impij errore liberarentur: Et ut fides non mediocri praemio destinata,
difficultate constaret.
He did not offer himself to the view of the People, lest the Wicked should be
delivered from their error: He adds, and that Faith which has assigned to it no
small reward, might meet with difficulty. Then it is Faith, and Faith is a
Virtue, as it was in those St. Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Whom having not seen, ye love: And in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

But yet however, Though Faith in Christ, and a Belief of his Resurrection, be
thus necessary to all, to those that saw him not, as well as to those that saw
him; yet there must be an Evidence sufficient to induce them to believe that
did not see, and to render them inexcusable that believe not; which should be
the Subject of the next General, viz.

3. That it is a sufficient Proof of Christ's Resurrection, and a sufficient
reason for our belief of it, That he was thus openly shown to such Witnesses,
though not to all the People. There was an absolute necessity for the Proof of
Christ's Resurrection that he should appear plainly and visibly to some; and to
whom sooner than to those that had been before conversant with him, and were
chosen by God Himself to be the Witnesses of it? But when this was done, and
they were sufficiently empowred to testify of it, there was no necessity that
the same Evidence should be given to others that was given to them, for the
reasons before laid down: Where I have already prevented my self; so that I
need not further to enlarge upon this Argument.

And so I shall proceed to the 4th General, which is,

4. To consider the Testimony which is given by Christ's Resurrection to the
Doctrine Taught by the chosen Witnesses; and that is Christ's being ordained by
God to be the Judge of Quick and Dead.

In which there are these Four Things to be considered: 1. That there is a Time
of Reckoning, and a Judgment to Come, when all men shall give an account of
themselves to God, and be determined to Happiness or Misery, according to what
they have done in this Life. 2. That Christ is ordained to be at that Time, the
Judge of Quick and Dead. 3. That this is as certain so to be, as that God
raised up Christ from the Dead. 4. That this is a Doctrine of such importance
and universal concernment to all Mankind, that it is to be preached to all the
People.


1. That there is a Judgment to come.

This World is a state of Trial, where every person has a Work to Do, an Office
to Discharge, a Talent to Improve, and a Time for it. But the time of
reckoning, when a Person is to give an account of his Stewardship, is reserved
to another Life.

And indeed the nature of this state will not admit that it should be
otherwise, and that persons here should receive their final Doom. For here God
rules in an ordinary way by the Ministry of Men, and under these circumstances
it is not possible to lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the
Plummet, and to bring all things to a right and unerring determination.

For men can judge only according to outward appearance, and cannot understand
what are the secret and original Springs of Action, which often are lodged very
deep, and yet which must be known, if we would pass an impartial Judgment.

Again; There are Actions of the Heart, which betray not themselves by any
External Signs and Indications, and so are only knowable to God the searcher of
the Heart.

Again, There are even some External Actions that a person is himself only
privy to; as secret Injustice on one side, and private Charity on the other,
when the left hand knows not what the right hand does. Matt* 6. 3.


Again; There are many Acts Good or Evil, which the Laws of men have no regard
to, as Gratitude and Ingratitude, that are highly commendable or injurious; and
yet no Human Authority does oblige to the Virtue, nor punish the want of it.

Again, Men are very partial, apt to be biased by Enmity, Envy, Interest, Fear
or Flattery, or Prejudice on one side to the worse, or by prepossession from
Affection and Interest to the other.

And therefore there needs a Higher Tribunal, where Universal Knowledge,
Unlimited Power, Impartial Administration bear sway: Where all things shall be
finally decided, all cases fully resolved and determined, according to the
Merits of them.

Eccl. 3. 16, 17. Romans 2. 6. 15. Eccl. 12. 14. 1 Cor. 4. 5.
This then the present state of things in the World does show: This the
Consciences of men do presage: This the Scripture every where inculcates: This
will be a Judgment exact and impartial, final, and irreversible. A
Consideration of mighty force: So Solomon thought it, when he concludes his
Advice with it, Eccl. 12. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter,
Fear God and keep his Commandments -- for God shall bring every work into
Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

So thought St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10. We labor, that whether present or
absent, we may be accepted of him. For we must all appear before the
Judgmentseat of Christ -- v. 11. Knowing therefore the Terror of the Lord, we
persuade men. And surely this will persuade men, or nothing will: This will
persuade, if they are to be persuaded. The Rich Man thought so, when he
concluded, That if Lazarus rose from the Dead, and went to his Five Brethren,
and testified unto them concerning a Place of Torment, they would repent. And
surely if this Doctrine was as much believed, and as well considered as it is
of importance, it would quicken the Slothful, awaken the Drowsy and Negligent,
reform the Perverse, and conquer the Obstinate. If they did but after this
manner reflect upon themselves: Gal. 6. 7.
Is the Time coming, when whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap?
when all that I have done, said or thought, shall be brought into Examination?
Are all these things wrote down in a Book of Remembrance? What a condition then
am I in, to appear before such a Judge, and such a Tribunal? If I know so much
by my self, who have kept no such Book, taken no such punctual account of my
self, and yet know so much as to condemn my self, and stand condemned by my own
Heart; what shall I say or think, when God is greater than my heart, and
knows all things? 1 John 3. 20.


May we not justly cry out with the Psalmist, Enter not into judgment with thy
Servant, O Lord! for in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified. Ps. 143. 2


And again, Ps. 130. 3
If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand? but there
is forgiveness with him; and that is testified by Jesus Christ, and confirmed
by God's raising him from the Dead, who was a Propitiation for our Sins. Which
brings me to the second.

2. That Christ is ordained to be, at that Time, the Judge of Quick and Dead.

So we read John 5. 22. That the Father has committed all judgment to the Son;
and v. 28, 29. The time is coming, when all that are in the grave shall hear
his voice, and come forth; and shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ:
Romans 14. 10.
That God shall judge the secrets of men by him. 1 Cor. 2. 16.


Matter indeed of just Terror to the Wicked, That he is then to be the Judge,
who thought nothing too dear to purchase their Redemption, but freely parted
with his own Life for it. How must those stand Speechless, and be Inexcusable,
When the Lord shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel
of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8.


But on the other side, What Comfort will this administer to all True
Believers, That He is to be the Judge, who took part of the same with them, and
laid down his Life for them? Heb. 2. 14.
To see him whom they have believed in as their Savior, loved and obeyed as
their Lord! To see him whom they have longed to see! What Joy will it then be
to such! What Comfort will spring up in their Minds, When the Lord Jesus shall
come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired of all them that believe
in that day! 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.


3. There is the certainty of this; As certainly is there a Judgment to come,
and as certainly shall Christ then be the Judge, as he himself rose from the
Dead.

Thus the Apostle improves it; Acts 17. 31. God has appointed a Day, in which
he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained,
and of which he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him
from the dead. That indeed is an undeniable Testimony for whatever it is to
prove. So it was thought by that miserable Person in Hell, Luke 16. 30. who
said of his Five Brethren, If one went from the dead, they will repent. That
is, There is no Evasion, it is Evidence not to be gainsaid. But here is one
risen from the Dead, that has brought Life and Immortality to Light. 2 Timothy 1.
10.
And then how inexcusable must they be that disregard such a Testimony, or the
matter it bears Testimony to? Let him come down from the cross, say the
incredulous Jews, and we will believe. Matthew. 27. 42.
But here is one come from the Dead, and what can be said then, if they believe
not?

4. The Doctrine of a Future Judgment, being a Point of great importance to
all, is to be preached unto the People. This is the Use St. Paul makes of it,
knowing the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
[That we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ] we persuade men.

And surely there is no matter of greater Terror, no Argument of greater Force
and Persuasion, and so none more to be used, and repeated, and insisted upon by
the Teacher; none more fit to be considered by the People, both as to the
Consequence of it, and the Negligence of Mankind, in the Consideration of it.
What an Influence would this Doctrine of a Judgment to come have upon us, if
firmly believed, duly pondered, and frequently thought upon? If it was but
taken into serious Consideration in the beginning of the Day, and reflected
upon in the close of it, what Evil would it prevent? And what Good would it put
us upon and promote? If the Thoughts of it did but intervene in the Spaces of
our Business, how just and exact would it make us in our Dealings? How
observant of our Words and Behavior? How would it oblige us to improve our
Time, and to lay out our Talents to the best Advantage.

And yet, though this be one of the most important Subjects we can think upon,
and the most necessary to have frequently in our Thoughts; though this be an
Article we all profess to believe, how little is it in our Minds? How little
Influence has it upon us; when we think, and speak, and act for the most part
as if all were shut up with the Day, and no more to be revealed than the Day it
self?

Considering which (the Importance of the Subject, and the Incogitancy of
Mankind) it is therefore necessary that it should be often preached unto the
People: That it should be pressed upon them with the utmost Force; and if
possible be of as much Efficacy as it is of Authority and Consequence. It is
God that requires it of the Teacher; for, says the Apostle here, He commanded
us to preach unto the people; and to testify, That it is he who was ordained
of God to be the judge of quick and dead.

It was the Consideration of this, without Doubt, amongst other things, that
has in all Ages stirred up Pious and Well-disposed Persons to do Good to
others; and to make the best Improvement of the Stock given to them by God the
Prime Donor and Benefactor: Of which we have memorable Examples; and of the
Fruits of which Charity and Benevolence, take A True Report of the great Number
of poor Children, and other poor People maintained in the several Hospitals,
under the Pious Care of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London, the
Year past.
CHRIST's-HOSPITAL.
CHildren put forth Apprentices and Discharged, 97. Four whereof being
instructed in the Mathematics and Navigation, are already placed out; and 6
others qualified for it, out of the Mathematical School, Founded by King
Charles II. 97 Children Buried 13 Children Remaining in the House and at Nurse
680 The Stated and certain Revenue amounts to little more than a moiety of the
necessary Charge.
St. BARTHOLOMEW's-HOSPITAL.
Cured and Discharged of Wounded, Sick and Maimed Soldiers, Seamen, and other
Diseased Persons 1997 Buried 142 Remaining under Cure 257
St. THOMAS's-HOSPITAL.
Cured and Discharged of Wounded, Sick and Maimed Soldiers, Seamen, and other
Diseased Persons 2686 The Revenue much less than will defray the Charge. Buried
162 Remaining under Cure 299
BRIDEWELL-HOSPITAL.
Received into it Vagrants, and other Indigent and Miserable People (many
whereof were relieved with Clothing, etc.) 904 Maintained and brought up in
diverse Trades at the Charge of the said Hospital 97
BETHLEHEM-HOSPITAL.
Brought into it Distracted Men and Women the last Year 73 Cured and Discharged
39 Buried 23 Remaining under Cure 113 The Revenue does not amount to one half
of the Yearly Expenses.


In this Report I have now laid before you such Noble Instances of Christian
Charity, as scarcely any City of the whole World can parallel; and that,
whether we consider the several useful Ends for which those Charities were
bestowed, and these Places endowed; or the Faithfulness of the Governors
concerned in the Administration. It is above an Hundred Years ago (as has been,
I perceive, before observed to this Congregation) when the Members of our
Church did publicly, in the Face of the World, challenge the great Pretenders
to such Charities (I mean those of the Church of Rome) to compare with them. I
forbid the best of them, says one of the great Men of that Age, upon this very
Occasion, to show me in Rhemes or Rome such a Show as we have seen these Two
Days*; [He Preached on the Wednesday in Easter-Week.] He goes on, I will be
able to prove, That Learning, in the Foundation of Schools; the Poor, in
Foundation of Almshouses, have received greater Help, within these Forty
Years, than it has in any Christian Realm, not only within the self-same Forty
Years, but also than it has in any Forty Years upwards, during all the Time of
Popery. Dr. Andrews, (after Bishop) Spittal-Sermon, 1588. p. 17. and Dr.
Willet's Synopsis Papismi.


And if so, What a wonderful Increase has been since made, and that within the
last Forty Years, notwitstanding the vast Devastations of a Civil War, and of a
devouring Fire; any one that will take the Pains to compare the State of the
City alone, as it was then, and as it is now, may see.

And I am sure there is not a greater Increase in the Revenue* than there is an
Improvement of the Administration. Let us but Review the Particulars.

1. As to the Orphans; What a Number is there? What Care is there taken in
their Education? First in their Nurseries, which of late they have erected; and
by a kind of Collegiate Institution, kept those Younglings from being reached
by those Temptations, which in promiseuous Company of other Children they were
before liable to be perverted by.

And when transplanted hither, into a riper Soil, how are they immediately
disposed of to the best Advantage, according to their Capacities, upon due
Trial and Observation?

There is nothing wanting to furnish them with Learning, if their Inclination
tend that way; or if they are otherwise disposed by their Genius, there are
other Masters for Writing and Accounts, Mathematics, Navigation, Trade by Land
or Sea. So that there is an Education that will make them useful Members of a
Commonwealth; and an Education which any one would be ambitious of; and others
that are able, elsewhere, pay liberally for.

But there is one thing not to be forgotten, and that is, The Pains that is
taken to train them up in Virtue and Piety: So that notwithstanding the great
Number of Youth together, there is not more Care taken of the Cleanliness of
the Place and Apparel, the Wholesomness of the Diet, than of their Morals and
Virtue, and their Instruction in the Principles of Religion.

The next thing that comes in our View, is the Care of the Sick and the Maimed;
who can take little or no Care of themselves, and are here liberally provided
for. And so are they that cannot so much as crave help, or know that they stand
in need of it; I mean the Lunatic; and even the perverse and obstinate, are
not neglected. Let us go through all the Miseries of Mankind, and all states of
men under them, and there is scarcely any but what have found careful and
liberal Benefactors.

So that I know nothing wanting to complete it, but some further care of the
Prisons, and a repressing of those numbers of vagrant Beggars, that are the
burden of the Kingdom, and the reproach of it. All the reflection I shall make
of this, shall be from the forecited Author. Methinks, says he, Ib. p. 21.
It is strange that the exiled Churches of strangers which are harbored here
with us, shall be able in this kind to do such good, as not one of their poor
is to be seen to ask about the streets, and this City the harbourer and
maintainer of them, should not be able to do the same good.

But my Business is not so much to celebrate the praises of such as have been
Charitable and Bountiful in this way, though they deserve to be had in
Everlasting remembrance for it; as it is to provoke others to an imitation of
the like Pious and Charitable Minds; which God be thanked other Ages, and even
this, is not wanting in. But however, there is room enough for others to
follow; and I am sorry for making such an Observation upon the whole, as will
not only make it very commendable, but a necessary Work; and to speak
Christianly, a Duty to such whom God has prospered in such a plentiful manner,
as they may be capable of it.

And this is so much the more capable of enforcement, that in all, the Expense
is much beyond the standing Revenue, and in some near, if not above, a Moiety
beyond it.

And what can be the issue of this, but augmenting their Debt, or that others
by their Benefactions should prevent it?

What remains therefore, but that those that are not under those necessities,
should consider the case of those that are?

Let those who have had Parents to provide for them; or who have been by the
Wonderful Providence of God, notwithstanding their want of it, raised in the
World to plentiful Estates, show their thankfulness to God by a care of those
that are Orphans and Comfortless. Joh. 14. 18.


Let such as have their Health and Limbs, and so can enjoy the Estate God has
blessed them with, consider those that want Health and Riches, nay the
Necessities of Life to support them under those Infirmities.

Let those that have the use of their Senses, and that have not had occasion to
burden, or lay too heavy a load upon their Minds; or if they have, yet have
not been pressed beyond measure, remember what a Blessing they enjoy by the use
of that Reason which others do want, and are deprived of.

Let those that have not by necessities, or other occasions, been exposed to
the Temptations of Vagrancy and Dissolute Courses, have some compassion for
those that have, and contribute toward the pulling of such out of the Fire.

Indeed if every one did but make the case of others their own; every one that
can, would be more or less a Benefactor to such Foundations as these are.

And this Argument would be improved, if we considered, That all we have is of
mere Gift, and we are but Stewards and Dispensers of it; it being for a time
deposited in our hands for several Excellent Ends and Uses; and that we are all
accountable another Day to God the Supreme Lord and Donor, and indeed
Proprietor of all. And thus our Savior represents it, Matt. 25. 31, etc.

When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the Holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory; and before him shall be
gathered all Nations -- Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and
ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came
unto me. He concludes, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

What greater encouragement, than to have our Savior himself a Debtor to us,
when we are all so to Almighty God! What greater than to have an Eternal Reward
for dispensing of that to others, which we our selves receive! What greater
than to be assured that the Son of Man Himself, when he shall come in his
Glory, will be ready to receive us, and that He will then say to us, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you!

I shall Conclude with that of the Apostle, who sums up all as to our Duty and
Encouragement: 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19.
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the Living God, who gives us richly all
things to Enjoy: That they do Good, that they be rich in good Works, ready to
Distribute, willing to Communicate; Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life.

Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant unto us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 4. Margin. r. (...). P. 23. l. 18. for revealed r. recalled.


