Royal Oak
Woodcut printer's device of an oak tree bearing three crowns.

(...), OR, The Transcendency of CHRIST'S LOVE toward the Children of Men. Laid
down by the Apostle St. Paul, in Ephesians. 3.19. A Treatise formerly Preached, but
now enlarged and published for common benefit. By Peter Williams, Preacher of
the Gospel.

I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2.

Christ is all in all, (...). 3.11.

As the Father has ^d me, so have I loved you, Joh. 15.9.

(...). Isidor. Pelus. lib. 1. Epist. 10.

(...). Macar. Hom. 16. p. 237.

Jesus Christus totus suavis est, totus salubris est, totus delectabilis, totus
denique, secundum Sponsae vocem, desiderabilis. Bern. Ser. 2. post Epiph. p. 22.

LONDON, Printed by E. M. for Nathanael Webb, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the Sign of the Royal Oak in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North
door, 1665.

IMPRIMATUR.

Joh. Hall. R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
Ex Aedibus Londinens. October. 15. 1664.
THE DEDICATION. To his Christian and Dearly Beloved Friends in YORK, and
elsewhere:
THE AUTHOR (as a public and permanent Testimonial of his unfeigned affection
to them, and real Gratitude for their Respect and Favor toward him) Humbly
dedicates this ensuing Treatise (being the First Fruits of his Labors in this
kind:)

Earnestly beseeching the God of all Grace, that he would grant them such a
knowledge of this (in it self) incomprehensible Love of Christ, as may tend
unto, and end in their being filled with all the fullness of God:

And that (through (...) ^urrence of his Spirit and Blessing) this (...)
^^^atise may be made some way useful and serviceable thereunto.

The Epistle to the Readers.
IF you would know why I have made this adventure to appear thus publicly, it
is, That I might Evangelizare manu, and scriptione; and speak among the people
(with whom I have been conversant) when I am dead and gone. For though Speech
has H^bet ^n sci^ quid laten is energiae viva vor, and in au^o^ discipuli de
docto^is ore tran^susa sortiu; son^^. Jer.
a wonderful secret Energy accompanying of it, and Multo magis viva vox
assicit. Plin. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 3. Nep. p. 95. Eras. ^^g. p. 218.
a living voice is more affecting and persuasive than a dead letter (and
therefore God has appointed Preaching to be a standing Ordinance in his
Church; as the most ready and likely way of conveying Sacred Truths to the
minds and hearts of men) yet herein Ward. Verba volant. Sc^ipta manent.
Writing has the advantage of Preaching, that whereas this is confined only to
a few, that is extended to many; and whereas this requires presence, and
continues but for a while, that has its use in absence, and is more permanent.
Sermons are like showers of rain, which water for the instant. Books are like
Snow, which lies longer on the Earth; these may preach, when the Author cannot,
and (which is more) when he is not.

As for this present Book, it Treats of a Subject altogether unexceptionable,
it being as noble, sweet, and of as necessary concernment, as any I could pitch
upon. What Subject more Noble than Jesus Christ Col. 2.3.
? in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge Field of the
Church. lib. 1. cap. 4. p. 8. out of Naz. Orat. 4. de sil. 1. p. 133.
. In whom all things appear full of mercy, and full of marvel. God before all
Eternity, and yet made man in time; born of a Woman, and yet a Virgin; wrapped
in swaddling bands, and yet glorified by the Angels, etc. What more sweet than
Love? And what love more sweet, than the love of Christ? This is that which the
Church says Cant. 1.2, 3. Delici is omnibus, and lantitiis potiores amores
tuos duco. Merc. in loc.
, is better than Wine, and makes his Name as Ointment poured forth to the
attracting of hearts to himself. This is that Cant. 3.10.
firm pavement on which Believers may stand confidently without fear of
falling. That victorious Cant. 2.3, 4.
Banner, under the shelter whereof they may sit down cheerfully, without fear
of being foiled by their Enemies, and find his fruit sweet to their taste. What
is of greater concernment to us, than to know this love of Christ, as we ought
to know it, so as in heart and life, in affection and conversation, to be in
some measure assimilated and conformed thereunto? Our present Justification and
Sanctification depend upon it; for by his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many Isa. 53.11.
, says the Lord by his Prophet. And Phil. 3.10.
by knowing him, we become conformable to his death, says the Apostle. And our
future salvation no less; for John 17.3.
this is life Eternal, to know the true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has
sent, says our Savior. These are the matters here Treated of, which I confess
are fitter for a David to handle, 2 Samuel 23.1.
The man raised on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, the sweet Psalmist
of Israel: Or for a Paul, 2 Cor. 12.4.
who was caught up into Paradise, and heard (...), unspeakable words, than for
one every way so inconsiderable as I am: Nay, its more fit for one of those
Purae intelligentiae, the Angels that are about the Throne, than for any dark
and dim-sighted Mortal to discourse of these things. And therefore the sense of
my own weakness and insufficiency, has been all along a grand discouragement,
and still is a ground of fear to me, lest this excellent Subject should be too
much debased in so low a hand, and prove to be but Salv.
Ornamentum in luto, by so mean handling of it. Yet such as it is, I have
adventured it to public View; and when I have added a few Lines, to give the
Readers a just account concerning my self and it, I shall discharge them of any
further trouble by way of Preface. And for my self, I have this to say, That
though I fall short of what should be done upon such a Subject, and might be
done by others of greater abilities, and better accomplishments; yet I have
done as I was able, not serving Christ and his Church 2 Samuel 24.25.
with that which cost me nothing, which (I trust) is accepted with the Lord,
and shall be with his people. Indeed I can challenge little for my own, besides
the Method and Substratum, having gathered most of the enlargements and
superstructure elsewhere, which I the rather chose to do, because I thought it
might perhaps render the whole the more acceptable to some Readers; nor shall I
herein (I hope) incur from any that are candid and ingenuous, the imputation of
Plagiarism, because I punctually and faithfully quote the Authors themselves,
and thereby Pliny's Epistle to Vespas. before his Not. Hist.
confess by whom I have profited. The reason of the silent Dedication
foregoing, made to many Friends in general, without mention of any one in
particular (if any be inquisitive about it) was this, because that The Lady
Mary Lister, Relict of Sir William Lister of Thornton in Craven in Yorkshire,
who exchanged this life for a better. Aug. 14. 1664.
truly honorable person to whom it was intended, Isa. 57.2.
was entered into peace, and brought to rest in the bed of silence, before I
could get it published, and thereby made incapable of it; but infinitely to her
advantage, who (I verily believe) was taken from studying to know the love of
Christ on Earth, that she might be filled with all the fullness of God in
Heaven, where I leave her; and having given this account of my self, I shall
add what I have to say concerning the present work, and its this: It was never
intended to please the captious, but to profit the conscientious; nor to tickle
the fancies of the curious, but to warm the hearts of the devout and pious; and
therefore I have studied Nos qui rerum magis quam verborum amatores, utilia
potius quam plausibilia sectamur, etc. in scriptiunculis nostris non lenocinia
esse volumus, sed remedia, etc. Salv. de Gub. Dei. Praes. p. 2.
sound matter, rather than fine words; and to be profitable, rather than
plausible. So that if you are nice and delicate, and seek after strong lines,
quaint expressions, high notions, and 1 Cor. 2.4.
the enticing words of man's wisdom, here is not for you; but if you are
serious, and sollicitous for savoury and wholesome Truths, these I can promise
you, which meeting with a quick appetite, and good digestion, may (through the
blessing of God) to be John 6.63.
Spirit and life to your souls. And that they may be so, I would advise every
one of you, that when you begin to read this Book, you would at least send up
some short Ejaculation to that God, Hos. 14.8.
from whom all our fruit is found, that there may be a blessing in it to our
selves, and all others into whose hands it shall come; in the attainment
whereof, I shall think my labor well bestowed, and abundantly recompensed,
especially if you will gratify with your remembrance at the Throne of Grace,
the unworthy Author, who is

Your Servant for Jesus sake, PETER WILLIAMS.
YORK, December 24. 1664.
The Contents of the Book.
CHAP. I. Sect. 1. THe coherence of the Words. Page. 1 Sect. 2. The several
Readings. Page. 2 Sect 3. The meaning of the Words. Page. 6 The Objections
answered, which are made against the sense asserted. Page. 10 Sect. 4. The
sense of the Apostles Prayer. Page. 13 Three Observations raised. ibid.
CHAP. II. The first Observation. Page. 14 Sect. 1. An Introduction to the
handling of it. ib. The Method propounded. Page. 15 Sect. 2. What love is here
meant in general. Page. 16 More particularly. ibid. Sect. 3. The three first
particulars. Page. 18 Sect. 4. The fourth particular. Page. 20 Sect. 5. The
fifth particular. Page. 23 Sect. 6. The sixth particular. Page. 25
CHAP. III. The greatness of Christ's love confirmed by Arguments. Page. 27
Sect. 1. The first Argument. ibid. Sect. 2. The second Argument. Page. 30 Sect.
3. The third Argument. Page 34 Sect. 4. The fourth Argument. Page 40
CHAP. IV. Sect. 1. The fifth Argument. Page 51 Sect. 2. The sixth Argument.
Page 54 Sect. 3. The seventh Argument. Page 61 Sect. 4. The eighth Argument.
Page 63
CHAP. V. The Application of the first Use, for exhortation to labor to know
this love of Christ. Page 67 Sect. 1. The Preface to the handling of it. ibid.
Sect. 2. Directions about our knowledge of Christ's love. 1. That it be an
affectionate knowledge. Page 71 Sect. 3. The first Branch of the first
Direction, That it be a knowledge accompanied with love to Christ. Page 73
CHAP. VI. Reasons why we should love Christ. Page 75 Sect. 1. The first
Reason. ibid. Sect. 2. The second Reason. Page 78 Sect. 3. The third Reason.
Page 88 Sect. 4. The fourth Reason. Page 98
CHAP. VII. Rules for our love to Christ. Page 103 Sect. 1. The first Rule
about the Manner. ib. Sect. 2. The first Branch of the first Rule, That it be
sincere. Four Characters of sincere love. Page 106 Sect. 3. The second Branch
of the first Rule, That it be steadfast and constant. Wherein this constancy
appears. Page 112
CHAP. VIII. Tbe second Rule. The Measure. Page 113 Sect. 1. Christ to be loved
above enjoyment. Page 114 Sect. 2. Christ to be loved above Relations. Page 118
An Objection answered. ibid. Sect. 3. Christ to be loved above our lives. Page
125 Sect. 4. Objections answered. Page 134
CHAP. IX. The third Rule about expressing our love to Christ. Page 145 Sect.
1. By love to all men. Page 146 Sect. 2. By love to the Saints especially. Page
149 Sect. 3. Mutual love commanded by Christ. Page 157 Sect. 4. Christ's Prayer
for it. Page 165 Sect. 5. One main end of instituting the great Ordinance of
the Supper. Page 172
CHAP. X. The second Branch of the first Direction. Let your love run to him by
desire, and rest on him by delight. Page 182 Sect. 1. Desire after Christ.
ibid. Sect. 2. Rest on him by delight. Page 185 Sect. 3. Let trust and fear be
attendants. Page 191 Sect. 4. Objections answered. Page 194 Sect. 5. Objections
answered. Page 199
CHAP. XI. The second Direction about our knowledge of Christ's love, That it be
an effectual knowledge. Page 201 Sect. 1. By way of Application, with
experience and assurance to our selves. Page 201 Sect. 2. By way of Admiration.
Page 208 Sect. 3. By way of Gratulation. Page 213 Sect. 4. By way of
Obligation. Page 216
CHAP. XII. The third Direction, That it be a progressive knowledge. Page 232
Sect. 1. In respect of our selves. Page 233 Sect. 2. In respect of others. Page
241
CHAP. XIII. General motives to know this love of Christ. Page 246 Sect. 1. The
double evidence that it carries with it. Page 247 Sect. 2. The influence it
has. Page 251 Sect. 3. A Question answered. Page 255 Sect. 4. The second Use
for Caution. Page 264 Sect. 5. The last Use for consolation. Page 271

The transcendency Of CHRIST'S Love toward the Children of Men.
EPHESIANS. 3.19. The former part of the Verse:

And to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge.


CHAP I.
Sect. 1.
THese words are a branch of the Apostles Prayer for the Ephesians, The
coherence of the Text with the Verses foregoing.
begun at the fourteenth Verse, and reaching to the end of the Chapter; made
indeed upon design, but a holy and good one, viz. To prevent their fainting at
his present tribulations for the Gospel, v. 13.14. I desire that you faint not
at my tribulations for you, which is your glory. For this cause I bow my knees
unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And because he knew, that the
experimental knowledge of the love of Christ, would be a special means to keep
them close to Christ and his Truth, notwithstanding all discouragements;
therefore, among other things, he prays, That they being rooted and grounded
in love, might be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height, And (as it is in the Text) to know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge; which love, duly and rightly taken in, would
tend to their establishment, as good rooting does to a Tree and a firm
foundation to a Building: for so the words Radicati propper agriculturam,
fundati propter aedificationem. Aug. Epist. 120. (mihi) p. 697. Duae
similitudines, quas adhibet, exprimunt quam firma, and constans debeat esse in
nobis charitas; Paulus vult came penitus animis nostris infixam esse, ut sit
quasi been fu^datum aedificium, and profunda plantatio. Calv. in loc.
(...), rooted and grounded (in the 17th. Verse) do import.

Sect. 2.
The several Readings.
BUT I come to the words themselves, and I meet with several readings and
interpretations of them among Expositors, which I shall mention, and pitch upon
that, which I conceive most agreeable to the Apostles meaning in this place.

(1.) The Syriack Translation (as I find it rendered by Ut cogn^scatis
magnitudinem cha^itatis Christi. Trem.
Tremelius) runs thus, That you may know the greatness of the love of Christ.
This is good, those two words (passing knowledge) being supplied by one word
(greatness:) yet it seems to be defective; for (according to the sense of this
place) there is not only a positive, but a superlative greatness in the love of
Christ, an exceeding greatness, as is expressed concerning Gods Power, Ephesians.
1.19.

(2.) The vulgar Latin runs thus, Scire etiam supereminentem scientiae
charitatem Christi: which Erasmus (from the ambiguity of the word scientiae,
being both the Genitive and Dative Case) is doubtful how to paraphrase, whether
according to the Dative Case, To know the love of Christ, which is greater than
can be known; or according to Ambrose, which excels, or has the
pre-eminence of our knowledge; or else, according to the Genitive Case, To know
the excellent love of the knowledge of Christ: Posterior sensus magis quadrat.
ad Graecum sermonem. Eras. in loc.
but he enclines to this latter sense, as most agreeable to the Greek. Of this
Reading I shall speak more under the next Head: and in the mean time I have
this to say against Erasmus his drawing of the Vulgar Translation to this
sense, That I much question whether it be agreeable to the mind of that
Interpreter, whoever he was: for its likely, if he had intended any such thing,
he would have otherwise placed the words, not Scire supereminentem scientiae
charitatem Christi, but Scire supereminentem charitatem scientiae Christi.
Besides, the great Patrons of this Translation, (I mean the Papists) carry the
sense quite another way, at least those which I have seen, as Dion, Carthus,
Estius, Tirinus, A Lapide, of whom more afterward.

(3.) The next Reading, is that which was even now mentioned, Vtque sciretis
eximiam dilectionem cognitionis Christi, And that you may know the excellent
love of the knowledge of Christ; Nor is Erasmus single in owning of it.
Hieron^mus interpretatur, eximiam dilectionem cognitionis Ch^isti. Bez. in loc.
Beza fathers it upon Hierome. Det and vobis (...), inquit, (...) ut
intelligatis excellent^m, atque superemin^ntem amorem illius cognitionis
Christi. Hoc est qu^m, cum ad cognitionem sui nos vocavit, exhibuit, ac
declaravit nobis Christus. Heins. in loc.
Heinsius contends stiffly for it, and expounds it to this sense, That the
Apostle prays for their knowledge, and understanding of that excellent,
transcendent, and unspeakable love, which Christ exhibits and declares to the
Sons of Men, when he calls them to the knowledge of himself. In his verbis
potest esse trajectio, quasi dicat Apostolus, excellentem Dei charitatem in
ipsa Christi cognitione, quae nobis contigit, elucere. Vorst. Schol. in loc.
Vorstius is not against it, and expounds it to the same sense. Summam illam
dilectionem, Dei scilicet, and proximi, quae ex cognitione Christi oritur.
Grot. in loc.
Grotius allows it, and gives this sense of it, That they might know, that is,
experience in themselves that love of God and their Neighbor, which arises
from the knowledge of Christ: He tells us of a M. S. in which the words are
thus, (...), and says, that it seems there were some Copies in Hierome's time,
which had it thus, because he so expounds it. And our English Annotator, who
treads in his steps, (Dr. Hammond) makes mention of a M. S. of the Kings,
wherein the words are so placed. And indeed if the words were so read in all,
or the most Copies, it were indisputably on their side; but seeing it is
otherwife, I crave leave to dissent, and (reserving all due reverence to the
learned Authors forementioned) to conclude with Beza, Quidam in hoc explicando
loco frustra se torserunt, ut Hieronymus, qui interpretatur eximiam dilectionem
cognitionis Christi, obscuro sensu, and trajectione ita violenta, ut admitti
certe non possit. Beza in loc.
That those who go this way, do but in vain trouble themselves to produce an
obscure sense of the words, not without a more violent transposition than can
be well admitted, especially seeing they may be carried without any straining,
to a better sense another way.

(4.) Another Reading is that of Ambrose, who renders it, Scire etiam
supereminentem scientiam charitatis Christi, as if it were not (...), but
(...); And thus Augustine reads it in his 120th. Epistle, (mihi) p. 697. To
know the transcendent knowledge of the love of Christ: But this requires a
greater mutation of the words than the former, to make it good; nor do I find,
or hear of any Original Copy to countenance it, as the other has. Besides
this, Augustine mentions it only in transitu; and though Ambrose thus renders
the words, yet his Comment is wholly agreeable to the sense I aim at, if it
were his, (which yet Bellar. de script. Eccles. p. 64. Geth. Patrolog. p. 281.
Rivet. Crit. Sacr. lib. 3. cap. 18.
many learned men do question.) I shall produce instances from him afterward,
and in the mean time shall leave this, and come to that which I conceive to be
the main.

(5.) In the last place therefore, Beza reads the words thus, Cognoscere
charitatem illam Christi omni cognitione superiorem, which our English
Translatours follow, and render it as you read, And to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge. Now from this Translation (which is so generally
known, and received among us) I am not willing to recede without just occasion,
which not finding as to this place, I shall cloze with it, and give you that
which I conceive to be the true and proper sense, and meaning of the words.

Sect. 3.
The meaning of the words.
THE Apostle prays, That they might know,) that is, Per (...) intelligitur non
nuda and simplex notitia, sed affectiva cum desiderio, app^obatione, and
dil^ctione conjuncta. Genesis Ha-Harm. in Joan. 14.17. (mihi) p. 933.
not by a bare notional, but affectionate knowledge, such as is accompanied
with desire, approbation and love; (...), hic est in semet experiri. Grot. in
loc.
by an experimental knowledge; Ut possitis scire, id est, animo complecti, and
pro dignitate aestimare charitatem Christi. Estius in locum.
that they might know, so as to embrace with the heart, and esteem according to
its dignity and worth, this love of Christ.

The love of Christ,) which some extend to Christ and God the Father;
Chari^otem Christi, and Dei Patris eandem intelligo Rolloc. in locum.
others to God in Christ; Quam Christus, and Deus per Christum nobis exhibuit.
Tirinus in loc. Quam exhibuit nobis Deus in Christo, vel qua Christus ipse
Filius Dei nos complexus est. Bez. in loc.
others leave it as indifferently applicable to the love which God has showed
in his Son, as John 3.16. Romans 5.8. Or that love, with which Christ himself,
the Son of God, has embraced us, as John 15.13. Post Dei Patris infinitam, and
incomprehensibilem cognitionem, and in^narrabilem clementiam, Christi quoque
agnoscere nos vult charitatem. Ambros. in loc.
Ambrose restrains it to the love of Christ: After the infinite, and
incomprehensible knowledge of God the Father, and his unspeakable mercy, he
would have us also acknowledge the love of Christ. Charitatem Christi, quam
exhibuit nobis. A Lapide in locum. Qua nos dilexit. Est. in loc.
The like does A Lapide, and Estius: The love of Christ, which he has showed
to us, and wherewith he has loved us. And in this sense I shall take it in the
ensuing discourse, having spoken of the love of God in Christ from another
place, 1 John 4.9, 10.

Which passes knowledge.) This admits of a double interpretation.

(1.) To take (...), knowledge, objectively, for that habit of knowledge, which
a man has attained in other things, and (...) for excelling, as it is used 2
Cor. 3.10. and then the meaning is this, He prays, that they might know that
love of Christ, the knowledge whereof excells all other knowledge in the world
whatsoever. Now this is a great truth: for our Apostle elsewhere, as a
Minister, prefers it before all other knowledge, 1 Cor. 2.2. and as a
Christian, before all other things, Phil. 3.7, 8. for which he had ventured the
loss of all, and in comparison of which, he reckoned no more of any thing which
he had parted with, or had yet besides him, but as loss and dung, Vid. Leigh's
Crit. Sacr. in verbo (...).
(...), dogs meat, as the word signifies. A very low, and diminishing term, yet
hardly low enough to express any thing by, which comes in competition with
Christ, and the knowledge of him. Charitatem quae procul dubio caeterarum rerum
excedit cognitionem. Theoph. Exaggerat autem Apostolus scientiam charitatis
Christi, quum asserit eam ^xuperare omn^m aliam cognitione^. Marior. e Sarcer.
Nor are there wanting such as countenance this exposion; Videri autem potest
Apostolus respicere ad Gnosticos, qui hoc superbo nomine sese nuncupaverunt, a
scientia, quam sibi peculiariter venditabant; utitur enim vocabulo (...), unde
(...); Atqui long majus est scire charitatom Christi, utpote quae universam
Gnosticorum, omniumque Philosophorum scientiam excedit, q^ia mysterium
charitatis Christi, qua semetipsum pro nobis tradidit, in cor hominis cujusquam
non ascendit, sicut in genere de huiusmodi mysteriis sapientiae Christianae
testatur Apostolus, 1 Cor. 2. Estius in loc. See likewise Dr. Hammond on the
place.
And some apply it particularly to that knowledge which the Gnostics boasted
of, thinking that the Apostle, in the word (...), had a particular respect to
them.

(2.) The next interpretation is to take knowledge subjectively, for the
faculty of knowing, and (...) for exceeding, that is, as we read it, passing,
or surpassing, and then the meaning is this, He prays, That they might know
that love of Christ, which for its infinite greatness is without the compass,
beyond, and above the reach of humane understanding; nay, it surpasses all
knowledge that is finite, not only Humane, but Angelical, as Omnem superat
cognitionem, nempe humanum, atque adeo Angelicam. Zanch. in loc.
Zanchy notes on the words. To this sense the generality of Expositors, both
ancient and modern, Protestants and Papists, (which I have met with) do
interpret the place: For Ambrose and Theophylact among the Ancients, I shall
have occasion to cite them in the ensuing discourse; for others, I refer the
more intelligent Reader to the Margin, Sic alibi pax Dei, quae superat omnem
sensum, custodiat carda vestra. Phil. 4.7. Calv. in loc. Paulus volens
significare infinitatem rei incomprehensibilis in hunc modu^ consuevit loqui;
sic Phil. 4.7. Sic hoc loco infinitatem hujus charitatis exprimens, ait, eam
superiorem omni cognitione. Rolloc. Quae superat humani ingenii captum, ut
quidem plene animo concipi possit. Bez. Quae scientiam nostram superat, seu
quam nunquam satis hac in vita cognoscere vel expendere possumus. Baldvin.
Scire charitatem Christi nostram notitiam sua magnitudine excede^em. Dion.
Carthus. Excedentem notitiam nostram, ac majorem quam ut penitus a nobis
intelligi possit; ita paulo inferius dicitur, Deum posse omnia facere supra
quam intelligimus. Estius. Excedentem omnem humanam cognitionem, seu quae major
sit, quam ut perfect sci^i, intelligi, vel comprehendi possit. Tirinus. Quasi
diceret, charitas Christi tanta est, ut superet omnem humanam cognitionem, and
scientiam. A Lapide. Thus among the Critics lately set forth together. Scire
charitatem Christi superantem captum humanum, vel excellentiorem quam ut
cognosci possit. Vat. Q^ae tam in^ens est, ut omnem hominum scientiam superet.
Isid. Clar.
where he may find their sense in their own words.

Among these, Est autem haec plana expositio, and cum superiore Metaphora
prorsus consentiens, atque etiam cum eo quod scripsit supra, verse. 8. Bez. in
loc.
Beza commends this as a plain exposition, altogether agreeing with the
foregoing Metaphor, and with, that which was written in the 8th. Verse of the
unsearchable riches of Christ. Haec Graecorum expositio est, eademque facilis,
perspicua, ut non sit opus alioru^ duriores, and minus probabiles
interpretationes huc adferre. Estius in loc.
Estius in like manner commends it, as the exposition of the Greek
Interpreters, and that both easy and plain, so that there is no need of adding
any other more difficult, and less probable interpretations. Nor do I find any
thing opposed so considerable, as to dissuade me from assenting to them in this
Exposition. As for what is objected by that late Reverend and learned Dr.
Hammond on the place.
Annotator of our own, who thinks this cannot probably be the meaning of the
place, that this passing knowledge should signify unsearchable, and
unintelligible, because the Apostle at the same time prays that they may know
it, it has been long since answered, nor do I think it sufficient to
invalidate this interpretation. Yet lest it should lie still as a stumbling
block in the Readers way, I shall endeavor the removal of it, and so proceed
to that observation which I mainly intend.

In this sense therefore the words contain an Orthodox Paradox: for the Apostle
gives the love of Christ this character, That it passes knowledge, and yet at
the same time makes it his prayer for these Ephesians, That they might know it;
and both true; nor does he make a vain prayer, which I shall labor to clear in
these particulars.

(1.) The love of Christ passes the knowledge of every natural man. His
natural capacities can never reach the understanding of it; it is not obvious
to sense and reason, nor can a humane knowledge comprehend how, or why it
should be, or what it is: Paulus scientiam hic statuit, quae sit omni notitia
superior, and me^ito; nam si huc facultas humana conscenderet, frustra peteret
nunc Paulus ipse, a Deo donari. Calv. in loc. Object.
If it did not exceed the comprehension of man's natural abilities, the Apostle
would never have prayed for it as a gift from God. And if he have a notion that
it is, as he may from the light of Scripture, yet his natural corruptions keep
him from any saving acquaintance with it, from any taste and experience of it,
1 Cor. 2.14. The blindness of his mind keeps him that he cannot know it, and
the emnity of his heart keeps him that he will not receive it.

But he writes to believers, and prays for them, such as he calls Saints, and
faithful in Christ Jesus, Chap. 1.1.

Answ.
They were a visible Church, wherein probably all the members were not real
Saints, though in the judgment of charity he writes to them, and prays for
them as such: But grant they were all real Saints, yet the love of Christ might
be said to pass their knowledge: For

(2.) Though by the help of the Spirit every believer does know, and that not
only notionally, but experimentally, by spiritual sight, taste, and feeling the
love of Christ: (for the Spirit of God does make believers 1 Cor. 2.12. Romans
5.5.
know the things that are freely given them of God, and Quisque spiritu Dei
fretus pro modulo suo tantum percipiat quantum est satis ad salutem. Bez. in
loc.
sheds abroad this love of Christ into their hearts, so that every one who is
partaker of the Spirit of Christ, does according to his measure perceive as
much of this love, as is sufficient to their salvation.) Yet their present
condition being imperfect, they cannot now perfectly comprehend this love in
its fullness and dimensions: for 1 Cor. 13.12.
what we know, we know but in part, and what we see, we see but as through a
glass, darkly in this life. The perfect knowledge of this love is reserved for
Heaven, though even there Christ in his love will be 2 These. 1.10.
admired as much as apprehended: and therefore I think Charitate^ hanc Christi
men's humana capit, and non capit, atque in eo capit, quod rapitur in
admiratione^, and videt aliquid superesse, quod persentiscere quidem potest,
attamen nonita percipere, ut possit explicare totum. Camer. de Eccles. (mihi)
p. 220. Et in Myroth. p. 250.
Camero states the matter right, when he says, The mind of man (even of him
who is most spiritual, and most clearly enlightened: for to him I apply it)
does receive this love of Christ, and does not receive it, receiving it so as
to be drawn into admiration, seeing always somewhat remaining, which he can
perceive indeed, but yet not so, as to be able to explain the whole of it: Thus
he. And to this sense does (...). Theoph. in loc.
Theophylact expound this place: for propounding this Question, Seeing it
passes knowledge, how shall we know it? he gives this Solution, First, The
Apostle says indeed, that it passes knowledge, that is, humane knowledge: but
you shall know it, not by humane knowledge, but by the Spirit. Again, He does
not say that you shall know this love, how great it is, but only that it is
great, and passes all knowledge. And Nullus sapiens est adeo in hac vita, qui
possit perfect lantam charitatem considerare, sed in futuro saeculo scietur
haec charitas. Ansel. in loc.
Anselm excludes the best from a perfect understanding of it here: There is
none so wise (says he) in this life, who can perfectly consider so great love,
but in the world to come it shall be known.

Object. But if they knew the love of Christ already in part, and could not
know it perfectly, to what purpose does he pray for it?

Answ. To very good purpose: For

(3.) That knowledge which the Saints have of the love of Christ in this life,
is capable of further measures and degrees; Etsi in hac vita praesenti plenum
hujus rei nec sensum, nec cognitione^ assequamur tamen eo usque per spiritum
Dei sanctum in ejusdem sensu, and apprehensione proficimus, ut ex ipsa
effectuu^ magnitudine, causam and fonte^ hunc dilectionis majore^, and
immensiore^ esse in Deo ipso statuamus, quam ut ab ullo cord humano, ab ullo
intellectu creato tota ejus amplitudo capi possit, and contineri. Bodius in
Ephesians. p. 401.
and though they could not know it perfectly here, yet they might know more of
it, and know better what they had already known; and this is that which the
Apostle prays for, that they might have a further, and fuller measure of
knowledge of this love of Christ, which in it self is so great, as that it
cannot be perfectly known in this life; and indeed Christians should in their
prayers and desires, be reaching after that, both in respect of grace and
comfort, for themselves and others, which they shall not fully enjoy, till they
come to heaven. Thus Paul for himself reached after such a measure of holiness,
as the Saints shall have at the resurrection of the dead; Phil. 4.11. That
perfection of holiness, that ac^ompanieth the estate of the resurrection Trap.
If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead. And thus he
prays here for these Ephesians, That they might know the love of Christ, which
passes knowledge, and be filled with all the fullness of God.

Sect. 4.
BY this time I hope you perceive the Apostles meaning. He prays, The sense of
the Apostles Prayer.
that these Ephesians might know, that is, know more, with more clearness,
certainty, experience and assurance of the love of Christ; that singular,
eminent, excellent love, which yet in it self is so great, that it is without
the reach of humane understanding, even that which is most sanctified, to
comprehend it fully in the dimensions of it.

Having given you this account of the words, The Observations raised.
the Observations which I might draw from them are three.

That the love of Jesus Christ to mankind, is an exceeding great, and
incomprehensible love. (1.)
It is called love passing knowledge.

The knowledge of this love, and improvement therein, ought to be the study of
every Christian in this life. (2.)
The Apostle prays for it, as that which they should long and labor after for
themselves.

Acquaintance with Jesus Christ in the greatness of his love, is an excellent
help to stedfastness in the profession of the Gospel, amidst all the
difficulties and discouragements of the world. (3.)
That is the ground of his prayer.

It is the first of these which I mainly intend; yet in the handling of this, I
shall have occasion to speak something of the other two.

CHAP II. The Point then is this.
THat the love of Jesus Christ, which he has showed to the Children men, Doct.
is an exceeding great and incomprehensible love; A love that passes knowledge.

Sect. 1.
An Introduction to the handling of the Doctrine.
THE very first letter of his Name is wonderful, Isa. 9.6. and he is as
wonderful in his love as in any thing else. This is the Golden Mine in the deep
things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. There are unsearchable riches in Christ, Ephesians. 3.8.
and this is the vein that runs through all these riches. The Apostle calls
Godliness a mystery, a great mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. and this love of Christ is
the golden string that runs through all these mysteries, and on which they hang
together. (...), ultimus scopus, aedeoque, centrum Scripturae, ad quod omnia
referuntur, est Christus Jesus. Gech. Exeg. de Sacr. Scrip. p. 27.
As Christ is the Center of the whole Scripture, so the love of Christ is the
Center of all that vast circumference of good things, which poor Christians
have, or hope for by him. A love, as far beyond the thoughts and understandings
of men to comprehend, as it is beyond their merits to deserve: so that in
handling hereof, I may say as a Chrysostom. as he is cited by Mr. Trap on the
Text.
Father does upon the same subject, I am like a man digging in a deep Spring; I
stand here, and the water rises upon me; I stand there, and the water still
rises upon me, and no hopes of ever fathoming this Abyss of love. But if you
say, Why then do you take such a subject in hand? I answer, Though we can never
know it all, yet we may, and must grow in the knowledge of this love of Christ,
and dive into this Sea, that has neither bank nor bottom, and where, as in
the Salt Waters, the deeper the sweeter. So that the mysterious depth, and
unsearchableness of this love, is no Supersedeas to our studying and preaching,
nor to your hearing and learning of it. We cannot preach Christ, but we must
preach love, for he is Love: you must give us leave therefore to speak of it,
though we do but balbutire, stammer it out, for we can do no more; we can tell
you that it is exceeding great, though how great it is we cannot tell: only
because it passes knowledge, you cannot think we speak too highly of it: for
Christus non patitur Hyperbolen.
Christ admits of no Hyperbole; and if we speak not all, you cannot blame us,
for who can declare it? neither Men nor Angels. And yet in speaking and hearing
of it, we may say, It is good to be here, that when we cannot comprehend this
love of Christ, we may be comprehended by it, which is worth our labor.

In the prosecution of this point, The Method propounded.
I shall show you what love I mean, and give you arguments of its
incomprehensibleness, and so apply it.

Sect. 2.
What love here meant. In general.
TO show you what love I mean; I told you it was the love of Christ before, and
I mean in general, his Redeeming love, that love, which he has manifested and
magnified in the redemption and salvation of sinners, (which work lay mainly on
the hands of Christ, as to the management, and accomplishment of it) a work
appointed and undertaken on purpose to magnify love and grace, as the work of
Creation was to magnify power, which it does, in an unspeakable and
unconceivable manner.

More particularly.
In particular.
(1.) I mean that love of the Lord Jesus, whereby, when from all eternity he was
the darling and delight of his Father, Prove. 8.30.
ever by him, as one brought up with him, and was daily his delight, v. 31.
rejoicing always before him, yet even then his delights were the Sons of Men.
Hoc tamen foelicissimo non abstante quem apud patrem fruebar statu, sic filiis
hominum delector, ut cum iis versari lubet, and benedictiones omni genere
communicare. Cartwright in loc.
Notwithstanding his most blessed condition with his Father, yet so great was
his Philanthropie, his love to mankind, that he was so delighted in us, as to
be willing to converse with us, and communicate all kind of blessings to us.

(2.) That love, whereby he so freely and readily undertook the great, and
costly work of fallen man's recovery: that when man could not help himself, and
all the Angels in Heaven were not able to administer sufficient help for his
restoration, but man's redemption had ceased for ever, in respect of any
possible assistance from the creature to advance and effect it, then he
willingly submitted to it; Psalm. 40.6, 7. 8. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.
that when sacrifice and offering, burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin would
not do, then he said, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. Yea, it was his delight
to do this will of God, in saving lost man, and this Law (though a sanguinary
Law to him, and that which was to cost him his hearts-blood, his life) was
within his heart, as the Psalmist expresses it. He was content to be a bored
Servant for the good of mankind: Mine ears have thou opened, or dug, (says
he in his Type, v. 6.) an allusion, Perfodisti aures, id est, me tibi jure
perpetuo mancipatum tenes. Allusio ad morem de quo Deuteronomy. 15.17. Grot. in. loc.
as some think, to that custom among the Jews, mentioned Exodus 21.6. Deuteronomy.
15.17. who bored the ears of their Servants, who liked, and were willing to
abide in their service. That when he looked, and there was none to help, and he
wondered that there was none to uphold, then his own arm brought salvation, to
allude to that of the Prophet Isa. 63.5.
; Goug^ on Heb. p. 433.
As his divine power made him able to effect what he offered, so his love and
pity moved him to offer his aid for man's Redemption.

Sect. 3.
(3.) THat love, whereby be took our nature upon him, Heb. 2.16.
not the nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, 2 Cor. 8.9.
That he who was rich, should for our sakes become poor; that he Joh. 1.1, 14.
who was the Word with God in the beginning, and was God, should be made flesh,
and dwell among us; that he who was the eternal Son of God, should in the
fullness of time Gal. 4.4, 5.
be made of a Woman, whom himself had made; that he Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
who was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
should make himself of no reputation, and take upon him the form of a Servant,
and be made in the likeness of men, and be found in fashion as a man. This was
love, and this love was exceeding great: Deus amore venit ad homines, venit in
homines, factus est homo. Amore D^us invisibilis servis suis factus est
similis. Aug. Man. cap 21.
It was in love only, that God came unto men, into men, was made man; in love,
the invisible God was made like to his own Servants. However his other
Attributes of Majesty, Power and Glory were eclipsed, yet this of Kindness and
Love had a great and clear Epiphany. Tit. 3 4.
The kindness and love of God our Savior, toward man, appeared, says the
Apostle. Velat^o Dei t^tis, revelatio charitatis.
The veiling of his Deity, was the revealing of his love. Ubi enim Dei
inn^^s^it humani^as, jam ^^n^gni^as ^atere non pot^st. Bern. in Epiph. Ser. 1.
mihi p. 19.
And when his humanity was made known, his kindness could not be concealed: nor
was it ordinary kindness and love neither, for (as that devout Father goes on)
In quo magis commendare poterat benignitatem suam, quam susc^piendo carnem
meam? meam inqua^, non carnem Adam, id est, non qualem ille habuit ante casum.
Quid tan^opere declaret m^sericordiam ejus, quam quod ipsam suscepit miseriam?
Quid ita pietate plenum, quam quod Dei Verbum propter nos factum est foenum?
D^mine! quid est homo, quia reputas cum? aut quid apponis erga cum cor tuum?
Hic attendat homo, quanta sit cura ejus Deo; hinc scial quid de eo cogitet, aut
quid sentiat. Quanti fecit te, ex his quae pro te factas est agnosce, ut
appareat tibi benignitas ejus ex humanitate. Quanto enim minorem se sec ^in
humanitate, tanto majorem exhibuit se in bonitate, and quanto pro me vilior,
tanto mihi charior est. Bern. ubi supra.
Wherein could he commend his love more, than by taking my flesh? mine I say,
not Adams, I mean that which he had before the Fall. What can so much declare
his mercy, as his taking upon him misery it self? What is so full of goodness,
as that the Word of God should be made withering grass? ( for our flesh is no
better, Isa. 40.6, 7.) Lord! what is man, that thou should magnify him?
that thou should set thine heart upon him? Job 7.17. Here man may consider
how great Gods care is of him; hence he may learn what to think, what to
conceive. Acknowledge, O man, how much he esteemed thee, by what he was made
for thee, that his kindness may appear to thee from his humanity: for by how
much the less he made himself in his humanity, by so much the greater showed he
himself in his goodness; and by how much the lower he is made for me, by so
much the dearer he is to me. Thus he: and with him I conclude this particular.

Sect. 4.
(4.) THat love, whereby he took our sins upon him, Gal 4.4.
was made under the Law, 2 Cor. 5. ult.
made Sin for us, Gal. 3.13.
made a Curse for us. Romans 8.3.
He was sent in the similitude of sinful flesh; and though he had no sin of his
own, yet Isa. 53 6.
the iniquities of us all were laid, or made to meet upon him, insomuch as
Ch^istus summus peccator, non quod ipse commiserit peccata, sed quod ea a nobis
commissa susc perit in corpus suum. Luth. Loci. Com. Clas. prim. p. 35. 36.
Luther says, he was the chiefest of sinners; not that he committed any
himself, (for he knew no sin) but because he took upon himself the sins which
we had committed, and bore them in his own body, on the tree, for the
satisfaction of divine Justice, as our Sponsor and Surety. Thus he was a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with grief: but he bore our griefs, and carried our
sorrows; he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him; he was oppressed and afflicted,
numbered with transgressors; his soul was made an offering for sin, and poured
out unto death: but it was for the transgressions of his people that he was
thus stricken, as the Isa. 3.3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12.
Evangelical Prophet has it. Phil. 2.8.
Thus he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the
Cross, and redeemed us, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with his own precious
blood. There are three things ( says Bern. Sermon. de Pass. (mihi) p. 33.
Bernard) to be more especially considered in the Passion of Christ, The
Suffering it self, the Manner, and the Cause; in the Suffering his Patience, in
the Manner his Humility, in the Cause his Love is commended. Here was love
then. It was not a forced, but a free undertaking. I lay down my life ( says
Joh. 10.15. v. 18.
he) for the sheep; no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; and
the ground of this undertaking was his pure and mere love; it was his kind
heart that killed him; never was his love so plainly and fairly written, as in
the characters of that blood which he shed on the Cross, which he that runs may
read: for Si non diligeret, non pateretur. Bern. lib. de Pass. cap. 41. p. 73.
if he had not loved, he would never have suffered. 1 John 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us.
Therefore we find his love and his suffering joined together in Scripture: Gal.
2.20.
Who loved me, and gave himself for me. Ephesians. 5.2.
As Christ has loved us, and given himself for us, an offering and sacrifice
to God, of a sweet smelling savor. v. 25.
As Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. And this love was great,
exceeding great: for if he had not loved much, he would never have suffered so
much as he did: In magnitudine passionis magnitudo consideretur charitatis.
Bern. ibid. Vulnera Christi sunt dolor livida, amore fulgida. Gerh. Homil.
Part 1. p. 805.
the greatness of his love may be considered in the greatness of his Passion.
But here how easily might I lose my self in so large a Field, were I not
confined? let it serve therefore to tell you in general, That his pains were
intolerable, his sorrows unutterable, his whole Passion unconceivable by any
but himself, who by enduring, was fully acquainted with them. His whole life,
from first to last, was but one continued Passion: but the extremity of all,
was in the cloze of all, which does more eminently bear that name. Oh! how
doleful a Tragedy was this! what dreadful things did he suffer then from all
hands! Heaven, Earth and Hell, God, Men and Devils, all laying load on him.
Totum pro corpore vulnus.
He endured much in his Body, by spitting, pricking, buffeting, scourging,
racking, nailing, piercing, till it was all but one wound: but he endured more
in his Soul, ( which indeed was the soul of his sufferings) insomuch as he was
Mark 14.33, 34. The words are all emphatical, (...). of which words see Dr.
Pearson on the Creed. (mihi) p. 385. 40. Cartwright on the Creed. p. 160.
Leigh's Crit. Sacr.
sore amazed, and very heavy, exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; and being
Luke 22.44.
in an agony, his sweat was as it were great drops of blood, falling down to
the ground; this made him cry out, Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? till at last Joh. 19.30.
he bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost-Blessed Lord! whither did thy love
carry thee! and how great was that love, which carried thee thus far for us!
The Jews said, when he shed tears over dead Lazarus, Behold how he loved him!
Joh. 11.36. but with much more reason may we say, when he shed his heart-blood
over us that were dead in trespasses and sins, Behold how he loved us! Because
of that excessive love ( says Propter nimiam charitate^, qua nos dilexit Deus,
nec pater filio, nec sibi fil^us ipse pepercit; vere nimiam, quia and mensuram
excedit, madum superat, plane super-emin^ns universis. Bern. Sermon. in Pass. p.
34.
Bernard) wherewith God loved us, neither the Father spared the Son, nor the
Son himself, that he might redeem a Servant; truly excessive, because it
exceeds all measure, all bounds, and plainly surpasses all things. As the e
was no sorrow like to his sorrow, so there was no love like to his love. In the
Greek Liturgy there is mention made (and that justly) of his unknown
sufferings: be sure then they were the fruit of his unknown love: nothing but
love could make him suffer, and nothing but great love could make him suffer
such grievous things, as he did for our sakes. Per vulnera viscera. Watsons
Sermon. Part 2. p. 495. Part. 1. p. 447.
We may discern his bowels of love through his wounds; he bled love at every
vein; his drops of blood were love-drops, and the more blood he shed for us,
the more love he showed to us, and the more love he deserves from us.

Sect 5.
(5.) THat love, whereby in his own due time he Isa. 55.5. Romans 8 30. Joh.
17.6. cha. 6.37. Ephesians. 3.17. 1 John 3.24. 1 Cor. 1.9. Ephesians. 1.3. Joh. 1.16. 1
Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 1.5, 6, 7, 13. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Joh. 8.36. Romans
5.1. Romans 14.17. Tit. 3.7. Ps. 110.3. Ezekiel. 16.8. 2 Cor. 11.2. Rev. 1.5 6. Non
lavisset, nisi dilexisset; quare non prius lavit, et postea dilexit, sed prius
dilexit, and postea lavit. Rich. de S. Victore in l^c ut citatur a Gerh. in
Homil. part prima p. 804.
calls, and coverts unto himself his Elect, who from all eternity were given
him by the Father; and by virtue of Union with his Person, through a spirit of
faith, gives them communion in his blessings and benefits, as they are able to
receive in this world, giving them from his own fullness, grace for grace;
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; Acceptance, Ad^ption,
Remission, Obsignation; Regeneration, Sanctification, Liberty, Peace, Joy in
the Holy Ghost, and whatever may make them happy in this world, and hopeful, as
heirs of eternal life, in the world to come. In a word, that whereby he loves
them, and washes them from their sins in his own blood, and makes them Kings
and Priests unto God, and his Father; which deserves that Doxology which is
there annexed to it, to be breathed forth by all who have an interest in it, To
him be glory, and dominion, for ever, Amen. Indeed it is a day of power, in
which a soul is brought into the participation of these privileges; yet it is
power mixed with love, called therefore a time of love. Christ draws fortiter
and suaviter, strongly by his power, and yet sweetly by his love. And though
this love may lie hid and concealed for the present, by reason of those
convulsions and terrors which accompany some men's conversion; yet it lies at
the bottom, rises up, breaks forth at last, when the wooed soul is won to
Christ, and espoused to him as a chaste Virgin, and has tasted the sweetness
of his fellowship, and knows the richness of those possessions and privileges,
in which he has estated her: then, I say, it appears, and leaves the man full
of gratitude, yea of admiration, upon sense of the exceeding greatness of that
love, which has brought him to all this. Thus it was with Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13.
etc.
who upon consideration, that he who was a blasphemer, a persecutor, and
injurious, should obtain mercy; and that Christ Jesus should come into the
world to save him, the chiefest of sinners, is raised and even ravished with
the thoughts of it, and cries out, verse. 14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus was exceeding abundant toward me with faith, and
love which is in Christ Jesus, and then, as if he wanted words to express his
gratitude, he breaks out into those significant expressions of his affection,
verse. 17. Prae ardore erumpit in istam exclamationem, quia doerant verba quibus
suam gratitudinem exprimeret. Na^ Epiphonemata praecipue locum habent, ubi
abrumpere orationem cogimur, quia rei magnitudo superat. Quid aut em Pauli
conversione admirabilius? Quanquam nos simul omnes admone^ suo exemplo, nunquam
de gratia divinae vocationis esse cogitandum, quin tandem efferamur
admiratione. Calv. in loc.
To the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only Wise God, be Honor and
Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Sect. 6.
THat love, whereby through his Joh. 17.11, etc. Heb. 7.25.
intercession, grace, Joh. 10.27, 28, 29.
power, spirit, and Heb. 1.14. Psalm. 91.11, 12. 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.
ministration of Angels, he keeps those whom he has thus called, and converted
unto that Kingdom, Glory, Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away, which he has Heb. 9.12.15.
purchased, and is reserved in heaven for them whither he entered, as their
Heb. 6.20.
forerunner for them, Joh. 14.2.
going before to prepare a place for them, from whence, Acts 3.19.21.
when the times of refreshing and restitution of all things shall come, 1 These.
4.16.
he will descend with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
Trump of God; and John 14.3.
will come again, and take them, with all his members to himself, that where he
is, they may be also, not being satisfied, as not being complete without them,
who are Ephesians. 1.23.
his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. A matter of strong
consolation to believers, that all they have by Christ, is not confined to this
world: for 1 Cor. 15.19.
if in this life only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable;
and that their hopes and reversions by Christ in the world to come, are so
secured by him, that they are as safe and sure, as if they were in hand, and
present possession. All which is the fruit of admirable love: Bishop Reynolds
on Psalm. 110. (mihi) p. 233. 40.
for the foundation of all our mercies, present or future, enjoyed or expected,
is an overflowing of love in Christ, without stint or measure; a turning of
heart, a rolling and sounding of bowels, a love which surpasses knowledge,
which is as much beyond the thoughts or comprehensions, as it is above the
merits of men. To conclude this, As there was an infinite price laid down to
purchase Heaven and glory for us; and an infinite powerlaid out, in calling and
keeping the Elect to the possession of the purchase: so it was, and is no less
than infinite love, that inclined Jesus Christ to lay down that price, and
still enclines him to lay out that power on the behalf, and for the benefit of
dearly bought, and as dearly beloved souls.This is the love that I mean; and if
the devout and diligent Reader would be further affected with it, I refer him
to the holy Rapture of Bishop Hall on this subject, first Printed in a small
Volume, with another Treatise, called Christ Mystical, and now inserted in the
third Volume of his Works, in Folio.

CHAP. III:
MY next work is to give you the Arguments, (2) The incomprehensibleness of
Christ's love cofirmed by Arguments.
by which the incomprehensible greatness of this love of Christ may be
confirmed and demonstrated.

And they are such as these:

Sect. 1.
IT must needs be great and incomprehensible because it is the love of Christ.
It was said of Gideon, Judges 8.21. As the man is, so is his strength; and it
must be said of Christ, As he is, so is his love. Now he being an infinite
person, his love must needs be infinite love, or else he would not love like
himself. He was Man indeed, that he might be capable of loving us in such a way
as we needed: but he was God also, that he might accomplish the ends and
designs of his love, which were our Redemption and Salvation: now Christ being
God, and so infinite in his nature (which is a piece of every Christians Creed,
and those who deny it now, will Quos suo tempore compescet aeternus Dei filius.
Aret. Probl. loc. 3. p. 11.
feel it to their shame and sorrow another day) that love which is in him, and
inseparable from his Essence (for God is Love, 1 John 4.16.) is undoubtedly
infinite; and as soon may Infinitu^, secundum quod infinitum, est ignotum. Bed.
Ax. Philos. p. 97.
finite creatures (such as we are) comprehend that which is infinite, as be
able to comprehend this love of Christ. Alas! there are lower and lesser things
which puzzle and nonplus the most reaching head among us, and how shall we
then be able to reach this? Vide Lessi^ librum de summo bono. p. 54. etc.
Glanvils Vanity of Dogmatizing.
The natural Works of Creation and Providence have many secrets which we cannot
dive into, many riddles which we cannot unfold: for Job 5.9.
he does great things, and unsearchable, mavelous things without number. Who
can answer the Quaeries put by the mighty God to Job 38.39, 40, 41, Chapters.
Job? Eccles. 11.5.
Who knows the way of the Spirit? or how the bones do grow in the Womb of her
that is with Child? The formation, quickening, growth of a Child in the Womb, is
a mystery to us. Who is there that is fully acquainted with the introduction,
nature, and workings of his own soul? which, as now it is, is Jer. 17.9.
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Who can
see the Ezekiel. 1.16.
wheel within the wheel, the secret spring of Providence, that moves and turns
the many, and seemingly cross revolutions in the world? Psalm. 77.^9.
Who can trace Gods way in the Sea, and his path in the great Waters, and his
footsteps, which are not known? and how then Job 11.7, 8, 9.
can we by searching find out God? can we find out his love to perfection? It
is as high as Heaven, what can we do? It is deeper than Hell, what can we know?
The measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea, to
allude to that of Zophar to Job. How can we understand the love of Christ's
heart, who are such strangers to the lusts of our own hearts? for Psalm. 19.12.
who can understand hsi errors? says the Kingly Prophet. Let him that thinks
to attain unto it, first Isa. 40.12.
measure the Waters in the hollow of his hand, and mete out the Heaven with a
span, and comprehend the dust of the Earth in a measure, and weigh the
Mountains in scales, and the Hills in a balance, as the Prophet speaks. Study
it we may, and must make it the chief of our studies, to know it experimentally
and savingly: but yet after our most diligent study, and the highest knowledge
of it, which we can attain unto in this life, we must sit down content with
that learned man's Motto, in reference to Science in general, Quantu^ est quod
nescimus! Quo magis studiis incumbimus, eo magis nos vid^mus, quod nihil
sciamus. Bever. Epistol. Quest. de Ter. vitae. p. 86.
How much is there which we know not! and say as Father Paul of Venice was wont
to say, The more we study it, the more we see, how little or nothing we
understand of it. Even Agur himself, though a very wise man, yet in his own
thoughts, in respect of the knowledge of God and Christ, was but at the first
beginning of his Catechism, Prove. 30.4.
What is his Name? and what is his Sons Name? But to shut up this, As soon may
a man find out God, who is unsearchable, as find out the love of Christ to
perfection: for God is love, and Christ is God, and his love like himself,
infinite. That Is the first.

Sect. 2.
MY next Argument shall be formed out of Christ's own words, Joh. 15.9. As the
Father has loved me, so have I loved you. From whence I thus argue, If Christ
has loved us as his Father loved him, then his love is exceeding great and
incomprehensible.

But Christ has loved us as his Father loved him.

Therefore; etc.

The Minor is proved from the place forementioned, which will strongly conclude
that which I bring it for. There is no doubt, but as the Father is Fons
Deitatis, the Fountain of the Deity, so he is Fons amoris, the Fountain of
love; and as he is the Fountain of love, surely he lets out the largest
measures of love upon Jesus Christ. Omnia diligit Deus quae fecit, and inter ea
magis diligit creaturas rationales, and in illis eas amplius, quae sunt m^mbra
^nigeniti sui, and multo magis ipsum ^nigenitum. Gerh. loc. com. Exeges. p.
295. ex Augustine. God loves all he made, especially rational creatures; more
especially believers: but above all his only begotten Son. Pater diligit filium
secundum utramque ejus naturam, quia secundum naturam divinam diligit cum tam
perfect, and fervide sicut seipsum (viz.) amore immenso; secundum naturam vero
assumptam diligit eum amore praecipuo, magis (viz.) quam cuncta simul creata.
Dion. Carth. in loc. (mihi) p. 854.
The Father loves the Son according to both his natures; according to his
divine nature he loves him so perfectly and ardently as himself, that is, with
an unmeasurable love; according to his humane nature, he loves him with a
principal love, above all the creatures besides. Now Christ says here, that he
has loved us, as his Father loved him, which questionless is in a most
transcendent manner.

I know there are that expound this Scripture to another sense, which must not
pass without some consideration, that it may not prejudice the conclusion which
I would draw from it. Unum comparationis membru^, Sicut dilexit me pater, and
ego vos dilexi; alterum vero, Man^te in dilectione mea. Mald.
Maldonate would have the words to run thus, As the Father has loved me, and I
have loved you, so continue in my love; taking love in the last clause, for
that love, by which we love Christ, and the two former branches for a double
Argument, to urge continuance in that love; as if the meaning were, Discipulos
ad di igendum se hortatur, idque duas ob causas; alteram quod se quoque pater
diligat, and aequum sit, ut illi diligant, quem pater tantopere dilexit;
alteram quod ipse quoque eos diligat, ita rec procum eos sibi amorem debere.
Idem.
Continue in your love to me, because my Father loves me; and it is but equal
that you should love him whom the Father loves so much; and likewise, because I
have loved you, and therefore you ought to love me again. But he confesses,
Omnes quos legerim interpretes existimant comparationem Christum non nisi inter
se and patrem facere. Idem.
that all the Interpreters which he had read, do take the comparison to lie
betwixt the love of the Father to himself, and his love to his Disciples, and I
shall not follow him in his singularity, when the comm^nly received sense is so
clear and plain. Nor is love in the last clause to be taken for that love,
which believers bear to Christ, as he would have it, but for that love which
Christ bears to them.

(1.) The very words sound to this sense: for it is (...), which Beza well
translates, Manete in illa mea charitate; Continue in that my love, In
charitate, qua ego vos prosequor. Bez. in loc. Vide plura in Gerh. Harmon. in
loc. p. 1008.
which I bear toward you, as he expounds it.

(2.) Besides, this best agrees with that which goes before, and that which
comes after. Immediately before he mentions his love to them, and therefore
this cannot well be expounded to any other sense, than their taking care for to
demean themselves, as that they may continue in the experience of his love
toward them. And immediately after, he compares his Fathers love and his own
again, v. 10. and prescribes them the same means for abiding in his love, which
himself used for abiding in his Fathers love, viz. Obedience. Now as the
Fathers love signifies his Fathers love to him in one part of the verse, so
Christ's love in the other part, signifies his love to them. It appearing then
by these considerations, that Christ's love to them is here meant, the Argument
which he uses for their continuing in his love, is drawn from the greatness of
it, in respect whereof it would be not only their duty, but their privilege to
continue in it; ^^d the greatness of this love he sets forth by way of
comparison, which because he could not find on earth, (for as to any humane
comparison it is altogether matchless, as I shall show you more afterward) he
fetches one from heaven, and says, he loved them as his Father loved him, and
that must needs be with an exceeding great, and incomprehensible love. So
Interpreters generally expound it, a taste whereof I shall give you in the
words of some of them: Sicut impense and infinite me dilexit pater, sic ego vos
impense and insinite diligo. Cart. Har. Metaphr. in loc. p. 927.
As my Father has loved me greatly and infinitely, so do I love you greatly
and infinitely: thus does Mr. Cartwright paraphrase it. Significat non vulgare^
dilectionem suam erga ipsos, neque plane talem, qualis esse solet dilectio a
creatura promonans, sed talem esse, qualis est creatoris ipsius, and Dei amor.
Nota igitur Christum non tantum nos priorem dilexisse, ut est, nos diligimus
eum, quia ipse nos dilexit prior, 1 John 4.19, sed etiam talem esse ejus erga
nos amorem, qualis est ille Dei amor, hoc est, infinitum, and
incomprehensiblem, etc. Rolloc. in Johan. p. 796.
It signifies (says Rolloc in loc.) that his love toward them was not common
and ordinary, nor such as is wont to proceed from the creature; but it was such
as is the love of God the Creator himself: Note therefore, that Christ did not
only love us first, as it is 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he loved us
first, but also, that his love toward us, is such as is that love of God, that
is infinite and incomprehensible. The love of Christ toward his own, (as Mr.
Hutcheson observes in his Comment on this place, Doct. 3.) is matchless, and
can be resembled by no love on earth, but is like his Fathers love to him, as
being eternal, sincere and intimate; incomprehensible, infinite and
unchangeable, as the other is. Let Gerhards note on the place seal up this
testimony. Colligitur autem ex hoc ultimo exhortationis argumento, quod
Christus omnes vere credentes summo and ineffabili amore prosequitur, si quidem
ita diligit eos, ut ipse a patre diligitur, quo nihil quicquam dulcius, nihil
jucundius cordi pio and contrito nunciari potest; quid enim ulterius desiderare
possumus, si certi sumus, nos ita a Christo diligi, ut ipse a patre diligitur,
quam nemo dubitare potest esse summam and ineffabilem dilectionem? etc. Gerh.
Harm. p. 1010.
We may gather from hence (says he) that Christ loves believers with the
highest and ineffable love, seeing he loves them so as he is loved of the
Father, than which nothing can be declared more sweet, more pleasant to a godly
contrite heart: for what can we desire more, if we are assured that we are so
loved of Christ, as he is loved of the Father? Who can doubt, but that it is
the highest and ineffable love? There is indeed a difference in this, That the
Father loves Christ our Mediator, as God, per naturam, naturally, because
coessential and coequal with himself; as Man, per gratiam unionis, by the grace
of Union, because the humane nature is assumed into the person of the Word. But
Christ loves believers by grace and adoption. But there is an agreement in
this, That first, as the Father loved Christ from eternity, so Christ has
loved us from eternity. Secondly, As the Father loves Christ truly, sincerely
and ineffably, so Christ's love to us is true, sincere and ineffable. Thirdly,
As the Father out of love bestowed all blessings upon Christ as Man, so Christ
out of love bestows blessings of all kinds upon us. Fourthly, As the Father
loves Christ constantly, and for ever, so Christ also loves us constantly and
for ever: so that upon the whole matter we may conclude, as Mr. Cartwright does
his Comment on this place, Quamobrem vere dicitur, Ephesians. 3.19. Amorem Christi
omnem humanam intelligentiam superare. Cart. Har. p 930.
That it is truly said, as it is in the Text, That the love of Christ passes
all knowledge. That Is the second Argument.

Sect. 3.
Argument for the exceeding greatness, and incomprehensibleness of the love of
Christ, shall be drawn from the infinite fullness of it, in respect of its
dimensions: Col. 1.19.
It has pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, and all
fullness of love, as well as any thing else. The Apostle speaks something of the
dimensions of it, in the Verse preceding the Text, v. 18. where he ascribes
length and depth, breadth and height to it; and thence concludes it to be a
love which passes knowledge. I know that some of the Ancients have applied
this to several things, which I willingly omit, as not conducing to my present
purpose, nor indeed agreeable to the Apostles scope, which is to magnify the
love of Christ, and engage the Ephesians in the study of it: and therefore
Paulus nihil per istas dimensiones intelligit, quam Christi charitatem, de qua^
continuo post. Calv. in loc. Quos termi ^os ad Christi dilectionem transfort.
Aret. Long satius videtur, ut hae dimensiones ad illam ipsam Dei Christique
charitatem referantur, cujus and praemissa, and subjectae est mentio. Bod. in
loc. p. 398.
Calvin, with other Expositors, conceive that the Apostle understands nothing
by these dimensions but the love of Christ, of which he speaks so immediately
after: Only the Question is, From whence the expression is taken. First, Some
think it may be an allusion to the heaving and waving of Offerings among the
Jews under the Law, which you find mentioned, Exodus 29.26. On which words Vide
Fagium in locum.
Fagius in his Annotations upon the Chaldee Paraphrase has this note out of
the Hebrew Doctors, That there was a double Ceremony used in some of the Jewish
Sacrifices, and particularly in this, which was for the consecration of their
Priests: The one was an heaving upward and downward, and this was called
(Terumah) from (Rum) Elevare, to heave; The other was a moving forward and
backward, on the right hand, and on the left, that is, from East to West, and
then from North to South, and this was called (Tenuphah) from (Nuph) Agitare,
to wave. Thus the shoulder of the Ram of Consecration was to be heaved, and the
breast waved before the Lord, v. 26. 27. called therefore the Heave Offering,
and Wave-offering. These Ceremonies (according to Vide Lyr. in loc. and Cartwr.
Annot. in Exodus p. 382.
Rabbi Solomon) were thus performed; Moses did put his hands under the hands of
Aaron and his Sons, who held the things that were to be offered, and first
lifted them upward, then drew them downward, and afterward drew them Eastward,
Westward, Northward and Southward. The Jews had a good meaning in these Rites:
Ad designandum, quod ea ^fferebant Deo, qui coelo, and terrae, and quatuor
orbis partibus dominatur. Lyr. Cart. Fag. ut supra.
for hereby was signified, That God was the Lord of Heaven and Earth. And we
may make a good use of it our selves, Ainsworth on the place.
If Ministers would learn from hence, how with all their heart, and with all
their strength they should give themselves unto the Service of God in his
Church, with much labor, and manifold afflictions, even as the Prince of our
salvation was consecrated also through afflictions, 2 Cor. 6.4. etc. Heb. 2.10.
And if both Ministers and People would learn, how with raised and enlarged
hearts and minds they should be conversant in the things of God, as the learned
Moralem considerationem qui addunt, mihi probantur, agitatione pectoris, and
armi exaltatione monitos nos suisse toto pectore, and opere invigilandum esse
divinis, excitato semper animo. Rivet. in Exodus mihi p. 1157.
Rivet points us unto; who also tells us, that I^terpretes Christiani eum Ritum
ad Christum ^eferent, ut indicetur, quam late pateat ejus ben^ficium, and
meritum, and quae sit regni ill us ampli^udo. Idem. ibid.
Christian Interpreters refer this Rite to Christ, that hereby may be shown,
how largely the merit and benefits of Christ do extend, and what is the
amplitude of his Kingdom. Vide B^z. Grot. and Bod. in loc.
Beza and Grotius think, that the Apostle might have respect hereunto in this
place, and so does Bodius. 2dly, Others take it to be a Metaphor drawn from
Quae addita hic sunt, a Mathematicis d^sumpta sunt, qui solidum corpus fere sic
definiunt, quod habeat latitudinem, longitudinem, and prefunditatem, quos
terminos ad Christi dilectionem transfert. Aret. Thus Ba^dvin. Rolloc. etc. on
the place.
Mathematicians, who make the dimensions of solid bodies to be the breadth and
length and depth, which dimensions the Apostle transfers to the love of Christ,
and one more than is usually attributed unto bodies, viz height: Infinitae
re^nquenda sunt ab art. Bed. Ax. Philos. p. 99.
for indeed the love of Christ is beyond all natural dimensions: but whether it
has respect to one or the other, or both of these, the application of these
dimensions to the love of Christ, according to the sense of Interpreters, will
serve abundantly to confirm that which I bring it for. Thus therefore it is
expounded by diverse of them: First, That the length of Christ's love notes its
eternity, and that both a part ante, backward: thus he says, I have loved
thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. and his delights were with the
Children of Men, before they had a being, or the World its beginning, Prove.
8.31. And also a part post, forward: thus its said, Having loved his own,
which were in the World, he loved them to the end, John 13.1. (...), in
perpetuum, for ever, according to (...). Gerh. Har. in loc. e Chrysostom.
Chrysostomes gloss, he continued always loving them. Thus according to the
Hebrew, (La Netzech) and (Le Gnolam) in finem, and in aeternum are all one, as
Psalm. 103.9. and (as Dr. Goodwin. The heart of Christ in Heaven, etc. p. 8.
one observes) the scope of this speech is to show, how Christ's heart and love
would be toward them, even for ever, etc. You have both put together, Psalm.
103.17. where the mercy of the Lord is said to be from everlasting to
everlasting upon them that fear him. Secondly, The breadth of Christ's love
notes its extent unto all the Elect, in all Ages, of whatever Nation, sex or
condition, without any respect of persons. Thus he is said to be the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. and would have all men to be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth, that is, all ranks and sorts of men, 1 Timothy 2.4. wherefore he bids his Apostles go, and teach all Nations, and preach
the Gospel to every creature, Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15. For there is no
difference betwixt the Jew and the Greek, but the same Lord over all is rich in
mercy to all that call upon him, Romans 10.12. There is neither Jew nor Greek,
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free, Male nor
Female, but Christ is all in all, and they are all one in Christ Jesus, Col.
3.11. Gal. 3.28. Thirdly, The depth of it notes its condescension to the lowest
depths, to draw sinners from thence, of which the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 86.12,
13. I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart; and I will glorify
thy Name for evermore: for great is thy mercy toward me, and thou have
delivered my soul from the lowest Hell. Fourthly, The height of it notes its
reaching up to the joys of Heaven and happiness, and carrying up souls
thither: I will come again, and take you to my self, that where I am, there may
you be also, John 14.3 Father, I will that those also whom thou have given me,
may be with me, where I am, that they may behold, that is, enjoy my glory, John
17.24. You see the Dimensions of Christ's love: Now let a poor Christian set
himself about the meditation of this love in these its dimensions; he may
sooner lose himself, than find out this love to perfection. Alas! if a poor,
finite, short, and dim-sighted creature begin to look backward into eternity
past, to find out the rise of this love; and then look forward into eternity to
come, to follow the reach of it, how soon must he be fain to sit down, and
aknowledge himself far short, and utterly incapable of ever reaching the length
of it? If he again consider, how much love every poor sinner needs, and how the
love of Christ has filled, and furnished so many thousands and millions of
elect souls in all ages past hitherto, till it has lodged them safely in
glory; and then consider again, how many more are yet to spend upon it, unto
the end of the world: he will rather cry out in admiration, Behold! what manner
of love is this! how great! how unmeasurable! than be able to say, he has
measured the breadth of it. And then if he consider, from how great a It is
worthy of that ejaculation of the devout Bishop Hall in his Rapture, p. 186. Oh
love, and mercy more deep than those depths from which thou have saved me, and
more high, than that Heaven to which thou have advanced me!
depth of misery it redeemeth, and to how great a height of happiness it
raises poor sinners, viz. from a close Prison to a choice Palace, from a low
Dungeon to a high Throne, from pressing Chains to a pleasing Crown, from the
blackest darkness to the brightest light, from intolerable torment to
unspeakable joy, from most grievous bondage to the most glorious liberty, from
doleful and cursed communion with damned Spirits, to delightful and blessed
communion with God in every person, and glorified Saints and Angels; from a
state beyond expression or conception for shame and misery, to a state
unspeakable, and unconceivable for glory and happiness; in a word, from the
lowest Hell to the highest Heaven; he may well conclude with the Apostle, That
it is a love which passes knowledge: sooner may the deepest head, the clearest
eye, the largest heart be swallowed up of this love, than be able to comprehend
it fully in these dimensions: for (as Dilectio Christi nobis proponitur, in
cujus meditatione nos exerceamus dies ac noctes, and in qua^ nos qu si
demergamus Calv. in Ephesians. 3.18.
Calvin well notes upon these words) The love of Christ which is propounded to
us, is so large a subject, that we may exercise our selves in the meditation of
it day and night, and plunge our selves into this boundless, bottomless Ocean,
till we be swallowed up of it: but we can never perfectly understand it. That Is
the third Argument.

Sect. 4.
MY fourth Argument is this, The love of Christ must needs be exceeding great
and incomprehensible, because it never had, nor is capable of a parallel
instance among the Sons of Men. If Men were able to express such a love as this
of Christ's, they might be able to know his love, as I can understand the love
of man to man, because I am able to express the same to others: but Christ's
love never was, nor ever can be paralleled: his love to mankind is as much
above theirs one to another, as the Heavens are above the Earth, Isa. 55.8.9.
If all the affection of the whole Creation were resident in one particular
person, yet it would lie as much short of the love of Christ, as finite does of
infinite: and therefore our Savior fetches a comparison from Heaven whereby
to set it forth, and says, He loved us, as his Father loved him, John 15.9.
which I made my second Argument. Gerhard Harmon. p. 1016.
The degrees of love are to be measured both by the object and matter of it.
(1.) In respect of the object; the lowest degree is, when a man loves one that
loves him, and does good to him, Mat. 5.46. Luke 6.32, 33. The next is, when
one loves him by whom he is not beloved, and from whom he receives no benefit;
The highest is, when one loves his enemy, who does not only not love him, but
hate him; nor only does him no good, but heaps injuries upon him, Mat. 5.44.
Luke 6.35. (2.) In respect of the matter three degrees likewise may be
reckoned: the lowest, when one does good to his Neighbor, out of the substance
which he has; the next, when he bestows all the goods which he has, of body,
mind and estate upon his Neighbor; the highest, when he lays down his life.
Now though there may be found, who will lay out themselves, and their estates
for the good of those who love them, and are beneficial to them; nay of those
that love them not, and are no way beneficial to them; yea that hate them, and
have done them ill turns; yea, though there may be some (but very rarely)
found, that have laid down their lives for their lovers and friend yet where
can we find an instance of those who have laid down their lives for enemies,
and injurious ones, save this of Christ's laying down his life for us? The
height of all humane affection is expressed in two places of Scripture, John
15.13. Romans 5.6. which amounts to no more than this, The laying down of life
for friends, for good men, scarcely for a righteous man, which circumstances
render it unworthy to be laid in the balance with the love of Christ, who laid
down his life for the ungodly, for sinners and enemies, Romans 5.6, 8, 10. in
consideration whereof, Bernard breaks out thus pathetically, Majorem charitatem
nemo habet, quam ut animam su^m ponat quis pro am cis suis. Tu ma^o (...)
h^buisti, Domine, pon^ns came pro inimicis; cum enim adhuc inimici essemus, per
mortem tuam and tibi reconciliati sumus, and patri. Q^aenam a^^a videdebitur
esse, vel fuisse, vel fore huic sim^lis charitati? Vix pro justo quis moritur;
tu pro impiis passus es, moriens propter delicta nostra, qui venisti
justificare gratis peccatores, servos facere fratres, captivos cohaeredes,
Exules Reges. Bern. de Pass. Dom. (mihi) page 34.
Greater love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his
friends: but thou, O Lord, had greater love, who did lay down thy life for
thine enemies: for when we were yet enemies, we were reconciled by thy death,
both to thy self, and to thy Father. What other love either is, or was, or
shall be seen like to this love? Scarcely for a righteous man will one dye: but
thou sufferedst for the ungodly, dying for our sins, who came to justify
sinners freely, to make servants brethren, captives coheirs, and Exiles Kings.
Thus he. Give me leave here to lay before you some examples of the love of the
children of men toward one another, as they are recorded in Sacred Writ, or in
other Histories, and we shall still find the love of Christ beyond the highest
and noblest of them.

(1.) We read of those who have gone far in love to their Country, and the
people with whom they have lived. Moses and Paul, for their Countrymen the
Jews, the one says to God, If thou will not forgive their sin, blot me, I pray
thee, out of the Book which thou have written, Exodus 32.32. The other says, I
could wish that my self were accursed from Christ for my Brethren, my Kinsmen
according to the flesh, Romans 9.3. which words, (whether we understand them of a
temporal death absolutely, according to Hierome, or of eternal death
conditionally, if it might be, if it were possible, as others take them) Voc^s
illae fuerunt eximi^ and stupendi amoris. Rivet. in Exodus (mihi) p. 1190.
were words of eminent and stupendous love, as the learned Rivet observes,
who, though he saw no inconvenience in either sense, yet prefers the former,
as less liable to exception, and attended with fewer difficulties, and
sufficient to express the affection of these holy men, who chose to dye, rather
than live to see their People destroyed and rejected. Multum charitatis in isto
Rege apparet. Pet. Martyr in loc.
It was great love and affection in David toward his People, when he desired
that the Lords hand might be stretched out against himself and Family, rather
than against them, 2 Samuel 24.17. It was no less love that moved Esther to
hazard her own life, for saving of the Jews, who were her own Countrymen, and
designed to destruction by the plot of wicked Haman, resolutely venturing into
the Kings presence uncalled, and against Law, which, if the golden Scepter had
not been held forth, had cost her her life, Esther 4.16. Even among the
Heathens there have been found those, who out of love to their Country and
People, have parted with the lives of their Children, yea their own lives.
Fulgo^. de dictis, factisque memorab. lib. 5. cap. 6. p. 152.
C. Marius waging War against the Cimbrians, was warned in a dream, that if he
sacrificed his Daughter Calphurnia, he should obtain the Victory, which he did,
and overcame his enemies. The like did Erecteus, as the same Author informs me,
and adds, That the greatness of his love to his Country, overcame his fatherly
affection toward his Daughter. Valor. Max. lib. 5. cap. 6. mihi p. 261, 262.
Curtius and Decius among the Romans are famous: The former for leaping into
the Earth, when it opened it self, and, as was said, would not be clozed till
the best thing in Rome were cast into it; The latter, for rushing into the
midst of the Enemies, when his party were like to be overcome in Battle by
them; both to the loss of their own lives for the preservation of their
Country. Idem ibidem. p. 264.
Codrus likewise among the Grecians is renowned, who being King of Athens, and
understanding from the Oracle at Delphos, that the War which then greatly
wasted that Country, would not be ended, unless he were slain by the hand of
the Enemy, ventured incognito into the Enemies Quarters, and by a wound given
to one of the Soldiers, provoked, and procured his own death.

(2) We read of those who have ventured far in love to their friends. Jonathans
love to David was wonderful, passing the love of Women, 2 Samuel 1.26. He loved
him as his own soul, 1 Samuel 20.17. insomuch as he incurred his Fathers
displeasure, and hazarded his own life in his excuse and defense, v. 27, to 34.
Great was the love of Valor. Max. lib. 4. cap. 7. p. 213.
Damon and Pythias, two Pythagorean Philosophers: for when one of them was
condemned to death by Dionysius the Tyrant, the other offered to dye for him:
But greater the love of those who did indeed dye for their friends, Idem
ibidem. p. 210.
as Voluminous did for Lucullus, who hearing that M. Antonius had slain his
friend, because he took part with Brutus and Cassius, made great lamentation
for him, and continued so to do, till he was brought before Antonius, to whom
he spoke after this manner, Command me, O Emperor, to be forthwith carried to
the Body of Lucullus, and slain there: for I ought not to survive him, who have
been the cause of his unhappy Warfare. This was no sooner asked but it was
granted, and he being brought to the place where his dead friend lay, after he
had kissed his right hand, and taken his head into his bosom, he was presently
beheaded besides him. The like friendship was betwixt Tapeus and Zogius in the
Kingdom of China, and the like fate happened to them, as I find it recorded by
a late Martinius Histor. Sinicae. Dec. prim. p. 116. 117.
Author. Tapeus being by the Emperor condemned to dye for no just cause,
Zogius not able to bear it, and being moved with the calamity of his friend,
exposed himself to apparent danger on his behalf, often rebuking the Emperor
for it with great freedom, who at last being enraged, said, Thou openly
discoverest thy self to be a Traitor, who to favor a Friend, art not afraid to
offend a King. To which Zogius for vindicating of himself, answered boldly, You
are mistaken, O Emperor: He that is true to his Friend, will be so to you; nor
is it fidelity toward you, to forsake a guiltless Friend. You have condemned
to death my Friend, who is innocent, convicted of no crime, against all Laws,
and the custom of good Kings. Because I desire to preserve him, I came under
suspicion of treason: but what affinity has Rebellion with faithfulness,
goodness and love? I defend the cause of my Friend, that you may not deal
unjustly and tyrannically, being faithful to both, but more to you: for both he
that preserves the innocent does well, but he that rectifies the erroneous
does better. Then the Emperor in a fury said, Either leave off your prating,
or dye with your Friend. To whom Zogius answered, It does not become an honest
man, for the prolonging of his life, to desert that which is lawful and right;
nor, for the avoiding of death, to confute by his deeds the things which he
has spoken agreeable to reason. The things which I have spoken tend to this,
That you may see how unjust a death you occasion to Tapeus: for where there is
no fault, there is no room for punishment. The Emperor vexed at this
constancy, commanded them both presently to be slain, not knowing (says the
Historian) That it is more glorious to dye in the maintaining of friendship,
than to preserve ones life by unfaithfulness.

(3.) We read of great love among other Relations. Clark's Mirror. fol. p. 209
Vrbinius Papinian the Roman, had a Servant, who hearing that the Soldiers
were about to slay him, came to him, and changed Apparel with him; took his
Ring and put it on his own finger, and letting him out at the backdoor, went
and lay, down in his Masters Bed, so that when the Soldiers came, taking him
for the Master, they slew him, who willingly chose death to save his Masters
life. This was great love in a Servant. Valor. Max. p. 202.
Tiberius Gracchus having found two Snakes in his House, was told, that upon
letting go the Male it would be sudden death to his Wife, and to himself upon
letting go the Female: but he preferring his Wives life before his own,
commanded the Male to be killed, and himself dyed soon after. This was great
love of a Husband to his Wife. Clark's Mirror. fol. p. 293.
Cabadis King of Persia being Deposed, and shut up in close Prison, and his
Brother Blazes set up in his room, the Wife of Cabadis first procures Horses to
be laid in the ways, and then ingratiating her self with the Prison-Keeper,
got leave often to visit her Husband. At last she changed Apparel with him, and
he getting thereby out of Prison, fled upon those Horses, and at last recovered
his Kingdom again: but she being discovered, was by the command of Blazes
cruelly put to death. This was great love of a Wife to her Husband. 'Twas great
love in David as a Father, which made him mourn as he did for Absalom, though
an ungrateful and ungracious Son, and to wish that he had dyed for him, 2 Samuel
18.33. And it was great love of a Son to a Father, which was showed by one of
Toledo (as Fulgos. lib. 5. cap. 4. p. 159.
Fulgosus relates the story) whose Father being condemned to dye, he never left
entreating by prayers and tears, till he obtained that his Father might be
released, and himself killed in his room. I am sensible how far beyond my first
intentions I have enlarged my self in the mention of these examples; and
therefore craving the Readers pardon for this excursion, I shall quickly
accommodate the whole to my present purpose, when I have given one instance
more of brotherly love among Christians, the rule whereof is set very high,
That from the consideration of the love of Christ, in laying down his life for
us, we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16. and this
example which I am now to mention, comes up to it. In the seventh Persecution
under Decius, Clark's general Martyrol. p. 52. The same story I find in Ambrose
his second Book concerning Virgins; only the names of the persons are not
mentioned Operum Tom. 4. (mihi) p. 100. etc. Masons Acts of the Church. p. 11.
Marc. Marul. Spalat. de institut. been vivendi. lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 226. Andr.
Hondors. Theatrum Historicum. (mihi) p. 499.
at Antioch, Theodora a godly Virgin, refusing to sacrifice to the Idols, was
condemned by the Judge to the Stews, which Sentence being executed, there were
many wanton young men ready at the door, to press into the House where she was:
but one of the Brethren, called Didymus, putting on a Soldiers habit, would
have the first admittance, and coming in, he persuaded her to change garments
with him, and so she in the Soldiers habit escaped away, and Didymus was left
to the rage and wondering of the people, being found a man. Hereupon he was
presented to the President, to whom he presently confessed the whole matter,
professing himself to be a Christian, and so was condemned; which Theodora
hearing of, thinking to excuse him, she came and presented her self to the
Judge as the guilty party, desiring that she might be condemned, and the other
excused: but the cruel Judge neither considering the virtue of the persons, nor
the innocence of the cause, most inhumanely condemned them both, first to be
beheaded, and then burnt, which was accordingly executed. Here was great love;
and indeed I have all along singled out the most eminent instances which I have
met with, of love among the Children of Men. But yet all this lies far short of
Christ's love toward us: For

(1.) There is so vast a difference betwixt the persons suffering, that the
best of them are not to be compared with Christ, who is worth ten thousand of
us; and the life which he laid down, infinitely more valuable than ten thousand
of ours.

(2.) The death which they underwent, was a debt which must have been paid by
all of them sooner or later, whether they would or no: but Christ lay under no
obligation to dye, only he voluntarily undertook it for our sakes.

(3.) The objects for which they suffered, were amiable and obliging: It was
for a Country, for Fateor equidem magna charitas est, cum quis pro amico ponit
animam; vix inquit Paulus, pro bono quis moriatur. At haec charitas long mayor
est, quu^ quis pro inimico ponit animam suam, neque ejusmodi amor inter homines
reperitur. Christus autem pro inimicis suis mortuus est; ergo singulari quodam
amore, cujus exemplum nullum extat inter homines, nos pres cuius est. Rolloc.
in Joan. p. 800.
Friends, for a Wife, for a Husband, for a Master, for a Child, for a Father,
for a fellow-Christian: but it was otherwise here: Christ died for ungodly
sinners and enemies, as I told you before: so that if we consider Christ in the
greatness and glory of his person, and Man in his meanness, vileness and
opposition to himself; and then consider love breaking forth from Christ so far
toward such a one, as to shed his blood, and lay down his life for him, and
that upon no other account, but his own free and undeserved love, it may make
us cry out with admiration, How great is his goodness! how great is his love!
This is that which raises the love of Christ so far above, out of our sight
and reach: Tantus nos dilexit tantum, and gratis, tantillos and tales. Ber. de
dil. Deo. p. 296.
That so great a person should love so low, and vile ones, as we were; so much,
and that freely: For (to use the words of Quis enim potest colligere mysterii
hujus charitatis rationem, ut and Deus hominis causa homo naesceretur, deinde
moreretur pro hominibus, pro servis Dominus, pro creatura Creator, pro impiis
Pius? Propter quid ita nos dilexit? Aut ut quid nostrum haberet, qui nullius
indiget? nunquid non charitas haec super scientiam hominum est? Aut quis
hominum poterit hanc charitatem alicui exhibere, quanquam impar sit, ac per hoc
supereminet humana commenta? Ambros. in Text.
Ambrose) who can gather a reason of the mystery of this love, that God for
Man's sake should become Man, and then dye for Men; the Lord for Servants, the
Creator for his Creature, the Holy One for the Ungodly? Wherefore did he thus
love us? What was it to gain of ours, who himself stands in need of nothing? Is
not this love above the knowledge of men? or, Who among the Sons of Men can
show this love to another, though there be no compare, and in this surpasses
all humane conception? Was ever love like this? No, it is incomparable: for (as
Non enim est pater, non matter, non amicus, non alius quisquam, qui nos tantum
dilexcrit, quantum tu, Domine, qui fecisti nos. Abso^beat igitur quaeso,
amantissime Domine, mentem meam ab omnibus, quoe sub coe^o sunt, ignita, and
melliflua vis tui amoris, ut totus tibi inhaercam, solaque suavitatis tuae
dulcedine pascar, delecter, inebrier. Idiot. Contemplat. de Amore Divino. cap.
5. p. (mihi) 353.
one speaks) There is neither Father, nor Mother, nor Friend, nor any other,
who has loved us so much as thou, O Lord, who have made us: Let therefore, I
beseech thee, O most loving Lord, the hotly-flaming, and sweetly-flowing force
of thy love swallow up my mind from all things under Heaven, that I may wholly
cleave unto thee, and be only fed, delighted, and even overcome with thy
sweetness. That Is the fourth Argument.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1.
MY next Argument shall be taken from the way which God takes for the
representing and applying of this love to us, Arg. 5.
that we may have some apprehension of it, and acquaintance with it.

(1.) For Representation. The love of Christ appears to be incomprehensible,
because the course which is taken for bringing us to some sight of it, is by
mediums and reflections. The light of the Sun is so strong and piercing, and
our sight so weak and tender, that our eyes are dazzled when we look directly
upon it: and therefore the best sight we have of it is by some medium or
reflection. Such is the love of Christ: the beams of it from the Mal. 4.2.
Sun of Righteousness are so strong, that it would soon overcome our weak and
dimm sight to look directly upon it, and therefore he shadows it out to us, and
reflects it upon us, that we may discern something of it. You know how the
Church under the Old Testament had Christ and his Love shadowed out under Types
and Sacrifices, and we have the representation of the same Christ, and the same
Love (for Heb. 13.8.
he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever) under the Word and Sacraments,
which are the glasses, by which we see darkly, and know in part that love of
Christ, which we cannot see directly as it is, nor know perfectly in this life.
Indeed ours have advantage of theirs in point of clearness: but still the
representations which we have are by mediums, not immediately, which we cannot
bear. Thus throughout the Scripture we have the love of Christ to his people
shadowed out under the resemblance of such relations, as are nearest, and most
obvious to us, and best known by us. As of a Isa. 40.11. Joh. 10.11.
Shepherd to his Flock, of a Isa. 49.15. Heb. 2.13.
Mother to her Children, of a Ephesians. 5.23.30.
Head to the Body, of one Joh. 15.14.
Friend and Heb 2.11.
Brother to another, of a Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.
Husband to his Wife, etc. Now God does hereby condescend to speak to us, as it
were in our own Idiom and language, that we might have some glimpse of that
love reflected through these relations, which we cannot fully conceive, nor
understand as it is in it self. To which I add this also, That the main end of
Christ's coming in the flesh, and taking our nature upon him, was to bring
himself nearer to us, not only that he might be capable of expressing his love
to us in such a way as we needed, by dying and suffering for us, but also that
we might be more familiarly acquainted with his own, and his Fathers love
toward us, as he gave an (...). Joh. 1.18.
Exegesis and declaration of it in our nature, which in it self passes
knowledge.

(2.) For Application. The love of Christ appears to be great and
incomprehensible, forasmuch as after it has been declared and represented in
that plain and familiar way which you have heard of, yet so far short are we of
understanding it to any good purpose, by our own reason, and abilities of
nature, that without the help of the Spirit, we cannot attain unto any saving
knowledge of it. This therefore is the great work which the Spirit has to do
in the Church, and for which he proceeds from the Father and the Son, namely to
bring the Elect to a sight, taste and experience of this love of Christ, and to
lead them on unto further measures, and higher degrees in this knowledge and
experience, till they attain perfection. To this end our blessed Savior being
to leave the world, leaves a promise of the Holy Ghost to supply his absence,
Joh. 16.7. and he tells us what his office and business should be, both in
reference to to the World, and in reference to Believers. In reference to the
World, that were yet Strangers, his business was to bring them to Christ, to
know and taste of his love, and that, by convincing them of sin, righteousness
and judgment, v. 8, 9, 10, 11. In reference to Believers, that were already
called and converted, his business was to bring them to further acquaintance
with Jesus Christ, and fuller experience of his love. Thus he tells them v. 14.
Neque enim nos illuminat Spiritus, ut abducat vel tantillum a Chrislo, sed ut
thesauros illos, qui in Christo sunt absconditi, reseret. In summa, non aliis
quam Christi divitiis nos locupletat Spiritus, ut ejus gloriam per omnia
illustret. Calv. in loc.
He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you; He
shall give you further insight into the mysteries of my love, which I could
tell you of my self, but that you cannot bear them now, v. 12. The Apostle
confirms this, who tells us, That as no man knows the things of a man, but the
spirit of man which is in him, so no man knows the things of God, but the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. But how then come any of us to know them? Why,
says he, God has revealed them to us by his Spirit, v. 10. who is therefore
given to believers, that they may know the things that are freely given them of
God, Apostolus per Dei dona ipsum Christum imp^imis, imo fere unum intelligit,
quum nihil nobis nisi in Christo sit la^gitus. Bez. in loc.
v. 12. and among other things they come to know the love of Christ, and to
know it more abundantly by the Spirit: for, says the same Apostle, The love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given to us, Romans
5.5. The first sight, and further tastes of the love of God in Christ, is from
the Holy Ghost. Now as the gift of the Spirit is in it self a great gift of
love, and indeed next to the gift of Christ the greatest, (the Evangelist makes
it equivalent to all good things, Luke 11.13. compared with Mat. 7.11.) so it
argues the love of Christ to be exceeding great, that the glorious Spirit of
God is given on purpose to bring us to acquaintance with it. If we were able to
comprehend it of our selves, there would be no need of the Holy Ghosts
influence, and assistance to bring us to the right understanding of it. That Is
the fifth Argument.

Sect. 2.
Arg. 6.
MY next Argument is this, The love of Christ must needs be a love passing
knowledge, because those who have attained to the highest pitch in the
knowledge of this love, do yet fall far short of knowing it to perfection in
this life; and yet the present fruits and effects of what they do attain unto,
are very great and incomprehensible. This Argument has two Branches, and both
tend to confirm the truth in hand.

(1.) Those who have attained to the highest pitch in the knowledge of this
love of Christ, do yet fall far short of knowing it to perfection in this life,
which is an undoubted evidence of its incomprehensible greatness. Alas! it is
but little, very little, which the best of Saints do know of it here upon
Earth, in comparison of what is to be known, and shall be known of it by them
in Heaven. Even Paul himself, who went as far as any in the knowledge of Christ
and his love, yet confesses that he 1 Cor. 13.12.
saw but through a glass darkly, and knew but in part. When he speaks of
Christ, he speaks of him as one in whom are Ephesians. 3.8.
unsearchable riches; and when he mentions the love of Christ in the Text, he
he calls it a love which passes knowledge. Ask a Saint that has had the
fullest and longest knowledge and experience of Christ, and his love, and he
will tell you, he has gotten no more than what leaves him admiring the fullness
which is in Christ, which he is never able to comprehend; he will tell you of a
plus ultra still, which which he can never reach; an Abyss of love, which he
can never fathom. It pleases him indeed to live and dye in the study and
meditation of it, yet without hopes of coming to the perfect knowledge of it,
though he should live Methuselahs age; he will confess himself at last to be a
mere Ignoramus in the things of Christ, and Maxima pars eorum quae scimus est
minima pars eorum quae nescimus.
that the greatest part of what he knows, is but the least part of that which
he knows not. The devout Author of the Contemplations of Divine love concealed
himself, and set them forth under the name of Idiota, and Idiot, it may be,
from an humble apprehension of his own ignorance of that love which he wrote
of. But this is not to be understood as arising from any defect on the Spirits
part, as if he were not able to teach this love perfectly; but on our part,
because being finite and frail creatures, we are not subjects capable of
receiving it fully as it is. Indeed if Christ should let forth himself in the
sulness of his love toward his Saints, considered in their present mortal and
imperfect estate, they were never able to bear it, but must use the language of
Christ to his Spouse, according to our Translation, Cant. 6.5.
Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me. (though as spoken by
Christ, it is otherwise interpreted by Ainsworth in loc.
Expositors) And therefore God is wont to reserve the fullest draught of this
sweetest Wine till last, to strengthen his Children against Satan's assaults,
(which are usually fiercest toward their latter end) and to sweeten their
passage hence, which is accompanied with such admirable effects, as is a
further evidence of the greatness of that love from whence it proceeds; which
is the second Branch of the Argument.

(2.) The present fruits and effects of what Believers do attain unto in the
knowledge of Christ's love, are many times so great, as do undoubtedly argue the
love it self to be far greater. If the fruits of this love be such as pass
understanding, this love it self must needs do so much more. Quod efficit tale,
illud est magis tale. And yet so it is. The Apostle makes mention of such
things as 1 Cor. 2.9. Malo simpliciter intelligere Dei gratias, quae fidelibus
quotidie conferuntur. Calv. in loc. Trap.
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
prepared by the Lord for them that love him: which is primarily to be
understood of those Favors and Love Tokens which God bestows upon his people
here; that Gospel-joy, and present comforts which Saints have in this life;
that praemium ante praemium, for he reserves not all for the life to come, but
gives a few Grapes of Canaan in this Wilderness. Thus in another place he makes
mention of Phil. 4.7.
the Peace of God which passes all understanding, which Believers experience
whiles they are here below, to the keeping their hearts and minds as in a
Garrison, against all assaults. And another 1 Pet. 1.8.
Apostle tells us of a joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which believers have
from Jesus Christ, and the sense of his love apprehended by faith. The present
peace, comfort and joy of a Christian in this life, is many times unspeakable
and unconceivable, that passes all understanding: how much more then that love
which influenceth all this? If there be so much in the fruit, the effect, the
stream, what is there in the root, the cause, the fountain? Surely the love of
Christ must needs be exceeding great, when the shedding of it abroad into the
hearts of his people by his Spirit, in a little more than ordinary measure,
whiles they are upon earth, does so transport them into an ecstasy of
unexpressible joy and consolation, as sometimes it does; especially those
discoveries of himself, and manifestations of his love, which he makes to some
of his special Favorites toward their dissolution, which I hinted before, and
shall here give a double instance of it in two famous Christians; the one is of
M. Leighs Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Brettergh, p. 16. 17.
Mr. John Holland, an eminent Minister of the Gospel in his time, He, the day
before he dyed, as often before, so then more eagerly, called for a Bible,
saying, Come, O come, death approaches, let us gather some flowers to comfort
this hour: which being brought, he turned with his own hands to the eight
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and giving the Book to a stander by, bid
him read. At the end of every Verse he made a pause, and gave the sense of it.
Having thus continued his Meditation and Exposition for the space of two
hours, or more, on the sudden he said, O stay your reading, what brightness is
this I see? Have you light up any Candles? To which he that stood by, answered,
No, it is the Sunshine: for it was about five a Clock in a clear Summers
Evening. Sunshine (says he) nay, it is my Saviors shine: Now farewell World,
welcome Heaven: the Day Star from on high has visited my heart; O speak it
when I am gone, and preach it at my Funeral: God deals familiarly with Man: I
feel his Mercy, I see his Majesty, whether in the body or out of the body I
cannot tell, God knows; but I see things that are unutterable.

The other is of This is in her life, which was written by a Friend, and joined
with the Sermon forementioned; and another Sermon upon the same occasion.
Mrs. Katharine Brettergh, a gracious Gentlewoman, of the Family of the Bruens
in Cheshire. She, in the beginning of that Sickness whereof she dyed, had a
very sore conflict with Satan, who prevailed so far, as to bring her into great
doubt and fear concerning her condition: but it pleased God before her death,
to bruise Satan under her feet, and to make her more than a Conqueror, filling
her with joy, and peace in believing: so that the joy of her heart broke out at
her lips, in such expressions as these. Whiles her Husband read the 17th.
Chapter of John, when he came to the ninth Verse, she cried out, O Lord Jesu,
do thou pray for me? O blessed, and sweet Savior, how wonderful! how
wonderful! how wonderful are thy Mercies! Then reading the 22d. Verse, with
mavelous joy she uttered the words of David many times over, I confess before
the Lord his loving kindness, and his wonderful Works before the Sons of Men:
for he has satisfied my soul, and filled my hungry soul with goodness. When he
came to the 24th. Verse, she said, Now I perceive, and feel the countenance of
Christ my Redeemer is turned toward me, and the bright-shining beams of his
mercy spread over me. And then again remembering some passages in that Chapter,
she said, O my sweet Savior, shall I be one with thee, as thou art one with
thy Father? and will thou glorify me with that glory which thou had with the
Father before the World was? And do thou so love me (who am but dust and
ashes) to make me partaker of glory with Christ? What am I, poor wretch, that
thou art so mindful of me? Oh how wonderful! how wonderful! how wonderful is
thy love! Oh thy love is unspeakable, that have dealt so graciously with me! Oh
I feel thy mercies, and oh that my tongue and heart were able to sound forth
thy praises as I ought, and as I willingly would do! Afterward she had these
expressions, Now blessed Lord, thy comfortable presence is come; yea Lord, thou
have had respect to thy Handmaid, and art come with fullness of joy, and
abundance of consolations; O blessed be thy Name, O Lord my God! Again, a
Christian Friend coming to see her, and marvelling at her exceeding joys,
desired the continuance of them; whereupon she burst out, and said, Oh the
joys! the joys! the joys that I feel in my soul! oh! they be wonderful! they
be wonderful! they be wonderful! And again, not long after, she said to a
Minister who came to see her, Oh! my soul has been compassed about with
terrors of death, fear within, and fear without; the sorrows of Hell were upon
me, knots and knorres were upon my soul, and a roaring Wilderness of woe was
within me: but blessed, blessed, blessed be the Lord my God, who has not left
me comfortless, but like a good Shepherd, has he brought me into a place of
rest, even to the sweet running Waters of Life, that flow out of the Sanctuary
of God; and he has led me into the green Pastures, where I am fed, and
exceedingly comforted, etc. Oh! blessed be the Lord! Oh! blessed be the Lord,
that has thus comforted me, and has brought me now to a place more sweet unto
me than the Garden of Eden! Oh the joy! oh the joy! the delightsome joy that I
feel! Oh how wonderful! how wonderful! how wonderful is this joy! Oh! praise
the Lord for his mercies, and for this joy, which my soul feels full well;
Praise his Name for evermore. And thus she continued, till at last she slept in
the Lord. Now from all this put together, I conclude, That seeing the love of
Christ shed abroad in the hearts of his people, has such admirable effects to
the filling of them with such unspeakable joy and comfort; and seeing it is but
little in comparison, which the highest, best, and most privileged Saints do
know, and taste of this love, here below: surely this love must needs have an
exceeding great, and incomprehensible fullness in it self. That Is the sixth
Argument.

Sect. 3.
MY next Argument is this, Arg. 7.
It appears to be a love which passes knowledge, because when the spirits of
just men shall be made perfect in Heaven, where they shall know, and receive
most of this love; yet even then they shall not be able to comprehend all of
it, but rather be comprehended by it. Its true, that in Heaven the capacities
of the Saints shall be enlarged to the utmost, and they shall be filled
according to that enlargement; they shall want nothing to make them perfectly
blessed; they shall have as much of this love in the beatifical fruits of it,
as they can hold, and shall be able to hold incomparably more than now they
can: but yet even then and there they will not be able to hold it all: for that
which is infinite, can never be comprehended by that which is finite, there
being no proportion betwixt them. So that what is said of the joy of our Lord
in Mat. 25.21. is true of the love of our Lord; its too big to enter into us,
therefore we must enter into it. As a large Vessel put into the Ocean takes in
of the water till it be full, yet cannot contain it all, but when it can hold
no more is swallowed up: so the Saints, who here sip and taste of the love of
Christ, shall in Heaven drink more of it, till they be everlastingly swallowed
up by it. Jesus Christ, even at his second coming, when he shall take up his
Saints to be where he is, Joh. 14.3. to behold, that is, enjoy his glory, Joh.
17.24. will even then be admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1.10.
admired for that love which brought them thither; and admired for that glory
which they shall enjoy there, as the fruits of this love. Dr. Sclater on These.
p. 50.
The measure of the glory will be so great, as shall fill the enjoyers with
wonder at the grace; beholders with no less than admiration at the power of the
bestower. When a glorified Saint shall consider himself raised from the dust,
yea the dunghill, to sit with Princes, to be made like, and equal to the
Angels, to see God, and enjoy an exceeding and eternal weight of glory, when he
has deserved no such matter, but the contrary, and thousand, yea millions of
men, his equals, if nos his betters, passed by, how will it fill such a one
with extolling, and admiring the rich grace and love of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ? We our selves (says Nos ipsi sentimus effundi amorem Dei
in corda nostra c^piosa copia per Spiritu^ Sanctum, qui datus est nobis: sed
totum semel comprehendere in hac vita non possumus. In altera vero vita
stupebimus ad admirabile^ illam dilectionem, neque tamen etiam tum animus
creaturae etiam glorificatae poterit infinitam illam totam comprehendere, quae
in Deo est: saltem id scimus, quod illa charitate toti implebimur, cum Deus
erit omnia in omnibus. Rolloc. in Joan. p. 7^6.
Rolloc) do now perceive the love of God to be shed abroad in great plenty into
our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us: but we are not able to
comprehend it altogether at once in this life. And in the life to come, we
shall be amazed at that admirable love, though even then the mind of a
glorified creature shall not be able to comprehend all that infinite love which
is in God: Yet this at least we now know, That we shall be altogether filled
with that love, when God shall be all in all. To conclude this, how exceeding
great must that love needs be, which the Saints in glory shall not be able
fully to comprehend! That Is the seventh Argument.

Sect. 4.
MY last Argument, Arg. 8.
wherewith I shall conclude what I have to say, as to the Doctrinal part of
this Proposition, is this, The love of Christ must needs pass all humane, Omnem
superat cognitionem, nempe humanam, adeoque Angelicam. Zanch. in loc. ut supra.
for it surpasses all Angelical knowledge. The Angels being purae
Intelligentiae, of pure Intelligences, and of larger capacities than the rest
of the creatures, do know more than we; yet their knowledge is but like that of
the creatures, finite and limited; Certissimum est Angelos etsi multa sciant,
m^l a lamen etiam nescire. Estius in Sentent. lib. 2. did. 7. p. 75.
though by their natural knowledge they know many things, yet not all things.
There are many things which they are ignorant of: they know not the hearts of
men, 1 Kings 8.39. nor many things to come, Isa. 41.23. nor the time when the
Day of Judgment shall be, Mat. 24.36. This great mystery of Christ, and his
love in redeeming and saving of Man, the very Angels themselves knew not at the
first: for as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 3.9. It was from the beginning of the
World hid in God; nor could they have known it at all by a natural knowledge.
If all the Angels in Heaven had sat in counsel from the beginning of the World
to this day, for contriving a way to save man, salva Dei justitia, they could
never have found it out; nor could they have known it when it was contrived, if
he who contrived had concealed it: but they came to know it at the first by
revelation from God. How soon it was revealed to them, is not revealed unto us,
and therefore cannot be determined by us: yet this appears, that the knowledge
which they had of it by revelation, was not complete at first, but was improved
by observation and experience. Leigh's Body of Divinity. p. 271.
Hence that distinction of the knowledge of Angels (among the Schoolmen) into
Natural, Revealed and Experimental. Their natural knowledge was improved, quoad
speciem, by Revelation: by it they know that which they knew not before; and
their knowledge by revelation was improved quoad gradum, by Experience: by it
they knew in fuller measure what they knew before; they knew the substance of
it by revelation, but the circumstances of it more clearly and fully by
experience and observation. Gods revealing it to them at first in the general,
has made them more eager in pursuit of the particulars; hence it is said, 1
Pet. 1.12, That the Angels desire to look into the mystery of Christ and the
Gospel; and the words there used are emphatical, (...), which signifies an
earnest, strong, and unsatisfied desire; (...), which signifies a diligent and
accurate inspection, to look and pry narrowly, by stooping down to see the
inside of things that are obscure, and under cover. It Is thought to be an
allusion to the posture of the Cherubims, which were put upon the Mercy-seat
with their faces looking down into it, Exodus 25. Now there are two ways
especially, by which the knowledge of Angels in the Mystery of Christ and his
love, seems to be improved.

(1.) By the Church. This is clear from Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10. where the Apostle
tells us, that the manifold Wisdom of God is made known by the Church to the
Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, that is, the Angels, (so called
Angel^ sic id o nuncupantur, quod Deus per ipsorum manum suam potestatem,
virtutem, and dominatione exe^ceat. Calv. in Ephesians. 1.21.
because of their Princely power under God over the Kingdoms of the World;)
and this he says was one intent of his preaching the Gospel. If it had not
been for the Churches sake that God would reveal so glorious a mystery, the
Angels in Heaven must have been for ever ignorant of it; and after they had
received notice of it by private revelation from God, yet was their knowledge
of it increased by Gods dispensations to, and in the Church, by reason whereof
the Church was Pauli autem verba hunc habent sensu^, quod Eccl^sia ex Judaeis
pariter ac gentibus collecta, qu si speculum sit, in quo contemplantur Angeli
mirificam Dei sapientiam, quam prius nescierant. Calv. in Ephesians. 3.10.
a glass, in which they saw, and observed the manifold Wisdom of God, and got
further and fuller experience of the mystery of Christ's love, and our
redemption thereby. Thus by the Prophecies and Promises of the Old Testament,
and by the performances and preaching of the New, and by the Providence and
Ordinances of both, (whereof the Church was the seat and center) the Angels
came to further acquaintance with Christ, and the way of man's salvation by him,
which they desired to look into.

(2.) By Christ himself; by beholding and attending upon him in our nature,
both as humbled on Earth, and exalted to glory in Heaven. This is that which
the Apostle reckons as a part of the great Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
that Christ was seen of Angels. They knew Christ was to come into the World by
Divine Revelation; they knew more of him by those Prophetical Praedictions
which were made of him, and more yet by attending upon him, and ministering unto
him whiles he was in our flesh upon Earth, carrying on the Work of our
Redemption; and yet more by beholding of him now he is glorified in Heaven,
sitting in our nature at his Fathers right hand: And yet even now they know not
all of Christ, and his love toward us: there is that in Christ which dazles
the sight, and exceeds the comprehension of the glorious Angels. Now if the
love of Christ passes their knowledge, surely it must needs surpass ours.

And thus I hope I have sufficiently cleared and confirmed the truth of my
Assertion, That the love of Jesus Christ is exceeding great and
incomprehensible.

CHAP V. I proceed now to Application. Applic.

THE first and main Use which I shall make of this point, Use 1. The first Use
of Exhortation, to labor to know the love of Christ.
shall be to turn this Prayer of the Apostle for these Ephesians into an
Exhortation unto every one that shall read these lines, that he would make it
his great business, study, and endeavor to know the Lord Jesus, and that in
his love.

Sect. 1.
MY great desire, The Preface to the handling of it.
and design is to bring you nearer to Christ, and to that end I lay before you
this grand attractive of his love, to draw you unto more acquaintance and
familiarity with him and it: therefore I first preached, and now publish it,
and I make it my earnest request to you all, to whom this shall come, that you
would not lay aside this advice which I now give you, of studying this love of
Christ, and getting a sound, saving knowledge of it, especially seeing it is a
matter of so general, so great and necessary concernment; so general, as that
none can exempt himself; so great, as that your All depends upon it; and so
necessary, as that you are undone without it.

This is the great business of a Gospel Minister, for himself and his People to
study, know and preach Jesus Christ. This was Paul's determination among the
learned Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2.2. to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified: for indeed this was the end of his Apostleship, as he tells the
Ephesians, Chap. 3. 8. to preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ. All our studies and preaching, which are not Christ directly or
reductively, are but (...), things by the by, and will not tend to any
comfortable account at last. We may please our selves, and it may be those that
hear us too, by preaching other things: but we shall not save our selves, and
those that hear us, unless we pre^ch Jesus Christ. We are but Prevaricators in
our office, if Jesus Christ be not the Vnum Magnum, nay the Vnum Maximum in our
Ministry.

This is also the great business of every Christian for himself, to know Jesus
Christ: our life depends upon it, according to our Saviors own words, Joh.
17.3. This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent. For the excellency of this knowledge, the Apostle Paul
counted all things but dross and dung, Phil. 3.8. This is the one thing
necessary, without which all a man's other knowledge will but hasten and
heighten his condemnation.

Si Christum discis, nihil est si caetera nescis;
Si Christum nescis, nihil est si caetera discis.
Englished thus, If Christ thou know, it will suffice,
Though else thou know naught;
If Christ be hid, thou art not wise,
Though all else thou be taught.


Now the love of Christ is the main matter to be studied, and known by every
one who would study and know Jesus Christ; and indeed we cannot miss of love in
the study and knowledge of Christ: for Christ is love. His Name, his Natures,
his Offices, his Doctrine, his Life, his Death, his Privileges, his
Ordinances, his All have a deep tincture of love in them; and this love is to
be known, and that it may be known, to be studied by us, by all of us, even the
best of us.

If you say, We hear this often enough, Object.
and know this well enough.

I answer, Nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur.
That is never said enough, Answ.
which is never learned enough; And though you know the love of Christ, do you
know it as you ought to know it? If you do not, you must go over it again, that
you may know it better; and you do not know Christ as you ought, nor his love
as you ought, until you have him and it by heart. You who know most and best,
are yet to seek: you know but in part; there are all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge hid in Christ, Col. 2.3. unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. which
can never be traced and found out. You may be all your time searching and
digging into them; and yet, though you should live never so long, not come to
the bottom at last, but must breath out your souls with an (...), in the
conclusion, oh! the depth: for this is a love which passes knowledge.

Object.
If you say, that it is an heartless, hopeless work which I put you upon, when I
bid you study to know the love of Christ, seeing it passes knowledge.

Answ.
I Answer, That it is true the love of Christ is such as passes knowledge; the
riches of Christ are unsearchable riches: but yet the unsearchable riches of
Christ should not make us idle, but active, in digging and searching them out
as far as we can; the unknowable love of Christ should not deaden and straiten,
but quicken and enlarge our appetite, to endeavor after as full a knowledge as
we may. What wise man will stand still, or go back, because he cannot finish
his journey in a day? Will not men dig for Gold, because they cannot get to the
bottom of the Mine? And shall we refuse to know as much as we can of this love
of Christ, because we cannot comprehend as much as there is? Far be it from any
of us to cherish any such thought: for the checking whereof consider,

(1.) That you may know enough of Christ and his love to serve for your souls
salvation, which its your great interest to mind and look after, as the great
end of your being.

(2.) You shall not need fear to be cloyed and glutted in the study of this
love; Varietas delectat, variety delights; and there is so much variety in this
one subject, the love of Christ, as renders the study of it very delectable.

(3.) The deeper you go in this love of Christ, the sweeter; yea, if (as Plut.
Moral. Tom. 2. Lat. 8. (mihi) p. 117.
Plutarch notes) Eudoxus was content to be burnt up by the Sun, if he might
have liberty first to stand so near, as to learn the figure, magnitude and form
of a Star; how much more and better should a Christian be content to enter
upon, and proceed in the search, study, knowledge and understanding of this
love of Christ, till he be at last swallowed up of that which he is never able
fully to comprehend!

Sect. 2.
IN the prosecution of this Exhortation, I shall do these two things, 1. I
shall direct your knowledge, that you may not mistake about it. 2. I shall
excite you to it by the encouragements which the Apostle lays down about the
Text, that you be not disheartened, so as to decline your duty in this
particular;


By way of Direction, which is needful: (1.) Directions about our knowing the
love of Christ.
for all knowledge of the love of Christ is not sufficient and saving; there is
a general, notional, speculative, historical knowledge, which will be
prejudicial, and not profitable in the end; though this be good, as far as it
goes, yet where there is no more, it is not sufficient. Those who know the love
of Christ in the notion only, for Discourse sake, or for a Professions sake
only, will fall as short of Heaven as the most ignorant person; yea, those who
know the love of Christ no better than thus, will but descend the more
learnedly into Hell, and incur the more severe condemnation. Now that you may
not mistake here, nor miscarry hereafter in this business of knowing the love
of Christ, I shall direct you to mind the qualifications of your knowledge; and
I shall mention three.

Direction 1. That it be affectionate knowledge.
(1.) Look that your knowledge of the love of Christ be Cognitio affectiva, an
affectionate knowledge; let it not swim in your heads only by empty Notions,
but sink down into your hearts, in sweet, savoury, warming, and lively
affections toward him. And

Sect. 2.
(1.) SEE that you have such a knowledge of Christ and his love, The first
Branch of the first Direction, That it be a knowledge accompanied with love.
as is accompanied with love to him. True love is grounded in knowledge, and
true knowledge has love built upon it. Though your heads be never so full of
the knowledge of Christ, yet if your hearts be not also full of love to him, it
will neither be acceptable to Christ, nor profitable to your selves. The
Apostle tells us how little the understanding of all mysteries, and all
knowledge will profit a man without love, 1 Cor. 13. for, as the Multa scilic^t
laudabilia, atque admiranda possunt in homine reperiri, quae sine charitatis
medullis habent quidem pietatis similitudinem, sed non veritate^ habent.
Prosper. ad Ruf. de great. and lib. arbitr. (mihi) p. 125.
Father observes, There may be many commendable and admirable things found in a
man, which, without the marrow of love, have indeed a show, but not the truth
of godliness. Love is the great affection of Union; it is gluten animi, the
cement of the soul. Though Scientia foris stat, dilectio intrat. Lyr. in Ephesians.
3.19.
knowledge stand without, and gives us a view of Christ, yet its love that
enters in, clasps about him, and cleaves to him: So that notwithstanding all
our knowledge, Christ and we shall still abide strangers, and the distance
remain, till love bring us together, which is the bond of perfectness, that is,
Q^od vinculum est perfectissimum, animos scilicet conjungens. Grot. in loc.
the most perfect bond, because it does join hearts together, Col. 3.14. Dr.
Reynolds of the Paso^s. p. 96.
So that herein Divine Love has the same kind of virtue with Divine Faith;
that as this is the being and subsisting of things to come, and distant in
time: so that is the union and knitting of things absent, and distant in place;
as Christ and Christians are, he being in Heaven, and they on Earth, whom yet
having not seen they love, 1 Pet. 1.8. and by love are united to him, and
become one spirit with him, 1 Cor. 6.17. And therefore O foelix hominum genus,
Si vestros animos amor, Quo coelu^ regitur, regat. Boet. de Consol. Phil. lib.
2. (mihi) p. 47.
O happy you, whose hearts by love
Are ruled, which rules in Heaven above!


Give me leave here a little to commune with you about your love to Christ, and
to show you why, and how you should love him; the one to move you to it, the
other to guide you in it.

CHAP. VI.
(1.) WOuld you have a reason for your love? Reasons and Motives for loving
Jesus Christ.
Truly were it so with you as it should be, this fire would burn into a flame
without blowing: but the truth is, men's hearts have lost their ingenuity, else
there would not need so much ado to persuade them to that which is not only
their duty, but their privilege, it being indeed an honor that Jesus Christ
will give us leave to love him. Consider therefore, because need so requires,
those Hos. 11.4.
bonds of love which your Lord has cast forth to draw in your hearts to the
love of himself.

Sect. 1.
(1. The first Reason for our love to Christ.
) It Is the sum of all that the Lord requires of you, and the best of all that
you can return unto him.

(1.) It Is the sum of all that he requires of you. As love from Christ is the
top of your happiness, so love to Christ is the sum of your duty. The whole Law
is briefly comprehended; all the Commandments (which are exceeding broad, and
of vast extent, Psalm. 119.96.) are summed up, and epitomized in this single
word, this sweetest Monosyllable, Love, (...). In summa^, ac compendium
reducitu^; namtota Lex nihil aliud is quam amo^em Dei, and proximi praec^pit.
B^z. in loc.
Romans 13.9. Love is the sum and substance of what we owe to God and Man; the
short summary and compendium of a Christians whole duty: whence the Apostle
calls the observance hereof the fulfilling of the Law, v. 10. and the Hoc
praeceptum Dei amandi, and alterum amandi proximi, dicuntur Hebraeis summae
magnae. Grot. in loc.
Jews called the Commands of loving God, and our Neighbor, The great Sums.
Now as the Servants of Naaman said to him, 2 Kings 5.13. so say I to you, If
the Lord had commanded you some greater thing, would you not have done it? If
he had required you to sacrifice your Children, to burn your bodies to ashes,
would you not have done it? how much more then when he bids you give him only
your hearts your love?

(2.) It Is the best of all that you can return unto him. Amor est primum, and
maximum donum, quo nihil magis donari potest, cum per ipsum caetera omnia
donantur. Lessius de summo bono. lib. 2. cap. 6. p. 134. See Jenkins on Jude.
Part 1 (mihi) p. 140. 4. and Manton on Jude. p. 117. Amor ubi venerit, caeteros
omnes in se traducit, and captivat affectus. Amor per se sufficit, per se
placet, and propter se. Ipse meritum, ipse praemium, ipse causa, ipse fructus,
ipse usus, per amorem enim conjungimur Deo. Aug. Man. cap. 18. (mihi) p. 234.
Love is the best thing that the best man ever gave to Christ: It Is love that
does engage all besides, and sweetens all that is engaged. Love is Queen Regent
in the soul; and all other Graces, Gifts, Duties, Services, attend her beck,
and serve her interest, and are welcome before the Throne, according to the
strain of love that is in them. Love is the kernel of every gift, the beauty of
every performance, the marrow of every duty, the luster of every ^race, the
salt which seasons every Sacrifice, without which, the exquisitest service is
but a ^ead carcass embalmed. The greatest gift without love is rejected; the
least with it is accept^d. Love is an act of grace of it self; other things are
not acts of grace without love, as Alms; yea Martyrdom it self is nothing
without love, 1 Cor. 13.3. but small things are made ^reat by love; A Cup of
cold Water, Mat. 10. A Widows Mite, Luke 21. find acceptance, ^s coming from
love. It Is love whereby a Chri^^ian comes nearest to God, who is love; and ^e
who dwells in love, dwells in God, and God ^n him, 1 John 4.16. Its love
which removes ^im furthest from hypocrisy: for in this only the ^ypocrite
cannot imitate him; he can speak, and ^o, and suffer: but he cannot love, and
the want ^f this spoils all. Its your best, nay its your All; ^ts all that the
Apostle desires Christians may re^urn to God for the mercy and peace bestowed
on them, Jude 2. Solus amor est ex omnibus animae motibus, sensibus, at^
affectibus, in quo potest creatura, etsi non ex aequo, respondere auctori, vel
ipsi mutuam rependere vicem. Aug. Manual. cap. 18. (mihi) p. 233.
Its only love of all the moti^ns and affections of the soul, by which the
Crea^ure, though not in a way of equality, can answer his Creator, and make any
return to him. And its only by love that the Redeemed of the Lord can return
unto him their Redeemer, for his great love in working Redemption for them. And
therefore seeing you can do no better nor more for Christ, it is but reasonable
that you should love him: But that is not all: For

The second Reason.
Sect. 2.
(2.) COnsider how strongly this love o^ Christ is urged in Scripture, and from
thence you may see further reason to love him. He is not content barely to
propound and prescribe it, but uses such arguments, a^ may allure or affright,
draw or drive, persuade or force you to observance and obedience.

(1.) As if there were something valuable in your love, he does invite and
encourage you to love him by the great and precious Promises which he has made
unto it. Haec precatio vice oraculi habenda est, etc. Calv. in Ephesians. 6.24.
That Apostolical benediction, Ephesians. 6.24. may be understood in the nature of
a Promise: the words are, Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity. Now Grace is as large a word for Blessing, as Love for
Duty; of the same extent in the New Testament with Peace in the Old. Hebraeorum
usitata salutatio erat, Pax tibi. At post patefactum redemptionis humanae
mysterium, in quo fontem gratiae Deus aperuit humano generi, gratiam etiam
adjungebant. Dav. in Coloss. p. 11.
The form of Blessing among the Jews, was, Peace be unto you, Genesis 43.23. but
when the Mystery of Man's Redemption was revealed, in which God opened a
fountain of Grace to mankind, it was changed into Grace be unto you, as appears
in the Epistles, where Grace is wished by the Apostles unto Christians, either
by it self, or in conjunction with Peace by way of Amplification. By this Grace
is meant the Morn. Exercise. Part. 2. 40. page 218.
Blessing of the Eternal God; Pink's Trial of a Christians sincere love to
Christ on that Text.
All those precious Mercies, and glorious Benefits, which flow from the grace
and favor of God. Its a short, but comprehensive word, and contains all good
in it; yet this grace in its greatest fullness, and utmost latitude, is wished
for, and shall be bestowed on all those that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity.
To this you may add Joh. 14.21.23. He that has my Commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be loved of my
Father, etc. In these two Verses there are four things promised to those who
truly and obedientially love the Lord Jesus.

(1.) There will be no love lost to lay it out upon Christ; you shall have it
again with advantage: for if you love him so as to keep his Commandments,
Christ has promised love for love, his Fathers love, his own love for your
love. He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him;
Gerh. Har. in loc.
which is not to be understood of a general, but special love; not of first
love, but after love; not of a love of benevolence, but of friendship and
complacency; he will so shed abroad his love into your hearts by the Holy
Ghost, that you shall know, and feel, and taste the love of the Father and Son
toward you; which appears further from that which is promised afterward.
Christ's love to such as love him, will not be an empty and idle, but a full and
operative love: For

(2.) He says he will manifest himself to you. I will love them, and will
manifest my self to them. He will deal with you as with Friends, and will make
known to you whatsoever shall be necessary for your salvation, John 15.15. he
will impart a fuller knowledge of himself to you, by the spirit of Wisdom and
revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. and larger tastes of his love. You shall be kissed with
the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.2. brought into his Banqueting House, and his
Banner over you love, under the shadow whereof you shall sit with great
delight, and his fruit shall be sweet to your taste, Cant. 2.3.4. He will so
manifest himself in a way of love to his people, as to give them occasion to
cry out with that holy man, Aliquando intromittis me in affectum multum
inusitatum introrsus, ad nescio quam dulcedinem, quae si perficiatur in me,
nescio quid erit, quod vita ista non erit. Aug. Conf. lib. 10. cap. 40.
At some times thou inwardly infusest into me a delight that I am not usually
acquainted with, a sweetness of I know not what kind, which could it be once
perfected in me, it should be I know not what manner of height, which this life
shall never arive unto. Such manifestations will Christ give of himself to
those who love him, as none know but they who experience them; nor can they
themselves sufficiently express them. But then

(3.) He says further, that his Father and he will come unto you. We will come
to him; that is, We will make secret and sweet approaches to such a sold by
the spirit, for the further enlightening, quickening, comforting, supporting, and
strengthening of him, till he be sealed up to the Day of Redemption. This is a
great matter, yet not all: for

(4.) He promises that his Father and he will make their abode with you: and
make our abode with him: whereby is signified the continuance and duration of
that grace which is shown by the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, when they come to
a beloved and loving soul. They will not come as Sojourners, but as Dwellers;
not turn aside to tarry with you for a night, but abide with you for ever. Now
what greater thing can be promised unto, or bestowed upon the Sons of men in
this life, than that which is comprehended in these words? and yet these are
promised to the love of Christ: so that if a man should set his love to sale,
he cannot do it to more profit and benefit to himself, than by laying it out
upon Christ, who is most rich and liberal in his rewards to his people for
their love, as appears from what has been said; though there be more yet, even
that which neither eye has seen^ nor ear heard, nor can enter into the heart
of man to conceive, which the Apostle says is prepared for those that love the
Lord, 1 Cor. 2.9. And if any evil befall them, that also (through the skill and
care of their wise Physician, Venenum pro remedio.
who can make a sovereign Treacle of the most deadly poison) shall cooperate
for the good of those who love God, according to the Promise, Romans 8.28. But
these I leave to be enlarged in your own Meditations, and pass on.

(2.) If this golden Key of the Promises open not the door of your hearts, to
let Christ into the possession of your love, behold the iron Hammer of the
Threatenings ready to force it open. Men's dead, dull, and disingenuous spirits
need this as well as other ways; and Christ is so resolved upon our love, that
he will leave no means unattempted to procure it. Know therefore that it is not
an arbitrary matter whether you love Christ or no: for necessity lies upon you,
and woe be to you if you love him not. Love Christ, or you are lost and undone
for ever. See what the Scripture speaks in this particular.

Psalm 2.12. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when
his wrath is kindled but a little. Osculari p o amare, obedire, obsequi, se
humiliter subjicere; ho^um signum q^ippe antiquitus osculu^s erat. Glass. Rhet.
Sacr. p. 1094. Osculum in sacra Scriptura significat unionem, charitatem,
pacem, reverentiam, Durand. Rat. Div. Offic. lib. 4. cap. 53. (mihi) p. 202.
The custom of Kissing of old, was a sign of affection or subjection, and thus
it is used in Scripture to signify

(1.) Affection. Thus Esau kissed his Brother, Jacob, in token of love and good
will, being reconciled to him, Genesis 33.4. Thus the Primitive Christians did:
Salute one another with an holy Kiss, Romans 16.16. 1 Cor. 16.20. (...), ab amore
cujus signu^ est. Rivet. in Psalm. 2. page 29.
This was signified in the Word, and more from the Apostle Peter's Adjunct,
where he calls it the Kiss of Charity, 1 Pet. 5.14. Precibus finitis mutuo nos
invicem osculo salutamus. Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr mentions this as a practice in his time: When Prayers are ended,
we salute one another with a Kiss.

(2.) It signifies likewise Subjection, Reverence and Obedience. Thus Samuel
kissed Saul when he had anointed him King, in token of subjection and obedience
to him, 1 Samuel 10.1. Thus Idolaters kissed their Idols, in token of Reverence,
1 Kings 19.18. Hos. 13.2. Now this place may be understood of both these; and
all men, even the greatest of men, Kings and Judges of the Earth, are charged
to kiss the Son, to love, and submit themselves to the Lord Jesus, and that
under a dreadful penalty if they do it not, lest he be angry. You cannot change
the nature of Christ by your not loving of him; he will be loving, and will
love still: ^ut you may change the property of it, as to ^our selves; he will
not love you, nay, you will ^urn it into anger against your selves. He can ^e
angry, and he will be angry with you, if ^ou love him not; Habebitis Judicem
severum, quem benignum dominum recusastis. Rivet. ubi supra. p. 30.
You shall find him a severe judge, whom you have refused as a mild and ^entle
Lord. And a little of this anger is enough ^or your destruction: for you shall
perish from ^he way, if his wrath be kindled but a little; ^ou'll perish at the
rebuke of his countenance, ^sal. 80.16. Perishing signifies eternal death and
misery, in opposition to eternal life and happiness. Joh. 3.15. and here it
holds forth ^his unto us, That those who do not love and obey the Lord Jesus
Christ, do cast themselves out of the way of Life, Salvation and Happiness, ^n
to a state of Death, Destruction and Misery, which will certainly be their
portion, from the just wrath and displeasure of him whom they have provoked by
their enmity and disobedience. And shall not this awaken you? But take another
Scripture.

Prove. 8.36. But he that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul; all they
that hate me, love death. It is no wrong to the Text, to understand these words
as spoken by Jesus Christ, who having declared his ancient love to the Sons
Men, calls upon them to hearken unto him, and receive his counsel; and having
encouraged them unto it, by telling them it would be their wisdom and
happiness, that they should have life and favor this way, v. 32.33.34.35. lest
this should not p^evail, he concludes by laying open the danger of such as
refuse, in the words forementioned. Where you may note

(1.) That they who refuse the counsel of Christ, are sinners against him, and
that in the highest degree; they are Christ-haters.

(2.) That it is of dismal consequence to be in the number of those who love
not, but hate Christ, (and not to love him, is to hate him, there is no medium
betwixt them) the consequence whereof is

(1.) That they wrong their souls. Injurius est animae suae. Pagn.
They are injurious to their souls; Expoliat an^mam suam. Mont.
They spoil and rob their souls; V^m addit animae suae. Jun.
They offer force and violence to their souls; Rapit an^ma^ suam. Merc. in
Lexic. Page and in loc.
They ravenously devour their souls, as the words are variously rendered by
Interpreters, but to the same purpose. Chamas significat apertam injuriam, and
violentia^. Merc.
The word signifies open injury and violence. But besides this,

(2.) They love death. Quia impudentes sibi exitium accersunt, dum me
negligunt, mortem amare vid^ntur, quia in exitium suum ruunt. Merc. in loc.
Because (as Mercer notes upon the place) they foolishly call destruction upon
themselves; Whiles they neglect me, they seem to love death, because they
violently rush upon their own ruin. Now, besides that destruction is the
portion of those who are enemies to Jesus Christ, these two things are
observable from this place.

(1.) That it is self-murder in all those who love not the Lord Jesus; it is
felo de se; their destruction is from themselves; they themselves lay violent
hands on their own souls.

(2.) That it is wilful self-murder. They do wilfully rush upon their
destruction, and will not be withheld from it, as if they were in love with
their own death, and ambitious of everlasting burnings, than which, what can
tend more to aggravate their sin and condemna^ion? And shall not this move you?
Well: I shall shut up this with that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha; which is a
denunciation of the heaviest curse against that man or woman, who in the midst
his profession does not sincerely and unfeignedly love the Lord Jesus. But this
being a place of some difficulty, it may not be amiss to spend a little time in
the opening of the words, and giving you the sense of them. August. Epist. 178.
(mihi) p. 921. Pinks Sermon upon this place. p. 3.
The words here used, which render the place difficult, are Anathema Maranatha;
the former of which is a Greek word, and signifies accursed, separated, devoted
to the Curse. It Is questioned whether Beza in loc. and Pet. Martyr. Eras.
Pareus. Ravanell. in verbo Maranatha.
Maranatha be one, or two, or three words: but most agree that it is of the
Syriack dialect, and signifies the Lord comes, or, our Lord comes. Now for
the better understanding of the place, you must know, that it is generally
conceived by the learned, that the Apostle in these expressions had a special
respect to the Jewish way of Excommunication, which we are therefore
necessarily to take into our consideration, for the better clearing of that
which lies before us. And here I find some difference about the several kinds
and degrees of the Jewish censures, and the enumeration of them. Deusius and
Buxtorph, as I find them cited by Forbes. in his Instruct. Histor. Theol. lib.
12. cap. 3. Sect. 14. Godwin. Jewish Antiq. lib. 5. cap. 2. Leighs Critic.
Sacr. in the word Maranatha.
Some make three kinds, which they reckon thus, Niddui, Cherem, Shammatha.
Niddui, which was the first and lowest, and signifies separation, was that
whereby the Offender was separated from al^ commerce and society with man or
woman, within the distance of four cubits, for the space of thirty days.
Cherem, which was the next, and signifies the same with Anathema, devoted t^
the Curse, was that whereby the Offender was i^ the public audience of the
whole Church excluded from its Communion, without any limitation of time, and
with Curses annexed out of the Law of Moses. Shammatha, which was the last, and
highest, and signifies (as some think) then is death; or rather (as others) the
Lord comes, was that whereby the excommunicated person (having besides all
other maledictions ou^ of the Law, this clause superadded, Our Lord comes) was
left as desperate and quite forlorn, (without all hope of pardon or
restitution) into the hands of the Lord, to receive from him an heavy doom at
his coming. This Goodwin ibid. p. 185.
Shammatha is by some conjectured to be of Enoch'^ constitution, and that in
the inflicting of it, Forbes. ibid. Sect. 16.
his own Prophecy was used, in the words of the Apostle Jude, v. 14. 15. Behold
the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon
all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches,
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. But Jacobus Capellus (as I find
him mentioned by a Forbes. ubi supra. Sect 14.
learned man) condemns this enumeration; and though he make three kinds, yet he
makes two of those forementioned to be but one, and adds another, reckoning
them thus, The first was called Nesipha, whereby the party was shut out from
the Camp seven days, as Miriam was, Numb. 12.14.15. The second Niddui, as
before. The third Cherem, or Shammatha, (for he makes them both one) was that,
whereby the Offender was driven from all communion, and all humane commerce,
and society interdicted him, as one cut off, till he repented. Itaque commodius
quoque videtur distribui excommunicatio in duas species, etc. Bez. in loc.
Grotius in loc. and in Luc. 6.22. Pinks Sermon. page 3. 4.
Others make but two kinds, and reckon the third only the highest degree of the
second, thus: The first, Niddui, the second, Cherem: Now to this Cherem, the
Apostles Anathema here does correspond; and of this there were two degrees, The
single and lesser Anathema, which is the same with Cherem; and the greater, the
extreme, Qui in eo damnatus esset, Domino quasi in manus citra ullam veniae
spem dederetur. Bez. in loc. Vide etiam Sclaterum in loc.
the compounded Anathema, which had Shammatha, according to the Jews, or
Maranatha, according to the Apostles phrase, added to it. This Grotius calls
Gravissimum Cherem; and Beza, with Calvin, take it to be the form, by which the
most grievous and extreme Excommunication was performed; the sense and
signification whereof was, (x) That he who was condemned by it, was given up
into the hands of the Lord without hope of pardon; and Eoque significatur
Dominu^ in adventu suo certo perditurum esse talem peccatore^. Ravanel. in
verbo Maranatha.
That the Lord at his coming would certainly destroy such a sinner. Now the
Apostle being to denounce judgment against those who love not the Lord Jesus,
makes choice of this way and form to express himself by, as the most grievous
and dreadful which he could find out: the meaning whereof is this, Let such a
one as loves not the Lord Jesus, not be barely accursed, but accursed as the
Jews curse the most obstinate Offenders in their greatest Excommunication, that
is, as Non sit ci Wil^s adventus ejus, qui jam completus est, and sic ad
damnationem sit ei secundus, qui adhuc futu^us est. Ansel. in loc.
Anselme interprets it, Let him have no benefit by his first coming, which is
past; and let his second coming, which is to come, be to his damnation; Or,
Pinks Ser. p. 5.
as another, Let him be accursed, and that in the most desperate manner,
expecting due vengeance from the Lord, when he comes with his holy millions to
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly, as it is,
Jude 14.15. So that as ever you would escape the Curse, and obtain the
Blessing; as ever you would have the appearing of Christ at the last day, to be
to your salvation, and not to your most fearful and intolerable condemnation,
it will concern you to look that you be found in the number of those who love
him in this day.

The third Reason.
Sect. 3.
(3.) COnsider how well he deserves your love, and that upon a double account.

(1.) Upon the account of his great loveliness. Of Christ's loveliness, as
described by the Church, in Cant. 5. See Owen of Communion with God. p. 78. to
87.
If you will not credit this without testimony, you have it both from Heaven
and Earth. From Heaven God the Father, from the excellent Glory, by a voice
declared concerning him, 2 Pet. 1.17. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, Morn. Exercise. Part 2. page 241.
He knew of whom he spoke, for he was his Son; and he does not say he was
pleased with him only, but well-pleased, that is delighted and satisfied. And
was he worthy of Gods love, and can you doubt whether he has deserved yours?
From Earth you have his Churches character and commendation of him, Cant. 5.16.
He is altogether lovely, Color, caput, comae, oculi, genae, labia, manus,
venture, crura, pes, guttur, omnia haec figurate describuntu^ in laud sponsi,
and quasi in clausula, and brevi capitulo totum concludens, totus (inquit)
desiderabilis. Gilbertus in loc. inter Bernard. opera
She had been from the tenth Verse describing him in all his lineaments, and
setting forth the perfections of every part, his head, hair, eyes, cheeks,
lips, hands, belly, legs, countenance and mouth, and in the cloze, sums up all
in this short, but full Encomium, That he is altogether lovely. Totus
desideria. Page Totus desideratissimus. Jun. Ainsworth Sibs Bowels opened. p.
373.
All, every whit of him, is desires, much to be desired, wholly amiable. As if
she had said, Why should I stand upon particulars? whatever I have said, or can
say of him, is infinitely short of his worth, and therefore I Will shut up all in
this, that he is altogether lovely; all over, from top to toe amiable, lovely
and delectable. And indeed so he is. If there be any thing unlovely in him, do
not love him: but because he has Omnes rations amabilitatis, he is maxim
diligibilis, as the Schoolmen speak; He is most to be beloved, because he has
all grounds of amiablen^ss in him. What is it which is most taking with you,
which is not in him?

(1.) Is it Beauty? He is white and ruddy, the chiefest (the Standard Bearer)
among ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. Fairer than the Children of Men, Psalm. 45.2.
Pulchritudinem Christi fuisse eximiam, and omnimodam, dubitare nesas est.
Rivet. in Psalm. 45. page 214. Fol.
Its a heinous and detestable thing to doubt of his excellent and perfect
beauty. He is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express Image of his
person, Heb. 1.3.

(2.) Is it Riches? He is proprietor and possessor of unsearchable riches,
according to the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.8. He is appointed Heir of all things, Heb.
1.2.

(3.) Is it Honor? God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above
every name, Phil. 2.9. higher than the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 89.27. King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, is the Name written on his Thigh and Vesture, Rev.
19.16. The Lord of Glory, as he is called in 1 Cor. 2.8. The King of Glory, as
David styles him Psalm. 24.7. that is, a most glorious Lord, and King, by an
usual Hebraisme.

(4.) Is it Power and Authority? All power (that is (...), and (...) belong
both to him, as those places intimate.
authority) is given to him in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28.18. he has a power,
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21.

(5.) Is it great Wisdom and Understanding? In him are hid all the treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2.3. He has not a little Wisdom, but treasures
of Wisdom; all the treasures of Wisdom.

(6.) Is it Goodness of disposition? He may be better than Titus Vespatian
called Deliciae generis humani, The delight and darling of mankind. How
earnestly does he invite and beseech poor sinners to come in to him that they
may be saved! Isa. 55.1. etc. Mat. 11.28. 2 Cor. 5.20. Vide Watsons Sermon of
Christ's loveliness, passim.
How patiently does he wait for their acceptance of his offers of grace? Rev.
3.10. even till his head be filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of
the night, Cant. 5.2. How readily does he embrace, and heartily welcome those
who come in to him, though they have been Prodigals, and stood out long against
his entreaties! Luke 15.20. etc. How sadly does he resent the delays and
denyals of obstinate sinners! with sorrow in his heart, Mark 3.5. with tears in
his eyes, Luke 19.41. and lamentable complaints in his mouth, Verse 42. Mat.
23.37. John 5.40. all which shows what a gracious disposition he is of.

(7.) Is it Sweetness of Conversation? That which was said of Saul and
Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.23. They were lovely in their lives, is much more true of
Christ. His life was purer than the Sunbeams, as Chrysostom speaks; his life
was a fair Copy without any blot; his lips never spoke a word amiss, Psa. 45.
Luke 4.22. John 7.46. his feet never did tread one step awry; he went about
doing good, Acts 10.38. his whole life was a pattern of good works.

(8.) Is it Usefulness to others? Herein he is most eminent. He is our Light.
The Sun of Righteousness, more useful than the Sun in the Firmament, Mal. 4.2.
He is our Life: our life of grace and comfort here springs from him, John 1.16.
Luke 2.25. and so does our life of glory hereafter, Col. 3.4. John 17.22, 24.
In a word, He is our All. Omnia ad salutem necessaria in omnibus fidelibus,
sanctificatis, and Christo copulatis. Dav. in Col. p. 306.
All that is necessary to salvation, in all the faithful that are sanctified
and united to him, Col. 3.11. Watsons Sermon on the Text. p. 420.
All good is eminently in him, and all good is conveyed derivatively from him.
He is made unto Believers a Paradise, a Tree of Life, a Jewel, a Crown, etc.
yea (...), etc. (...). Macar. Hom. 31. (mihi) p. 410.
All in all, as Macarius speaks. Even Christ crucified, (though to the blind
world the greatest stumbling block, and Rock of offense) yet to them who have
their senses rightly exercised to discern him, is most amiable. When he is to
the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, even then to them
who are called, both Jews and Greeks, it is Christ the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.23.24. which made the Apostle resolve to know, and to
glory in nothing but Christ crucified; the Cross of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.2. and
Gal. 6.14. The more bloody he was for us, the more lovely should he be to us:
because therein he showed most love to us. Sihs Bowels opened. p. 374.
By how much the more he was abased for us, this makes him the more lovely,
that out of love he would abase himself so low. When greatness and goodness
meet together, how goodly is it! And likewise, because from hence arises our
greatest benefit and advantage. Christ's Cross is our Crown, his Passion the
ground of our hope and expectation, his shame our glory, his pain our ease, his
curse our blessing, his stripes our healing, his confinement our liberty, his
condemnation our justification, his suffering our reigning, his death our life:
for his Cross was the atonement of Divine wrath, the condemnation of sin, ^^ux
Christi est clavis Pa^adisi. Damasc.
the opening of Heaven, which was shut against us. Well then: lay these things
together, and if it appear that Jesus Christ is thus lovely, there is no
question but he deserves to be loved by you, especially if you take in the
other consideration upon which he deserves your love; and that is

(2.) Upon the account of his love to your selves. It Is true, Tam bonus est,
and pulcher in se Deus, ut licet non amasset nos, nec benefecisset, nec
fecisset, amandus esset supra omnes ematores, benefactores, and conditores
nostros, imo etiamsi adisset nos, and malefecisset. N^irem. de Adorat. in Spir.
and Verit. p. 369.
that Christ's goodness and amiableness is such, as that it deserves our love,
though he had never loved us, nor done good to us; yea, after he has loved us,
Quia bonus est in se D us, plus debemus amare, quam quia nos amat, and
benefacit. Idem. p. 375.
we ought to love him more because he is good and amiable in himself, than
because he loves us, and is beneficial to us. But though the loveliness of
Christ be sufficient to deserve our love, and we can never love him at so high
a rate as his amiableness deserves, (for, Jenkins on Jude 4. Part 1. p. 152.
as one says, If every leaf and spire of grass, nay all the stars, sand,
atoms in the world were so many souls and Seraphims, whose love should double
in them every moment to eternity, yet could not their love be enough for the
loveliness of our God.) yet Christ, that he may not fail of catching our love,
casts out the bait of his own love, to allure ours to himself. He begins and
loves, that we may love him again, 1 John 4.19. Manton on Jude. p. 100.
As water is cast into a Pump, when the springs lie low, to bring up more
water, so Christ has shed, and poured out his love upon us, that our love
might rise up to him again by way of gratitude and recompense. God loves, that
he may be loved, (says Amat Deus, ut ametur cum amat, nihil aliud vu^t quam
amari, sciens, amore esse beatos, qui se amaverint. Aug Man. (mihi) p. 236.
Austin) and when he loves, he desires nothing but to be loved again, knowing
that those who love him, are happy in that love. I have already made out the
exceeding greatness of Christ's love toward us, in the undertaking and
accomplishing of our Redemption, the consideration whereof cannot, without
monstrous ingratitude, but engage us to love him again.

(1.) Can you think of Christ's Undertaking for us, and not love him? That he,
not like Jonah would be cast into the Sea to allay a storm raised for his own
sake, but, when our sins had raised a storm of Divine wrath, would be cast in
to allay it. When he saw the misery of Mankind, he said, Let it come on me.

(2.) Can you think of his Incarnation and not love him? That he should divest
himself of his Robes of Glory, and condescend to take upon him the Rag of our
flesh; That he, who was God, and Lord of all, should humble himself, and empty
himself, and make himself of no reputation, and be made in the likeness of man;
yea take upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.6.7.

(3.) Can you think of his Passion and not love him? Indeed his Incarnation was
a Passion, and his whole life as continued suffering: but I mean that which is
emphatically so called; that which he suffered at, or immediately before his
death, which who can think of, and not be all in a flame of love? Ambrose
Looking unto Jesus. p. 658.
That the Judge of all the World should be accused, judged and condemned; That
the eternal Son of God should be found struggling with his Fathers wrath; That
he who had said, I and my Father are one, should sweat drops of blood in his
Agony, and cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? as he did on the
Cross; That the Lord of Life should with unconceivable pains breath out his
soul, and dye on the Tree of shame and curse!

(4.) Can you think that all this should be for us, and not love him? That when
he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Manton on Jude. p. 109.
they were our griefs which he bore, and our sorrows which he carried, Isa.
53.3, 4. The very same griefs that we should have suffered, so far as his holy
person was capable of them; his desertion was equivalent to our loss, his
Agonies to to our Curse, and punishment of sense. We were the Malefactors, and
the Kings Son chose our Chains, and suffered in our stead.

(5.) Can you think that he suffered all this for us very willingly, and not
love him? When he had undertaken to be baptized with this baptism, he was
straightned till it was accomplished, Luke 12.50. He did with the like
indignation rebuke Peter dissuading from his Cross, as he did the Devil
tempting him to Idolatry; Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.23. compared with
Mat. 4.10. He was satisfied with all the travel of his soul, as it was the
means of our salvation, Isa. 53.11. as if he had said, Welcome Agonies, welcome
stripes and wounds, welcome Curse, welcome Cross, welcome Death, so that poor
souls be saved.

(6.) Can you think of his love in all this, and not love him? his infinite
love, far beyond his sufferings, and the outward expressions of it, as the
Windows of the Temple were more large and open within than without? Can you
think of it and not love him?

(7.) Can you think that all this was intended to constrain your love, and not
love him? He made himself so vile, that he might be the more dear, and precious
unto us; every one of his wounds is a mouth open to plead for your love.
Certainly if love brought Christ from Heaven to Earth, to the Cross, to the
Grave, it should carry our hearts to him in Heaven again, with ardent and
fervent love. O duri, and indu^ati, and obdurati filii Adam, quos non emollit
tanta benignitas, tanta fla^ma, tam ing^ns ardor amoris! Bern. Sermon. in Pent.
(mihi) p. 45.
And oh hard, and extremely hardened Sons of Adam, whom so great bounty, so
great a flame and heat of love does not mollify, and melt into love again!
Omnis equitas ditit, ut dilectus diligentem diligat; and amatus amanti mutuam
charitatem impendat. Bern. de Caena Dom. Ser. 13.
All equity dictates, that he who is beloved, should love him again by whom he
is beloved; and shall Christ only have love unjustly detained from him, after
he has loved us? Magnes amoris amor.
Love is the Loadstone of love; and were it not a shameful thing, that Christ's
love should lose its attractive power upon us, on whom it is most laid out? It
is not first love that is required of us, but only a reflection of his own love
back again; and Nimis durus est animus, qui amorem, si nolebat impendere, nolit
rependere. Aug. de Catech. rud. cap. 4.
there is too much of the stone in that man's heart, who if he will not begin
and lead, will not follow in this way of love, and repay love for love. Well,
for a cloze of this, I shall show you how the consideration of Christ's love
has warmed and affected others hearts, and leave it as a goad in your sides to
quicken your imitation. What should this, but make us call upon our souls to
the love of him who has thus loved us, as Austin did? O anima mea, insignita
Dei imagine, redempta Christi sanguine, desponsata fide, dotata spiritu, ornata
virtutibus, deputata cum Angelis! Dilige illum, a quo tantum dilecta es,
intend illi, qui intendit tibi, quaere quaerentem te, amae am itorem tui, a
quo amoris, cujus amore praeventa^s, qui est causa amor^s us. Aug. Man. (mihi)
p. 240.
O my soul, stamped with the Image of God, redeemed with the blood of Christ,
espoused by faith, endowed with the spirit, adorned with graces, committed to
the tuition of Angels! Love him by whom thou art so much beloved; mind him who
minds thee; seek him that seeks thee; love thy Love, by whom thou art
loved, who has prevented thee with his love, and is the cause of thy love. But
because we cannot so much as love him without his influence, let us go to him
as he does: O ignis qui semper ardes, and nunquam extingueris! O amor, qui
semper ferves, and nunqua^ tepescis, accende me! accendor totus a te, ut totus
diligam te, Minus eenim te amat, qui tecum aliquid amat, quod non propter te
amat. Diligam te, Domine, quoniam tu prior dilexisti me. Aug. Solil. p. 164.
O fire, which always burnest, and art never extinguished! O love, which art
always hot, and never coolest, kindle me; let me be wholly enflamed by thee,
that I may wholly love thee: for he loves thee too little, who loves any thing
with thee, which he does not love for thee. Lord, let me love, yea, with thine
help I will love thee, because thou have first loved me. Let Anselme conclude
this matter, who thus breaths after a loving Savior, Certe, Domine, quia
fecisti me, debeo amori tuo meipsum totum; quia me red^misti, debeo meipsum
totum; quia tantum promittis, debeo meipsum; imo tantum debeo amori tuo plus
quam m^ipsum, quantum tu es major me, pro quo dedisti teipsum, and cui
promittis teipsum. Fac (precor) Domine, me gustare per amorem quod gusto per
cognitionem, sentiam per affectum quod sentio per intellectum. Plus debeo quam
meipsum totum, sed nec plus habeo, nec hoc ipsum possum per me reddere totum.
Trahe me, Domine, in amorem tuum, and hoc ipsum totum. Totum quod sum, tuum est
condition; fac totum tuum dilectione. Ansel. Medit. de Genesis Hum. cap. 7.
(mihi) p. 269. 16. Inter opera. Tom. 3. (mihi) p. 199. Fol.
Surely, O Lord, because thou have made me, I owe my whole self to thy love;
because thou have redeemed me, I owe thee my whole self; because thou promisest
so much, I owe thee my whole self; yea, I owe to thy love as much more than my
self, as thou art greater than me, for whom thou have given thy self, and to
whom thou promisest thy self. Cause me, O Lord, I beseech thee, to taste that
by love, which I taste by knowledge; let me feel by affection, that which I
feel by understanding. I owe thee more than my whole self, but I neither have
more, nor can I give thee this wholly of my self. Lord draw me, and that wholly
into thy love. All that I am is thine, by condition, make me all thine by love
and affection. Thus he. -- And now lay these things together, His loveliness in
himself, his love toward you, surely it will strongly conclude that he
deserves your love, which should be a strong incentive to you to love him. Give
me leave to add one motive more, and I have done.

Sect. 4.
The fourth Reason.
(4.) ALL true believers, who have a saving knowledge of Christ, and experienced
his love toward themselves, do, and cannot but love him. The Church testifies
this, saying to him in her conference with him, Cant. 1.3, 4. The Virgins love
thee. The Upright love thee. The Virgins, that is, Ainsworth on the place.
those chosen, called, and faithful ones, who with chaste and pure minds serve
the Lord only, and worship him in spirit and truth, and stand with Christ on
Mount Sion, whom you find described, Rev. 14.3, 4. These love the Lord for the
odor of his good ointments, which they perceive by his Word and Spirit; they
love him because he first loved them, and has shed abroad his love in their
hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given to them. It is said of the Israelites,
Numb. 33.29. Trap on the place.
That they removed their Tent from Mithcah, which signifies Sweetness, to
Hashmonah, which signifies Swiftness, to teach us (says one) that the Saints
have no sooner tasted of Christ's sweetness, but they are carried after him with
incredible swiftness: For (as Amor Dei amorem animae parit, and came intendere
sibi facit. Aug. Man. p. 236.
Austin observes) The love of God does breed and bring forth the love of the
soul, and makes it to be intent upon himself. The Upright, that is, Ainsworth.
those who have upright hearts, and righteous conversations: These, upon the
remembrance of the love of Christ, manifested by his Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and the graces and benefits flowing from them to his
Church, do love him, that is, are confirmed and increased in love to him more
and more. Robotham on Cant. p. 80.
As fire is increased by adding of fuel unto it, so is our love to Christ, upon
fresh and new manifestations of his great love toward us. That the Church her
self did love Christ, is clear from the whole Book of Canticles, Watsons
Christ's loveliness. p. 435.
which is nothing else, but a Divine Epithalamium, or Marriage-Song, in which
are all the strains of holy love set forth in the purest Allegories and
Metaphors, such as do represent that dear affection and union which is betwixt
Christ and his Church. She calls him her Beloved, Cap. 2.3. nor did she love
him from the teeth outward, (as we say) but with a love fetched as deep as the
bottom of her heart: O thou whom my soul loves, says she, Cap. 1.7. Jeanes
Scholast. pract. Divin. Part 1. on Col. 1.19. p. 221.
The remembrance of his love to her, had such an impression upon her heart, as
to make her sick of love, Cant. 2.5 Sibs Bowels opened. p. 305.
A sickness not unto death, but unto life; a sickness that never ends, but in
comfort and satisfaction. It wrought in her a love of a most powerful and
unconquerable influence; a love as strong as death, Cant. 8.6. a love as
forcible and irresistible as death, trampling upon, and breaking through all
difficulties, that occur in performance of duties unto, or undergoing of
sufferings for Christ. A love inflamed into jealousy, and this jealousy as
cruel, or hard as the Grave, as it there follows, that is, as inexorable unto
all the enemies of Christ, unto her most profitable and pleasant sins, her
darling and most indulged lusts. A love of the same nature with fire: the
coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame. ibid. For

(1.) As Fire is the hottest of Elements, so her love of Christ was more
solidly intense, than her love of any creature whatsoever. She was, as it were
all of a fire with the love of him.

(2.) As the motion of fire is upwards, toward Heaven, so the Churches love of
Christ was as a fiery Chariot, whereby she was carried up into Heaven.

(3.) As fire burns all things combustible, so her love of Christ consumed all
her corruptions; and whereas elementary fire may be quenched, the love of
Christ is a celestial flame: Many Waters cannot quench it, neither can the
Floods drown it, v. 7. It could not be extinguished or abated by the calamities
which she underwent for his sake; And in the last place, It was so sincere and
incorrupt, as that it could not be bribed by any treasure. If a man would give
all the substance of his house for love, it would be contemned. The Apostle
Peter could appeal to Christ himself in the case, when he demanded of him the
third time, Joh. 21.17.
Simon Peter love thou me? Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee. The same Apostle witnesses concerning Believers, to whom he wrote,
that they did love the Lord Jesus, 1 Pet. 1.8. yea, though they had never seen
him. Multum est amare eum, quem de facie non noveris. Grot. in loc.
It is much to love one whom we never saw; and yet these loved Christ, whom
they never saw, from what they had heard of him by the preaching of the
Apostles, and from what they knew, and tasted of him by faith. Faith is not (as
Fides non est nuda, otiosa, and frigida notitia, sed inflammat cor ad amorem
Christi. Qui vere in Christum credant, eundem etiam diligunt. Gerh. in Petr. p.
78.
Gerhard notes on that place) a naked, idle, cold knowledge, but inflames the
heart with the love of Christ; they who truly believe in Christ, do also love
him. That Woman who is (...), called a sinner, Luke 7.37. whatever her name
was, (for it was not Mary Magdalen, though she be so called in the Contents of
that Chapter in our Bibles, as a learned D^spaigne Shibboleth. p. 11. etc.
Frenchman observes) She (I say) having experienced the great love of Christ,
in forgiving her many sins, did love him again; yea, she loved much, v. 47
(...). Ignat. Epist. ad Romans p. 89.
Ignatius, who saw Christ in the flesh, being about twelve years old when he
was Crucified, thus wrote to the Romans, Believe me that I love Jesus, who gave
himself for me; and a little before, in the same Epistle, he writes, (...).
ibid. p. 88.
My Love is crucified, making Christ the only object of his love. They were the
dying words of Melch. Adam. Vit. Ger. Theol. p. 154.
Luther, I bless thee, heavenly Father, that thou have revealed Jesus Christ
unto me, whom I have believed, whom I have professed, whom I have loved, whom I
have glorified. Wards Sermons 8. p. 15. Walls. None but Christ p. 64.
Mr. Welsh, a Suffolk Minister, being in a deep muse, after some discourse that
had passed of Christ, and tears trickling abundantly from his eyes before he
was aware, being urged for the cause thereof, confessed ingenuously, It was
because he could not draw his dull heart to prize Christ aright, nor to love
him enough. And it was a high expression of devout Herbert in his Poems, Herb
Poems p. 40.
Ah! my dear God! though I am clean forgot,
Let me not love thee, if I love thee not.


Nor is this to be wondered at: for his love constrains them; and truly Amat non
immerito, qui est ama^us sine merito; amat sine fine, quia sine principio se
cognoscit amatum. Bern. Epist. 107.
he loves deservedly, who was loved without desert; he may well love without
end, who knows himself to have been beloved without beginning, as the Father
speaks. Wall. None but Christ. p. 64.
Indeed our cold love of Christ would be almost as great a wonder as his great
love to us, and might make us justly fear that we never savingly knew him.

I hope by this time you are sufficiently convinced of the reasonableness of
knowing Christ so as to love him, which methinks should make every one of you
breath after Christ and his love, in the language of the Seraphical Doctor:
Ei^, dulcissime Jesu, transfige saluberrimo vulnere amoris tui medullas animae
meae, ut vere ardeat, langueat, and liquefiat, and solo desiderio tuo deficiat.
Bonaven. Solilo. cap. 2.
Well, sweetest Jesus, strike through the inmost parts of my soul with the most
wholesome wound of thy love, that it may truly burn, and be sick of love; and
melt and faint with desire of thee only. Thus much by way of motive to persuade
your love.

CHAP. VII.
(2. Direction how Jesus Christ is to be loved.
) WOuld you have a Guide for your love? I shall in some few particulars direct
you how you should love the Lord Jesus.

Sect. 1.
(1. The first general Direction respects the quality of it, grounded on Ephesians.
6.24.
) LOok that your love be such for quality, as the Apostle makes the character
of true love to Christ, which has the blessing entailed upon it, Ephesians. 6.24.
Grace be with all them that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity: so it is in the
Text of our Bibles, and in the Margin, With incorruption. In the Greek it is
(...), which because it has been variously interpreted, I shall first open the
words, and then deduce what I intend from them. Optat incorruptibilitatem, id
est, immortalitatem, and coeleste^ gloriam in vita^ aeterna. Pisc. in loc.
Piscator takes this as a distinct blessing, which the Apostle prays for on
the behalf of these Ephesians. He had before prayed for Peace, Love, with Faith
and Grace; and here (says he) he wishes for them incorruptibility, that is,
immortality, and heavenly glory in the life eternal. Ad immortalitatem, vel cum
immortalitate, vita videlicet aeterna, and meta ejus gratiae qua^ pro fidelibus
precatur. Bez.
Beza renders it Ad immortalitatem, or Cum immortalitate, To, or with
immortality, and refers it to Grace in the beginning of the Verse, as if the
meaning were, Grace be with them that love the Lord Jesus, unto immortality,
that is, eternal life, which is the end of that grace, which he begs for
Believers. To this sense is the Syriack Version by Temellius. Gratia quae non
corrumpitur. Trem.
Grace which is not corrupted. And Sic maneant in gratia, quod non decidant ab
ea, sed perveniant ad gloriam, quae est gratia consummata. Lyr. in loc.
Lyra's note agrees hereunto, who says the Apostle here prays, That they may
so abide in grace, as not to fall from it, but to reach unto glory, which is
grace consummate and made perfect. Incorruptibilem hanc gratiam oppo^o ego
An^themati illi aeterno, quod Paulus alibi denuncial adversus eos qui non
diligunt Dominum nostrum J^sum Christum. Rolloc. in loc.
Rolloc understands it in this sense, opposing this incorruptible grace to that
eternal curse, which the same Apostle denounces in another place, (of which I
have spoken before) against those who love not the Lord Jesus. Some understand
this (...), for that which is in our own Translation, In sincerity. Thus (...),
quod alias verti salet immortalitas, hic sonat integritatem, ac sinceritatem
animi, vacantis omni corruptela vitiorum. Eras. in loc.
Erasmus, whose note is, That though this word is wont to be elsewhere rightly
rendered Immortality, yet here it signifies integrity, and sincerity of a heart
free from all sinful corruption. Subindicare voluit Paulus, tunc demum omni
corruptela fore vacuum cor hominis, si omni hypocrisi caret. Calv.
Calvin follows this sense, and says, that the Apostle uses this word, to
signify, that then is the heart of man void of corruption, when it is without
hypocrisy. Several Videsis, Vorstium, Bodium, Baldvinu^, and Hemingiu^ in loc.
others follow this sense, but I pass them over. Some understand the words
according to the sense of the Margin, with incorruption, that is, with
constancy and continuance. Thus the Greek Scholiast (as I find mentioned by
Bodius) expounds it, of a perpetual and incorruptible love, which fails not,
nor is diminished, but grows, and is increased day by day, till it come to the
highest pitch of perfection. And thus Significatur is, qui nulla vi, nullis
precibus, nullis illecebris se corrumpi, id est, a recto abduci patitur. Talis
animi status hic dicitur (...), potestque hoc (...) verti constanter. Grot. in
loc.
Grotius, who says it may well be rendered Constantly, and that such a one is
signified by it, as will not suffer himself to be corrupted, nor drawn away
from that which is right by any force, entreaties, or allurements whatsoever.
Intelligo de constantia and sinceritate. Aret. in loc.
Others I find, who take in both these latter Interpretations, and understand
it both of sincerity and constancy too. Believers (says a Fergusson on the
place.
late Writer) are here described from this, that they love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, or incorruption, that is, not for a time only, but constantly; not
in hypocrisy, or show only, but sincerely and really. And truly, there is such
a near, and necessary conjunction betwixt these two, that they cannot well be
separated, (for that which is sincere, will be constant, and that which is
constant, is sincere) especially seeing the word signifies both; and therefore
hence I would direct you (as ever you would obtain that grace, favor, and all
good, which in this Apostolical benediction is annexed unto it) that you look
your love to Christ be for the quality of it sincere and steadfast, pure and
permanent, without reservation, and without recidivation.

Sect. 2.
The first Branch of the first Direction, That it be sincere.
(1.) LOok that your love to Christ be a sincere love: for that may be one sense
of the word, So it is in our Translation.
as I showed you before.

Quest. But how shall I know that my love to Christ is sincere?

Answ. I shall not handle the case at large: yet I shall give you some
characters of such a love, which may give you some light in this matter; and
for those who desire further satisfaction, I shall refer them to the Reynolds
on Psa. 110. p. 59. etc. Pinks Trial of Christians love to Christ, the three
last Sermons especially. Morn. Exercise. Part 2. Sermon. 9. p. 218.
Authors quoted in the Margin, where they may find the case more fully and
largely resolved. The Characters which I shall give, are these,

4 Characters of sincere love to Christ.
(1.) Sincere love of Christ is spiritual in its principle and constitution. It
is not founded in Nature, but Grace, and springs not from custom, education,
formal profession, external communion, or an historical faith: but it is begun
in a deep sense of our infinite wants and miseries without Christ, The first
character, It is Spiritual.
together with his suitableness, sufficiency, and readiness to relieve and
rescue us; and it is carried on, and further strengthened and increased by
evidence of our propriety and interest in him. Unfeigned love is the daughter
of unfeigned faith: Now this faith, as it believes what Christ is in himself,
abundantly able and willing to answer all the necessities of the soul, works a
love of desire after him; and as it applies, and brings home all this with some
clearness and evidence to the soul, so it works a love of complacency. This is
the first Character, and of great concernment: for if ever you would make good
your love to Christ, you must make good the ground and principle of it.

(2.) Sincere love is Cordial in the exercise of it. 1. It is with the heart.
The second Character. It is Cordial.
O thou whom my soul loves, says the Spouse, Cant. 1.7. Quem ex animo diligo.
Mercer. in loc.
Whom I love with my very soul. Ainsworth.
It notes the unfeignedness and fervency of her love. Sincere love is not
complemental, but cordial; it stands not in outward expression, but intimate
affection. When Christ wooes for your love, he bids you give him your heart,
Prove. 23.26. and says as Jehu did to Jonadab, 2 Kings 10.15. Is thine heart
right, as my heart is with thine heart? if this be wanting, he values not all
your good words, but will say as Delilah did to Sampson, Judge. 16.15. How can
thou say I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? 2. It is also with the
whole heart. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy mind, says our Savior, Mat. 22.37. There is no
love befitting God but such a love. He loves a broken, but cannot endure a
divided heart; he will have all or none. We should love Christ infinitely, and
because we cannot, we must love him unfeignedly, which we do not, unless we
love him with our hearts without halting, and with our whole hearts without
halving. Dr. Preston of Love. p. 155.
The Lord will have the whole stream of your affection, desires, intentions and
endeavors to run to him; there must not a rivulet run out of it; it must not
be drained away, but the whole stream must be all bestowed upon himself; there
must be no division there, but he must have all; and there is good reason for
it: for he has loved us with his whole heart, and his whole soul, Jer. 32.41.
Christ then must be the Center of all the affections of your whole heart, if
you would love him sincerely, as you ought to do.

The third Character. It is Chaste.
(3.) Sincere love is chaste love. The love of a soul to Christ is of the nature
of Conjugal love, which when it is chaste has these properties. 1. That it is
a Personal love; a love of the Person more than his portion. Meretricius amor
est plus annulum, qua^ sponsum amare.
It is the love of a Harlot, to love the Ring more than the Husband. Our love
of Christ must be a personal love; we must love him, more than his. He indeed
(says Amat profecto cast, qui ipsum quem amat, quaerit, non aliud quicquam
ipsius. Bern. Ser. 7. in Cant. p. 138.
Bernard) loves chastely, who seeks him whom he loves, not any other thing
which he has. Its adulterate love, to love the privileges and blessings of
Christ above himself; and (as Greenham p. 516.
one of our own speaks) If we love not Christ more than his benefits, we are
not worthy of him. A Christian does, and may lawfully love the Ordinances,
Privileges, Graces and Benefits which come by Christ, but yet he loves Christ's
person more than these, and above all these: so that if there were not any of
these in hand, or in hope, yet would he look upon Christ as altogether lovely,
and love him without these. Nobilis amator non quiescit in dono, sed in me
super omne donum. Thom. A ^emp. de Imit. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 6. (mihi) p. 153.
That is the noble lover, who rests not in any gift received from Christ, but
rests in Christ above every gift: so the devout A Kempis brings in Christ
speaking to the soul. 2. That it is a love of the Person, considered in the
utmost extent of that relation of a Husband; that is, not only as a Cherisher
and Preserver, but also as a Head, Guide and Lord. Thus a Christians sincere
love to Christ, respects, and is carried out to whole Christ; not only as Jesus
to Save, but also as Lord to Rule. It looks at Christ as Mediator, and loves
him in all the offices of his Mediatorship; not only as Isa. 55.4. Ephesians. 5.23.
Col. 2.6.
Witness, but also as Leader and Commander; not only as Savior of his Body,
but also as Head of his Church; not only as Priest, to satisfy and intercede,
but also as Prophet, to teach, lead and guide; and as King, to Rule, govern,
and exercise dominion. As the Heart must not be divided, which is the principle
of our love: so Christ must not be divided, who is the object of our love. As
we must love with the whole heart, so we must love a whole Christ, or not at
all. Take it for a clear truth, (says one) That if thou love not Christ as
thy Sovereign Lord; Morn. Exercise. Part 2. p. 229.
if thy heart be not knit to him, as thy High Priest with God; if thou have not
affectionately entertained him as thy Master and Teacher; in a word, if thou
art not consecrated unto God by Christ; if thou art not a loyal Subject, and a
willing Disciple, love in sincerity does not dwell in thee. 3. That it is an
unshared, and incommunicable love. When a Woman is married to an Husband, if
she love him sincerely, as she ought, he has no Corrivals in her affection,
but she gives him her whole love, and does not divide it betwixt him and
others; her heart is set upon him more, than all the World besides: so it is
with a Christian who truly loves Christ: He has none in Heaven but Christ, and
there is none on Earth that he desires besides him, Psalm. 73.25. His Motto is
that of the Lambert
Martyr, None but Christ, None but Christ. As Christ is all in all to him, so
he is all in all his affections for Christ. Reynolds on Psalm. 110. p. 74. The
fourth character, It is Real.
As the rising of the Sun drowneth all those innumerable Stars which shined in
the Firmament before, so the beauty of this Sun of Righteousness does blot out,
or else gather together unto it self all those scattered affections of the
soul, which were before cast away upon meaner objects. This is chaste love, and
the third Character of that which is sincere.

(4.) Sincere love is real love, not not in word and in tongue only, but in
deed and in truth. If that be required in our love to Christians, as it is 1
John 3.18. surely it must not be omitted in our love to Christ. Our Savior
himself makes this the proof of our love. If you love me, keep my Commandments,
John. 14.15. And again, He, that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it
is that loves me, v. 21. And again, If a man love me, he will keep my words,
v. 23. So John 15.14. You are my friends if you do whatsoever I command you.
You see then, That exhibition of works is the probation of love, as the
Probatio dilectionis est exhibitio operis. Bern. in Coen. Dom. Ser. 8.
Father speaks. Its in vain for men to talk of loving Christ, if they do not
walk after him, in a free, cheerful, universal, and constant obedience to his
Commandments. Leighs Crit. Sacr. in the word (...).
Some derive the Greek word for love, (...), from (...), because love is always
operative. As Fire is the most active Element, so Love is the most working
Grace. Indeed Amor, si non operatur, non est. Greg.
Love, if it be not operative, is not at all. Qui praecepta Dei contemnit, Deum
non diligit; neque enim regem diligimus, si odi^ ejus leges habemus. Isid.
He does not love God, who contemns his Precepts; as we love not a King, when
we hate his Laws. Vide Hardy on John. Part 2. p. 472. 473.
We cannot approve the sincerity of our love, but by the reality of our
obedience. He who loves Christ (says Qui diligit Christum, probat, and
sectatur ea, quae Christo grata esse novit, atque odit and fugit quae Christo
minime placere novit. Contra vero ubi non est Praeceptorum Christi observatio,
ibi non est vera dilectio, quamvis multa sit de dilectione gloriatio, etc.
Gerh. Har. (mihi) p. 925.
Gerhard) does approve, and follow those things which he knows to be acceptable
unto Christ; and does hate, and avoid such things as he knows will by no means
please him. On the other side, where there is not an observance of Christ's
Precepts, there is no true love of Christ, though there may be much boasting of
it. Deeds speak more strongly than words: If a Wife should boast that she loves
her Husband, and in the mean time oppose him in all things, she will never be
able to persuade her Husband, nor any others, that she truly loves him: So
those who boast that they love this heavenly Husband, the Lord Jesus, and in
the mean time trample his Commandments under their feet, do but deceive
themselves. The true and noble love of Jesus, (as a Amor Jesu nobilis ad magna
operanda impellit, and ad desideranda semper perfectiora excitat. Amor onus non
sentit, labores non reputat, plus affectat quam valet. Amor onus sine onere
portat, and omne amarum dulce, ac sapidum efficit. A Kemp. de Imit. Christi.
lib. 3. cap. 5. (mihi) p. 149. 150.
devout man speaks) does enforce to the doing of great things, and does excite
to the desire of more perfect things. Love feels no burden, reckons not of
labors, and affects more than it can do. It bears a burden without burden, and
makes every bitter thing sweet and savoury. True love of Christ is real and
operative, not only full of affection to him, but also of action for him,
expressed in obedience to his Commandments. These are the Characters of sincere
love; and it will concern you to look that your love be thus sincere.

Sect. 3.
The second Branch of the first Direction, That it be steadfast and constant.
(2.) LOok that your love to Christ be a steadfast and constant love: for that
may be another sense of the So it is in the Margin of your Bibles: With
incorruption.
word, as was showed before. Roberts Evidences. p. 21. Two Characters of
constant love. The first is, That it be Inviolable.
True love of Christ is a long-lasting, yea an everlasting affection; it will
not waste, putrify, worm-eat or decay: but is incorruptible. Now there are two
things which go to the making up of this steadfast, constant love.

(1.) It must be Inviolable, such as will not be corrupted. Man has more
Suitors for his love than one. Christ sues for it, and Satan sues for it, and
neither will be satisfied without it: only with this difference, that Christ
will have all or none; but Satan will be content with a part: if he cannot get
the whole, he is willing to have it divided: for thereby he knows he shall have
all at last, because Christ will not be put off with a piece of the heart, nor
accept of half our love. Now as Christ sues by the Word, so Satan sues by the
World: but when once Christ has gained the love of a man's heart in good
earnest to himself, not all the baits which Satan lays for him, nor all the
fair promises which he makes to him from the Worlds Trinity, 1 John 2.16.
Ambitiosus honos, and opes, and foeda voluptas; Haec tria pro Trino Numine
Mundus habet.
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride, the pleasures,
profits, preferments of this life, can bribe or corrupt him in his love to
Christ, but he remains inviolable against all these. Now he can say, having
loved him, and tasted of his sweetness, unto all other temptations and
allurements from the creature, Frustra blanditiae venitis ad me; They are no
more to him than they are to a dead man: for such a one is he to the World, and
all the flattering, enticing blandishments of it, as Paul said he was, Quia
nihil ad mortuum pertineat. Calv. in loc.
Gal. 6.14. I am crucified to the World. This is one Branch of the character of
true love to Christ, as it is set down, Cant. 8.7. If a man would give all the
substance of his House for love, it would be utterly contemned: which though
Ainsworth interpret to the sense, That neither Love, nor any other Grace can be
purchased by money, yet ordinarily it is interpreted to such a sense, as will
serve the end I bring it for, viz. That the soul which is truly affected to
Jesus Christ, will not be persuaded out of it by any thing which this World can
afford. Thus Mercer: Opibus non ducitur, aut quaestu Ecclesia, ut a Christi
amore discedat, cum omnia sua propter Christum parata sit relinquere. Merc. in
loc.
The Church is not drawn by riches or gain to depart from the love of Christ,
seeing she is ready to leave all she has for Christ. To the same purpose one
of our own: Jac^so^ in loc.
If a man, though the wealthiest man in the World, should proffer a Christian
all his wealth, to hire him to abandon his love and loyalty to Christ, he would
look upon it with scorn and indignation, with contempt and detestation. A true
Believer will part with all he has for Christ's sake: but he will not part with
Christ for all the World. Such a one was Luther, who could not be tempted by
all the fair promises which the Romanists made him of Honor and Wealth, to
abate of his zeal and affection for Christ and his Truth, but answered all
their temptations with this noble resolution, Contemptus est Romanus furor and
favo^. Melch. Adam. in vita Lutheri. p. 114.
The fury and favor of the Romish Party is by me alike contemned. So that when
one asked, Why they did not stop his mouth with Silver or Gold, another
answered, Hem^ Germana haec Bestia non curat Aurum. ibid. p. 158.
Alas! this German Beast cares not for Gold. Such a one was the noble Marquess
of Vico, who having left his Country, Relations and Estate, for Christ's sake
and Religion, and having withstood several temptations to return, was at last
assaulted by a subtle and importunate Jesuit, who, among other things, made
him fair offers of money, if he would return home: but he resolutely repelled
this Temptation in these words, Crashaw's gracious life of Gal. Carao. p. 211.
Let their money perish with them, who esteem all the Gold in the World worth
one days society with Jesus Christ. And such a love as this must we have to
Christ, if we would be constant to him.

The second is, That it is Invincible.
(2.) It must be Invincible, such as cannot be conquered. As Christ has
threatenings to enforce our love, as well as promises to entice it, from the
Word; so has Satan from the World, to keep, or call off our hearts from
Christ. He has a frowning, as well as a smiling World; threats as well as
promises, force as well as flattery; and where he prevails not by the one, he
will make use of the other: but now where a soul is fully bent and fixed in
love to Christ, it will Genesis 49.24.
abide in strength against this as well as the other, by the hands of the
mighty God of Jacob. This love in the heart of a Christian is a fire, that has
a most vehement flame, which many waters cannot quench, nor the floods drown,
as it is expressed Cant. 8.6, 7. Where, Anisworth, Jackson, Robo^ham, in loc.
by Waters and Floods, (according to a usual Metaphor in Scripture, 2 Samuel
22.17. Psalm. 32.6. Psalm. 42.7.) are meant many and sore afflictions,
persecutions, troubles and temptations; and so that which is intended, is, That
no threatenings, afflictions and persecutions can beat off the Spouse from the
love of Christ. The love of Christ, wherewith the Saints are inflamed, is such
as cannot be quenched with any calamities or persecutions whatsoever. Thus
Mercer takes it: Persecutiones possumus ^ccipere, and adversatorum terrorem,
and minas; ne hae quidem amorem Ecclesiae in Christum extiguere possint; minus
bland t^ae, illecebrae. Merc. in loc.
By Waters and Floods (says he) we may understand Persecutions, and the
terror and threats of Adversaries; even these cannot quench the love of the
Church to Christ: how much less can flatteries and allurements do it? To this
purpose is that of the Apostle, Romans 8.35. ad fin. What shall separate us from
the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril, or Sword? etc. -- I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
thingt to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. I know
these words are generally taken by Grot. Vorst Calv. Bez. Eras. Pareus. Pisc.
Expositors for that love with which the Lord loves us: yet some of the
Ambros. Ansel. Theoph.
Ancients take them for that love which we have toward him; And Nec inepta,
nec impia est sententia. Pet. Mart. in loc.
Peter Martyr (though he follow it not) says, it is no ill, or unfit sense. I
think Deodat does well, who takes in both senses: What grief or calamity can
make us doubt that Christ has withdrawn his love from us, and make us cease
loving him? So he, and the Commentators forementioned on that place in the
Canticles, do make this Scripture parallel with that. And it is a great truth,
that as none of these things can make Christ cease loving those whom he has
once loved: so neither can they make a Christian cease loving of Christ, whose
heart is sincerely pitched upon him in a way of love. It is every ones duty.
Qui non est paratus omnia pati, and ad voluntate^ stare dilecti, non est dignus
amato^ appellari. Opo^tet amantem omnia dura, and amara propter dilectu^ lib
n^er amplecti, nec ob contraria accid^ntia ab eo deflecti. A Kempis de Imit.
Christi. lib. 3. cap. 5. p. 152.
He who is not ready to suffer all things, and to stand to the will of his
beloved, is not worthy to bear the name of a lover. It becomes him who loves,
to embrace willingly all hard and bitter things for his sake whom he loves; nor
for all contrary occurrences to be turned aside from him; And it is the
property of every upright Christian. This has been verified in the whole noble
Army of Martyrs, in all Ages, who have with the strongest resolution, and most
invincible stedfastness, entertained all the threats and torments of their
enemies, rather than deny Christ, or be separated from his love. Upon this
account they have been tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection. Others had trial of cruel mockings and
scourgings; yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were
sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the Sword; they wandered about in
sheepskins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented, as you
have it, Heb. 11.35, 36, 37. Thus the Nec retardali estis ab a^itormentorum
metused ipsis tormentis magis estis ad aciem provocati, sorts and stabiles ad
maximi certaminis praelium prompta devotione prodistis. Cypr. Epist. 9.
Father speaks of the Martyrs and Confessors in his time, as good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ, That they were not retarded from the battle by fear of torments,
but were more provoked to the battle by those very torments, coming forth
strong and steadfast, with ready devotion to that battle which had the greatest
conflict. Ita animati, ut incorruptam fidei firmit^tem non blanditiae
decipiant, non minae terreant, non cruciatus ac tormenta devincant. Nec plus ad
dejiciendum potest terrena poena, quam ad erigendum tutela diviua.
Nor did flatteries deceive, nor threats terrify, nor pains and torments
overcome the incorrupt firmness of their faith, (which wrought by love, as true
faith does, Gal. 5.6.) Nor was any earthly punishment more able to cast them
down, than Divine protection was to raise them up. Tolerastis usque ad
consummationem gloriae durissimam quaestionem, nec cessistis suppliciis, sed
vobis potius supplicia cesserunt. Idem ibid. Steterunt torti torquentibus
fortiores; and pulsantes ac laniantes ungulas pulsata ac laniata membra
vicerunt. Inexpugnabilem fidem superare non potuit diu saeviens plaga repetita,
quamvis rupta compage vis^crum torquerentur in servis Dei jam non membra, sed
vulnera. Idem ibid.
They endured the most grievous Inquisition to the consummation of their glory;
nor did they yield unto punishments, but punishments rather yielded unto them:
And a little after, The tormented stood stronger than their tormentors; their
beaten and torn members overcame those instruments of cruelty wherewith they
were beaten and torn. Cruel stripes, of long continuance, and often renewed,
could not overcome their impregnable faith; no, not though their very bowels
were dug out, and not so much the members, as the wounds of the servants of
God were tormented. In another place having written to some Martyrs, they
return him an answer, wherein, among other things they tell him, Hosts
veritatis non tantum non perho^rescimus, sed provocamus; and inimicos Dei jam
hoc ipso, quod non c^ssimus, vicimus. Epist. 26. inter Cypr. Epist.
Now we are not only not afraid of the enemies of the Truth, but we provoke
them; and in this very thing, that we yield not to the enemies of God, we
overcame them. And a little before they tell him, That it was the Trumpet of
the Gospel which animated them to this combat. And among other places, these
are two there mentioned which gave them great encouragement, He that loves
Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10.37. and that
forecited, Romans 8.35, etc. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? etc.
It was their love to Christ which made them invincible in all their sufferings
for Christ; and this was an evidence of the truth and rightness of it, that it
was steadfast and invincible. I might give you innumerable instances of this: as
many Martyrs so many instances: I shall content my self with naming two or
three. Ignatius, whose heart was enflamed with love to Christ, (as I hinted
before) kept this fire in, amidst the waters and floods of Persecution which he
met with. Hear what he says whiles he was a Prisoner, a little before his
suffering; (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Roman. Edit. Usser. (mihi) p. 86.
Now I begin to be a Disciple I care for neither things visible nor invisible,
so that I may but obtain Jesus Christ. Let fire, cross, concourse of wild
Beasts, the cutting, separating and breaking of my bones, the dissipation of my
members, the destruction of my whole body, and the torments of the Devil; let
all come upon me, only that I may obtain Jesus Christ. Clarks Lives. 4. Vol. 1.
p. 7. 8.
Polycarpus being urged by the Proconsul to blaspheme Christ, with promise of
his liberty, returned this excellent answer, Four score and six years have I
served Christ, neither has he ever offended me in any thing; and how can I
then revile my King that has thus kept me? Being threatened with wild Beasts
unless he would repent, he answered, Bring them forth, for I have determined
with my self not to repent, and turn from the better to the worse. When Idem.
p. 145.
Chrysostom had received a threatening message from Eudoxia the Empress, he
returned this answer, Go tell her, Nil nisi peccatum timeo, I fear nothing but
sin. If the Queen will, let her banish me: The Earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof. If she will, let her saw me asunder: Isaiah suffered the same;
if she will, let her cast me into the Sea, I will remember Jonah; if she will,
let her cast me into a burning fiery Furnace, or among wild Beasts: the three
young men, and Daniel were so dealt with; if she will, let her stone me, or cut
off my head, I have Stephen and the Baptist my blessed companions; if she will,
let her take away all my substance: Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, and
naked shall I return thither again. Thus he. I shall add but the example of
Moses, who is an instance of this steadfast love in both parts of it, as you
find, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26, 27. When he was come to years, he refused to be
called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter; the pleasures of sin, and the treasures of
Egypt. Here was inviolable love. He chose affliction with the People of God;
esteemed the reproach of Christ above the Worlds wealth; feared not the wrath
of the King. Here was invincible love. This is to love Christ aright; and if
you would love him as you ought, you must learn thus to love him; To love him
(as that Disce, O Christian, quemadmodum diligas Christum, disce amare
dulciter, ne illecti; prudenter, ne decepti; fortiter, ne oppressi ab amore
Domini avertamus. Bern. in Cant. Ser. 20 p. 148.
Father directs) sweetly, lest being enticed; wisely, lest being deceived; and
strongly, lest being oppressed you be turned aside from your love of the Lord.
Sit fortis, and constans amor tuus, nec cedens terroribus, nec succumbens
laboribus. ibid.
Let your love therefore (as he goes on) be strong and steadfast; neither giving
way to terrors, nor sinking under labors. Non abduci blanditiis, nec seduci
fallaciis, nec injuriis frangi; (...) cord, toto animo, tota virtu^e delige^e
est. ibid.
Not to be drawn away with flatteries, nor seduced with fallacies, nor broken
and overcome with injuries: this is to love him with all the heart, with all
the mind, and with all the strength. Thus love the Lord Jesus sincerely and
steadfastly, which is all the direction I shall give you for the quality of your
love. I now proceed to another Direction.

CHAP. VIII.
(2.) LOok that your love to Christ be, The second general direction respects
the measure of our love.
Modus diligendi Deum est sine modo diligere. B^rn. de d^l. Dec. (mihi) p. 295.
for the measure of it, without measure. There can be no excess in loving
Christ, as there may be in loving other things; the Woman in the Gospel loved
much, Luke 7.47. but not too much. As his love to us was a transcendent love,
so must ours be to him, it must transcend our love to all other things in the
World. We are to love him ( says a Reyn. of the Pass. page 82.
learned Man) above all things.

(1.) Appretiative, setting an higher price upon his Glory and Command, than
upon any other thing besides.

(2.) Intensive, with the greatest force and intention of our spirit, setting
no bounds, or measure, to our love of him.

(3.) Adaequate, as the complete, perfect, and adequate object of all our love,
in whom it must begi^, and in whom it must end. Christ must be loved ( says
the Reyn. on Psalm. 110. page 74.
same Author in another place) with a principal, and superlative love,
grounded on the experience of the soul in it self, that there is ten thousand
times more beauty, and amiablenesse in him, than in all the honors, pleasures,
profits, satisfactions, which the world can afford: that in comparison, or
competiti^n with him, the dearest things of this World; the Parents of our
Body, the Children of our Flesh, the Wife of our Bosom, the Blood of our
Veins, the Heart in our Breast, must not only be laid down, and lost as
sacrifices, but hated as snares, when they draw us away from him. Preston of
Love page 162.
Indeed we do not love him as God, but as a Creature, if we do not love him
above all: to say we love him as God, and yet, not to love him above all, is a
contradiction. Nay we love him not at all, if we love him not above all. For
(as Pinks Trial of Love page 33.
one observes) so much only do we love Christ, as we love him more than we love
any thing else besides, though never so lovely.

(1.) Because we have infinitely more reason to love him, than it is possible
we should have to love any thing else, and therefore it is not to be accounted
love unto him, if we can afford as much and more to something else.

(2.) Because, if we love but one thing better than we do him that one thing
may force us to despite, forsake, and betray him, as accursedly, as if we
preferred an hundrd things before him; yea he that resolvedly prefers but one
thing before his Communion with Christ, will quickly be entreated by his own
heart to prefer more.

Sect. 1.
IF you would have these things more particularized, our Savior has done it
in Luke 14.26.33. From whence I have sufficient ground to call upon you to love
Jesus Christ, as Walls. none but Christ page 62.
I find Bernard professed himself to do, Plusquam tua, plusquam tuos, plusquam
te.

(1.) Love Jesus Christ plusquam tua, more than all your enjoyments of estate,
riches, wealth, Christ is to be loved above our enjoyments.
houses, lands, and whatever you have in this World: for so says our Savior,
Luke 14.33. Whosoever he be that forsakes not all he has, he cannot be my
disciple. It was a true acknowledgement of Austin, Minus te amat, qui tecum
aliquid amat, quod propter te non amat, Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 29. See
Reyn. Vanity of the Creature.
That he loves God too little, who loves any thing besides him, which he does
not love for him. There is so much unsuitablenesse in the things of the World,
which are terrene and temporal, to the nature of a man's soul, which is
spiritual and immortal; so much insufficiency to supply his necessities, and
satisfy his desires; nay, so much, not only of vanity, but also of vexation,
in the getting, keeping, increasing, using, reviewing, and disposing of these
things, that it is a wonder any rational creature should be transported with
any irregular, and in ordinate affection toward them, especially seeing by the
vote of Scripture such have not the love of God in them, 1 John 2.15. But what
madness is it for men to prefer these things in their affections before Jesus
Christ? Is it not enough that we may have the World for our use, and use it
when we have it; but we must dote upon it, and delight in it, and love it above
the Lord himself? which yet too many do, but to their prejudice; for, as the
forementioned Father speaks, Non est in eo fundamentum Christus, cui talia (
viz. terrena, and temporalia) praeponuntur. Aug. de civ. Dei lib. 21 cap. 26.
(mihi) page 656.
Christ is not the foundation in that Soul, where these earthly and temporal
things are preferred before him. It cuts off their interest in Christ, and
their title to Heaven, and Happiness How much rather should we choose to love
a living Christ than a dead creature, a full and sufficient Christ, than a
vain, empty creature, an abiding Christ than a perishing creature, a s^tisfying
Christ than a deceiving creature, a contenting Christ than a vexatious
creature? yea, it is our wisdom, and happiness to love Christ so much more
than all creature comforts, by how much he is more worthy to be beloved; being
more amiable in himself, and more advantageous to those who love him, than they
are, or can be. Love Christ therefore above all you have of this World, so as
to reserve the chi^f^st room in your hearts for him, whilst these things are
in your hands, and (...) they come in competition with Christ to thr^w them
o^^, as intoll^rable burdens, and trampl^ them under foot as dross and dung.
Th^s is to love Christ aright, thus have the ^^ri^^^ l^^e^ him. His Disciples
forsook all to follow him, Mat. 19 27. Thou know, Lord, (said (...). Cl^rks
English M^^ty^ol. p. 146. To the l^ke pu^pose spoke another Martyr Steph^^
Knight. p. 132.
one o^ the Martyrs in Queen Mary's time in his last prayer) That if we would
but seem to please men in things contrary to thy Word, we might enjoy the
commodities of life, as others do, but seeing the world will not suffer me to
enjoy them, except I (...) against thy holy Laws, behold, I ^ave here all the
pleasures of this life, for the hopes sake of eternal life purchased by
Christ's bl od, and promised to all them, that fight on his side. Thus must we
love him, if we would be his disciples, for this (as was said before out of
that place in Luke chap. 14. 33.) is one of the terms of Discipleship: nor need
we be afraid to venture thus far for his sake, who has given us such
encouragement, as he has done, by telling us, Mat. 19.29. That whosoever has
forsaken houses, or lands, etc. for his Names sake, shall receive an hundred
fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Christ will see that his people shall
be no l^sers in what they pure with upon his account, for what they venture of
the things of this World shall be m^de up in himself, in the blessings of his
Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Amiserum omnia (...) habeb^^^: nunquid fidem?
nunquid p^etatem? nunquid interioris h^mini^ bo^^, qui est a^^^ Deum d^^es? Hae
su^t op^s christianorum, and (...) Aug de civ. Dei lib. 1 cap. 10. (mihi) page
21.
Austin spends a chapter to show, that Christians are no losers, in parting
with the things of the world for Christ's sake, Because they have spiritual
riches, which they cannot lose, their Faith, and Godliness, and the goods of
the Inner-man, whereby they are rich toward God, and which are a Christians
truest and best riches; and because they have laid up for themselves treasures
in Heaven, according to our Saviors counsel in Mat. 6.20. whither none of
their enemies can come to take them away. This made Paulinus the famous Bishop
of No^a, pray thus unto God (as the Father there reports concerning him) when
the City was wasted by the Goths, and himself taken prisoner; Domine, non
excrucier propter aurum, and argentum, ubi enim sint omnia mea, tu scis, ib.
page 22.
O Lord, suffer me not to be troubled for gold or silver; for thou know,
where all my riches are laid up. This made the believing Jews before him,
endure joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing within themselves, that
they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance, as the Apostle has it,
Heb. 10.34. And this should make us willing to do the same, when called to it;
Optanda nimirum est jactura, quae lucro majore pe^satur.
Such loss of earthly things for Christ being desirable, which is recompensed
with greater gain in Spiritual and Heavenly things. I shall shut up this, with
that of a Devout Man. Oportet dilectum pro dilecto relinquere, quia Jesus vult
solus super omnia amari. Dilectio creaturae fallax and instabilis, dilectio
Jesu fidelis and perseverabilis. Qui adhaeret creaturae, cadet cum labili, qui
amplectitur Jesum firmabitur in aevum. Illum dilige, and amicum tibi retine,
qui omnibus recedentibus, te non relinquet, nec patietur in fine perire. A.
Kemp, de imit. Christi lib. 2. cap. 7. p. 111.
It becoms us to leave that which we love, for him whom we love; because Jesus
Christ will be alone loved above all things. The love of the creature is
deceitful and unstable, the love of Jesus is faithful and persevering: he
that adhereth to the creature will find it slide from him, and shall fall with
it, but he that imbraceth Jesus shall be established for ever. Love him
therefore and retain him for thy friend, who when all things shall give thee
the slip, will not leave thee, nor suffer thee to perish in the conclusion.
Love him above all the things of the World, which are in thy possession, for
(as the same Author has it a little after) Dilectus tuus talis est naturae, ut
alienum non velit admittere; sed solus vult cor tuum habere, and tanquam Rex in
proprio Throno sedere. Idem ibid.
Thy beloved is of such a nature, that he will not admit a stranger, but will
have thy heart alone for himself, and sit there as King in his own Throne,

Sect. 2.
Above our Relations
(2.) LOve Jesus Christ Plusquam tuos, More than all your Relations, though
never so near and dear to you. Hear what our Savior says, Luke 14.26: If any
man come to me, and hate not Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and
Brethren, and Sisters, he cannot be my Disciple.

Object.
But perhaps this may sound harsh in the ears of some, who may be ready to
retort: What hate Father and Mother, etc. This is a hard saying, who can bear
it?

I shall therefore speak something for the opening, and clearing of this
Scripture, Answer.
that no Stumbling blocks may from thence lie in the way to discourage any Man
from following Christ.

Know therefore (1. How this is to be understood.
) It cannot be understood, as if Christ would hereby extinguish natural
affections in his Followers toward their Relations, forbidding our love to
them, and requiring our hatred of them: No, no; 1. Love to our Relations is
implanted by himself in every one by nature. 2. It is not only allowed, but
required by his commandment in Scripture, Exodus 20.12. 3. It was in himself,
and expressed by him to his dying hour, for then, out of filial affection did
he commend his Virgin Mother to the care of his beloved Disciple, John 19.27.
By which example (as the Bellarmin de Sept. verb. dom. lib. 1. c. 11. p. 89.
Alex. Roberts. Sacred Septenary. p. 73. Smith on the Creed p. 230. Gerh.
Harmon. de pass. p. 187.
Learned observe) Christ would teach us what affection and care we owe to our
Relations according to the flesh. Far be it from us therefore to imagine,
that our Savior would have us turn Barbarians, when we became Christians, or
that he would have us cast off all natural affection when we come unto him.
This is not his meaning. But,

Secondly, Christ's end and design is, to regulate, and keep within due bounds,
our love to our earthly relations, and raise our affection to himself to its
due pitch, and height. He would have us to love Father and Mother, etc. But yet
so as to reserve a singular, and sovereigne affection for himself; not to
suffer our love to them to exceed, or drown our love to Him. Love them we may,
but not more than himself, so it is expressed Mat. 10.37. Quiamat supra me.
Beza in loc.
and so * Beza expounds it here. Certum est voc^m hanc improprie sumi, nam
parents odisse impium est, semetipsu^ (...). Grot. Simplicissima interpretatio
est, quae (...) exponit minus amare quendam.
It is certain (says Grotius) that this word is to be taken improperly, for it
is a wicked thing to hate ones Parents, and impossible to hate ones self,
Ephesians. 5.29. And therefore he expounds this hating by less loving. Thus
Deodate takes it, and thus (they both observe) the word (to hate) is sometimes
taken in Scripture, see Genesis 29.31, 33. Deuteronomy. 21, 15.16. Thus Glassius takes
it: Odiss^, post ponere, and minus^ curare, seu prae al o chario^i negligere,
significat. Glassius Gram. sacr. p. 582. Rhet. sacr. p. 10 56. Vide Vorst.
Philolog. sacr. cap. 5. page 149, 150.
To hate (says he) Signifies to put behind, and less to care for one, or to
neglect in comparison of another who is more dear, and more highly esteemed.

So that this phrase, 1. Is not to be understood in a strict but in a moderate
sense. To hate is not to love; and this, 2. Not absolutely, but comparatively:
not to love them in comparison of Christ, not to love them so much a^ Him, or
more than Him. To set them behind Him, and to care for them less than Him, and
to neglect them in comparison of Him, who ought to be more dear to them. 3.
This to be understood upon occasion of their standing in competition with Him.
Si nos a Christo sequendo impediat nostrorum amor, fortiter resistendum est.
Calv. in loc.
If the love of our relations hinder us from following of Christ, it is
strongly to be resisted, as Calvin observes. And so Glassius, Odisse igitur
parents, and alia, religionis and pietatis causa, est, non ita diligere ut
Christum and ejus doctrinam, sed eos post habere, ita ut, vocatione divina
serente, deserantur, si in Christi servitio remoras insicere veli^t. Glass. ubi
supra. Qui tamen illos non odit, sed facit quod plerunque ex odio fieri solet,
quia illos relinquit, Christumque sequitur. Idem, ibidem.
To hate our Parents and other things, in the cause of Religion, and
Godliness, is not to love them so as we love Christ and his Gospel, but to set
them behind, so as to leave them (Gods call allowing of it) if they prove
Remora 's to us in the service of Christ. Yet (as he adds) such an one does
not properly hate, but does that, which is wont to be done out of hatred,
because he leaves them and follows Christ. And then, as it is observed Pinks
trial page 6.
by one, 4. The hatred here required, is not be understood so much in reference
to their persons, as to those favors, and contentments, which we may receive
from them. When we are driven to that pinch, that we must either lose Christ,
or the good looks, good words, and good deeds of those, whom we account our
best friends, we should so hate, that is, by a Hebraisme, neglect or disesteem
whatsoever comforts or favors we could expect from them, that, without any
long pause or deliberation, we may be content to let them go, and be glad we
are so rid of them, that we may stick close unto Christ. So that to shut up
this in the words of a learned man Hic verus se^sas inde resultat, Christum
Jesum a suis Christianis sic diligi deber^, ut illa dilectio non tantum
dilectionem parentum, conjugis, liberoru, and qua^umvis Christianorum, long
superet, sed etiam si parent^s, co^^ux, vel liberi, vel etiam quivis alii, nos
in aliquibus a Christi doctrina, vel sequela, avocare vellent, ut eos non
tantum nonaudiamus, sed ab iis nos segregemus, and propterea odio ipsos
prosequamur. Chem. Lyser. Har. in loc.
This is the true sense that results from the words, That Jesus Christ ought so
to be loved by Christians, that this love must not only far surpass the love
of Parents, Wife, Children, and other Christians; but also, if Parents, Wife,
or Childrens, or any others, would in any things call us off from the Doctine
of Christ, and following of him, that we not only hear them not, but separate
our selves from them, and upon that account, and in that sense, hate them. Thus
must we love Christ, if we would be his Disciples, that is, prefer Him before
all our relations in our thoughts, esteem, and affection, even those who are
nearest to us, and dearliest loved by us, so as that when it comes to this,
that we cannot enjoy both, to leave them, and cleave unto Christ, to undervalue
any advantages which we may have by them in comparison of those which come by
Christ, and to be hardened against all their tears, entreaties, and offers,
which tend to the keeping or drawing us from His service. Thus have the Saints
loved Him. Hierom deserves to lead the way, in the instances which shall be
produced, for that noble resolution recorded of him in these words: Clarks
lives, part 1. p. 132.
If my Father stood weeping on his knees before me, and my Mother hanging on my
neck behind me, and all my Brethren, Sisters, Children, and Kinsfolk, howling
on every side to retain me in a sinful life, I would fling my Mother to the
ground, run over my Father, despise all my Kindred, and tread them under my
feet, that I might run to Christ. When Clarks ^n. ^rtyrol. ^g. 93, 94
Saturus a nobleman in Africa was threatened by Genserick, that if he would not
turn Arian, he should forfeit his house, and goods, that his Children should be
sold, and his Wife given to the Camel-driver; his Wife hearing of her doom,
went to him with her garments rent, her hair disheveled, her Children at her
heels, and a sucking infant in her hands, whom casting at her Husbands feet,
she said to him, Have compassion of me thy poor Wife, and of these thy
Children; look upon them, let them not be made slaves; let not me be yoked to a
base marriage; that which thou art required to do, thou do it not willingly,
but by constraint, and therefore it will not be laid to thy charge. But he gave
her answer in the words of Job, Thou speak like a foolish Woman; Thou actest
the Devils part; If thou lovedst thy Husband, thou would never seek to draw
him to sin, which will prove the second death. I am resolved therefore, as my
Lord commands me, to forsake Wife, Children, Lands, House, etc. that I may be
his Disciple. Thus Idem. p. 249.
George Carpenter, a Bavarian Martyr, said to one that came to him in prison,
and bad him recant his errors, that he might return to his Wife and Children,
My Wife and my Children are so dear to me, that they cannot be bought from me
with all the riches, and possessions of the Duke of Bavaria, but for the love
of my Lord God I willingly forsake them all. Thus Masons Acts of the Church p.
332.
Richard Woodman, an English Martyr, being persuaded by the Bishop of
Chichester to look to his Wife and Children, answered, God knows how dearly I
love my Wife and Children in him, but they are in Gods hands, and I have them,
as if I had them not, but regard the pleasing of God more than all other
things. Clarks English Martyrol. p. 211.
A poor woman in Cornwall ( another Martyr in Q Mary's time) being bid by the
Bishop to remember her Husband and Children, answered, I have them, and I have
them not, whilst I was at liberty I enjoyed them, but now standing here as I
do in the cause of Christ, and his truth, where I must forsake Christ, or my
Husband, I am content to stick to Christ only, my heavenly Spouse, and to
renounce the other. Many other such Testimonies might be produced, but I shall
close with that of one Wards Life of faith in death, among his Sermons p. 162.
Kilian a Dutch Schoolmaster, who, to such as asked whether he loved not his
Wife and Children, answered, Yes: If all the world were gold, and were mine to
dispose of, I would give it to live with them, but yet my soul and Christ are
dearer to me than all. And thus must we love Christ, if we would love Him
aright, when we are called to it, as they were. I shall conclude this branch
with that notable saying of the same Author who ended the former. Flige^dis est
magis totum muadum habere contrariu^, quam J^su^ oss^^sum. (...) o^^^bus C^^^^^
^^is, s^^ fes^s solus dilectus specialis: Diligantur omnes propter Jesum, J^^^s
a^^^em propter seipsum. Solus Jesus Christus est singulariter a^^^lus, qui
solus bonus, and fidelis prae omnibus invenitur amicis, A. Hemp. de Imit.
Christi. lib. 2. cap. 8. page 114.
It is more eligible to have the whole world against us, than to have Jesus
Christ offended; and therefore among all that are dear unto you, let him alone
be your beloved in a special manner; Let all others be loved for his sake, but
he for his own sake. Jesus Christ alone is singularly to be loved, who alone is
found good, and faithful above all other friends.

Sect. 3.
(3) LOve Jesus Christ plusquam te, More than thy self, than thy own life.
Above our own lives.
This is one of the things, which our Savior requires us to hate, if we would
be his Disciples indeed, in the place forementioned, Luke 14.26. If any man
come to me, and hate not ( besides Father and Mother, etc. as before) even his
own life, he cannot be my Disciple. The meaning whereof is this, When we cannot
preserve our life, without being treacherous to Christ, renouncing our
profession of him, and quitting our affection, and service to him, we must so
far hate our own lives, as to part with them freely upon the hardest terms,
rather than forsake him. Every Christian is bound to love his neighbor as
himself, Mat. 22.39. That is, Mant. on James p. 262.
pursue his good with the same heart, and in the same way that he would do his
own; But he must love his Savior more than himself. Its true, Caryll on Job
Vol. 1. p. 240.
that life is a man's most precious treasure, and the most excellent thing in
nature, which every one loves so dearly, and prizeth so highly, as that Nihil
quicquam est carius, pensiusque nobis, quam rosmet ipsi. Anl. Gel. Noct. Attic.
lib. 12. cap. 5. (mihi) p. 269.
nothing is more dear and precious; therefore will a man part with any thing,
with all things, for the preservation of it. 'Twas a great truth, though the
Father of lies spoke it, Job 2.4. Skin for Skin, yea all that a man has will
he give f^r his life; And yet this precious life, ( so it is called Prove. 6.26)
must be neglected, under valued, and parted with as a sacrifice, when called
for on Christ's behalf. When a Christian is driven to this straight, that life
and sin, or death and Christ lie before him, and one cannot be avoided; death
with Christ is to be chosen, and preferred, and life with sin against Christ is
to be refused with abhorrency. This is Christ's demand, and expectation from his
followers, nor is there any unreasonableness in it, if we consider, (1) That we
owe our lives to Christ, who laid down his life for us, Caryll on Job Vol. 1.
p. 244.
John 10.15. He did not only spend himself in all to his life, but spent life
and all, that we might not perish: though he were the Prince of life, Acts
3.15. yet he became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, that we
might live, Phil. 2.8. And this he did merely out of his great love to us, Ephesians.
5.2. Now, if the Lord Jesus did so love us, as to give his life a ransom for
ours, Mat. 20.28. He may well expect, that we should not stumble at parting
with our lives when he has need of them, and may get himself glory by our
death. Wards ubi supra p. 144.
My Savior began to me in a bitter cup, and shall I not pledge him? said Mr.
Saunders, when he was at the Stake, and ready to be offered. 2. It is the
truest self-love for a man to hate himself for Christ, as he has told us,
John 12.25. He that loves his Life shall lose it, but that hates his life in
this World, shall keep it unto life eternal.

He that loves his Life] that is, with an excessive and preposterous love (for
so the word is here to be understood, as (...) de amare nimio et praepostero
hic usurpatur Gerh. Har. p. 127.
Gerhard notes) He that so loves his life, as that from a desire and endeavor
of keeping it, he denies me and my Gospel.

He shall lose it] He shall not only not keep it, but destroy it. (...), which
signifies not to lose, but destroy, to bring unto utter destruction; for that
is the force of the word here, and in other places, as the Perdere hic non
significat amittere, aut facere ^i charae jacturam, sed exitio tradere, Calv.
in loc. Vis hujus verbi i^ transitiva significatione usurpati est in extremum
exitium adducere, Ger. Har. p. 128.
Learned observe. The meaning is, That his study to preserve his temporal life
upon these terms does expose him to eternal death and destruction; for it is
to be taken in opposition to eternal life in the close of the verse.

But he that hates his life] Non simpliciter vita odio habenda sit (quae
merito censetur inter summa Dei beneficia) sed quia eam libenter objicere
debent fideles, quum eos a Christi accessu remoratur, Calv. in loc. Hoc
comparative est dictum, quia spernenda sit vita, quoties nobis impedimento est
ne deo vivamus, Idem ibid.
Not simply ( for so it is to be reckoned among the chiefest of earthly
blessings, to be highly prized and carefully preserved) but in reference to
Christ and his Gospel ( out of love to whom, life it self is to be
undervalued, neglected, and cast away, if it hinder us from living to God, and
be a Remora in our way to Christ) Now he that thus hates his life, and will
freely part with it, when called thereunto, for Christ's sake (for it is not to
be understood, Vide Tolet. and Calv. in loc.
as if a man might desperately destroy himself, and put an end to his life upon
every slight occasion) such a one shall keep it unto life eternal.] Though it
may seem, in the eyes of vain and foolish men, a throwing away of their life;
yet it is the safest, and wisest way of preserving it. It is not Jactura, but
Mercatura. Their parting with a temporal life in this World shall be
abundantly recompensed, with the gain of eternal life. And it is observable,
what variety of words are used by the Evangelists in this matter, which
probably might be for the help of our Faith in so difficult a case as this is.

(...) Shall keep it.
; Says this Evangelist here. Though it be a real parting with it in one
sense, viz. temporally; yel it is as real a keeping of it in another, and
better sense, viz. eternally.

(...) Shall find it.
; So another has it, Mat. 10.39. Though it be lost, it is not utterly lost;
lost at is as to this World, but it shall befound again in the World that is to
come; the Glory and happiness whereof will make sufficient amends for what
they leave and lose here.

(...) Shall save it.
; So a third has it, Mark 8.35. Though they lose the Cabinet, they save the
Jewel; they lose the life of the Body, b^^ save the life of the Soul, which is
far better.

(...) Shall preserve it
; So it is Luke 17.33. A Word, that is but once more used in the New Testament,
and that is Acts 7.19. which has respect to Pharaohs command to cast the
Israelitish males into the River as soon as they were born, Exodus 1.22. (...),
to the end they might not live. Verbum significat soetum vivum parere Chemn
Lyser. Har. in loc. Vivum animal producere. Scap.
The word signifies to bring forth a living creature. Beza renders it by
Vivificabit, and makes it the same with (...), Shall quicken it. Our
Translation renders it, Shall preserve it. Christ does hereby very fitly
express the frailty of our present life ( as Conci^^e expri^it Christus
praesentis vitae fragilitatem, quum dicit animas (...) (hoc est, generari in
vitam) ubi perditae fuerint, peri^^e est ac si homines negaret in terra vivere,
quia verae demum and solidae vitae initium est renunciare mundo. Calv. in loc.
Calvin notes) when he makes use of this word, and it is as if he should deny
men to to live upon the earth, because then do men begin to live a true and
solid life, when they leave the World. The meaning of the word (which surely is
very emphaticall) seems to be this. Whosoever shall lose his life now, shall
bring it forth alive again in Eternity. The loss of life for Christ is but a
misterious Midwifery toward eternal life. And it may be upon this account the
Passion-dayes of the Martyrs were called by the Ancients, Natalitia Salutis,
The Birth days of Salvation. We shall not end our lives in the fire ( said
Clarks en^^ M^^. p. 176.
Mr. Julines Palmer the Martyr) but only change them for a better life, yea
for coals we shall receive pearls. Thus does Christ bring meat out of the
eater, and out of the strong sweetness to his beloved, and loving ones, making
death it self to be a womb of life to those, who lay down their lives for him.
So that it is our greatest gain to lose for Christ, and our greatest
befriending of our selves to be enemies to our own lives upon the account of
his Name, and Gospel. For (as Quicquid impietate conservaveris, ^oc certiss^me
amittis, quicquid autem pictate amiseris, hoc cert^ssime coaservas, Brent. Hom.
20. in Luc. 17. page 383.
one notes) Whatsoever thou keep by impiety, thou most certainly losest; but
that which thou losest in the way of Godliness, thou most certainly preservest.
3. All that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, do love him above themselves, and
their own lives. Thus the Apostle Paul in his Farewell Sermon to the Church of
Ephesus. Acts 20.22, 23, 24. And now behold I go bound in the Spirit to
Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there, Save that the
holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide
me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear, unto my
self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the Ministry, which I have
received of the Lord Jesus. Neither count I my life dear unto my self, Tantum
abest vincula metuam, ne mo^tem quidem defugio. Hebraeis praetiosam habere
vitam dicitur, qui ei parcit, 2 Reg 1.13, 14. contra nullo pretio babere qui
no^ parcit, Ezec. 36.5 Grot. in loc.
I am so far from fearing bonds, that I avoid not death it self. There is an
Hebraism in the words, for according to that dialect he is said to count his
life dear, who spares it; and he counts is not dear, who does not spare it, as
Grotius observes. Turpe est caeco vivendi amore sic nos teneri, ut propter
vitam perdamus vivendi causas. Neque enim simpliciter vita^ na^ pro ^ihilo
ducit, sed ejus respectum obliviscitur ut cursum suum absol^at, and ministerium
suum complete, quod a Christo accepit, Calv. i^ loc.
Nor does he simply make nothing of his life, but only forgets his respect of
it, in reference to the honor and service of Jesus Christ in the Ministry of
the Gospel, and the finishing his own course with joy; and indeed it is a base
thing for a man to be so in love with life, as for it to lose the ends of his
being; it was otherwise with our Apostle, who counted not his very life dear to
himself. Again in the very next chapter, Acts 21.13. when Agabus had foretold
the danger, that would attend him upon his going to Jerusalem, and friends
dissuaded him from going thither, he answered, What mean you to weep, and break
my heart; I am ready, not only to be bound, but to die also at Jerusalem, for
the Name of the Lord Jesus: Ecce vere strenuus miles, ardens amat^r, sor^ts
pagnator, imp^rterritus prae^a, quem nihil seperare potest a charitate D^i,
quae est in Christo Jesu Domino nostro, Lorin in loc. e Carthus.
behold a truly stout soldier an ardent Lover, a valiant Champion, an
undoubted Preacher, whom nothing can separate from the love of God, which. is in
Christ Jesus our Lord Suo responso declarat Paulus, non nisi mortis contemptu
p^^^^os fore Chr sti servos ad praestandum efficium, nec probe unquam animate^
^ore ad vivendum Domino, nisi qui vitam suam pro testimonio ver^tatis libenter
deponat Calv. in loc.
By which answer Paul declares, that the servants of Christ will never be ready
to perform their duty, but by the contempt of death; nor will they ever be well
animated to live unto the Lord, unless they will freely lay down their life
for the testimony of the Truth. Thus it is said of the faithful ones, in Rev.
12.11. That they loved not their lives to the death, that is, Mede in loc.
They valued their life at nothing, or spent it freely for Christ, as Mr. Mede
expounds it. Brightman in loc.
They loved not their lives unto the death more than God, or they neglected or
contemned them, that is, in respect of the Truth, as Mr. Brightman has it.
(...) for (...). Dr. T^o. Tailor in loc. page 618.
They slighted, despised their lives, and rather exposed them to hazard and
loss, than to be removed from their holy profession. as Dr. Tailor notes.
Semetipsos parvi duxerunt pro Christo etiam instantemortis periculo, Grot.
They set themselves at a low rate for Christ, even when they were in present
danger of death, so Grotius. Non dilexerunt vitam suam magis quam mortem pro
Christi gloria oppetendam, Par. in loc.
They loved not their life more than suffering death for the Glory of Christ,
so Pareus. The meaning is, They loved not their lives so far as to avoid
death for Christ's sake; but freely ventured, and laid down their lives, and
suffered death it self, in witnessing to the Truth of the Gospel, and
professing the Name of Christ; Thus have the Martyrs in all ages loved Christ,
who have offered up their lives, as a sacrifice for Christ, not only with
patient submission, but also with earnest desire, yea, with steadfast resolution
to offer them up all, though they had never so many.

A Noble Gentleman in the persecution of the Church of Christ in the Valtoline
( Clarks Genesis Martyr. p. 327.
as my Author reports) being threatened with death, unless he would abjure his
Faith, answered, God for bid, that to save this temporal life, I should deny
my Lord Jesus Christ, who with his precious blood upon the Cross redeemed me
at so dear a rate; and having so long freely and publicly professed him,
should now hazard the loss of eternal life, to which I was elected before the
foundation of the World, I say, God forbid; whereupon they murdered him.
(...). Ign. Epist. ad Romans Edict Usser. (mihi) p. 86.
Oh that I were with the wild beasts which are prepared for me ( said
Ignatius) I would allure them to make a quick dispatch of me, and if they would
not, I would provoke them. Sulpitius Severus, in his History, writing
concerning the persecution in the time of Diocletian and Maximinian, has this
observation of the Christians readiness to suffer death for Christ's sake:
Certatim gloriosa in certamina ^uebatur, multoque avidius tum Martyria
gloriosis mortibus quaerebantur, quam nunc Episcopatus pravis ambitionibus
appetuntur. Sulpit. Ser. Hist. sacr. lib. 2. p. 385.
They rushed (says he) with strife and emulation into those glorious
conflicts, and much more greedily were Martyrdoms sough^^y glorious deaths,
than Bishoprics now are coveted with corrupt ambitions. And Georgius
Memorabilis Eusebii locus, quem quisque Christianus scire debet; Quo tempore
(de hac persecutione loquitur) mirandam supra modum, alacritatem, vimque revera
divinam, and singularem: animi propensionem eorum, qui in Christum crediderunt,
intuebamur Simulatque enim sententia contra priores pronuntiata fuit, alii
aliunde ad tribunal judicis prosilierunt, seque Christianos confiteri,
acerbitates, and multiplicia tormenta pro nihilo ducere, absque metu, and
terrore, pro religione loqui, cum gaudio denique risu, and laetitia postremam
mortis sententiam excipere, (...). Horn. Comment. in Sulpit. Sev. loc. supra
dictum.
Hornius in his Commentary upon this Author, and this place, produces a
Testimony out of Eusebius concerning the Martyrs courage under this same
Persecution, which I have translated and inserted here: for he says every
Christian ought to know it, and it is very suitable to the point in hand We
beheld ( says the Historian) the exceeding wonderful, and truly divine
power, and singular readiness of mind, that was in those, who believed in
Christ. For as soon as Sentence was pronounced against some that went before,
others from another place leapt out before the judgment seat and confessed
themselves Christians, making no reckoning of their severities and manifold
torments, but did speak for Religion without fear or terror: yea, received the
last Sentence of death with joy, laughter, and gladness, in so much as they
sang, and sent up Hymns, and Thanksgivings unto the God of all, even to their
last breath. In the persecutions of latter times, there was the like
resolution, courage, and constancy in those who suffered. Wards life of Faith
in death, page 158. and page 160.
If I had ten heads ( said Henry Voes) they should all off for Christ; God
forbid that I should rejoice in any thing save in the Cross of Christ. Wards
life of Faith in death, page 158. and page 160.
It is a small matter (said another) to die once for Christ, if it might be, I
could wish I might die a thousand deaths for him. Masons Acts of the Church,
page 274.
If every hair of my head were a man, I would suffer death in the faith I am
in, said John Ardly, a Martyr in Queen Mary's days; Thus has the love of
Saints toward Christ been strong as death, and so must ours, if we would love
him aright.

Sect. 4.
I Have been larger here, then was at first intended, and yet, before I leave
it, I must crave leave to answer a double Objection.

Object. 1. If this be so, that we must love Christ above our lives, if we
would be his Disciples indeed, then it seems there are none true Saints, but
such as are also Martyrs.

Answer. It is so; See Pinks Trial, page 44, 45, etc.
but then you must thus distinguish; There is Actual and Habitual Martyrdom 1.
Actual, then life is really laid down, for the sake of Christ, and his Gospel.
Such Martyrs have those been, who, in all ages, and generations have sealed the
Truth with their blood, and stood unto their profession of Christ, even to the
suffering of death from the hands of violent and bloody men. 2. Habitual, when
there is Praeparatio animi, a Readiness of mind to lay down our life for
Christ, whenever he shall call for it. When there is faith enough to
encourage, and love enough to constrain us to be Martyrs, if the honor of our
Profession should require it. Such a one was Paul, who was ready to die at
Jerusalem, for the Name of Christ, as you have heard before. Now there are none
true Saints, who are not Habitual Martyrs at least, and Actual too, when they
are called unto it. They do not love Christ, as they ought, who do not love him
a ove their lives, so as actually to lay them down for his sake, when he does
call for them, and to be habitually disposed so to do, if he should call for
them.

Indeed Christ does not always put his followers upon such an expense, as to lay
down their lives for him, he does not always call them to be Actual Martyrs,
b^t yet it will concern every one, who professes the Name of Christ, to look,
that he have always this habitual preparation of mind; (1.) Because these are
the terms of Christianity at all times, even in the most calm, and serene
estate of the Church; in which, if a Christian find not his heart disposed, to
lay himself, and all that is near and dear to him, even his life at the feet of
Christ, to serve his interest, and promote his Glory; he has reason to
question the truth of his profession; (2.) Because those things, which have
come from the mouth of Christ to this purpose, in the Gospel, have not come
from him as Counsels of Perfection, which concern only some particular persons,
who aim at an higher degree of Glory in the world to come, than others have (as
the Papists would bear us in hand) but as Precepts of Necessity, which concern
every one; as if you look into the chapter so often mentioned Luke 14. Those
words ver. 26.33. were spoken to the great multitudes, which followed Christ,
as appears from ver. 25. and they run generally without exception. (...). If
any man, ver. 26. and (...). Every one of you, ver. 33. Nor do Those
forementioned. p. 60
the grounds and reasons, of loving Christ above all, concern some only, or
some above others, but all equally and indifferently, and therefore there is no
color of pretense to think that some only are obliged by it. (3.) Because
times and the state of things quickly change and alter, nor does the Church
ever enjoy such a calm, but a terrible storm may arise unexpectedly, and quite
dash it away, and therefore there is no man, though born in the most peaceable
time of the Gospel, but, e're the glass of his life be run out, he may meet
with a fiery trial. And seeing this has been the way of his providence,
toward the best of Churches, and Saints, what reason have any to expect
exemption? Shall the Earth be forsaken for us, or the Rock removed out of his
place? as he in Job. cap. 18.4. (4.) Because what ever indulgence and abatement
may be given to the Church, wherein you live, yet, as particular Professors and
Christians, though you live and die, during the public tranquillity of it, yet
you may be privately brought to that plunge; that you must either hazard your
life, or else in some fearful manner, against your Conscience, dishonor and
deny Jesus Christ. As may be the case of Merchants, who travel into foreign
parts, and may suddenly fall into such hands, as may force them to deny Christ,
or die for him. Yea, at home many may take away our lives, who cannot take away
our other contentments, as Romish Assassinats have deprived Kings of their
lives, when they could not of their Kingdoms. It is certain, that whosoever
cares not for his own life is master of another man's, and by consequence of his
Religion, if he love his life above it. How easy were it (they are the words
of the forecited reverend Author) for a Ruffian, that had no Religion of his
own, to pull such a one into a corner, and with a naked blade to make him
forswear his Religion, as often as he pleased; yea, if the trick were in use,
such a one might be robbed of his Religion upon the highway, seeing any man
that were so disposed, with a pistol at his breast, might make him deliver up
his Faith, with as much haste as his purse; so that every one had need to have
this piece of Christian Armor continually about him, ( The shoes of the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace. He that would see more of this readiness
to suffer, may consult Mr. Gurnall upon this Text, Christian Armor part 2. page
440, etc.
Ephesians. 6.15. and the feet of his Soul well shod with them. (5.) Because there is
no better means toward help in the enduring of actual Martyrdom, if it should
come, than by looking after, and making provision of this habitual, before the
other come; nor is he ever likely to perform Christ's expectation of laying
down his life for him, when it comes to it, who is not readily disposed
thereunto by a serious preparation of mind before hand. It is to be feared he
will shrink in the wetting, and come off with a Non putaram, in the day of
suffering, who did not count the costs of Religion; Expect, and lay in
provision for the worst in a day of Serenity and Tranquillity. And so much for
that first Objection. There remains yet another.

Sect. 5.
OBject 2. Alas! Then I doubt all my love to Christ is a mere Cipher, and
stands for naught, for though I am convinced, that Jesus Christ deserves, and I
should express such a love as this, yet I tremble at the very thoughts of it,
and am afraid I shall fall short of it, If I be called to it, and shall flinch
from Christ to save my life?

Answer. (1.) This being a sore and grievous Trial, the greatest that is,
called by the Apostle, See Pinks Trial, page 54, 55, etc.
a fiery Trial, 1 Pet. 4.12. Nature will manifest, and may be allowed, an
aversation from it, as it tends to a separation of soul and body, and that with
such painful circumstances, as this is usually attended with. Yea, Grace it
self is allowed a deprecation of it, at the hands of God, if it may stand with
his will and pleasure, and an avoidance of it, by with drawing from the hands
of men, so far as it may be done without sin. We have Christ's example in all
these, who (until his time was come) did avoid the hands of his malicious,
persecuting enemies. John 8.59. chap. 10.39. chap. 11.54. when his time drew
near, that he must suffer, at the apprehension of it, his soul was troubled,
John 12.27. His soul was exceeding sorrowful unto death, Mat. 26.38. He was
sore amazed, and very heavy, Mark. 14.33. It brought him into such an Agony,
that his swe^t was, as it were great drops of Blood, falling to the ground,
Luke 22.44. In this condition he prayed to his Father, that he would save him
from this hour, John 12.27. that, if it were possible this cup might pass from
him, Mat. 26.39. He offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and
tears, Heb. 5.7. And be sides his example, we have for the last of avoiding
danger, his precept, Mat. 10 33. when they persecute you in this City flee into
another. He allows them (says Fugam cis permittit periculi, sed non officii
Paraeus in loc.
one) to flee from danger, though not from duty. Only you must look, that your
fear and aversation be not excessive, so as to distract you in point of duty,
nor to make you distrustful of the power of God to help, and carry you through
it And look, that your Prayer against it be not absolute, but with submission
to the will of God, as Christ's was. And look, that your care to secure, and
save yourselves be not managed with the use of any unwarrantable means, for
that were to choose iniquity rather than affliction, and to hazard our souls
for saving the outward man, (2.) Know this, that a Christian of the greatest
grace has not strength enough of his own to carry him through this fiery
Trial without divine assistance, whereas the weakest Christian, with Gods
help, shall be able to abide it with courage, and constancy. If our ability to
will and to do is from Christ as it is Phil. 2.13. without him we can do
nothing, John 15 5. Then much more our ability to suffer, especially in so high
a degree, as this, must needs be from him. Sibs Bruised reed. Edit. 6. p. 298.
In such a conflict as this not only nature will fuil us, but Grace too,
unless there be a stronger, and new supply: and therefore the divine power of
Christ is necessary to carry us above our own strength, especially in such hot
service as this, where we meet with greater opposition, than we can deal with
alone by our selves. page 299. 300.
It is dangerous therefore to look for that from our selves, which we must have
from Christ; for, since the fall, all our strength lies in him, as Sampsons in
his hair; we are but subordinate Agents, moving as we are moved, and working as
we are first wrought upon, free so far as we are freed, no wiser, nor no
stronger, than he makes us to be in any thing we undertake. But there is no
danger from a humble sense of our own weakness, if it drive us out of our
selves unto firm dependence upon him in whom our greatest strength lies, for
this is the fittest seat and subject, for him to perfect his strength in. Nay,
this is a good sign; for, as it proceeds from love, and argues a desire not to
leave Christ, so it takes the wisest and safest course for its own security,
and has gone further upon Trial, than greater, but ungrouned confidence has
done. page 300. 301. In te stas, and non stas, and frustra nititur, qui non
innititur, Aug.
Dependent Spirits are the wisest, and ablest, nothing is stronger than
humility, that goes out of its self; or weaker than pride, that rests upon
his own bottom. And therefore it has been seen, that page 255.
weakness with humble acknowledgment, watchfullness, and dependence, has
stood it out, when strength with too much confidence has failed. You know what
Peter's confidence in himself (that Though all men forsook Christ, he would not)
came to at last, even to a denial with an oath, yea with cursing and swearing,
Mat. 26.33.70.72.74. Clarks Life of Saunders, p. 496.
The story of Saunders and Pendleton is known, and fit for our present purpose.
These two meeting together in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, and speaking
of the persecution which was like to ensue, Mr. Saunders showed much weakness
and many fears, whereas Pendleton showed great confidence, and said, What man?
there is much more cause for me to fear than for you, forasmuch as I have a big
and fat body, yet will I see the utmost drop of this grease of mine molten
away, and the last gobbet of this flesh of mine consumed to ashes, before I
will forsake Jesus Christ and his truth which I have professed; and yet he with
all his confidence, when it came to it, played the Apostate, and turned Papist,
when the other, by the goodnss and power of God, helping his infirmities,
sealed the truth with his blood. Remember therefore, in the midst of the sense
of your own weakness and infirmity, that His grace is sufficient for you, 2.
Cor. 12.9. And that it is given, and that on the behalf of Christ, (who
purchased it by his blood upon earth, and sues it out by his intercession in
heaven) not only to believe (that you may be Christians) but also to suffer for
his sake (that you may be constant and crowned Christians) Phil. 1.29. Not only
the occasion of suffering is given by his providence, but also the ability to
suffer, by his influence and assistance; without this you cannot but fall, with
this you shall be sure to stand. (3) God has abundantly provided by his word
and works for the encouragement of the weakest Christian, if truly such,
against the strongest trial: For thou may be confident, if thou art one of
his, that either he will not call thee out to such suffering, or, if he do,
that he will support thee under it, and carry thee through it. All have not the
Martyrs faith, nor shall all have the Martyrs fire: yet, if this should prove
to be the portion appointed for thee, never fear, but (if thou art a true
believer) he, who gave thee power to believe at the first ( which No^ minus
difficile est homini credere, quam cudaveri volare.
thou could no more do of thy self, than a dead man can fly) he will not
deny thee power to suffer, whatever he calls thee out unto; seeing this, as
well as the other, is his gift, (as was said before) and the purchase of
Christ's blood; especially if you consider his promises, Of giving power to the
faint, and increasing strength to them that have no might. (...). Vide Leigh^
Crit Sac^.
Isaiah 40.29. Of giving his Spirit to help our infirmities, Romans 8.26. to help
with us over against us, as the word signifies. Of not suffering us to be
tempted above what we are able, and making a way for our escape, that we may be
able to bear it, 1 Corinthians. 10.13. Of making his strength perfect in the
weakness of her servants, 2 Cor. 12 9. Besides, God is never more for us, than
when we are m^st for him, whose glory lies at stake, as well as our lives, and
he is more curious of that, than we can be of this. Moreover your Savior,
having had experience of all the amazements and horrors of death, when he
suffered it for you, cannot forget both to pity and succor you, when you
suffer it for him, for in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is
able (and no less willing) to succor those that are tempted, as the Apostle
infers, Heb. 2.18. And his being heard in the days, when he offered up prayers
and supplications, with strong crying and tears to him that was able to save
him from death, Heb. 5.7. may be a strong ground of encouragement, to hope and
believe, that we, praying for the removal of such a bitter Cup with submission
to the Will of God, shall obtain (as he did) though not the removal of it, yet
strength under it. Add unto all this the instances of Gods presence and power
in such cases, enabling the weakest and most timorous, even Women and Children,
to undergo this trial for his names sake. Wherefore, (4) For a close, I
commend this to the troubled and trembling heart, for his Direction, in such a
case. Do not torment thy self with anxious fears and cares, concerning thy
holding out in a fiery trial, but rather mind thy present duty, and cast the
burden of such things as are to come, upon him, who cares for thee, and will
sustain thee in so doing, neither will he ever suffer the righteous to be
moved, Psalm. 55.22. 1 Pet. 5.7. Sufficient to such, a day will he the evil of
it, when it comes, Mat. 6.34. and therefore do not anticipate, and make it
double, to what otherwise it would be, Lukin. Life of faith, Pref. to the
Reader Direct. 2. p. 8. 9.
by your cares and fears about it before it come. It is true, that a prudent
foresight of evil is good, Proverbs 22.3. that is, so to foresee, as to prepare
for what we cannot avoid, that is our duty, as was said before; but then let me
tell you, there is no better way of preparing for it, then by minding our
present duty. And therefore instead of being thus over-solicitous concerning
that which is to come, Do you examine and prove your selves, whether you be in
the says, and Christ be in you, according to your profession, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
Acquaint your selves with God, and be at peace with him, Job 22.21. Make this
your constant exercise, to have a conscience void of offense, toward God and
toward men, Acts 24.16. Draw nigh to God, and keep close to him in humble
Communion, and Walk, as before him, in holy, upright, heavenly Conversation,
Psalm. 73.28. Genesis 17.1. Make daily improvements in sanctification, mortifying
corruption, and growing in Grace, cleansing your selves from all filthiness of
flesh and Spirit, and perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Stand
upon your guard against sins of daily incursion, and take heed of those that
wast the conscience, Psalm. 19.12, 13. Keep your selves from your own iniquity,
Psalm 18.23. and Watch against those temptations, to which you ly exposed, by
reason of your present condition, from Satan, the World, and the Flesh, Mat.
26.41. Revel. 16.15. And in simplicity of heart, resign up your selves to the
will and disposal of him, whose you are and whom you serve, Mat. 6.10. And
thus doing you may be confident, that neither tribulation, nor distress, nor
persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, nor life, nor
death, nor the other thing shall be able to separate you from any love of God
in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8, 35. etc.

And thus I have showed you, that Jesus Christ, is to be loved, for the measure
of it, above all, not only our Enjoyments and Relations, but also our Lives.
And (to use Beatus (...), qui inl^diget quid s^t ama e Jesum, and contemnere
scipsum prop^er Jesum, A Kemp. de Imit. Christi, lib. 2. cap. 7. page 111.
a Kempis his words, for a close of this head) Blessed is that man, who knows
what it is to love the Lord Jesus, and to contemn himself f r Jesus his sake.
The difficulty whereof may make us breath out our desires to him, that helps
to will and to do, in the words of the same devout Author. Amem te plusquam,
nec me, nisi propter te, Idem lib. 3. cap 5. page 151.
Oh! grant, that I may love thee more than my self, nor my self at all, unless
for thee.

CHAP. IX.
ANd so much for that second direction con-the Measure of your love to Christ.
I sh^^l add, but one more; which concerns the expressing of your love to
Christ in his present distance from you.

(3. The third Dir^ction concerns the expressing of our love to Christ,
) Express your love to Christ, in his present distance from you, by your love
one toward another, and toward all men, according to the Apostles
distribution, 1 These. 3.12.

Sect. 1.
By love to all men.
(1.) A Christians love is to extend is self to all men. This our Savior
intends, when he bids us every one love our neighbor, as our selves, Mat.
22.39. Where, by Neighbor, we are not to understand only our own country m^n,
kindred, and friends, Pareus. Musc. Grot. Perkins. Wh^te in loc. Spanhem. D^b.
Evan^. vol.; D^b. 138.
according to the corrupt gl^sse of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5 43. but
all men to whom we may be (...), according to Christ's own sense in the Parable,
Luke 10.30. etc. And so a Stranger, nay, an enemy, may be our neighbor ( Ham.
Pract. Cat. edit. 5. p. 53.40. Grot. in Luc. 10.33 Salmer in Parab. Tract. 16.
for such were the Jews to the Samaritans) Proximus non sanguinis
propinquitate, sed rationis societate pensandus est, in qua soccii su^^ omnes
homines, Aug. Epist. 52. (mihi) page 267.
There is a propinquity of nature, as well as of Blood, and this neighborhood
is to be esteemed according to the former, and not only according to the
latter. Ille cui a nobis praebend^m est, vel a quo nobis praebendum est,
officium misericordiae recte proximus deci^ur Aug. de doct. Christiana, Edit.
Calixt. quarto, lib. 1. cap. 30.
So that he is rightly called our Neighbor to whom we may show, or from whom
may be sh^wn unto us, any office or work of mercy. M^nt. on James, page 260,
261.
Thus all mankind is, according to the expression of Scripture, our own flesh,
Isaiah 58.7. Our blood, Acts 17.26. And by virtue of this affinity of nature,
our love is to reach unto all. We must do good unto all, Gal. 6.10. as God
himself does, whose mercies are said to be over all his works, Psalm. 145.9.
That is, they are spread, as ^n Expansum, or Firmament over the whole Creation,
which he makes appear by doing good to all. And according to the Rule of the
Gospel, we are to bear such a love to our Neighbor, in this extended sense, as
we do to our selves, we being bound to desire and end^avour their good by
virtue of their manhood, and humane nature, as we would our own, that is, with
the same heart, and in the same way, that we would pursue our own good, we are
engaged to pursue theirs, though not in the same measure, and proportion; It is
a likeness of quality, not of equality, of kind, not of degrees, which our
Savior requires, when he says, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, as thy self.
Thus our love is to extend it self. (1.) To those who are far from us, and
strangers to us, as well as to those who are next us Gaius is commended for his
love to strangers, 3 John 5. That which we do to our own^, for affections sake,
let us do to others, that are strangers to us, for humanities sake ( says Quod
praestamus nostris per affectum, praestemus alienis per humanit atatem, Lact.
de vero cultu, lib. 6. cap. 12. (^^hi) page 347.
Lactantius.) 2. To those who are bad, as well as to those who are good. (...)
apere (...) erea^us, nemo tame^ est a benefic^^s charita^^s exclude^dus, Fulg.
Ser. de charitate, p. 506.
Though in this work of love some ar^ to be preferred before others, yet none
are to be excluded. A wicked man is partaker of the humane nature, and under a
possibility of being made partaker of the Divine nature, and therefore to be
loved; you were, as he, before conversion, and God can convert him, and make
him, as you are, and therefore love him. Hereby you will imitate your heavenly
Father, Who makes his Sun to rise on the good and on the bad, and makes his
rain to fall on the just, and on the unjust, Mat. 5.45. Its true, that David
says, he did hate those, that hate the Lord, Psalm. 139.21. and so will every
good man, but ( Vir pius odit improbum, sed perfecto odio, perfectum autem
odium est, quod nec justitia, nec scientia caret, id est, ut nec propter vitia
homines oderis, nec vitia propter homines diligas. Dav. in Coloss. p. 31.
as a learned man observes) He hates them with a perfect hatred, now (says he)
perfect hatred is that, which neither wants justice nor knowledge, that is, so
as neither to hate men's persons for their vices sake, nor yet to love men's
vices for their persons sake. (3.) To enemies, as well as friends; and indeed
this is proper to Christianity. All men will love their friends ( says Amicos
d^ligere omnium est, inimicos autem solorum Christianorum, Tert. ad Scap.
Tertullian) but Christians only will love their enemies. Jenkins on Jude,
part 1. p. 131.
To be kind to the kind argues civility, to be unkind to the unkind argues
corruption, to be unkind to the kind argues divelishness, to be kind to the
unkind argues Christianity. Dav. in col. ibid.
This does especially evid^nce the force and efficacy of love; for as that fire
is hottest, which warms not only those things which are near, but also those
which are at a distance: so is that love the most perfect, and lively, which
reaches not only to friends, but also to enemies. Robinsons Essays, page 145.
Let therefore the grace of God herein especially triumph over our corruption,
that whereas by nature, we would be loved of them whom we hate, by grace we may
love them which hate us: This is a great work of grace indeed, yet most
necessary for all Christ's Disciples, for we have his command to love our
enemies, to bless them that curse us, and to do good to them that hate us, and
to pray for them, that despightfully use us, and persecute us, Mat. 5.44.
besides which we have his example; he loved us, when we were strangers, and a
far off, Ephesians. 2.12, 13. yea, ungodly sinners and enemies against him, Romans
5.6, 8, 10. Colos. 1.21. Now the consideration of this, that we were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in
malice, and envy, hateful, and hating one another, and that then the kindness
and love of God our Savior appeared unto us; this (according to the Apostles
arguing, Titus 3.2, 3, 4.) should have a mighty influence upon our spirits, to
the melting and moulding of them into love, and meekness, toward all men, even
those who are ungodly, and strangers, yea enemies unto us. but I pass this,
and come to speak of Christians love one to another.

Sect. 3.
(2.) A Christians love is most eminently to be manifested toward the Saints,
By love o^ the Saint^s especially.
all the Saints Col. 1.4. all, In quibus aliquid Christi videmus, in whom we
see any thing of Christ, as it is reported Bucer's was. Though Christian love
be very extensive, yet there is an order to be observed in that extent; Next
unto Christ, his Saints must have the highest Room in our hearts, and our
choicest, chiefest love is to be reserved for them. Jenkins on Jude Part. 1.
page 133.
Though a love of benevolence is not to be denied to the bad, yet our love of
Complacency must be set upon the good. Though the Holy Ghost has exempted none
from being the Object of our Beneficence (whereby our love is expressed) we
must do good to all, yet there is a (...), an especially put upon the household
of faith; They must have a special preferment in our affection, and a
pre-eminence in the fruits of it, Galatians 5.10. Ut ca object^ melius
videntur, quae su^t magis in lace posita, quia lux est formale ob^ectu^ vis^s:
sic illi homines magis amantur, qui sunt Deo magis conjuncti, quia Deus est
formale, and propriu^ objectum charitatis, Dav. in Col. p. 30.
Nor is it without reason, that the Saints should be more loved by us than
others, because that which is the formal reason of love is most conspicuous in
them; for, as those objects are best seen, which are most in the light, because
light is the formal object of sight: so those men are most to be loved, who
are nearest to God, because God is the formal and proper object of love.
Sanctior est copula cordium quam corporu^, Bed.
The bond of grace is more eminent than the bond of nature; and Sanct^ora
membra sunt ma^ori charitate amplectenda. Aug.
where there is the most holiness, such are to be embraced with the most love;
thus Beatus, qui amat te, and amicum in te, and inimicum propter te. Aug. Conf.
lib. 4. cap. 9. page 73.
Though all men are to be loved for Christ's sake, even enemies, and wicked men,
yet believers are to be loved in him, and happy is that man, who thus
expresses his love to Christ. This is a matter of such concernment and
consequence among Christians, that I shall crave leave to expatiate a little,
in venting the thoughts and desires of my heart about it. And here I could
wish, that I had occasion to say to the Christians of this Generation, as the
Apostle does to the Thessalonians, 1. These. 4.10. As touching Brotherly love,
you need not that I write unto you, for ye your selves are taught of God to
love one another, and indeed you do it. But alas! its A complaint of the want
of love among Christians.
otherwise. It was said of the Christians in Tertullians time, Tert. Apol. cap.
39. p. 47.
Vide, ut invicem se diligant, See, how they love one another. Then there was
so much love, that it was, Ad stuporem Gentilium, To the wonder of the
Gentiles; but now there is so little, that it is, Ad pud^rem Christianorum, To
the shame of Christians. We live in the last and worst days of the world, 2.
Timoth. 3.1. in which (as our Savior foretold, Mat. 24.12.) iniquity abounds,
and the love of many waxes cold. It was the conjecture of Merito primum Dei
judicium fuit in aqua contra ardore^ luxuriae; ultimum vero judicium erit in
igne contra tepore^ charitatis. Ludolph. de vita Christi. Part 2. cap. 87.
one, That as Gods first judgment against the old World, was by Water, against
the heat of Lust: so his last judgment, upon the World that now is, will be by
Fire, against the coldness of Love. Which if true, we may fear that great and
terrible day is not far off, seeing the hearts of men, yea of good men, are so
cold in love, one toward another. Oh! my friends, for the enmities and
animosities, the envy and strife, the divisions and dissentions, the hatred and
wrath, which have been, and are, among Christians themselves, not only in other
places, but even in England, a place of the greatest light and profession,
whereby they malign, censure, reproach, despise, oppose, bite, and devour one
another, there are, at least ought to be, great searchings of heart; and Oh!
that my head were waters, and my eyes fountains of tears, to weep day and night
for the want of love, in the Christians of this generation toward one another.
Hear a little some of the complaints which have been made (and not without
cause) about it. The fire of brotherly love ( says Wats. Perfume of Love. page
625, 626.
one) is almost ready to go out, scarce any sparks of it yet remaining among
us, but instead of the fire of love, the wildfire of passion rages
vehemently, and is predominant. Many live, as if they had been born on the
mountains of Bether, the mountains of division, and as if they had been
baptized in the waters of Meribah, the waters of strife. Alas! ( says Baxters
Saints Rest. Edit. 4. Part 1. p. 138. 135 133. 136.
another) that Turks and Pagans can agree in wickedness, better than Christians
in the truth; that Bears, and Lions, Wolves and Tigers, can agree together, but
Christians cannot; that a legion of Devils can agree in one body, and not the
tenth part of so many Christians in one Church. I read indeed in Pagan writers,
that Christians were as cruel as Bears and Tigers against one another. Amm^anus
Marcellinus gives it as the reason of Julians policy, Am. Marcell. (...)
Juliani.
in proclaiming liberty for every party to profess and preach their own
opinions, because he knew the cruel Christians would then most fiercely fall
upon one another, and so by liberty of conscience, and by keeping their
Children from the Schools of learning, he thought to have rooted out
Christianity from the earth. But I had hoped his accusation had come from the
malice of the Pagan writer; little did I think to have seen it so far verified.
Did I ever think to have heard Christians so to reproach and scorn Christians?
and men professing the fear of God, make so little conscience of censuring,
vilifying, slandering, and disgracing one another! Lord! what Devils are we
unsanctified, when there is yet such a nature remaining in the sanctified? Such
a Nature has God, in these days, suffered to discover it self, even in the
godly, that, if he did not graciously and powerfully restrain, they would shed
the blood of one another, and no thanks to us, if it be not done. It was a just
charge and sad complaint made by Hildersham on Psalm. 51. p. 691.
a Reverend, and holy man, more than thirty years ago, which for the
sutableness of it to our own case and time, I shall here transcribe. It is
utterly a fault among you (said he then) that the difference in judgment and
practice, about the Ceremonies of our Church, has caused such strangeness, and
alienation of mind and affection, between such as do truly fear God, both
Ministers and people; We are so far from receiving, esteeming, loving, and
maintaing society one with another, notwithstanding this difference in judgment
about these things, that we are apt to despise and judge one another for it,
and doubt whether there be any truth of grace in them that differ from us in
these things. Surely (says the one side) the indifferency, and lawfulness of
these things is now so clearly manifested, as these men must needs be wilfully
blind, that do not see it. Nay, certainly they cannot choose but see it well
enough, and were it not for a carnal respect to their credit with the people,
among whom they have gotten a great name and applause, by standing out so long,
they would doubtless conform themselves. And surely (says the other side) the
utter unlawfulness of these Ceremonies, is now so clearly revealed, that these
men must needs be wilfully blind, that see it not; nay, they do see it well
enough, and were it not for a carnal respect they have unto their worldly
peace, and estate, they would never use them; certainly they sin against their
conscience, in observing of them. And what truth of grace can there be in them
that are wilfully blind, and for carnal respects, do thus sin against their own
conscience. And thus do both sides grossly and dangerously err, and sin
against their brethren. And when ye sin so against the brethren, ( says the
Appstle 1 Cor. 8.12.) ye sin against Christ. For the experience of all times,
and of this present age, proves evidently, that there be of both sides that
fear God unfeignedly, and in the whole tenor, and course of whose
conversation, the life and power of true godliness does manifestly appear. And
if thou do not see this (whosoever thou art, that art most bitter and violent
of either side) then art thou certainly thy self most wilfully blind. And I do
assure thee (in the Name of the Lord, and by good warrant out of his Word) that
if thou can not unfeignedly love every one that truly fears God (whether he
conform, or not conform) if thou can not bewail and strive against these hard
conceits thou have been wont to entertain against such, thou can have no
comfort at all in thine own estate before God: Thus far he. And is the matter
any whit amended now? Truly no; the same occasions of difference in judgment
remaining, there are the same distances of affection, the same heats and
contentions of spirit attending thereupon; nay, I fear, greater, which is very
sad to consider: Reynolds Sermon of the peace of the Church. p. 16. 17. Of
Brotherly Reco^e l. p. 8, 19.
Indeed it were to be desired, though hardly to be hoped, that in the Church of
God, there were no noise of axes, and hammers, no difference in judgments and
conceits, but in the best ages of the Church there have been, and therefore we
can expect no other, than that there ever will be, varieties and differences of
judgment: But that in this case of unavoidable differences among good men,
there should be no more mutual charity, meekness, moderation, tolerance, and
humanity expressed, and one the contrary, so much judging, despising,
rejecting, and insulting over one another, such bitter invectives, and
voluminous reproaches, such recording of Brethrens infirmities, and raking into
the sores, which Christ died to heal; such backbiting, slanderous speeches,
such secret dividing contrivances, and deep designs against Brethren; that
disagreement of judgments, should break forth into disunion of hearts; that
amidst the variety of our several conceits, there should be no more care, to
preserve still the unity of faith, and love, by which only we are known to be
Christ's Disciples; that though there be not Via una, one Way, there should not
yet be Cor. unum, one Heart. This is a Lamentation, and will be for a
Lamentation. Now, when these things are thus among us (though they ought not so
to be) shall we sit still in silence, and stupidity, and suffer the sweet and
soft fire of love to die out quite, and the wildfire of passion and contention
to spread and prevail, without moving a tongue, or hand, or foot toward the
repressing of the one, and reviving of the other? Shall we see Christians
taking one another by the throat, and stand by, as if we were unconcerned in
it? This were enough to make the dumb to speak; For surely, should we
altogether hold our peace, the stones would immediately cry out, as our Savior
said in another case, Luke 19.40. This may somewhat justify, and vindicate my
writing, when I may not speak, that my Pen may reach those, whom my tongue
cannot; especially, when it is upon so harmless, and innocent a design, as the
abating of wrath, and advancing of love, among Christians, which the love of
Christ, ( the main subject of this discourse) does so naturally, and
necessarily lead unto. Suffer me therefore, as I have called upon you to love
the Lord Jesus, now to call upon you to love one another. The Author of that
Comment upon the Epistle to the Galations ( inserted in the sixth Tome of
Hieroms works, Sixth. Senens. Bibl. lib. 4. p. 309. Gerh. Patrolog. p. 317.
Rivel. crit. Sacr. lib. 4 p. 1133.
though it be none of his) reports of St. John, That whiles he abode at
Ephesus, to a very great age, so that he was hardly led to the Church betwixt
two, when he was not able to make any long discourse to his hearers, he used
only to speak these words, Little children, love one another. And truly, were
I to finish my Testimony, or my course, so as never to speak, or write more
unto you, I could not do it better, than as I now do, by bespeaking your love
one to another. Oh! Christians love one another, and I beseech you, let this
counsel be acceptable unto you, do not deny me this request, me thinks, you
should not, when I come in Christ's name, and beg it for his sake, who has laid
such obligations upon you hereunto, that you must needs be exceeding hard, and
obdurate, if you withstand them. Give me leave to propound them to your
consideration.

Sect. 5.
(1.) COnsider how strictly this is enjoined, and how strongly urged by our
Lord Jesus. It was his dying charge, The first Motive to persuade mutual love
among Christians from Christ's commands
which he frequently inculcated, sweetly insinuated, and powerfully pressed
upon his Disciples, and in them upon all Christians. Manton on Jude p. 131.
Speeches of dying men are received with most veneration, especially the charge
of dying friends; Therefore the Brethren of Joseph, fearing lest he should
remember the injuries formerly done to him, used this plea, Thy Father did
command before he died, saying, So shall ye say to Joseph, Forgive, I pray
thee, now the trespass of thy Brethren, etc. Genesis 50.16, 17. When Christ took
leave of his Disciples, he left this as his last charge, that they should love
one another, and let us see, how he propounds, and sets this home, that it
might take place with them, John 13.34, 35 You may take the rise of this
Discourse from the 33 verse, where he gives this sweet, and kind compellation,
Little children, and he does it, to make the easier way for what he had to
propound to them; As if he had said, Gerh. Harm. p. 849.
It becomes obedient children to bear in continual remembrance the words of
their dying Father, and it is but necessary for you, who are my children, to
keep and carry about with you, for ever fixed in your hearts, this, which, as
my dying legacy, I bequeath to you, of loving one another. When he coms to the
matter, you may see, how he fills his mouth with Arguments, as many arguments
almost as words. A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another,
etc. You see, (1.) It is a commandment, Gerh. p. 852.
not a bare advice, and counsel, which he leaves as an arbitrary matter for
them either to do or not to do according to their own will, and pleasure; but
he binds them to it by a weighty, and serious command. Now Intonante divino
praecepto, ^on objiciendu^, sed obediendum, Tert.
When the sound of a divine precept enters into our ears, we must leave off
objecting, and fall to obeying. (2.) It is a commandment of his own
prescribing, a commandment I give unto you. Gerh. ubi supra.
I, who am your one, and only Master, Mat. 23.8* 10. I, to whom your audience
and obedience has been bespoken by a voice from the excellent glory, Mat.
17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17. I whom you own as your Lord and Master, John 13.13. I
command you to love one another, and therefore it concerns you, who are my
Disciples, and followers, to observe me herein. Again (3.) It is a
commandment, which I give unto you, as a special token, and privilege. Gurnal
Christian Arm. part 2. p. 424.
He was now taking his farewell of them, and this was as the streakings of that
milk wherewith he had fed them; never dropped a sweeter discourse from his
blessed lips, he saved his best wine till last: He was now making his last
will, and among other things, which he bequeaths to his Disciples, he takes
this commandment, as a Father would do his seal-ring off his finger, and gives
it unto them. Yet this is not all; for (4.) He gives it them, not barely as a
commandment, but as a new Commandment. A new commandment give I unto you.
Wats. Perfume of Love, p. 618.
Which is not to be understood, as if it were so new, as never to have been
heard of before; for it it was as old as Moses, written in the ancient Statutes
and Records, Lev. 19.18. Nay, as old as Adam, written in the Heart of Man, by
Nature, as with the point of a Diamond, in which respects it was an old
commandment: And yet new, (1.) Because Excellent, for the Hebrews call that
New, Novum Hebraica dicitur phrasi, non quia novum sed quia praestantissimu^,
Mald.
which is Excellent Psalm. 33.3. a new song there, is an excellent song; and a
new commandment here, is a most excellent commandment; as if he had said, I
have given you many commandments, whiles I have been conversant with you. but
now I give you one, which is instar omnium, one instead of all, one most
excellent, this of love. Again, new (2) Because renewed, thus the Jews use to
speak, that which is renewed, they call new; thus Jer. 26.10. the new gate
there, is the gate that was but repaired, and Ezekiel 36.26. the new heart is the
renewed heart. This commandment of loving one another, Christ here calls a new
commandment, coming forth now in a new edition, corrected, and enlarged;
corrected and amended, from the false glosses and corruptions of the Scribes,
and Pharisees: and enlarged from his own example, as it follows in the next
words; As I have loved you, that ye also love one another. Before it was only,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; now it is, Love one another, as I
have loved you. And yet he has not done, for (5.) it is a commandment
strengthend with the most forcible Motives. (1.) The first is in the words even
now mentioned; That you love one another, as I have loved you. This Motive is
drawn from his own example, his love which he has showed unto us, and there
are two things in Christ's example, which may engage our love one to another;
for from his Love toward us, (1.) We have the strongect Reason and ground for
our love to Christians. Particula (...) ponitur (...) id est, quia ego vos
ditexi, ideo aequum est ut and vos invicem diligatis. Gerh. Har. p. 855.
So some take this As here, for Because, as if the meaning were, Because I have
loved you, it is but equal and reasonable, that you should love one another.
Thus he propounds his own love toward us, in taking our nature upon him,
coming in flesh, living so lovingly and kindly among those with whom he
conversed, and at length sealing up all with his blood and death, as a strong
Obligation to us, to love one another; and so indeed it is, What can be
greater? G^rnals Christian Armor, Part 2. p. 424.
What should not the love of Christ command a Christian? if it were to lay down
his life for the brethren, would it be denied? how much less, when it is only
to lay down our strifes and animosities, and to embrace one another in love? If
Christ your Master and Lord, your Head and your King, has thus loved you, who
are but Disciples, Servants, Members, and Subjects, much more ought you to love
your fellow servants, members, and subjects. (2.) We have the highest and best
Rule, and pattern, for our love to Christians. Christ by his love to us, has
not only given us an Argument why, but also a Direction how, we should love one
another, and we are bound to conform to him herein. He that says, he abides
in Christ, ought himself also so to walk, as Christ also walked, 1 John 2.6.
and We must walk in love, as Christ also loved us, says another Apostle,
Ephesians. 5.2. We must follow Christ in his love, though we cannot do it passibus
aequis: We must write after his copy, though we cannot make such fair
Characters. We must love one another, as he loved us, though we can never love
as much as he; in the same manner, though we fall short in the measure. Gerh.
Ub. supra p. 855. J^^^es Schol. pract. Divinity. Part 1. in his Treat. of
Christ's fullness. p. 226.
And here there are these things, in which our love of Christians, should be
conformable to Christ's love toward us. (1.) The love of Jesus Christ toward
us was a free love, he loved us when we deserved it not; without consulting his
own profit or advantage, but only minding our salvation: and hereby he has
taught us to love one another freely; not respecting our own profit, but the
will and command of God, paying it as a debt, not to purchase some benefit to
our selves thereby, not lo^king at our own things herein, but at the things of
others, the good and benefit of those whom we love, more than our own, 1 Cor.
10.24. Philippi. 2.4. (2.) The love of Jesus Christ toward us, was a true and
real love: he did not feign and c^unterfeit a love to us, but did truly love
us; it was not complementall, but cordial; it was not verbal, but real. He
went about doing good, and suffering evil, for our sakes, all his life long,
Acts 10.38. Heb. 12.3. and then gave himself for us, his blood, his life, out
of his great love to us, Ephesians. 5.2. and hereby he has taught us to love one
another sincerely, and really, without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. unfeignedly,
1 Peter 1.22. not in word, and in tongue only, but in deed, and in truth also,
1 John 3.18. There must be a work and labor in our love. 1 These. 1.3. Heb.
6.10. so as that we must perform all offices of love and kindness to the
Saints. Our love toward them must be expressed by sympathizing with them in
all conditions, Rejoicing with them that do rejoice, and weeping with them that
weep, Romans 12.15. Distributing to the necessities of them that want, as we are
able, and opportunity is offered to us, Romans 12.13. Gal. 6.10. 1 John 3.17.
James 2.15.16. Bearing with them in their infirmities, Gal. 6.2. Forbearing of
them and forgiving of them, when they offend us, Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.12, 13.
Yea, laying down our lives for the brethren, as the case may be, and need
sometimes requires, 1 John. 3.16. Romans 16.3, 4 Phil. 2.17, 18. We must not
count our very lives too dear for the brethren, Cotton upon John p. 262.
Roberts Bell. Evid. p. 232.
when the laying of them down may be serviceable to the glory of God, and the
good of his Church, and the sparing of them would be prejudicial both ways.
(3.) The love of Jesus Christ toward us was a constant love. Having loved his
own which were in the world, he loved them to the end, John 13.1. Whom Jesus
Christ once loves, he loves for ever; nor do the unkindnesses of his Children
tire him out, and make him cease loving of them: They may make him hide his
face from them, but not set his heart against them -- Herberts Poems. The Bag.
p. 145.
Storms are the triumph of his art,
Well may he close his eyes, but not his heart.


Now hereby he teaches us to be constant in our love one to another, to
continue and persevere in our love to the end, Heb. 13.1. yea to abound and
increase more and more, as the Apostle prays, 1 These. 3.12. Our love of the
Brethren should be perpetual and not be altered, interrupted and abated by
their petty unkindnesses, much less by the greatest and most miserable change
of their outward condition, Proverbs, 17.17. Thus have we from the love of
Christ, both a Reason, and a Rule, for our love to one another, and by both a
strong obligation thereunto, (2.) The second Motive it laid down in the 35.
verse. By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you have love
one to another. This is the grand Character of Christianity, without which all
our profession will come to nothing. There is a great Emphasis in the words,
which tends to the stronger enforcing of that which he brings it for. Gerh.
Harm. p. 856. Dr. Pierce Sermon on the place (mihi) p. 405.
He does not say, Hereby you shall be my Disciples, but hereby it shall be
known, for we are made Disciples by faith, but manifested to be so by love. Nor
does he say, hereby I shall know that you are my Disciples, for he knew all
men, and needed not that any should testify concerning man, John 2.24.25. Nor
does he say, hereby you shall know that you are my Disciples (though that be
true 1 John 3.14.) but hereby others shall know; Nor does he say, hereby they
shall guess and conjecture, but hereby they shall know, as by a sure and
infallible sign. Nor does he say, hereby your Discipleship shall be known, as a
special secret, to very few, but as the Sun in his Meridian, all men shall know
it. Nor does he say, that all men shall know, that you are my Servants and
brethren, but my Disciples, whiles you observe my precepts, and follow my
example, as Disciples should do. Nor does he say, that hereby all men shall
know, that you seem to be my Disciples in a disguise, but that you are so
without a fiction. Lastly, he does not say, your Discipleship shall be known by
the assembling your selves in the house of Prayer, your crying Lord, Lord, your
showing signs and wonders, working miracles, or casting out Devils in my Name,
your being Orthodox in judgment, and jumping together in your opinions, but by
this it shall be known as a Token which never fails, If you have love one to
another. So that this is the Badge of Christianity, and Character of every true
Christian, to love one another, Charitas est quaed im forma informans alias
virtutes, adeo ut aliae sine charitate informs sint, and virtutum quasi
simulachra. Rolloc. in Col. 3.14.
without which all our Profession, Privileges, and Performances, are nothing
in the account of Christ. One would think our Savior had by this time said
enough to engage all Christians to love one another, but he has not yet done;
and therefore, if you pass on to the fifteenth Chapter, you will find him go
over it again, and again: In the twelfth verse, says he, This is my
Commandment, that you love one another, as I have loved you. Gurnals Christian
Arm. Part 2. p. 425.
As if he would signify to them, that as he had one Disciple, who went by the
Name of the Disciple whom Jesus loved: So he would have a darling Commandment,
in which he takes some singular delight; and that this should be it, viz. Their
loving one another. And for a Conclusion ^e goes over it again in the
seventeenth verse, These things I command you, that you love one another;
intimating, that this one thing was ^ll things, all that ever he had spoken to
them, and given them in charge, were either com^rehended in this, or to be
referred to it. Thus ^ur Savior enjoined and enforced this duty of love among
Christians; this was his Doctrine which he preached to, and pressed upon, his
Disciples, and in them upon our selves: and shall we be so disingenious, as not
to hearken ^o him, and observe him herein? Yet this is not all, and therefore,

Sect. 4.
(2. The second Motive, from Christ's Prayer.
) COnsider in the next place his Prayer for it. Having preached it up among his
Disciples on earth, in the Chapters forementioned, as if he were resolved not
to miss his work, he sets upon praying it down from his Father in Heaven, in
the seventeenth Chapter which contains his excellent Prayer, Gurnall Uhi supra.
p. 426.
and what he insisted most upon in his Sermon, that he enlarges most upon in
this Prayer. Love was the charge which he laid upon them, and Unity is the
blessing which he begs of his Father for them, verse the eleventh, Holy Father,
keep through thy Name, those whom thou have given me; and why all this care?
that they may be one as we are. As if he had said, Father, did we ever fall
out? was there ever discord betwixt us? why then should they who are thine and
mi^^ disagree? So verse the 21. and again verse the twenty third, he is
pleading hard for the same mercy; and why so often? is it so hardly wrung from
God, that Christ himself mus^ tug so often for it? no, sure; but as Christ said
of the voice that came from heaven, John 12.30 This voice came not because of
me, but for your sakes: So must I say here, This ingeminated zeal of Christ,
for his peoples unity and love, was for their sakes, that seeing how much his
Heart was set upon their loving one another, their hearts might also be more
set upon it, (...) seek and pursue it, and that seeing how great an enemy he
was to contentions and divisions, they might be scared from raising and
fomenting them. And does it not concern Christians to make that the matter of
their study and endeavor, which Christ made the matter of his prayer? did he
pray for Love and Unity for us, and shall not we strive for it for our selves?
Oh! how sad and dismal a sight is it, to behold Christians, by their wrath and
bitterness against one another, to make, as much as in them lies, the Prayer
of Christ of none effect* Surely, this would have some influence to the uniting
of Christian hearts in love, if it were more seriously pondered by them. Yet
this is not all, The third from Christ's passion.
for,

(3) Consider, that he not only Preached it, and Prayed for it, but also Paid
for it; Gurnall ibidem p 427.
As he went from preaching up love on earth by his Sermon, to pulling it down
from heaven by Prayer: so he went from praying to paying for it, and the price
which he laid down for it, was his Blood. It Is true, that our Reconciliation
with God, and Union with him, was the first and chief thing, which he purchased
for his people by his death and bloodshed, b^t yet he had in his eye also their
reconciliation and union with one another, and next to that, this was mainly
in^ended by him: For his Church is his House and Resting Place, Psalm.
132.13.14. and he knew he should take but little rest, if that were on fire by
divisions and dissentions. It is his Kingdom, Psalm. 2.6. and how should his
Laws be obeyed, if all his Subjects were in an hubbub against one another? In a
word, his Church is a people, which he has taken out of the world for his
Name, Acts 15.14. that is, for his Honor, and Glory, but he would have little
credit to be the Head of a wrangling divided people. And therefore where he
prays that they may be made perfect in one, John 17.23. he insists upon this as
his great Argument. That the world may know that thou have sent we. Now that
the knitting of Christians together in Love, was one great end of Christ's
death, is clear from Scripture; take a place or two, Ephesians. 1.10. The Apostle
here shows, That this was the mystery of Gods will, purposed in himself from
all Eternity, and published by the Gospel, viz. That he might gather together
in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth,
even in him. The meaning of which place is this Fergus. on the place.
That out of Christ all things are scattered, and disordered, the whole world
is a confused Chaos, and horrible confusion, but in and by him, by his Merit,
and in his Body, all his Elect (whether Angels or Men, when her already
glorified, or yet upon earth) who before were separated from God, and one
another, are recapitulated, and gathered together into one (as the word (...)
is well rendered) that is, Significat (...) ^artes dissectas, and divulsas, in
uau^ corpus conjungere, ut quum oratores brevem enumerationem argumentorum
texunt, aut qui calculis subductis singula in unam summam revoca^. Bez. in loc.
Qui dispersos in unum agmen cogit, recte dicitur cos (...). Grot. in loc.
Are made one with God by the union of Faith, and one among themselves by the
union of Love, as In ejus corpus co^les^e^do, and Deo unimur, and inter nos
mutuo fumus conjunct^ Calv. in loc.
Calvin observes on the place. Now this was effected by his Cross, as appears
from the next Chapter, where we have the matter more cl^arly and fully proved:
See Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16, For he is our peace, who has made both one, etc. The
main and principal intendment of which words, is to set forth the efficacy of
Christ's Mediation, toward the effecting of union, peace and reconciliation for
the Sons of Men, according as they need: To this purpose, Goodwins Univers.
Peacemaker. p. 2. 6.
In the beginning of the fourteenth verse, be in general proclaims Jesus
Christ to be our peace. He is our peace, that is, the Author and Worker of our
peace. Then, in the following words, he proceeds unto those particulars, in
which we needed, and Christ was made our peace, and they are two. (1.) Between
our selves mutually, and here he instanceth in the greatest breach and enmity
that ever was, that betwixt Jew and Gentile, this is in part of the fourteenth
and the whole fifteenth verse. (2.) Between God and us, in the sixteenth verse.
In the handling of these, he lays down the Parts and Means of accomplishing
both, and observes a notable parallel therein.

The Parts of the Peace made among our selves, Jews and Gentiles, are two

(1.) Positive. Making both one, verse fourteen. Making of twain one new man,
verse fifteen. He made peace betwixt them, by uniting a distant, different, and
divided people. And here you may note. (1.) The Nearness of the Union. Non ait
Unum populum, sed unum hominem, ut arctior conjunctio significetur, non tam
civium ejusdem civitatis, quam membroru^ ejusdem corporis, habentium unum
Caput, nempe Christum, and unam quasi a nimam, nempe, Spiritu^ ejus Sanctum.
Rolloc. in loc.
He does not say, One people, but One man, to signify the strictness of the
Union, not of Citizens of the same City so much, as of Members of the same
Body, having one Head, to wit, Christ, and as it were one Soul, to wit, his
Holy Spirit. And then you may further note, (2.) The way of accomplishing this
Union, Non ait, ut conjungeret quales erant, sed ut conderet, hoc est, crearet
denuo, and regeneraret utrumque populum inter se conjungendum* Rolloc. ibidem.
which was not by moulding them up together in the same condition, wherein he
then found them, but by changing, creating anew, and regenerating of them
first, and then uniting them, and therefore it is not said to make one man, but
one New man, so making peace; Christ begins this Reconciliation at Renovation.

(2.) Privative. And that is by taking away the occasion and cause of the diff
rence. Who has broken down the middle wall of partition between us, having
abolished the enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances,
verse the fourteenth and fifteenth. This Law of Commandments were those Rites
and Ceremonies, unto which the Jews were bound by the Lord under the Old
Testament: Ceremonias has Inimicitas vocat, quia praeter caeteros, hic erat
unus finis, and usus Caeremoniarum, quod per has Deus discrevit suum populum ab
omnibus aliis gentibus. Rollo. in loc.
These were a wall of partition betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles, whereby they
were separated and distinguished one from another; And they were the Enmity,
that is, the ground of the Enmity, that was betwixt them, for which they were
set one against another, Grot. in loc.
the Jew despising the Gentile, and the Gentile hating the Jew, upon the
account of them. These Jesus Christ abolished, and took away, thereby to unite
the differing parties, and make peace betwixt them.

By way of Proportion hereunto, the Parts of the Peace betwixt God and us,
likewise two. (1.) One Positive; Reconciliation. That he might reconcile both
unto God in one Body, verse the sixteenth, that is, that he might make up the
breach, distance, and estrangement, which sin had made, and bring us into that
state of amity and friendship, which we once enjoyed; for that is the notion of
Reconciliation, as is observed Reconciliare nihil aliud est, quam ami^^tia^
offensione aliqua gravi dicemptam resarcire, and sic iniin^cos in pristinam
concordiam reducere. Dav. in Col p. 101.
by a learned man. Where the phrase of reconciling us in one body is
observable, intimating (says Goodwin Ubi supra page 2. 3.
one) That Christ in reconciling us to God himself, carried it so, and did it
under such a consideration and respect, as necessarily drew on, and involved
our reconciliation one with another. (2.) The other is Privative, and that is,
Slaying the Enmity, removing that which was the cause and occasion of the
breach, and difference, betwixt God and us, which was only sin, which our
Savior took upon himself, and thereby took away.

Now, the Means of accomplishing both these is one, and the same, though
diversely expressed. In his flesh, verse the fifteenth, by the Cross, verse the
sixteenth, by his blood, verse the thirteenth; which comes all to one, for this
peace, both with God and one another, was wrought by the blood which he shed,
and the death which he suffered on the Cross. By all which you see that
Christ's eye in his suffering was upon the reconciling of man to man, as well as
of man to God. Now (that I may bring this home to my present purpose) is there
any thing, that can be desired, more effectual to unite the hearts of
Christians together in love, than the consideration of the Price, which our
Lord Jesus laid down for the purchase of it? How can you (Christians) expect
the fruit of Christ's death in Reconciliation to God, if you mind not the other
fruit of Reconciliation to his people? How unworthy a thing were it for you, to
uphold that enmity one against another, which Christ came to put away, and to
put away that peace and love which he came to purchase? Did it cost him so
much, even his Blood, his Life, to suppress the one, and advance the other;
and would it not be a shame for Christians, by their indulged enmities and
animosities against one another, to make (as much as in them lies) the Cross
of Christ of none effect, and his blood to be shed in vain? Consider this; and
that Jesus Christ may not loose this fruit of his great cost for your good, see
that yove love one another. I have yet one consideration more to propound to
you, which should be of no small weight, with such as profess themselves
Christians, and it is this,

Sect. 5.
The fourth Motive from his Instituting his Supper
(4.) COnsider, That one main end of his instituting the great Ordinance of the
Supper was for the upholding and confirming of mutual Love among Christians.
Rey^. Medit. on the Sacr. cap. 14. p. 103, etc.
This Sacrament is, as it were, the sinew of the Church, whereby, the
faithful, being all animated by the same Spirit, that makes them one with
Christ, are knit together in a bond of peace. Goodwins Peacemaker. p. 41.
As it was appointed to be a seal of the Covenant of Grace, between God and us,
ratified thereby: so also to be a Communion, the highest outward pledge, and
ratification, and testimony of love and amity, among the members of Christ
themselves. That it is so, is clear enough,

(1.) From that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.17. For we being many, are one bread,
and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread. The very Elements
signify Union; One bread, and One cup, import one Body. Though naturally their
parts were separated in several grains, and grapes, yet are they by the art of
man molded together, and made up into one artificial body, consisting of
diverse homogenious parts: so Christians, naturally as disjoynted in their
affections as their beings, are, by the powerful operation of Christ's Spirit,
united into one spiritual body, a Symbol, and confirmation whereof, they have
in this Sacrament; for by partaking of this one bread, they are evidenced to be
One Bread, as the Sign, and One Body, as the thing signified. And therefore the
same Apostle tells them in the 11. Chapter, verse 18, 20. that because of their
divisions and dissentions, though they did come together, it was not to eat the
Lords Supper, their very divisions crossing the end of its institution.

(2.) This appears likewise from the very act of eating and drinking, as at a
Common Feast. Patricks Mensa Mystica. Sect. 1. cap. 6. p. 122, 123. etc.
It is generally known, that among all Nations, Jews and Gentiles, their
feasting together has been for a sign of unity, conjunction of minds, and
friendly society. Hence it is that all our Companies and Fraternities in Cities
have their Guild-halls, where they meet, and ^^asts likewise at certain times,
for the main^aining of love and amicable correspondence. Therefore this
Sacrament was called by the Ancients, Synaxis, a collection, gathering
together, or assembling the faithful; namely in^o that Unity, which Christ by
his Merits ^urchased, by his Prayer obtained, and by ^is Spirit wrought in them.

(3.) This makes that Sacrament agreeable ^o its Type, the Jewish Passover,
which was not only a Feast of Remembrance, but also a Feast of Love. It was
Commanded to be one whole Lamb, and eaten in one Family, and not to have one
bone of it broken, to signify that there should be all Unity, and no Schism,
or Rupture, in the Church, which is Christ's Body. The bread also was to be
eaten without Leaven, which might signify, how far they should be removed from
the swelling of passion, and sowreness of malice, who did eat of the same
unleavened-bread. And the Apostle makes this application of it to Christians,
in reference to this Supper, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.

(4.) The Rites in use among the Primitive Christians, which were annexed to
this Sacrament, do clear this. Their Holy Kiss, Romans 16.16. which the
Apostle St. Peter calls the Kiss of Charity, 1 Peter 5.13. Their Love Feasts,
Jude 12. which (as Caena nostra de nomine rationem sui ostendit; vocatur (...),
id quod dilectio penes Graecos est. Tert. Apol. cap. 39. p. 58 See Jenkins on
Jude pt. 2. p. 256, 269
Tertullian observes) carried their Nature in their Name; called so to signify
and strengthen Love among Christians. Their collections for the poor, 1 Cor.
16.1, 2. These were all in Testimony of Love, and for the preservation of
Charity among Christians.

(5.) Our Savior himself put this out of doubt, for immediately before he
ordained this Sacrament, he gave his Disciples an Example of love in washing
their feet, which was for their instruction, to teach them to love, and
condescend to one another, John 13.15. You see by this, that one end of the
Lords Supper was for the advancement of love among Christians, nor is there any
sin more contrary to this Ordinance ( as Non est peccatum Sacramento
Eucharistiae aeque adversum atque discordia. Luth. Loci com. clas. 2. p. 141.
Luther notes) than dissension. Ushers Ser. before the Parl. on 1 Cor. 10.17.
p. 8, 9 and p. 13.
Christians therefore should remember, that as often as they come to the Lord;
table, so often do they enter into new bonds of peace, and tie themselves with
firmer knots of Love together, this blessed Communion being a sacred Seal, not
only of the union which we have with our Head by Faith, but also of our
Conjunction with the other members of the body by Love. And therefore it is a
lamentable thing, Dolendum quidem est, quum nos pauci numero idem profiteamur
Evangelium, sacrae Coenae occasion, quam praecipuum inter nos unitatis
vinculum esse decebat, in varias sententias distrahi. Calv. Epist. fol. (mihi)
page 246.
to behold how this Holy Sacrament, which was ordained by Christ to be a bond,
whereby we should be knit together in unity, is by Satan's malice, and the
corruption of Man's disposition, so strangely perverted the contrary way, that
it is made the principal occasion of that woeful distraction, which we see
among Christians at this day, and the very fuel of endless strifes and
contentions. Beloved! these things ought not so to be, though so they have
been, and still are; and Oh! that Christians would at length lay it to heart,
that Christ's end and design, in this Ordinance, may be accomplished by their
mutual love one to another, and disappointed by their differences and
dissentions. Now lay all these together, Christ's Preaching and Prayer, and
Passion, and appointing this Ordinance for the knitting of Christians hearts
together in love, and judge you, whether they are not a sufficient obligation
to all those, who profess his Name, have tasted of love from him, and bear any
real love to him again, to see that they love one another with a pure heart
fervently, 1 Pet. 1.22. With the heart, sincerely, and unfeignedly, without
complement, hypocrisy, or dissimulation. With a pure heart; pure in it self,
being purified by faith, Acts. 15.9. purified in obeying the truth through the
Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.21. pure in its love, loving not for carnal, but holy ends,
and seeking the soul-good of one another in the first place. And all this
fervently; the word is (...), Leighs Crit. Sacr. Gerh. in loc. p. 136.
which notes both the Intention of love, that it be with all the might, and
likewise the Extention of love, that it be constant without cessation or
interruption. Thus should Christians love one another, and that for Christ's
sake, who has deserved and does expect it at our hands, to whom we cannot
better express our love at this distance, than by loving those, who stand in so
near a relation to him, and are placed in such vicinity to us, that they may be
called his Proxies, to receive the fruits of our love to himself, in his
absence, from us. And therefore, for a close, give me leave to renew my
Exhortation to you, and to beseech, yea conjure you, in the words of the
Apostle Paul to his Philippians, Chapter 2. 1, 2. If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that you be like minded, having
the same love, bring of one accord, of one mind. You see it is love, and unity,
and unanimity (the Subject which I have in hand) which he exhorts unto, and Oh!
how eloquent and emphaticall, how strong and cogent is he in those arguments
which he uses for the pressing of it. I am persuaded (says Reynolds Sermon. on
the place page 2.
one) that th^re is scarce in all the Scripture to be found an Exhortation,
wherein the duties required are set on with more invincible obsecration, with
more melting and conquering persuasion, than in these words. For the uniting of
the Pilippians hearts (says Ut Philippensium animos componeret, oquam sacro
fascino usus est? Ipsa suada, credo, si loqui posset, non potuisset (...), ubi
quot verba, tot tela, quae nimirum animos nostros percellant, sodicent, and
lan^inent. Mortoni sententia de pace procurand. inter ^vangel. page 25.
another) he uses a kind of holy charm and enchantment. I believe, Persuasion
it self, could not speak more perswasively, where there are as many weapons as
words, able to work upon any heart not possessed with an iron sinew. Let us take
a short view of his Arguments.

If there be any Consolation in Christ] Reyno^ds Ubi su^^^ p. 27, etc.
Where is there Consolation, but in and by Christ, who is called the
Consolation of Israel, Luke, 2.25. and wherein stands this Consolation by him,
but in being our Peacemaker, making peace and accord betwixt God and man,
betwixt a man and himself, and betwixt Man and Man? Here lies the Spring of all
your Comfort, and if you have drawn Waters of Consolation hence with joy, and
would draw more, be like-minded, having the same love; for how can you expect
Comforts from Christ, if you minister discomforts unto one another?

If any Comfort of Love] If you have ever found sweetness in the love of God,
in the love of Christ, in Brotherly love, If you ever received comfort by my
love to you, if you desire to return any comfort back by your love to me, show
the power of that love, which is to unite the mind, hearts, souls, judgments,
and affections of Brethren one unto another, through want whereof, you will
deprive your selves of one of the sweetest comforts of Christianity.

If any fellowship of the Spirit] If you know, and have experi^nced what it is
to have 2 Cor. 13.14.
Communion with the Spirit in his Joh. 16.8
Convincing, 2 These. 2.13.
Sanctifying, John 14.26.
Teaching, Romans 8.14.
Leading, Romans 8.26.
Strengthening, John 14.16.
Comforting, and Romans 5.5.
Confirming influences, as a Spirit of Ephesians. 1.17, 18.
Wisdom and Revelation, as a Spirit of Romans 1.4 Zech 12.10.
Grace and Holiness, as a Spirit of Isa. 11.2.
Counsel and Knowledge, as a Spirit of John 16.13.
Truth, as a Spirit of Isa. 11.2. and 2 Timothy 1.7.
Might and Power, as the John 14.16.
Comforter, as a Romans 8.16.
Witness, and Ephesians. 1.13.
Seal, and verse 14.
Earnest. If you have ever found the benefit of Communion of Saints, and know
what it is to have fellowship with them in the same Relations, Principles,
Ends, Interests, Gifts, Graces, Ordinances, Providence, Privileges, Hopes, of
which 1 Cor. 12 4 7, 11, 12, 13. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.15, 16. Col. 2.19.
the Spirit of Christ is both the Vinculum, and Vehiculum, knitting and uniting
the whole Body of Saints to their Head, and the Members one to another,
furnishing every Member with supplies, and influencing with life and power, for
communicating of those supplies for the good of one another, and of the whole.
If these things are so, and you have any sense and experience of them, it will
be your great concernment to love one another; because, as there is nothing
does more further and strengthen your fellowship with the Spirit, and by the
Spirit with one another, than Love does; so there is nothing does Ephesians. 4.30,
31, 32. Mat. 12.25.
more weaken and obstruct both, than divisions and dissentions.

If any Bowels, and Mercies] In Christ toward you; if his tender heart have
been wide open to refresh you. In you toward me; if you have any sympathy
with a suffering Apostle, with a Father in bonds. In me toward you; if you
have ever found in me the compassions of a Father. In you toward your
Brethren, if you will not be like Judas, a Disciple without Bowels, whose
Bowels gushed out, a Brother without Natural affections, show this
tender-heartednesse in being like-minded one to another, having the same love.
The Bowels are wrapped round as it were within one another, and so should the
hearts and affections of believers be.

Fulfill ye my joy] Afflictions I have enough already, you need not by your
dissentions add more. A Prisoner in bonds, expecting the s^n^ence of Death, the
sword of Persecution, but ^hese things trouble me not, I can rej ice in
Dungeons, in Bonds, in Deaths, if it go well with the Church of Christ, I
prefer Jerusalem above liberty, and life, and my chiefest joys. This would
cumulate and complete my afflictions, this would be heavier than my chain,
darker than my prison, sharper than my sword, worse than a Nero unto me, if you
my Children should wound my soul with your dissentions. God has used me as a
means of much joy to you, in using me as an Instrument to administer the
Consolations of Christ, the Comforts of Love, the Fellowship of the Spirit, the
Bowels of Christianity, unto you. And God has used you as a means of much joy
to me. Your fellowship in the Gospel, my joy, Chapter 1.4, 5. Your faith in
Christ, your readiness to suffer for his Name, my joy. Your care of me, and
supplying my wants once, and again, my joy, Chapter 4.10, 16. These things are
the beginnings of joy. Would ye Complete it? would you make my soul run over
with comfort? Would ye Crown me with Glory and Joy? O then, mind the same
things, have the same love, and then I have all, I abound, and am full. There
is no greater joy to a Minister of the Gospel, than to hear that his Children
walk in the Truth, John 3.4. You see how the Apostle, fills his mouth with
arguments, that the hearts of these Philippians might be filled with love one
toward another. And I shall resume all that has been said into an heap of
Arguments, for the re-inforcing of this duty. There is Consolation in Christ,
there is Comfort of Love, there is a Fellowship of the Spirit, there are Bowels
and Mercies, there is the joy of many faithful Ministers of the Gospel to be
fulfilled, there is a great Ordinance in one main end of it to be observed,
there is the Purchase of Christ's Blood to be obtained, there is his Prayer to
be answered, and sealed, there is his Example to be imitated, there is his Love
to be returned, there is his Commandment to be obeyed, there is our
Discipleship to be manifested in the truth and power of it; and therefore it is
but equal and reasonable, nay simply necessary for all those, who bear the
Name of Christians, to love one another, and I beseech you, do it, yea, abound
and increase more and more; And the Lord, who is the God of Love and peace, 2
Cor. 13.11. make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and
toward all men, To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness
before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all
his Saints, 1 These. 3.12, 13. which though we ^ail of here upon earth, yet this
is some relief, and comfort, that it shall be fully and com^leatly obtained in
heaven, where all darkness shall be removed from the minds of Gods people, and
all corruption from their hearts, ^he cause of present strifes and contentions,
and nothing but love and concord shall sway and ^ear rule for ever; where
Luther and Zuin^lius, and all dissenting Brethren, shall be ^ade friends, and
agree well together, as Si non amplius in his terris te visurus sum, ^bi tamen
conveniemus, ubi Luthero cum Zuinglio optime convenit. Melch. Adam. in vita
Iryn. page 879.
Grynoeus wrote in a Letter to Chytraeus, a little before his death; where not
only the wound of contention is cured, but the scarr, which is ^ere often left
upon the place, is not to be seen ^here, to disfigure the beauty of its rest,
and ^eace; the consideration whereof has made Spero me brevi ex his rixis
migraturu^ esse ad Ecclesiam, in qua sine Sophistica Deus celebrabitur.
Melanct. Epist. p. 224. Spero me brevi in Ecclesiam Coelestem migraturum esse
procul remotam ab illis furiis, quae nunc Ecclesiam horribiliter turba^t. Idem.
page 514. Cupio ex hac vita migrare propter duas causas: (1) Ut fruar
desiderato conspectu Filii Dei, and Coelestis Ecclesiae: (2) Ut liberer ab
immanibus, and implacabilibus odiis Theologorum. Melch. Ad. in Vit. Strigel. p.
427.
some pious, precious souls weary of earth, and willing to be dissolved,
wishing and desiring the wings of a Dove, ( with the Prophet David, Psalm.
55.6.) that they might flee away and be at rest, in that place, where there is
a Rest remaining for the people of God, as from all other evils, so from this
of divisions and dissentions, among Brethren, Heb. 4.9

And thus much shall suffice to have been spoken concerning the first
Affection, Love to the Lord Jesus, on whom I have given the longer Attendance,
and served with the more solemnity, because of her Royalty, as Queen Regent in
the soul; As for the rest, which are her Train of Handmaids, waiting on her, I
shall dispatch them with the more ease and brevity, yet can I not wholly omit
them, forasmuch as Love her self is not complete without them. Briefly thus,

CHAP. IX.
The second branch of the first Di^^^tion, about (...) of Christ's Love.
(2.) LET your Love to the Lord Jesus, run toward him by Desire, and rest on
him by Delight, which Amor currit per desiderium, quiescit per gaudium.
it is proper for true Love to do. Know him so, as to love him, and love him
so, as to desire him, and delight in him.

Sect. 1.
Tha^ ^t be accompanied with Desire.
(1.) LET your Love to Christ run toward him in desires, earnest, hungring,
and thirsting, desires after Union, and Communion with him. The tidings which
you have of him in his word, as the Desire of all Nations, Whitak. Sermon. on the
place p. 46.
Haggai 2. 7. because of his desirableness in himself, and in comparison of
other things, Cant. 5.10.16. Proverbs 3.15. because of the Desideratus cunctis
gentibus dicitur, quonia^ omnes gentes illius adventu, and redemptione, multum
indigebant, and unaquaeque res quasi pondere naturae appetit id quo maxim
indiget. Riber. in loc.
absolute need which all have of him, without whom, they can neither live
comfortably, nor die happily, as being without God, and without hope, so far as
they are without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. and because of his desire toward them,
to do them good, and communicate of his fullness to them, Prove. 8.31. Cant.
7.10. this should render him desirable unto you, whatever he is in the thoughts
and esteem of the blind, unbelieving world, Isaiah 53.2. and should make him
actually desired by you, even by all of you, that you may taste and see how good
and gracious, how loving and lovely he is, Psalm. 34.8. And every taste which
any of you, who know, and love, and believe in him, have had of his sweetness
and fullness, should set you on longing for more, not with pain, as at first,
but with pleasure. Know Christ therefore so as to love him, and love him so as
to Amor est pondus animi, quocunque fertur; and amore fertur animus in Deum,
tanquam in centrum aeternae quietis. Aug. de civ. Dei. lib. 11. ca. 28. p. 677.
and Less. de sum. bono. lib. 2. cap. 11. p. 201, 202.
long after him, long to know him more, long to love him more, long to enjoy
him more on earth, till your knowledge, love, and longing, shall be perfectly
satisfied in heaven. Sistitur appetitus in via, satiatur in patria.
Indeed a Christians appetite is stayed with what he has from Christ for a
Viaticum in his present pilgrimage, but it is not fully satisfied, till he come
home to his own Country and Fathers House, in which respect our present life is
but a life of desires in comparison, and the life to come most properly the
life of enjoyments. Whiles the men of the world make choice of many things to
be the objects of their desires, do you pitch upon Christ, who alone is
sufficient to satisfy your desires, which all other things never can. When you
hear many say, Who will show us any good, and place that good in some outward
thing? do you with David say, Lord! lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon me, Psalm. 4.6. Whom have I in heaven but thee! and there is none on earth
that I desire besides thee, Arrowsmiths Armil. Catech. Aph. 1. Exerc. 4 page 59.
Psalm. 73.25. (f) Let Diotrephes say, It is good for me to have the
pre-eminence; Judas, It is good for me to bear the Bag: Demas, It is good for
me to embrace this present world; But do you conclude with David, Psalm. 73.38.
It is good for me to draw nigh to God. And in drawing nigh to him, let your
souls follow hard after him, Psalm. 63.8. Panting after him, as the Heart
pants after the Water brooks, Psalm. 42.1. Thirsting, and longing for him as
the dry and thirsty land for water, Psalm. 63.1. Thus pant and thirst, and long
for his manifesting himself to you in mediate communion in grace. Let him kiss
ne with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.2. Stay me with Flagons, comfort me
with apples, for I am sick of Love, Cant. 2.5. Let my beloved come into his
Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.16. Make have, my beloved, and be
thou like a Roe or a young Heart upon the mountains of spices, Cant. 8.14. And
(2.) for his coming to take you up into immediate communion with himself in
Glory. O! when shall I come, and appear before God in Glory! Psalm. 42.2. When
will thou show me the path of life, that I may come into thy presence, where is
fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. When shall I behold
thy face in righteousness, so as to be satisfied with thy likeness, Psalm.
17.15. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. Even so
come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Revel. 22.20. I conclude this in the words of
that Devout Soul -- Come, Lord, my head does burn, my heart is sick, Herberts
Poems Home. p. 99.

While thou do ever, ever stay:
Thy long deferrings wound me to the quick,
My Spirit gaspeth night and day.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee!


Sect. 2.
(2.) LET your Love to Christ rest on him by Delight. With Delight.
If you love him whom you have not seen, then, though now you see him not, yet
believing, rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, 1 Peter 1.8. If
Christ has brought you into his Chambers, remember his love more than wine, so
as to be glad, and rejoice in him, Cant. 1.4. If he has brought you into his
banqueting house, and his banner over you has been love, sit down under his
shadow with great delight, and let his fruit be sweet to your taste, Cant.
2.3.4. say with David, Psalm 116.7. Return to thy Rest O my soul, for the Lord
has dealt bountifully with me. I call for no more at your hands in this, than
the Apostle does of his beloved Philippians, and in them of all Christians,
Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice; in which words
you see both, Who it is, that is to be the Object of a Christians joy; not
himself, nor the world, nor the creature, but the Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ;
and also How he is to rejoice in him, viz. Greatly and Abundantly, Rejoice; and
again rejoice; and continually, rejoice in the Lord always: At all times, in all
conditions, unto the end. Nor is all this required without sufficient reason,
for as Good is the object of Joy, so Jesus Christ is such a good, as renders
him a most adequate object of the joy and delight of all his people See these
particulars more fully opened in D. Reynolds Sermon on Phil. 4.4. p. 8, 9, etc.
. (1.) He is a Good ever present with them, Lo, I am with you always, Mat.
28.20. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you, John 14.18. He is
bodily absent, but spiritually present, in his Ordinances, and by his Spirit he
is ever among them, to walk in them, as in his House and Temple, 2 Cor. 6.16.
Rev. 2.1. to manifest himself to them, to sup with them, and make his abode
with them, as his friends and favorites, John 14.21, 23. Rev. 3.20 (2.) He is a
most Precious Good; not an ordinary common Good, which if a man want he may
compensate with some other thing; but a Treasure and Pearl of highest price, in
whom are unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. Hidden Treasures, Col. 2.3. In
comparison of whom all other things are but loss and dung, Phil. 3.7, 8. most
precious in the eyes of his people, 1 Pet. 2.7. precious in his own immediate
excellencies, The chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. precious in the
respects he bears to us; in the sweet and intimate relations of an Husband,
Head, Savior, Brother, etc. precious in the great things he has done for us,
in the rich supplies of grace and peace he does bestow upon us, in the high
dignity whereunto he advances us, etc. (3.) He is a full and sufficient Good
for his people. There is in Christ something proportionable to all their wants.
He is Bread, Wine, Milk, Living-water to feed them, Isaiah 55.1. John 6.5. cap.
7.37. He is a Garment of righteousness, to cover and adorn them, Isaiah 61.10.
Romans 13.14. a Pysician to heal them, Mat. 9.12. A Counselor to advise them,
Isaiah 9.6. A Captain to defend them, Heb. 2.10. A Prince to Rule, a Prophet to
Teach, a Priest to make Atonement for them. A Husband to Protect, a Father to
Provide, a Foundation to Support, a Root to Quicken, an Head to Guide, a
Treasure to Enrich, a Sun to Enlighten, a Fountain to Cleanse, Acts 5.31. Acts
3.22. Heb. 10, 11, 12.21. Isaiah 54.5. Isaiah 9.6. Heb. 2.11. 1 Cor. 3.11.
Revel. 22.16. Mal. 4.2. Zech. 13.1. As the one Ocean has more Waters than all
the Rivers in the World, and one Sun more Light than all the Luminaries in
heaven: so one Christ is more All to a poor soul, than if it had the All of the
whole World a thousand times over. (4.) He is a most pure Good, without any
mixture of dross, or bitterness, to abate or corrupt the excellency of it. A
Lamb without spot, and blemish, 1 Pet. 1.19. He did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. Holy, harmless, undefiled, Heb. 7.26. Never
any believer found any thing in him, for the which to repent of making choice
of him. Even the severest things of Christ, are matters of joy unto his
servants. If he make them sorrowful, their sorrow is turned into joy, John
16.20. his very Yoke is easy, and Burden light, Mat. 11.30. his Commandments
not grievous, 1 John 5.3. nay his very Cross, and afflictions, matter of
choice, of joy, of gloriation, of triumph, Heb. 11.25, 29. Acts 5.41. Romans 5.3.
Romans 8.37. and if his sufferings are so sweet; oh then, how glorious are his
Consolations? (5.) He is the rarest Good in the world, his whole Name is
Wonderful, Isaiah 9.6. his whole dispensation mysterious, 1 Timothy 3.16. The
invisible God manifested, a Son born of a Virgin, the Lawgiver made under the
Law, the Lord of Glory, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
humbled, emptied, in the form of a servant, reckoned among transgressors,
without form or comeliness, rejected, despised, put to shame, a man of sorrows;
a dead man raised by his own power, and advanced to the Throne of God: these,
and all the particulars of Christ God-man, incarnate, and crucified, are things
so profound, and unsearchable, that the very Angels desire to look into them
with wonder and astonishment, 1 Pet. 1.12. (6.) He is a various Good, full of
exquisite, and copious variety; Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. It has pleased the Father, that in him all fullness
should dwell, Ephesians. 3.10. He received the Spirit without measure, John 3.34.
that there might be enough in him to answer all the desieres and delights of
his people. Wisdom to Teach, Righteousness to Justify, Grace to Renew Power to
Defend, Peace to Comfort, Life to Quicken, Glory to Save them; Seven eyes upon
one stone, Zech. 3.9. (7.) He is a most prevailing and victorious Good;
stronger than the strong-man, Luke 11.22. casting out, and judging the Prince
of the World, John 12, 31. chapter 16.11. abolishing death, 2 Timoth. 1.10.
taking away sin, destroying the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.5.8. and
overcoming the world, and the lusts thereof, John 16.33. treading all his
Churches enemies under his and their feet, 1 Cor. 15.25. triumphing openly over
them in his Cross, before God and Angels, Colos. 2.15. ascending up on high,
and leading Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 4.8. By a way of wisdom catching Satan by
the book of his Divine power, hidden under the infirmity of his humane nature.
By a way of Judgment condemning him for shedding the innocent blood of the Son
of God. By a way of power, vanquishing him, and casting him out of the
possession, which he had purchased. (8.) He is a perpetual and durable Good;
Death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9. He ever lives to make
intercession; Heb. 7.25. There is an Oath, an Amen upon the perpetuity of the
life and Priesthood of Christ, Psalm 110.4. Behold, I am alive for evermore,
Revel. 1.18. And he lives for ever not only in his Person, but to be for ever
the life, portion, and blessedness of his people, because he lives, they shall
live also, John 14.19. (9.) He is the proper good of his own people: He has
not only given himself unto God for them, as their Sacrifice, but he has
given himself likewise unto them, as their Portion. He is theirs and they his,
Cant. 6.3. They his, by a dear Purchase, and he theirs by a sweet Communion.
They are said to have him, 1 John 5.12. as a man has his most peculiar
possession; his Name is, The Lord our Righteousness, Jeremiah 23.6. he is more
ours, than we are our own, and we have infinitely more in him, than in our
selves; defective in our selves, complete in him; weak in our selves, strong in
him; dead in our selves, alive in him; miserable in our selves, blessed in him;
mutable in our selves, established in him. Now put all this together, Christ
being a present, precious, sufficient, pure, rare, various, victorious,
perpetual, proper Good to his people, he is so fit an Object for their Joy and
delight, that it were a wondrous absurdity for any Soul, who knows him, and
has tasted of his love, and makes profession of his Name, to be drowned in
sensual and worldly delights, or to set up his Rest in any thing short of
Christ.

Sect. 3.
(3.) LET Trust and Fear be Attendants upon the Desires and Delights of your
Love. With trust and fear.


(1.) Trust in him. If you believe in God, believe also in Christ, John 14.1.
You must take him in your way to the Father, if you would trust in him aright,
1 Peter 1.21. John 14.6. and he himself is an Object fit for your trust, who is
over all, God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. (1.) Trust therefore in him alone;
whiles some trust in themselves, leaning to their own understandings, Proverbs
3.5. trusting in their own righteousness, Ezekiel. 33.13. others in their Idols,
Psalm 115.8. others in their riches, Psalm 52.7. others in Chariots, and
Horses, Psalm 20.7. others in Man, making flesh their Arm, Jeremiah 17.5. let
Israel, let the house of Aaron, let all that fear the Lord trust in him alone,
Psalm 115.9, 10, 11. It is better to trust in the Lord Jesus, than to put
confidence in man, than to put confidence in Princes, Psalm 118.8, 9. in whom
there is no help, for their breath goes forth, they return to their earth, in
that very day their thoughts perish, Psalm 146.3, 4. But happy is he who has
the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, verse 5.
Blessed are all they that put their trust in him, Psalm 2.12. (2.) Trust in him
at all times, Psalm. 62.8. in times of prosperity, so as not to be puffed up in
pride, and presumption; In times of adversity, so as not to sink down in
dejection and despondency; In times of prosperity, so as not to forget God, and
lift up the heel against him; In times of adversity, so as not to forsake God,
and put forth your hands to iniquity. (3.) Trust in him with all your heart,
Proverbs 3.5. Praecipitur. ut non verbis, sed animo, non per hyprocrisin, and
distractionem quandam, sed rotunde and sincere faciamus, quod hic toto cord
faciendum dicitur. Cart. in loc.
With your heart, sincerely, without dissimulation, pretending to trust in him,
when indeed you trust in something else; and with all your heart, entirely,
without division, not partly resting on him, and partly leaning to your selves,
or the creature, but give him the whole trust of your whole heart. (4.) Trust
in him in reference to all your Concernments, your souls, bodies, lives,
estates, liberties, callings, duties, burdens, relations, etc. You may venture
to do it, for He is laid in Sion for a Foundation, and is a tried Stone, a
precious Cornerstone, a sure Foundation, Isaiah 28.16. the Rock of Ages, in
whom there is everlasting strength, Isaiah 26 4. able to bear the weight of
that trust which is devolved on him; In whom whosoever believes, shall not be
confounded, 1 Peter 2.6. You need not fear miscarrying, when you are in the
hands of him, who has thus loved you, with so great, so dear, and costly a
love, and out of love has undertaken for you, especially considering how great
his Truth and Faithfulness is, to whatsoever he undertakes, being Truth it
self, John 14.6. the Amen, the True and faithful Witness, Revelations 3.14. a
merciful and faithful High Priest, Hebrews 2.17. faithful to him that appointed
him, Heb. 3.2. and faithful to those for whom he was appointed, verse the
sixth. And likewise, how great a sufficiency of power and ability he has,
commensurate to his affection (being the Mighty God, Isaiah 9.6. the Almighty,
Revelations 1 8.) to accomplish all the designs of his love for your good and
happiness, against all contradiction, and opposition whatsoever; Who also is,
and was, and is to come, Revelations 1.8. everliving, to see the full
accomplishment of all by his Intercession, whereby he is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God by him, Hebrews 7.25. Stay your selves
therefore by firm trust and dependence upon him, for he will keep him in
perfect peace (in Shalom, Shalom. Heb.
peace, peace, as it is in the Original) whose mind is stayed upon him,
because he trusts in him, Isaiah 26.3. And they who know his Name, will put
their trust in him, for he has not forsaken those that se^k him, Psalm 9.10.

(2.) Fear, least from those Remains of corruption, which are within you, any
thing disingenious, or uncomely, should break forth to the distasting, and
displeasing of him, by whom you are thus beloved. He does not belong to thee, O
Lord (says Non pertinet ad ^o, Domine, n^^ de tuis est, qui te no^ diligit,
nec diligit te, qui sci^^ter essendit. Cypr. de Bapt. Christi. p. 494.
Cyprian) n^r is he in the number of thine, who does not love thee, nor does he
love thee, who knowingly off^nds thee. Even this Lord of life, and love, is to
be served with fear, and his most beloved, and loving ones, are to r^j^yce with
trembling, Psalm 2.11. S^ought. Magi. ^^ares Commission. p. 37.
We must begin all our service with fear, trembling at our own infirmities, and
must end all again with fear, blushing at our own virtues and excellencies.
That salvation, which we hope and expect from him, must be wrought out with
fear and trembling, and that because he is so gracious, as to work in us both
to will and to do, of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. The knowledge of
our Redemption by the Blood of Christ, is made an argument by the Apostle, for
passing the time of our sojourning here in fear, 1 Peter 1.17, 18, 19. But here
it may be Objected.

Sect. 4.
OBject. 1. That its said in Luke 1.74. That the end of our Redemption is, that
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve without fear?

Answ. In answer hereunto, and for the right understanding of this place, we
must distinguish Fear.

Bishop Downhams Covenant of Grace, Quarto, (mihi) p. 70, etc. See likewise
Hierons Abridgment of the Gospel. p. 130. Rivet in Psalm 2. p. 27. Scharp.
Symphon. p. 139.
(1.) In respect of the Object, There is the fear of God, and the fear of our
enemies. God has delivered us out of the hands of our enemies, that we should
serve him without fear, not of himself, but of those enemies, from whom he has
redeemed us; for as God has redeemed us from the service of our enemies, that
we might serve him: so he has freed us from the fear of them, that we might
fear him only. Isaiah 43.1. Fear not (viz. thine enemies) for I have redeemed
thee. And this serving without fear of our enemies, may be taken either
Metonymically, without cause of fear, and then without fear is as much as
without danger, as (...) (id est) (...) absque periculo. Theoph. in loc.
Theophylact takes it; which belongs to all true believers, though but
Incipients, whose salvation is sure, though they are not always sure of it. Or
else properly, without fear it self, and then, without fear, is as much as with
confidence, and assurance, as (...). Bez. in loc.
Beza takes it, making it parallel with Ephesians. 3.12. But, suppose that fear be
meant here in reference to God, then

(2.) Fear is to be distinguished in respect of the Subject, the persons
fearing, and so it is either Servile, and Slavish, the fear of Bondslaves,
which are under the Law, or Filial, and Son like, the fear of Sons, who are not
under the Law, but under Grace. The former is properly called Metus, whose
effect is Metuere ab aliquo, to be afraid of the object that is feared; The
other is Timor, whose effect is to fear and reverence the object feared. The
former is a fearful expectation of some evil from the party feared; The other
an awful reverence of the party feared, not to offend him by doing evil. So
that the formal object of the former is Malum poenae, in regard whereof they
are afraid of God, of the other Malum culpae, in regard whereof they fear to
offend God, and displease him. The former is rather Metus poena, than Timor
Dei; for if there were no punishment, they that have but this fear, would not
fear to offend God; Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. The other out of
love of God, and of goodness, though there were no punishment to be feared,
fears to offend; Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore. The former arises from
a Spirit of Bondage, Romans 8.15. called a Spirit of Fear, 2 Timothy 1.7. and
is a fruit and effect of the Law, forcing and compelling those, who are under
it, to yield some outward obedience for fear of punishment. The other arises
from a Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8. and is a fruit of the Gospel, and of Faith,
when a man being persuaded of Gods mercy and goodness toward him in Christ,
fears to offend so graci^us a God, and merciful a Father, according to that
in Psalm 130.4. The former where it is alone, is a Sinful, the latter a Godly
fear, Heb. 12.28. That a Helish, this a Holy ^ear; Aliud est timere Deum, aliud
timere poenam; aliud est timere patrem, aliud timere judicem; filius timet
patr^m, simul tame^ etiam ^um diligit, ^^r timet j^d^cem, simul autem et^am eum
odit: hic igitur servilis timor dicitur, ille autem silialis. Ferus in 1 Joan.
4.18.
That is a fear of God as a Judge, This is a fear of him as a Father: That
fears him as a Thief does the Judge, Ne puniat, least he should punish him;
This as a Son does his Father, Ne deserat, least he should forsake him: That is
accompanied with the hatred of Malefactors, Qui, quem metuunt, oderunt; This is
accompanied with the love of Children, who reverence, yet love their Parents.
That has Torment, 1 John 4.18. This is a Treasure, Isaiah 33.6. That drives
from God, This makes a man cleave faster to him. That may restrain the outward
acts of sin, but This represseth the inward affections to it. Now
questionless, it is not to be understood, that the Redeemed of the Lord shall
serve him without this filial fear, for in reference thereunto, we are required
to serve the Lord with fear, Psalm 2.11. nor can we serve him acceptably
without it, Heb. 12.28. This is one of the chiefest things which God requires
of man, Eccles. 12.13. It is the very chief point of Wisdom, Psalm 111.10. So
that when it is said in this place, that the Redeemed of the Lord must serve
him without fear, it must needs be meant of that fear only which is slavish,
and of the reign and predominacy of it, as it is in the unregenerate, witho^t
any filial fear, not of the remainders of it, as it is mingled with filial fear
in Gods own Children in this life. For such as is our Redemption (I speak of it
passively, as it is in us) such is our freedom from servile fear, viz.
inchoated, or begun in this life, and increasing by degrees, but not complete
or perfect, till the life to come, which is called the day of our full
Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. and being not complete he^e, we are not wholly freed
by it from this servile fear. The very best, whiles they carry about them the
body of sin (as they do, whiles they carry about them this body of flesh)
whiles they have the relics of corruption remaining in them, are not wholly
free from this fear of punishment, there is a mixture of it with there filial
fear in their present state of imperfection, and it has an influence to the
keeping of them from sin, and quickening of them to duty. Hildersh. on Psalm 51.
p 357, 358.
Destruction from the Lord, was a terror to Job, and kept him from opression,
Job 31.21, 23. and Paul was conscionable in his Ministry from the Terrors of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11. But this fear does not wholly prevail with the people
of God, it has not the sole influence to keep them from sin, and engage them
to duty, there is faith and love mixed with their fear. Paul was constrained by
love, as well as awed by fear, 2 Cor. 5.14. As their love to God is not a
fellow-like familiarity, as is among equals, but is (out of apprehension of his
greatness, holiness, and justice) tempered with fear, and an awful dread of
him: so neither is that fear of God which is in them, a mere servile fear, like
that of the slave, that has nothing to move him to duty, but the fear of the
whip, but is (out of an apprehension, and assurance of his goodness) mixed with
love, Hosea 3.5. You see then, that it is a mere slavish fear from which the
people of God are redeemed, so as that it shall not have the sole prevalency in
their service, though there will be some mixture of it with their love, and
will have some prevalency in their service, in their present imperfect estate.
And this I take to be the true sense of this place.

Sect. 5.
OBject. 2. But it may be said, where there is love, there is none of this
fear, for there is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, as the
Apostle has it, 1 John 4.18.

Answ. (1.) Its true, Hildersh. on Psalm 51. p. 365.
that in love there is no such fear, nothing is more contrary to the nature of
love, than these fears are; but in the person that has true love these fears
may be.

(2.) Perfect love will cast out all these fears, and the perfecter our love to
God is, the more it will cast out these fears, and deliver us from them, but
the love of the best of Gods servants, is imperfect, and will be, till we come
to heaven, for there, and there only, are the Spirits of just men made perfect,
Heb. 12.23.

Having removed these Objections, (which may be of use for the convincing of
some, that fear is not so Anti-evangelicall, as they are apt to mistake it to
be, and for the comforting of others, who are ready to conclude against
themselves, because of those remainders of servile fear, which they find in
their hearts) I resume my exhortation, and renew my request unto you, to fear
the Lord. Suppress all slavish fear, as much as may be, but cherish
Reverential and Filial fear. Fear the Lord, and his Greatness, so as to stand
in awe of him, and take heed of offending him in any thing, and fear the Lord
and his Goodness, so as to be careful to please him in all things. There is
one way of accomplishing both these, and that is, the way of Love, nor can
there be a better. G^t your hearts inflamed with love toward Christ, and that
will suppress slavish fear, for it casts out the fear that has torment, 1 John
4.18. perfect love casts it quite out, and according to a Christians growth in
love, will this fear decay in him. But it will promote Reverential and Filial
fear. In quantum quisque amat, in tantu^ timet.
As far as a man loves Christ, so far will he thus fear him; for Res soliciti
ple^^ timoris amor.
Love is full of that fear, which makes a man solicitous to avoid what may
offend, and follow what may please, him whom we love. And you have as much
reason to question the truth of your love from the defect of Reverential, and
Filial fear, as from the excess of Slavish fear.

And thus I have at last dispatched this first Direction, concerning your
Knowledge of the Love of Christ, that it be Affectionate, so as to love him in
the Manner and Measure, and to Express that Love in the Way prescribed; so as
to Desire, and Delight in him, to Trust in him, and Fear before him. I proceed
to what remains.

CHAP. XI.
(2.) LOok that your knowledge of the love of Christ be Cognitio ^ffectiva;
Direction 2. That it be an effectual knowledge.
let it not be an empty, barren, ineffectual knowledge, but such as is full,
fruitful, and effectual. And that these four ways.

Sect. 1.
(1.) BY way of Application, Experience, By way of application, with assurance
to our selves.
and Assurance. Content not your selves with the knowledge of Christ, and his
love, at a distance, but reach aster such a knowledge, as may bring all home to
your selves. Be not satisfied to know that Christ is the Savior of the world,
and has born great and wonderful love to the Sons of Men, but labor so to know
his love and salvation, as to apprehend, appropriate, and apply all to your own
comfort, and benefit. To know within your selves, as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
10.34. to know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, as Joshua speaks,
Josh. 23.14. viz. sensibly, evidently, experimentally, assuredly, that he is
your Savior, stood in your room, bore your sins, and suffered Gods wrath for
you, whereby God is as well pleased with you, as if you had suffered for them
in your own persons in hell eternally; that he bare a special love to you in
particular, and that you have a real interest in, a sure title to the
privileges, and blessings, which he, out of his infinite love, has purchased
at so dear a rate for poor sinners. Such a knowledge as this would I have you
look after, and to help you forward herein there are two things, which I would
propound for your Encouragement.

(1.) Such a knowledge of Christ's love is attainable. A Christian may know the
love of Christ with assurance of his interest in it. Culverwels White Stone p.
134.
This indeed is a most excellent truth, the flos lactis, the very cream of that
(...), that sincere milk which is to nourish souls, it is the budding and
blossoming of happiness, the Antedating of heaven, the prepossession of glory,
and therefore envied us by Satan, who by his Romish instruments would wrest it
out of our hands; But we have more clear light from Scripture, to discern the
truth of what we hold in this particular, than to be easily cheated of so fair
a Jewel of our Crown, as if it were counterfeit. Here we see so many eminent
Christians both in the Old and New Testament, setting their Seals to this
truth, by their own experience, that we cannot but subscribe to it. Ab esse ad
posse is a fair Argument, and I shall use no other to prove what I assert.

Other Christians have attained a certainty in their knowledge of Christ and
his Love, not only Objective, that there is a Christ, and that there is such a
love; but also Subjective, that this Christ is theirs, and this love theirs:
And therefore so may you. That others have, is clear. In Job 19.25. you may
hear Job appropriating a Redeemer to himself. I know that my Redeemer lives.
He asserts his interest in Christ, as his Redeemer; and therefore no wonder if
he be so confident of his being acquitted at Gods Tribunal, as he is, Chapter
13 18. I know that I shall be justified. A believer then may arrive at
assurance, full assurance of interest in Jesus Christ. Such an Application did
Thomas make to himself, when he cried out, John 20.28. My Lord, and my God. See
(says Vide Dei mirabilia, quis credidisset ex tam pertinaci incredulitate
tantam futuram fidem? Fer. in loc.
Ferus on the place) the wonderful things of God; who would have believed, that
so great faith should have risen out of such obstinate unbelief, which he had
discoverd just before? And what should this teach us, but (as the same Author
Non satis est credere, quod Dominus, and Deus sit, nisi credas, quod Dominus,
and Deus tuus sit. Fer. ibidem.
has it a little after) That it is not enough to believe that Christ is Lord
and God, unless we believe that Christ is Lord and our God. Thus the Apostle
Paul, Gal. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me. See how he applys to himself the love of Christ, and the fruits
of it. This is so clear, as the adversaries themselves cannot deny, but that
many choice ones have had a full and satisfying light springing in upon their
souls, and clearing their eternal condition to them, but then they say, it is
by way of extraordinary revelation, a special privilege vouchsafed to some
few of Gods choicest Worthies by a rare indulgence. And yet (as to the matter
in hand) the way and manner of the Apostles expressing themselves in this
particular, shows, that this is not a privilege peculiar only to a few, but
common to all believers. I shall bring two places to prove this, the one is 1
John 4.16. the other Romans 5.5. in both which places, besides their asserting
the thing it self, the great point of assurance, in most significat terms,
they speak of it in the plural number, and make mention only of common means
for obtaining of it. Let us consider the places. In the one place, says the
Apostle John, We have known and believed the love, that God has to us. In the
other place, says the Apostle Paul, The love of Christ is shed abroad into our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. Now both the one, and the
other do (1.) Assert assurance: John speaks of knowing the love of God, and the
word he uses, (...), signifies (...) Significat ve^e, certo, and solid
cognoscere. Leighs Crit. sacr.
to know truly and certainly, and it is a knowledge with Application, We know
the love that God has to us. Paul speaks of the shedding abroad the love of
God, which is no other than witnessing of this love to our hearts, as Dei
dilectio effusa dicitur, id est, abundamer t^s^ata hominum animis Grot. in loc.
Grotius observes. The sense of this love, wher^by we perceive that we are
beloved by him, and taste that he is gracious, as Charitas Dei dicitur effusa in
cordibus nostris, quia sc^sus illius charitatis est effasus, ^ea^imus e^im ^os
a D^o diligi, and gustamus, quam bon^^, and s^^vis est Dominus. Gerh. in loc
Gerhard notes. It is a Metaphorical expression, and can signify nothing else
than this, for (as Quod larg^t^r effunditur in corda no^tra, id corda replet,
and quod corda replet, id non potest anlatere, quin certissi^^e sentiatur.
Pare^s in loc.
Pareus has it) That which is plentifully poured out into our hearts, does
fill our hearts, and that which does fill our hearts, cannot be hid, but must
certainly be perceived by us. And they do (2) Express it in such a way, as
shows it to be a thing not peculiar to some few, but common to many; for first,
It is expressed plurally, not I know the love of God to me, as of one, but we
know the love of God to us, as of many besides himself: and, The love of God is
shed abroad, not into my heart only, but into our hearts, intimating that it
was not peculiar to himself, but common to other believers with himself. And
then, Secondly; They both mention a common means of obtaining it. John mentions
faith. We have known, and believed, that is, (as Cognovimus credendo, talis
enimnotitia non nisi fide percipitur Calv. in loc.
Calvin observes) We have known by believing, because such a knowledge springs
from faith. Now, though all men have not faith, 2 These. 3.2. yet all true
Christians have, and such a faith, as is capable of improving into assurance.
And then, Paul mentions the Holy Ghost, the love of God is shed abroad into our
hearts, by the Holy Ghost, whereby we come to know the things that are freely
given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now all who have real interest in Christ are
partakers of this Spirit, for If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his; All have him as a Sanctifier, and many have him as a Sealer. So
that this assurance of Christ's love, is not so peculiar unto some, nor
vouchsafed to them in such an extraordinary way, but that others may attain
unto it. Seeing therefore it has been attained by others, and is attainable by
you in an ordinary way, let the consideration of it quicken your endeavors
after it: Indeed it is not a thing which will be done Sedendo, and votis, by
sitting still, and wishing for it; no, it will cost you labor and diligence, 2
Pet. 1.10. before you come to it; but think not much of a little pains to
obtain that, which will make such abundant recompense for the pains bestowed
about it, when it is obtained. Content not your selves therefore with a low
measure of faith, but go on from faith to faith, till you come from affiance to
confidence, so as to know the love which God has unto you. And beg, beg hard
the Spirit of Christ, (which is promised to those who ask him, Luke 11.13.)
that you may know the things, which are freely given you of God, and
particularly, this love, having it shed abroad into your hearts by the Holy
Ghost, given unto you.

(2.) Such a knowledge of Christ's love, when attained, is exceeding sweet and
comfortable. I confess, your future safety and happiness lies in this, that
Christ loves you, but your present comfort lies in your knowing that he loves
you. Robinsons Essays. p. 11.
He whom God loves, though he know it not, is an happy man, but he that knows
it, knows himself to be happy, and that is most comfortable. It Is true, that
the love of Christ in it self is better than Wine, sweeter and more delightful
than all earthly delicates and creature comforts whatsoever, but it is not
sweet to us, till it be showed and sealed, manifested and assured by the kisses
of his mouth, which are the tokens and pledges of his love, which made the
Church so earnest in desiring of them, Cant. 1.2. Indeed there is no comfort
without it. Quid est Deus, nisi meus? What is God, if he be not mine? is a true
saying; and what is the love of Christ to me, if I have no share in it? And
there is but little difference (as to present comfort) betwixt having no share
in it, and not knowing whether we have or no. A condemned man that has his
pardon granted, though he shall not die, yet he has little comfort in his
life, till he know it. And though a Christian, who is beloved of Christ, shall
not perish, yet his life will be full of trouble, and his heart exceedingly
tormented, and disquieted, if he know it not, and though he go to heaven, it
will not be with such full sail, he will not have an entrance administered so
abundantly, as otherwise it might. Wall. None but Christ. p. 52.
Good and evil affect not, till it be apprehended; Job lamented not all his
losses, till a messenger related them to him; nor did Jacob rejoice that Joseph
was alive, till he knew it. Who joys in an inheritance fallen to him, till he
know it? nor can we joy in Christ as a Savior, nor in his love, till we know
him to be our Savior, and that he has loved us. The best knowledge of the
Sun, is by seeing its light, and feeling its influence; the knowledge of Honey,
is by taste; and the best knowledge of Christ and his love, is by tasting, and
seeing that he is gracious. Lay both these together, and they may be a strong
inducement to make you look after a knowledge of the love of Christ, by way of
Application, Experience, and Assurance, which is the first particular.

Sect. 2.
By way of Admiration.
(2.) BY way of Admiration. Know Jesus Christ in his love, so as to admire him
and it. We are wont to supply the defect of our apprehensions, about great and
extraordinary matters, with admiration, now what more worthy of our admiration
than Jesus Christ, whose Name is wonderful, Isaiah 9.6. and his Love, which (as
the Text tells us) passes knowledge? He is Wonderful in his Person and in his
Works, and no less wonderful in his Love, which does influence all his works
of Wonder for our good. We admire Mysteries (which Mysteriu^ est sacrum
secretum, secretam habens intelligentia^ Dav. in Col. p. 132
are holy secrets, hardly understood) and surely then we have reason to admire
Christ, to whom the great Mystery of godliness is reducible, for what is it
(according to the Apostles account, 1 Timothy 3.16) but God was manifested in the
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, received up into Glory. All which are meant (whatever
some have delivered to the contrary) of Christ, and (as Hierom said of the
Revelations, Quot verba, tot Sacramenta) I may say of these words, As many
words, so many mysteries, and as many mysteries, so many matters of admiration.
Study and meditate upon the Lord Jesus and his love, as much as you can, that
you may have some understanding of him and it, but when you have gone as far
as you can, there will be still Plus ultra. The riches that are in Christ are
unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. The love that he has manifested unto us is
unknowable love, the dimensions of it for height, d^pth, length, and breadth
are unmeasurable, verse 18.19. And therefore, when you are at a loss in your
search, stand still in holy silence, and fall to admiring what you fall so
infinitely short of apprehending. Admire him in his Philanthropie, his love to
mankind in general. That the eternal Son of God, should set his heart upon the
Sons of Men, and love them, them rather than the Angels, them, when fallen as
well as the Angels, when ungodly, rebels, and enemies; that he should love them
so as to leave his Glory, which he had from all eternity with his Father, and
be made flesh for them, and lead a life full of miseries and necessities, and
a^ last die a shameful, painful, accursed death for them, to pay their scores
to Divine Justice, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, eternal
Redemption, and Sal^ation for them. This is strange and extraordinary love,
worthy ^o b^ admired, for no reason c n be given of it, h^ love^ us thus,
because he loved us, and upon no ^ther a^count. Here then is a fit place to cry
out with David, Psalm 8.4. Lord! what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or
the son of man, that thou visitests him? What is man, Enosh, forgetful man, (
as Proprie obliviscen^em Enosh denotare videtur, Eusebius. De praepar. Evang. l.
11. (mi^i) c. 4. p. 148.
Eusebius w^ll have it, deriving it from Nashah, which signifies to forget)
forgetful of thee, and of thy benefits toward him. Or rather, Homo dicitur
Enosh, sed demum post ae^umnosum conditionem autegr^ssae praev^^cat^^ culpa i^
mun^u i roduct^^^, ca vox ^am homi^em (...), inop^ae variae, mole^ ^ori mor^is,
nec^ssitu^ moriendi, and, ut ve^bo dicem, adversis rebus obnoxium connotat.
Martinius. Lexic. Philol. in Praef. (...)
Sickly, mortal, miserable man, as others, who better derive it from Anash,
which signifies to be sick and in misery. What is this man, that thou should
be mindful of him? not so as barely to remember him, but so as t^ show eminent
care and kindness to him, as words of memory in the hebrew language do import,
according to the learned Rivet. in loc.
Rivets observation on the place: and what is the Son of Man, the Son of Adam,
the Son of him, whose original was earth and dust (as the word Adam signifies)
who by his Apostasy and rebellion had forfeited thy favor and love, What was
he, that thou should visit him? not with a grievous but gracious visitation,
not to punish and destroy him, as he had deserved, but to redeem and save him;
What matchless, admirable love was this! Admire his singular special love to
your souls; you, who are believers. That when others (after all this) are left
without the knowledge of Christ and his love, he has made it known to you, by
his Word and Gospel; that when thousands among whom you live, who hear of
Christ and his love, and have offers of both made unto them, are left with the
reins on their own necks, to follow lying vanities, and forsake their own
mercy, to refuse, resist, and rebel against all the off^rs of grace, and you
have hearts, and natures, as full of emnity and opposition against Christ as
any, and have manifested so much, and gone on to maintain it, for some time,
more or less, yet the Lord has at length turned the stream, taken the stone
out of your hearts, overcame the resistance of your froward Spirits, made you
willing in the day of his power; and drawn you effectually to run after him,
and close with him, so that you are now in Christ partakers of his love, having
it shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost given unto you, and are under
his care and keeping, till you come to receive the end of your Faith, the
salvation of your souls, to be filled with all the fullness of God, to see him
face to face, whom now you see through a glass darkly, and to be for ever
satitfied from that Fountain of love immediately, whence you have but small
snips and tastes through the Conduits of Ordinances here. Is not this strange
love? and can any other Reason be given of it, but the good pleasure of your
Redeemer? Even so because it seemed good in his sight. How should this make you
retire inward? and in contemplation and admiration of these things, cry out in
imitation of the Man after Gods own heart. 2 Samuel 7.18. Who am I, O Lord God,
and what is thy poor creature, that thou have brought me hitherto? And this was
yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God, for thou have spoken of thy
servants soul, for a great while yet to come, even so long as eternity: And is
this the manner of Man, O Lord God. And what can I say more unto thee? For
thou, Lord God, knowwest, and love thy servant, for thy loves sake, and
according to thy heart thou have done all these things, to make thy Servant
know them, and taste of them. Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God, and thy
love is great, there is none like unto it, and be thou admired and adored in
the greatness of thy love, wherewith thou have refreshed the soul of thy
Servant, for ever. Thus admire the love of Christ; and to engage you herein,
know, that it is admired by Angels, who, Calvin in loc.
with wonder and admiration, desire to look into these things, 1 Pet. 1.12. and
it shall be admired by glorified Saints, to all eternity, 2 These. 1.10. The
happiness of heaven ( says Doctor Holdsworths Ser. p. 526
one) is all ecstasy, an ecstasy of admiration at the love which has been showed
to them, and experienced by them in bringing them thither. Now it is good for
Christians to begin that work on earth, which they shall be ever doing when
they come to heaven. And let me tell you, for the further quickening of you to
this work, that the knowledge which you have of the love of Christ, which does
not leave you admiring of it, is but a dry and carnal, not a savory and
spiritual knowledge. I hope the consideration of all this, will make the Devout
Soul breath forth it self in such language as this, which he may learn of a
Bishop Halls Holy rapture, p. 212.
holy man, wherewith he ends his Patheticall Meditation of the love of Christ,
and with that I shall end this particular. Lord! what room can there be
possibly in these straight and narrow hearts of ours, for a due admiration of
thy transcendent love and mercy? I am swallowed up, O God, I am willingly
swallowed up in this bottomless abyss of thine infinite love, and there let me
dwell in a perpetual ravishment of Spirit, till being freed from this clog of
earth, and filled with the fullness of Christ, I shall be admitted to enjoy
that, which I cannot now reach to wonder at, thine incomprehensible bliss and
glory, which thou have laid up in the highest heavens for them that love thee,
in the blessed communion of all thy Saints and Angels, thy Cherubim, and
Seraphim, Thrones, Dominions, and Principalities, and Powers, in the beatifical
presence of thee the ever-living God, the eternal Father of Spirits, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, one infinite Dei^y, in three co-essentially, co-eternally,
co-equally glorious persons, To whom be blessing, honor, glory, and power, for
ever, and ever, Amen.

Sect. 3.
(3.) BY way of Gratulation. By way of Gratulation.
Know the love of Christ, so as to be Thankeful for it. Nature it self teaches
us to be grateful to those, who have showed kindness unto us, and shall we
receive so many benefits from Jesus Christ, the fruits of his mere love, and
not think every one of us, with David, of a Quid retribuam? What shall I render
to the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? Psalm 116.12. and seeing he
needs not, nor does desire more, and we can give no better, let us not be
backward to take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord,
verse 13. If he had called for some greater thing, would we not have done it?
how much more, when he says only, Offer unto God Thanksgiving, and pay thy
vows to the most high, Psalm 50.14. and counts himself glorified thereby, for
(says he verse 23.) Whosoever offers praise glorifieth me. Yea, he has let us
know, by the man after his own heart, That this praising of him with a song,
and magnifying him with thanksgiving, is better pleasing unto him, than an Ox,
or Bullock, that has horns and hoofs, Psalm 69.30, 31. The love of Christ in
redeeming and saving lost sinners should not be thought or spoken of without a
Doxology, by all that hear of it, especially by those who have tasted of it.
This should make Christians keep a perpetual (...) est gratum se declarare pro
accepto benefic^, illud agnoscendo, et autorem ejus praedicando, Dav. in
Coloss. p. 22.
Eucharist, declaring themselves thankful for so great a benefit, by
acknowledging of it, and speaking to the praise of the Author of it. The
Scripture is not without examples for your imitation in this particular, and
therefore go you forth by the footsteps of the flock, write after the Copies
which are set before you, take with you the words, and in the sense of Christ's
love, say with David Psalm. 86.12, 13. I will praise thee, O Lord, my God, with
all my heart, and I will glorify thy Name for evermore; For great is thy mercy
toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest Hell. And again,
Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me,
bless his holy Name; Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his
benefits; who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases; who
redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindnesses
and tender mercies. With the Mother of our Lord, Luke 1.46, 47. My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit does r^joyce in God my Savior, For he has
regarded the low estate of his poor servant. With those in Rev. 5.9, 12, 13.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, and has redeemed us to God by his blood,
out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing; and
therefore blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him, that sits on the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever, and ever. Finally, with John, Gratias egit,
and agere nos docet immortales Christo protantis beneficiis, quod lavit, quod
fecit Sacerdotes, and Reges Deo, and patri, Par. in loc.
Rev. 1.5, 6. Unto him that has loved us, and washed us, from our sins in his
own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father, to him
be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. Thus Christians, sound forth the
praises of him, who has thus loved you; seeing he has showed so much good
will toward you, and wrought so much peace for you, which you deserved not, do
not deny to ascribe glory to him, to whom it of so much right belongs, Luke
2.14. His heart has been enlarged in love toward you, and you are not
straightned in him. Oh! be not straightned in your own bowels, but be you also
enlarged in love, and thankfulness unto him. If the love of Christ be implanted
in our hearts, it will spring out at your lips, and your mouths will show forth
his praise; (q) If your Souls have been satisfied with this marrow and fatness,
Ps. 63.5.
your mouths will praise him with joyful lips. Whereas he, whose heart and
lips are not filled with blessing and praise to Christ for his love, gives
clear evidence against himself, that he has neither part nor lot in this
matter. He never tasted of the love of Christ, who is not thankful for it.

Sect. 4.
By way of Obligation to holiness and obedience.
(4.) BY way of Obligation to Holiness and Obedience. Know the love of Christ,
so as thereby to be restrained from sin, and constr^i^ed to duty and service.
And here I would say two things;

(1.) The love, grace, and mercy of Christ, which he has manifested in
undertaking for us, as our M^diator and Redeemer, is the strongest motive that
can be to Holiness, and Obedience. This is that which the Scripture uses, Romans
6. The scope of that wh^le Chapter is to advance Holiness and Obedience, and
the prime and principal motive, which he uses thereunto, is the Grace of God
in Christ. Ver. 1. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid.
And ver. 15. Shall we sin* because we are not under the Law, but under Grace?
God forbid. Its the Devils Logic to argue from grace to sin, from love to
looseness, which the Apostle casts off with abhorrency, as unworthy to be
entertained by an ingenu^us, gracious heart, so much as in thought, they are
ungodly men, who thus turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, Jude 4. Again
Romans 12.1, 2. I beseech you, Brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present
your Bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable, which is your reasonable
service, and be not conformed to this world, etc. You see here, that the
mercies of God are the strong bonds, by which the Apostle would draw these
Romans from following the World in the corruptions, and lusts of it, and engage
them to service and obedience: and indeed the most natural, and proper
inference from mercy is duty, and seeing our infinite misery, has met with the
infinite mercy of our God to relieve us in it, and redeem us from it, what
other can be the result of it with a serious Christian, but the yielding up of
himself to the God of his mercies? Thus 1 Cor. 6 20. Ye are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods.
The love of Christ in going to the price of our Redemption, should be a strong
obligation to us to glorify him with those Bodies and Souls, which he has
Redeemed, at so dear a rate. Thus the Apostle Peter exhorting to holiness, 1
Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. (as obedient children not fashioning yours^lvs according to
the former lusts in your ignorance, but as he which has called you is holy, so
be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. etc.) makes the love of Christ in
shedding his blood for them, the great Motive. Ver. 18, 19. Forasmuch as you
know, that you were not redeemed with corruptible things as silver and gold,
but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ. So Cap. 4.1. He makes the love of
Christ in dying for us, a strong reason, why Christians should conform to his
cross by crucifying their lusts. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us
in the flesh, arm your selves with the same mind. This love of Christ is so
strong a Motive, to Holiness and Obedience, Nisi plusquam ferrei simus, facere
non poterimus, quin totos nos devoveamus Christo, dum reputamus quanto amore
nos prosectutus est, quum mortem pro nobis subiit Calv. in 2 Cor. 5.
that unless we are more hard than iron, we cannot but devote our selves
wholly to Christ, when we consider how greatly he loved us, when he shed his
blood, and laid down his life for us.

(2.) The Love of Christ, in the ways, whereby he has expressed it to us,
especially in dying for us, and rising again, is the most effectual means to
promote our holiness and obedience. Wall none but Christ, page 68.
I have read, That five Monks were studying what was the best means to mortify
sin. One said, to meditate on Death; the second, to meditate on Judgment; the
third, to meditate of the joys of Heaven; the fourth, to meditate on the
torments of Hell; the fifth and last, to meditate of the love and sufferings of
Christ: Which indeed is the best means of all. There are bands of love called
by the Prophet, The cords of a Man, Hos. 11.4. because the most proper means to
prevail with, and work upon Man, who is a reasonable creature; with these bands
of love, the Lord Jesus draws us from sin to himself and service, as in the
forementioned place, and Jer. 31.3. These held the Apostle Paul fast bound to
his duty, and kept him from deviating, and wandering from Christ, see 2 Cor.
5.14. The love of God constrains us. He had before been speaking of the force
that fear had to make him solicitous in the service of Christ, because of the
account which he was to give, ver. 10, 11. And now he mentions the force of
love, the love of Christ, which he showed in dying for us, and this (says he)
constrains us, (...). It hems us in on every side, as men in a besieged City,
or as beasts in a pinfold (as Leighs Crit. sacr. in verbo (...).
some deduce the Metaphor) that we cannot make an escape. Metaphora est in
verbo constringendi, quanotatur fieri non posse, quin quisquis mirificum illum
amorem quem testatus est nobis Christus morte sua, vere expendit, and reputat,
quasi ei alligatur, and arctissimo vinculo constrictus, se in illius obsequium
addicat, Calv. in loc.
Or it keeps us fast bound, as with cords and bands, fortiter yet ^uaviter, not
forcedly but freely, that we cannot turn aside to the crooked ways of sin, and
disobedience to the displeasing of Christ, but must go, that we are led by him
in the ways of obedience and holiness. Totos possidet ac regit (amor Christi)
ut ejus affiatu quasi correpti agamus omnia, Bez. in loc.
It has the possession and rule of us, so as we are acted by its influence and
instinct. Now the love of Christ is an effectual means of holiness, and
obedience, two ways; by Argument, and by Power.

(1.) By Argument. This is clear by the forecited passage of the Apostle 2 Cor.
5.14.15. Where he shows, how himself and others came to be constrained by the
love of Christ, and that is by way of Argument: The love of Christ (saiyes he)
constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
dead, and that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. As if
he had said, when we set our selves seriously to consider the love of Christ,
in the eminent greatness of it, as carrying him to the Cr^sse, the Grave, to
Death for us, we find out and conclude upon the^e two things, (1.) The
miserable condition of the objects of it; for if one died for all, we determine
thus, That then were all dead Morte scilicet peccati, per quod irae Dei,
aeternisque poenis facti obnoxii, quid enim attinebat pro omnibus mori, nisi
omnes reas mortis invenisset, Calixt. in loc.
dead in sin, and thereby liable to the wrath of God and eternal punishment,
for why should he else die for all, if he had not found all in a state of
death? (2.) The Holiness of the end of it. And that he died for all, that they
who live, etc. This is our holy reasoning, and reckoning, that the end of his
love in dying for us was, that they who live, who by his favor and benefit are
redeemed from warth and damnation, should not henceforth live unto themselves,
not order their lives according to their own will, nor serve the lusts and
desires of the flesh; but unto him that died for them, and rose again; that is,
be ruled wholly by his will, and dedicate themselves to his service, living for
his use and glory, and renouncing whatsoever is contrary to him. Now this (says
he) constrains us. These are arguments so full and forcible, that we are
surrounded by them, no gap left open for sin and licentiousness, but we are
wholly bound up, and constrained in service and obedience to him, who has thus
loved us.

(2.) By Power, As there is an Argument in the love of Christ engaging
Christians to holiness and obedience: so there is a virtue and power flowing
from thence, which does enable believers thereunto. The death and resurrection
of Christ (wherein his love most eminently appeared) is not only the
meritorious and exemplary cause of our dying to sin, and living to God, but
also the efficient cause of it, by a secret power and virtue issuing from
thence to those that believe. Nam ut humanitatem Verbo unita^ virtute Verbi
excitavit a morte: sic etiam nos sibi unitos, and insitos, eadem virtute
exuscitat ad novam vitam gratiae Dav. in Colos. p. ^07
For as the Humanity being united to the Word, was by the power of the Word
raised from the dead: so those who are united to him, and implanted in him, are
by the same power raised from the death of sin to the life of grace. That there
is such a power, is clear, from Phil. 3.10. where the Apostle shows, that the
height of his ambition was to know Christ, yet not by a notional and empty, but
a powerful and effectual knowledge. That I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, that is, Brinsley Mystical Implant. p. 191.
a power and virtue, flowing from his resurrection, working the like effect in
himself, in raising him to the life of grace here, and glory hereafter. And the
fellowship of his sufferings: Calv. in loc.
Not only that which is external, and stands in the bearing of the Cross, but
also that which is inward, and stands in the mortifying of the flesh, and the
crucifying ^f the old man. And this by being made conformable unto his death,
(...), Conformis factus, or, Configuratus. Brinsley ubi supra p. 132.
Not conforming my self, by way of imitation, but, being made conformable by a
power out of my self, the power and virtue of Ch^ists death. Na^ quisquis hoc
facit, non idagit propriis viribus, sed cum Christo sepultus est in Christo
resurrexit, est igitur in Christum insitus, and Spiritu Christi vivificatus,
Dav. in Col. p. 207.
For whosoever conforms to Christ's death and resurrection, by dying to sin, and
rising again to newness of life, does it not by any power or ability of his
own, but is buried with Christ, and raised in Christ, and is therefore
implanted into him, and quickened by his Spirit. Now, this power and virtue is
drawn forth from Christ by Faith, as appears from Col. 2.12. Buried with him in
Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him, through the faith of the
operation of God, who has raised him from the dead. In which words we have the
outward Sign, which does represent a Christians communion with Christ in his
death, and resurrection, and that is Baptism; As also the inward Grace, whereby
a Christian comes to be really conformable to Christ in both; by the death of
sin, and life of grace, and that is Faith; which is set forth both in it self,
as it is the Instrument, whereby we become real partakers of the benefits of
Christ's death, and resurrection, which are signified in Baptism: And also in
its Author, and Worker, which is God, called therefore Faith of the operation
of God, to distinguish it from a false faith of our own fancying; and likewise
in its Exercise, for it pitcheth upon the power of God, put forth in raising of
Christ from the dead, and thence derives a power for the raising of the soul
from the sptritual death in sin, to a spiritual life of grace; that is the
meaning of that clause which is added, who has raised him from the dead, as
the Objectum particulare, quod fides potissimum hac in re intuetur, est Dei
potentia excitans Christum ex mortuis pro salute nostra, Dav. in loc. p. 208.
Reverend Davenant has observed.

Now, what is all this for, Christians, but to persuade you to labor after
such a knowledge of Christ and his love, as may be effectual to your Holiness
and Obedience. And I beseech you, be not satisfied without it; for,

(1.) Without this you cross and thwart Jesus Christ in one main end and design
of his love, in undertaking, acting, and suffering for us, which was not
looseness and licentiousness, but holiness and obedience, that we might serve
him, as well as be saved by him, and that we might be saved from sin, as well
as from wrath, and from the filth and power of sin, as well as the guilt and
condemnation of it. Why was he manifested in our flesh, but to take away our
sins, and that h^ might destroy the works of the Devil? 1 John 3.5.8. Why was
he called Jesus, but that he might save his people from their sins, as you find
it See Hopkins Treat on that Scripture.
Mat. 1.21. Why did he sanctify himself ( by Grot. in loc.
offering himself up to God as a sacrifice) but for our sakes, that we also
might be sanctified? Joh. 17.19. Why did he give himself for us, and bear our
sins in his own body on the Tree, but that he might sanctify and cleanse us,
that we might be presented glorious without spot or wrinkle, that we might be
holy, and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. That he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works, Tit. 2.14. That we being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness, 1
Pet. 2.24. Why did he rise again, but that he might be Lord of dead and living,
Romans 14.9. and that we might bring forth fruit unto God? Romans 7.4. Why is he
sent to any people in the Ministry of the Gospel, but to bless them in turning
them from their iniquities? as Acts 3.26. Indeed, what is the end of the whole
work of our Redemption, from first to last, but that we being delivered out of
the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life? Luke 1.74, 75. Now, what a
shame would it be for Christians, by sin and disobedience to frustrate this end
of Christ's love in dying for us, and as much as in them lies to make the Cross
and Redemption of Christ to be in vain, and of none effect?

(2.) Without this you make void your own profession; your Christianity falls
to the ground, as a thing of naught, in respect of truth and reality, and in
respect of profit and benefit to your selves. Let every one that names the
Name of Christ (says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.19.) that professes himself to be
a Christian, that being asked to whom he belongs, owns Christ for his Lord and
Master, glories in, and boasts of that relation, let every such a one, that
would be in deed and in truth, what he says and shows he is in word and tongue,
depart from iniquity, (...), let him be an Melius est Apostatam esseinferni,
and impietatis, quam coeli and pietatis, Luth. Loci com. Clas. 5. p. 116.
Apostate, make, and maintain the greatest distance from sin and iniquity; Let
him avoid it, not pass by it, turn from it, and pass away, as the Wise man
expresses it, Prove. 4.15. Otherwise, though he have a name to live, he is
dead, Rev. 3.1. He is a Christian (...), outwardly, not (...), inwardly; (...)
in the Letter, not (...), in the Spirit, as the Apostle phraseth it, Rom 2.28,
29. the shadow of Christianity he may have, but wants the substance, he may
have a profession, but wants power (which is all in all in Religion) and so is
nothing at all in Gods account. An Id^l is nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4. and a formal
Christian is no more, a painted Image without life, having eyes b^t sees not,
feet but walks not. Such as call themselves Christians, and are not so ^ndeed,
destroying the power and virtue of that h^ly Name by their wickedness, as Nos,
qui nos Christianos esse dicimus, perdimus vim tanti nominis vitio pravitatis,
Salv. de Gub. Dei lib. 3. p. 99
Salvian speaks, for a Nomen sine actu and officio suo nihil est, Idem. p. 100.
name is nothing, no not the name of Christian, without duty and action
answerable thereunto. Christi nomen induere, and non per Christi via^ pergere,
quid aliud est, quam praevaricatio divini nominis? Cypr. de Zelo (mihi) page
373.
They are mere cheats in Religion and and prevaricators of the name of Christ,
who cal^ themselves Christians, and yet walk not the way of Christ, says
Cyprian. Whatever amiableness there be in the name of Christ and the profession
of Christianity, there is none at all in those, who are without holiness and
obedience, they are but Sues cum ornamento, as Salvian ubi supra p. 101.
Salvian phraseth it, Swine still, though decked and adorned, nay they are
odious and loathsome. They who profess to know God, and in works deny him, are
abominable, Tit. 1. ult. A Christian living in sin, and serving his lusts, is a
horrible spectre, yea a monster in the account of God, says Christianus in
peccato vivens, and concupiscentiis suis serviens, horrendum spectrum, imo
monstrum censetur cora^ Deo, Dav. in Col. p. 206.
one of our own. Thus you see, that without holiness, men make void the truth
and reality of their Christianity, and for profit and benefit, they are like to
receive none by it. Our happiness (says (...), Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. p. 52.
a Father) stands not in being called, but in being Christians, and therefore,
it becomes us to look that we be not only Christians in name, but in reality.
Si vita Sanctorum nobis deerit, appellatio Sanctorum nihil proderit, Dav. in
Col. p. 9. Nihil prodest nomen sanctum habere sine moribus, Salv. de Gub. Dei
lib. 3. p. 99.
The name of Saints will be of no advantage to those, who live not Saint-like,
holy lives. Christ will profit that man nothing who is Sine Christo
Christianus, bearing his Name without participating of his Nature, and doing
his will. Professio externa nihil prodest, si adsint mala opera. Qui se Christi
esse dicit, ut vere, and cum suo bono talis sit, long absit a vita impura: Al
os quam tales Christus non agnoscit, Grot. in 2 Timothy 2.19.
An outward profession avails not, if accompanied with wicked practices; He
that says, he is Christ's, that he may be so indeed, and to his own advantage,
must keep at the greatest distance from an unholy life, for none but such does
Christ acknowledge for his own. The unprofitableness of such men's Religion may
appear from an induction of such particulars as these; for (1.) It leaves them
short of acquaintance with Christ. They who have truly learned Christ, have
been taught to put off the old man with his deceitful lusts, and to put on the
new man which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians.
4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments: He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John 2.3, 4. Again, (2.) It leaves them
short of relation to him, and interest in him. They are not Christ's, for they
who are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, Gal.
5.24. They are not the friends of Christ, for they who are such, do keep his
commandments, John 15.14. Again, (3.) It leaves them short of union with Jesus
Christ, for If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. he
walks as Christ also walked, 1 John 2.6. and that is, not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit, for the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, sets them
free from the law of sin and death, Romans 8.1, 2. Again, (4.) It leaves them
short of communion and fellowship with Jesus Christ, for those only have
fellowship with him, who walk in the Light, as he is in the Light; but if we
say, that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not
the truth, 1 John 1.6, 7. Now, how vain and unprofitable must that man's
profession needs be, which leaves him thus without Christ, without the true
knowledge of him, relation to him, union and communion with him? surely it will
never be available to salvation; and therefore no wonder, if (5.) It leaves
them short of acceptance with Christ at the last day, and admission into glory,
for (as the Scripture testifies, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23.) there be many, who cry,
Lord, Lord, make a fair outward show and profession, who, for want of doing his
will, seconding that profession with power and practice, shall be turned off
(with a Non novi vos, I know you not) among the workers of iniquity.

(3) Without this, your profession will but tend to agravate your sin, and
condemnation. (1.) Your Sin; This reflects the greatest dishonor upon Christ
and Religion, for the Name of Christ is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through
such as these, Romans 2.24. and the way of truth is evil spoken of, 2. Pet. 2.2.
The unholy lives of Christians open the mouths of Turks, and Infidels, to speak
against Christ and Christianity. Lo, these are they that worship Christ; their
religion is such as the professors are, and as the Disciples are, such is their
Lord and Master, as the worshippers are, such is he who is worshipped by them,
as Ecce quales sunt, qui Christu^ colunt, Talis profecto secta est, quales and
sectatores; Aestimari de cultoribus suis potest ille qui coli^ur. Q^^ando ^^^m
bonus Magister est, cujus tam malus videmus esse Discipulos Salv. de Gub. Dei
lib. 4. page 149.
Salvian brings them in blaspheming. Thus they increase their own personal
guilt by way of participation, the guilt of others blasphemies redounding upon
them, by whom they were occasioned. This makes Christians to be worse than
Heathens, for Thereby (as the same Ex hoc ipso utique deteriores sumus
(barbaris) si non meliores sumus qui meliores esse debemus Criminosior enim
culpa est, ubi honestior flatus, Salv. ibidem p. 133.
Salvian excellently) we are worse than they, if we are not better, because we
should be better; for the more honorable any man's state is, the more criminal
is his fault. And again, a little after, Nos qui Christiani esse dicimur, si
simile aliquid barborum impuritatibus facimus, gravius erramus. Atrocius enim
sub sancti nominis professione peccamus. Ubi sublimior est praerogativa, major
est culpa; ipsa enim errores nostros religio, quam profitemur, accusat, Salv.
ibid. p. 154.
If we who are called Christians, do any thing that is like to the impurities
of Heathens, we err worse than they, for we sin the more foully under the
profession of a holy Name; where there is the higher privilege, there is the
greater fault; for that Religion, which we profess, does accuse the offenses
which we commit. (2.) Your condemnation. Such as profess to know Christ, and
yet in works deny him, as they contract a greater guilt: so they do deserve,
and incur a greater and a sorer punishment. The higher any are raised toward
heaven, by profession, and privileges, the lower shall they be cast into hell,
if they walk not up thereunto. This is the condemnation, the very emphasis of
damnation, the sting of hell, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light, John 3.19. It had been better for such not to have
known Christ, and the way of righteousness, than to walk contrary thereunto, 2
Peter 2.21. Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah, will fare better in the day of
Judgment, and meet with an easier Hell, than such shall Mat. 11.21, etc. Their
holy name increases their guilt, and their profession of goodness, makes their
wickedness the more damnable, as Magis damnabilis est malitia, quam titulus
bonitatis accusat, and reatus impii pium nomen, Salv. lib. 4 de Gub. Dei p. 154.
Salvian observes. Now that this may never be your case,

(1.) Dwell upon the Love of Christ in Redeeming of you, by Meditation, till
you be constrained by the Argument that it carries along with it, to hate and
avoid all sin, and to yield up your selves sincerely to his service. Set your
selves therefore to meditate how far his love carried him, in doing and
suffering for you: Consider his Incarnation, Life, Death; remember, that it was
sin which put him to all that pain and trouble, that labor and sorrow which
he endured, that the removing of this evil of sin, made him so willingly
undergo all that evil of suffering, which you read of. And then, As to Sin,
reason thus with your selves; Was sin the great cause and instrument of Christ's
death? were my sins the cords that bound him, the whips that scourged him, the
thorns that wounded him, the nails that fastened him, the spear that pierced
him, and fetched his heart-blood from him? and shall I love the sins that killed
my Savior? shall I use them kindly, who thus abused him? God forbid. I would
not embrace him as a friend, who had slain my Father, nor hug in my bosom that
Serpent which had stung my friend to death; and shall I entertain and cherish
sin, which has dealt worse than so with my everlasting Father, my best Friend?
far be it from me. Again, Did Jesus Christ do, and suffer, all this out of his
love to me, but extreme hatred against sin, and shall I so ill requite his
love, as to love that which he hated? Did he come to take away sin, and shall I
resume and embrace it? was he sent to condemn it, and shall I justify it? was
he manifested to destroy the works of the Devil, and shall I save them? did he
die for sin, Clarks Lives, quarto, p. 189. The Glory of their times, p. 471,
and shall I live in it? was he cut of to finish transgression and make an end
of sins, and shall I continue in sin, that grace may abound? does he make daily
approaches to me, to turn me from mine iniquities, and shall I as constantly
return to them? God forbid. Methinks the consideration of these things should
set a Christian as far from sin, as Anselme was, who said, (x) That if he
should see the shame of sin on the one hand, and the pains of hell on the
other, and must of necessity choose one, he would rather be trust into hell
without sin, than go into heaven with sin. And for Service, reckon thus with
your selves; If the Lord Jesus has thus loved me, to suffer such indignities
and hardships for me, and bestow so many, so great, so wonderful blessings upon
me, surely I owe the greatest love, duty, and obedience to him; Sane etiamsi
millies pro ejus gloria possem sanguinem fundere, and mill annis maximos
labores subire, ne millessima^ partem vel unius beneficii possem compensare,
etc. Less. de Sum. bono. lib 4. c. 4. p. 577.
Surely, were I able a thousand times, to shed my blood for his glory, and to
undergo the hardest labors a thousand years, I were never able to make a
compensation for the thousand part of one of his benefits, because all his
benefits are of infinite worth, and, were we able to give it, would require
infinite love and service at our hands. But because we cannot do that, I firmly
resolve to do that which I easily may (through his assistance) and wherewith
the Divine goodness is well pleased, namely, with all care to keep all his
Commandments, so that I will rather die, than wilfully break any of them; yea,
I will devote my whole life to his service, that all my thoughts, words, and
actions may be directed to his glory. Thus reason your selves into the
obedience and service of Jesus Christ, by the consideration of his great love
toward you, in being humbled, and becoming obedient to the death of the Cross
for you.

(2.) Draw forth by faith the Power of Christ's love, in dying for you, and
rising again, for the bringing you into conformity thereunto. By faith believe
that there is such a power, and apprehend, and apply it to your selves, till
you find, That you are planted toge her with Christ in the likeness of his
death and resurrection Romans 6, 5. So that what was done in him naturally and
properly, be done in you by way of Analogy and Proportion, as Quod in Christo
sactum est per naturam, id in nobis fieri intelligit per analogiam, and
proportionem, Chrysostom. in loc.
Chrysostom expounds these words. That as he died a true, natural death for
sin by a real separation of his soul from his body: so you may die a true
spiritual death to sin, by a real separation of your souls from the body of
sin; not from this or that member, but from the whole body, and every member;
For Non mundatur nisi qui omnibus peccatis renunciavit. Quis enim mundum
dixerit hominem, qui vel in una tantum cloaca volatetur, Paris. de virtut. cap.
22.
as none will account that man clean, who is found wallowing but in one filthy
sink; so neither is that Christian clean, who has not renounced all his sins.
As his was, though violent and painful, yet voluntary death, he gave himself
for ^our sins, Gal. 1.4. and laid down his life freely, John 10.17, 18. So,
though in the mortification of your lusts you offer violence, to them and
suffer pain in your selves, many an agony, and soul conflict, yet your dying to
sin must be voluntary, and the sacrificing of your lusts a freewill offering to
the Lord. That as his Resurrection was to a new life; so you may be raised up
from the death of sin to walk i^ newness of life, Rom 6.4. having a new
principle, the Spirit and not the flesh; a new rule, the word and not the
world, a new end, not your selves but God, the praise and glory of God, Phil.
1.11, For so Jesus Christ, in that he lives, he lives unto God, Romans 6.10, In
the Greek it is, (...), which Beza renders in gloriam, thinking, that (...) is
put for (...), and that the Apostle intends by this clause to set forth the
final cause of Christ's resurrection which is the glory of the Father, vide Bez.
in loc.
To the glory of God the Father, v. 4. As he being raised from the dead died no
more, death has no more dominion over him, v. 9. So you being raised from sin
may no more be turned to folly, sin may have no more dominion over you. Thus
conform your selves to Christ in his death and resurrection, which because you
cannot do of your selves, by your own power, exercise faith on the operation of
God in raising of Christ from the dead, till you come to know experimentally
the power of his resurrection, feeling the same power put forth in your selves,
for the raising you up to newness of life, and making you conformable to his
death. So much for that second Direction concerning your knowledge of the love
of Christ, that it be effectual. There is yet one more, which is this.

CHAP. XI.
Direct. 3. That it be a progressive knowledge.
(3.) LOok that your knowledge of the love of Christ be Cognitio progressiva, a
progressive knowledge, and that in two respects.

Sect. 1.
(1.) IN respect of your selves. In respect of our selves
Be not content that you have a true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and his love,
nor take up your rest in any measure of that knowledge, to which you have
already attained, but labor to abound, and increase more and more. Do you know
the love of Christ with an affectionate, and effectual knowledge, as you have
been directed? yet stay not here, but go on to know him and it more
affectionatly, so as to love him more abundantly, to desire him more ardently,
to delight in him more contentedly, to trust in him more firmly, and to fear
offending him more solicitously; go on to know him more effectually, so as to
apprehend his love more confidently, and apply it to your selves more
assuredly, to admire it more humbly, to be more cordially, and fruitfully
thankful for it, to be further removed from sin, even the least appearance of
it, and more devoted to his service, standing complete, and perfect in all the
will of your God. To this purpose consider,

(1.) That it is the property of every true Christian thus to grow and increase
more and more. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more
and more till it be perfect day, Prove. 4.18. The righteous shall hold on his
way, and he that has clean hands shall wax stronger and stronger, Job. 17.9.
You cannot evidence, that you know Christ at all in truth, unless you grow in
the knowledge of him, for, Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the
Lord, Hos 6.3. Thus the Apostle Paul says of himself, Phil. 3 12, 13, 14. Not
as though I had attained, either were already perfect, but I follow after, if
that I may apprehend that, for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus;
Brethren, I I count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth to those things
which are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus. You see that the Apostle (though I believe one of the
highest form in the School of Christ) did not pretend unto perfection, only
was continually going forward, and making a proficiency, and this is the
property of every gracious man, who (as Nunquam justus arbitratus se
comprehendisse, nunquam dicit, satis est, sed semper esurit, sititque
justitiam, it a ut si semper viveret, semper quantum in se est, justior esse
contenderit, semper de bono in melius proficere totis viribus conaretur, Bern.
Ep. 252. page 262.
Bernard has it) does never think, that he has attained, never says that it
is enough, but is always hungring and thirsting after righteousness, so that if
he should always live, he would always (as much as in him lies) strive to be more
righteous, he would always endeavor with all his might to go forward from good
to better. Mant. on Jude, page
Where there is life, there will be growth, and if grace be true it will surely
increase. Though a painted tree or flower keeps always at the same pitch, and
will be as little ten years hence, as it is now; yet a living tree, a living
flower, grows on still toward perfection, so though Pretenders of Religion
keep at a stay, or rathre, when their first heats are spent, are fearfully
blasted; yet those who have true grace, who are compared to living plant^ and
trees, do grow in bulk and stature, in beauty and fruitfulness, This is
excellently set forth by the Psalmist Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14. The Righteous shall
flourish like the Palm tree, he shall grow like a Caedar in Lebanon: Those
that be planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our
God: They shall still bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and
flourishing. Godwins Christian growth, p. 57. Car. on Job. vol. 7. page 397.
Here is not only a mention of growing but of flourishing, and here is
flourishing thrice mentioned, and it is not only growing and flourishing like a
tree, but like a palm tree ( Alciat. Embl. 36. page 177.
which flourishes under oppression) and like a Cedar (which of all trees is
said to be the tallest, and shoots up highest, and its Schrevel. Comment. in
Virg. Aeneid. l. 7. p. 666 Plin. Not. hist. lib 16 cap. 40. p. 491. Erasm.
Adag. p. 181, 195. Schrevel in Pers. Sat. 1 Casaub. in Pers. p. 87.
wood most durable) like a Cedar, not growing in ordinary places, but in
Lebanon, where were the goodliest Cedars: Nor does the Spirit promise here a
flourishing of boughs and leaves only, as some trees do, and no more, but in
fruit; and this not only for fruit once in a year, or for one year, but they
still bring forth fruit: and that not only in their youth and beginning of
grace, but in old age; and that not only in the entrance of that state which
is called old age, threescore years, but that which the Scripture calls the
perfection of old age, threescore years and ten, grayheaded old age ( Filius 60
annoru^ ad senectutem, filius 70 annoru^ ad canitie^ pervenit. Buxt. Lex. in
verbo (Seib) Tailor. capit. patr. cap. 5. p. 32 Caryll. on Job, v. 5. p. 32. ex
Diu.
as the learned Hebrews observe upon the word here used) for that which follows
to an hundred years, and upward is dotage, as they reckon it. What a divine
Climax does the Spirit of God make in this Scripture, to show that the
godlyman, as to his state, is so far from declining, that he is still climbing
higher and higher: To the same purpose is that of Hos. 14.5, 6. I will be as a
dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly and cast forth his roots as
Lebanon, his branches shall spread and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree,
and his smell as Lebanon. Which shows how Christians grow by all ways of
growth, upward and downward, in root, branches, and fruit; and this fruit
eminent in fairness and sweetness, as the Olive tree, as Lebanon. Though the
body of a picture does not grow, yet the body of a living man does, and so does
the body of Christ, and every member thereof, that is truly of the body, not
tied thereto by an outward profession only, but closely knit by a real union,
as is expressed by the Apostle in two places, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Col. 2.19. in both
which places he shows the manner of spiritual growth in the Mystical Body of
Christ, by proportion of the growth of Members in the Not ral Body. Christ is
the Head, from whom the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplieth according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, makes increase to the edifying of it self in love. See Bish.
Reynolds on Hos. 14. Ser. 5. p. 42 to 50. where this place is largely opened.
Christians by a spirit of faith are united to Christ, as an head; and by a
spirit of love to one another, as members; from which union flows a communion
both with Christ and one another, and from thence (...), a supply, or
demonstration of nourishment, and also (...), an energy or effectual working,
and from all a growth and increase, even with the increase of God, a mighty and
great increase, according to the Scripture phrase. Thus you see that true
Christians, do grow, and if ever you would approve your selves Disciples
indeed, members of Christ's Body, and planted in his house, you must grow
likewise; it is but a sad sign of hypocrisy, when there is no proficiency.
Minime pro certo est bonus, qui melior esse non vult, and ubi incipis nolle
fieri melior, ibi etia^ desinis esse bonus, Ber. Epist. 91. p. 230.
For certain, he is not good, who has no mind to be better; he is stark
naught, that desires not to be as good as the best. That Is the first
Consideration.

(2.) Consider, that the highest Christians stand in need of further growth and
proficiency. Its true, Jenk. on Jude p. 162.
he that has the least grace and acquaintance with Christ, has enough to make
him thankful, but he that has the most, has not enough to make him idle. So
long as there is want there should be growth; now grace is not given out at
once, but by degrees, where grace is truly wrought, yea gotten to some good
degree, yet there is something lacking, till grace be perfected in glory, 1
These. 3.10. Here we are in a state of growth and progress, not of rest and
perfection, all our present perfection is but an unwearied study, and constant
endeavor to go on toward perfection, as the Indefessum proficiendi studium,
and jugis conatus ad perfectionem, perfectio reputatur, Bern. Epist. 253. p.
262.
Father speaks. Mant. on Jude p. 120.
Christ says in his last prayer to his Father, John 17.26. I have declared
unto them thy Name, and will declare it; and to Nathaniel, John 1.50. Believe
thou? thou shall see greater things than these. There is more to come, and
therefore we should not rest in present experiences. He were a foolish builder,
who would rest in the middle of his work, and, because the foundation is laid,
never mind the super structure: and they are no wise Christians, who content
themselves that they are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, and do not take care to grow into an holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians.
2.20, 21. As we must not always stick in principlss, but go on to perfection: so
those, who have made the greatest progress, will find cause (by reason of what
is still lacking in them) of making further proficiency, till they come to be
perfect men and women, and reach the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. Even Paul (as you heard before) did not count that he had
attained, but saw a need of pressing forward, Phil. 3. and then surely much
more we. That Is the second Consideration.

(3.) Consider, that this is the duty of every Christian. It is not enough that
you have grace and knowledge, but you must grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; so you are required to do, 2. Pet. 3.18.
It is not enough that you be in Christ, rooted in him, but you must grow up
into him in all things, and be built up in him, Ephesians. 4.15. Col. 2.7. The
Christian must be like the Crocodile, that (as Arist. de Hist. Anim. lib. 5.
cap. 33. Franz. Hist. Anim. sacr. p. 199.
some affirm) grows as long as it lives, and cease to be when it cease to
grow. Jenkins on Jude p. 162.
Christianity knows no Enough, the degrees of a Christians grace, and knowledge
of Christ, must be like numbers, the highest whereof being numbered, a higher
than that may yet be named. The Motto of every Christian should be that of
Charles the fifth, Rivet on Hos. p. 653
Plus ultra, accounting that there is More yet beyond to be attained unto. We
are never gotten far enough, till we are gotten home, nor must we ever cease
growing, till we grow into heaven. If perfection be our pattern, proficiency is
our duty. Mant. on Jude page 121, 123.
Jesus Christ himself grew when he was upon earth, we read not that he grew in
grace, but we read that he grew in knowledge, Luke 2.40. He grew in wisdom, and
stature; the meaning is, his human capacity was enlarged by degrees, according
to his progress in age and strength, for in all things he was like us except
sin; and our reason is ripened, and perfected together with our age. Now,
Christians must be conformed to Christ in all things, and grow in grace and
knowledge, as he grew in wisdom. That Is the third Consideration.

(4) Consider, that it is such a Duty, as has much profit, or damage,
entailed upon the observance, or neglect, of it.

(1.) There is much profit redounds to them who put in practice this duty of
growing in grace and in the knowledge of Christ, for (besides their present
honor in the sight of others, and comfort in their own bosoms) it will add to
their Crown and Glory hereafter. Jenkins on Jude p. 165, 166
If any shall follow the Lamb, in whiter and larger robes of glory than others,
they are those, whom he has adorned most with the robes of grace here. If any
shine brighter than others in heaven, they shall be those, who have been
brightest in grace upon earth. Though glory be not bestowed for any merit in
grace, yet I see no inconvenience to hold, that it is bestowed according to the
proportion of grace. If the more grace a Saint has, the more he be fitted for
glory, then the more grace he has, the more (it is likely) he shall be filled
with glory; The more the soul is widened with grace, the more capacious will it
be of glory; The heaviest Crowns are fittest for the strongest heads.

(2.) On the other side, there is no small damage redounds to such as neglect
to grow, and increase. Gurnals Christian Armor, Part 3. page 694.
There is no such thing in Religion, as a saving Trade of godliness; some men
in their worldly Trade can say at the years end, that they have neither got nor
lost, but you cannot say thus at the days end, that you are in the evening
neither better nor worse than you were in the morning. We are like those, who
are upon a swift stream, if they let their Oar miss its stroke, they are
driven back again; like those who are going up a sandy hill, who sink lower, if
they get not up higher. In viis Domini non proficere est deficere, non progredi
est regredi, Balduin in Ephesians. (mihi) p. 175.
In the ways of God, not to make proficiency is to decline, not to go forward
is to go backward. There is no standing at a stay in Christianity, Aut
ascendas, necesse est, aut descendas; si attentas stare, ruas necesse est,
Bern. Epist. 91. p. 230.
Either we ascend or descend, and if we attempt to stand still, we must needs
fall down. The grace which a true Christian has will soon be less, if he add
not to it, and that which a hypocrite seemed to have will be none at all, if he
stick in that condition. Hypocrisy (without repentance) will end in Apostasy.
Mant. on Jude p. 118, 119.
We cannot keep that which we have received, if we do not labor to increase
it; He that would not improve his Talent, lost it, Mat. 25. so here, we wast
and consume what we have, if we do not improve it. There are no stinted Trees
in Christ's Garden, if they leave off to grow, they prove do^ted, or rotten
Trees. An active nature, such as man's is, must either grow worse, or better;
therefore we should be careful of the increase of grace, as we would be
cautions of the loss of grace. Wherefore (to conclude this) As you would be
Christians indeed; As you would answer the imperfection of your present
condition; As you would be obedient to the command of God; As you would not
lose that which you have wrought, but receive a full reward; labor to grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus. Thus let it be a progressive
knowledge in respect of your selves.

Sect. 2.
(2.) IN respect of others. Do what you can for propagating the knowledge of
Christ unto others. To help this forward a little, In respect of others.
consider,

(1.) That if you are Christ^ans indeed, you will do it. There is nothing more
covetous, or prodigal than grace is, a Saint loves to be receiving from God,
and imparting unto others. Reyn. on Hos. 14. Ser. 5. p. 41
The nature of grace is too manifest it self, and by that means to allure
others, and gather to its own quality. It is set forth in Scripture by the
names of Light, which shines abroad; of Ointment, and Perfume, which cannot be
hid; of Leaven and Salt, which deriveth its own nature, and relish upon a whole
lump. Therefore the Holy Ghost was given in Tongues, fiery Tongues, and a
rushing wind, all which have a quality of self manif station, and notifying
themselves to others. Jeak. on Jude, page, 164
The whole country fares the better for arich Cristians, he keeps open
House, the more he has the more he gives he labors to make all like himself,
his bonds only excepted. The lips of the righteous feed many, says Solomon,
Prove. 10.21. David promises, upon his own experiencing Gods mercy to himself,
to teach Transgressors his ways, Psalm. 51.13. and so he did, Psalm. 34.8, 11. O
taste and see that the Lord is good. Come ye children, hearken unto me, and I
will teach you the fear of the Lord. As soon as Andrew had met with-Christ, he
found out and brought his brother Simon to him, John 1.40, 41, 42. As soon as
Philip was called to Christ, he found out Nathaniel, and brought him to Christ
also, verse 43, 45. When the Woman of Samaria had met with Christ, she went and
called her friends and neighbors out of the City, to come to him, John 4.28,
29, 30. Nor can it be otherwise, See Hildersham on the 4th. of John Lect. 49.
which is all on this subject.
for the love which they bear to Christ, constrains them to do all they can to
enlarge his Kingdom; and the love they bear to their neighbors, makes them do
all they can to further the good of their souls. Consider further,

(2.) You shall be no losers in so doing; for, besides the glory which redounds
to Christ (whose honor, as King of Saints, is in the multitude of Converts, as
an earthly Kings is in the multitude of his Subjects, Proverbs 14.28.) it will
tend much to your own benefit, and advantage, and that both in grace here, and
in glory hereafter. (1.) In grace here, There is no better way to grow in
grace, and the knowledge of Christ your selves, than by communicating what you
have unto others. Hildersh. ubi supra.
The more you draw unto the knowledge of Christ, the more will your own
knowledge of him increase, Romans 1.11.12. This is like casting of seed into the
earth, which brings it back again with great increse. Because God knew Abraham
would make good use of that which he knew, for the instruction of his Family,
therefore he would hide nothing from him, Genesis 18.19. (2.) In glory hereafter;
for being employed as Instruments in carrying on this highest and noblest of
works, the converting of men, and so saving their souls from death, and hiding
a multitude of sins, James 5. ult. they shall receive the greater recompense of
reward, Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the
Stars for ever and ever. Let these considerations move you to set upon this
work, in those ways whereby it is most likely to be accomplished. Now, though
there are some ways which are peculiar to some particular persons, yet there
are others common unto all Christians. The Ministers of the Gospel are to
disperse the knowledge of Christ by preaching, that the sweet savor thereof
may ( through the good hand of God upon them) be manifested in all the places
whither they are sent, to the attracting and drawnig of Souls to come in unto
him, 2 Cor. 2.14. Magistrates are to do it by their authority, providing
Orthodox Ministers for the work forementioned, and encourageing them in it.
Thus did Jehosaphat 2 Chronicles. 17.8, 9. and Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30.22. Learned men
are to do it by their pens, recording, and transmitting to posterity the truth,
as it is in Jesus. Rich men are to do it by their purses, who are to honor the
Lord with their Substance, Prove. 3 9. nor can they do it better, than by
employing what they have to further the propagation of the Gospel, for the
increase of the knowledge of Christ, among the Sons of men. But besides these,
there are three things, which all Christians may, and ought to do toward the
progress of the knowledge of Christ, among others, and I advise all, into
whose hands this shall come, that, upon the former considerations, they would
seriously mind the doing of them. 1. The first is Prayer. This is Primus
vagitus infantis Christiani, the first cry of an Infant Christian, nor is he a
child of God, who is no acquainted with it. Now look that one strain in your
Prayers sound this way, That the Lord of the harvest, would send forth
laborers into his harvest, Mat. 9.38. That he would give pastors after his own
heart, to feed his people, with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3.15. That he
would ^pen unto them whom he sends forth, a door of utterance, that they may
speak the mystery of Christ boldly, as they ought to speak, Col. 4.3, 4. Ephesians.
6 19, 20. That they may be delivered from unreasonable men, who believe not,
and their service may be excepted of the Saints, 2 These. 3.2. Rom 15, 30, 31.
That a great do^r and effectual may be opened among their people, though they
have many adversaries. 1 Cor. 16.9. That they may come in the fullness of the
blessing of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15.29 and the savor of his knowledge
may be manifested by them in every place, 2 Cor. 2.14. That thus the Bishop
Tailors Grand. Exempl. p. 359. Dr. Hamon Plact Cat. p. 310. 4o.
Kingdom of Christ may come, Mat. 6.10. and his Gospel run and be glorified,
2 These. 3.1. and his way may be known upon earth, his saving health among all
Nations, Psalm. 67.2. and the Earth may be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, Isaiah 11.9. This is one excellent way. 2.
The second is I struction. Let those who know Jesus Christ themselves, teach
the knowledge of him to others, as they have ability and opportunity,
especially their Families, Friends, Relations, and Neighbors. Instruct the
ignorant in the ways of Christ, admonish the unruly, who wander from him, and
stand out against him; encourage the towardly, support the weak, comfort the
feeble minded, 1 These. 5.14. Tell those, with whom you have to do, how good the
Lord is, what he has done for your souls: tell them of Christ's unsearchable
riches, his infinite love, the great things which he has done, and suffered
for poor sinners, their misery without him, their happiness in him, and
persuade them to come in to him, and close with him, and taste how good and
gracious he is, Psalm. 66.16. Psalm. 34.8. that is another way. 3. The third is
Example; the good conversation of Christians do notably adorn the doctrine of
God our Savior, Tit. 2.10 and win such as are without to profess the same
Gospel, and embrace the same Christ with themselves, 1 Pet. 3.1. whereas their
evil conversation opens the mouths and heardens the hearts of evil men
against Christ, and his ways, Romans 2.24. 2 Pet. 2.2. Look then, That your
conversation be such as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. That you be blamless,
and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked, and
perverse Nation, shining as lights in the world, Phil. 2.15. That you deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and live soberly, and righteously, and godly in
this present world, Tit. 2.12. That as he which has called you is holy, so you
be holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 2.15. Take heed that your lives
be not contradictory to your prayers, lest you pull down with the one hand more
than you build with the other; but let all go together, fervent prayers, solemn
instructions, and an holy life, whereby you may become hopefully instrumental
for propagating the knowledge of Christ unto others. Thus look that your
knowledge of the love of Christ be not only Affectionate and Effectual, but
also Progressive in those two particulars which have been mentioned. And this
is all which I have to say by way of Direction in this point of knowing the
love of Christ.

CHAP. XIII.
General Motives, to labor after this knowledge of Christ's Love.
THere is yet one thing more to be done, before I shut up this Use, and that is,
to lay down some Motives, for the exciting of you to look after this knowledge
of the love of Christ. This indeed has been done already, but the former
Motives have been suited to the particulars, through which we have gone; what I
have now to add will respect the whole matter, the knowledge of Christ's love in
general; And these Motives shall be only those encouraging ones, which are laid
down by the Apostle within the veiw of the Text, that you may not be
disheartened, from the pursuit, and persecution of that, to which you have been
exhorted.

Now these are drawn 1. From the Evidence, that this knowledge of Christ's love
gives unto 2. From the Influence that it has upon
those that have attained unto it.

Sect. 1.
(1.) FRom the Evidence, which this knowledge of Christ's love gives unto those,
who have attained unto it.

(1.) Labor to know this love of Christ, as you have been directed, for this
will be an evidence of your present Saintship. I gather it from what the
Apostle speaks, ver. 18. That you may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
etc. All that bear the name of Christ should study to know the love of Christ,
it is their duty; but only such as are partakers of Christ, and are real
Saints, are able to comprehend it; All they are able (not all alike, but every
one according to his measure, all in part, not any perfectly) and only they.
Jennes Scholast. Pract. Div. Vol. 1. Of Christ's fullness, page 223.
The knowledge of Christ's love is the privilege of the Saints, common to all
believers, yet so proper and peculiar to them, as that it belongs to none but
Saints. So that if you have an effectionate, effectual, growing knowledge of
the love of Christ, then you are Saints; but on the other side, if you live in
ignorance of the love of Christ, or content your selves with a notional,
ineffectual, stinted knowledge of it, you can have no evidence of your
Saintship. Many are called to be Saints, which yet cannot be called Saints,
some are called Saints, which yet are not Saints, if you would be Saints
indeed, as well as called to be such, or called such, be sure you be not found
without the knowledge of the love of Christ, and such a knowledge as has been
propounded to you.

(2.) It will be an Evidence of your Title unto, and interest in, that Glory
which is to be revealed in the World to come. This follows upon the former; for
those who are gracious Saints on earth, may be confident they shall be glorious
Saints in heaven, whereas those who are not Saints here, cannot be saved
hereafter; Without sanctification no salvation, 2 These. 2.13. Without holiness
no seeing the face of God, Heb. 12.14. And this is evidenced from a true
knowledge of Christ, for this the Apostle makes the end of his praying, that
these Ephesians might know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, viz.
That they might be filled with all the fullness of God, as it immediately
follows the Text. Which though some understand of that which is to be enjoyed
here, yet I rather take it, as relating to the glory and happiness of heaven.
For though it has pleased the Father, that in Christ should all fullness dwell,
Col. 1.19. and all believers do from his fullness receive grace for grace, John
1.16. and they are complete in him, Col. 2.10. (...), filled in him (the same
word with that in the Text) and that in this life, yet you must understand it
aright. Bodius in Ephesians. p. 402.
They are complete in him; not in themselves, but in him, who is their Head, and
they by virtue of Union with him, as Members with their Head, may lay claim to
his fullness. Again, they are complete with such a fullness, as is agreeable to
their present state; that is, they have found in him all things requisite to
their perfect Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, and eternal
Salvation, so that they need not go out to any other to make up what is wanting
in him. And therefore (taking it in reference to eternal glory) it is not meant
of a simple and absolute compleatness, but of such as so (...), in some sense
only, that is, initiall, not perfect by faith and hope, not full fruition; jure
potius, quam re, by right to it, rather than possession of it. They are
complete in him, as expectants of a glory to come, not as spectators of a glory
that is present, as militant, not as triumphant, as passing toward, not
reigning in their heavenly country, with a fullness competent to their present
condition, not with all the fullness of God, which is not enjoyed by any, till
they come among the Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. which is only
in heaven. Fergus. on the place, p. 214.
So that the Apostle, when he speaks of being filled with all the fullness of
God, seems to aim at the setting forth of that most glorious and blessed estate
of believers in heaven, where the Saints shall have the most immediate, and
fullest enjoyment of God that they are capable of. Jeanes ubi supra p. 224.
There will be a full knowledge of God in the beatifical vision; the full Image
of God; a full participation of the Divine Nature; a full union with, and
fruition of God; full and immediate influences from God, according to that of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.28. where he says, God shall be all in all, that is, in
all the elect he shall be vice omnium, instead of all Ordinances to their
souls, and instead of all means and helps to their bodies. And I saw no Temple
therein (says Saint John, Rev. 21.22, 23.) for the Lord God Almighty, and the
Lamb, are the Temple of it; And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the
Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the
light thereof. The meaning of the place is, that God shall immediately, by
himself, supply the room of all external means unto his glorified Saints in
heaven. There they shall be filled with all this fullness of God; Though the
Saints, even in heaven, shall not take in all of God, (for that is impossible
for finite creature^) yet as much as is possible for them they shall, and as
much as is nec^ssary to make them perfectly blessed; here, when they have
gotten most, there is something, yea much wanting, but then they shall be
filled as full as they can hold. The Vessels of glory will then be enlarged to
take in more, than now is possible for them, and according to that capacity
they shall be filled with all the fullness of God. Now, forasmuch as this
knowledge of the love of Christ, which has been treated of, is a good evidence
of right, and title, to this blessed condition, it may be a strong Motive to
you to labor to be filled with the knowledge of the love of Christ here, that
you may be filled with all the fullness of God hereafter.

Sect. 2.
(2.) FRom the Influence which it has upon all those, who have attained unto
it. Now, a right knowledge of the love of Christ, has a strong influence upon
Christians, as a preservative to keep them from fainting at the tribulations
which accompany the Gospel, their own or others. This may be gathered from the
whole scope of the Apostle in the latter part of this Chapter. In the 13th.
verse, he desires these Ephesians that they would not faint at his
tribulations, ((h) (...), Not shrink back, Leighs Crit. sacr. (...). Vinci a
malo, Animum despondere, and quasi pedem in certamine refer, and succumbere,
Gerh. Har. p. 564
as cowards in battle, nor give place in afflictions and dangers, as the word
imports; Not be overcome of the evils of sufferings which accompany the Gospel,
in the preaching and professing of it, so as to yield and go back from their
duty.) Now, that they might not, he prays for them, verse 14, 15, etc. For
this cause I bow my knees, etc. And there are three things which he prays for
them, that they may be kept from fainting, (1.) Coroboration, and Confirmation,
by the Spirit of God, verse 16. That he would grant you, according to the
riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner
man. (2) A further Union with Jesus Christ verse 17. That Christ may dwell in
your hearts by faith. (3.) Intimate acquaintance with Jesus Christ in his love,
verse 17, 18, 19. That you, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, In which words
there are three things observable.

(1.) That as a Tree or House cannot stand fast and firm against boisterous
winds and storms, unless the one be well rooted, and the other have a sure
foundation: so neither can a Christian hold out in those Trials, which he is
like to meet with in his course, unless he be well rooted, and grounded.

(2.) That the root and foundation, whereon a Christian is kept firm, and
stedsast, in times of trial, and trouble, is Love; That ye being rooted and
grounded in love, which some take for our love to God, but rather it is meant
of Gods love in Christ, Christ's love to us, for (as (i) one well notes) Our
love is rather a branch than a root, it is the love of Christ, in which we take
firm rooting that nothing can shake us, and therefore we are said to be rooted
in him, Col. 2.7.

(3.) The way whereby Christians come to be rooted and grounded in love, is, by
the knowledge of it, such a knowledge whereby they apprehend and apply it to
themselves, and have the comfortable experience of it in their own hearts; Thus
the Apostle goes on, That you may be able to comprehend with all Saints, etc.
and to know the love of Christ, etc. So that by virtue of the coherence of this
part of the Apostles prayer with his design in making of it, this must be a
true inference. Baine on Ephesians. p. 412.
Jeanes ubi supra p. 224.
That a feeling, efficacious knowledge of Christ's love, and the dimensions
thereof, will embolden and hearten the Saints in their own and others
sufferings, and as a soveeign cordial keep them from all despondency, and
sinking of Spirit. There are other places to prove this. The Church Cant. 2.4.
says, Christ's love was a banner over her. His banner over me was Love. Engl.
Annot. the larger, on the place. Jackson also on the place.
(l) The preaching of the Gospel, or Christ in the preaching of the Gospel, is
a Standard, Banner, or Ensign displayed, Isa. 11.10. whose Motto or Device is
Love, and among others, this may be one reason, Because, as Soldiers are by
their Banner and Ensign, encouraged, and heartned to fight manfully against
their enemies, and not to shrink; but keep close to their colors, in hope of
Victory: so by the discovery of Christ's love in the Gospel, Christians, who
have faith to apprehend, and apply it, are emboldened to withstand courageously
all their spiritual enemies, and are continually supported, and inwardly
strengthened, and so are enabled to hold out unto the end ( under all the
trials and troubles which they meet with) in assured expectation of Victory at
the last.

But I return to our Apostle, who in two other places does confirm this truth,
not by barely asserting that it is so, but by laying down the grounds and
reasons why it is so.

One place is Romans 5. In the 3d. verse you hear him speak of glorying in
tribulations. We glory in tribulations. So far were they from fainting under
them, that they gloryed in them. (...), a high word, and the same which he
uses in reference to hope of the glory of God in the foregoing verse. A
Christian has ground of glorying in his Present cross, as well as in his
future crown. (...), i. e. (...) 2 Cor. 12.10. Non modo aequo and moderato
animo sumus, sed etiam magna laetitia perfusi, Bez. in loc. Gloriari est gestu,
and. verbis exultare, Par. in loc.
The word signifies contentment with, taking pleasure in, and exultation under
suff^rings: We are so far from sinking under tribulations by despondency, that
we are able to lift up our heads, and hearts, with joy, and exultation. But
whence comes it, that Christians are so born up under their sufferings, that
they faint not? why? it is reducible to their experimental knowledge of the
love of Christ. Because the love of Christ (says he verse 5.) is shed abroad
into our hearts by the holy Ghost given unto us. Which words are not to be
referred to that which is next only, but to all that went before. It is a
Christians sense, and taste of the love of Christ (through the effusion of it
into his heart by the Spirit) which keeps him from fainting, (...) ab (...) and
(...), quod gloriantes cervices erigant, and caput attollant, Harmar. Lexic.
Etymol. in verbo (...).
and makes him to glory in tribulation.

Sect. 3.
Quest. BUt how comes it, that the love of Christ, thus known and experienced,
is such a cordial against fainting under tribulations?

Answ. This may be gathered from that which goes before, where we have these
grounds of it.

(1.) Because the sting and bitterness of every suffering is taken away from
them. Guilt and Wrath are the things which make afflictions so painful and
distastful as they commonly are; it is the feeling of the guilt of sin, and fear
of the wrath of God (as mingled with their sufferings) which so often affright
men, and make them to faint under them; but now he who knows the love of Christ
(having apprehended it by faith, and having the sense of it shed abroad in his
heart by the Holy Ghost) is justified and at peace with God; thus he begins the
Chapter, Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. And the fear of
Guilt being taken away by Justification, and the fear of Wrath by
Reconciliation, he may well lift up himself in courage, and confidence, under
whatever sufferings he meets with, and say with Luther, Feri Domine, nam a
peccatis absolutus sum; Strike Lord, for thou have pardoned mine iniquities.
Nor is there any wonder to be made at their stability, and stedfastness in this
state of grace, and peace, ( from which all their afflictions and sufferings
cannot remove them) seeing they are brought into it by the hand of Christ, By
whom we have access ( or rather (...). Adducti sumus, Bez. Beza (...) recte
vertit adductionem transitive potius qua^ absolute aditum, Par. in loc.
are inducted) in this grace wherein we stand, verse 2.

(2) Because those who have this sense of the love of Christ in their hearts,
are able to look through their tribulations to the great recompense of reward,
which they know will make abundant recompense for all at last. Thus in the end
of the second verse, We rejoice in hope of the gl ry of God. The hope of the
glory of God is an excellent means to keep a soul from fainting under
tribulations. This is a remedy of Christ's own prescribing to his Disciples and
all believers; Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give
you the Kingdom, Luke 12 32. Let not your hearts be troubled, in my Fathers
house are many Mansions, John 14.1, 2. This hope the Saints have, and thereby
are kept from fainting, yea, made to rejoice in all their tribulations, 2 Cor.
4.16, 17. For this cause we faint not, For our light afflictions, which are but
for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory;
Whiles we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen; for the things which are seen, are temporal, but the things which are
not seen, are eternal. Looking by an eye of faith into another world, they saw
glory for afflictions, a weight of glory, an exceeding, a more exceeding, a far
more exceeding weight of glory, for light afflictions; eternal glory, for
momentany afflictions; and through hope of enjoying this glory, after they had
suffered a while here, they were kept from fainting. Nay, it is said of the
believing Hebrews, That they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods; how?
why, as it follows, knowing in themselves, that they had in heaven, a better
and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. Martyrs look not at their Cross, but at
their Crown ( says Pericul^ non respicit Martyr, coronas respicit, Bas.
one of the Fathers.) Nor does he feel his chains and torments upon his body,
whose mind is in heaven ( as Nihil crus sentit in nervo, cu^ jus animus in
coelo, Tert.
another speaks.)

(3.) Because of those excellent effects and fruits, which such do find wrought
and brought forth by their present sufferings. Not only that which they have in
hope, but also what they have in hand, not only their future glory, but also
their present improvement in grace by their tribulations, does keep them from
fainting under them, as the Apostle sets it forth by an excellent Climax, verse
3, 4, 5. Knowing that tribulation works patience, etc. As ill as affliction
and suffering is in it self, and to wicked men, it is of great advantage to the
souls of the Saints; and an happy exchange it is, to part with outward comforts
for spiritual graces; But let us take a survey of the words, and you shall see
what good fruit is brought forth from this bitter root.

Knowing] See how he begins: Not ghessing or thinking, but knowing, that is,
M^nt. on James page 17.
Either being assured from the Spirit teaching, and the proof that has been
made by others and our selves; Or distinctly considering, by spiritual
discourse, acting our thoughts upon the nature and quality of our sufferings,
and the promises which are made to them

That tribulation works patience] Here is the first good fruit, Tribulation
works, In choata^ augeat, and paulatim veluti conficiat, Bez. in loc.
Significat reminchoatam provehere eo usque donec perficiatur, Camor. Myroth. p.
259.
(...), increases, perfecteth patience, carries on to perfection that
patience which is already begun, as the word imports. A strange Paradox, that
tribulation, which is the cause of so much murmuring and impatience, should
work patience; and yet so it is, not in all, but in the people of God, not of
it self, but from the Spirit working by, and with it. And it is an usual form of
speaking in Scripture, to ascribe that to the instrument, which is proper to
the efficient cause only. Ut autem medicus ex rebus venenatis and noxiis
componit saluberrima pharmaca: ita Deus opt. max. sua sapientia ex
afflictionibus, quantumvis rebus malis, praeclarissimas virtutes producit,
qualis est patientia, P. Mart. in loc.
Thus ( as a Physician, out of the m^st poisonous, and hurtful things,
compounds very wholesome medicines:) the great and g^od God by his infinite
wisdom, does produce, even from afflictions, which are evil in themselves, the
most excellent graces, such as patience is. Afflictions do minister matter, and
occasion for patience, and they call for patience, and (through the blessing of
God, sanctifying these afflictions, and helping a Christians infirmities by his
Spirit) patience is produced, whiles a Christian is helped to consider, (1.)
That these afflictions come from the providence of God, that God, who is his
Father, who sends them in love, and for his good. (2.) That hereby he is
conformed to his Head, Jesus Christ. (3.) That there are great and precious
promises made unto them, and that there shall be a gracious issue out of them
in due time. Nor is it barely produced, but also increased and perfected, for,
as Habits are perfected by Acts: so are graces perfected by exercise.

And patience experience] This is the second good Fruit. Now many and manifold
are the experiences, which Christians have by bearing afflictions; and that,

(1:) In respect of themselves. Thus they experience (1.) How depraved their
nature is, whereby (if God should leave them) they would murmur* and complain,
quarrel and blaspheme, instead of suffering patiently when they are afflicted.
(2) How weak they are in themselves, who would sink under the least burden, if
not supported by divine manutenency. (3.) In what state and condition they are
spiritually, that they are the children of God, because conformed to Jesus
Christ in the Image of his sufferings, which all Gods children are
predestined unto* Romans 8.29. and because they are enabled to bear them, as
children, with patience, and submission. (4.) What grace they have: though
grace be in them, and known to be there by the Lord, yet it is not so well
known to themselves and others, as when it is drawn out; now afflictions are a
notable means to draw it out, and give them the experience of it. Nos enim
sumus tanquam quae, dam aromata, quorum odor, nisi ea contuderis, non sentitur:
sumus velutilapides Pyritides, qui non exerunt vim eam quam habent ad
comburendum, nisi cum premuntur digitis, Mart. in loc.
For we are like some kind of spices, who yield not their fragrant smell, till
they are beaten; we are like D^ Pyritide vi^esis Plin. Not. hist. lib. 37 cap.
11. Nicols A^c. Gem. p. 236.
fire-stones, who show not their burning quality, till they are rubbed with ones
fingers.

(2.) In respect of God. They experience (1.) His Wisdom, in ordering their
afflictions for them in their nature, measure, and continuance. (2.) His Power,
and all sufficiency, in upholding and strengthening of them. (3*) His Mercy, and
goodness, in passing by their infirmities, and not dealing in strictness, and
severity, with them.(4) His Faithfulness, in not leaving them in their
distresses, not suffering them to be tempted above what they are able, and
making a way for their escape, 1 Cor. 10.13.

(3.) In respect of the sufferings themselves, they experience what they are,
and know how to carry under new troubles without fear and dread, and how to
advise and comfort those, who are in the like condition. Pareus in loc.
As a souldiewho has endured the brunt of many a battle, has run through many
hazards, and endured many hardships, gets experience in war, and is called an
expert soldier, because he does not so much fear dangers and enemies, and
knows how to manage military affairs, which one that is raw and untrained does
not; so Christians grow expert by the afflictions which they endure, and by
being inured to them, can tell the better how to deal with them. So that they
will esteem that a light burden, which others, that are but young beginners,
judge almost intolerable, and will carry away with ease, that which others
groan, and are ready to sink under.

And experience hope] This is the third good Fruit. Hope, that as he has been
with them in troubles past: so he will be with them now Heb. 13.5.
and never leave them nor forsake them for the future, but will be Ps. 48.14
their God and guide unto the death. That there shall be an end at last of all
their sufferings, and that a glorious end, Tim. 2.12.
that having suffered with Christ they shall reign with him; James 1.12. Rev.
2.10.
that having endured temptation, and been faithful unto the death, they shall
receive the Crown of Life; Rev. 7.14, 15.
that having come out of great tribulation, and washed their robes, and made
them white in the blood of the Lamb, they shall be before the Throne of God,
and serve Him day and night in his Temple; (f) that the trial of their faith
should be found to praise, and honor, and glory, 1 Pet. 1.7
at the appearing of Christ, not according to their merit, but according to his
gracious promise.

And hope makes not ashamed] This is the Crown of a Christians hope, that it
shall not meet with disappointment, and end in shame and confusion to him that
has it, as other hopes do. Worldly hope from men is often frustrated, because
bottomed upon a slippery foundation, the words and promises of a mutable
creature that may deceive; whence arose that German proverb, Sperare, and
expectare multos reddit stultos, Pisc. in loc.
That hope and expectation makes many fools. The wicked hypocrites hope from
God himself, is sure to be disappointed, because grounded on their own vain and
false opinions, therefore compared to the giving up of the ghost, Job 11.20. to
the spiders web, which shall be cut off, Job 8.14. These hopes make ashamed,
but so does not the hope of a true Christian; because, being set upon an
unmovable basis, the infallible word of the God of truth, and proceeding from
the full assurance of faith, and being cherished and strengthened by the
earnest of Gods Spirit in their hearts, it shall most ^erta nly be
accomplished. Now lay all this together, and if those who know the love of
Christ do enter into tribulation justified from Guilt, and at peace with God,
and being in, can look through it to a^ Eternity of glory, with joyful hope and
confidence, and do reap so many sweet fruits from it for the present, it need
not be doubted, but such have sufficient to keep them from fainting in a day of
trouble. The other place (which I shall but name) is Romans 8.35, 37, 38, 39.
where we find the Apostle so far from fainting under tribulations, that he
triumphs over them, upon the knowledge and sense of Christ's love, and that upon
a double account.

(1.) Because a true believer is never the less beloved by Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding all his sufferings. What shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness,
or peril, or sword? verse 35. that is, none of these shall; and verse 38, 39.
Neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. What a Cordial is this to a Christian, under all the evils and enemies
which he meets with, to consider that none of them can separate him from the
love of Christ. His estate, his liberty, his relations, his life, may be taken
from him, but the love of Christ can never be taken from him; He may have many
and mighty enemies, Men and Devils set against him, but Jesus Christ is his
friend, and will abide so for ever, having loved him once, he will never cease
loving of him, but will love him to the end, John 13.1. and this is his Cordial
of strong consolation to cheer and refresh his spirits in all that he endures.

(2) Because a believer shall be conqueror, and obtain a glorious Victory after
all his conflicts through Christ, ^erse 37. Nay in all these things we are more
than conquerors, through him that loved us: mark it, They are conquerors
already, yea more than so; if there be any thing more, or better than conquest,
and victory, they have it, vertually, in and through Christ at present, and
they shall be really so, declared, and appear to be so at last. Nor does this
arise from a doubtful opinion, or probable conjecture, but from a full
persuasion, and assured confidence. I am persuaded, etc. verse 39. Pareus in
loc.
persuaded from the unchangeable purpose of God, his infallible promise, and
sure covenant; from the costly satisfaction and constant intercession of Jesus
Christ; and from the inward testimony of the Spirit in my heart, which cannot
fail.

Thus I hope the matter is sufficiently cleared, and confirmed; Wherefore
Christians, seeing you are told by our Savior, That in the world you shall
have tribulation, John 16 33. and by his Apostles, That through much
tribulation you must enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. and seeing you
know not what evil may be upon the earth, Eccles. 11.2. nor how soon you may be
called to bear your cross, in following after Christ, and have your share in
great and much affliction, let me advise and persuade you to prepare for it;
and because the love of Christ apprehended, and applied by faith, is so
excellent a cordial against fainting at such a time, let me again beseech you,
to labor after the knowledge of the love of Christ, and to know it more and
more. To this end, be much and earnest in prayer for the plentiful effusion of
this love into your hearts by the Holy Ghost, given unto you; Vt totus figatur
in cord, qui totus fuit fixus in Cruce, That he who was wholly fastened to the
Cross, may be wholly fixed in your hearts, as the August.
Father speaks. Then come what will, what can come, you need not fear, you need
not faint, whatever you be separated from, you shall not be separated from
Christ, and his love; and whatever conflicts you have now, you shall be
conquerors, more than conquerors in the end, through him that loved you.

And thus I have, at last, dispatched this first, and main Use; There is
something to be superadded by way of Caution and Comfort, with which I shall
briefly conclude the whole matter.

Sect. 4.
Use is by way of Caution. Take heed of despising and rejecting this Love in
the Offers of it by the Ministry of the Gospel. Of Caution, that we despise not
this Love in the Offers of it.
Has the Lord Jesus thus loved you, and is he still at the cost of sending 2
Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors to make tenders of love to you, and will you not accept them?
shall motions of love be made to your souls from the Lord of Life and Glory (as
there are in his Word and Ordinances) and will you not hearken to them? Does he
make Proclamation to all that will, Rev. 22.17.
to come and drink of the water of Life freely, Isa. 55.1.
to buy wine and milk without money and without price, to taste how gracious and
loving he is, and will you still verse 2.
lay out your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not? Does he Rev. 3.20.
stand at the door, and knock, Isa. 30.18
waiting to be gracious to you, and bestow his love upon you, even Cant. 5.2
till his head be filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night,
and will you not open to him, and give him admission? will you Jona. 2.8.
for the following of lying vanities, forsake your own mercy? Will thou, O
covetous Worldling, slight and refuse the love of Christ, for the dung and
dross of this present world? Will thou, O voluptuous Epicure, prefer thy Cups
and Queans, thy base perishing lusts, before it? Will thou, O ambitious wretch,
choose an aerie title of honor, a preferment to some slippery place in the
Kingdoms of this world, which are but Fancies, and Fallacies, before an
interest in this love? Alas! Sirs, do you not know, that this Rev. 6.16.
Lamb of God can be angry, that he has Wrath as well as Love, and Wrath as
infinite as his Love, for Ps. 90.11
Who knows the Power of it? according to his Fear so is his Wrath: and for whom
can you imagine this Wrath to be reserved, but for his Nah. 1.2.
enemies? and such are they, who slight and refuse his Love. Take heed then
what you do; Take heed of flying from the arms of his Love, till you fall
headlong into the fire of his Wrath; If you have refused and rebelled hitherto,
yet now come in, and 2 Chro. 30.8.
yield your selves to the Lord, and be no more stiff-necked. Now Ps. 2.12.
kiss the Son lest he be angry. Take heed of persisting any longer in your
enmity, and opposition, for Job 36.18, 19.
Because there is wrath, he may take you away with a stroke, and then a great
ransom cannot deliver thee: He will not esteem thy riches, no, not gold, nor
all the forces of strength. But if he continue to exercise the Romans 2.4, 5.
riches of his goodness in his forbearance and longsuffering toward you, and
you go on to despise it, and are not led to repen^ance by it; know this from
the Lord, that you do but treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Beware therefore betimes, and Heb.
3.7, 8.
to day, whiles it is called to day, harden not your hearts, but hear his
voice, and accept of the offers of grace, which are made unto you, lest you
feel at last by woeful experience, the truth of that which you will not now
believe, that Heb. 10.31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who in that
great and terrible day will deal (1.) In pure wrath (without any mixture of
mercy or pity) with those who now despise and refuse his love. Prove. 1.26, 28.
He will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes: Then shall
they call upon him, but he will not answer, they shall seek him early, but they
shall not find him. Nor (2.) shall they ever be able to escape it. Rev. 6.16.
Though they call to the mountains to fall on them, and the rocks to cover
them, that they may be hid from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb, it shall not secure them. Nor (3.) shall they be
able to abide it; as it is unavoidable, so it is intolerable. Wicked men P^^
2.12.
perish from the way, if his wrath be kindled but a little: how then shall they
abide it, when it is thoroughly kindled? when that (...). 6.17
great day of his wrath is come, who shall be able to stand? for even of
present wrath it is said, Nahum 1.6.
Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide the fierceness of his
anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.
And the sting of all is this, (4.) That there will never be any end, or
mitigation of it. The Wrath of God is often compared to fire, and this wrath to
come, which I am speaking of, is Mat. 3.12.
unquenchable fire, and the burnings of it Isa. 33.14
everlasting burnings. It is wrath that shall John 3.36.
abide upon unbelievers, and never be taken off to eternity. Now Ps. 50.22
consider this, you that forget God, and slight Jesus Christ, and neglect the
great salvation which is offered to you; lest he tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver you. One would think, that what has been said, should be
sufficient to startle and awaken the most secure sinners; And the Lord make it
effectual to that end and purpose, unto all such, into whose hands this shall
come.

Sect. 5.
THe last Use is by way of Consolation. The consideration of the greatness of
Christ's love may administer abundance of comfort to the Saints, who know it, By
way of Consolation to those who have a right knowledge of the love of Christ.
so as to have an interest in it. If the love of Christ be so incomprehensible,
as you have heard, then you need not fear to be supplied. Your wants and
necessities are many and great, its true, but there are unsearchable riches of
love in Christ, from whence you may have enough for your relief.
Notwithstanding all the communications, which have been made of Christ's love to
the Saints in all ages, and generations past, he is as full as ever, and will
be as long as there is a Saint on this side heaven to need him; he may be
imparted, but cannot be impaired; he is the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever, Hebrews 13.8. What is it that troubles you, against which you may not
find strong Consolation, from the love of Christ?

(1.) Is it Sin that troubles you, so that you bewail it, and mourn and grieve
for it, and go bowed down all the day long because of it? Truly this is the
only thing that can justly create trouble to a Christian, but this does it
necessarily, because of the evil of it, nor can he claim a title to the love of
Christ, to whom sin is not grievous; for though the Gospel tells us, That where
sin has abounded, there grace much more abounds, Romans 6.20. yet it is only
there, where the sin that has abounded in the life, in the commission of it,
does abound in the heart, and conscience, in contrition for it, and detestation
of it. But yet even here there is relief from the love of Christ, so far as to
keep you from dejection and desperation, though not from a due sense and deep
humiliation; for (1.) Is it the Guilt of your many and great sins, which
affrights you? Consider, there is love enough in Christ to pardon them. Christ's
love can cover a multitude of sins, and will cover all the sins of penitent
sinners: If man's love will do this, 1 Pet. 4.8. Prove. 10.12. much more Christ's,
whose ways are not as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts, for as the
heavens are higher than the earth: so are his ways higher than our ways, and
his thoughts than ours, Isaiah 55.8, 9. he means his thoughts and ways of
mercy, and so says the Psalmist expressly, Psalm 103.11. As the heaven is high
above the earth: so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. She was a
great sinner, of whom he said, Luke 7.47. Her sins which are many are forgiven
her: The eye of favor and love (as the Favoris oculus velut nox est ad omnem
labem. Arab. prove ut citat. a Culv. Act of Obliv. p. 34.
Arabic proverb has it) is as the night to every fault, to hide and conceal
it, that it be not seen. (2.) Is it the power of your corruptions, which you
groan under, and desire deliverance from? There is love enough in Christ to
subdue them, Mich. 7.19. and by the law of the Spirit of life, to make you free
from the law of sin and death, Romans 8.2. love enough to sanctify you
throughout, and thoroughly throughout, 1 These. 5.23. as well as to justify you.

(2.) Is it Temptations from Satan, that trouble you? There is love enough in
Christ to pity you, because of them. He was in all points tempted as we are,
yet without sin, and therefore is such an High Priest, as is touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15. love enough to help and succor you in
them, for, In that he himself suffered being tempted, he is able also to
succor them that are tempted, Hebrews 2.18. love enough to save yout out of
them, for, the God of Peace will bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans
16.20.

(3.) Is it the Snares and Dangers of this World, that trouble you? Know, that
as he had love enough to give himself for us, that he might redeem us from this
present evil world, Gal. 1.4. so he has still love enough to make you
partakers of his victory, which he has obtained over the world, John 16.33.
and to make you conquerors over it by faith, 1 John 5.4. and in the mean time
to keep you from the evil of the world, though he does not take you out of it,
John 17.15.

(4) Is it the Duties and Difficulties of your course, which trouble you, not
in themselves, but because of your weakness and infirmity, by reason whereof
you cannot deal with them? There is love enough in Christ to help your
infirmities by his Spirit, Romans 8.6. to assist you in your duties, Phil. 4.13.
to support you under, and carry you through, all the difficulties of your
pilgrimage; to be continually with you and hold you by the right hand, to guide
you with his counsels, and at last receive you to glory, Psalm 73.23, 24.

(5.) Is it your Afflictions you meet with, that trouble you? yet in Christ's
love you may have peace and comfort enough to cheer you amidst all your
Tribulations, John 16.33. There is Favor enough in his love to answer all the
frowns and displeasures of men; Honor enough to answer all your abasements;
Riches enough to answer all your poverty; Liberty enough to answer all your
outward restraints. Here is love enough to be your ease in pain; your health in
sickness; your gain in losses; your peace in war; your joy in sorrow; your life
in death: In a word, here is love enough to keep you here, and to crown you
hereafter; love enough for this, and another world, even for all Eternity.
Only look to it by Meditation, lay hold of it for your present subsistence by
Faith, plead it by Prayer, and take heed of abusing it by making it an occasion
to sin; Cum gratia Dei sit mellen, ne comedas eam totam.
If the grace of God be as Honey for sweetness, do not make a prey of it, and
devour it all together, by any ungodly practice; take heed of turning it into
wantonness, Jude 4. by continuing in sin, that grace may abound, Romans 6.1.
for that will be bitterness in

The END.
The Authors cited in this Treatise.
AVgustin Ambrose Anselm Aretius Ainsworth Is. Ambros. Melch. Adamus Arrowsmith
Anon. The Glory of the times. Alciat Aristotle Assembl. Annot. Beza Bellarmine
Bodius Bernard Bid Beverovicius Baldwin Boethius Bonaventure Brentius Brightman
Baxter Brinsley Buxtorph Baine Basil. Calvin Isid. Clarius Camero Chrysostom
Th. Cartwright Chapter Cartwright Clark Crashaw Cyprian Chemnitius Caryl Cotton
Culverwel Calixtus Casaubon Dionys. Carth. Davenant Durantus Damascen Despaigne
Downham. Erasmus Estius Eusebius. Fagius Fulgosus Forbesius Fergusson
Fulgentius Ferus Franzius. Grotius Gerhardus Gouge Glanvil Goodwin Glassius
Godwin Gilbertus in Cant. Greenham Gregorius A. Gellius Gurnal. Heinsius
Hammond Hall Hondorsius Herbert Hemingus Hardy Hildersham Hierom Holdsworth
Hopkins Harmar. Junius and Trem. Idiota Jenkins Just. Mart. Ignatius Isidor.
Jackson Jeanes. Kempis A Lapide Edw. Leigh Luther Lessius Lyranus W. Leigh
Land. Min. Lorinus Lukin Lactantius Ludolphus. Marlorat. Maldonat. P. Martyr
Mart Martinius. Mason Marc. Marula. Manton Montanus Mercer Macarius Mede
Musculus Marton Melancton Mat. Martinius. Nieremberg Nicols. Owen. Pearson
Plutarch Prosper Pink Pagnin Piscator Preston. Perkins Pierce Patrick
Parisiensis Pliny. Rivet Rolloc Reynolds Ravanel. Robotham Fr. Roberts Alex.
Roberts Robinson Ribera. Sibs Scapula Sulpitius Severus. Spanhemius Salmeron.
Sixth. Senensis Staughton Scharpius Salvian Schrevelius Tertullian Tirinus
Theophylact Trap Tollet Bp. Jer. Tailor. D.T. Tailor. Fra. Tailor Vorstius
Vatablus Valerius Maximus. Usher. Watson Ward Wall White Whitaker. Zanchy.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by Nathanael Webb, at the Royal Oak in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and William Grantham, at the Black Bear, near the little
North-door. 1665.
SErmons upon Solemn Occasions, collected into one Volume, in Quarto, by Dr.
Nathanael Hardy, Dean of Rochester. -- The first Epistle General of St. John,
unfolded and applied, in Quarto, by the same Author. Mr. Isaac Ambrose's Works,
Containing The first, middle, and last things, in three Treatises of
Regeneration, Sanctification; with Meditations on Life, Death, Hell and
Judgment. -- Redeeming the time. A Sermon Preached in Preston, at the Funeral
of the Lady Margaret Houghton, in Quarto. Three Gospel Ordinances, viz. 1. War
with Devils. 2. Ministration of, and Communion with Angels. 3. Looking unto
Jesus. A view of the Everlasting Gospel, or the Souls eying of Jesus, as
carrying on the great Work of Man's salvation, from first to last, in Quarto. A
Discourse of Ananias and Saphyra, laying open their sin and punishment, by Mr.
Will. Houghton, in Quarto. Hadadrimmon, Sive Threnodia Anglicana ob Regicidium;
A Sermon on the 30th of January, 1660. being the Annual Solemn Fast for the
horrid Murder of King Charles the I. on David's Humiliation for cutting off the
Royal Robe, and detestation of cutting off the Royal Head of the Lords
Anointed. Noah's Dove, with her Olive Branch, or the happy tidings of the
abatement of the Flood of Englands Civil Discords. A Thansgiving Sermon for the
Restoration of his Sacred Majesty Charles the II. by Will. Cole, B. D.
Knowledge and Practice, or a Discourse of the chief things necessary to be
known, believed, and practiced in order to Salvation, by Samuel Cradock, B. D.
Mr. Richard Vines, A Treatise of the Institution, right Administration and
receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; delivered in twenty Sermons, at
St. Lawrence Jury, in Quarto. [History surveyed, in a brief Epitome: or a
Nursery for Gentry] comprised in an intermixed discourse upon Historical and
Poetical relations, in Quarto. Mr. Walter Cradock, [Gospel Liberty] in the
Extention and Limitation of it, in Quarto. Mr. John Browning, [Concerning
Public Prayer, and the Fasts of the Church] six Sermons, or Tracts, in 4.
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum ex authoritate primum Regis Henrici 8.
inchoata, in Quarto. Christ and the Church Parallels, in three Books, Quarto,
by Henry Virtue. Irenicum, or an Essay toward a Brotherly Peace and Union, by
Discipulus de Tempore Junior. Learn of a Turk, or Instructions and Advices,
sent from the Turkish Army at Constantinople, to the English Army in London.
Mr. Rich. Lewthwait [Vindiciae Christi and obex errori Arminiano; A Plea for
Christ] in Quarto. Welsh Common Prayer, with the Singing-Psalms, in Quarto.
John Ley, Entitled, A Discourse of Disputation, chiefly concerning matters of
Religion, newly published, in Quarto. Mr. John Lawson's [Gleanings and
Expositions of some of the more difficult places of holy Scripture] in Quarto.
Mr. Edward Thorp, [The new Birth, or Birth from above] in Quarto. Roberti
Heggi, Dunelmensis aliquot Sacrae Paginae Loca, Lectiones, in Quarto. The
Beacon flaming, with a non obstante, against those that plead for liberty of
Printing and publishing Popish Books] in Quarto. Mr. Nathanael Stephens [A
Precept for the Baptism of Infants out of the New Testament] in Quarto. Mr.
Edmund Calamy, [The Monster of sinful Self-seeking Anatomized] A Sermon. Mr.
John Warren of Hatfield Regis in Essex, [The Potent Potter] A Sermon. -- [The
unprofitable Servant] A Sermon Preached at the Assize at Chelmsford in Essex,
in Quarto. -- [Mans Fury subservient to God's Glory] A Sermon on the fifth of
November. Dr. Robert Gell, [A Sermon, touching Gods Government of the World by
Angels,] preached before the Astrologers, in Quarto. -- Noah's Flood returning,
A Sermon preached before the Right Worshipful Company of Drapers, in London, in
Quarto. Dr. John Whincop, [Gods Call to Weeping and Mourning] A Sermon,
preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in Quarto. Mr. George Walker, A
Sermon. Mr. William Good, (Jacob Raised) A Sermon. Mr. Thomas Goodwin, (The
great Interest of States and Kingdoms) A Sermon. Mr. Samuel Kem, (The King of
Kings) His privy marks for the Kingdoms choice of Members: A Sermon preached
upon the choice of Burgesses for the Parliament, in 4. M. Ben. Hubbard (Sermo
Secularis) Or, a Sermon to bring to remembrance the dealings of Jehovah with
this Kingdom of England, in Quarto. M. I. P. A Sermon Preached upon Matthew.
22.21. Wherein is set forth the King's due in part, and Peoples duty, in
Quarto. Mr. Ambr. Staveley, (Index Expurgatorius, Or, a short Examination of
the Doctrine of Purgatory) in 4. Dr. Robert Wild, (The Arraignment of a sinner
at the Bar of Divine Justice) A Sermon Preached in St. Mary's in Oxon, at an
Assize, in Quarto. Mr. Giles Firmin, Stablishing against shaking, or a
discovery of the Prince of Darkness (scarcely) transformed into an Angel of
Light, powerfully now working in the deluded people called Quakers, in Quarto.
-- Tithes vindicated from Antichristianism and Oppression, etc. in Quarto. Mr.
Stephen Marshal, The power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion
vindicated. George Swinnock, The Gods are Men, or the Mortality of Persons in
places of Magistracy. A Sermon, preached at an Assize at Hartford, in Quarto.
Mr. Calamy, The happiness of those who sleep in Jesus. A Sermon Preached at the
Funeral of the Lady Waller. Dr. Rutherford, The Joy of Angels. A Sermon
preached before the honorable Society of Grayes-Inne, in 4. Mr. Giles Firmin,
An Examination of Dr. Owen's Nature of Schism; with a Discourse concerning
Parochial Congregations in England; Also a Plea for Ordination by Imposition of
hands, etc. in Octavo. J. Votier. Entitled, Vox Dei and Hominis, God's Call
from Heaven ecchoed by Man's Answer from Earth. A Treatise of Effectual
Calling, in Octavo. Mr. Robert Young, (A Sovereign Antidote against all Grief,
with the Victory of Patience) in 8. Mr. Ben. Needler (Expository Notes, with
Practical Observations upon Genesis) in 8. Bp. Davenant, (An Exhortation to
Brotherly Communion betwixt the Protestant Churches) in 8. (The Bee-Hive of the
Romish Church) A work of all good Catholics to be read, and most necessary to
be understood, in 8. Mr. John Simpson, (The perfection of Justification against
the Pharisees, the Purity of Sanctification against the Stainers of it; the
unquestionableness of Glorification against the Saduces) in 8. -- ( Vindiciae
Literarum, The Schools guarded) or the excellency and usefulness of Arts,
Sciences, Languages, History, and all sorts of Humane Learning, in
subordination to Divinity, etc. in 8. by Tho. Hall, B. D. Mr. John Warren of
Hatfield in Essex, (Principles of Christian Practice) Illustrated with
Questions and Scripture-Answers, in 8. Mr. Daniel Evans, (Baptismal Catechism)
showing unto what person, whether of riper years, or as yet Infants, the
Sacrament of Baptism ought to be administered according to the Scriptures, in 8.
Gods great care of his good People in bad times, by Mr. James Nalton, late
Minister in Foster-lane, London. Mr. Thomas Gery, The Fort Royal of
Christianity Defended, or a demonstration of the Divinity of the sacred
Scriptures, with a discussion of the great controversies in Religion, about
universal Redemption, Free Will, Original-sin, etc. in 12. -- Holy Meditations
upon Gods Attributes, and other chief points of Religion, in 12. -- A Mirror
for Anabaptists. Mr. Thomas Jackson (The true Evangelical Temper) wherein
Divinity, and Ecclesiastical History are interwoven and mixed, etc. in 12. Hen.
Carpenter, The Deputy Divinity, or Inferior Deity and Subordinate God in the
World, A Discourse of Conscience, in 12. Rich. Sibbs, Antidotum contra
Naufragium fidei and bonae Conscientiae, in 12. Mr. Mullard, (Celestial
Soliloquies) composed of several Divine Meditations and Prayers drawn from the
holy Scripture, in 12. Francis Thin Esquire; (The perfect Ambassador) treating of
the Antiquity, Privileges and behavior of men belonging to that Function, in
12.
FINIS.

