A KEY into the LANGUAGE OF AMERICA: OR, An help to the Language of the Natives
in that part of AMERICA, called NEW ENGLAND. Together, with brief Observations
of the Customs, Manners and Worships, etc. of the aforesaid Natives, in Peace
and War, in Life and Death. On all which are added Spiritual Observations,
General and Particular by the Author, of chief and special use (upon all
occasions,) to all the English Inhabiting those parts; yet pleasant and
profitable to the view of all men:

BY ROGER WILLIAMS of Providence in New England.

LONDON, Printed by Gregory Dexter, 1643.

To my Dear and Welbeloved Friends and Counrey-men, in old and new ENGLAND.
I Present you with a Key; I have not heard of the like, yet framed, since it
pleased God to bring that mighty Continent of America to light: Others of my
Contrymen have often, and excellently, and lately written of the Country
(and none that I know beyond the goodness and worth of it.)

This Key, respects the Native Language of it, and happily may unlocke some
Rarities concerning the Natives themselves, not yet discovered.

I drew the Materials in a rude lump at Sea, as a private help to my own
memory, that I might not by my present absence lightly lose what I had so
dearly bought in some few years hardship, and charges among the Barbarians;
yet being reminded by some, what pity it were to bury those Materials in my
Grave at land or Sea; and withal, remembering how often I have been importuned by
worthy friends, of all sorts, to afford them some helps this way.

I resolved (by the assistance of the most High) to cast those Materials into
this Key, pleasant and profitable for All, but speally for my friends residing
in those parts:

A little Key may open a Box, where lies a bunch of Keys.

With this I have entered into the secrets of those Countries, where ever
English dwell about two hundred miles, between the French and Dutch
Plantations; for want of this, I know what gross mis-takes my self and others
have run into.

There is a mixture of this Language North and South, from the place of my
abode, about six hundred miles; yet within the two hundred miles
(aforementioned) their Dialects do exceedingly differ; yet not so, but (within
that compass) a man may, by this help, converse with thousands of Natives all
over the Country: and by such converse it may please the Father of Mercies to
spread civilitie, (and in his own most holy season) Christianity; for one
Candle will light ten thousand, and it may please God to bless a little Leaven
to season the mighty Lump of those Peoples and Territories.

It is expected, that having had so much converse with these Natives, I should
write some little of them.

Concerning them (a little to gratify expectation) I shall touch upon four
Heads:

First, by what Names they are distinguished.

Secondly, Their Original and Descent.

Thirdly, their Religion, Manners, Customs, etc.

Fourthly, That great Point of their Con^ersion.

To the first, their Names are of two sorts:

First, those of the English giving: as Natives, Salvages, Indians, Wild-men,
(so the Dutch call them Wilden) Abergeny men, Pagans, Barbarians, Heathen.

Secondly, their Names, which they giv^ themselves.

I cannot observe, that they ever h^ (before the coming of the English, Frenc^
or Dutch amongst them) any Names t^ difference themselves from strangers, for
they knew none; but two sorts of nam^ they had, and have amongst themselves.

First, general, belonging to all Native^ as Ninnuock, Ninnimissinnuwock,
Enisk^ tompa^wog, which signifies Men, Folk, (...) People.

Secondly, particular names, peculi^ to several Nations, of them amongst the^
selves, as, Nanhiggane^uck, Massachuseu^ Cawasumseuck, Cowwese^uck, Quintiko^
Qunnipie^uck, Pequ^oog, etc.

They have often asked me, why w^ call them Indians Natives, etc. And (...)
derstanding the reason, they will ca^ themselves Indians, in opposition to E^
glish, etc.

For the second Head proposed, their Original and Descent.

From Adam and Noah that they spring, it is granted on all hands.

But for their later Descent, and whence they came into those pars, it seems
as hard to find, as to find the Wellhead of some fresh Stream, which running
many miles out of the Country to the salt Ocean, has met with many mixing
Streams by the way. They say themselves, that they have sprung and grown up
in that very place, like the very trees of the wilderness.

They say that their Great God Cawtantowwit created those parts, as I observed
in the Chapter of their Religion. They have no Clothes, Books, nor Letters,
and conceive their Fathers never had; and therefore they are easily persuaded
that the God that made English men is a greater God, because He has so richly
endowed the English above themselves: But when they hear that about sixteen
hundred years ago, England and the Inhabitants thereof were like unto
themselves, and since have received from God, Clothes, Books, etc. they are
greatly affected with a secret hope concerning themselves.

Wise and Judicious men, with whom I have discoursed, maintain their Original
to be Northward from Tartaria: and at my now taking ship, at the Dutch
Plantation, it pleased the Dutch Governor, (in some discourse with me about
the Natives), to draw their Line from Iceland, because the name S^ckmakan (the
name for an Indian Prince, about the Dutch) is the name for* Prince in Iceland.

Other opinions I could number up: under favor I shall present (not mine
opinion, but) my Observations to the judgment of the Wise.

First, others (and my self) have conceived some of their words to hold
affinity with the Hebrew.

Secondly, they constantly anoint their heads as the Jews did.

Thirdy, they give Dowries for their wives, as the Jews did.

Fourthly (and which I have not so observed amongst other Nations as amongst
the Jews, and these:) they constantly separate their Women (during the time of
their monthly sickness) in a little house alone by themselves four or five
days, and hold it an Irreligious thing for either Father or Husband or any
Male to come near them.

They have often asked me if it be so with women of other Nations, and whether
they are so separated: and for their practice they plead Nature and Tradition.
Yet again I have found a greater Affinity of their Language with the Greek
Tongue.

2. As the Greeks and other Nations, and our selves call the seven Stars (or
Charles Waine the Bear,) so do they Mosk or Paukunnawaw the Bear.

3. They have many strange Relations of one Wetucks, a man that wrought great
Miracles amongst them, and walking upon the waters,, etc. with some kind of
broken Resemblance to the Son of God.

Lastly, it is famous that the Sowwest (Sowaniu) is the great Subject of their
discourse. From thence their Traditions. There they say (at the South-west) is
the Court of their great God Cautantouwit: At the South-west are their
Forefathers souls: to the South-west they go themselves when they dye; From
the South-west came their Corn, and Beans out of their Great God
Cautantowwits field: And indeed the further Northward and Westward from us
their Corn will not grow, but to the Southward better and better. I dare not
conjecture in these Uncertainties, I believe they are lost, and yet hope (in
the Lords holy season) some of the wildest of them shall be found to share in
the blood of the Son of God. To the third Head, concerning their Religion,
Customs, Manners etc. I shall here say nothing, because in those, 32. Chapters
of the whole Book, I have briefly touched those of all sorts, from their Birth
to their Burialls, and have endeavored (as the Nature of the work would give
way) to bring some short Observations and Applications home to Europe from
America.

Therefore fourthly, to that great Point of their Conversion so much to be
longed for, and by all New-English so much pretended, and I hope in Truth.

For my self I have uprightly labored to suite my endeavors to my pretenses:
and of later times (out of desire to attain their Language) I have run through
varieties of Intercourses with them Day and Night, Summer and Winter, by Land
and Sea, particular passages tending to this, I have related diverse, in the
Chapter of their Religion.

Many solemn discourses I have had with all sorts of Nations of them, from one
end of the Country to another (so far as opportunity, and the little
Language I have could reach.)

I know there is no small preparation in the hearts of Multitudes of them. I
know their many solemn Confessions to my self, and one to another of their
lost wandering Conditions.

I know strong Convictions upon the Consciences of many of them, and their
desires uttred that way.

I know not with how little Knowledge and Grace of Christ the Lord may save,
and therefore neither will despair, nor report much.

But since it has pleased some of my Worthy Countrymen to mention (of late in
print) VVequash, the Peq^t Captain, I shall be bold so far to second their
Relations, as to relate mine own Hopes of Him (though I dare not be so
confident as others.

Two days before his Death, as I past up to Qunnib^icut River, it pleased my
worthy friend Mr. Fenwick whom I visited at his house in Say-Brook Fort at the
mouth of that River) to tell me that my old friend VVequash lay very sick: I
desired to see him, and Himself was pleased to be my Guide two mile where
VVequash lay.

Amongst other discourse concerning his sickness and Death (in which he
freely bequeathed his son to Mr. Fenwick) I closed with him concerning his
Soul: He told me that some two or three year before he had lodged at my
House, where I acquainted him with the Condition of all mankind, and his Own in
particular, how God created Man and All things: how Man fell from God, and of
his present Enmity against God, and the wrath of God against Him until
Repentance: said he your words words were never out of my heart to this
present; and said he me much pray to Jesus Christ: I told him so did many
English, French, and Dutch, who had never turned to God, nor loved Him: He
replied in broken English: Me so big naughty Heart, ^e heart all one stone!
Savory expressions using to breath from compunct and broken Hearts, and a sense
of inward hardness and unbrokennesse. I had many discourses with him in his
Life, but this was the sum of our last parting until our general meeting.

Now because this is the great Inquiry of all men what Indians have been
converted? what have the English done in those parts? what hopes of the Indians
receiving the Knowledge of Christ!

And because to this Question, some put an edge from the boast of the Jesuits
in Canada and Maryland, and especially from the wonderful conversions made by
the Spaniards and Portugalls in the West-In dies, besides what I have here
written, a also, beside what I have observed in the Chapter of their Religion!
I shall further present you with a brief Additionall discourse concerning this
Great Point, being comfortably persuaded tha^ that Father of Spirits, who was
graciousl^ pleased to persuade Iaphet (the Gentiles to dwell in the Tents of
Shem (the Jews will in his holy season (I hope approach ing persuade, these
Gentiles of Ameri^ to partake of the mercies of Europe, a^ then shall be
fulfilled what is written by the Prophet Malachi, from the risin^ of the Sun
in (Europe) to the going dow^ of the same (in America) my Name sha^ great among
the Gentiles.) So I desire (...) hope and pray,

Your unworthy Countryman ROGE^ WILLIAMS

Directions for the use of the LANGUAGE.
1. A Dictionary or Grammar way I had consideration of, but purposely avoided,
as not so accommodate to the Benefit of all, as I hope this Form is.

2. A Dialogue also I had thoughts of, but avoided for brevities sake, and yet
(with no small pains) I have so framed every Chapter and the matter of it, as
I may call it a^ Implicit Dialogue.

3. It is framed chiefly after the Narroganset Dialect, because most spoken in
the Country, and yet (with attending to the variation of peoples and Dialects)
it will be of great use in all parts of the Country.

4. Whatever your occasion be either of Travel, Discourse, Trading etc.

^turne to the Table which will direct you to the Proper Chapter.

5. Because the Life of all Language is in the Pronuntiation, I have been at
the pains and charges to Cause the Accents, Tones, or sounds to be affixed,
(which some understand, according to the Greek Language, Acutes, Graves,
Circumflexes) for example, in the second leaf in the word Ewo He: the sound or
Tone must not be put on E, but woe where the grave Accent is.

In the same leaf, in the word Ascowequassin, the sound must not be on any of
the Syllables, but o^ quass, where the Acute or sharp sound is.

In the same leaf in the word Anspaumpmaun. tam, the sound must not be on any
other syllable but Maun, where the Circumflex or ^long sounding Accent is.

6. The English for every Indian word or phrase stands in a straight line
directly against the Indian: yet sometimes there are two words for the same
thing (for their Language is exceeding copious and they have five or six words
sometimes for one thing) and then the English stands against them both: for
example in the second leaf, Cowaunckamish and Cuckquenamish. I pray your
Favor.

AN Help to the native Language of that part of America called NEW ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. Of Salutation.
Observation.
THe Natives are of two sorts, (as the English are.) Some more Rude and
Clownish, who are not so apt to Salute, but upon Salutation resalute lovingly.
Others, and the general, are sober and grave, and yet cheerful in a mean,
and as ready to begin a Salutation as to Resalute, which yet the English
generally begin, out of desire to Civilize them.

What cheer Netop? is the general salutatio^ of all English toward them,
Netop is friend.

Netompauog Friends.

They are exceedingly delighted with Salutations in their own Language.

Neen, Keen, Ewo, I, you, he. Keen ka neen You and I. Asco wequassin Asco
wequassunnummis Good morrow. Askuttaaquompsin? Hou do you? Asnpaumpmauntam I
am very well. Taubot paump mauntaman I am glad you are well. Cowaunckamish My
service to you

Observation.
This word upon special Salutations the^ use, and upon some offense conceived
by the Sachim or Prince against any: I have seen the party reverently do
obeisance, by stroking the Prince upon both his sholders, and usin^ this word,
Cowaunckamish and Cuckquenamish I pray your favor. Cowaunkamuck He salutes
you. A spaumpmauntam sachim How does the Prince Aspaumpmauntam Committamus? How
does your Wife? Aspaumpmauntamwock cummuckiaug? How does your children?
Konkeeteaug They are well. Tau bot ne paump maunthettit I am glad they are
well. Tunna Cowaum Tuckoteshana Whence come you. Yo nowaum I came that way.
Nawwatuck noteshem I came from far. Mattaasu noteshem I came from hard by.
Wetu An House. Wetuomuck no^te shem I came from the house. Acawmuck noteshem I
came over the water. Otan A Town. ^tanick noteshem I came from the Town.

Observation.
In the Nariganset Country (which is the chief people in the Land:) a man
shall come to many Towns, some bigger, some lesser, it may be a dozen in 20.
miles Travel.

Observation.
Acawmenoakit Old England, which is a^ much as from the Land on ^'other side:
hardl^ are they brought to believe that that Wate^ is three thousand English
mile over, or there abouts.

Tunnock kuttome Whither go you? Wekick nittome To the house. Nekick To my
house. Kekick To your house. Tuckowekin Where dwell you? Tuckutt^in Where keep
you? Matnowetuomeno I have no house.

Observation.
As commonly a single person has n^ house, so after the death of a Husband o^
Wife, they often break up house, and liv^ here and there a while with Friends,
to all a^ their excessive Sorrows.

Tou wuttiin? Where lives he? Awanick uchick Who are these? Awaun ewo? Who is
that? Tunna umwock? Tunna Wutshauock Whence come they? Yo nowekin I dwell here.
Yo ntiin I live here. Eiu or Nniu? Is it so? Nux Yea. Mat nippompitammen I have
heard nothing. Wesuonck A name. Tocketussaweitch What is your name?
Taantussawese? Do you ask my name? Ntussawese I am called, etc.
Matnowesuonckane I have no name.

Observation.
Obscure and mean persons amongst them have no Names: Nullius numeri, etc. as
the Lord Jesus foretells his followers, that their Names should be cast out,
Luke 6. 22. as not worthy to be named, etc. Again* because they abhor to
name the dead (Death being the King of Terrors to all natural men: and though
the Natives hold the Soul to live ever; yet not holding a Resurrection, they
die, and mourn without Hope.) In that respect I say, if any of their Sachims or
neighbors die who were of their names, they lay down those Names as dead.

Now annehick nowesuonck I have forgot my Name.

Which is common amongst some of them, this being one Incivilitie amongst the
more rusticall sort, not to call each other by their Names, but Keen, You, Ewo
He, etc.

Tahena What is his name? Tahossowetam What is the name of it Tahettamen What
call you this? Teaqua What is this? Yo neepoush Stay or stand here. Mattapsh
Sit down. Noonshem Non anum I cannot. Tawhitch kuppee yaumen What come you for?
Teaqua kunnau^nta men What do you fetch? Chenock cuppeeyau mis? When came you?
Maish-kitummayi Just even now. Kitummayi nippeeam I came just now. Yo
Committamus? Is this your Wife? Yo cuppappoos Is this your Child? Yo
cummuckquachucks Is this your Son? Yo cuttaunis Is this your Daughter? Wunnetu
It is a fine Child. Tawhich neepouweeye an Why stand you? Pucquatchick? Without
do^s. Tawhitch mat pe titeayean? Why come you not in?

Observe.
In this respect they are remarkably free and courteous, to invite all
Strangers in; and if any come to them upon any occasion, they request them to
come in, if they come not in of themselves.

Awassish Warm you. Mattapsh yoteg Sit by the fire. Tocketunnawem What say
you? Keen netop? Is it you friend. Peeyaush netop Come hither friend. Petitees
Come in. Kunnunni Have you seen me? Kunnunnous I have seen you. Taubot mequaun
namean I thank you for your kind remembrance. Taubotneanawayean I thank you.
Taubotne aunanamean I thank you for your love.

Observe.
I have acknowledged amongst them an heart sensible of kindnesses, and have
reaped kindness again from many, seven years after, when I my self had
forgotten, etc. hence the Lord Jesus exhorts his followers to do^ good for
evil: for otherwise, sinners will do good for good, kindness for kindness,
etc.

Cowammaunsh I love you. Cowammaunuck He loves you. Cowammaus You are loving.
Cowautam? Understand you? Nowautam I understand. Cowawtam tawhitche
nippeeyaumen Do you know why I come. Cowannantam Have you forgotten?
Awanagusantowosh Speak English. Een^ntowash Speak Indian. Cut^hanshishaumo
How many were you in Company? Kunnishishem? Are you alone? Nnishishem I am
alone. Naneeshaumo There be 2. of us. Nanshwi^hawmen We are 4. Npiuckshawmen We
are 10. Neesneechecktashaumen We are 20. etc. Nquitpausuckowashawmen We are an
100. Comishoonhommis Did you come by boat? Kuttiakewushaumis Came you by land?
Mesh nomishoon hommin I came by boat. Meshntiauke wushem I came by land.
Nippenowantawem I am of another language Penowantowawhettuock They are of a
diverse language. Mat nowawtau hette mina We understand not each other.
Nummauchenem? I am sick. Cummauchenem? Are you sick? Tashuckqunne cum
mauchenaumis How long have you been sick? Nummauchemin or Ntanneteimmin I will
be going. Sauop Cummauchemin You shall go to morrow. Mauchish or anakish Be
going. Kuttannawshesh Depart. Mauchei or anittui He is gone. Kautanaushant He
being gone. Mauchehettit or Kautanawshawhettit When they are gone. Kukkowetous
I will lodge with you. Yo Cowish Do, lodge here. Hawunshech Farewell. Chenock
wonck cup peeyeaumen? When will you be here again? Netop tatta My friend I can
not tell.

From these courteous Salutations Observe in general: There is a savor of
civility and courtesy even amongst these wild Americans, both amongst
themselves and toward strangers.

More particular:

The Courteous Pagan shall condemn
Uncourteous Englishmen,
Who live like Foxes, Bears and Wolves,
Or Lion in his Den.
Let none sing blessings to their souls,
For that they Courteous are:
The wild Barbarians with no more
Then Nature, go so far:
If Natures Sons both wild and tame.
Humane and Courteous be:
How ill becomes it Sons of God
To want Humanity?
CHAP. II. Of Eating and Entertainment.
AScumetesimmis? Have you not yet eaten Matta niccattuppummin I a^ not hungry.
Niccawkatone I am thirsty. Mannippeno? Have you no water? Nip. or nipewese
Give me some water. N^mitch, commete^immin Stay, you must eat first.
Teaquacummeich What will you eat? Nokehick. Parched meal which is a ready very
wholesome food, which they eat with a little water, hot or cold; I have
traveled with near 200. of them at once, near 100. miles through the woods,
every man carrying a little Basket of this at his back, and sometimes in a
hollow Leather Girdle about his middle, sufficient for a man three or four
days:

With this ready provision, and their Bow and Arrows, are they ready for War,
and travel at an hours warning. With a spoonful of this meal and a
spoonful of water from the Brook, have I made many a good dinner and supper.

Aupummineanash. The parched corn. Aupuminea-naw^aump. The parc'd meal boild
with water at their houses, which is the wholesomest diet they have.
Msickquatash. Boild corn whole. Manusqussedash. Beans. Nasaump. A kind of
meal pottage, unpartch'd.

From this the English call their Samp, which is the Indian corn, beaten and
boild, and eaten hot or cold with milk or butter, which are mercies beyond the
Natives plain water, and which is a dish exceeding wholesome for the English
bodies.

Puttuckqunne^ge. A Cake. Puttuckqunnegunash puttuckqui. Cakes or loves round.
Teagun kuttie maunch? What shall I dress f^r you? Assamme. Give me to eat.
Ncattup. I am hungry, Wunna ncattup. I am very hungry. Nippaskanaun tum. I am
almost starved. Pautous notatam. Give me drink. Sokenish. Power forth. Cosaume
sokenum mis. You have powered out too much. Wuttattash. Drink. Nquitchetammin.
Let me taste. Quitchetash. Taste. Sa^nqui nip? Is the water coo Saun kopaugot.
Cool water. Chowhesu. It is warm, Aquie wutt ^ttash. Do not drink. Aquie
waumatous. Do not drink all. Nec^wni meich teaqua. First eat something:
Tawhitch mat me choan. Why eat you not? Wussaume kusopita. It is too hot.
Teaguun nummeitch What shall I eat? Mateag keesitauano? Is there nothing ready
boyld? Ma teag mecho ewo. He eats nothing. Cotchikesu assamme. Cut me a piece.
Cotchekunnemi we yous. Cut me some meat. Metesittuck. Let us go eat.
Pautiinnea mechimucks. Bring hither some victuals. Numwautous. Fill the dish.
Mihtukmecha kick. Tree-eaters.

A people so called (living between three and four hundred miles West into the
land) from their eating only Mihtu^chquash, that is, Trees: They are Meneaters,
they set no corn, but live on the bark of Chesn^t and Walnut, and other fine
trees: They dry and eat this bark with the fat of Beasts, and sometimes of men:
This people are the terror of the neighbor Natives; and yet these Rebels,
the Son of God may in time subdue.

Mauchepweeean. After I have eaten. Mauchepwucks. After meals. Mauchepwut.
When he has eaten. Paushaqua mauchepwut. After dinner. Wayyeyant mauchepwut.
After supper. Nquittmauntash. Smell. Weetimoquat. It smells sweet. Machemoqut.
It stinks. Weekan. It is sweet. Mach^ppoquat. It is sour. Auwusse weekan. It
is sweeter. Askun. It is raw. Noonat. Not enough. Wusaume w^kissu. Too much
either boiled or roasted. Waumet Taubi. It is enough. Wuttattumutta. Let us
drink. Neesneechahettit taubi. Eenough for twenty men. Mattacuckquaw. A
Cook. Mattacucquass. Cook or dress. Matcuttassamiin? Will you not give me to
eat? Keen meitch. I pray eat.

They generally all take Tobacco; and it is commonly the only plant which men
labor in; the women managing all the rest: they say they take Tobacco for two
causes; first, against the rheum, which cavseth the toothake, which they are
impatient of: secondly, to revive and refresh them, they drinking nothing but
water.

Squuttame. Give me your pipe. Petasinna, or, Wuttammasin. Give me some
Tobacco. Ncattauntum, or, Ncattiteam. I long for that. Mauchinaash nowepiteass.
My teeth are naught. Nummashackqune aumen. We are in a dearth.
Mashackquineaug. We have no food. Aucuck. A Kettle. Mishquockuk. A red Copper
Kettle. Netopkuttassammish. Friend, I have brought you this. Quamphash
quamphomiinea. Take up for me out of the pot. Eippoquat. It is sweet. Teaqua
aspuckquat? What does it taste of? Nowetipo. I like this. Wenomeneash. Grapes
or Rayfins. Waweecocks. Figs, or some strange sweet meat. Nemauanash. Provision
for the way. Nemauaninnuit. A snapsacke. Tackhummin. To grind corn.
Tackhumiinnea. Beat me parched meal. Pishquehick. Vnparch'd meal. Nummauchip
nup mauchepummin. We have eaten all. Cowaump? Have you enough? Nowaump. have
enough. Mohowaugsuck, or, Mauqu^uog, from moho to eat. The Canibals, or, Men
eaters, up into the we^ two, three or four hundred miles from us.
Cummohucquock. They will eat you.

Whomsoever comes in when they ar^ eating, they offer them to eat of that
which they have, though but little enough prepar^ for themselves. If any
provision of fish (...) flesh come in, they make their neighbou^ partakers with
them.

If any stranger come in, they presentl^ give him to eat of what they have;
many (...) time, and at all times of the night (as I have fallen in travel
upon their houses) when no thing has been ready, have themselves an^ their
wives, risen to prepare me some r^freshing.

The observation general from their eating. etc.
It is a strange truth that a man shall generally find more free entertainment
and refresh ing amongst these Barbar^ans, then among thousands that call
themselves Christians.

More particular:

Course bread and water's most their fare,
O Englands diet fine;
Thy cup runs ore with plenteous store
Of wholesome bear and wine.
Sometimes God gives them Fish or Flesh,
Yet they are content without;
And what comes in, they part to friends
and strangers round about.
Gods providence is rich to his,
Let none distrustful be;
In wilderness, in great distress,
These Ravens have fed me.
CHAP. III. Concerning Sleep and Lodging.
NSowwushkawmen I am weary. Nkataquaum. I am sleepie. ^ukkovetous. Shall I
lodge here? ^o nickowemen? Shall I sleep here? ^ukkoweti. Will you sleep
here? Wunneg^n, cowish. Welcome, sleep here. ^ummouaquomen. I will lodge
abroad. Puckquatchick nickouemen. I will sleep without the the doors,

Which have known them contentedly do, by a fi^ under a tree, when sometimes
some Engli^ have (for want of familiarity and languag^ with them) been
fearful to entertain the^

In Summertime I have known them ly^ abroad often themselves, to make room
f^ strangers, English, or others.

Mouaquomitea. Let us lie abroad. Cowwetuck. Let us sleep. Kukkouene? Sleep
you? Cowweke. Sleep, sleep. Cowwewi. He is a sleep. Cowwewock. They sleep.
Askukkowene? Sleep you yet? Takitippocat. It is a cold night. Wekit^ppocat. It
is a warm night. Wauwhautowaw anawat, and Wawhautowavog. There is an alarm, o^
there is a great shou^ ing:

Howling an^ shouting is their Alarm; they having n^ Drums nor Trumpets: but
whether an en^mie approach, or fire break out, this Alarm^ passes from house
to house; yea, commonly, if any English or Dutch come amongst the^ they give
notice of strangers by this sign; y^ I have known them buy and use a Dut^
Trumpet, and known a Native make a good Drum in imitation of the English.

Matannauke, or Mattannaukanash A finer sort of mats to sleep on. Mask tuash
Straw to ly on. Wudd^uckqunash ponamauta Let us lay on wood.

This they do plentifully when they lie down to sleep winter and summer,
abundance they have and abundance they lay on: their Fire is instead of our
bedcloaths. And so, themselves and any that have occasion to lodge with them,
must be content to turn often to the Fire, if the night be cold, and they who
first wake must repair the Fire.

Mauataunamoke Mend the fire. Mauataunamutta Let us mend the fire. Toketuck Let
us wake. As kuttoke^mis Are you not awake yet Tokish, Tokeke Wake wake Tokinish
Wake him. Kitumyai tokean As soon as I wake. Ntunnaquom^n I have had a good
dream Nummattaquomen I have had a bad dream.

When they have a bad Dream, which they conceive to be a threatening from God,
they fall to prayer at all times of the night, especially early before day: So
David's z^alous heart to the true and living God: At midnight will ^rise etc. I
prevented the dawning of the day, etc. Psalm. 119. etc.

Wunnak ukkussa quaum You sleep much. Peeyanntam He prays. Peeyauntamwock The^
pray. Tunna kukkowemis ^here s^pt you? Awa^n w^ck kukkoue^mis At whose house
did you sleep?

I once travailed to an Island of the wildest i^ our parts, where in the night
an Indian (as he said) had a vision or dream of the Sun (whom they worship for
a God) darting a Beam^ into his Breast which he conceived to be the Messenger
or his Death: this poor Native called his Friends and neighbors* and prepared
some little refreshing for them, but himself was kept waking and Fasting in
great H^miliations and Invocations for 10. daye^ and nights: I was alone
(having travailed from my Bark the wind being contrary) and little could I
speak to them to their understandings especially because of the change of there
Dialect or manner of Speech from our neighbors: yet so much (through the help
of God^ I did speak of the True and living only Wis^ God* of the Crcation: of
Man, and his fal^ from God, etc. that at parting many burst forth, Oh when will
you come again, to bring us some more news of this God?

From their Sleeping: The Observation general.

Sweet rest is not confind to soft Beds, for, not only God gives his beloved
sleep on hard lodgings: but also Nature and Custom gives sound sleep to these
Americans on the Earth, on a Board or Mat. Yet how is Europe bound to God for
better lodging, etc.

More particular.

God gives them sleep on Ground, on Straw,
on Sedg^e Mats or B^ord:
When English softest Beds of Down,
sometimes no sleep afford.
I have known them leave their House and Mat
to lodge a Friend or stranger,
When Jews and Christians often have sent
Christ Jesus to the Manger.
Before day they invocate their Gods,
though Many, False and New:
O how should that God worshipped be,
who is but One and True?
CHAP. IIII. Of their Names.
NQuit One Neesse 2. Nish 3. Yoh 4. Napanna 5. Qut^a 6. enada 7. Shwosuck 8.
Paskugit 9. Piuck 10. Piuck nabna quit 11. Piucknab neese 12, Piucknab nish 13,
Piucknab yoh 14, Piucknab napanna 15, Piucknab naqutta 16; Piucknab enada 17,
Piuck nabna shwosuck 18, Piucknab napaskugit 19. Neesnee^chick 20,
Neesnee^chick nab naquit, etc. 21, Shwinckeck 30, etc. Swincheck nab naquit,
etc. 31, etc. Yowinicheck 40. Yowinicheck nabna qit, etc. 41, etc.
Napannetashincheck 50, Napannetashinchek nabna quit 51, etc. Quttatashincheck
60, Quttatashincheck nab na quit 61, etc. Enadatashincheck 70, Enadatashincheck
nabna quit 71, etc. Swoasuck ta shin check 80, Shwoasuck ta shincheck nebna
quit 81, etc. Paskugit tashincheck, etc. 90, Paskugit tashin check nabna quit,
etc. 91, etc. Nquit pawsuck 100. Nees pawsuck 200. Shweepawsuck 300. You
pawsuck 400, Napannetashe pawsuck 500, Quttatashe pawsuck 600,
^nadatashepawsuck 700, Shoasucktashe pawsuck 800, Paskugit tashepawsuck 900,
Nquittemittannug 1000, Neese mitt^nnug 2000, Nishwe mitt^nnug 3000, You
mittannug 4000, Napannetashemit tannug 5000, Quttatashe mit tannug 6000,
Enadatashemit tannug 7000, Shoasuck ta she mittannug 8000, Paskugittashemit
tannug 9000, Piuckque mittannug 10000, Neesneecheck tashe mittannug 20000,
Shwinchecktashe mittannug 30000, Yowincheck tashemittannug 40000,
Napannetashincheck tashemittannug 50000. Quttatashincheck tashemittannug 60000.
Enadatashincheck tashe mittannuck 70000. Shoasuck tashincheck tashe mittannug
80000. Paskugit tashincheck tashe mittannug 90000. Nquit pausuckoemit tannug,
etc. 100000.

Having no Letters nor Arts, 'cis admirable how quick they are in casting up
great numbers, with the help of grames of Corn, instead of Europes pens or
counters.

Numbers of the masculine gender.
Pawsuck 1. Neeswock 2. Skeetomp a Man. ^huog 3. Yowock 4. Napannetasuog 5. as,
Skeetom Pauog, Men. Quttasuog 6. ^nada tasuog 7. ^hoasuck tasuog 8. Paskugit
tasuog 9. Prucksuog 10. Prucksuog nabnaquit 11. Of the Feminine Gender.
Pawsuck 1 N enash 2 Swinash 3 Yowunnash 4 Napannetashinash 5 as, Waucho H^ll.
Wauchoas^ H^lls. Quttatshinash 6 Enadtashinash 7 Shoasucktashinash 8
Paskugittashinash 9 Piuckquatash 10 Piuckquatash nabnaquit. 11

From their Numbers, Observation General.
Let it be considered, whether Tradition of ancient Forefathers, or Nature has
taught them Europes Arithmaticke.

Mor particular:

Their Brains are quick, their hands,
Their feet, their tongues, their eyes:
God may fit objects in has time,
To those quick faculties.
Objects of higher nature make them tell,
The holy number of his Sons Gospel:
Make them and us to tell what told may be;
But stand amazed at Eternity.
CHAP. V. Of their relations of consanguinitie and affinity, or, Blood and
Marriage.
NNin-nninnuog, and keetomp-auog Man-men Squaws-suck. Woman-women. Kichize, and
An old man, Kichizuck Old men. Homes. and An old man, Homesuck Old men.
Kutchinnu A middle-aged-man. Kutchinnuwock. Middle-aged-men. Wuskeene A youth,
W^skeeneesuck. Youths. Wenise and An old woman. Wenisuck Old women. ^attauntum
Very old und decrepit. Wasick. An Husband. Weewo, and Mittummus, and Wullogana
A Wife. Noweewo, My Wife. Nummittamus, etc. Osh. A Father. Nosh My father. Cosh
Your father. Cuttos^? Have you a fathee? Okasu, and^ Witchwhaw A mother. Nokace
nitchwhaw My mother. Wussese An Uncle. Nissese My Uncle. Papoos, A child.
Nippapoos, and Nummuckiese My child. Nummuckquachucks My son. Nittaunis My
daughter. Non anese A sucking child. Muc^quachuckquemese A little boy. Squ^sese
A little girl. Weemat. A brother.

They hold the band of brotherhood so^ dear, that when one had committed a
mur^ there and fled, they executed his brother; an^ it is common for a brother to
pay the debt of a brother deceased.

Neemat My brother. Weticks, and Weesummis A sister. Wematittuock They are
brothers. Cutchashematitin? How many brothers have you? Natoncks My cousin.
Kattoncks Your cousin. Watoncks A cousin. Nulloquaso My ward or pupil.
Wattonksittuock They are cousins. Kihtuckquaw A virgin marriageable.

Their Virgins are distinguished by a bash^ll falling down of their hair over
their eyes.

Towiuwock Fatherless children.

There are no beggars amongst them* nor fatherless children unprovided for.

Tackqiuwock Twins.

Their affections, especially to their children, are very strong; so that I
have known a Father take so grievously the loss of his ch^de, that he ha^h
cut and stob d himself with g^iefe and rage.

This extreme affection, together with want of learning, makes there children
saucy, bold, and undutifull.

I once came into a house an requested so^ water to drink; the father bid his
son ((...) some 8. years of age) to fetch some water: t^ boy refused, and
would not stir; I told the f^ther, that I would correct my child, if he shou^
so disobey me, etc. Upon this the father to^ up a stick, the boy another, and
flew at his ^ther: upon my persuasion, the poor fat^ made him smart a little
threw down his sti^ and run for water, and the father confessed t^ benefit of
correction, and the evil of their t^ indulgent affections.

From their Relations Observation general.

In the ^nes of depraved mankind, are yet be found Natures distinctions, and
Natures ^ections.

More particular:

The Pagans wild confess the bonds
Of married chastity:
How vild are Nicolai^ans that hold
Of Wives community?
How kindly flames of nature burn
^n wild humanity?
Natural affections who wants, is sure
F^r from Christianity.
Best nature's vain, he is blessed that s made
A new and rich partaker
Of divine Nature of his God,
And blessed eternal Maker.
CHAP. VI. Of the Family and business of the House.
VVEtu An House. Wetuomuck At home. Nekick My house. ^ekick Your house. ^k ick
At his house. Nickquenum. I am going home:

Which is a solemn word amongst them; and no man will offer any hinderance to
him, who after some absence is going to visit his Family, and uses this word
Nicqu^num (confessing the sweetness even of these short tem^orall homes.)
^uttuckakaun A round house. ^uttcukakaunese A little round house. ^etuomemese A
little house; which ^eir women and maids live apart in, four^, five, or six
days, in the time of their monthly sickness, which custom in all parts of
the Country they strictly observe, and no Man may come into that house.

Nees quttow A longer house wi^ two fires. Shwishcuttow With three fires.
Abockquosinash The mats of the house. Wuttapuissuck The long poles, which
commonly men get and fix, and then the women cover the house with mats, and
lin^ them with embroydered mats which the women make, and call them
Mannotaubana, o^ Hangings, which amongst them make as fair^ a show as Hangings
with us. Note, or Yote Chickot and Squtta Fire. Notawese and chickautawese A
little fire. Puck Smoke. Puckissu Smokie Nippackis Smoke troubles me.
Wuchickapeuck Burching bark, an^ Chesout bark which they dress finely, an^
make a Summer-covering for their houses. Cuppoqui^ttemin. I will divide house
wi^ you, or dwell with yo^

Two Families will live comfortably and ^vingly in a little round house of some
four^en or sixteen foot over, and so more and ^ore families in proportion.

^uckqusquatch I am cold. ^uckqusquatchimin ^otouwassiceuck Let us make a fire.
^udtuckqun A piece of wood. ^udtuckquanash Lay on wood. ^namauta ^wacomwushesh
Cut some wood. ^aumashinnaunam ^uta Let us make a good fir^. ^aacomwushem I
will cut wood. ^eneshesh Fetch some small sticks, ^onck, and ^onkatack More.
^onckataganash ^aus Fetch some more ^tashin and newucha^hinea, There is no
more. ^equanantash A light fire. ^quanantig A Candle, or Light. ^quanantiganash
Candles. ^kinan A light fire. ^auo? Who is at home? ^t Awawanunno There is no
body. ^appo Kosh Is your father at home? Tuckiu Sachim Where is the Sachine?
Ma^apeu He is not at home P^yau He is come. Weche-peyau kee mat Your brother is
come with him. Potawash Make a fire. Potauntash Blow the fire. Peeyauog They
are come Wame paushe All-some. Tawhitch mat peya yean Why came, or, come yo^
not. Mesh noonshem peeyaun? I could not come. Mocenanippeeam I will come by and
by. Aspeyau, asquam He is not come yet. Yo autant mesh nippeeam I was here the
Suns high. And then the point with the hand to the Sun by who^ highth they
keep account of the day and b^ the Moon and Stars by night, as we do b^
clocks and dialls, etc.

Wuskont p^yauog They will come. Te^qua nauntick ewo What comes he for? Yo
^ppitch* ewo Let him sit there. Unhappo kosh Is your father at home Unnaugh He
is there. Np^peyup n^wwot I have long been here. ^awhitch p^yauyean. Why do
you come? ^eaguun kunnauntamun? What come you for? ^un ewo? Who is that?
^owechiume He is my servant. ^cum, naus Call fetch. ^titeauta Let us go in.
^oonapummin autashehettit There is not room for so many. ^ubapimmin Room
enough. ^oonat Not enough. ^quam Not yet. ^m, namitch By and by. ^ce,
unu^kquaquese Instantly. ^ish, kitumm^y Just, even now. ^ckiu, t^yu Where.
^kkekuttokawmen Would you speak with him? ^x Yea. ^ttammaun tam He is busy.
^top notammaun Friend, I am busy. ^am ^tammauntam Are you busy? ^tammish I
hinder you. ^ammumme ^tamme You trouble me.

Obs. They are as full of business, and as impatient of hinderance (in their
kind) as any Merchant in Europe.

Nqussutam I am removing. Notammehick ewo He hinders me. Maumach^uash Goods.
Auquiegs Housholdstuffe. Tucki^uash ^here be they? Wenawwetu Rich. Machetu
Poor. Wenawetuo^nckon Wealth. Kuphash Shut the door. Kuphommin To shut the
door. Yeaush Shut door after you.

Obs. Commonly they never shut their doors, day nor night; and it is rare that
an^ hurt is done.

Wunegin Well, or good. Machit Naught, or evil. Cow^am? Do you understand?
Mach^ug No, or not. Wunnaug A Tray. Wunnauganash Trayes. Kunam A Spoone.
Kunnamauog Spoones.

Obs. In steed of shelves, they have severa^ baskets, wherein they put all
their housholdstuffe: they have some great bags or sacks made of Hemp, which
will hold five or six bushells.

Tackunck, or, Weskhunck. Their pounding Mortar.

Obs. Their women constantly beat all their corn with hand: they plant it,
dress it, gather it, barn it, beat it, and take as much pains as any people
in the world which labor is questionless one cause of their extraordinary
ease of childbirth.

Wunnauganemese A little Tray. Teaqua cunnatinne What do you look for?
Natinnehas Search. Kekineas See here. Machage cunna miteouwin? Do you find
nothing. Wonckatack Another. Tunnati Where. Ntauhaunanatinnehommin. I cannot
look or search. Ntauhaunanamiteouwin I cannot find. Wiaseck Eiassunck Mocotick
Punnetunck Chauqock. A Knife.

Obs. Whence they call Englishmen Chauquaquock, that is, Knive-men, stone
formerly being to them in stead of Knives, Awle-blades, Hatchets and Howes.

Namacowhe Lend me your Knife. Cow^aseck Wonck Commesim? Will you give it me
again? Matta nowauwone I knew nothing. Matta nowahea Mat meshnowahea I was
innocent. Pautous Pautauog Bring hither. Mauchatous Carry this. Niaut^sh, and
W^awhush. Take it on your back.

Obs. It is almost incredible what burdens the poor women carry of Corn, of
Fish, of Beans, of Mats, and a child besides

Awaun There is some body. Kekineas Go and see. Squauntaumuck At the door.
Aw^un ke^n? Who are you? Ke^n n^top Is it you. Pauquanam^innea Open me the
door.

Obs. Most commonly their houses are open, their door is a hanging Mat, which
being lift up, falls down of it self; yet many of them get English boards and
nails, and make artificial doors and bolts themselves, and others make
slighter doors of Burch or Chestnut bark, which they make fast with a cord in
the night time, or when they go out of town, and then the last (that makes
fast) goes out at the Chimney which is a large opening in the middle of their
house, called: Wunnauchicomock, A ^himney. Anunema Help me. Neenkuttannu^mous.
I will help you. Kuttannummi? Will you help me? Shookek^eas Behola here.
Nummouekekineam I come to see. Tou auteg Know you where it lies? Tou nuckquaque
How much? Yo naumwauteg Thus full. Aquie Leave off, or do not. Wask^che On the
top. Naumatuck In the bottom. Auqunnish Let go. Aukeease^u Downwards.
Keesuckqiu Upwards. Aumaunsh Ausauonsh Aumaunamoke. Take away. Nanouwetea A
Nurse, or Keeper. Naunouwheant Nanowwu^nemum I look to, or keep.

Obs. They nurse all their childrem themselves; yet, if she be an high or rich
woman, she maintains a Nurse to tend the child.

Wauchaunama Keep this for me. Cuttatashi^nnas Lay these up for me.

Obs. Many of them begin to be furnished with English Chests; others, when they
go forth of town, bring their goods (if they live near) to the English to
keep for them, and their money they hang it about their necks, or lay it under
their head when they sleep.

Peewauqun Have a care. Nnowauchaunum I will have a care. Kuttaskwhe Stay for
me. Kutta^a, and Cowauchaunum? Have you this or that? Pokesha, and Pokeshawwa.
It is broke. Mat Coanichegane Have you no hands? Tawhitch? Why ask you?
Noonshem Paw^uckquammin. I cannot reach. Aquie Pokeshattous. Do not break.
Pokeshattouwin. To break. Assotu, and Assoko. A fool.

Obs. They have also amongst them natural fools, either so borne, or
accidentally deprived of reason. Aquie assokish Be not foolish. Awanick Some
come. ^autamwock ^uchewannauog They are laden. ^attapeu and ^. shenawsui A
woman keeping alone in her moneth^y sickness. Moce ntunnan I will tell him by
and by. Cowequetummous I pray or entreat you. Wunniteouin To mend any thing.
Wunniteous, or, Mend this, Wussiteous. Mend this. Wuskont nochemuckqun. I shall
be chidden. Nickummat Easy. ^uckat Hard. ^ummequawname? Do you remember me?
Mequaunamiinnea Remember me. Puckquatchick Without doors. Nissawhocunck ewo He
puts me out of doors. Kussawhoki? Do you put me out of doors?
Kussawhocowoog. Put them forth. Tawhitch kussawhokiean? Why do you put me
out? S^wwhush, Go forth. S^wheke Wussauhemutta Let us go forth. Matta
nickquehick I want it not. Machag^ nickquehickom^a. I want nothing.

Ob. Many of them naturally Princes, or e^ industrious persons, are rich; and
the poo^ amongst them will say, they want nothing^ Paw^awash. Dry or air
this. Pawsunnummin. To dry this or that. Cuppausummunnash Dry these things.
Ap^summa. Warm this for me. Paucotche Already. Cutsshitteous Wash this.
Tatagganish Shake this. Naponsh Lay down. Wuche machug About nothing.
Puppuckshackhege A Box. Paupaquonteg A Key. Mowashuck Iron. Wauki. Crooked.
Saumpi Strait. Aumpani^mmin To undo a knot. Aumpanish Untie this. Paushinummin
To divide into two. Pepenash Take your choice. Nawwuttunsh Throw hither.
Pawtawtees Negau^owash Send for him. N^gauchhuwash Send this to him.
Nnegauchemish He send^ to me. Noww^ta No matter. Mauo. To cry and bewail;
which bewailing is very solemn amongst ^em morning and evening and sometimes
in the night they bewail their lost husbands, wives, children brethren or
sisters etc. Sometimes a quarter, half, yea, a whole year, and longer, if it
be for a great Prince.

In this time (unless a dispensation be given) they count it a profane thing
either to play (as they much use to do) or to paint themselves, for beauty,
but for mourning; or to be angry, and fall out with any, etc.

Machemoqut It stincks. Machemoqussu A vile or slinking person. Wunnickshaas
Mingled. Wunnickshan To mi^gle. ^esick, and nashoqua. A Comb. (...) To fall
down. Ntetupshem I fall down. Tou anuckquaque? How big? Wunnashpishan To
snatch away. Tawhitch wunnashpishayean Why snach you? Wutrush Hitherward, and
give me. ^neick. or, awwusse Further. ^eickomasu, and awwassese. A little
further. Wuttushenaquaish Look hither. Yo anaquayean. Look about. Mauks
maugoke Give this. Yo commeish I will give you this. Qussucqun-naukon Heavy,
light. Kuckqussaqun You are heavy. Kunnauki You are light. Niekattash,
singular. Leave, or depart. Nickattammoke, plur. Nickattamutta. Let us depart.
Yowa. Thus. Ntowwaukaumen. Iuseis. Awawka^wni. It is used. Yo awautees. Use
this. Yo weque. Thus far. Yo meshnowekeshem I went thus far. Ayatche, and
Conkitchea. as Often. Ayatche nippeeam. I am often here. Paketash. Fling it
away. Npaketamunnash. I will east him away. Wut^ammasim. Give me Tobaco. Mat
nowewuttammo I take none.

Obs. Which some do not but they are ra^ Birds; for generally all the men
throughou^ the Country have a Tobacco-bag, with a pip^ in it hanging at their
back: sometimes the^ make such great pipes, both of wood and ston^ ^at they are
two foot long, with men or ^asts carved so big or mafsie, that a man ^ay be
hurt mortally by one of them; but ^ese commonly come from the Mauquauwogs, (...)
the Men eaters, three or four hundred ^les from us: They have an exc^llent Art
(...) cast our Pewter and Brass into very neat and artificial Pipes: They
take their Wuttam^uog (tkat is, a weak Tobacco) which the men ^ant themselves,
very frequently; yet I ne^r see any take so excessively, as I have seen ^en in
Europe; and yet excess were more ^lerable in them, because they want the
re^eshing of Bear and Wine, which God has ^uchsafed Europe.

^uttammagon. A Pipe. ^opuonck. A Pipe. ^hicks. A Cock, or Hen:

A ^ame taken from the English Chicke, because ^ey have no Hens before the
English came.

Chicks anawat. The Cock crows. Neesquttonckqussu. Ababler, or prater.
Cunneesquttonckqussimmin. You prate.

Obs. Which they figuratively transfer from the frequent troublesome clamor
of (...) Cock.

Nanotateem. I keep house alone. Aquie kuttunnan. Do not tell Aquie
mooshkishattous. Do not disclose. Teag yo augwhattick? What hangs there? Yo
augwhattous. Hang it there. Pemisquai Crooked, or winding. Penayi. Crooked.
N^ussutam. I remove house:

Which they do upon these occasions: From thic^ warm valleys. where they
winter, they re^ move a little nearer to their Summer fields (...) when it is
warm Spring, then they remove t^ their fields where they plant Corn.

In middle of Summer because of the abun^ dance of Fleas, which the dust of the
house breeds. they will fly and remove on a sudde^ from one part of their
field to a fresh place (...) And sometimes having fi^lds a mile or two^ or many
miles asunder. when the work of^ one field is over, they remove house to the^
other: If death fall in amongst them, they pr^sently remove to a fresh place:
If an enemy approach, they remove into a Thicket, or Swampe. unless they have
some Fort to remove unto.

Sometimes they remove to a hunting house in the end of the year, and forsake
it not un- Snow lie thick, and then will travel home, ^n, women and children,
through the snow, ^rtie, yea, fifty or sixty miles; but their ^at remove is
from their Summer fields to ^rme and thick woodie bottomes where ^y winter:
They are quick; in half a day, (...), sometimes at few hours warning to be
^he and the house up elsewhere. especially, (...) they have stakes ready
pitched for their ^ats.

I once in travel lodged at a house, at which ^my return I hoped to h^ve
lodged again ^re the nex night, but the house was gone ^that interim, and I
was glad to lodge un^ a tree:

The men make the poles or stakes, but the ^men make and set up, take down*
order, (...) carry the Mats and housholdstuffe.

Observation in general.
The sociablenesse of the nature of man ap^ares in the wildest of them, who
love so^tit; Families, cohabitation, and consocia^ of houses and towns
together.

More particular:

How busy are the sons of men?
How full their heads and hands?
What noise and tumults in our own,
And eke in Pagan lands?
Yet I have found less noise, more peace
In wild America,
Where women quickly build the house,
And quickly move away.
English and Indians busy are,
In parts of their abode:
Yet both stand idle, till God's call
Set them to work for God. Mat. 20. 7.

CHAP. VII. Of their Persons and parts of body.
UPpaquontup. The head. Nuppaquontup. My head. Wesheck. The hair.
Wuchechepunnock. A great bunch of hair bound up behind. Muppacuck. A long
lock.

Obs. Yet some cut their hair round, and some as low and as short as the sober
English; yet I never saw any so to forget nature it self in such excessive
length and monstrous fashion, as to the shame of the English Nation, I now
(with grief) see my Contrymen in England are degenerated unto.

Wuttip. The brain.

Ob. In the brain their opinion is, that the soul (of which we shall speak
in the Chapter of Religion) keeps her chief seat and residence:

For the temper of the brain in quick apprehensions and accurate judgments
(to say no more) the most high and sovereign God and Creator, has not made
them inferior to Europeans.

The Mauquauogs, or Men-eaters, that live two or three miles West from us, make
a delicious monstrous dish of the head and brains of their enemies; which yet
is no bar (when the time shall approach) against Gods call, and their
repentance and (who knows but) a greater love to the Lord Jesus? great sinners
forgiven love much.

Mscattuck. The forehead. Wuskeesuck-quash. Eye, or eyes. Tiyush
kusskeesuckquash? Can you not see, or where are your eyes? Wuchaun. The
nostrills. Wuttovwog^guash. Ear, ears. Wuttone. The mouth. Weenat. The
tongue. Wepit-teash. Tooth, teeth. Pummaumpiteunck. The tooth-ake.

Obs. Which is the only pain will force their stout hearts to cry; I cannot
hear of any disease of the stone amongst them (the corn of the Country, with
which they are fed from the womb, being an admirable cleanser and opener:) but
the pain of their women's childbirth (of which I shall speak afterward in the
Chapter of Marriage) never forces their women so to cry, as I have heard some
of their men in this pain.

In this pain they use a certain root dried, not much unlike our Ginger.

S^chipuck. The neck. Quttuck. The throat. Time^uassin. To cut off or behead.
which they are most skillful to do in fight: for, when ever they wound, and
their arrow sticks in the body of their enemy they (if they be valourous, and
possibly may) they follow their arrow, and falling upon the pers^n wounded and
tearing his head a little aside by hi^ Lock, they in the twinkling of an eye
fetch off his head though but with a sorry knife.

I know the man yet living, who in time of war, pretended to fall from his
own camp to the enemy, proffered his service in the front with them against
his own Army from whence he had revolted. He propounded such plausible
advantages, that he drew them out to battle himself keeping in the front; but
on a sudden, shot their chief Leader and Captain and being shot, in a trice
fetched off his head and returned immediately to his own again, from whom in
pretense (though with this treacherous ntention) he had revolted: his act was
false and treacherous, yet herein appears policy, stoutnesse and activitie,
etc.

Mapannog. The breast. Wuppittene enash. Arm, Arms. Wuttah. The heart.
Wunnetu nitta. My heart is good.

Obs. This speech they use when ever they profess their honesty; they
naturally confessing that all goodness is first in the heart.

Mishquinash. The veins. Mishque, neepuck. The blood. Uppusquan. The back.
Nuppusquannick. My back, or at my back. Wunnicheke. Hand. Wunnickegannash.
Hands. Mokasfsuck. Nails.

Ob. They are much delighted after battle t0 hang up the hands and heads of
their enemies: (Riches, long Life, and the Lives of enemies being objects of
great delight to all men natural; but Solomon begged Wisdom before these.)

Wunnaks, The belly. Apome, Apomash. The thigh, the thighs. Mohcont, tash. A
leg, legs. Wussete, tash. A foot, feet. Wunnicheganash. The t^es. Tou
wutt^nsin. What manner of man? Tou nuckquaque. Of what bigness? Wom^esu,
Mowesu, and Suckesu. White, Black, or swarfish.

Obs. Hence they call a Blackamore (themselves are tawnie, by the Sun and
their annoyntings, yet they are borne white:) Suckautacone. A cole. black man.
For, Sucki is black, and Wautacone, one that wears clothes, whence English,
Dutch, French, Scotch, they call Wautacona^og, or Coatmen.

Cumminakese. You are strong. Minikesu. Strong. Minioquesu. Weak.
Cumminiocquese. Weak you are. Qunnauqussu. A tall man. Qunnauqussitchick. Tall
men. Tiaquonqussu. Low and short. Tiaquonqussichick. Men of low stature.
Wunnetu-wock. Proper and personal.

The general Observation from the parts of the body.
Nature knows no difference between Europe and Americans in blood, birth,
bodies, etc. God having of one blood made all mankind, Acts 17. and all by
nature being children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.

More particularly:

Boast not proud English, of thy birth and blood,
Thy brother Indian is by birth as Good.
Of one blood God made Him and Thee and All,
As wise, as fair, as strong, as personal.
By nature wrath's his portion, thine ne more (store
Till Grace his soul and thine in Christ re-
Make sure thy second birth, else thou shall see,
Heaven open to Indians wild, but shut to thee.
CHAP. III. Of Discourse and News.
AUnchemokauhettittea. Let us discourse, or tell news. Tocketeaunchim? What
news? Aaunchemokaw. Tell me your news. Cutta^nehemokous. I will tell you
(...). Mautaunchemokouean. When I have (...) the n^wes. Cummautaunchemokous. I
have done my n^wes.

Obs. Their desire of, and delight in news, is great as the Atkemans, and all
men, more or lest; a stranger that can relate news in their own language,
they will st^le him (...), a God.

Wutaunche^ocouoog. I will tell it them. Awaun mesh aunchemokau. Who brought
this no^es? Awaun mesh kuppittouwaw. Of whom did you hear it? Uppanaunchim.
Your news is true. Cowawwunnaunchim. He tells false news. Nummautanume. I
have spoken enough. Nsouwu^sanneme. I am we^ry with speaking

Obs. (...) manner is upon any tidings to sit round double or treble or more as
their numbers be; I have seen ne^r a thousand in a round, where (...) could
not well near half so many have si^ten: Every man has his pipe of their
Tobacco, and a d^epe silence they make, an^ attention give to him that
speaks; and many of them will deliver themselves either in a relation of
news, or in a consultation with very emphaticall speech and great action,
commonly an hour, and sometimes two hours together.

Npenowauntawaumen. I cannot speak your language. Matta nippannawem I lie not.
Cuppannowem. You lie. Mattanickoggachousk. Matntiantacompaw. I am no lying
fellow. Matntiantasampawwa. Achienon^umwem. I speak very true. Kukkita.
Hearken to me. Kukkakittous. I hear you.

Obs. They are impatient (as all men and God himself is) when their speech is
not attended and listened to.

Cuppittous. I understand you. Cowautous. Machagenowautam. I understand not.
Ma^nowawtawatemina. We unaestand net each other. Wunnaumwash. Speak the
truth. Coanaumwem. You speak true.

Obs. This word and and the next are words of great flattery which they use
each to other, but constantly to their Princes at their speeches, for which, if
they be cloquent, they esteem them Gods as Heroa among the Jews.

Wunnaumwaw (...). He speaks true. Cuppannawautous. I do not believe you.
Cuppannawau^i* Do you not believe? Nippannawautunek ewo. He does not believe
me. Micheme nippanna^utam. I shall never believe it.

Obs. As one answered me when I had discoursed about many points of God, of the
creation. of the soul, of the danger of it, and the saving of it, he assented;
but when I spoke o^ the rising again of the body, he cried out, I shall never
believe this. Pannouwa awaun. awaun keesitteouwin. Some body has made this
lie. Tatta Pitch I cannot tell, it may so come to pass. Nni* e^u. It is true.
Mat enano, or, mat eano. It is not true. Kekuttokaunta. Let us speak together.
Ku^tokash. Speak. Tawhitch mat cuttoan? Why speak you not? Teaqua ntunnawem,
or, nteawem? What should I speak? Wetap^mmin. To fit down. Wetapwauwwas. Sit
and talk with us. Taupowaw. A wise speaker. Enapwauwwaw, Eississumo. He speaks
Indian. Matta nowawwauon, matta nowahea. I know nothing of it. Pitchnowauwon, I
shall know the truth. Wunnaumwauonck. Wunnaumwayean. If he say true.

Obs. Canounicus, the old high Sachim of the Nariganset Bay (a wise and
peaceable Prince) ^nce in a solemn Oration to my self, in a so^emne assembly,
using this word, said, I have never suffered any wrong to be offered to the
English since they landed; nor never will: (...) often repeated this word,
(...), Eng* lishman; if the Englishman speak true, if h^ mean truly, then
shall I go to my grave i^ peace, and hope that the Eng^sh and my poste^ ritie
shall live in love and peace together. (...) replied, that he had no cause (as
I hoped) t^ question Englishmans, (...) that i^ faithfulness he having had
long experience o^ their friendlincsse and trust^nefle. He tooke^ stick, and
broke it into ten pieces* and relat^ ten instances (laying down a stick to
ever^ instance) which gave him cause thus to fear^ and say; I satisfied him in
some presently, a^ presented the rest to the Governors of the English, who, I
hope, will be far from givin^ just cause to have (...) to question their
Wunnaumwauanck, or faithfulness.

Tocketunnantum, Tocketunaname, Tocketeantam? What do you think? Ntunnantum,
I think. Nteantum. Nanick nteeatum. I think so to. Nteatammowonck. That is my
thought, o^ opinion. Matntunnantammen I think not so. Matnteeantammen.
^owecontam, I am glad. ^oweeteantam. ^oanaumatous. I believe you.

Obs. This word they use just as the Greek ^ngue does that verb, (...): for
believing (...) obeying as it is often used in the new Te^meni, and they say
C^annaumatous, I will ^ey you.

^o aphettit. When they are here. ^o peyahettit. When they (...) c^m.

^his Ablative case absolute they much use, and comp ise much in little;
^waunagrss, suck. Eng^sh-man, men. ^is they call us, as much as to say, The^e
^ngers.

^acone-nuaog. Englishman, men.

That is* Coat-men, or clothed.

^uquaqock. Englishmen, properly swordmen. Wautaconisk. An English woman.
Wautaconemese. An English youth. Waske peyaeyan. When you came first. Waske
peyahetit, Wautaconauog. When Englishmen came first. Tawhitch peyahettit Why
come they hither?

Obs. This question they often put to me: Why ^ome the Englishmen hither? and
measuring others by themselves; they say, It is because you want firing: for
they, having burnt up the wood in one place, (wanting draughts to bring wood to
them) they are feign to follow the wood; and so to remove to a fresh new place
for the woods sake.

Matta mihtuckqunnu^nno? Have you no trees? Mishaunetash, Maunetash. Great
slore. Maunauog, Wussaumemaunauog They are too full of people. Noonapuock. They
have not room one by another. Aumaumuwaw Paudsha. A messenger comes.
Wawwhawtowauog. They hollow. Wauwhautowaw anawat. It Is an Alarm.

Obs. If it be in time of war, he that is a Messenger runs swiftly, and at
every town the Messenger comes, a fresh Messenger is sent: he that is the
last, coming within a mile or two of the Court, or chief house, he hollowes
often and they that hear answer him. until by mutual hollowing and answering
he is brought to the place of audience whereby this means is gathered a great
confluence of people to entertain the news. Wussuckwheke, Wussuckwhonck. A
letter which they so call from ^hommin, to paint; for, having no letters, their
painting comes the nearest.

Wussuckquash. Write a Letter. Wussuckwheke, yimmi. Make me a Letter.

Obs. That they have often desired of me upon many occasions; for their good
and ^eace, and the English also, as it has pleased ^od to vouchsafe
opportunity.

^uenowauog. They complain. Tawhitch quenawayean? Why complain you? Mucco. It
is true you say. Tuckawnteawem? What should I say to it?

The general Observation from their Discourse and News
The whole race of mankind is generally in^cted with an itching desire of
hearing News.

more particular:

Man's restless soul has restless eyes and ears.
^anders in change of sorrows, cares and fears.
Feign would it (Bee-like) suck by the ears, by the ey^
Something that might his hunger satisfy:
The Gospel, or Glad tidings only can,
Make glad the English, and the Indian.
CHAP. IX. Of the time of the day.
Obs. THey are punctual in measuring the^ Day by the Sun, and their Night by
the Moon and the Stars, and their lying much abroad in the air; and so
living in the open fields, occasioneth even the youngest among^ them to be very
observant of those Heavenly Lights.

Mautaubon, Chichauquat wompan. It is day. Aumpatauban. It is broad day. Tou
wuttuttan? How high is the Sun (...) that is, What is it (...) clock (...)
Paspisha. It is Sunne-rise. Nummattaquaw. Fore-noone. Yahen Paushaquaw. Almost
noone. Paweshaquaw. Noone. Quttukquaquaw Panicompaw. After dinner. ^awwauwquaw.
Afternoon. ^o wu^tuttan The Sun thus high. ^ahen waiyauw. Almost Sunset.
^ayaawi. The Sun is set. ^unnauquit: Evening. ^oppakunnetch, auchaugotch. Dark
night. Tuppaco, and ^ematippocat. Toward night. ^anashowatippocat. Midnight.
^houoeatch. About Cockcrowing. ^tompanisha Break of day. ^o taunt nippeean.
The Sun thus high, I will come.

Obs. They are punctual in their promises (...) keeping time; and sometimes
have charged ^ee with a lie for not punctually keeping ^ime, though hindered.

Yo taunt cuppee^yaumen Come by the Sun thus high. ^amakeesuck. This day.
^uop. Tomorrow. ^uisaume tatsha. It is too late. ^iaquockaskeesakat. A short
day. Quawquonikeesakat. A long day. Quawquonikeesaqutcheas. Long days.
Nquittakeesiquockat, Nquittakeespummishen. One days walk. Paukunnum. Dark.
Wequai. Light. Wequashim. Moonlight.

The general observation from their time of the day.
The Sun and Moon, in the observation of all the sons of men, even the
wildest a^ the great Directors of the day and night; as (...) pleased God to
appoint in the first Creation.

More particular.

The Indians find the Sun so sweet,
He is a God they say;
Giving them Light, and Heat, and Fruit,
And Guidance all the day.
They have no help of Clock or Watch,
And Sun they overprize.
Having those artificial helps, the Sun,
We unthankfully despise. (more bright
God is a Sun and Shield, a thousand times
Indians, or English, though they see.
Yet how few prise his Light?
CHAP. X. Of the season of the Year.
NQuittaqunnegat. One day. Neesqunnagat. 2 days. Shuckqunockat. 3 days.
Yowunnockat, etc. 4 days. Piuckaqunnagat. 10 days. Piuckaqunnagat nabnaquit.
11 days. Piuckaqunnagat nab neeze, etc. 12 days. Neesneechektashuck
qunnockat. 20 days. Neesneechektashuck qunnockat-nabnaquit etc. 21 days.
Sequan. The Spring. Aukeeteamitch. Spring, or Seed-time. Neepun, and
Quaqusquan. Summer. Taquonck. Fall of leaf and Antumne. Papone. Winter.
Salequacup. This Spring last. Yo neepunnacup. This Summer last. Yo taquonticup.
This Harvest last. Papapocup. Winter last. Yaunedg. The last year. Nippauus.
The Sun. Munnannock. Nanepaushat. The Moon. Nqnitpawsuckenpauus. 1 Month.
Neespausuck npauus. 2 Months. Shwe pausuck npauus etc. 3 Months.
Neesneahettit 2 Months. Shwinneahettit. 3 Months. Yowinneahettit, etc. 4
Months.

Obs. They have thirteen Months accordi^ to the several Moo^es; and they give
to ea^ of them significant names: as, Sequanakeeswush. Spring month.
Neepunnakeeswush. Summer month. Taquontikeeswush. Harvest month.
Paponakeeswush etc. Winter month, etc. Nquittecautummo. 1 Year.
Tashecautummo? How many years? Chashecautummo cuttappemus? How many years si^
you were borne? Neesecautummo. 2 Year. ^hwecautummo. 3 Year. Yowecautummo. 4
Year. Piukquecautummo. 10 Year. Piuckquecautummo, nabnaquit, etc. 11 Year,
etc.

Obs. If the year prove dry, they have great and solemn meetings from all
parts at one high place, to supplicate their gods, and to beg^aine, and they
will continue in this worship ten days, a fortnight; yea, three weeks, until
rain come.

^ashinash paponash? How many winters? ^hauqushapapone. A sharp winter.
^eesqush keesuckquai. By day. ^aukocks nokannawi. By night.

General Observation from their Seasons of the Year.
The Sun and Moon, and Stars and sea^s of the year do preach a God to
all the ^onnes of men, that they which know no let^rs, do yet read an eternal
Power and God^ad in these:

More special.

The Sun and Moon and Stars do preach,
^e Days and Nights sound out:
Spring. Summer, Fall, and Winter eke
Each Month and Year about.
2
So that the wildest sons of men
Without excuse shall say,
Gods righteous sentence past on us,
(In dreadful Judgment day.)
If so, what doom it theirs that see,
Not only Natures light;
But Sun of Righteousness, yet chose
To live in darkest Night?
CHAP. XI. Of Travel.
Mayi. Away. Mayuo? Is there away? Mat mayanunno. There is no way. Peemayagat.
A little way. Mishimmayagat. A great path. Machipscat. A stonepath.

Obs. It is admirable to see, what paths their naked hardened feet have made in
the wilderness in most stony and rockie places.

Nnatotemuckaun. I will ask the way. Kunnatotemous. I will inquire of you.
Kunnatotemi? Do you ask me? Tou nishin meyi? Where lies the way?
Kokotemiinnea meyi Show me the way. Yo ainshick meyi. There the way lies.
Kukkakotemous. I will show you. Yo cummittamayon. There is the way you must
go. Yo chippachausin. There the way divides. Mauchatea. A guide. Mauchase. Be
my guide.

Obs. The wilderness being so vast, it is a mercy, that for a hire a man shall
never want guides, who will carry provisions, and such as hire them over the
Rivers and Brooks, and find out often times hunting-houses, or other lodgings
at night.

Anoce wenawash. Hire him. Kuttannoonsh. I will hire you. Kuttaunckquittaunch.
I will pay you. Kummuchickonckquatous. I will pay you well.
Tocketaonekquittiinnea. What will you give me? Cummauchanish. I will conduct
you. Yo aunta, Let us go that way. Yo cuttaunan. Go that way. Yo mtunnock.
The right hand. Yo nmunnatch. The left hand. Cowechaush. I will go with you.
Wetash. Go along. Cowechaw ewo. He will go with you. Cowechauatimmin. I will
go with you. Wechauatittea. Let us accompany. Taubot wetayean. I thank you
for you company.

Obs. I have heard of many English lost, and have often been lost my self, and
my self and others have often been found, and succored by the Indians.

Pitchcowawwon. You will lose your way. Meshnowawwon. I lost my way.
Nummauchemin, Ntanniteimmin. I will be going. Mammauchetuck. Let us be going.
anakiteunck. He is gone. Memauchewi anittui. Memauchegushannick. They are gone.
Anakug^shannick. They are gone. Tunnockuttome Tunnockkuttoyeaim Whither go
you? Tunnockkuttinshem. Nnegonshem. I will go before. Cuppompaish. I will stay
for you. Negonshesh. Go before. Mittummayaucup. The way you went before*
Cummattanish. I will follew you. Cuppahimmin. Stay for me. Tawhich quaunqua
queen? Why do you run so? Nowecontum pummishem. I have a mi^d to travel
Konkenuphshauta. Let us go apace. Konkenuppe. Go apace. Micheme
nquaunquaquemin. I have run always. Yo ntoyamaushem. I go this pace.

Obs. They are generally quick on foot, ^rought up from the breasts to running:
their ^gs being also from the womb stretched and ^ound up in a strange way on
their Cradle ^ackward, as also anointed; yet have they ^ome that excel: so
that I have known many ^f them run between fourescoure or an hun^red miles in
a Summers day, and back with^n two days: they do also practice running ^f
Races; and commonly in the Summer, ^hey delight to go without shoes, although
^hey have them hanging at their backs: they ^re so exquisitely skilled in all
the body and ^owels of the Country (by reason of their ^untings) that I have
often been guided twen^ie, thirty, sometimes forty miles through ^e woods, a
straight course. out of any path. Yo wuche. From hence. Tounuckquaque yo wuche
How far from hence? Yo anuckquaque. So far. Yo anuckquaquese. So little a
way. Waunaquese. A little way. Aukeewushauog. They go by land. Mishoon
homwock. They go or come by water. Naynayoumewot. A Horse. Wunnia,
naynayoumewot. He rides on Horseback.

Obs. Having no Horses, they covet them above other Cattle, rather preferring
ease in riding, then their profit and belly, by milk and butter from Cowes and
Goats, and they are loath to come to the English price for any.

Aspummewi He is not gone by. As pummewock They are not gone by. Awanick
payanchick Who come there? Awanick negonshachick? Who are these before us? Yo
cuppummesicom min. Cross over into the way there. Cuppi-machaug. Thick wood: a
Swamp

Obs. These thick Woods and Swamps (like the Boggs to the Irish) are the
Refuges for Women and children in War, whilst the men fight. As the Country
is wondrous full of Brooks and Rivers, so does it also abound with fresh
ponds, some of many miles compass.

Nips-nipsash Pond: Ponds. Weta: wetedg The Woods on fire. Wussaumpatammin To
view or look about. Wussaum patamoonck. A Prospect. Wuttocekemin To wade.
Toceketuck Let us wade. Tou wuttauqussin? How deep? Yo ntauqussin Thus deep.
Ku^niish. I will carry you. Kuckqussuckqun You are heavy. Kunnaukon You are
light. Pasuckquish Rise. Anakish: mauchish: Go. Quaquish Run. Nokus kauatees
Meet him. Nockuskauatitea Let us meet. Neenmeshnockuskaw. I did meet.

Obs. They are joyful in meeting of any in travel, and will strike fire
either with stones or sticks, to take Tobacco, and discourse a little together.
Mesh Kunnockqus kauatimmin? Did you meet? etc. Yo Kuttauntapimmin. Let us rest
here. Kustackquetuck. Let us sit down. Yo appituck Let us sit here. Nistowanis
Nistowanishkau men. I am weary. Nickqussaqus I am lame. Ntouagonnausinnum min
We are distressed undone, or in misery.

Obs. They use this word properly in wandering toward Winter night, in which
case I have been many a night with them, and many times also alone, yet always
mercifully preserved.

Teano wonck nippee am I will be here by and by again. Mat Kunnickansh I will
not leave you. Aquie Kunnickatshash. Do not leave me. Tavvhitch nickat shiean?
Why do you forsake me? Wuttanho A staff. Yo ^sh Wuttanho Use this staff.

Obs. Sometimes a man shall meet a lame man or an old man with a Staff: but
generally a Staff is a rare sight in the hand of the eldest, their
Constitution is so strong, I have upon occasion traveled many a score, yea
many a hundredth mile amongst them, without need of stick or staff for any
appearance of danger amongst them: Yet it is a rule amongst them, that it is
not g^od for a man to travel without a Weapon nor alone.

Taquattin Frost. Auke taquatsha The ground is frozen. Seip taquattin. The
River is frozen. Now annesin I have forgotten. nippitt akunna mun. I must go
back.

Obs. I once travalled with near 200 who had word of near 700. Enemies in the
way, yet generally they all resolved that it was a shame to fear and go back.

Nippanishkokommin Npussago. kommin I have let fall something. Mattaasu A
little way Nauwot. A great way. Nawwatick Far of at Sea. Ntaquatchuwaumen I
go up hill. Taguatchowash Go up hill. Waumsu Down hill. Mauunshesh Go
slowly or gently. Mauanishauta Let us go gently. Tawhitch cheche qunnuwayean?
Why do you rob me? Aquie chechequnnuwash. Do not rob me. Chechequnnuwachick.
Robbers. Chechequnnittin There is a Robbery committed. Kemineantuock They
murder each other.

Obs. If any Robbery fall out in Travel, between Person of diverse States, the
offended State sends for Justice, If no Justice be granted and recompense
made, they grant out a kind of Letter of Mart to take satisfaction themselves,
yet they are careful not to exceed in taking from others, beyond the
Proportion of their own loss.

Wuskont awaun nkemineiucqun. I fear some will murder me.

Obs. I could never hear that Murders or Robberies are comparably so
frequent, as in parts of Europe amongst the English, French, etc.

Cutchachewussim min. You are almost there. Kiskecuppeeya^umen. You are a
little short. Cuppeeya^umen Now you are there. Muckquetu Swift.
Cummummuckquete. You are swift. Cussasaqus You are slow. Sassaqushauog They are
slow. Cuttinneapummishem Will you pass by? Wuttineapummushauta. Let us pass
by. Keeatshauta. I come for no business. Ntinneapreyaumen In vain or to no
purpose. Acouwe Ntackowvvepeyaun. I have lost my labor. Cummautussakou. You
have mist him. Kihtummayi-wussauhumwi. He went just now forth. Pittuckish. Go
back. Pittucketuck. Let us go back. Ponewhush. Lay down your burtlen.

General Observations of their Travel.
As the same Sun shines on the Wilderness that does on a Garden! so the same
faithful and all sufficient God, can comfortfeede and safely guide even
through a desolate howling Wilderness.

More particular.

God makes a Path, provides a Guide,
And feeds in Wilderness!
His glorious Name while breath remains,
O that I may confess.
Lost many a time, I have had no Guide,
No House, but hollow Tree!
In stormy VVinter night no Fire,
No Food, no Company:
In him I have found a House, a Bed,
A Table, Company:
No Cup so bitter, but's made sweet,
When Go'd shall Sweetning be.
CHAP. XII. Concerning the Heavens and Heavenly Lights,
Keesuck. The Heavens. Keesucquiu. Heavenward. Auke, Aukeeaseiu. Downwards.
Nippawus. The Sun. Keesuckquand. A name of the Sun.

(Obs.) By which they acknowledge the Sun, and adore for a God or divine power.

Munnannock. A name of the Sun. Nanepaushat, and Munnannock. The Moon.
Wequashim. A light Moon. Pashpishea. The Moon is up. Yowuttuttan. So high.

Obs. And so they use the same rule, and words for the course of the Moon in
the Night, as they use for the course of the Sun by Day, which we mentioned in
the Chapter of the ^oure, or time of the Day concerning the Suns rising,
course, or Sun setting. Yo Ockquitteunk. A new Moon. Paushesui. Half Moon.
Yo wompanammit.

Obs. The Moon so old, which they measure by the setting of it, especially
when it shines till Wompan, or day.

Anockqus: anocksuck. A Star Stars.

Obs. By occasion of their frequent lying in the Fields and Woods, they much
observe the Stars, and theirvery children can give Names to many of them, and
observe their Motions, and they have the same words for their rising-courses
and setting, as for the Sun or Moon, as before.

Mosk or Paukunawaw the great Bear, or Charles Waine, which words Mosk or
Paukunnawwaw signifies a Bear, which is so much the more observable, because,
in most Languages that sign or Constellation is called the Bear.

Shwishcuttowwauog The Golden Metewand. Mishannock. The morning Star.
Chippapuock. The Brood-hen, etc.

General Observations of the Heavenly Bodies.
The wildest sons of Men hear the preaching of the Heavens, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, yet not seeking after God the Maker are justly condemned, though
they never have nor despise other preaching, as the civilized World has done.

More particular.

When Sun does rise the Stars do set,
Yet there is no need of Light,
God shines a Sun most glorious,
When Creatures all are Night.
The very Indian Boys can give,
To many Stars their name,
And know their Course and therein do,
Excel the English tame.
English and Indians none enquire,
Whose hand these Candles hold:
Who gives these Stars their Names Job. 35.

More bright'ten thousand fold. (himself
CHAP. XIII. Of the Weather.
TOcke tussinnammin keesuck? What think you of the Weather? Wekineauquat.
Fair Weather. Wekinnauquocks. When it is fair weather. Tahki, or tatakki.
Cold weather. Tahkees. Cold,

Obs. It may be wondered why since New England is about 12. degrees nearer to
the Sun yet some part of Winter it is there ordinarily more cold then here in
England: the reason is plain: All Islands are warmer then maine Lands and
Continents, England being an Island, Englands winds are Sea winds, which are
commonly more thick and vapoury, and warmer winds: The Nor-West wind (which
occcasioneth New England cold) comes over the cold frozen Land, and over many
millions of Loads of Snow: and yet the pure wholsomnesse of the Air is
wonderful, and the warmth of the Sun, such in the sharp* est weather, that I
have often seen the Natives Children run about stark naked in the coldest
days, and the Indians Men and Women lie by a Fire, in the Woods in the ^oldest
nights, and I have been often out my self such nights without fire,
mercifully, and ^onderfully preserved.

Taukocks. Cold weather. Kausitteks. Hot weather. Kussuttah. It is h^t.
^uckqusquatch nnoonakom. I am a cold. ^ickqussittaunum. I Sweat. ^attauqus. A
cloud. ^attaquat. It is over-cast. ^uppaquat. ^kenun. Rain. ^anaquat.
^namakeesuck ^sokenun. It will rain to day. ^kenitch. When it raines. ^chepo,
or Cone. Snow. ^nimanaukock-Sochepo. It will snow to night. ^chepwutch. When it
snowes. ^ishunnan. A great rain. ^uqui, pauquaquat. It holds up. ^appi. Dry.
^appaquat. Dry weather. ^pu. Afrost. Missittopu. A great Frost. Capat. Ice.
Neechipog. The Deaw. Michokat. A Thaw. Michokateh. When it thawes.
Missuppaugatch. When the rivers are op^ Cutshausha. The Lightning. Neimpauog.
Thunder. Neimpauog pesk homwock. Thunderbolts are shot.

Obs. From this the Natives conceiving (...) consimilitude between our Guns and
Thunder, they call a Gunne Peskunck, and to discharge Peskhommin that is to
thunder.

Observation general of the VVeather.
That Judgment which the Lord Jesus pronounced against the Weather-wise (bu^
ignorant of the God of the weather) will fal^ most justly upon those Natives,
and all me^ who are wise in Natural things, but willingly blind in spiritual.

English and Indians spy a Storm.
and seek a hiding place:
O hearts of stone that think and dream.
Th'everlasting storms t'out-face.
Proud filthy Sodom saw the Sun,
Shine (...) her head most bright.
The very day that turned she was
To stinking heaps, before night.
How many millions now alive,
Within few years shall rot?
O blessed that Soul, whose portion is,
That Rock that changes not.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Winds.
VVAupi. The Wind. Waupanash. The Winds. Tashinash waupanash How many winds are
there?

Obs. Some of them account of seven, some ^ight, or nine; and in truth, they
do upon ^he matter reckon and observe not only the ^oure, but the eight
Cardinal winds, although ^hey come not to the accurate division of ^he 32.
upon the 32. points of the compass, as we do.

Nanummatin, and Sunnadin. The North wind. Chepewessin. The North east.
Sachimoachepewessin. Strong North east wind. Nopatin. The East wind.
Nanockquittin The South east wind. Touwuttin South wind. Paponetin West wind.
Chekesu The Northwest. Chekesitch When the wind blowe^ Northwest.
Tocketunnantum? What think you? Tou pitch wuttin? Where will the wind be?
Nqenouhick wuttin I stay for a wind. Yo pitch wuttin Sauop Here the wind will
be (...) morrow. Pitch Sowwanishen. It will be Southwest.

Obs. This is the pleasingest, warmest wind in the Climate, most desired of the
Indians, making fair weather ordinarily; and therefore they have a Tradition,
that to the Southwest, which they call Sowwaniu, the gods chiefly dwell; and
hither the souls of all their Great and Good men and women go.

This Southwest wind is called by the New-English, the Sea turn, which comes
from the Sun in the morning, about nine or ten of the clock Southeast, and
about South, and then strongest Southwest in the afternoon, and toward
night, when it dies away.

It is rightly called the Sea turn, because the wind commonly all the Summer,
comes off from the North and Northwest in the ^ight, and then turns again
about from the South in the day: as Solomon speaks of the va^itie of the Winds
in their changes, Eccles. 1. 6.

Mishaupan A great wind. Mishitashin A storm. Wunnagehan. or, Wunnegin waupi.
Fair wind. Wunnegitch wuttin When the wind is fair. Mattagehan A cross wind.
Wunnagehatch When the wind comes fair Mattagehatch When the wind is cross.
Cowunnagehuckamen. You have a fair wind. Cummattagehuckamen. The wind is
against you. Nummattagehuckamen. The wind is against me.

General Observations of the Winds.
God is wonderfully glorious in bringing the Winds out of his Treasure, and
riding upon the wings of those Winds in the eyes of all the sons of men in
all Coasts of the world.

More particular:

English and Indian both observe,
The various blasts of wind:
And both I have heard in dreadful storms
Cry out aloud, I have sinned.
But when the storms are turned to calmes,
And seas grow smooth and still:
Both turn (like Swine) to wallow in,
The filth of former will.
It Is not a storm on sea, or shore,
It Is not the Word that can;
But it is the Spirit or Breath of God
That must renew the man.
CHAP. XV. Of Foul.
NPeshawog Pussekesesuck. Foul. Ntauchaumen. I go afowling or hunting.
Auchaui. He is gone to hunt or foul. Pepemoi. He is gone to foul.
Wompissacuk. An Eagle. Wompsacuck quauog. Eagle.* Neyhom, mauog. Turkies.
Paupock, suog. Partridges. Aunckuck, quauog. Heath-cocks. Chogan, e^uck.
Blackbird, Black-birds.

Obs. Of this sort there be millions, which are great devourers of the Indian
corn as soon as it appears out of the ground; Unto this sort of Birds,
especially, may the mystical Fowls, the Devils be well resembled (and so it
pleases the Lord Jesus himself to observe, Matthew. 13. which mystical Foul
follow the sowing of the Word, and pick it up from loose and careless
hearers, as these Black-birds follow the material seed.

Against the Birds the Indians are very careful, both to set their corn deep
enough that it may have a strong root, not so apt to be plucked up, (yet not too
deep, lest they bury it, and it never come up:) as also they put up little
watch-houses in the middle of their fields, in which they, or their biggest
children lodge, and early in the morning prevent the Birds* etc.

Kokokehom, Ohomous. An Owl. Kaukont* tuock. Crow, Crows.

Obs. These Birds, although they do the corn also some hurt, yet scarce will
one Native amongst an hundred will kill them, because they have a tradition, that
the Crow brought them at first an Indian Grain of Corn in one Ear, and an
Indian or French Bean in another, from the Great God Kautan^uwits field in the
Southwest from whence they hold came all their Corn and Beans.

Honck,-honckock, Wompatuck-quauog. Goose, Geese. Wequash-shauog. Swans, Swans.
Munnucks-munnuck suck. Brants, or Brantgeese. Queque^cum-mauog. Ducks.

Obs. The Indians having abundance of these sorts of Foul upon their waters,
take great pains to kill any of them with their Bow and Arrows; and are
mavelous desirous of our English Guns, powder and shot (though they are
wisely and generally denied by the English) yet with those which they get from
the French, and some others (Dutch and English) they kill abundance of Foul,
being naturally excellent marks-men; and also more hardened to endure the
weather, and wading, lying, and creeping on the ground, etc.

I once saw an exercise of training of the English, when all the English had
mist the mark set up to shoot at, an Indian with his own Piece (desiring leave
to shoot) only hit it.

Kitsuog. Cormorants.

Obs. These they take in the night time, where they are asleep on rocks, off
at Sea, and bring in at break of day great store of them: Yo aquechinock. There
they swim. Nipponamouoog I lay nets for them.

Ob. This they do on shore, and catch many foul upon the plains, and feeding
under Oaks upon Akrons, as Geese, Turkies, Cranes, and others, etc.

Ptowe^i. It is fled. Ptowewushannick They are fled: Wunnup,-pash Wing, Wings:
Wunnuppanick anawhone Wing-shot: Wuhockgock anwhone Body-shot: Wuskowhan A
Pigeon: Wuskowha^nannuaog Pigeons: Wuskowhannanaukit Pigeon Country:

Obs. In that place these Foul breed abundantly, and by reason of their
delicate Food (especially in Strawberrie time when they pick up whole large
Fields of the old grounds of the Natives, they are a delicate foul, and
because of their abundance, and the facility of killing of them, they are and
may be plentifully fed on.

Sachim: a little Bird about the bigness of a swallow, or less, to which the
Indians give that name, because of its Sachim or Princelike courage and Command
over greater Birds, that a man shall often see this small Bird pursue and
vanquish and put to flight the Crow, and other Birds far bigger then it self.

Sowwanakitauwaw They go to the South ward.

That is the saying of the Natives, when the Geese and other Foul at the
approach of Winter betake themselves, in admirable Order and discerning their
Course even all the night long.

Chepewaukitauog They fly Northward.

That is when they return in the Spring. There are abundance of singing Birds
whose names I have little as yet inquired after, etc.

The Indians of Martins vineyard, at my late being amongst them, report
generally, and confidently of some Islands, which lie off from them to Sea, from
whence every morning early, certain Fowls come and light amongst them, and
return at Night to lodging, which Island or Islands are not yet discovered,
though probably, by other Reasons they give, there is Land, etc.

Taunek-kauog. Crane, Cranes? Wushowunan. The Hawke.

Whch the Indians keep tame about their houses to keep the little Birds from
their Corn.

The general Observation of Foul.
How sweetly do all the several sorts of Heavens Birds, in all Coasts of the
World, preach unto Men the praise of their Makers Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, who feeds them and their young ones Summer and Winter with their
several suitable sorts of Food: although they neither sow nor reap, nor
gather into Barnes?

More particularly:

If Birds that neither sow nor reap.
Nor store up any food,
Constantly find to them and theirs
A maker kind and Good!
If man provide eke for his Birds,
In Yard, in Coops, in Cage.
And each Bird spends in songs and Tunes,
His little time and Age!
What care will Man, what care will God,
For's wife and Children take?
Millions of Birds and Worlds will God.
Sooner then His forsake.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Earth, and the Fruits thereof, etc.
Auke, and Sanaukamuck. Earth or Land. Nittauke Nissa wnawkamuck. My Land.
Wuskaukamuck. New ground. Aquegunnitteash. Fields worn out. Mihtuck-quash.
Trees. Pauchautaqunnesash. Branch, Branches. Wunnepog-guash. Leaf, leaves.
Wattap. A root of Tree, Seip. A River. Toyusk. A bridge. Sepoese. A little
River. Sepoemese. A little Rivelet. Takekum. A Spring. Takekummuo? Is there a
Spring. Sepuo? Is there a River? Toyusquanuo. Is there a Bridge.

Obs. The Natives are very exact and punctual in the bounds of their Lands,
belonging to this or that Prince or People, (even to a River, Brook) etc. And
I have known them make bargain and sale amongst themselves for a small piece,
or quantity of Ground: notwithstanding a sinful opinion amongst many that
Christians have right to Heathens Lands: but of the delusion of that phrase, I
have spoke in a discourse concerning the Indians Conversion.

Paugautemisk. An Oak. Wompimish. A Chestnut Tree. Wompimineash. Chesnutts.

Obs. The Indians have an Art of drying their Chestnuts, and so to preserve them
in their barnes for a dainty all the year.

Anauchemineash. Akornes.

These Akornes also they dry, and in case of want of Corn, by much boiling
they make a good dish of them: yea some times in plenty of Corn do they eat
these Acornes for a Novelty.

Wussoquat. A Wallnut Tree. Wusswaquatomineug. Wallnut.

Of these Wallnuts they make an excellent Oil good for many uses, but
especially for their annoynting of their heads. And of the chips of the
Walnut-Tree (the bark taken off) some English in the Country make excellent
Beer both for Taste, strength, color, and in offensive opening operation:
Sasaunckapamuck. The Sassafrasse Tree. Mishquawtuck. The Cedar tree.
Cowaw-esuck. Pine-young Pine. Wenomesippaguash. The Vine-Tree. Micuckaskeete. A
Meadow. Tataggoskituash. A fresh Meadow. Maskituash. Grass or Hay.
Wekinash-quash. Reed, Reeds. Manisimmin. To cut or mow. Qussuckomineanug. The
Cherry Tree. Wuttahimneash. Strawberries.

Obs. This Berry is the wonder of all the Fruits growing naturally in those
parts: It is of it self Excellent: ^o that one of the chiefest Doctors of
England was wont to say, that God could have made, but God never did make a
better Berry: In some parts where the Natives have planted, I have many times
seen as many as would filla good ship within few miles compass: the Indians
bruise them in a Mortar, and mix them with meal and make Strawberry bread.

Wuchipoquameneash. A kind of sharp Fruit like a Barbary in taste.

Sasemineash another sharp cooling Fruit growing in fresh Waters all the
Winter, Excellent in conserve against Fevers.

Wenomeneash. Grapes. Wuttahimnasippaguash. Strawberry leaves. Peshauiuash.
Violet leaves. Nummouwinneem. I go to gather. Mowinne-auog. He or they gather.
Atauntowash. Clime the Tree. Ntauntawem. I clime. Punnouwash. Come down.
Npunnowaumen. I come down. Attitaash. Hur^le-berries.

Of which there are diverse sorts sweet like Currants, some opening, some of a
binding nature.

Sau^taash are these Currants dried by the Natives, and so preserved all the
year, which they beat to powder, and mingle it with their parcht meal, and
make a delicate dish which they call Sautauthig; which is as sweet to them as
plum or spice cake to the English.

They also make great use of their Strawberries having such abundance of them,
making Strawberry bread, and having no other Food for many days, but the
English have exceeded, and make good Wine both of their Grapes and Strawberries
also in some places as I have often tasted.

Ewachim-neash. Corn. Scannemeneash. Seed-Corne. Wompiscannemeneash. White
seed-corne.

Obs. There be diverse sorts of this Corn and of the Colors: yet all of it
either boil^ in milk, or buttered, if the use of it were known and received
in England (it is the opinion of some skillfull in physic) it might save many
thousand lives in England, occasioned by the binding nature of English wheat
the Indian Corn keeping the body in a constant moderate looseness.

Aukeeteaumen. To plant Corn. Outtaunemun. To plant Corn. Anakausu. A
Labourer. Anakausichick. Laborers. Aukeeteaumitch. Planting time.
Aukeeteahettit. When they set Corn. Nummautaukeeteaumen. I have done planting.
Anaskhommin. To how or break up.

Obs. The Women set or plant, weed, and hill, and gather and barn all the
corn, and Fruits of the field: Yet sometimes (...) ^an himself, (either out
of love to h^ (...) (...) care for his Children, or being an (...) ^an) will
help the Woman which (by the ^ustome of the Country) they are n^ ^ound to.

When a field is to be broken up* they (...) ^very loving sociable speedy way
to disp^ (...): All the neighbors men and Women (...) (...), fifty, a hundred
etc, join, and come in to ^elp freely.

With friendly joining they break up their ^elds, build their Forts, hunt the
(...), ^op and kill fish in the Rivers, it being true ^ith them as in all the
World in the Affairs (...) Earth or Heaven: By concord little things grow
great, by discord the greatest ^ome to nothing Concordia parvae res crescunt,
^iscordia magnae dilabuntur.

^naskhig-anash. How, Howes. ^naskhomwock. They how. ^naskhommontea^min. They
break for me. ^naskhomwautow^win. A breaking up How.

The Indian Women to this day (notwith^anding our Howes, do use their natural
^owes of shells and Wood. Monaskunnemun. To weed. Monaskunnummautowwin. A
weeding or broad How. Petascunnemun, To hill the Corn. Kepenu^min and
Wu^tunnemun. To gather Corn. Nunnowwa. Harvest time. Anouant. At harvest.
Wuttunnemitch-Ewachim. When harvest is in. Paufinnummin. To dry the corn.

Which they do carefully upon heaps and Mats many days, before they barn it
upcovering it up with Ma^at night, and opening when the Sun is hot.

Sokenug. A heap of corn.

Obs. The woman of the family will commonly raise two or three heaps of twelve
fifteen, or twenty bushells a heap, which they dry inround broad heaps; and
if she have help of her children or friends much more^ Pockhommin. To beat or
thrash out. Npockhommin. I am threshing. Cuppockhommin? Do you thrash?
Wuskokkamuckomeneash. New ground Corn. Nquitawannanash. One basket fulll.
Munnote,-tash. Basket, Baskets. Mauseck. A great one Peewasick. A little one.
Wus^aumepewasick. Too little. Pokowannanash Half a basket full. Necsow^manash.
Two baskets full. Shoanash. Three. Yowanannash. Four, etc. Ani^ash. Rotton
corn. Waweekanash. Sweet corn. Tawhitch quitche mauntamen? Why do you smell
to it? Auqunnash. Barnes. Necawnauquanash. Old barnes.

Askutasquash, their Vine aples, which the English from them call Squashe^
about the bigness of Apples of several colors, a sweet, light wholesome
refreshing.

Uppakumineash. The seed of them.

The Observation general of the Fruits of the Earth.
God has not left himself without witin all parts and coasts of the world;
the raines and fruitful seasons, the Earth, Trees, Plants, etc. filling man's
heart with food and gladness, witnesses against, and condemns man for his
unthankfulness and unfruitfulnesse toward his Maker.

More particular:

^s thousands since, God gave command
(as we in Scripture find)
(...) Earth and Trees and Plants should bring
Forth fruits each in his kind.
^he Wilderness remembers this,
The wild and howling land
^rs the toyling labor of,
The wil^est Indians hand.
^an forgets his Maker, who,
am'd him in Righteousness.
^adise in Paradise, now worse
^hen Indian Wildernesse^
CHAP. XVII. Of Beasts, etc.
^nashimwock. Beasts. ^tasuog. Catt^ll.

This name the Indians give to tame (...) yea, and Birds also which they keep
(...) about their houses: Muckquashim-wock. Wolves. Moattoqus. A black Wolf.
Tummock quauog Noosup Sumhup. pauog. Beaver,-Beavers.

Obs. This is a Beast of wonder; for cutting and drawing of great pieces of
trees with his teeth, with which, and sticks and earth I have often seen, fair
streams and rivers damm'd and stopped up by them: upon these streams thus
damm'd up, he builds his house with stories, wherein he sits dry in his
chambers, or goes into the water at his pleasure.

Mishquashim. A red Fox. P^quawus. A gray Fox.

Obs. The Indians say they have black Foxes; which they have often seen, but
never could take any of them: they say they are Manittooes, that is, Gods
Spirits or Divine powers, as they say of every thing which they cannot
comprehend.

Ausup-pannog. Racoone, Racoones Nkeke, nkequock. Otter, Otters. Pussough. The
wildcat.

Ockqutchaun-n^g. A wild beast of a reddish hair about the bigness of a Pig,
and rooting like a Pig; from whence they give this name to all our Swine.
Mishanneke-quock. Squirrill, quirrils. Anequs anequussuck. A little colored
Squirril^ Wautuckques. The Conie.

Obs. They have a reverend esteem of this Creature, and conceive there is some
Deity in it.

Attuck, quock Dear. Noonatch noonatchaug. Moosqu^n. A Fawn. Wawwunnes. A
young Bucke. Kutt omp and Paucotta^waw. A great Bucke. Aunan quuneke. A D^.
Q^nneq ^wese. A little young D^. Naynayoumewot. A Horse. Cowsnuck. Cowes.
(...). Goats. Hegsuck. Swine. Pigsuck.

Obs. This Termination suck, is common in their language; and therefore they
add it to our English Cattle, not else knowing what names to give them; Anum.
A D^g. Yet the variety of their Dialects and proper speech within thirty or
fort^ (...) each of other, is very great, as appears in that word, Anum, The
Cowwese^ Dialect. Ayim, The Narriganset Dialect. Arum. The Qunnippinck Dialect.
Alum. The Neepmuck Dialect. So that although some pronounce not L, nor R. yet
it is the most proper Dialect of other places, contrary to many reports.

Enewashim. A Male. Squashim. A Female. Moos-soog. The great Ox, or rather a
red Dear. Askug. A Snake. Moaskug. Black Snake. Sesek. Ratile Snake.
Natuppw^ck. ^hey feed. Teaqua natuphettit? Wha^ shall they eat? Natuphettitch
yo san^ukamick. Let them feed on this ground.

The general Observation of the Beasts.
The Wilderness is a clear resemblance of the world, where greedy and
furious men persecute and devour the harmless and innocent as the wild
beasts pursue and devour the Hinds and Roes.

More particular.

The Indians, Wolves, yea, Dogs and Swine,
I have known the Dear devour,
Gods children are sweet prey to all;
But yet the end proves sour.
For though Gods children lose their lives,
They shall not loose an hair;
But shall arise, and judge all those,
That now their Judges are.
New-England's wild beasts are not fierce,
As other wild beasts are:
Some men are not so fierce, and yet
From mildness are they far.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Sea.
VVEchekum Kitthan. The Sea. Paumpagussit. The Sea-God, or, that name which
they give that Deity or Godhead which they conceive to be in the Sea.

Obs. Mishoon an Indian Boat, or Canow made of a Pine or Oak, or Chesnut-tree:
I have seen a Native go into the woods with his hatchet carrying only a
Basket of Corn with him, and stones to strike fire when he had feld his tree
(being a chestnut) he made him a little House or shed of the bark of it, he puts
fire and follows the burning of it with fire, in the midst in many places: his
corn he boyles and has the Brook by him, and sometimes angles for a little
fish: but so he continues burning and hewing until he has within ten or
twelve days (lying there at his work alone) finished, and (getting hands,)
lanched his Boat; with which afterward he ventures out to fish in the Ocean.

Mishoonemese. A little Canow.

Some of them will not well carry above three or four: but some of them
twenty, thirty, forty men.

Wunnauanounuck. A Shall^p. Wunnauanounuckquese. A Skiffe.

Obs. Although themselves have neither, yet they give them such names, which in
their Language signifies carrying Vessels.

Kitonuck. A Ship. Kitonuckquese. A little ship. Mishittouwand. A great Canow.
Peewa^u. A little one. Paugautemissaund. An Oak Canow. Kowawwaund. A pine
Canow. Wompmissaund. A chestnut Canow. Ogwhan. A boat adrift. Wuskon-togwhan. It
will go a drift. Cuttunnamiinnea. Help me to launch. Cuttunnummutta. Let us
launch. Cuttunnamoke. Launch. Cuttannummous. I will help you. Wutkunck. A
paddle or Oar. Namacouhe comishoon. Lend me your Boat. Pautousnenotehunck
Bring hither my paddle. Comishoonhom? Go you by water? Chemosh-chemeck. Paddle
or row. Mauminikish and Maumanetepweeas. Pull up, or row lustily. Sepa^kehig. A
Sail. Sepagehommauta. Let us sail. Wunnagehan. We have a fair wind.

Obs. Their own reason has taught them, to pull of a Coat or two and set it
up on a small ^ole, with which they will sail before a wind ten, or twenty
mile, etc.

Wauaupunish. Hoyse up. Wuttautnish. Pull to you. Nokanish. Take it down.
Paketenish. Let go or let sly. Nikkoshkowwaumen We shall be drowned. Nquawu
pshawmen. We overset. Wussaume pechepausha. The Sea comes in too fast upon us.
Maumaneeteantass. Be of good courage.

Obs. It is wonderful to see how they will venture in those Canoes, and how
(being often overset as I have my self been with them) they will swim a mile,
yea two or more safe to Land: I having been necessitated to pass waters
diverse times with them, it has pleased God to make them many times the
instruments of my preservation: and when sometimes in great danger I have
questioned safety, they have said to me: Fear not, if we be overset I will
carry you safe to Land.

Paupautuckquash. Hold water. Kinnequass. Steer. Tiackomme kinniquass. Steer
right. Kunnosnep. A Killick, or Anchor. Chowwophommin. To cast over-boord.
Chouwophash. Cast overboard. Touwopskhommke. Cast anchor. Mishitt^shin. It is
a storm. Awepesha. It caulmes. Awepu. A calm. Nanouwashin. A great caulme,
Tamoccon. Flood. Nanashowetamoccon Half Flood. Keesaqushin. High water.
Taumacoks. Upon the Flood. Mishittommockon. A great Flood. Mau^chetan and skat.
Ebb. Mittaeskat. A low Ebb. Awanick Paudhuck? Who comes there?

Obs. I have known thirty or forty of their Canowes filled with men, and near
as many more of their enemies in a Sea Fight.

Caupau^shess.* Go ashoare. Caupaushauta. Let us go ashoare. Wusseheposh.
Heave out the water. Askepunish. Make fast the Boat. Kspunsh and Kspunemoke.
Tie it fast. Mauminikish. Tie it hard. Neene Cuthomwock. Now they go off.
Kekuthomwushannick. They are gone already.

General Observations of the Sea.
How unsearchable are the does of the Wisdom and Power of God in separating
from Europe, Asia and (...) such a mighty vast continent as America i^ and
that for so many ages? as also, by such a Western Ocean of about three
thousand of English miles breadth in passage over?

More particular:

They see Gods wonders that are called
Through dreadful Seas to pass,
In tearing winds and roaring seas,
And clames as smooth as glass.
I have in Europes ships, often been
In King of terrors hand;
When all have cried, Now, now we sinck,
Yet God brought safe to land.
Alone amongst Indians in Canoes,
Sometime o^re-turn'd, I have been
Half inch from death, in Ocean deep,
Gods wonders I have seen.
CHAP. XIX. Of Fish and Fishing.
NAmaus,-suck. Fish, Fishes. Pauganaut, tamwock. Cod,

Which is the first that comes a little be^re the Spring. Qunnamaug-suck.
Lampries,

The first that come in the Spring into the fresh Rivers.

Aumsuog, and Munnawha^eaug. A Fish somewhat like a Herring.
Missuck^ke-kequock. Basse.

The Indians (and the English too) make a dainty dish of the Uppaquontup, or
head of this Fish; and well they may, the brains and fat of it being very
much, and sweet as marrow.

Kauposh-shauog. Siurgeon.

Obs. Diverse part of the Country abound with this Fish; yet the Natives for
the goodness and greatness of it, much prize it, and will neither furnish the
English with so many, nor so cheap, that any great trade is like to be made of
it, until the English themselves are fit to follow the fishing.

The Natives venture one or two in a Canow, and with an harping Iron, or such
like Instrument stick this fish, and so hale it into their Canow; sometimes
they take them by their nets, which they make strong of Hemp.

Ashop. Their Nets.

Which they will set thwart some little River or Cov^ wherein they kill Basse
(at the fall of the water) with their arrows, or sharp sticks, especially if
headed with Iron, gotten from the English, etc. Aucup. A little Cove or Creek.
Aucppawese. A very-little one. Wawwhunnekesuog. Mackrell. Mishquammau^quock.
Red fish, Salmon. O^acontuck. A fat sweet fish, something like a Haddock.
Mishcup-pauog, Sequanamauquock. Breame.

Obs. Of this fish there is abundance which the Natives dry in the Sun and
smoke; and some English begin to salt, both ways they keep all the year;
and it is hoped it may be as well accepted as Cod at a Market, and better, if
once known.

Taut-auog. Sheeps-heads. Neeshau^og Sassammau^quock Nquitteconna^og* Ecles.
Tatackommmau^og. Porpuses. Potop-pauog. Whales:

Which in some plac^s are often cast up; I have seen some of them, but not
above sixty foot long: The Natives cut them out in several parcells, and give
and send far and near for an acceptable present, or dish.

Mi^sesu. The whole. Poquesu. The half. Waskeke. The Whalebone. Wussuckqun. A
tail. Aumau^og. They are fiishing. Ntaumen. I am fishing. Kuttau^men? Do you
fish? Nnattuckqunnu^wem. I go a fishing. Aumachick, Natuckqunnuwachick.
Fishes. Aumaui. He is gone to fish. Awacenick kukkattineanaumen? What do you
fish for? Ashau^nt-teau^g. Lobsters. Opponenau^hock. O^sters. Sickis^uog.
Clams.

Obs. This is a sweet kind of shelfish, which all Indians generally over the
Country, Winter and Summer delight in; and at low wate^ the women dig for
them: this fish, and the natural liquor of it, they boil, and it make^ their
broth and their Nasau^mp (which is kind of thickened broth) and their bread sea*
sonable and savory, in stead of Salt: and for that the English Swine dig and
root these Clams wheresoever they come, and watc^ the low water (as the Indian
women do) therefore of all the English Cattle, the Swine (a^ also because of
their filthy disposition) ar^ most hateful to all Natives, and they call ^em
filthy cut throats, etc.

^equnnock ^oquauhock.. A Horse-fish.

Obs. This the English call Hens, a little ^ck shel* fiish which the Indians
wade deep ^d dive for, and after they have eaten the ^eat there (in those
which are good) they ^eake out of the shell, about half an inch (...) a black
part of it, of which they make ^eir Suckau^hock, or black money, which is (...)
them precious.

^eteauhock. The Periwinckle.

Of which they make their Wompam, or white mo^y, of half the value of their
Suckawhock, or ^cke money, of which more in the Chapter (...) their Coin.

^mmenakiss, ^mmenakissamen (...)? Have you taken store? ^mmenakiss. I have
taken store. (...). I have killed many. ^ge. I have caught none. ^manep. A
fishing-line. ^manapeash. Lines.

The Natives take exceeding great paine^ in their fishing, especially in
watching their seasons by night; so that frequently they lay their naked bodies
many a cold night on the cold shore about a fire of two or three stick^ and
often in the night search their Nets; an^ sometimes go in and stay longer in
froze^ water.

Hoquaun aunash. Hook, hooks. Peewasicks. Little hooks. Maumacocks. Great
hooks. Nponamouoog. I set nets for them. Npunnouwaumen. I go to search my
nets. Mihtuck quashep. An Eele-pet. Kunnagqunneuteg. A greater sort.
Onawangonnakaun. A bait. Yo onawangonnatees Ba^te with this. Moamitteaug. A
little sort of fish, half as big as Sprats, plentiful in Winter.

Paponaumsu^og. A winter fish, which comes up in the brooks and rivulets; so^
call them Frost fish, from their coming (...) from the Sea into fresh Brooks,
in times (...) frost and snow.

Qunosuog. A fresh fish; which t^ Indians break the Ice in fresh ponds, when
the take also many other sorts: for, to my kno^ ledge the Country yields many
sorts of oth^ fish, which I mention not.

The general Observation of Fish.
How many thousands of Millions of those under water, sea-Inhabitants, in all
Coasts of the world preach to the sons of men on shore, to adore their
glorious Maker, by presenting themselves to Him as themselves (in a manner)
present their lives from the wild Ocean, to the very doors of men, their
fellow creatures in New England.

More Particular.

What Habacuck once spoke, mine eyes
Have often seen most true,
The greater fishes devour the less,
And cruelly pursue.
Forcing them though Coves and Creekes,
To leap on driest sand,
To gasp on earthie element, or die
By wildest Indians hand.
Christ's little ones must hunted be
Devoured; yet rise as He.
And eat up those which now a while
Their fierce devourers be.
CHAP. XX. Of their nakedness and clothing.
PAu^skesu. Naked. Pauskesitchick Naked men and women. Nipposkiss. I am naked.

They have a twofold nakedness:

First ordinary and constant, when although they have a Beasts skin or an
English mantle on, yet that covers ordinarily but their hinder parts and all
the foreparts from top to toe, (excep their secret parts, covered with a little
Apron, after the pattern of their and our first Parents) I say all else open
and naked.

Their male children go stark naked, and have no Apron until they come to
ten or twelve years of age; their Female they, in a modest blush cover with a
little Apron of an hand breadth from their very birth.

Their second nakedness is when their men often abroad and both men and women
within doors, leave off their beasts skin, or English cloth and so (excepting
their little Apron) are wholly naked; yet but few of the women but will keep
their skin or cloth (though loose) or near to them ready to gather it up about
them.

Custom has used their minds and bodies to it, and in such a freedom from any
wantonness, that I have never seen that wantonness amongst them as, (with
grief) I have heard of in Europe.

Nipposkenitch. I am robbed of my coat. Nipposkenick ewo. He takes away my Coat.
Acoh. Their Dear skin. Tummockquashunck. A Beavers coat. Nkequashunck. An
Otters coat. Mohewonck. A Rakoone-skin coat. Natoquashunck. A Wolues-skin coat.
Mishannequashunck. A Squirrill-skin coat. Neyhommauashunck A Coat or Manlte
curiously made of the fairest feathers of their Neyhommau^og, or Turkies, which
commonly their old men make; and is with them as Velvet with us.

Mau^nek: nquittiashiagat. An English Coat or Mantell. Caudnish. Put off.
Ocquash. Put on. Neesashiagat. Two coats. Shwishiagat. Three coats.
Piuckquashiagat. Ten coats, etc.

Obs. Within their skin or coat they creep contentedly, by day or night, in
house or in the woods, and sleep soundly counting it a felicity, (as indeed an
earthly one it is; (...) pe^liculam quemque (...). That every man be content
with his skin.

Squaus auhaqut. a Woman's Mantle. Mucki is auhaqut. A child's Mantle. Petacaus.
an English Wastecoat. Petacawsunnese. a little wastecoat. Au^tah and autawhun.
Their apron. Caukoanash. Stockins. Nquittetiagattash. a pair of stockins.
Mocussinass, and Mockuss^nchass. Shoes.

Obs. Both these, Shoes and Stockins they make of their Deerc skin worn out,
which yet being excellently tanned by them is excellent for to travel in wet
and snow; for it is so well tempered with oil that the water clean wrings
out; and being hanged up in their chimney, they presently dry without hurt as
my self has often proved.

Noonac^minash. Too little. (...). Big enough. Saunketippo, or, Ash naquo. a
Hat or Cap. Moose. The skin of a great Beast as ^ig as an Ox some call it a red
Dear. Wussuckhosu. Painted.

They also commonly paint these Moose and Deere-skins for their Summer wearing,
with variety of forms and colors.

Petouwa^sinug. Their Tobacco-bag, which hangs at their neck* or sticks at
their girdle, which is to them in stead of an English pocket.

Obs. Our English clothes are so strange unto them, and their bodies inured so
to endure the weather, that when (upon gift etc.) some of them have had English
clothes, yet in a shower of rain, I have seen them rather expose their skins
to the wet then their clothes, and therefore pull them off, and keep them dry.

Obs. While they are amongst the English they keep on the English apparel, but
pull of all, as soon as they come again into their own Houses, and Company.

General Observations of their Garments.
How deep are the purposes and Counsels, of God? what should be the reason of
this mighty difference of One man's children that all the Sons of men on this
side the way (in Europe, Asia and Africa should have such plenteous clothing
for Body for Soul! and the rest of Adams sons and Daughters on the other
side, or America (some think as big as the other three,) should neither have
nor desire clothing for their naked Souls, or Bodies.

More particular:

O what a Tyrant's Custom long,
How do men make a tush,
At what is in use, though never so foul:
Without once shame or blush?
Many thousand proper Men and Women,
I have seen met in one place:
Almost all naked, yet not one,
Thought want of clothes disgrace.
Israel was naked, wearing clothes!
The best clad Englishman, Exodus 32.

Not clothed with Christ, more naked is:
Then naked Indian.
CHAP. XXI. Of Religion, the soul, etc.
MAnit-manittowock. God, Gods.

Obs. He that questions whether God made the World, the Indians will teach him.
I must acknowledge I have received in my converse with them many Confirmations
of those two great points, Heb. 11. 6. viz:

1. That God is. 2. That he is a rewarder of all them that diligently seek
him.
They will generally confess that God made all: but then in special, although
they deny not that English-mans God made English Men, and the Heavens and Earth
there! yet their Gods made them and the Heaven, and Earth where they dwell.

Nummusquaunamuckqun manit. God is angry with me?

Obs. I have heard a poor Indian lamenting the loss of a child at break of
day, call up his Wife and children and all about him to Lamentation, and with
abundance of tears cry out! O God thou have taken away my child! thou art
angry with me: O turn thine anger from me, and spare the rest of my children.

If they receive any good in hunting, fishing, Harvest etc. they acknowledge
God in it.

Yea, if it be but an ordinary accident, a fall, etc. they will say God was
angry and did it. musquantum manit God is angry. But herein is their Misery.

First they branch their Godhead into many Gods.

Secondly, attribute it to Creatures.

First, many Gods: they have given m^ the Names of thirty seven which I have,
al^ which in their solemn Worships they invo^ cate: as

Kautantowwit the great South-West God, t^ to whose House all souls go, and
from whom came their Corn Beans, as they say Wompanand. The Eastern God.
Chekesuwand. The Western God. Wunnauameanit. The Northern God. Sowwanand. The
Southern God. Wetuomanit. The house God.

Even as the Papists have their He and She Saint Protectors as St. George, St.
Patric^ St. Denis. Virgin Mary, etc.

Squauanit. The Woman's God. Muckquachuckquand. The Childrens God.

Obs. I was once with a Native dying of wound, given him by some murtherous
(...) (who robbed him and run him through with a Rapier, from whom in the heat
of h^ wound, he at present escaped from them b^ dying of his wound, they
suffered Death at new Plymouth, in New England, this Native dying called much
upon Muckquachuckquand, which of other Na^ves I understood (as they believed)
had appeared to the dying young man, many years before, and bid him when ever
he was in distress call upon him.

Secondly, as they have many of these fained Deities: so worship they the
Creatures in whom they conceive does rest some Deity: Keesuckquand. The Sun
God. Nanepaushat. The Moon God. Paumpagussit. The Sea. Yot^anit. The Fire God,

Supposing that Deities be in these, etc.

When I have argued with them about their Fire-God: can i^ say theybe, but this
fire must be a God, or Divine power, that out of a stone will arise in a
Spark, and when a poor naked Indian is ready to starve with cold in the House
and especially in the Woods, often saves his life, does dress all our Food for
us, and if it be angry will burn the House about us, yea if a spark fall into
the dry wood, burns up the Country, (though this burning of the Wood to them
they count a Benefit both for destroying of vermin, and keeping down the Weeds
and ^hickets?)

Praesentem narrat quaelibet herba Deum.
Every little Grass does tell,
The sons of Men, there God does dwell.
Besides there is a general Custom amongst them, at the apprehension of any
Excellency in Men, Women, Birds Beasts, Fish, etc. to cry out Manittoo, that
is, it is a God, as thus if they see one man excel others in Wisdom, Valor,
strength, Activity etc. they cry out Manittoo A God: and therefore when they
talk amongst themselves of the English ships, and great buildings, of the
plowing of their Fields, and especially of Books and Letters, they will end
thus: Manittowock They are Gods: (...), you are a God, etc A strong Conviction
natural in the soul of man, that God is* filling all things, and places, and
that all Excellencies dwell in God, and proceed from him, and that they only
are blessed who have that Jehovah their portion.

Nickommo. A Feast or Dance.

Of this Feast they have public, and private and that of two sorts.

First in sickness, or Drouth, or War, or Famine.

Secondly, After Harvest, after hunting, when they enjoy a caulme of Peace,
Health, Plenty, Prosperity, then Nickommo a Feast, especially in Winter, for
then (as the Turk says of the Christian, rather the Antichristian,) they run
mad once a year) in their kind of Christmas feasting.

Powwaw. A Priest. Powwauog. Priests.

Obs. These do begin and order their service, and Invocation of their Gods,
and all the people follow, and join interchangeably in a laborious bodily
service, unto sweating, especially of the Priest, who spends himself in
strange Antic Gestures, and Actions even unto fainting.

In sickness the Priest comes close to the sick person, and performs many
strange Actions about him, and threaten and conjures out the sickness. They
conceive that there are many Gods or divine Powers within the ^ody of a man: In
his pulse, his heart, his Lungs, etc.

I confess to have most of these their customs by their own Relation, for
after ^nce being in their Houses and beholding that their Worship was, I durst
never be an ^ye witness, Spectatour, or looker on, least I should have been
partaker of Satan's Inventions and Worships, contrary to Ephesians. 5. 14.

Nanouwetea. An over-Seer ana Orderer of their Worship. Neen nanowwunnemun. I
will order or oversee.

They have an exact form of King, Priest, and Prophet, as was in Israel
typical of old in that holy Land of Canaan, and as the Lord Jesus ordained in
his spiritual Land of Canaan his Church throughout the whole World: their
Kings or Governors called Sachima^g, Kings, and At^owau^g Rulers do govern:
Their Priests perform and manage their Worship: Their wise men and old men of
which number the Priests are also,) whom they call (...) they make solemn
speeches and Orations, or Lectures to them, concerning Religion Peace, or War
and all things.

Nowemausi^teem. I give away at the Worship.

Heo^ she that makes this Nickommo Feast or Dance besides the Feasting of somet
mes twenty, fifty, an hundredth yea I have seen near a thousand persons at one
of these Feasts) they give I say a great quantity of money, and all sort of
their goods (according to and sometimes beyond their Estate) in several small
parcells of goods, or money, to the value of eighteen pence, two Shillings, or
thereabouts to one person: and that person that receives this Gift, upon the
receiving of it goes out, and hollowes thrice for the health and prosperity of
the Party that gave it, the Mr. or Mistress of the Feast.

Nowemacau^nash. I Will give these things. Nitteau^guash. My money.
Nummaumachiuwash. My goods.

Obs. By this Feasting and Gifts, the Devil drives on their worships
pleasantly (as he does all false worships, by such plausible Earthly Arguments
of uniformities, universalities, Antiquities, Immunities, Dignities, Rewards,
unto submitters, and the contrary to Refusers) so that they run far and near
and ask Awaun. Nakommit? Who makes a Feast? Nkekinneawaumen. I go to the
Feast. Kekineawau^i. He is gone to the Feast.

They have a modest Religious persuasion not to disturb any man, either
themselves English, Dutch, or any in their Conscience, and worship, and
therefore say: Aquiewopwau^wash. Peace, hold your peace. Aquiewopwau^wock.
Peeyau^ntam. He is at Prayer. Peeyauntamwock. They are praying. Cowwewonck. The
Soul,

Derived from Cowwene to sleep, because say they, it works and operates when
the body sleeps. Michachu^ck the soul, in a highe^ notion, which is of
affinity, with a word signifying a looking glass, or clear resemblance, so
that it has its name from a cleer^ fight or discerning, which indeed seems
very well to suit with the nature of it.

Wuhock The Body. Nohock: cohock. My body, your body.
Awaunkeesitteou^wi^cohock. Who made you? Tunna-awwa
comm^tchichunckkitonckquean? Whether goes your soul^ when you die? An.
Sowanakitau^waw. It goes to the South-West.

Obs. They believe that the souls of Me^ and Women go to the Sou^west, their
great and good men and Women to (...) his House, where they have hopes (as the
Turks have of carnal Joys): Murtherer^ thieves and Liars, their Souls (say
they (...) wonder restless abroad.

Now because this Book (by Gods good providence) may come into the hand of many
fearing God, who may also have many an o^portunity of occasional discourse
with some of these their wild brethren and Sisters, and may speak a word for
their and our glorious Maker, which may also prove some prepara^ory Mercy to
their Souls: I shall propose ^ome proper expressions concerning the Cre^tion
of the World, and man's Estate, and in ^articular theirs also, which from my
self many hundreths of times, great numbers of them have heard with great
delight, and ^reat convictions: which who knows (in ^ods holy season) may rise
to the exalting ^f the Lord Jesus Christ in their conversion, ^d salvation?

^etop Kunnatotemous. Friend, I will ask you a Question. ^atotema: Speak on.
^ocketunnantum? What think you? ^waun Keesiteouwin Keesuck? Who made the
Heavens? ^uke Wechekom? The Earth, the Sea? ^ittauke. The World.

Some will answer Tatta I cannot tell, some ^ill answer Manittowock the Gods.

^suog Manittowock. How many Gods be there? Maunau^og Mishaunawock. Many,
great many. Netop machage. Friend, not so. Pausuck naunt manit. There is only
one God. Cuppsittone. You are mistaken. Cowauwaanemun. You are out of the way.

A phrase which much pleases them, being proper for their wandering in the
woods, and similitudes greatly please them.

Kukkakotemous, wachit-quashouwe. I will tell you, presently* Kuttaunchemokous.
I will tell you news. Pausuck nau^nt manit keesittin keesuck, etc One only
God made the Heavens, etc. Napannetashemittan naugecautummonab nshque. Five
thousand years ago and upwards. Naugom nau^nt wukkesittinnes wame teagun. He
alone made all thing* Wuche mateag. Out of nothing.
Quttatashuchuckqunnacaus-keesitinnes wame. In six days he made (...) things.
Nquittaqunne. The first day He man Wuckeesitin wequai. the Light. Neesqunne.
The second day He Wuckeesitin Keesuck. made the Firmameut Shuckqunne
wuckeesitin Au^ke ka wechekom. The third day he made the Earth and Sea.
Yoqunne wuckkeesitin Nippau^us ka Nanepau^shat. The fourth day he made the Sun
and the Moon. Neenash-mamockiuwash wequanantiganash. T^o great Lights. Ka wame
anocksuck. And all the Stars. Napannetashuckqunne Wuckeesittin pussuckseesuck
wame. The fifth day he made all the Foul. Keesuckquiuke. In the Air, or
Heavens. Ka wame namau^suck. And all the Fish in the Wechekommiuke. Sea.
Quttatashukqunne wuckkeesittin penashimwock wame. The sixth day he made all
the Beasts of the Field. Wuttake wuche wuckeesittin pausuck Enin, or,
Eneskeetomp. Last of all he made one Man Wuche mishquock. Of red Earth, Ka
wesuonckgonnakaunes Adam, tuppautea mishquock. And called him Adam, or red
Earth. Wuttake wuche. Then afteward, while Cawit mishquock. Adam, or red Earth
slept. Wuckaudnummenes manit peetau^gon wuche Adam. God took a rib from Adam,
or red Earth. Ka wuche peteaugon. And of that rib he made Wukkeesitinnes
pausuck squaw. One woman, Ka pawtouwunnes And brought her to Adamuck. Adam,
Nawont Adam wuttunnawaun nuppeteagon ewo. When Adam saw her, he said, This is
my bone. Enadatashuckqunne, aqu^i, The seventh day he rested, Nagau wuche
quttatashuckqune anacau^^uock Englishm^nuck. And therefore Englishmen work
sixdayes. Enadatashuckqunnockat taubataumwock. On the seventh day they praise
God.

Obs. At this Relation they are much satisfied, with a reason why (as they
observe) the E^glish and Dutch, etc. labor six days, and rest and worship the
seventh.

Besides, they will say, We never heard of this before: and then will relate
how they have it from their Fathers, that Kawan^owwit made one man and woman of
a stone, which disliking, he broke them in pieces, and made another man and
woman of a Tree, which were the Fountains of all mankind.

They apprehending a vast difference of Knowledge between the English and
themselves, are very observant of the English lives: I have heard them say to
an Englishman (who being hindered, broke a promise to them) You know God, Will
you lie Englishman?

Netop kihkita. Hearken to me. Englishmannuck, Englishmen. Dutchmannuck,
keenouwin ka wame mittaukeuk-kitonck quehettit. Dutch men, and you and all the
world, when they die. Mattux swowanna kit auog, Michichonckquock. Their souls
go not to the Southwest. Wame, ewo pawsuck Manit wawontakick. All that know
that one God. Ewo man it waumau sachick ka uckqushanchick. That love and fear
Him. Keesaqut a^og. They go up to Heaven. Micheme weeteantamwock. They ever
live in joy. Naugom manit wekick. In Gods own House. Ewo manit mat
wauontakick. They that know not this God. Matwaumausachick. That love. Mat ewo
uckqushanchick. And fear him not. Kamootakick. Thieves. Pupannouwachick.
Liars. Nochisquauonchick. Unclean persons. Nanompanissichick, Idle persons.
Kemineiachick. Murderers. Mammausachick. Adulterers. Nanisquegachick.
Oppressors or fierce. Wame ^naumakiauog. They go to Hell or the Deep. Micheme
mauog. They shall ever lament. Awaun kukkakotemogwunnes? Who told you so?
Manittoo wussuckwheke. Gods Book or Writing.

Obs. After I had (as far as my language would reach) discoursed (upon a
time) before the chief Sachim or Prince of the Country, with his Archpriests,
and many other in a full Assembly; and being night, wearied with travel and
discourse, I lay down to rest; and before I slept, I heard this passage:

A Qunnihticut Indian (who had heard our discourse) told the Sachim
Miantunno^mu, that souls went up to Heaven, or down to Hell; For, says he,
Our fathers have told us, that our souls go to the Southwest.

The Sachim answered, But how do you know your self, that your souls go to
the Southwest; did you ever see a soul go thither?

The Native replied; when did he (naming my self) see a soul go to Heaven or
Hell?

The Sachim again replied: He has books and writings, and one which God
himself made, concerning men's souls, and therefore may well know more then
we that have none, but take all upon trust from our forefathers.

The said Sachim, and the chief of his people, discoursed by themselves, of
keeping the Englishmans day of worship, which I could easily have brought the
Country to, but that I was persuaded, and am, that Gods way is first to turn
a soul from it is Idols, both of heart, worship, and conversation, before it
is capable of worship, to the true and living God, according to 1 These. 1. 9.
You turned to God from Idols to serve or worship the living and true God. As
also, that the two first Principles and Foundations of true Religion or Worship
of the true God in Christ, are Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward
God, before the Doctrine of Baptism or washing and the laying on of hands,
which contain the Ordinances and Practices of worship; the want of which, I
conceive, is the bane of million of souls in England, and all other Nations
professing to be Christian Nations who are brought by public authority to
Baptism and fellowship with God in Ordinances of worship, before the saving
work of Repentance, and a true turning to God, Heb. 6. 2.

Netop, kitonckquean kunnuppamin micheme. Friend, when you die you perish
everlastingly. Micheme cuppauqua neimmin. You are everlastingly undone.
Cummusquauna muckqun manit. God is angry with you. Cuppauquanuckqun He will
destroy you. Wuche cummanittowockmanauog. For your many Gods. Wame pitch
chickauta mittauke. The whole world shall ere long be b^rnt.

Obs. Upon the relating that God has once destroyed the world by water; and
that He will visit it the second time with consuming fire: I have been asked
this profitable question of some of them, What then will b^come of us? Where
then shall we be?

Manit anawat. God commandth, Cuppittakunnamun weep wame. That all men now
repent.

The general Observation of Religion, etc.
The wandering Generations of Adams lost posterity, having lost the true and
living God their Maker, have created out of the nothing of their own
inventions many false and fained Gods and Creators.

More particular:

Two sorts of men shall naked stand.
Before the burning ire (...) These. (...). (...).

Of him that shortly shall appear,
In dreadful flaming fire.
First, millions know not God, nor for
His knowledge, care to seek:
Millions have knowledge store, but in
Obedience are not meek.
If woe to Indians, Where shall Turk,
Where shall appear the ^ew?
O, where shall stand the Christian false?
O blessed then the True.
CHAP. XXII. Of their Government and Justice.
Sachim-mauog. King, Kings. Sachimauonck, A Kingdom or Monarchy.

Obs. Their Government is Monarchical yet at present the chiefest government
in the Counrey is divided between a younger Sachim, Miantunnomu, and an elder
Sachim Caunounicus, of about fourscore years old this young man's Uncle; and
their agreemen^ in the Government is remarkable:

The old Sachim will not be offended a^ what the young Sachim does; and the
young^ Sachim will not do what he conceives will displease his Uncle. Saunks.
The Queen, or Sachims Wife. Sauncksquuaog. Queens. Otan, -nash. The town,
towns. Otanick. To the town. Sachimmaacommock A Princes house, which
according to their condition, is far different from the other house, both in
capacity or receipt; and also the finenesse and quality of their Mats.

Atauskawaw-wauog. Lord, Lords. Wauontam. A Wise man or Counselor.
Wauontakick. Wise men. Enatch or eatch Keen anawayean. Your will shall be law.
Enatch neen anowa. Let my word stand. Ntinnume. He is my man. Ntacquetunck ewo.
He is my subject. Kuttack quetous. I will subject to you.

Obs. Beside their general subjection to the highest Sachims, to whom they
carry presents: They have also particular Protectors, under Sachims, to whom
they also carry presents, and upon any injury received, and complaint made,
these Protectors will revenge it.

Ntannotam. I will revenge it. Kuttannotous. I will revenge you. Miaawene. A
Court or meeting. Weep cummiaawene. Come to the meeting. Miawetuck. Let us
meet. Wauwhautowash. Call a meeting. Miawemucks. At a meeting. Miawehettit.
When they meet.

Obs. The Sachims, although they have an absolute Monarchy over the people;
yet they will not conclude of ought that concerns all, either Laws, or
Subsides, or wars, unto which the people are averse, and by gentle persuasion
cannot be brought.

Peyautch naugum. Let himself come here. Petiteatch. Let him come.
Mishauntowash. Speak out. Nanantowash. Speak plain. Kunnadsittamen weep. You
must inquire after this. Wunnadfittamutta. Let us seach into it. Neen
pitch-nnadsittamen. I will inquire into it. Machissu ewo. He is naught.
Cuttiantacompawwem. You are a lying fellow. Cuttiantakiskquawquaw. You are a
lying woman. Weep cukkummoot. You have stole. Mat meshnawmonash I did not see
those things. Mat mesh nummam menash. I did not take them. Weep kunnishqueko
cummiskissawwaw. You are fierce and quarrelsome.

Obs. I could never discern that excess of scandalous sins amongst them,
which Europe abounds with. Drunkenness and gluttony, generally they know not
what sins they be; and although they have not so much to restrain them (both
in respect of knowledge of God and Laws of men) as the English have* yet a man
shall never hear of such crimes amongst them of robberies murders, adulteries
etc. as amongst the English: I conceive that the glorious Sun of so much
truth as shines in England, hardens our English hearts: for what the Sun
softeneth not, it hardens.

Tawhitch yo enean? Why do you so? Tawhitch cummootoan? Why do you steal?
Tawhitch nanompaniean? Why are you thus idle or base? Wewhepapunnoke. Bind him.
Weep kunnishaumis. You killed him. Weep kukkem^eantin. You are the murderer.
^asaumitauwhitch. Let him be whipped. ^pponck quittauwhitch. Let him be
imprisoned. Nippitch ewo. Let him die. Niphettitch. Let them die. Niss-Nissoke.
Kill him. Pum-pummoke. Shoot him.

Obs. The most usual Custom amongst them in executing punishments, is for the
Sachim either to beat, or whip, or put to death with his own hand, to which
the common sort most quietly submit: though sometimes the Sachim sends a secret
Executioner, one of his chiefest Warriors to fetch of a head, by some sudden
unexpected blow of a Hatchet, when they have feared Mutiny by public execution.

Kukkeechequaubenitch. You shall be hanged. Nippansinnea. I am innocent.
Uppansinea-ewo. He is innocent. Matmeshnowauwon. I knew nothing of it.
NNnowauntum. I am sorry. Nummachieme. I have done ill. Aumaunemoke. Let it
pass, or take away this accusation Konkeeteatch Ewo. Let him live.
Konkeeteahetti Let them live.

Observation general, of their Government.
The wildest of the sons of Men have ever found a necessity, (for
preservation of themselves, their Families and Properties) to cast themselves
into some Mould or form of Government.

More particular:

Adulteries, Murders, Robberies, Thefts,
Wild Indians punish these!
And hold the Scales of Justice so,
That no man farthing leese.
When Indians hear the horrid filths,
Of Irish, English Men,
The horrid Oaths and Murders late,
Thus say these Indians then.
We wear no Clothes, have many Gods,
And yet our finnes are less:
You are Barbarians, Pagans wild,
Your Land's the Wilderness.
CHAP. XXI. Of Marriage.
VVuskene. A young man. Keegsquaw. A Virgin or Maid. Segauo. A Widdower.
Segousquaw. A Widow. Wussenetam. He goes a wooing. Nosenemuck. He is my son
in Law, Wussenetuock, Awetawatuock. They make a ^atch.

Obs. Single fornication they count no sin^ but after Marriage (which they
solemnize by consent of Parents and public approbation publicly) then they
count it hainoufer either of them to befalse.

Mammausu. An adulterer. Nummam mogwunewo He has wronged my bed. Palle
nochisquauaw. He or She has committed adultery.

Obs. In this case the wronged party man put away or keep the party offending:
commonly, if the Woman be false, the offende^ Husband will be solemnly
revenged upon the offender, before many witnesses, by many blows and wounds,
and if it be to Death, yet the guilty resists not, nor is his Death revenged.

Nquittocaw. He has one Wife. Neesocaw. He has two Wives. Sshocowaw. He has
three. Yocowaw. Four Wives, etc.

Their Number is not stinted, yet the chief Nation in the Country, the
Narrigansets (generally) have but one Wife.

Two causes they generally allege for their many Wives.

First desire of Riches, because the Women ^ring in all the increase of the
^ield, etc. ^he Husband only fisheth, hunteth, etc.

Scecondly, their long sequestring themselves from their wives after
conception, un^ill the child be weaned, which with some is ^ong after a year
old, generally they keep their children long at the breast: Committamus. Your
Wife. Coweewo. ^ahanawatu? ta shincommaugemus. How much gave you for her?
^apannetashom paugatash. Fivefathome of their Money. ^utta, enada shoasuck ta
shompa^gatash Six, or seven, or eight Fathom.

If some great man's Daughter Piuckquom* (...) ten (...).

Obs. ^nerally the Husband gives these payments for a Dowry, (as it was in
Israel) to the Father or Mother, or guardian of the Maid. To this purpose if
the man be poor his Friends and neighbors do pummenumm^ te auguash, that is
contribute Money towar^ the Dowry.

Numm ttamus. My Wife. Nuliogana. Wauma^su. Loving. Wunn^kesu. Proper. Maan^u.
Sober and chaste. Muchick^hea. Fruifull. Cutchashekeamis? How many children have
you had? Nquitt^kea. I have had one. (...). Two, etc.

Obs. They commonly ab^und with Children, and increase mightily; except the
plauge fall amongst them or other lesser sicknesses and then having no means
of recovery, they perish wonderfully.

^atou ene^chaw. She is falling into Travel. Neechaw. She is in Travel.
Paugco^che nechauwaw. She is already delivered. Kitummayi-mes-nechaw. She was
just now delivered.

Obs. It has pleased God in wonderful manner to moderate that curse of the
sorrows of Childbearing to these poor Indian Women: So that ordinarily they
have a wonderful more speedy and easy Travel, and delivery then the Women of
Europe: not that I think God is more gracious to them above other Women, but
that it follows, First from the hardness of their constitution, in which
respect they bear their sorrows the easier.

Secondly from their extraordinary great labor (even above the labor of men)
as in the Field, they sustain the labor of it, in carrying of mighty
Burdens, in digging clammes and getting other Shelfish from the Sea, in
beating all their corn in Morters: etc. Most of them count it a shame f^r a
Woman in Travel to make complaint, and many of them are scarcely heard to
groan. I have often known in one Quarter of an hour a Woman merry in the
House, and delivered and merry again: and within two days abroad, and after
four or five days at work, etc.

Noosawwaw. A Nurse. Noonsu Nonannis. A sucking Child: Wunnunogan. A Breast,
Wunnunnoganash. Breasts. Munnunnug. Milk. Aumaunemun. To take from the breast,
or Weane.

Obs. They put away (as in Israel) frequently for other occasions beside
Adultery, yet I know many Couples that have lived twenty, thirty, forty years
together.

Npaketam. I will put her away. Npakenaqun. I am put away. Aquiepaketash. Do
not put-away. Aquiepokeshattous Awetawatuonck. Do not break the knot of
Marriage. Tackquiu^wock. Twins. Towiu^ uwock. Orphans. Ntouwiu^. I am an
Orphane. Wauchau^nat. A Guardian. Wauchauamachick. Guardians. Nulloquaso. My
charge or Pupil, or Ward. Peewau^qun. Look well to him etc.

General Observations of their Marriage.
God has planted in the Hearts of the Wildest of the sons of Men, an High
and Honorable esteem of the Marriage bed, in so much that they universally
submit unto it, and hold the Violation of that Bed, Abominable, and accordingly
reap the Fruit thereof in the abundant increase of posterity.

More Particular.

When Indians hear that some there are,
(That Men the Papists call)
Forbidding Marriage Bed and yet,
To thousand VVhoredomes fall:
They ask if such do go in Clothes,
And whether God they know?
And when they hear they are richly clad,
know God, yet practice so.
No sure they are Beasts not men (say they,)
Men's shame and foul disgrace,
Or men have mixed with Beasts and so,
brought forth that monstrous Race.
CHAP. XXVI. Concerning their Coin.
THe Indians are ignorant of Europes Coin; yet they have given a name to ours,
and call it Mone^^ from ^he English Money.

Their own is of two sorts; one white which they make of the stem or stock of
the Periwincle, which they call Meteauhock, when all the shell is broken off:
and of this sort six of their small Beads (which they make with holes to string
the bracelets) are curran^ with the English for a penny.

The second is black, incling to blew, which is made of the shell of a fish,
which some English call Hens, Poquauhock, and of this sor^ three make an
English penny.

They that live upon the Sea side, generally make of it, and as many make as
will.

The Indians bring down all their sorts o^ Furs, which they take in the
Country, both to the Indians and to the English for this India^ Money: this
Money the English, French and Dutch, trade to the Indians, six hundred miles in
several parts (North and South from New England) for their Furs, and
whatsoever they stand in need of from them: as Corn, Venison, etc

Nquittompscat. 1 penny. Neesaumscat. 2 pence. Shwaumscat. 3 pence. Yowomscat. 4
pence. Napannetashaumscat. 5 pence. Quttatashaumscat, or, quttauatu. 6 pence.
Enadatashaumscat. 7 pence. Shwoasuck tashaumscat. 8 pence. Paskugittashaumscat.
9 pence. Piuckquaumscat. 10 pence. Piuckquaumscat nab naquit. 11 pence.
Piuckquaumscat nab nees, etc. 12 pence.

Obs. This they call Neen, which is two of their Qutta^atues, or six pence.

Piukquaumscat nab nashoasuck, which they call Shwin. 18d. 3 quttauatues.
Neesneecheckaumscat nab yoh, or, yowin. 2s. 4 quttauatues. Shwinchekaumscat, or
napannetashin. 2s. 6d. 5 quttauatues. Shwinchekaumscat 2s. 6d. 6 quttauatues.
You innchekaumscat nab neese. 3s. 6d. 7 quttauatues. You inncheckaumscat
nabnashoasuck. 4s. 8 quttauatues. Napannetashwincheckaumscat nab yoh. 4s. 6d. 9
quttauatues Quttatashincheck aumscat, or, more commonly used Piuckquat. 5s. 10
quttauatues, or, 10 six pences.

Obs. This Piuckquat being sixty pence, they call Nquittompeg, or
nquitnishca^usu, that is, one fathom, 5 shillings.

This one fathom of this their stringed money, now worth of the English but
five shillings (sometimes more) some few years since was worth nine, and
sometimes ten shillings per Fathom: the fall is occasioned by the fall of
Beaver in England: the Natives are very impatient, when for English commodities
they pay so much more of their money, and not understanding the cause of it;
and many say the English cheat and deceive them, though I have labored to make
them understand the reason of it. Neesaumpaugatuck, 10 shil. 2 Fathom.
Shwaumpaugatuck. 15 shil. 3 Fathom. Yowompaugatuck, etc. 20 shil. 4 Fathom.
Piuckquampaugatuck or, Nquit pausck. 50 shil. 10 Fathom.
Neespausuckquompaugatuck. 5 lib' 20 Fathom. Shwepausuck. 30 Fathom. You
pausuck, etc. Nquittemittannauganompaugatuck. 40 Fathom, or, 10. pounds.
Neesemittannug, etc. Tashincheckompaugatuck? How many Fathom?

Obs. Their white they call Wompam (which signifies white): their black
Suckauhock (Sucki signifying black.)

Both amongst themselves; as also the English and Dutch, the black penny is two
pence white; the black fathom double, or, two fathom of white.

Weep kuttassawompatimmin. Change my money. Suckauhock, nausakesachick. The
black money. Wauompeg, or Wauompesichick-mesim Give me white. A^awompatittea.
Come, let us change. Anawsuck. Shells. Meteauhock. The Periwinckle.
Suckauanausuck. The black shells. Suckauaskeesaquash. The black eyes. or that
part of the shel-fish called Poqu^u^hock (or Hens) broken out near the eyes,
of which they make the black.

Puckwheganash and Mucksuck. Awle blades. Papuckakiuash. Britle, or breaking,
Which they desire to be hardened to a britle temper.

Obs Before ever they had Awle blades from Europe, they made shift to bore this
their shell money with stone, and so fell their trees with stone set in a
wooden staff, and usedwode^ howes: which some old and poor women (fearful to
leave the old tradition) use to this day Natouwompitea. A Coyner or Minter*
N^anatouwompiteem. I cannot coin. Natouwompitees. Make money or Coin.
Puckhummin. To bore through. Puckwhegonnautick. The Awle blade sticks.
Tutteputch anawsin. they do on stones. To smooth them, which Qussuck-anash.
Stone, Stones. Cauompsk. A Whetstone. Nickautick. A kind of wooden Pincers or
Vice. Enomphommin. To thread or string. Aconaqunnauog. Thread the Beads.
Enomphommin. Thread, or string these. Enomphosachick. Strung ones. Sawhoog and
Sawhosachick. Loose B^ads. Naumpacouin. To hang about the neck.

Obs. They hang these strings of money about their necks and wrists; as also
upon upon the necks and wrists of their wives and children.

Machequoce. A Girdle:

Which they make curiously of one two, three, four, and five inches thickness
and more, of this money which (sometimes to the value of ten pounds and more)
they wear about their middle and as a scarf about their shoulders and breasts.

Yea the Princes make rich Caps and Aprons (or small breeches) of these Beads
thus curiously strung into many forms and figures: their black and white
finely mixed together.

Observations general of their Coin.
The Sons of men having lost their Maker, the true and only Treasure, dig
down to the bowels of the earth for gold and silver; yea, to the botome of the
Sea, for shells of fishes, to make up a Treasure, which can never truly enrich
nor satisfy.

More particular:

The Indians prize not English gold,
Nor English Indians shell:
Each in his place will pass for ought,
What ere men buy or sell.
English and Indians all pass hence,
To an eternal place,
Where shells nor finest gold's worth ought,
Where nought's worth ought but Grace,
This Coin the Indians know not of,
Who knows how soon they may?
The English knowing, prize it not,
But fling't like dross away,
CHAP. XXV. Of buying and selling.
ANaqushau^og, or Traders. Anaqushanchick Anaqushento. Let us trade. Cuttasha?
Have you this or that? Cowachau^num? Nitasha. I have. Nowachau^num.
Nquenowhick. I want this, etc. Nowekineam. I like this. Nummachinammin. I do
not like. Maunetash nquenowhick. I want many things. Cuttattauamish. I will buy
this of you. Nummouanaquish. I come to buy. Mouanaqushauog, Chapmen.
Mouanaqushanchick.

Obs. Amongst themselves they trade their Corn, skins, Coats, Venison, Fish,
etc. and sometimes come ten or twenty in a Company to trade amongst the English.

They have some who follow only making of Bows, some Arrows, some Dishes,
and (the Women make all their earthen Vessels) some follow fishing, some
hunting: most on the Seaside make Money, and store up shells in Summer against
Winter whereof to make their money.

Nummautanaqush. I have bought. Cummanohamin? Have you bought? Cummanohamoush.
I will buy of you. Nummautanohamin. I have bought. Kunnauntatauamish. I come to
buy this. Comaunekunnuo? Have you any Cloth? Kop^ocki. Thick cloth. Wass^ppi.
Thin. Suckinuit. Black or blackish. M^shquinuit. Red Cloth. Wompinuit. White
Cloth.

Obs. They all generally prize a Mantle of English or Dutch Cloth before their
own wearing of Skins and Furs, because they are warm enough and Lighter.

Wompequ^ayi. Cloth inclining to white,

Which they like not, but desire to have a sad color without any whitish
hairs, suiting with their own natural Temper, which inclines to sadness.

Etouwawayi. Wollie on both sides. Muckucki. Bare without Wool. Checheke
mautsha. Long lasting. Qunnascat. Of a great breadth. Tiockquscat. Of little
breadth. Wuss. The Eage or list. Aumpacunnish. Open it. Tuttepacunnish. Fold it
up. Mat Weshegganunno. There is no Wool on it. Tanogganish. Shake it.
Wuskinuit. New Cloth. Tanocki, tanocksha. It is torn or rent. Eatawus. It is
Old. Quttaunch Feel it. Audta A pair of small breeches or Apron.

Cuppaimish I will pay you, which is a word newly made from the English word
pay.

Tahenauatu? What price? Tummock cumme^sh. I will pay you Beaver. Tea^guock
Cummeinsh. I will give you Money. Wauwunnegachick. Very good.

Obs. They have great difference of their Coin. as the English have: some that
will not pass without Allowance, and some again made of a Counterfeit shell,
and their very black counterfeited by a Stone and other Materials: yet I never
knew any of them much deceived, for their danger of being deceived (in these
things of Earth) makes them cautelous.

Cosaumawem. You ask too much. Kuttiackqussauwaw. You are very hard. Aquie
iackqussau^me. Be not so hard. Aquie Wussaumowash. Do not ask so much. Tashin
Commesim? How much shall I give you? Kutteaug Commeinsh. I will give you your
Money. Nkeke Commeinsh. I will give you an Otter. Coanombuqusse
Kuttassokakomme. You have deceived me.

Obs. Who ever deal or trade with them, had need of Wisdom, Patience, and
Faithfulness in dealing: for they frequently say Cuppamanem, you lie,
Cuttassokakomme, you deceive me.

Misquesu Kunukkeke Your Otter is reddish. Yo auwusse Wunnegin This is better.
Yo chippauatu. This is of another price. Augausauatu. It is Cheap.
Muchickauatu. It is dear. Wuttunnauatu. It is worth it. Wunishau^nto. Let us
agree. Aquie neesquttonck qussish. Do not make ado. Wuche nquittompscat.
About a penny.

They are are marvailous subtle in their Bargains to save a penny: And very
suspicious that English men labor to deceive them: Therefore they will beat
all markets and try all places, and run twenty thirty, ^ea. forty mile, and
more, and lodge in the Woods, to save six pence.

Cummammenash nitteau^guash? Will you have my Money? Nonanum. I cannot.
Noonshem. ^awhitch nonanum ean? Why can you not? ^achage nkockie. I get
nothing. ^ashaumskussayi commesim? How many spans will you give me?
Neesaumsqussayi. Two spans. ^hwaumscussayi. Three spans. ^owompscussayi. Four
Spans. ^apannetashaumscussayi. Five spans. ^uttatashaumskus Sayi. Six spans.
Endatashaumscussayi. Seven spans. Enadacashaumskuttonayi. Seven spans.
Cowenaweke. You are a rich man.

Obs. They will often confess for their own ends that the English are richer
and wiser and valianter then themselves; yet it is for their own ends, and
therefore they add Nanou^o, give me this or that a disease which they are
generally infected with: some more ingenuous, scorn it; but I have often seen
an Indian with great quanties of money about him beg a Knife of an English man,
who happily has had never a penny of money.

Aketash-tamoke. Tell my money. Now annakese. I have mis-told. Cosaumakese. You
have told too much. Cunnoonakese. You have told too little. Shoo kekineass. Lo
ke here. Wunetu nitteaug. My money is very good. Mamattifluog kutteauquock.
Your Beads are naught. Tashin mesh commaug? How much have yo^ given? Chich^gin.
A Hatchet. An^skunck. A How. Maumichemanege. A Needle. Cuttatuppaunamum. Take
a measure. Tatuppauntuhommin. To weigh with scales. Tatuppauntuock. They are
aweighing. Netatup. It is all one. Kaukakineamuck. Peben ochichauquanick. A
Looking Glass.

Obs. It may be wondered what they do with Glasses, having no beauty but a
swarfish color, and no dressing but nakedness; but pride appears in any
color, and the meanest dress: and besides generally the women paint their
faces with all sorts of colors.

Cummanohamogunna. They will buy it of you. Cuppittakunnemous. Take your cloth
again. Cuppittakunnami. Will you serve me so? Cosaumpeekunnemun. You have tore
me off too little cloth. Cummachetannakun namous. I have torn it off for you.
Tawhitch cuppittakunamiean? Why do you turn it upon my hand? Kutchicheginash,
kaukinne pokeshaas. Your Hatchets will be soon broken. Teano waskishaas. Soon
gapt. Natouashock quittea. A Smith. Kuttattau amish auke I would buy land of
you. Tou nuckquaque? How much? Wuche wuttotanick Plantation. For a Town, or,
Niss^kineam. I have no mind to seek. Indiansuck sekineamwock. The Indians are
not willing. Noonapuock naugum They want room themselves. Cowetompatimmin. We
are friends. Cummaugakeamish. I will give you land. Aquie chenawausish. Be not
churlish.

General Observation of Trade.
O the infinite wisdom of the most holy wise God, who has so advanced Europe
above America, that there is not a sorry How, Hatchet, Knife, nor a rag of
cloth in all America, but what comes over the dreadful Atlantic Ocean from
Europe: and yet that Europe be not proud, nor America discouraged. What
treasures are hid in some parts of America, and in our New English parts, how
have foul hands (in smoakie houses) the first handling of those Furs which
are after worn upon the hands of Queens and heads of Princes?

More particular:

Often have I heard these Indians say,
These English will deceive us.
Of all that is ours, our lands and lives.
In the end they will bereave us.
So say they, whatsoever they buy,
(Though small) which shows they are shie
Of strangers, fearful to be caught
By fraud, deceit, or lie.
Indians and English fear deceits,
Yet willing both to be
Deceived and cozened of precious soul,
Of heaven, Eternity.
CHAP. XXVI. Of Debts and Trusting.
Noonat. I have not money enough Noonamautuckquawhe. Trust me. Kunnoonamautuck
quaush. I will owe it you.

Obs. They are very desirous to come into debt, but then he that trusts them,
must sustain a twofold loss:

First, of his Commodity.

Secondly, of his custom as I have found by dear experience: Some are
ingenuous, plain hearted and honest; but the most never pay unless a man
follow them to their several abodes, towns and houses, as I my self have
been forced to do, which hardship and travells it ha^ yet pleased God to
sweeten with some experiences and some little gain of Language.

Non^mautuckquahe ginath. Debts. Nosaumautackquawhe. I am much in debt. Pitch
nippautowin. I will bring it you. Chenock n^quombeg When cuppauutiin
n^teauguash. Will you bring me my money? Kunnaumpatous, I will pay you.
Kukke^skwhush. Keeskwhim teaug mesin. Pay me my money. Tawhitch p^yauyean Why
do you come? Nn^dgecom. I come for debts. Machet^. A poor man. Nummacheke. I
am a poor man. Mesh nummauchnem. I have been ficke. Nowemacaunash
nitteauquash. I was feign to spend my money in my sickness.

Obs. This is a common, and as (they think) most satisfying answer, that they
have been sick: for in those times they give largely to the Priests, who then
sometimes heales them by conjurations; and also they keep open house for all
to come to help to pray with them, unto whom also they give money.

Mat noteaugo. I have no money. Kekineash nippetunck. Look here in my bag.
Nummache mauganash. I have already paid. Mat coanaumwaumis. You have not kept
your word. Kunnampatowin keenowwin. You must pay it. Mach^ge wuttamauntam. He
minds it not. Machage wuttammauntammoock. They take no care about paying.
Micheme notammauntam. I do always mind it. Mat nickowemen naukocks. I cannot
sleep in the night for it.

General Observations of their debts.
It is an universal Disease of folly in men to desire to enter into not only
necessary, but unnecessary and tormenting debts, contrary to the command of the
only wise God: Owe ^o thing to any man, but that you love each other.

More particular:

I have heard ingenuous Indians say,
In debts, they could not sleep.
How far worse are such English then,
Who love in debts to keep?
If debts of pounds cause restless nights
In trade with man and man,
How hard's that heart that millions owes
To God, and yet sleep can?
Debts paid, sleep's sweet, sins paid, death's sweet,
Death's night then is turned to light;
Who dies in sins unpaid, that soul
His light's eternal night.
CHAP. XXVII. Of their Hunting, etc.
We shall not name over the several sorts of Beasts which we named in the
Chapter of Beasts.

The Natives hunt two ways:

First, when they pursue their game (especially Dear, which is the general
and wonderful plenteous hunting in the Country:) I say, they pursue in
twenty, forty, fifty, yea, two or three hundred in a company, (as I have
seen) when they drive the woods before them.

Secondly, They hunt by Traps of several sorts, to which purpose, after they
have observed in Springtime and Summer the haunt of the Dear, then about
Harvest, they go ten or twenty together, and sometimes more, and withal (if
it be not too far) wives and children also, where they build up little
hunting houses of Barks and Rushes (not comparable to their dwelling houses)
and so each man takes his bounds of two, three, or four miles, where he sets
thirty, forty, or fifty Traps, and baits his Traps with that food the Dear
loves, and once in two days he walks his round to view his Traps.

Ntauchaumen. I go to hunt. Ncattiteam weeyous. I long for Venison.
Auchautuck. Let us hunt. Nowetauchaumen. I will hunt with you. Anumwock. Dogs.
Kemehetteas. Creep. Pitch nkemehetteem I will creep. Pumm pummoke. Shoot.
Uppetetoua. A man shot accidentally. Ntaumpauchaumen. I come from hunting.
Cutchashineanna? How many have you killed Nneesnneanna. I have killed two.
Shwinnea^nna. Three. Nyowinneanna. Four. Npiuckwinneanna. Ten, etc.
Nneesneechecttash^nneanna. Twenty. Nummouashawmen. I go to set Traps. Ape
hana. Trap, Traps. Ashappock. Hemp. Masaunock. Flax. Wuskapehana. New Traps.
Eataubana. Old Traps.

Obs. They are very tender of their Traps where they lie, and what comes at
them; for they say, the Dear (whom they conceive have a Divine power in them)
will soon smell and be gone.

Npunnowwaumen. I must go to my Traps. Nummishkommin. I have found a Dear;

Which sometimes they do, taking a Wolf in the very act of his greedy prey,
when sometimes (the Wolf being greedy of his prey) they kill him: sometimes
the Wolf having glutted himself with the one half, leaves the other for his
next bait; but the glad Indian finding of it, prevents him.

And that we may see how true it is, that all wild creatures, and many tame,
prey upon the poor Dear (which are there in a right Emblem of Gods
persecuted, that is, hunted people, as I observed in the Chapter of Beasts
according to the old and true saying: Imbelles Damae quid nisi praeda sumus?
To harmless Ro^s and Does,
Both wild and tame are foes.)


I remember how a poor Dear was long hunted and chased by a Wolf, at last
(as their manner is) after the chase of ten, it may be more miles running, the
stout Wolf tired out the nimble Dear, and seasing upon it, killed: In the act
of devouring his prey, two English Swine, big with Pig, past by, assaulted the
Wolf, drove him from his prey, and devoured so much of that poor Dear, as
they both surfeted and dyed that night.

The Wolf is an Emblem of a fierce bloodsucking persecutor.

The Swine of a covetous rooting worldling, both make a prey of the Lord Jesus
in his poor servants.

Ncummootamuck qun natoqus. The Wolf has robbed me.

Obs. When a Dear is caught by the leg in the Trap, sometimes there it lies a
day together before the Indian come, and so lies a pray to the ranging Wolf,
and other wild Beasts (most commonly the Wolf) who seaseth upon the Dear and
robs the Indian (at his first devouring) of near half his prey, and if the
Indian come not the sooner, hee^ makes a second greedy Meal, and leaves him
nothing but the bones, and the torn Deereskins, especially if he call some of
his greedy Companions to his bloody banquet.

Upon this the Indian makes a falling trap called Sunnuckhig, (with a great
weight of stones) and so sometimes knocks the Wolf on the head, with a
gainefull Revenge, especially if it be a black Wolf, whose Skins they
greatly prize.

Nanowwussu. It is lean. Wauwunnockoo. It is fat. Weekan. It is sweet.
Machemoqut. It smells ill. Anit. It is putrified. Poquefu Poskattuck and
Missesu. Half a Dear. Kuttiomp. A whole Dear. Paucottauwat. A Buck.
Wawunnes. A young Buck. Qunneke. A Do. Aunan. A Fawn. Moosqin. Thus thick of
fat. Yo asipaugon Noonatch, or, attuck ntiyu. I hunt Venison. Mishanneke ntiyu.
I hunt a Squirrill. Paukunnawaw ntio. I hunt a Bear, etc. Wusseke. The hinder
part of the Dear. ^pome-ichash. Thigh: Th^ghes. ^ppeke-quock. Shoulder,
shoulders: ^uskan, A bone. ^ussuckqun A tail. Awemanittin. Their Rutting time.
Paushinummin. To divide. Paushinummauatittea. Let us divide.

This they do when a Controversy falls out, whose the Dear should be.

Causkashunck, The Dear skin.

Obs. Pumpom: a tribute Skin when a Dear (hunted by the Indians, or Wolves) is
killed in the water. This skin is carried to the Sachim or Prince, within whose
territory the Dear was slain.

Ntaumpowwushaumen. I come from hunting.

General Observation of their hunting.
There is a blessing upon endeavor, even to the wildest Indians; the sluggard
rosts not that which he took in hunting but the substance of the diligent
(either in earthly or heavenly affairs) is precious, Prove. 25.

More particular:

Great pains in hunting the Indians Wild,
And eke the English tame;
Both take, in woods and forests thick,
To get their precious game.
Pleasure and Profit, Honor false,
(The wordl's great Trinity)
Drive all men through all ways, all, times,
All weathers, wet and dry.
Pleasure and Profits Honor, sweet,
Eternal, sure and true,
Laid up in God, with equal pains;
Who seeks, who does pursue?
CHAP. XXVIII. Of their Gaming, etc.
THeir Games, (like the English) are of two sorts; private and public:

Private, and sometimes public; A Game ^ike unto the English Cards; yet, in
stead of Cards they play with strong Rushes.

Secondly, they have a kind of Dice which are Plumb stones painted, which they
cast in (...) Tray, with a mighty noise and sweating: Their public Games are
solemnized with ^he meeting of hundreds; sometimes thou^ands, and consist of
many vanities, none of which I durst ever be present at, that I might not
countenance and partake of their folly, after I once saw the evil of them.

Ahanu. He laughes. Tawhitchahanean. Why do you laugh? Ahanuock. They are
merry. Nippauochaumen. We are dancing. Pauochauog. They are playing or dancing.
Pauochautowwin. A Babble to play with. Akesuog. They are at Cards, or telling of
Rushes. Pissinneganash. Their playing Rushes. Ntakesemin. I am a^elling or
counting; for their play is a kind of Arithmatick*

Obs. The chief Gamesters amongst them much desire to make their Gods side
with them in their Games (as our English Gamesters so far also acknowledge
God) therefore I have ^ene them keep as a preciou^ stone a piece of
Thunderbolt, which is lik^ unto a Crystal, which they dig out of the ground
under some tree, Thunder-smitte^ and from this stone they have an opinon o^
success, and I have not heard any of these prove losers which conceive may be
Satan policy and Gods holy Justice to harden the^ for their not rising higher
from the Thunderbolt, to the God that send or shoots it Ntaquie akesamen. I
will leave play. Nchikossimunnash. I will burn my Rushes. Wunnaugonhommin To
play at ^ice in their Tray. Asauanash. The painted Plumbstones which they
throw. Puttuckquapuonck. A Playing Arbo^r.

Obs. This Arbor or Play house is made of long poles set in the earth, four
square, sixteen or twenty foot high; on which they hang great store of their
stringed money have great stakings, town against town, and two chosen out of
the rest by course to play the Game at this kind of Dice in the midst of all
their Abettors, with great shouting and solemnity: beside, they have great
meetings of football playing, only in Summer, town against town, upon some
broad sandy shore, free from stones, or upon some soft hea^hie plot because of
their naked feet, at which they have great stakings, but seldom quarrel.

Pasuckquakohowauog They meet to football. Cukkummote weep. You steal; As I
have often told them in their gamings, and in their great losings (when they
have staked and lost their money, clothes, house, corn, and themselves, (if
single persons) they will confess it being weary of their lives, and ready to
make away themselves, like many an English man: an Emblem of the horror of
conscience, which all poor sinners walk in at last, when they see what woeful
games they have played in their life, and now find themselves eternal Beggars.

^esaqunnamun, Another kind of solemn public meeting, wherein they lie under
the trees, in a kind of Religious observation, and have a mixture of Devotions
and sports: But their chiefest Idol of all for sport and game, is (if their
land be at peace) toward Harvest, when they set up a long house called
Qunnekamuck. Which signifies Long house, sometimes an hundred sometimes two
hundred foot long upon a plain near the Court (which they call Kitt^ickan^ick)
where many thousands, men and women meet, where he that goes in danceth in the
sight of all the rest; and is prepared with money, coats, small breeches,
knifes, or what he is able to reach to, and gives these things away to the
poor, who yet must particularly beg and say, Cowequetummous, that is, I
beseech you: which word (although there is not one common beggar amongst them)
yet they will often use when their richest amongst them would fain obtain ought
by gift.

General Observations of their Sports.
This life is a short minute, eternity follows. On the improvement or
dis-improvement of this short minute, depends a joyful or dreadful eternity;
yet (which I tremble to think of) how cheap is this invaluable Jewel, and
how many vain inventions and foolish pastimes have the sons of men in all
parts of the world found out, to pass time and post over this short minute of
life, until like some pleasant River they have past into mare mortuum, the
dead sea of eternal lamentation.

More particular:

Our English Gamesters scorn to stake
Their clothes as Indians do,
Nor yet themselves, alas, yet both
Stake souls and lose them to.
O fearful Games! the devil stakes
But ^trawes and Toys and Trash,
(For what is All, compared with Christ,
But Phil. 3. 8. (...)
Dogs meat and Swines wash?
Man stakes his Iewell-darling soul,
(His own most wretched foe)
Ventures, and loses all in sport
At one most dreadful throw.
CHAP. XXIX. Of their War, etc.
A Queen. Peace. Nanoueshin, and Awepu. A peaceable calm; for Awe^pu signifies
a calm. Chepewess, and Mishittashin. A Northern storm of war, as they
wittily speak, and which England now woefully feels, until the Lord Jesus
chide the winds, and rebuke the raging seas.

Nummusquantum. I am angry. Tawhitch musquawnamean? Why are you angry? Aquie
musquantash. Cease from anger. Chachepissu, nishquetu. Fierce. Tawhitch
chachepisettit nishquehet^it? Why are they fierce? Cummusquaunamuck He is angry
with you. Matwauog. Soldiers. Matwauonck. A Battle. Cnmmusqnaunamish I am
angry with you. Cummusquawname? Are you angry with me? Miskisauwaw. A
quarrelsome fellow. Tawhitch niskquekean? Why are you so fierce? Ntatakcommuck
qun ewo. He struck me. Nummokokunitch I am robbed. Ncheckequnnitch. Mecautea.
A fighter. Mecauntitea. Let us fight. Mecaunteass. Fight with him. Weep
cummecautch. You are a quarreller. Juhettitea. Let us fight. Juhetteke. Fight,
Which is the word of encouragement which they use when they animate each other
in war; for they use their tongues in stead of drums and trumpets.

Awaun necawni aum piasha? Who drew the first bow, or shot the first shot?
Nippaketatunck. He shot first at me. Nummeshannantam Nummayaontam. I scorn, or
take it indignation.

Obs. This is a common word, not only in war, but in peace also (their
spirits in naked bodies being as high and proud as men more gallant) from which
sparks of the lusts of pride and passion, begin the flame of their wars.

Whauwhautowaw anowat. There is an Alarm. Wopwawnonckquat. An hubbub.
Amaumuwaw paudsha. A Messenger is come. Keenomp Muckquomp pauog. Captains, or
Valiant men. Negonsh^chick. Leaders. Kuttowonck. A Trumpet. Popowutrahig. A
Drum.

Obs Not that they have such of their own making; yet such they have from the
French: and I have known a good Drum made amongst them in imitation of the
English.

Quaquawtatatteaug They train. Machippog. A Quiver. Cauquat -tash. Arrow,
Arrows. Onuttug. An half Moon in war. Peskcunck. A Gunne. Saupuck. Powder.
Matit. Vnloden. Mechimu. Laden. Mechimuash. Lode it. Shottash. Shot; A made
word from us, though their Gunnes they have from the French, and often sell
many a score ^o the English, when they are a little out of frame or Kelter.

Pummenummin teauquash. To contribute to the wars. Askwhitteass. Keep watch.
Askwhitteachick. The Guard. Askwhitteaug. Is ^s the Guard.

Obs. I once traveled (in a place concei^ed dangerous) with a great Prince,
and his Queen and Children in company, with a Guard of near two hundred,
twenty, or thir^ie fires were made every night for the Guard (...) the Prince
and Queen in the midst) and ^entinells by course, as exact as in Europe; and
when we traveled through a place where ^mbushes were suspected to lie, a
special Guard, like unto a Lifeguard, compassed some nearer, some farther of)
the King and Queen, my self and some English with me.

They are very copious and patheticall in O^ations to the people, to kindle a
flame of ^rath, Valor or revenge from all the Com^on places which Commanders
use to insist ^n. We^assu Afraid. Cowesass. Are you afraid? Tawhitch wesasean?
Why fear you? Manowesass. I fear none. Kukkushickquock. They fear you.
Nosemitteu^nck quock They fly from us. Onamatta cowauta Let us pursue.
Nuckqusha. I fear him. Wussemo-wock. He flies, they fly. Npauchippowem I fly
for succor. Keesau^name. Save me. Npummuck. I am shot. Chenawau^su. Churlish.
Waumausu. Loving. Tawhitch chenawau sean? Why are you churlish? Aumansk. A
Fort. Waukaunosint. Cupshitteaug. They lie in the way. Aumanskitteau^g. They
fortify. Kekaumwaw. A scorner or mocker. Nkekau^muck ewo. He scorns me.
Aq^ekekaumowash. Do not scorn.

Obs. This mocking (between their great ones) is a great kindling of Wars
amongst them: yet I have known some of their chiefest say, what should I hazard
the lives of my precious Subjects, them and theirs to kindle a Fire, which no
man knows how far, and how long it will burn, for the barking of a Dog?

Sekineam. I have no mind to it. Nissekineug He likes not me. Nummanneug. He
hates me. Sekinneauhettu^ock. Maninnewauhettuock. They hate each other.
Nowetompatimmin We are Friends. Wetompachick. Friends. Nowepinnatimin. We join
together. Nowepinnachick. My Companions in War, or Associats. Nowechusettimmin.
We are Confederates. Nechuse ewo This is my Associate. Wechusittuock. They
join together. Nweche kokkewem. I will be mad with him. Chickau^ta wetu. An
house fired.

Once lodging in an Indian house full of people, the whole Company (Women
especially) cried out in apprehension that the Enemy had fired the House, being
about midnight: The house was fired but not by an Enemy: the men ran up on the
house top, and with their naked hands beat out the Fire: One scorcht his leg,
and suddenly after they came into the house again, undauntedly cut his leg
with a knife to let out the burnt blood.

Yo anawhone There I am wounded. Missinnege A Captain. Nummissinnam ewo. This
is my Captive. Waskeiuhettimmitch. At beginning of the fight.
Nickqueintonckquock They come against us. Nickqueintouoog. I will make War
upon them. Nippauquanau^og. I will destroy them. Queintauatittea. Let us go
against them. Kunnauntatauhuckqun. He comes to kill you. Pauquana. There is a
slaughter. Pequttoog pauquanan. The Pequts are slain. Awaun Wuttunnene? Who
have the Victory. Tashittawho? How many are slain? Neestawho. Two are slain?
Piuckqunneanna. Ten are slain.

Obs. Their Wars are far less bloody, and devouring then the cruel Wars
of Europe; and seldom twenty slain in a pitched field: partly because when
they fight in a wood every Tree is a Bucklar.

When they fight in a plain, they fight with leaping and dancing, that seldom
an Arrow hits, and when a man is wounded, unless he that shot follows upon
the woundded, they soon retire and save the wound^d: and yet having no Swords,
nor ^uns, all that are slain are commonly slain with great Valor and Courage:
for the Conqueror entures into the thickest, and brings away ^he Head of his
Enemy.

Niss-nissoke. Kill kill. Kunnish I will kill you. Kunnishickqun ewo. He will
kill you. Kunnishickquock. They will kill you. ^iuckissuog. They are stout men.
Nickummissu^og They are Weak. Nnickummaunamauog. I shall easily vanquish.
them. Neene nuppamen. I am dying? Cowaunckamish. Quarter, quarter.
Kunnanaumpasummish. Mercy, Mercy. Kekuttokau^nta, Let us parley. Aquetuck. Let
us cease Arms. ^unnishau^nta. Let us agree. Cowammaunsh. I love you. ^unnetu
nta. My heart is true. ^uppauntash. Consider what I say. Tuppau^ntamoke. Do
you all consider. Cummequaunum cummittamussussuck ka cummuckiaug. Remember your
Wives, and Children. Eatch keen anawayean. Let all be as you say^.
Cowawwunnauwem. You speak truly. Cowauontam. You are a wise man Wetompatitea.
Let us make Friends.

General Observations of their Wars.
How dreadful and yet how righteous is it with the most righteous Judge of the
whole World, that all the generations of Men being turned Enemies against, and
fighting against Him who gives them breath and Being, and all things, (whom yet
they cannot reach, should stab, kill, burn, murder and devour each other?

More Particular.

The Indians count of Men as Dogs,
It is no Wonder then:
They tear out one another throats!
But now that English Men,
That boast themselves Gods Children, and
Members of Christ to be,)
That they should thus break out in flames.
Sure it is a Mystery!
The second sea'ld Mystery or red Horse,
Whose Rider has power and will, Rev. 2. 6.

To take away Peace from Earthly Men,
They must Each other kill.
CHAP. XXX. Of their paintings.
1. THey paint their Garments, etc. 2. The men paint their Faces in War. 3.
Both Men and Women for pride, etc.


Wompi White. Mowi-sucki. Black. Msqui. Red. Wesaui Yellow. Askaski. Green.
Peshau^i. Blew, etc.

Obs. Wunnam their red painting which they most delight in, and is both the
Bark of the Pine, as also a red Earth.

Mishquock. Red Earth. Metewis. ^lack Earth.

From this M'etewis is an Indian Town a day and a halfes Journey, or less
(West, from the Massachusetts) called Metewemesick.

Wussuckhosu. A painted Coat.

Of this and Wussuckwheke, (the English Letters, which comes nearest to their
painting I spoke before in the Chapter of their clothing.

Aunakesu. He is painted. Aunakeuck. They are painted. Tawhitch auna kean? Why
do you paint your self? Cheskhosh. Wipe off. Cummachiteouwunash
kuskeesuckquash. You spoil your Face. Mat pitch cowahick The God that made you
Manit keefiteonckqus will not know you.

General Observations of their paintings.
It has been the foolish Custom of all barbarous Nations to paint and figure
their Faces and Bodies (as it has been to our shame and grief. we may
remember it of some of our Forefathers in this Nation.) How much then are we
bound to our most holy Maker for so much knowledge of himself revealed in so
much Civility and Piety? and how should we also long and endeavor that America
may partake of our mercy:

More particular:

Truth is a Native, naked Beauty; but
Lying Inventions are but Indian Paints,
Dissembling hearts their Beautie's but a Lie,
Truth is the proper Beauty of Gods Saints.
Foul are the Indians Hair and painted Faces,
More foul such Hair, such Face in Israel.
England so calls her self, yet there is
Absoloms foul Hair and Face of Jesabell.
Paints will not bide Christ's washing Flames of fire,
Fained Inventions will not bide such storms:
O that we may prevent him, that betimes,
Repentance Tears may wash of all such Forms.
CHAP. XXXI. Of Sickness.
NUmmau^chnem I am sick. Mauchinau^i. He is sick. Yo Wuttunsin He keeps his
Bed. Ac^ie nummauchnem. I am very sick. Noonshem metesimmin. I cannot eat.
Match ge nummete simmin. I eat nothing. Tocketu^sinammin? What think you? Pitch
nkeeteem? Shall I recover? Niskee^aqush mauchinaash. My eyes fail me.
Ncussawontapam. My head aches. Npummaumpiteunck My Teeth ache. Nchesammattam,
Nchesammam. I am in pain.

Obs. In these cases their Misery appears, that they have not (but what
sometimes they get from the English) a raisin or current or any physic, Fruit
or spice, or any Comfort more than their Corn and Water, etc. In which
bleeding case wanting all Means of recovery, or present refreshing I have been
constrained to, and beyond my power to refresh them, and I believe to save many
of them from Death, who I am confident perish many Millions of them (in that
mighty continent) for want of Means.

Nupaqqontup Kuspissem. Bind my head. Wauaupunish Life up my head.
Nip^aquontup. (...) nsete. My Foot is sore. M^chage nickow emen I sleep not.
Nnanotissu. I have a Fever. Wame kussopita nohock. My body burns. Ntatupe
note, or chickot. I am all on fire. Yo nteatchin. I shake for Cold. Ntatuppe
wunnepog. I shake as a leaf. Puttuckhumma. Cover me. Pautous nototam min.
Reach me the drink.

Obs. Which is only in all their extremities, a little boild water, without
the addition of crum or drop of other comfort: O Englands mercies, etc.

Tahaspunayi? What ails he? Tocketuspanem? What aile you? Tocketuspunnaumaqun?
What hurt has he done to you? Chassaqunsin? How long has he been sick?
Nnanowweteem. I am going to visit.

Obs. This is all their refreshing, the Visit of Friends, and Neighbors, a
poor empry ^isit and presence, and yet indeed this is very solemn, unless it
be in infectious diseases, and then all forsake them and fly, that I have
often seen a poor House left alone in the ^ld Woods, all being fled, the
living not able to bury the dead: so terrible is the apprehension of an
infectious disease, that not only persons, but the Houses and the whole Town
takes flight.

Nummockquese. I have a swelling. Mocquesui He is swelled. Wame wuhock*
Mockqu^sui. All his body is swelled. Mamaskishaui. He has the Pox.
Mamaskishauonck. The Pox. Mamaskishaumitch. The last pox. Wesauashaui. He has
the plague. Wesauashauonck. The plague. Wesauashaumitch. The great plague.

Obs. Were it not that they live in sweet Air, and remove persons and Houses
from the infected, in ordinary course of subordinate Causes, would few or any
be left alive, and surviving.

Nmunnadtommin. I vomit Nqunnuckquus. I am lame. N^psa. I am d^afe. Npockunnum.
I am blind. Npockquanammen. My desease is I know not what. Pesuponck. An
Hot-house. Npesuppaumen. I go to sweat. Pesuppauog. They are sweating.

Obs. This Hot-house is a kind of little Cell or Cave, six or eight foot over,
round, made on the side of a hill (commonly by some Rivulet or Brook) into
this frequently the men enter after they have exceedingly heated it with store
of wood, laid upon an heap of stones in the middle. When they have taken out
the fire, the stones keep still a great heat: Ten, twelve, twenty more or
less, enter at once stark naked, leaving their coats small breeches (or
aprons) at the door, with one to keep all: here do they sit round these hot
stones an hour or more, taking Tobacco, discoursing, and sweating together;
which sweating they use for two ends: First, to cleanse their skin: Secondly,
to purge their bodies, which doubtless is a great means of preserving them,
and recovering them from diseases, especially from the French disease, which by
sweating and some potions, they perfectly and speedily cure: when they come
forth (which is matter of admiration) I have seen them run (Summer and
^inter) into the B^ooks to cool them, without the least hurt.

M^ qu^eash. The veins. Msq^, neepuck. Blood Nsau^ paushaumen. I have the
bloody Flixe. Matux (...) auwaw. ^e cannot go to stool. Poww^w. Their Priest.
Maunetu. A Con urer. Powwaw nippetea. The priest is curing him. Yo
Wutteantawaw. He is acting his ^ure.

Obs. These Priests and onjurers (like Simon (...)) do bewitch the people, and
not only take their Money, but do most certainly (by the help of the Devil)
work great Cures though most certain it is that the greatest part of their
Priests do merely abuse them and get their Money, in the times of their
sickness and to my knowledge, long for sick times: and to that end the poor
people store up Money, and spend both Money and goods on the Powwaws, or
Priests in these times, the poor people commonly dye under their hands, for
alas, they administer nothing but howl and roar, and hollow over them, and
begin the song to the rest of the People about them, who all join (like a
Quire) in Prayer to their Gods for them. Maskit ponamiin. Give me a Plais^er.
Maskit Give me some physic Cotatamhea. Drink.

Both which they earnestly desire of the English, and do frequently send to my
self, and others for, (having experimentally found some Mercy of that kind
(through Gods blessing) from us.

Nickeetem. I am recovered. Kitummayi nick eekon. I am ju^ now recovered.

General Observation of their sickness.
It pleases the most righteous, and yet patient God to warn and summon, to
try and arraigne the universal race of Adams sons (commonly) upon Beds of
sickness before he proceed to execution of Death and Judgment: Blessed those
souls which prevent Judgment, Death and sickness to, and before the evil
days come, Arraigne, and Judge themselves and being sick for Love to Christ,
find him or seek him in his Ordinances below, and get unfeigned Assurance of
Fternall enjoyment of Him, when they are here no more.

More particular:

One step twix't Me and Death, (it was David's speech,)
And true of sick Folks all:
Man's Leaf it fades, his Clay house cracks;
Before it is dreadful Fall.
Like Grasshopper the Indian leapes,
Till blasts of sickness rise:
Nor soul nor Body Physic has,
Then Soul and Body dies.
O happy English who for both,
Have precious physics store:
How should (when Christ has both refresh't,
Thy Love and zeal be more?
CHAP. XXXII. Of Death and Burial, etc.
As Pummissin. He is not yet departed. Neene. He is drawing on. Pausawut
kitonckquewa. He cannot live long. Chachewunnea. He is near dead. Kitonckquei.
He is dead. Nipwi maw. He is gone. Kakitonckqueban. They are dead and gone.
Sequttoi. He is in black, That is, He has some dead in his house (whether
wife or child etc.) for although at the first being sick, all the Women and
Maids black their faces with soote and other blackings; yet upon the death of
the sick, the father, or husband, and all his neighbors, the Men also (as the
English wear black mourning clothes) wear black Faces, and lay on soote
very thick, which I have often seen clotted with their tears.

This blacking and lamenting they observe in most doleful manner, diverse
weeks and months; yea, a year, if the person be great and public.

Sequt. Soote. Michemeshawi. He is gone for ever. Mat wonck kunnawmone. You
shall never see him more. Wunnowauntam Wulloasin. Grieved and in bitterness.
Nnowantam, ^loasin. I am grieved for you.

Obs. As they abound in lamentations for the dead, so they abound in
consolation to the living and visit them frequently, using this word
Kutchimmoke, Kutchimmoke* Be of good cheer which they express by stroaking
the cheek and head of the father or mother, husband or wife of the dead.

C^epassotam. The dead Sachim. Mauchauhom. The dead man. Mauchauhomwock
Chepeck. The dead. Chepa^quaw. A dead woman. Yo a papan. He that was here.
Sachimaupan. He that was Prince here.

Obs. These expressions they use, because, they abhor to mention the dead by
name, and therefore, if any man bear the name of the dead he changes his name
and if any stranger accidentally name him, he is checked, and if any wilfully
name him he is fined; and and amongst States, the naming of their dead Sachims,
is one ground of their wars; so terrible is the King of Terrors, Death, to
all natural men.

Aquie mishash aquic mishommokc. D^e not name. Cowewenaki. You wrong me, to
wit, in naming my dead. Posakunnamun. To bury. Aukuck ponamun. To lay in the
earth. Wesquaubenan. To wrap up, in winding mats or coats, as we say, winding
sheets.

(...), One of chiefest esteem, who winds up and buries the dead commonly some
wise, grave, and well descended man has that office.

When they come to the Grave, they lay the dead by the Grave's mouth and then
all sit down and lament; that I have seen tears run down the cheeks of
stoutest Captains, as well as little children in abundance: and after the dead
is laid in Grave, and sometimes (in some parts) some goods cast in with them,
They have then a second great lamentation, and upon the Grave is spread the Mat
that the party died on the Dish he eat in; and sometimes a fair Coat of skin
hung upon the next tree to the Grave, which none will touch, ^ut suffer it
there to rot with the dead: Yea, I saw with mine own eyes that at my late
coming forth of the Country, the chief and most aged peaceable Father of the
Country, Caunou^nicus, having buried his fonne, he burned his own Palace, and
all his goods in it, (amongst them to a great value) in a sollemne remembrance
of his son, and in a kind of humble Expiation to the Gods, who (as they
believe) had taken his son from him.

The general Observation of their Dead.
O^ how terrible is the look the speedy and serious thought of death to all
the sons of men? Thrice happy those who are dead and risen with the Son of
God, for they are past from death to life, and shall not see death (a heavenly
sweet Paradox or Ridle) as the Son of God has promised them.

More particular:

The Indians say their bodies die,
Their souls they do not die;
Worse are then Indians such, as hold
The souls mortality.
Our hopeless Body rots, say they,
Is gone eternally,
English hope better, yet some's hope
Proves endless misery.
Two Worlds of men shall rise and stand
Before Christ's most dreadful bar;
Indians, and English naked too,
That now most gallant are.
True Christ most Glorious then shall make
New Earth, and Heavens New;
False Christ's, false Christians then shall quake,
O blessed then the True.
Now, to the most High and most Holy, Immortal, Invisible, and only Wise God,
who alone is Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and the
Last, who Was and Is, and is to Come; from Whom, by Whom, and to Whom are all
things; by Whose gracious assistance and wonderful supportment in so many
varieties of hardship and outward miseries, I have had such converse with
Barbarous Nations, and have been mercifully assisted, to frame this poor KEY,
which may, (through His Blessing) in His own holy season) open a Door; yea,
Doors of unkowne Mercies to Us and Them, be Honor, Glory, Power, Riches,
Wisdom, Goodness and Dominion ascribed by all His (...) Jesus Christ to
Eternity, Amen.

FINIS.
The TABLE.
CHAP. PAGE. I. OF Salutation. 1 II. Of Eating and Entertainment. 10 III. Of
Sleep. 17 IV. Of their Numbers. ^2 V. Of Relations of Consanguinity, etc. 27
VI. Of House, Family, etc. 31 VII. Of Parts of Body. 48 VIII. Of Discourse and
News. 54 IX. Of Time of the day. 62 X. Of Seasons of the Year. 65 XI. Of
Travel. 68 XII. Of the heavenly Lights. 79 XIII. Of the Weather. 82 XIV. Of
the Winds. 85 XV. Of Foul. 88 XVI. Of the Earth and Fruits thereof. 92 XVII.
Of Beasts and Cattle. 104 XVIII. Of the Sea. 108 XIX. Of Fish and Fishing. 113
XX. Of their Nakedness and Clothing. 110 XXI. Of their Religion, Soul, etc.
114 XXII. Of their Government. 132 XXIII. Of their Marriages. 138 XXIV. Of
their Coin. 144 XXV. Of their Trading. 151 XXVI Of their Debts and Trusting.
159 XXVII. Of their Hunting 163 XXVIII. Of their Sports and Gaming. 169 XXIX.
Of their Wars. 174 XXX. Of their Paintings. 183 XXXI. Of their Sickness. 185
XXXII: Of their Death and Burial: 192

I have further treated of these Natives of New England, and that great point
of their Conversion in a little additionall Discourse apart from this.

I Have read over these thirty Chapters of the American Language, to me wholly
unknown, and the Observations, these I conceive inoffensive; and that the
Work may conduce to the happy end intended by the Author.

IO. LANGLEY.
Printed according to this License; and entered into Stationers Hall.

